*A New Nation Votes: American Election Returns 17871825
*Delegates to the Constitutional Convention: Massachusetts (Brief Biography of Gerry)
*Gerry family archive at Hartwick College

 
 



[[Encryption]]

In cryptography, encryption is the process of encoding messages or information in such a way that only authorized parties can read it. "Encryption Basics | EFF Surveillance Self-Defense Project." Encryption Basics | EFF Surveillance Self-Defense Project. Surveillance Self-Defense Project, n.d. Web. 06 Nov. 2013. . Encryption doesn't prevent hacking but it reduces the likelihood that the hacker will be able to read the data that is encrypted. Goldreich, Oded. Foundations of Cryptography: Volume 2, Basic Applications. Vol. 2. Cambridge university press, 2004. In an encryption scheme, the message or information, referred to as plaintext, is encrypted using an encryption algorithm, turning it into an unreadable ciphertext. This is usually done with the use of an encryption key, which specifies how the message is to be encoded. Any adversary that can see the ciphertext should not be able to determine anything about the original message. An authorized party, however, is able to decode the ciphertext using a decryption algorithm, that usually requires a secret decryption key, that adversaries do not have access to. For technical reasons, an encryption scheme usually needs a key-generation algorithm to randomly produce keys.

==Kinds of encryption==

=== Symmetric key encryption ===

In symmetric-key schemes, Symmetric-key encryption software the encryption and decryption keys are the same. Thus communicating parties must agree on a secret key before they wish to communicate.

=== Public key encryption ===
Illustration of how a file or document is sent using Public key encryption.

In public-key encryption schemes, the encryption key is published for anyone to use and encrypt messages. However, only the receiving party has access to the decryption key and is capable of reading the encrypted messages. Bellare, Mihir. "Public-Key Encryption in a Multi-user Setting: Security Proofs and Improvements." Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2000. Page 1. Public-key encryption is a relatively recent invention: historically, all encryption schemes have been symmetric-key (also called private-key) schemes. 

One of the earliest public key encryption applications was called Pretty Good Privacy (PGP). It was written in 1991 by Phil Zimmermann and was purchased by Symantec in 2010. 

== Uses of encryption ==

Encryption has long been used by militaries and governments to facilitate secret communication. It is now commonly used in protecting information within many kinds of civilian systems. For example, the Computer Security Institute reported that in 2007, 71% of companies surveyed utilized encryption for some of their data in transit, and 53% utilized encryption for some of their data in storage. Robert Richardson, 2008 CSI Computer Crime and Security Survey at 19.i.cmpnet.com Encryption can be used to protect data "at rest", such as files on computers and storage devices (e.g. USB flash drives). In recent years there have been numerous reports of confidential data such as customers' personal records being exposed through loss or theft of laptops or backup drives. Encrypting such files at rest helps protect them should physical security measures fail. Digital rights management systems, which prevent unauthorized use or reproduction of copyrighted material and protect software against reverse engineering (see also copy protection), is another somewhat different example of using encryption on data at rest.

Encryption is also used to protect data in transit, for example data being transferred via networks (e.g. the Internet, e-commerce), mobile telephones, wireless microphones, wireless intercom systems, Bluetooth devices and bank automatic teller machines. There have been numerous reports of data in transit being intercepted in recent years. Fiber Optic Networks Vulnerable to Attack, Information Security Magazine, November 15, 2006, Sandra Kay Miller Encrypting data in transit also helps to secure it as it is often difficult to physically secure all access to networks.

=== Message verification ===

Encryption, by itself, can protect the confidentiality of messages, but other techniques are still needed to protect the integrity and authenticity of a message; for example, verification of a message authentication code (MAC) or a digital signature. Standards for cryptographic software and hardware to perform encryption are widely available, but successfully using encryption to ensure security may be a challenging problem. A single slip-up in system design or execution can allow successful attacks. Sometimes an adversary can obtain unencrypted information without directly undoing the encryption. See, e.g., traffic analysis, TEMPEST, or Trojan horse.

Digital signature and encryption must be applied at message creation time (i.e. on the same device it has been composed) to avoid tampering. Otherwise any node between the sender and the encryption agent could potentially tamper it. It should be noted that encrypting at the time of creation only adds security if the encryption device itself has not been tampered with.

== See also ==

* Substitution cipher
* Rotor cipher machines

* Brute-force attack
* Cold boot attack
* Cyberspace Electronic Security Act (in the US)
* Disk encryption
* Key management
* Physical Layer Encryption

==References==

==Further reading==

* 
* Kahn, David, The Codebreakers - The Story of Secret Writing (ISBN 0-684-83130-9) (1967)
* Preneel, Bart, "Advances in Cryptology  EUROCRYPT 2000", Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2000, ISBN 978-3-540-67517-4
* Sinkov, Abraham, Elementary Cryptanalysis: A Mathematical Approach, Mathematical Association of America, 1966. ISBN 0-88385-622-0

==External links==



[[EPR paradox]]

Albert Einstein

The EPR paradox is an early and influential critique leveled against the Copenhagen interpretation of quantum mechanics. Albert Einstein and his colleagues Boris Podolsky and Nathan Rosen (known collectively as EPR) designed a thought experiment which revealed that the accepted formulation of quantum mechanics had a consequence which had not previously been noticed, but which looked unreasonable at the time. The scenario described involved the phenomenon that is now known as quantum entanglement.

According to quantum mechanics, under some conditions, a pair of quantum systems may be described by a single wave function, which encodes the probabilities of the outcomes of experiments that may be performed on the two systems, whether jointly or individually. At the time the EPR article discussed below was written, it was known from experiments that the outcome of an experiment sometimes cannot be uniquely predicted. An example of such indeterminacy can be seen when a beam of light is incident on a half-silvered mirror. One half of the beam will reflect, the other will pass. If the intensity of the beam is reduced until only one photon is in transit at any time, whether that photon will reflect or transmit cannot be predicted quantum mechanically.

The routine explanation of this effect was, at that time, provided by Heisenberg's uncertainty principle. Physical quantities come in pairs which are called conjugate quantities. Examples of such conjugate pairs are position and momentum of a particle and components of spin measured around different axes. When one quantity was measured, and became determined, the conjugated quantity became indeterminate. Heisenberg explained this as a disturbance caused by measurement.

The EPR paper, written in 1935, was intended to illustrate that this explanation is inadequate. It considered two entangled particles, referred to as A and B, and pointed out that measuring a quantity of a particle A will cause the conjugated quantity of particle B to become undetermined, even if there was no contact, no classical disturbance. The basic idea was that the quantum states of two particles in a system cannot always be decomposed from the joint state of the two. An example (in braket notation) is: 

Heisenberg's principle was an attempt to provide a classical explanation of a quantum effect sometimes called non-locality. According to EPR there were two possible explanations. Either there was some interaction between the particles, even though they were separated, or the information about the outcome of all possible measurements was already present in both particles.

The EPR authors preferred the second explanation according to which that information was encoded in some 'hidden parameters'. The first explanation, that an effect propagated instantly, across a distance, is in conflict with the theory of relativity. They then concluded that quantum mechanics was incomplete since, in its formalism, there was no room for such hidden parameters.

Violations of the conclusions of Bell's theorem are generally understood to have demonstrated that the hypotheses of Bell's theorem, also assumed by Einstein, Poldolsky and Rosen, do not apply in our world. Gaasbeek, Bram. "Demystifying the Delayed Choice Experiments", p. 1 (arXiv:1007.3977v1 22 Jul 2010) Most physicists who have examined the issue concur that experiments, such as those of Alain Aspect and his group, have confirmed that physical probabilities, as predicted by quantum theory, do exhibit the phenomena of Bell-inequality violations that are considered to invalidate EPR's preferred "local hidden-variables" type of explanation for the correlations to which EPR first drew attention. Bell, John. On the EinsteinPoldolskyRosen paradox, Physics 1 3, 195-200, Nov. 1964 

== History of EPR developments ==
The article that first brought forth these matters, "Can Quantum-Mechanical Description of Physical Reality Be Considered Complete?" was published in 1935. Einstein struggled to the end of his life for a theory that could better comply with his idea of causality, protesting against the view that there exists no objective physical reality other than that which is revealed through measurement interpreted in terms of quantum mechanical formalism. However, since Einstein's death, experiments analogous to the one described in the EPR paper have been carried out, starting in 1976 by French scientists Lamehi-Rachti and Mittig Advances in atomic and molecular physics, Volume 14 By David Robert Bates at the Saclay Nuclear Research Centre. These experiments appear to show that the local realism idea is false. . 

== Quantum mechanics and its interpretation ==

Since the early twentieth century, quantum theory has proved to be successful in describing accurately the physical reality of the mesoscopic and microscopic world, in multiple reproducible physics experiments.

Quantum mechanics was developed with the aim of describing atoms and explaining the observed spectral lines in a measurement apparatus. Although disputed especially in the early twentieth century, it has yet to be seriously challenged. Philosophical interpretations of quantum phenomena, however, are another matter: the question of how to interpret the mathematical formulation of quantum mechanics has given rise to a variety of different answers from people of different philosophical persuasions (see Interpretations of quantum mechanics).

Quantum theory and quantum mechanics do not provide single measurement outcomes in a deterministic way. According to the understanding of quantum mechanics known as the Copenhagen interpretation, measurement causes an instantaneous collapse of the wave function describing the quantum system into an eigenstate of the observable that was measured. Einstein characterized this imagined collapse in the 1927 Solvay Conference. He presented a thought experiment in which electrons are introduced through a small hole in a sphere whose inner surface serves as a detection screen. The electrons will contact the spherical detection screen in a widely dispersed manner. Those electrons, however, are all individually described by wave fronts that expand in all directions from the point of entry. A wave as it is understood in everyday life would paint a large area of the detection screen, but the electrons would be found to impact the screen at single points and would eventually form a pattern in keeping with the probabilities described by their identical wave functions. Einstein asks what makes each electron's wave front "collapse" at its respective location. Why do the electrons appear as single bright scintillations rather than as dim washes of energy across the surface? Why does any single electron appear at one point rather than some alternative point? The behavior of the electrons gives the impression of some signal having been sent to all possible points of contact that would have nullified all but one of them, or, in other words, would have preferentially selected a single point to the exclusion of all others. http://plato.stanford.edu/entries/qt-epr/ 

==Einstein's opposition==
Einstein was the most prominent opponent of the Copenhagen interpretation. In his view, quantum mechanics is incomplete. Commenting on this, other writers (such as John von Neumann von Neumann, J. (1932/1955). In Mathematische Grundlagen der Quantenmechanik, Springer, Berlin, translated into English by Beyer, R.T., Princeton University Press, Princeton, cited by Baggott, J. (2004) Beyond Measure: Modern physics, philosophy, and the meaning of quantum theory, Oxford University Press, Oxford, ISBN 0-19-852927-9, pages 144145. and David Bohm Bohm, D. (1951). Quantum Theory, Prentice-Hall, Englewood Cliffs, page 29, and Chapter 5 section 3, and Chapter 22 Section 19. ) hypothesized that consequently there would have to be 'hidden' variables responsible for random measurement results, something which was not expressly claimed in the original paper.

The 1935 EPR paper condensed the philosophical discussion into a physical argument. The authors claim that given a specific experiment, in which the outcome of a measurement is known before the measurement takes place, there must exist something in the real world, an "element of reality", that determines the measurement outcome. They postulate that these elements of reality are local, in the sense that each belongs to a certain point in spacetime. Each element may only be influenced by events which are located in the backward light cone of its point in spacetime (i.e., the past). These claims are founded on assumptions about nature that constitute what is now known as local realism.

Though the EPR paper has often been taken as an exact expression of Einstein's views, it was primarily authored by Podolsky, based on discussions at the Institute for Advanced Study with Einstein and Rosen. Einstein later expressed to Erwin Schrdinger that, "it did not come out as well as I had originally wanted; rather, the essential thing was, so to speak, smothered by the formalism." Quoted in Kaiser, David. "Bringing the human actors back on stage: the personal context of the EinsteinBohr debate", British Journal for the History of Science 27 (1994): 129152, on page 147. In 1936, Einstein presented an individual account of his local realist ideas. English translation by Jean Piccard, pp 349382 in the same issue, doi:10.1016/S0016-0032(36)91047-5). 

== Description of the paradox ==
The original EPR paradox challenges the prediction of quantum mechanics that it is impossible to know both the position and the momentum of a quantum particle. This challenge can be extended to other pairs of physical properties.

===EPR paper===
The original paper purports to describe what must happen to "two systems I and II, which we permit to interact ...", and, after some time, "we suppose that there is no longer any interaction between the two parts." In the words of Kumar (2009), the EPR description involves "two particles, A and B, interact briefly and then move off in opposite directions." According to Heisenberg's uncertainty principle, it is impossible to measure both the momentum and the position of particle B exactly. However, according to Kumar, it is possible to measure the exact position of particle A. By calculation, therefore, with the exact position of particle A known, the exact position of particle B can be known. Also, the exact momentum of particle A can be measured, so the exact momentum of particle B can be worked out. Kumar writes: "EPR argued that they had proved that ... B can have simultaneously exact values of position and momentum. ... Particle B has a position that is real and a momentum that is real." EPR appeared to have contrived a means to establish the exact values of either the momentum or the position of B due to measurements made on particle A, without the slightest possibility of particle B being physically disturbed. 

EPR tried to set up a paradox to question the range of true application of Quantum Mechanics: Quantum theory predicts that both values cannot be known for a particle, and yet the EPR thought experiment purports to show that they must all have determinate values. The EPR paper says: "We are thus forced to conclude that the quantum-mechanical description of physical reality given by wave functions is not complete." 

The EPR paper ends by saying: While we have thus shown that the wave function does not provide a complete description of the physical reality, we left open the question of whether or not such a description exists. We believe, however, that such a theory is possible.

=== Measurements on an entangled state ===
We have a source that emits electronpositron pairs, with the electron sent to destination A, where there is an observer named Alice, and the positron sent to destination B, where there is an observer named Bob. According to quantum mechanics, we can arrange our source so that each emitted pair occupies a quantum state called a spin singlet. The particles are thus said to be entangled. This can be viewed as a quantum superposition of two states, which we call state I and state II. In state I, the electron has spin pointing upward along the z-axis (+z) and the positron has spin pointing downward along the z-axis (z). In state II, the electron has spin z and the positron has spin +z. Therefore, it is impossible (without measuring) to know the definite state of spin of either particle in the spin singlet. 

The EPR thought experiment, performed with electronpositron pairs. A source (center) sends particles toward two observers, electrons to Alice (left) and positrons to Bob (right), who can perform spin measurements.

Alice now measures the spin along the z-axis. She can obtain one of two possible outcomes: +z or z. Suppose she gets +z. According to the Copenhagen interpretation of quantum mechanics, the quantum state of the system collapses into state I. The quantum state determines the probable outcomes of any measurement performed on the system. In this case, if Bob subsequently measures spin along the z-axis, there is 100% probability that he will obtain z. Similarly, if Alice gets z, Bob will get +z.

There is, of course, nothing special about choosing the z-axis: according to quantum mechanics the spin singlet state may equally well be expressed as a superposition of spin states pointing in the x direction. Suppose that Alice and Bob had decided to measure spin along the x-axis. We'll call these states Ia and IIa. In state Ia, Alice's electron has spin +x and Bob's positron has spin x. In state IIa, Alice's electron has spin x and Bob's positron has spin +x. Therefore, if Alice measures +x, the system 'collapses' into state Ia, and Bob will get x. If Alice measures x, the system collapses into state IIa, and Bob will get +x.

Whatever axis their spins are measured along, they are always found to be opposite. This can only be explained if the particles are linked in some way. Either they were created with a definite (opposite) spin about every axisa "hidden variable" argumentor they are linked so that one electron "feels" which axis the other is having its spin measured along, and becomes its opposite about that one axisan "entanglement" argument. Moreover, if the two particles have their spins measured about different axes, once the electron's spin has been measured about the x-axis (and the positron's spin about the x-axis deduced), the positron's spin about the z-axis will no longer be certain, as if (a) it knows that the measurement has taken place, or (b) it has a definite spin already, about a second axisa hidden variable. However, it turns out that the predictions of Quantum Mechanics, which have been confirmed by experiment, cannot be explained by any hidden variable theory. This is demonstrated in Bell's theorem. George Greenstein and Arthur G. Zajonc, The Quantum Challenge, p. "in the early 1980s have conclusively shown that quantum mechanics is indeed orrect, and that the EPR argument had relied upon incorrect assumptions." 

In quantum mechanics, the x-spin and z-spin are "incompatible observables", meaning the Heisenberg uncertainty principle applies to alternating measurements of them: a quantum state cannot possess a definite value for both of these variables. Suppose Alice measures the z-spin and obtains +z, so that the quantum state collapses into state I. Now, instead of measuring the z-spin as well, Bob measures the x-spin. According to quantum mechanics, when the system is in state I, Bob's x-spin measurement will have a 50% probability of producing +x and a 50% probability of -x. It is impossible to predict which outcome will appear until Bob actually performs the measurement.

Here is the crux of the matter. You might imagine that, when Bob measures the x-spin of his positron, he would get an answer with absolute certainty, since prior to this he hasn't disturbed his particle at all. Bob's positron has a 50% probability of producing +x and a 50% probability of xso the outcome is not certain. Bob's positron "knows" that Alice's electron has been measured, and its z-spin detected, and hence B's z-spin has been calculated, but the x-spin of Bob's positron remains uncertain.

Put another way, how does Bob's positron know which way to point if Alice decides (based on information unavailable to Bob) to measure x (i.e., to be the opposite of Alice's electron's spin about the x-axis) and also how to point if Alice measures z, since it is only supposed to know one thing at a time? The Copenhagen interpretation rules that say the wave function "collapses" at the time of measurement, so there must be action at a distance (entanglement) or the positron must know more than it's supposed to know (hidden variables). 

Here is the paradox summed up:

It is one thing to say that physical measurement of the first particle's momentum affects uncertainty in its own position, but to say that measuring the first particle's momentum affects the uncertainty in the position of the other is another thing altogether. Einstein, Podolsky and Rosen asked how can the second particle "know" to have precisely defined momentum but uncertain position? Since this implies that one particle is communicating with the other instantaneously across space, i.e., faster than light, this is the "paradox".

Incidentally, Bell used spin as his example, but many types of physical quantitiesreferred to as "observables" in quantum mechanicscan be used. The EPR paper used momentum for the observable. Experimental realisations of the EPR scenario often use photon polarization, because polarized photons are easy to prepare and measure.

=== Locality in the EPR experiment ===
The principle of locality states that physical processes occurring at one place should have no immediate effect on the elements of reality at another location. At first sight, this appears to be a reasonable assumption to make, as it seems to be a consequence of special relativity, which states that information can never be transmitted faster than the speed of light without violating causality. It is generally believed that any theory which violates causality would also be internally inconsistent, and thus useless. 

It turns out that the usual rules for combining quantum mechanical and classical descriptions violate the principle of locality without violating causality. Causality is preserved because there is no way for Alice to transmit messages (i.e., information) to Bob by manipulating her measurement axis. Whichever axis she uses, she has a 50% probability of obtaining "+" and 50% probability of obtaining "", completely at random; according to quantum mechanics, it is fundamentally impossible for her to influence what result she gets. Furthermore, Bob is only able to perform his measurement once: there is a fundamental property of quantum mechanics, known as the "no cloning theorem", which makes it impossible for him to make a million copies of the electron he receives, perform a spin measurement on each, and look at the statistical distribution of the results. Therefore, in the one measurement he is allowed to make, there is a 50% probability of getting "+" and 50% of getting "", regardless of whether or not his axis is aligned with Alice's.

However, the principle of locality appeals powerfully to physical intuition, and Einstein, Podolsky and Rosen were unwilling to abandon it. Einstein derided the quantum mechanical predictions as "spooky action at a distance". The conclusion they drew was that quantum mechanics is not a complete theory. 

In recent years, however, doubt has been cast on EPR's conclusion due to developments in understanding locality and especially quantum decoherence. The word locality has several different meanings in physics. For example, in quantum field theory "locality" means that quantum fields at different points of space do not interact with one another. However, quantum field theories that are "local" in this sense appear to violate the principle of locality as defined by EPR, but they nevertheless do not violate locality in a more general sense. Wavefunction collapse can be viewed as an epiphenomenon of quantum decoherence, which in turn is nothing more than an effect of the underlying local time evolution of the wavefunction of a system and all of its environment. Since the underlying behaviour doesn't violate local causality, it follows that neither does the additional effect of wavefunction collapse, whether real or apparent. Therefore, as outlined in the example above, neither the EPR experiment nor any quantum experiment demonstrates that faster-than-light signaling is possible.

== Resolving the paradox ==

=== Hidden variables ===
There are several ways to resolve the EPR paradox. The one suggested by EPR is that quantum mechanics, despite its success in a wide variety of experimental scenarios, is actually an incomplete theory. In other words, there is some yet undiscovered theory of nature to which quantum mechanics acts as a kind of statistical approximation (albeit an exceedingly successful one). Unlike quantum mechanics, the more complete theory contains variables corresponding to all the "elements of reality". There must be some unknown mechanism acting on these variables to give rise to the observed effects of "non-commuting quantum observables", i.e. the Heisenberg uncertainty principle. Such a theory is called a hidden variable theory.

To illustrate this idea, we can formulate a very simple hidden variable theory for the above thought experiment. One supposes that the quantum spin-singlet states emitted by the source are actually approximate descriptions for "true" physical states possessing definite values for the z-spin and x-spin. In these "true" states, the positron going to Bob always has spin values opposite to the electron going to Alice, but the values are otherwise completely random. For example, the first pair emitted by the source might be "(+z, x) to Alice and (z, +x) to Bob", the next pair "(z, x) to Alice and (+z, +x) to Bob", and so forth. Therefore, if Bob's measurement axis is aligned with Alice's, he will necessarily get the opposite of whatever Alice gets; otherwise, he will get "+" and "" with equal probability.

Assuming we restrict our measurements to the z- and x-axes, such a hidden variable theory is experimentally indistinguishable from quantum mechanics. In reality, there may be an infinite number of axes along which Alice and Bob can perform their measurements, so there would have to be an infinite number of independent hidden variables. However, this is not a serious problem; we have formulated a very simplistic hidden variable theory, and a more sophisticated theory might be able to patch it up. It turns out that there is a much more serious challenge to the idea of hidden variables.

==== Bell's inequality ====

In 1964, John Bell showed that the predictions of quantum mechanics in the EPR thought experiment are significantly different from the predictions of a particular class of hidden variable theories (the local hidden variable theories). Roughly speaking, quantum mechanics has a much stronger statistical correlation with measurement results performed on different axes than do these hidden variable theories. These differences, expressed using inequality relations known as "Bell's inequalities", are in principle experimentally detectable. Later work by Eberhard showed that the key properties of local hidden variable theories which lead to Bell's inequalities are locality and counter-factual definiteness. Any theory in which these principles apply produces the inequalities. Arthur Fine subsequently showed that any theory satisfying the inequalities can be modeled by a local hidden variable theory.

After the publication of Bell's paper, a variety of experiments to test Bell's inequalities were devised. These generally relied on measurement of photon polarization. All experiments conducted to date have found behavior in line with the predictions of standard quantum mechanics theory.

However, Bell's theorem does not apply to all possible philosophically realist theories. It is a common misconception that quantum mechanics is inconsistent with all notions of philosophical realism. Realist interpretations of quantum mechanics are possible, although as discussed above, such interpretations must reject either locality or counter-factual definiteness. Mainstream physics prefers to keep locality, while striving also to maintain a notion of realism that nevertheless rejects counter-factual definiteness. Examples of such mainstream realist interpretations are the consistent histories interpretation and the transactional interpretation (first proposed by John G. Cramer in 1986). Fine's work showed that, taking locality as a given, there exist scenarios in which two statistical variables are correlated in a manner inconsistent with counter-factual definiteness, and that such scenarios are no more mysterious than any other, despite the fact that the inconsistency with counter-factual definiteness may seem 'counter-intuitive'.

Violation of locality is difficult to reconcile with special relativity, and is thought to be incompatible with the principle of causality. However, the Bohm interpretation of quantum mechanics keeps counter-factual definiteness, while introducing a conjectured non-local mechanism in the form of the 'quantum potential' that is defined as one of the terms of the Schrdinger equation. Some workers in the field have also attempted to formulate hidden variable theories that exploit loopholes in actual experiments, such as the assumptions made in interpreting experimental data, although no theory has been proposed that can reproduce all the results of quantum mechanics.

There are also individual EPR-like experiments that have no local hidden variables explanation. Examples have been suggested by David Bohm and by Lucien Hardy.

===Einstein's hope for a purely algebraic theory===
The Bohm interpretation of quantum mechanics hypothesizes that the state of the universe evolves smoothly through time with no collapsing of quantum wavefunctions. One problem for the Copenhagen interpretation is to precisely define wavefunction collapse. Einstein maintained that quantum mechanics is physically incomplete and logically unsatisfactory. In "The Meaning of Relativity", Einstein wrote, "One can give good reasons why reality cannot at all be represented by a continuous field. From the quantum phenomena it appears to follow with certainty that a finite system of finite energy can be completely described by a finite set of numbers (quantum numbers). This does not seem to be in accordance with a continuum theory and must lead to an attempt to find a purely algebraic theory for the representation of reality. But nobody knows how to find the basis for such a theory."
If time, space, and energy are secondary features derived from a substrate below the Planck scale, then Einstein's hypothetical algebraic system might resolve the EPR paradox (although Bell's theorem would still be valid). Edward Fredkin in the Fredkin Finite Nature Hypothesis has suggested an informational basis for Einstein's hypothetical algebraic system. If physical reality is totally finite, then the Copenhagen interpretation might be an approximation to an information processing system below the Planck scale.

==="Acceptable theories" and the experiment===
According to the present view of the situation, quantum mechanics flatly contradicts Einstein's philosophical postulate that any acceptable physical theory must fulfill "local realism".

In the EPR paper (1935), the authors realised that quantum mechanics was inconsistent with their assumptions, but Einstein nevertheless thought that quantum mechanics might simply be augmented by hidden variables (i.e., variables which were, at that point, still obscure to him), without any other change, to achieve an acceptable theory. He pursued these ideas for over twenty years until the end of his life, in 1955.

In contrast, John Bell, in his 1964 paper, showed that quantum mechanics and the class of hidden variable theories Einstein favored would lead to different experimental results: different by a factor of for certain correlations. So the issue of "acceptability", up to that time mainly concerning theory, finally became experimentally decidable.

There are many Bell test experiments, e.g., those of Alain Aspect and others. They support the predictions of quantum mechanics rather than the class of hidden variable theories supported by Einstein. 

=== Implications for quantum mechanics ===
Most physicists today believe that quantum mechanics is correct, and that the EPR paradox is a "paradox" only because classical intuitions do not correspond to physical reality. How EPR is interpreted regarding locality depends on the interpretation of quantum mechanics one uses. In the Copenhagen interpretation, it is usually understood that instantaneous wave function collapse does occur. However, the view that there is no causal instantaneous effect has also been proposed within the Copenhagen interpretation: in this alternate view, measurement affects our ability to define (and measure) quantities in the physical system, not the system itself. In the many-worlds interpretation, locality is strictly preserved, since the effects of operations such as measurement affect only the state of the particle that is measured. However, the results of the measurement are not uniqueevery possible result is obtained.

The EPR paradox has deepened our understanding of quantum mechanics by exposing the fundamentally non-classical characteristics of the measurement process. Before the publication of the EPR paper, a measurement was often visualized as a physical disturbance inflicted directly upon the measured system. For instance, when measuring the position of an electron, one imagines shining a light on it, thus disturbing the electron and producing the quantum mechanical uncertainties in its position. Such explanations, which are still encountered in popular expositions of quantum mechanics, are debunked by the EPR paradox, which shows that a "measurement" can be performed on a particle without disturbing it directly, by performing a measurement on a distant entangled particle. In fact, Yakir Aharonov and his collaborators have developed a whole theory of so-called Weak measurement.

Technologies relying on quantum entanglement are now being developed. In quantum cryptography, entangled particles are used to transmit signals that cannot be eavesdropped upon without leaving a trace. In quantum computation, entangled quantum states are used to perform computations in parallel, which may allow certain calculations to be performed much more quickly than they ever could be with classical computers.

== Mathematical formulation ==
The above discussion can be expressed mathematically using the quantum mechanical formulation of spin. The spin degree of freedom for an electron is associated with a two-dimensional complex vector space V, with each quantum state corresponding to a vector in that space. The operators corresponding to the spin along the x, y, and z direction, denoted Sx, Sy, and Sz respectively, can be represented using the Pauli matrices: 

:

where is the reduced Planck constant (or the Planck constant divided by 2).

The eigenstates of Sz are represented as

:

and the eigenstates of Sx are represented as

:

The vector space of the electron-positron pair is , the tensor product of the electron's and positron's vector spaces. The spin singlet state is

:

where the two terms on the right hand side are what we have referred to as state I and state II above.

From the above equations, it can be shown that the spin singlet can also be written as

:

where the terms on the right hand side are what we have referred to as state Ia and state IIa.

To illustrate how this leads to the violation of local realism, we need to show that after Alice's measurement of Sz (or Sx), Bob's value of Sz (or Sx) is uniquely determined, and therefore corresponds to an "element of physical reality". This follows from the principles of measurement in quantum mechanics. When Sz is measured, the system state  collapses into an eigenvector of Sz. If the measurement result is +z, this means that immediately after measurement the system state undergoes an orthogonal projection of  onto the
space of states of the form

:

For the spin singlet, the new state is

:

Similarly, if Alice's measurement result is z, the system undergoes an orthogonal projection onto

:

which means that the new state is

:

This implies that the measurement for Sz for Bob's positron is now determined. It will be z in the first case or +z in the second case.

It remains only to show that Sx and Sz cannot simultaneously possess definite values in quantum mechanics. One may show in a straightforward manner that no possible vector can be an eigenvector of both matrices. More generally, one may use the fact that the operators do not commute,

:

along with the Heisenberg uncertainty relation

:

== See also ==

* Bell test experiments
* Bell state
* Bell's theorem
* Braket notation
* CHSH Bell test
* Coherence (physics)
* Correlation does not imply causation
* Counter-factual definiteness
* Fredkin Finite Nature Hypothesis
* GhirardiRiminiWeber theory
* GHZ experiment
* Interpretations of quantum mechanics
* Local hidden variable theory
* Many-worlds interpretation
* Measurement in quantum mechanics
* Measurement problem
* Penrose interpretation

* Philosophy of information
* Philosophy of physics
* Pondicherry interpretation
* Popper's experiment
* Quantum decoherence
* Quantum entanglement
* Quantum gravity
* Quantum information
* Quantum pseudo-telepathy
* Quantum teleportation
* Quantum Zeno effect
* Sakurai's Bell inequality
* Synchronicity
* Wave function collapse
* Ward's probability amplitude
* WheelerFeynman absorber theory
* Zero-point field

== References ==

=== Selected papers ===
* P.H. Eberhard, Bell's theorem without hidden variables. Nuovo Cimento 38B1 75 (1977).
* P.H. Eberhard, Bell's theorem and the different concepts of locality. Nuovo Cimento 46B 392 (1978).
* A. Einstein, B. Podolsky, and N. Rosen, Can quantum-mechanical description of physical reality be considered complete? Phys. Rev. 47 777 (1935). 

* A. Fine, Hidden Variables, Joint Probability, and the Bell Inequalities. Phys. Rev. Lett. 48, 291 (1982).
* A. Fine, Do Correlations need to be explained?, in Philosophical Consequences of Quantum Theory: Reflections on Bell's Theorem, edited by Cushing & McMullin (University of Notre Dame Press, 1986).
* L. Hardy, Nonlocality for two particles without inequalities for almost all entangled states. Phys. Rev. Lett. 71 1665 (1993).
* M. Mizuki, A classical interpretation of Bell's inequality. Annales de la Fondation Louis de Broglie 26 683 (2001).
* P. Pluch, "Theory for Quantum Probability", PhD Thesis University of Klagenfurt (2006)
* M. A. Rowe, D. Kielpinski, V. Meyer, C. A. Sackett, W. M. Itano, C. Monroe and D. J. Wineland, Experimental violation of a Bell's inequality with efficient detection, Nature 409, 791794 (15 February 2001). 
* M. Smerlak, C. Rovelli, Relational EPR 

====Notes====

=== Books ===
* John S. Bell (1987) Speakable and Unspeakable in Quantum Mechanics. Cambridge University Press. ISBN 0-521-36869-3.
*Arthur Fine (1996) The Shaky Game: Einstein, Realism and the Quantum Theory, 2nd ed. Univ. of Chicago Press.
* J.J. Sakurai, J. J. (1994) Modern Quantum Mechanics. Addison-Wesley: 174187, 223232. ISBN 0-201-53929-2.
* Selleri, F. (1988) Quantum Mechanics Versus Local Realism: The EinsteinPodolskyRosen Paradox. New York: Plenum Press. ISBN 0-306-42739-7
* Leon Lederman, L., Teresi, D. (1993). The God Particle: If the Universe is the Answer, What is the Question? Houghton Mifflin Company, pages 21, 187 to 189.
*John Gribbin (1984) In Search of Schrdinger's Cat. Black Swan. ISBN 978-0-552-12555-0

== External links ==
* The EinsteinPodolskyRosen Argument in Quantum Theory; 1.2 The argument in the text;http://plato.stanford.edu/entries/qt-epr/#1.2
* The original EPR paper.
* Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy: "The EinsteinPodolskyRosen Argument in Quantum Theory" by Arthur Fine.
* Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy: "The Einstein-Podolsky-Rosen Argument and the Bell Inequalities".
* Abner Shimony (2004) "Bells Theorem."
*EPR, Bell & Aspect: The Original References.
*Does Bell's Inequality Principle rule out local theories of quantum mechanics? From the Usenet Physics FAQ.
*Theoretical use of EPR in teleportation.
*Effective use of EPR in cryptography.
*EPR experiment with single photons interactive.
*Spooky Actions At A Distance?: Oppenheimer Lecture by Prof. Mermin.



[[Encapsulation]]

Encapsulation may refer to:

== Chemistry ==
* Molecular encapsulation, in chemistry, the confinement of an individual molecule within a larger molecule
* Micro-encapsulation, in material science, the coating of microscopic particles with another material

== Biology ==
* Cell encapsulation, technology made to overcome the existing problem of graft rejection in tissue engineering applications

== Computing ==
* Encapsulation (networking), the process of adding control information as it passes through the layered model
* Encapsulation (object-oriented programming), enclosing objects in a common interface in a way that makes them interchangeable, and guards their states from invalid changes



[[Ethnologue]]

Ethnologue: Languages of the World is a web-based publication that contains statistics for 7,106 languages and dialects in the 17th edition, released in 2013. Ethnologue 17th edition website Up until the 16th edition in 2009, the publication was a printed volume. Ethnologue provides information on the number of speakers, location, dialects, linguistic affiliations, availability of the Bible in the language, and an estimate of language viability using EGIDS. Lewis, M. Paul & Gary F. Simons. 2010. Assessing Endangerment: Expanding Fishmans GIDS. Revue Roumaine de linguistique 55(2). 103120. Online version As of July 2013, it is the most comprehensive and accessible language catalog, although some information is dated or spurious.

William Bright, then editor of Language: Journal of the Linguistic Society of America, wrote of Ethnologue that it "is indispensable for any reference shelf on the languages of the world." Bright, William. 1986. "Book Notice on Ethnologue", Language 62:698. According to Ole Stig Andersen on Danmarks Radio, although "Ethnologue has grown to become the world's most complete and authoritative survey of the world's languages," the data has many errors. Review of the 15th edition, by Ole Stig Andersen (Danmarks Radio) For example, cross-references can link to the wrong ISO 639 codes, while the family trees are generated automatically, resulting in problematic cladistic cascades that may distort language relationships.

==Overview==
The Ethnologue is published by SIL International (formerly known as the Summer Institute of Linguistics), a Christian linguistic service organization, which studies numerous minority languages, to facilitate language development and to work with the speakers of such language communities to translate portions of the Bible in their language.
 
What counts as a language depends on socio-linguistic evaluation: see Dialect. As the preface says, "Not all scholars share the same set of criteria for what constitutes a 'language' and what features define a 'dialect. Ethnologue follows the general linguistic criteria, which are based primarily on mutual intelligibility. Shared language intelligibility features are complex, and usually include etymological and grammatical evidence agreed upon by experts. Typological analysis of language leads experts to generally agree (or not) on some language relationships. If new supporting expert evidence for a language is found and the Ethnologue editors receive the information, they may reclassify a language, changing its identifiers. The ISO classification decisions are made by a different process and team.

In addition to choosing a primary name for the language, Ethnologue also gives some of the names by which a language is referred to by its speakers, by governments, by foreigners and by neighbors, as well as how it has been named and referenced historically, regardless of which designation is considered official, politically correct or offensive.

In 1984, the Ethnologue released a three-letter coding system, called an "SIL code", to identify each language that it describes. This set of codes significantly exceeded the scope of previous standards, e.g., ISO 639-1. The 14th edition, published in 2000, included 7,148 language codes which generally did not match the ISO 639-2 codes. In 2002 the Ethnologue was asked to work with the International Organization for Standardization (ISO) to integrate its codes into a draft international standard. The 15th edition of the Ethnologue was the first to use this standard, called ISO 639-3. (preprint) 

With the 17th edition, the Ethnologue introduced a numerical code for language status, along the lines of Fishmans Graded Intergenerational Disruption Scale, that ranks a language from 0 for an international language to 10 for an extinct language with no attempt at revival. This has had unintended consequences: Linguists have been denied funding for documenting endangered languages because Ethnologue rates them as "vigorous" (6); in doing so, SIL is addressing a competing concern, that missionaries generally cannot get funding to translate scripture unless the language is vigorous.

==Editions==
New editions of Ethnologue are published approximately every four years. The publishing history is as follows: History of the Ethnologue 

 Edition Date Editor Notes 
 1 1951 Richard S. Pittman 10 pages, mimeographed 
 2 1951 Pittman 
 3 1952 Pittman 
 4 1953 Pittman 
 5 1958 Pittman first edition in book format 
 6 1965 Pittman 
 7 1969 Pittman 4,493 languages 
 8 1974 Barbara Grimes 
 9 1978 Grimes 
 10 1984 Grimes SIL codes first included 
 11 1988 Grimes 6,253 languages; 
 12 1992 Grimes 6,662 languages 
 13 1996 Grimes 6,883 languages 
 14 2000 Grimes 6,809 languages 
 15 2005 Raymond G. Gordon, Jr. 6,912 languages; draft ISO standard 
 16 2009 M. Paul Lewis 6,909 languages 
 17 2013, updated 2014 Lewis, Simons, & Fennig 7,106 living languages 

==Language families==
Ethnologue classification is based on Bright (1992), Bright, William (ed.), 1992, Oxford international encyclopedia of linguistics, vol. 14. Oxford University Press. but has evolved with input from many individual researchers. The information on classification in the individual language articles is based on this information. However, the family trees are computer-generated and strongly dependent on consistency in the formatting of the classification data; consequently they are inconsistent and frequently show spurious groupings.

Following are the 225 language families (including 95 language isolates) and 6 typological categories listed in the Ethnologue language family index of the 17th edition. Browse by Language Family The first column gives the Ethnologue name for the group, followed by the location by continent and Ethnologues count of the number of languages in the family. 

 Family Continent Count 
 Afro-Asiatic Africa/Asia 374 
 Algic North America 42 
 Altaic Europe/Asia 65 
 Amto-Musan Oceania 2 
 Andamanese Asia 14 
 Arafundi Oceania 3 
 Arai (Left May) Oceania 6 
 Arauan South America 5 
 Australian Oceania 299 
 Austro-Asiatic Asia 170 
 Austronesian Asia/Oceania 1253 
 Aymaran South America 3 
 Barbacoan South America 4 
 Bayono-Awbono Oceania 2 
 Border Oceania 15 
 Bororoan South America 3 
 Botocudoan South America 1 
 Caddoan North America 5 
 Cahuapanan South America 2 
 Cariban South America 32 
 Central Solomons Oceania 4 
 Chapacuran South America 5 
 Chibchan South America 20 
 Chimakuan North America 1 
 Chinookan North America 2 
 Chipaya-Uru South America 2 
 Chocoan South America 8 
 Cholonan South America 2 
 Chon South America 2 
 Chukotko-Kamchatkan Asia 5 
 Chumashan North America 6 
 Cochim-Yuman North America 9 
 Coosan North America 1 
 Dravidian Asia 85 
 East Birds Head-Sentani Oceania 8 
 East Geelvink Bay Oceania 12 
 East New Britain Oceania 7 
 Eastern Trans-Fly Oceania 4 
 Eskimo-Aleut North America 11 
 Eyak-Athabaskan North America 43 
 Fas Oceania 2 
 Guajiboan South America 5 
 Guaykuruan South America 5 
 Haida North America 2 
 Harkmbut South America 2 
 Hmong-Mien Asia 38 
 Huavean North America 4 
 Indo-European Europe/Asia 443 
 Iroquoian North America 9 
 Jabutian South America 2 
 Japonic Asia 12 
 Jean South America 16 
 Jicaquean North America 1 
 Jivaroan South America 4 
 Kamakanan South America 1 
 Karaj South America 1 
 Kartvelian Asia 5 
 Katukinan South America 2 
 Kaure Oceania 4 
 Kaweskaran South America 2 
 Keresan North America 2 
 Khoisan Africa 28 
 Kiowa-Tanoan North America 5 
 Kwomtari Oceania 3 
 Lakes Plain Oceania 20 
 Lencan North America 1 
 Lower Mamberamo Oceania 2 
 Maiduan North America 4 
 Maipurean South America 60 
 Mairasi Oceania 3 
 Mapudungu South America 2 
 Mascoyan South America 5 
 Matacoan South America 7 
 Maxakalian South America 2 
 Mayan North America 31 
 Maybrat Oceania 2 
 Misumalpan North America 5 
 Miwok-Costanoan North America 8 
 Mixe-Zoquean North America 17 
 Mongol-Langam Oceania 3 
 Mosetenan South America 1 
 Muran South America 1 
 Muskogean North America 6 
 Nambiquaran South America 6 
 Niger-Congo Africa 1539 
 Nilo-Saharan Africa 205 
 Nimboran Oceania 5 
 North Bougainville Oceania 4 
 North Caucasian Europe 34 
 Otomanguean North America 177 
 Paezan South America 8 
 Palaihnihan North America 2 
 Panoan South America 27 
 Pauwasi Oceania 5 
 Piawi Oceania 2 
 Pomoan North America 7 
 Puinavean South America 7 
 Purian South America 2 
 Quechuan South America 46 
 Ramu-Lower Sepik Oceania 32 
 Sahaptian North America 5 
 Salish North America 26 
 Slivan South America 3 
 Senagi Oceania 2 
 Sepik Oceania 55 
 Sino-Tibetan Asia 460 
 Siouan-Catawban North America 14 
 Skou Oceania 8 
 Somahai Oceania 2 
 South Bougainville Oceania 9 
 South-Central Papuan Oceania 22 
 Tacanan South America 6 
 Tai-Kadai Asia 95 
 Takelman North America 1 
 Tarascan North America 2 
 Tequistlatecan North America 2 
 Tiniguan South America 1 
 Tor-Kwerba Oceania 24 
 Torricelli Oceania 57 
 Totonacan North America 12 
 Trans-New Guinea Oceania 481 
 Tsimshian North America 3 
 Tucanoan South America 25 
 Tupian South America 75 
 Uralic Europe/Asia 38 
 Uto-Aztecan North America 61 
 Wakashan North America 6 
 West Papuan Oceania 23 
 Wintuan North America 3 
 Witotoan South America 7 
 Yaguan South America 2 
 Yanomaman South America 4 
 Yele-West New Britain Oceania 3 
 Yeniseian Asia 2 
 Yokutsan North America 1 
 Yuat Oceania 6 
 Yukaghir Asia 2 
 Yukian North America 2 
 Zamucoan South America 2 
 Zaparoan South America 5 
 83 other language isolates  83 

 Typological group Count 
 Deaf sign language 137 
 Creole 93 
 Pidgin 17 
 Mixed language 23 
 Constructed language 1 

 Other Count 
 Unclassified 65 

==See also==
* Linguasphere Observatory Register
* Glottolog
* Lists of languages
* List of language families
* Primary language names in Ethnologue 17 by ISO code
* Primary language names in Ethnologue 16 by ISO code
* Primary language names in Ethnologue 14 and 15 (partial)
* Primary language names and codes in Ethnologue 13
* Primary language names and codes in Ethnologue 12
* Primary language names and codes in Ethnologue 11

==References==

==External links==
* Web version of The Ethnologue
** Ethnologue  History
* How Linguists and Missionaries Share a Bible of 6,912 Languages (The New York Times)
* Ethnologue 13 (1996) language codes and names



[[Evaporation]]

Aerosol of microscopic water droplets suspended in the air above a hot tea cup after that water vapor has sufficiently cooled and condensed. Water vapor is an invisible gas, but the clouds of condensed water droplets refract and disperse the sun light and so are visible.

Evaporation is a type of vaporization of a liquid that occurs from the surface of a liquid into a gaseous phase that is not saturated with the evaporating substance. The other type of vaporization is boiling, which is characterized by bubbles of saturated vapor forming in the liquid phase. Steam produced in a boiler is another example of evaporation occurring in a saturated vapor phase. Evaporation that occurs directly from the solid phase below the melting point, as commonly observed with ice at or below freezing or moth crystals (napthalene or paradichlorobenzine), is called sublimation.

On average, a fraction of the molecules in a glass of water have enough heat energy to escape from the liquid. Water molecules from the air enter the water in the glass, but as long as the relative humidity of the air in contact is less than 100% (saturation), the net transfer of water molecules will be to the air. The water in the glass will be cooled by the evaporation until an equilibrium is reached where the air supplies the amount of heat removed by the evaporating water. In an enclosed environment the water would evaporate until the air is saturated.

With sufficient temperature, the liquid would turn into vapor quickly (see boiling point). When the molecules collide, they transfer energy to each other in varying degrees, based on how they collide. Sometimes the transfer is so one-sided for a molecule near the surface that it ends up with enough energy to 'escape'.

Evaporation is an essential part of the water cycle. The sun (solar energy) drives evaporation of water from oceans, lakes, moisture in the soil, and other sources of water. In hydrology, evaporation and transpiration (which involves evaporation within plant stomata) are collectively termed evapotranspiration. Evaporation of water occurs when the surface of the liquid is exposed, allowing molecules to escape and form water vapor; this vapor can then rise up and form clouds.

== Theory ==

For molecules of a liquid to evaporate, they must be located near the surface, be moving in the proper direction, and have sufficient kinetic energy to overcome liquid-phase intermolecular forces. When only a small proportion of the molecules meet these criteria, the rate of evaporation is low. Since the kinetic energy of a molecule is proportional to its temperature, evaporation proceeds more quickly at higher temperatures. As the faster-moving molecules escape, the remaining molecules have lower average kinetic energy, and the temperature of the liquid decreases. This phenomenon is also called evaporative cooling. This is why evaporating sweat cools the human body.
Evaporation also tends to proceed more quickly with higher flow rates between the gaseous and liquid phase and in liquids with higher vapor pressure. For example, laundry on a clothes line will dry (by evaporation) more rapidly on a windy day than on a still day. Three key parts to evaporation are heat, atmospheric pressure (determines the percent humidity) and air movement.

On a molecular level, there is no strict boundary between the liquid state and the vapor state. Instead, there is a Knudsen layer, where the phase is undetermined. Because this layer is only a few molecules thick, at a macroscopic scale a clear phase transition interface can be seen.

Liquids that do not evaporate visibly at a given temperature in a given gas (e.g., cooking oil at room temperature) have molecules that do not tend to transfer energy to each other in a pattern sufficient to frequently give a molecule the heat energy necessary to turn into vapor. However, these liquids are evaporating. It is just that the process is much slower and thus significantly less visible.

=== Evaporative equilibrium ===

Vapor pressure of water vs. temperature. 760 Torr = 1 atm.

If evaporation takes place in enclosed area, the escaping molecules accumulate as a vapor above the liquid. Many of the molecules return to the liquid, with returning molecules becoming more frequent as the density and pressure of the vapor increases. When the process of escape and return reaches an equilibrium, the vapor is said to be "saturated", and no further change in either vapor pressure and density or liquid temperature will occur. For a system consisting of vapor and liquid of a pure substance, this equilibrium state is directly related to the vapor pressure of the substance, as given by the ClausiusClapeyron relation:

: 

where P1, P2 are the vapor pressures at temperatures T1, T2 respectively, Hvap is the enthalpy of vaporization, and R is the universal gas constant. The rate of evaporation in an open system is related to the vapor pressure found in a closed system. If a liquid is heated, when the vapor pressure reaches the ambient pressure the liquid will boil.

The ability for a molecule of a liquid to evaporate is based largely on the amount of kinetic energy an individual particle may possess. Even at lower temperatures, individual molecules of a liquid can evaporate if they have more than the minimum amount of kinetic energy required for vaporization.

== Factors influencing the rate of evaporation ==
Note: Air used here is a common example; however, the vapor phase can be other gasses.

;Concentration of the substance evaporating in the air: If the air already has a high concentration of the substance evaporating, then the given substance will evaporate more slowly.
;Concentration of other substances in the air: If the air is already saturated with other substances, it can have a lower capacity for the substance evaporating.
;Flow rate of air: This is in part related to the concentration points above. If fresh air is moving over the substance all the time, then the concentration of the substance in the air is less likely to go up with time, thus encouraging faster evaporation. This is the result of the boundary layer at the evaporation surface decreasing with flow velocity, decreasing the diffusion distance in the stagnant layer.
;Inter-molecular forces: The stronger the forces keeping the molecules together in the liquid state, the more energy one must get to escape. This is characterized by the enthalpy of vaporization.
;Pressure: Evaporation happens faster if there is less exertion on the surface keeping the molecules from launching themselves.
;Surface area: A substance that has a larger surface area will evaporate faster, as there are more surface molecules that are able to escape.
;Temperature of the substance: If the substance is hotter, then its molecules have a higher average kinetic energy, and evaporation will be faster.
;Density: The higher the density the slower a liquid evaporates.

In the US, the National Weather Service measures the actual rate of evaporation from a standardized "pan" open water surface outdoors, at various locations nationwide. Others do likewise around the world. The US data is collected and compiled into an annual evaporation map. Geotechnical, Rock and Water Resources Library  Grow Resource  Evaporation. grow.arizona.edu The measurements range from under 30 to over 120 in per year.

==Thermodynamics==

Evaporation is an endothermic process, in that heat is absorbed during evaporation.

== Applications ==

*Industrial applications include many printing and coating processes; recovering salts from solutions; and drying a variety of materials such as lumber, paper, cloth and chemicals.

* When clothes are hung on a laundry line, even though the ambient temperature is below the boiling point of water, water evaporates. This is accelerated by factors such as low humidity, heat (from the sun), and wind. In a clothes dryer, hot air is blown through the clothes, allowing water to evaporate very rapidly.
* The Matki/Matka, a traditional Indian porous clay container used for storing and cooling water and other liquids.
* The botijo, a traditional Spanish porous clay container designed to cool the contained water by evaporation.
* Evaporative coolers, which can significantly cool a building by simply blowing dry air over a filter saturated with water.

=== Combustion vaporization ===

Fuel droplets vaporize as they receive heat by mixing with the hot gases in the combustion chamber. Heat (energy) can also be received by radiation from any hot refractory wall of the combustion chamber.

=== Pre-combustion vaporization ===

The catalytic cracking of long hydro-carbon chains into the shortest molecular chains possible, vastly improves gasoline mileage and provides reduced pollutant emissions once the fuel vapor is at its optimum ratio with air.
The chemically correct air/fuel mixture for total burning of gasoline has been determined to be 15 parts air to one part gasoline or 15/1 by weight. Changing this to a volume ratio yields 8000 parts air to one part gasoline or 8,000/1 by volume.

=== Film deposition ===

Thin films may be deposited by evaporating a substance and condensing it onto a substrate, or by dissolving the substance in a solvent, spreading the resulting solution thinly over a substrate, and evaporating the solvent.

== See also ==

* Atmometer (evaporation)
* Condensation
* Cryophorus
* Crystallisation
* Desalination
* Distillation
* Drying
* Eddy covariance flux (aka eddy correlation, eddy flux)
* Evaporator
* Evapotranspiration
* Flash evaporation
* Heat of vaporization
* Hydrology (agriculture)
* Latent heat
* Latent heat flux
* Pan evaporation
* Sublimation (phase transition) (phase transfer from solid directly to gas)
* Transpiration

== References ==

==Further reading==

* Has an especially detailed discussion of film deposition by evaporation.



[[Esbat]]

An esbat is a coven meeting of other than one the Sabbats within Wicca and other Wiccan-influenced forms of contemporary Paganism. Janet and Stewart Farrar describe esbats as an opportunity for a "love feast, healing work, psychic training and all." Farrar, 1984, p. 178. 

==Etymology==
The term esbat is derived from Old French s'esbattre (Modern French bat), meaning to frolic and amuse oneself, diversion. It was a borrowing by 20th century anthropologist Margaret Murray's use of French witch trial sources on supposed Witches' Sabbaths in her attempts to "reconstruct" a Witch Cult in Western Europe.

==Observance==
An esbat is commonly understood to be a ritual observance on the night of a full moon. However, the late high priestess Doreen Valiente distinguished between "full moon Esbat" and other esbatic occasions. 

The term esbat in this sense was described by Margaret Murray. 

==Notes==



[[Equal temperament]]

Tuning Continuum.jpg|right|250px|thumb|Figure 1: The syntonic tuning continuum, which includes many notable "equal temperament" tunings (Milne 2007). Milne, A., Sethares, W.A. and Plamondon, J.,[http://www.mitpressjournals.org/doi/pdf/10.1162/comj.2007.31.4.15 "Isomorphic Controllers and Dynamic Tuning: Invariant Fingerings Across a Tuning Continuum", Computer Music Journal, Winter 2007, Vol. 31, No. 4, Pages 15-32. ]]Chromatic scale on C, full octave ascending, notated only with sharps. 

An equal temperament is a musical temperament, or a system of tuning, in which every pair of adjacent notes has an identical frequency ratio. As pitch is perceived roughly as the logarithm of frequency, this means that the perceived "distance" from every note to its nearest neighbor is the same for every note in the system.

In equal temperament tunings, an interval  usually the octave  is divided into a series of equal steps (equal frequency ratios between successive notes). For classical music, the most common tuning system is twelve-tone equal temperament (also known as 12 equal temperament), inconsistently abbreviated as 12-TET, 12TET, 12tET, 12tet, 12-ET, 12ET, or 12et, which divides the octave into 12 parts, all of which are equal on a logarithmic scale. It is usually tuned relative to a standard pitch of 440 Hz, called A440.

Other equal temperaments exist (some music has been written in 19-TET and 31-TET for example, and 24-TET is used in Arabic music), but in Western countries when people use the term equal temperament without qualification, they usually mean 12-TET.

Equal temperaments may also divide some interval other than the octave, a pseudo-octave, into a whole number of equal steps. An example is an equal-tempered BohlenPierce scale. To avoid ambiguity, the term equal division of the octave, or EDO is sometimes preferred. According to this naming system, 12-TET is called 12-EDO, 31-TET is called 31-EDO, and so on.

String ensembles and vocal groups, who have no mechanical tuning limitations, often use a tuning much closer to just intonation, as it is naturally more consonant. Other instruments, such as some wind, keyboard, and fretted instruments, often only approximate equal temperament, where technical limitations prevent exact tunings. Some wind instruments that can easily and spontaneously bend their tone, most notably double-reeds, use tuning similar to string ensembles and vocal groups.

The tuning continuum of the syntonic temperament, shown in Figure 1, includes a number of notable "equal temperament" tunings, including those that divide the octave equally into 5, 7, 12, 17, 19, 22, 26, 31, 43, 50, and 53 parts. On an isomorphic keyboard, the fingering of music written in any of these syntonic tunings is precisely the same as it is in any other syntonic tuning, so long as the notes are spelled properlythat is, with no assumption of enharmonicity. This consistency of fingering makes it possible to smoothly vary the tuning (and hence the pitches of all notes, systematically) all along the syntonic tuning continuuma polyphonic tuning bend. The use of dynamic timbres lets consonance be maintained (or otherwise manipulated) across such tuning bends.

==History==
The two figures frequently credited with the achievement of exact calculation of equal temperament are Zhu Zaiyu or Chu-Tsaiyu in 1584 and Simon Stevin in 1585. According to Fritz A. Kuttner, a critic of the theory, it is known that "Chu-Tsaiyu presented a highly precise, simple and ingenious method for arithmetic calculation of equal temperament mono-chords in 1584" and that "Simon Stevin offered a mathematical definition of equal temperament plus a somewhat less precise computation of the corresponding numerical values in 1585 or later." Both developments occurred independently. Fritz A. Kuttner. "Prince Chu Tsai-Y's Life and Work: A Re-Evaluation of His Contribution to Equal Temperament Theory", p.200, Ethnomusicology, Vol. 19, No. 2 (May, 1975), pp. 163206. 

Kenneth Robinson attributes the invention of equal temperament to Zhu Zaiyu Kenneth Robinson: A critical study of Chu Tsai-y's contribution to the theory of equal temperament in Chinese music. (Sinologica Coloniensia, Bd. 9.) x, 136 pp. Wiesbaden: Franz Steiner Verlag GmbH, 1980. DM 36. p.vii "Chu-Tsaiyu the first formulator of the mathematics of "equal temperament" anywhere in the world and provides textual quotations as evidence. Robinson, Kenneth G., and Joseph Needham. 1962. "Physics and Physical Technology". In Science and Civilisation in China, vol. 4: "Physics and Physical Technology", Part 1: "Physics", edited by Joseph Needham. Cambridge: University Press. p. 221. Zhu Zaiyu is quoted as saying that, in a text dating from 1584, "I have founded a new system. I establish one foot as the number from which the others are to be extracted, and using proportions I extract them. Altogether one has to find the exact figures for the pitch-pipers in twelve operations." Robinson 1962, p. 221. Kuttner disagrees and remarks that his claim "cannot be considered correct without major qualifications." Fritz A. Kuttner. p. 163. Kuttner proposes that neither Zhu Zaiyu or Simon Stevin achieved equal temperament, and that neither of the two should be treated as inventors. Fritz A. Kuttner. p. 200. 

===Europe===
Simon Stevin's Van de Spiegheling der singconst c. 1605.

====Early history====
One of the earliest discussions of equal temperament occurs in the writing of Aristoxenus in the 4th century BC.

Vincenzo Galilei (father of Galileo Galilei) was one of the first practical advocates of twelve-tone equal temperament. He composed a set of dance suites on each of the 12 notes of the chromatic scale in all the "transposition keys", and published also, in his 1584 "Fronimo", 24 +1 ricercars. Galilei, V. (1584). Il Fronimo... Dialogo sopra l'arte del bene intavolare. G. Scotto: Venice, ff. 8089. He used the 18:17 ratio for fretting the lute (although some adjustment was necessary for pure octaves). J. Murray Barbour Tuning and Temperament p8 1951 Michigan State University Press 

Galilei's countryman and fellow lutenist Giacomo Gorzanis had written music based on equal temperament by 1567. Giacomo Gorzanis, c. 1525 - c. 1575 Intabolatura di liuto. Geneva, 1982 Gorzanis was not the only lutenist to explore all modes or keys: Francesco Spinacino wrote a "Recercare de tutti li Toni" (Ricercar in all the Tones) as early as 1507. 
In the 17th century lutenist-composer John Wilson wrote a set of 30 preludes including 24 in all the major/minor keys. John Wilson, 26 Preludes, Diapason press (DP49, Utrecht) in "English Song, 16001675, Facsimile of Twenty-six Manuscripts and an Edition of the Texts" vol. 7, Manuscripts at Oxford, Part II. introduction by Elise Bickfoer Jorgens, Garland Publishing Inc., New York and London, 1987 

Henricus Grammateus drew a close approximation to equal temperament in 1518. The first tuning rules in equal temperament were given by Giovani Maria Lanfranco in his "Scintille de musica". "Scintille de musica", (Brescia, 1533), p. 132 Zarlino in his polemic with Galilei initially opposed equal temperament but eventually conceded to it in relation to the lute in his Sopplimenti musicali in 1588.

====Simon Stevin====
The first mention of equal temperament related to Twelfth root of two in the West appeared in Simon Stevin's manuscript Van De Spiegheling der singconst (ca 1605) published posthumously nearly three centuries later in 1884. 
However, due to insufficient accuracy of his calculation, many of the chord length numbers he obtained were off by one or two units from the correct values. Thomas S. Christensen, The Cambridge history of western music theory p205, Cambridge University Press As a result, the frequency ratios of Simon Stevin's chords has no unified ratio, but one ratio per tone, which is claimed by Gene Cho as incorrect. Gene Cho, The discovery of musical equal temperament in China and Europe  Page 223, Mellen Press 

The following were Simon Stevin's chord length from Vande Spiegheling der singconst: Gene Cho, The discovery of musical equal temperament in China and Europe  Page 222, Mellen Press 

 TONE CHORD 10000 from Simon Stevin RATIO CORRECTED CHORD 
 semitone 9438 1.0595465 9438.7 
 whole tone 8909 1.0593781 
 1.5 tone 8404 1.0600904 8409 
 ditone 7936 1.0594758 7937 
 ditone and a half 7491 1.0594046 7491.5 
 tritone 7071 1.0593975 7071.1 
 tritone and a half 6674 1.0594845 6674.2 
 four-tone 6298 1.0597014 6299 
 four-tone-and-half 5944 1.0595558 5946 
 five-tone 5611 1.0593477 5612.3 
 five-tone-and-half 5296 1.0594788 5297.2 
 full tone 1.0592000 

A generation later, French mathematician Marin Mersenne presented several equal tempered
chord lengths obtained by Jean Beaugrand, Ismael Bouillaud and Jean Galle. Thomas S. Christensen, The Cambridge history of western music theory p207, Cambridge University Press 

In 1630 Johann Faulhaber published a 100 cent monochord table, with the exception of several errors due to his use of logarithmic tables . He did not explain how he obtained his results. Thomas S. Christensen, The Cambridge history of western music theory p78, Cambridge University Press 

====Baroque era====

From 1450 to about 1800, plucked instrument players (lutenists and guitarists) generally favored equal temperament, "Lutes, Viols, Temperaments" Mark Lindley ISBN 978-0-521-28883-5 and the Brossard lute Manuscript compiled in the last quarter of the 17th century contains a series of 18 preludes attributed to Bocquet written in all keys, including the last prelude, entitled Prelude sur tous les tons, which enharmonically modulates through all keys. Vm7 6214 Angelo Michele Bartolotti published a series of passacaglias in all keys, with connecting enharmonically modulating passages. Among the 17th-century keyboard composers Girolamo Frescobaldi advocated equal temperament. Some theorists, such as Giuseppe Tartini, were opposed to the adoption of equal temperament; they felt that degrading the purity of each chord degraded the aesthetic appeal of music, although Andreas Werckmeister emphatically advocated equal temperament in his 1707 treatise published posthumously.

J. S. Bach wrote The Well-Tempered Clavier to demonstrate the musical possibilities of well temperament, where in some keys the consonances are even more degraded than in equal temperament. It is reasonable to believe that when composers and theoreticians of earlier times wrote of the moods and "colors" of the keys, they each described the subtly different dissonances made available within a particular tuning method. However, it is difficult to determine with any exactness the actual tunings used in different places at different times by any composer. (Correspondingly, there is a great deal of variety in the particular opinions of composers about the moods and colors of particular keys.)

Twelve tone equal temperament took hold for a variety of reasons. It conveniently fit the existing keyboard design, and permitted total harmonic freedom at the expense of just a little impurity in every interval. This allowed greater expression through enharmonic modulation, which became extremely important in the 18th century in music of such composers as Francesco Geminiani, Wilhelm Friedemann Bach, Carl Philipp Emmanuel Bach and Johann Gottfried Mthel.

The progress of equal temperament from the mid-18th century on is described with detail in quite a few modern scholarly publications: it was already the temperament of choice during the Classical era (second half of the 18th century), and it became standard during the Early Romantic era (first decade of the 19th century), except for organs that switched to it more gradually, completing only in the second decade of the 19th century. (In England, some cathedral organists and choirmasters held out against it even after that date; Samuel Sebastian Wesley, for instance, opposed it all along. He died in 1876.)

A precise equal temperament is possible using the 17th-century Sabbatini method of splitting the octave first into three tempered major thirds. Di Veroli, Claudio. Unequal Temperaments: Theory, History and Practice. 2nd edition, Bray Baroque, Bray, Ireland 2009, pp. 140, 142 and 256. This was also proposed by several writers during the Classical era. Tuning without beat rates but employing several checks, achieving virtually modern accuracy, was already done in the first decades of the 19th century. Moody, Richard. Early Equal Temperament, An Aural Perspective: Claude Montal 1836 in Piano Technicians Journal. Kansas City, USA, Feb. 2003. Using beat rates, first proposed in 1749, became common after their diffusion by Helmholtz and Ellis in the second half of the 19th century. Helmholtz, Hermann L.F. Lehre von den Tonempfindungen Heidelberg 1862. English edition: On the Sensations of Tone, Longmans, London, 1885, p.548. The ultimate precision was available with 2-decimal tables published by White in 1917. White, William Braid. Piano Tuning and Allied Arts. 1917, 5th enlarged edition, Tuners Supply Co., Boston 1946, p.68. 

It is in the environment of equal temperament that the new styles of symmetrical tonality and polytonality, atonal music such as that written with the twelve tone technique or serialism, and jazz (at least its piano component) developed and flourished.

===China===

====Early history====
The origin of the Chinese pentatonic scale is traditionally ascribed to the mythical Ling Lun. Allegedly his writings discussed the equal division of the scale in the 27th century BC. Owen Henry Jorgensen, Tuning (East Lansing: Michigan State University Press, 1991) However, evidence of the origins of writing in this period (the early Longshan) in China is limited to rudimentary inscriptions on oracle bones and pottery. The Formation of Chinese Civilization: An Archaeological Perspective, Zhang Zhongpei, Shao Wangping and others, Yale (New Haven Conn)and New World Press (Beijing),2005 

A complete set of bronze chime bells, among many musical instruments found in the tomb of the Marquis Yi of Zeng (early Warring States, c. 5th century BCE in the Chinese Bronze Age), covers 5 full 7 note octaves in the key of C Major, including 12 note semi-tones in the middle of the range. The Formation of Chinese Civilization, 2005 (opt cit), the Eastern Zhou and the Growth of Regionalism, Lu Liancheng, pp 140 ff 

An approximation for equal temperament was described by He Chengtian, a mathematician of Southern and Northern Dynasties around 400 AD. J. Murray Barbour Tuning and Temperament p55-56, Michigan State University Press 1951 

Prince Zhu Zaiyu constructed 12 string equal temperament tuning instrument, front and back view
Historically, there was a seven-equal temperament or hepta-equal temperament practice in Chinese tradition. 

Zhu Zaiyu (), a prince of the Ming court, spent thirty years on research based on the equal temperament idea originally postulated by his father. He described his new pitch theory in his Fusion of Music and Calendar  published in 1580. This was followed by the publication of a detailed account of the new theory of the equal temperament with a precise numerical specification for 12-TET in his 5,000-page work Complete Compendium of Music and Pitch (Yuel quan shu ) in 1584. 
An extended account is also given by Joseph Needham. Science and Civilisation in China, Vol IV:1 (Physics), Joseph Needham, Cambridge University Press, 19622004, pp 220 ff 
Zhu obtained his result mathematically by dividing the length of string and pipe successively by

, and for pipe diameter by

 The Shorter Science & Civilisation in China, An abridgement by Colin Ronan of Joseph Needham's original text, p385 

;

 (still in tune after 84/12 = 7 octaves)

====Zhu Zaiyu====

According to Gene Cho, Zhu Zaiyu was the first person to solve the equal temperament problem mathematically. Gene J. Cho "The Significance of the Discovery of the Musical Equal Temperament In the Cultural History," http://en.cnki.com.cn/Article_en/CJFDTOTAL-XHYY201002002.htm Murray Barbour said, "The first known appearance in print of the correct figures for equal temperament was in China, where Prince Tsaiy's brilliant solution remains an enigma." J. Murray Barbour, Tuning and Temperament Michigan University Press, 1951 p7 The 19th-century German physicist Hermann von Helmholtz wrote in On the Sensations of Tone that a Chinese prince (see below) introduced a scale of seven notes, and that the division of the octave into twelve semitones was discovered in China. "The division of Octave into twelve Semitones, and the transposition of scales have also been discovered by this intelligent and skillful nation" Hermann von Helmholtz On the Sensations of Tone as a Physiological basis for the theory of music, p 258, 3rd edition, Longmans, Green and Co, London, 1895 

Zhu Zaiyu's equal temperament pitch pipes
Zhu Zaiyu illustrated his equal temperament theory by construction of a set of 36 bamboo tuning pipes ranging in 3 octaves, with instructions of the type of bamboo, color of paint, and detailed specification on their length and inner and outer diameters. He also constructed a 12-string tuning instrument, with a set of tuning pitch pipes hidden inside its bottom cavity. In 1890, Victor-Charles Mahillon, curator of the Conservatoire museum in Brussels, duplicated a set of pitch pipes according to Zhu Zaiyu's specification. He said that the Chinese theory of tones knew more about the diameter of pitch pipes than its Western counterpart, and that the set of pipes duplicated according to the Zaiyu data proved the accuracy of this theory. Lau Hanson, Abacus and Practical Mathematics p389 (in Chinese   389) 

==General properties==

In an equal temperament, the distance between each step of the scale is the same interval. Because the perceived identity of an interval depends on its ratio, this scale in even steps is a geometric sequence of multiplications. (An arithmetic sequence of intervals would not sound evenly spaced, and would not permit transposition to different keys.) Specifically, the smallest interval in an equal-tempered scale is the ratio:

:
:

where the ratio r divides the ratio p (typically the octave, which is 2/1) into n equal parts. (See Twelve-tone equal temperament below.)

Scales are often measured in cents, which divide the octave into 1200 equal intervals (each called a cent). This logarithmic scale makes comparison of different tuning systems easier than comparing ratios, and has considerable use in Ethnomusicology. The basic step in cents for any equal temperament can be found by taking the width of p above in cents (usually the octave, which is 1200 cents wide), called below w, and dividing it into n parts:
:

In musical analysis, material belonging to an equal temperament is often given an integer notation, meaning a single integer is used to represent each pitch. This simplifies and generalizes discussion of pitch material within the temperament in the same way that taking the logarithm of a multiplication reduces it to addition. Furthermore, by applying the modular arithmetic where the modulus is the number of divisions of the octave (usually 12), these integers can be reduced to pitch classes, which removes the distinction (or acknowledges the similarity) between pitches of the same name, e.g. 'C' is 0 regardless of octave register. The MIDI encoding standard uses integer note designations.

==Twelve-tone equal temperament==

In twelve-tone equal temperament, which divides the octave into 12 equal parts, the width of a semitone, i.e. the frequency ratio of the interval between two adjacent notes, is the twelfth root of two:

:

This interval is divided into 100 cents.

=== Calculating absolute frequencies ===

To find the frequency, Pn, of a note in 12-TET, the following definition may be used:

:

In this formula Pn refers to the pitch, or frequency (usually in hertz), you are trying to find. Pa refers to the frequency of a reference pitch (usually 440Hz). n and a refer to numbers assigned to the desired pitch and the reference pitch, respectively. These two numbers are from a list of consecutive integers assigned to consecutive semitones. For example, A4 (the reference pitch) is the 49th key from the left end of a piano (tuned to 440 Hz), and C4 (middle C) is the 40th key. These numbers can be used to find the frequency of C4:

:

=== Historical comparison ===
 Date,name,ratio,cents: from equal temperament monochord tables p55-p78; J. Murray Barbour Tuning and Temperament, Michigan State University Press 1951
 

 YEAR NAME RATIO CENTS 
 400 He Chengtian 1.060070671 101.0 
 1580 Vincenzo Galilei 18:17 99.0 
 1581 Zhu Zaiyu 1.059463094 100.0 
 1585 Simon Stevin 1.059546514 100.1 
 1630 Marin Mersenne 1.059322034 99.8 
 1630 Johann Faulhaber 1.059490385 100.0 

=== Comparison to just intonation ===

The intervals of 12-TET closely approximate some intervals in just intonation. The fifths and fourths are almost indistinguishably close to just.

In the following table the sizes of various just intervals are compared against their equal-tempered counterparts, given as a ratio as well as cents.

 Name Exact value in 12-TET Decimal value in 12-TET Cents Just intonation interval Cents in just intonation Error 
 Unison (C) 1.000000 0 = 1.0000000 0.00 0 
 Minor second (C/D) 1.059463 100  1.06666 111.73 11.73 
 Major second (D) 1.122462 200 = 1.1250000 203.91 3.91 
 Minor third (D/E) 1.189207 300 = 1.2000000 315.64 15.64 
 Major third (E) 1.259921 400 = 1.2500000 386.31 +13.69 
 Perfect fourth (F) 1.334840 500  1.33333 498.04 +1.96 
 Augmented fourth (F/G) 1.414214 600 = 1.4000000 582.51 +17.49 
 Perfect fifth (G) 1.498307 700 = 1.5000000 701.96 1.96 
 Minor sixth (G/A) 1.587401 800 = 1.6000000 813.69 13.69 
 Major sixth (A) 1.681793 900  1.66666 884.36 +15.64 
 Minor seventh (A/B) 1.781797 1000  1.77777 996.09 +3.91 
 Major seventh (B) 1.887749 1100 = 1.8750000 1088.27 +11.73 
 Octave (C) 2.000000 1200 = 2.0000000 1200.00 0 

=== Seven-tone equal division of the fifth ===
Violins, violas and cellos are tuned in perfect fifths (G  D  A  E, for violins, and C  G  D  A, for violas and cellos), which suggests that their semi-tone ratio is slightly higher than in the conventional twelve-tone equal temperament. Because a perfect fifth is in 3:2 relation with its base tone, and this interval is covered in 7 steps, each tone is in the ratio of to the next (100.28 cents), which provides for a perfect fifth with ratio of 3:2 but a slightly widened octave with ratio of  517:258 or  2.00388:1 rather than the usual 2:1 ratio, because twelve perfect fifths do not equal seven octaves. During actual play, however, the violinist chooses pitches by ear, and only the four unstopped pitches of the strings are guaranteed to exhibit this 3:2 ratio.

==Rational semitone==
For any semitone that is a proper fraction of a whole tone, exactly one equal division of the octave lets the circle of fifths generate all the notes of the equal division while preserving the order of the notes. (That is, C is lower than D, D is lower than E, etc., and F is indeed sharper than F.) The number of divisions needed for the octave is seven times the number of divisions of a whole tone minus twice the number of divisions of the semitone. The corresponding fifth spans a number of divisions equal to four whole tones minus one semitone. Hence, for a semitone of one-half of a whole tone, the corresponding equal temperament scheme is 12-EDO with a fifth of seven divisions. A semitone of one-third of a whole tone corresponds to 19-EDO with a fifth of eleven divisions.

12-EDO is the equal temperament with the smallest number of divisions that allows for a rational semitone to preserve the desired properties concerning note order and the circle of fifths. It also has the desirable property of making the semitone exactly one-half of a whole tone. These are additional reasons why 12-EDO became the predominant form of equal temperament.

While each rational semitone corresponds to only one equal temperament, the reverse is not the case. For example, both a semitone of one-seventh, and a semitone of eight-ninths both use 47-EDO, which is the smallest number of divisions that has two different semitones. However, they have different values for the fifth, as a semitone of one-seventh uses a fifth of twenty-seven divisions while a semitone of eight ninths uses a fifth of twenty-eight divisions.

==Other equal temperaments==

=== 5 and 7 tone temperaments in ethnomusicology ===

Five and seven tone equal temperament (5-TET and 7-TET ), with 240 and 171 cent steps respectively, are fairly common. A Thai xylophone measured by Morton (1974) "varied only plus or minus 5 cents," from 7-TET. A Ugandan Chopi xylophone measured by Haddon (1952) was also tuned to this system. According to Morton, "Thai instruments of fixed pitch are tuned to an equidistant system of seven pitches per octave ... As in Western traditional music, however, all pitches of the tuning system are not used in one mode (often referred to as 'scale'); in the Thai system five of the seven are used in principal pitches in any mode, thus establishing a pattern of nonequidistant intervals for the mode." Morton, David (1980). "The Music of Thailand", Musics of Many Cultures, p.70. May, Elizabeth, ed. ISBN 0-520-04778-8. Indonesian gamelans are tuned to 5-TET according to Kunst (1949), but according to Hood (1966) and McPhee (1966) their tuning varies widely, and according to Tenzer (2000) they contain stretched octaves. It is now well-accepted that of the two primary tuning systems in gamelan music, slendro and pelog, only slendro somewhat resembles five-tone equal temperament while pelog is highly unequal; however, Surjodiningrat et al. (1972) has analyzed pelog as a seven-note subset of nine-tone equal temperament (133 cent steps ). A South American Indian scale from a preinstrumental culture measured by Boiles (1969) featured 175 cent seven tone equal temperament, which stretches the octave slightly as with instrumental gamelan music.

5-TET and 7-TET mark the endpoints of the syntonic temperament's valid tuning range, as shown in Figure 1.
* In 5-TET the tempered perfect fifth is 720 cents wide (at the top of the tuning continuum), and marks the endpoint on the tuning continuum at which the width of the minor second shrinks to a width of 0 cents.

* In 7-TET the tempered perfect fifth is 686 cents wide (at the bottom of the tuning continuum), and marks the endpoint on the tuning continuum, at which the minor second expands to be as wide as the major second (at 171 cents each).

=== Various Western equal temperaments ===
Easley Blackwood's notation system for 16 equal temperament: intervals are notated similarly to those they approximate and there are fewer enharmonic equivalents. Myles Leigh Skinner (2007). Toward a Quarter-tone Syntax: Analyses of Selected Works by Blackwood, Haba, Ives, and Wyschnegradsky, p.55. ISBN 9780542998478. 

Comparison of equal temperaments from 9 to 25 (after Sethares (2005), p.58).

31 tone equal temperament was advocated by Christiaan Huygens and Adriaan Fokker. 31-TET has a slightly less accurate fifth than 12-TET, but provides near-just major thirds, and provides decent matches for harmonics up to at least 13, of which the seventh harmonic is particularly accurate.

In the 20th century, standardized Western pitch and notation practices having been placed on a 12-TET foundation made the quarter tone scale (or 24-TET) a popular microtonal tuning.

29-TET is the lowest number of equal divisions of the octave which produces a better perfect fifth than 12-TET. Its major third is roughly as inaccurate as 12-TET, however it is tuned 14 cents flat rather than 14 cents sharp.

41-TET is the second lowest number of equal divisions that produces a better perfect fifth than 12-TET. Its major third is more accurate than 12-ET and 29-ET, about 6 cents flat.

53-TET is better at approximating the traditional just consonances than 12, 19 or 31-TET, but has had only occasional use. Its extremely good perfect fifths make it interchangeable with an extended Pythagorean tuning, but it also accommodates schismatic temperament, and is sometimes used in Turkish music theory. It does not, however, fit the requirements of meantone temperaments, which put good thirds within easy reach via the cycle of fifths. In 53-TET the very consonant thirds would be reached instead by strange enharmonic relationships. A consequence of this is that chord progressions like I-vi-ii-V-I won't land you back where you started in 53-TET, but rather one 53-tone step flat (unless the motion by I-vi wasn't by the 5-limit minor third).

Another extension of 12-TET is 72-TET (dividing the semitone into 6 equal parts), which though not a meantone tuning, approximates well most just intonation intervals, even less traditional ones such as 7/4, 9/7, 11/5, 11/6 and 11/7. 72-TET has been taught, written and performed in practice by Joe Maneri and his students (whose atonal inclinations interestingly typically avoid any reference to just intonation whatsoever).

Other equal divisions of the octave that have found occasional use include 14-TET, 15-TET, 16-TET, 17-TET, 19-TET, 22-TET, 34-TET, 46-TET, 48-TET, 99-TET, and 171-TET.

=== Equal temperaments of non-octave intervals ===

The equal-tempered version of the BohlenPierce scale consists of the ratio 3:1, 1902 cents, conventionally a perfect fifth and an octave, called in this theory a tritave (), and split into a thirteen equal parts. This provides a very close match to justly tuned ratios consisting only of odd numbers. Each step is 146.3 cents (), or .

Wendy Carlos created three unusual equal temperaments after a thorough study of the properties of possible temperaments having a step size between 30 and 120 cents. These were called alpha, beta, and gamma. They can be considered as equal divisions of the perfect fifth. Each of them provides a very good approximation of several just intervals. Three Asymmetric Divisions of the Octave by Wendy Carlos Their step sizes:
* alpha: (78.0 cents)
* beta: (63.8 cents)
* gamma: (35.1 cents)
Alpha and Beta may be heard on the title track of her 1986 album Beauty in the Beast.

==See also==

* Musical acoustics (the physics of music)
* Music and mathematics
* Microtuner
* Microtonal music
* Piano tuning
* List of meantone intervals
* Diatonic and chromatic
* Electronic tuner

== References ==
=== Citations === 

=== Bibliography ===
* Cho, Gene Jinsiong. (2003). The Discovery of Musical Equal Temperament in China and Europe in the Sixteenth Century. Lewiston, NY: Edwin Mellen Press.
* Jorgensen, Owen. Tuning. Michigan State University Press, 1991. ISBN 0-87013-290-3
* 
* Surjodiningrat, W., Sudarjana, P.J., and Susanto, A. (1972) Tone measurements of outstanding Javanese gamelans in Jogjakarta and Surakarta, Gadjah Mada University Press, Jogjakarta 1972. Cited on http://web.telia.com/~u57011259/pelog_main.htm, accessed May 19, 2006.
* Stewart, P. J. (2006) "From Galaxy to Galaxy: Music of the Spheres" 
* Khramov, Mykhaylo. "Approximation of 5-limit just intonation. Computer MIDI Modeling in Negative Systems of Equal Divisions of the Octave", Proceedings of the International Conference SIGMAP-2008, 2629 July 2008, Porto, pp. 181184, ISBN 978-989-8111-60-9

== External links ==
* "An Introduction to Historical Tunings" by Kyle Gann, KyleGann.com.
* Huygens-Fokker Foundation Centre for Microtonal Music
* A.Orlandini: Music Acoustics
* "Temperament" from A supplement to Mr. Chambers's cyclopdia (1753)
* "12TET Frequency Table Maker"  Creates a frequency table (Hz.) for all 12TET pitches
* "HANDBOOK OF ACOUSTICS  online book" Brief description of Scheibler's tonometer
* Barbieri, Patrizio. Enharmonic instruments and music, 14701900. (2008) Latina, Il Levante Libreria Editrice
* "Fractal Microtonal Music", Jim Kukula.
https://www.academia.edu/5210832/18th_Century_Quotes_on_J.S._Bachs_Temperament

 


[[Edward Gibbon]]

Edward Gibbon (8 May 1737 O.S. 27 April 16 January 1794) Gibbon's birthday is 27 April 1737 of the old style (O.S.) Julian calendar; England adopted the new style (N.S.) Gregorian calendar in 1752, and thereafter Gibbon's birthday was celebrated on 8 May 1737 N.S. was an English historian and Member of Parliament. His most important work, The History of the Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire, was published in six volumes between 1776 and 1788. The Decline and Fall is known for the quality and irony of its prose, its use of primary sources, and its open criticism of organised religion. The most recent and also the first critical edition, in three volumes, is that of David Womersley. For commentary on Gibbon's irony and insistence on primary sources whenever available, see Womersley, "Introduction". While the larger part of Gibbon's caustic view of Christianity is declared within the text of chapters XV and XVI, Gibbon rarely neglects to note its baleful influence throughout the remaining volumes of the Decline and Fall. 

==Early life: 17371752==
Edward Gibbon was born in 1737, the son of Edward and Judith Gibbon at Lime Grove, in the town of Putney, Surrey. He had six siblings: five brothers and one sister, all of whom died in infancy. His grandfather, also named Edward, had lost all of his assets as a result of the South Sea Bubble stock market collapse in 1720, but eventually regained much of his wealth, so that Gibbon's father was able to inherit a substantial estate. D. M. Low, Edward Gibbon. 17371794 (London: Chatto & Windus, 1937), p. 7. 

As a youth, Gibbon's health was under constant threat. He described himself as "a puny child, neglected by my Mother, starved by my nurse". At age nine, he was sent to Dr. Woddeson's school at Kingston upon Thames (now Kingston Grammar School), shortly after which his mother died. He then took up residence in the Westminster School boarding house, owned by his adored "Aunt Kitty", Catherine Porten. Soon after she died in 1786, he remembered her as rescuing him from his mother's disdain, and imparting "the first rudiments of knowledge, the first exercise of reason, and a taste for books which is still the pleasure and glory of my life". Norton, Letters, vol. 3, 10/5/86, 4548. By 1751, Gibbon's reading was already extensive and certainly pointed toward his future pursuits: Laurence Echard's Roman History (1713), William Howel(l)'s An Institution of General History (168085), and several of the 65 volumes of the acclaimed Universal History from the Earliest Account of Time (17471768). Stephen, DNB, p. 1130; Pocock, Enlightenments of Edward Gibbon, 2940. At age 14, Gibbon was "a prodigy of uncontrolled reading"; Gibbon himself admitted an "indiscriminate appetite". p. 29. 

==Oxford, Lausanne, and a religious journey: 17521758==
Following a stay at Bath in 1752 to improve his health, at the age of 15 Gibbon was sent by his father to Magdalen College, Oxford, where he was enrolled as a gentleman-commoner. He was ill-suited, however, to the college atmosphere and later rued his 14 months there as the "most idle and unprofitable" of his life. Because he himself says so in his autobiography, it used to be thought that his penchant for "theological controversy" (his aunt's influence) fully bloomed when he came under the spell of the deist or rationalist theologian Conyers Middleton (16831750), the author of Free Inquiry into the Miraculous Powers (1749). In that tract, Middleton denied the validity of such powers; Gibbon promptly objected, or so the argument used to run. The product of that disagreement, with some assistance from the work of Catholic Bishop Jacques-Bnigne Bossuet (16271704), and that of the Elizabethan Jesuit Robert Parsons (15461610), yielded the most memorable event of his time at Oxford: his conversion to Roman Catholicism on 8 June 1753. He was further "corrupted" by the 'free thinking' deism of the playwright/poet couple David and Lucy Mallet; Pocock, Enlightenments of Edward Gibbon. for Middleton, see pp. 4547; for Bossuet, p. 47; for the Mallets, p.23; Robert Parsons Persons, A Christian directory: The first booke of the Christian exercise, appertaining to resolution, (London, 1582). In his 1796 edition of Gibbon's Memoirs, Lord Sheffield claims that Gibbon directly connected his Catholic conversion to his reading of Parsons. Womersley, Oxford Dictionary of National Biography, p. 9. and finally Gibbon's father, already "in despair," had had enough. David Womersley has shown, however, that Gibbon's claim to having been converted by a reading of Middleton is very unlikely, and was introduced only into the final draft of the "Memoirs" in 179293. Womersley, Gibbon and the 'Watchmen of the Holy City': The Historian and His Reputation, 17761815 (Oxford University Press, 2002), as cited by G. M. Bowersock in The New York Review of Books, 25 November 2010, p. 56. Bowersock suggests that Gibbon fabricated the Middleton story retrospectively in his anxiety about the impact of the French Revolution and Edmund Burke's claim that it was provoked by the French philosophes, so influential on Gibbon.

Within weeks of his conversion, the youngster was removed from Oxford and sent to live under the care and tutelage of Daniel Pavillard, Reformed pastor of Lausanne, Switzerland. It was here that he made one of his life's two great friendships, that of Jacques Georges Deyverdun (the French language translator of Goethe's The Sorrows of Young Werther); the other being John Baker Holroyd (later Lord Sheffield). Just a year and a half later, after his father threatened to disinherit him, on Christmas Day, 1754, he reconverted to Protestantism. "The various articles of the Romish creed," he wrote, "disappeared like a dream". John Murray (ed.), The Autobiographies of Edward Gibbon. Second Edition (London: John Murray, 1897), p. 137. He remained in Lausanne for five intellectually productive years, a period that greatly enriched Gibbon's already immense aptitude for scholarship and erudition: he read Latin literature; travelled throughout Switzerland studying its cantons' constitutions; and studied the works of Hugo Grotius, Samuel von Pufendorf, John Locke, Pierre Bayle, and Blaise Pascal.

==Thwarted romance==
Edward Gibbon, by Henry Walton (died 1813)
He also met the one romance in his life: the daughter of the pastor of Crassy, a young woman named Suzanne Curchod, who would later become the wife of Louis XVI's finance minister Jacques Necker, and the mother of Madame de Stal. The two developed a warm affinity; Gibbon proceeded to propose marriage, Norton, Biblio, p. 2; Letters, vol. 1, p. 396. a concise summary of their relationship is found at 396401. but ultimately wedlock was out of the question, blocked both by his father's staunch disapproval and Curchod's equally staunch reluctance to leave Switzerland. Gibbon returned to England in August 1758 to face his father. There could be no refusal of the elder's wishes. Gibbon put it this way: "I sighed as a lover, I obeyed as a son." Murray, p. 239. The phrase, "sighed " alludes to the play Polyeucte by "the father of French tragedy," Pierre Corneille. Womersley, Oxford Dictionary of National Biography, p. 11. He proceeded to cut off all contact with Curchod, even as she vowed to wait for him. Their final emotional break apparently came at Ferney, France in the spring of 1764, though they did see each other at least one more time a year later. Womersley, 1112. 

==First fame and the grand tour: 17581765==
Portchester Castle came under Gibbon's command for a brief period while he was an officer in the Hampshire militia. 
Upon his return to England, Gibbon published his first book, Essai sur l'tude de la Littrature in 1761, which produced an initial taste of celebrity and distinguished him, in Paris at least, as a man of letters. In the Essai, the 24-year-old boldly braved the reigning philosophic fashion to uphold the studious values and practices of the rudits (antiquarian scholars). Ibid., p. 11; and The Miscellaneous Works, First edition, vol. 2. From 1759 to 1770, Gibbon served on active duty and in reserve with the South Hampshire militia, his deactivation in December 1762 coinciding with the militia's dispersal at the end of the Seven Years' War. Womersley, Oxford Dictionary of National Biography, pp. 11, 12. Gibbon was commissioned a captain and resigned a lieutenant colonel, later crediting his service with providing him "a larger introduction into the English world." There was further, the matter of a vast utility: "The discipline and evolutions of a modern battalion gave me a clearer notion of the phalanx and the legion; and the captain of the Hampshire grenadiers (the reader may smile) has not been useless to the historian of the Roman empire." Murray, p. 190. The following year he embarked on the Grand Tour (of continental Europe), which included a visit to Rome. In his autobiography Gibbon vividly records his rapture when he finally neared "the great object of pilgrimage":

...at the distance of twenty-five years I can neither forget nor express the strong emotions which agitated my mind as I first approached and entered the eternal City. After a sleepless night, I trod, with a lofty step the ruins of the Forum; each memorable spot where Romulus stood, or Tully spoke, or Caesar fell, was at once present to my eye; and several days of intoxication were lost or enjoyed before I could descend to a cool and minute investigation. Murray, pp. 266267. 

And it was here that Gibbon first conceived the idea of composing a history of the city, later extended to the entire empire, a moment known to history as the "Capitoline vision": Pocock, "Classical History,"  #2. 

It was at Rome, on the fifteenth of October 1764, as I sat musing amidst the ruins of the Capitol, while the barefooted fryars were singing Vespers in the temple of Jupiter, that the idea of writing the decline and fall of the City first started to my mind. Murray, p. 302. 

Womersley (Oxford Dictionary of National Biography, p. 12) notes the existence of "good reasons" to doubt the statement's accuracy. Elaborating, Pocock ("Classical History,"  #2) refers to it as a likely "creation of memory" or a "literary invention" seeing as how Gibbon, in his autobiography, claimed his journal dated the reminiscence to 15 October, when in fact the journal gives no date.

==Gibbon's literary failures==
In June of 1765, Gibbon returned to his father's house, and remained there until the latter's death in 1770. Cecil, Algernon. Six Oxford thinkers: Edward Gibbon, John Henry Newman, R.W. Church, James Anthony Froude, Walter Pater, Lord Morley of Blackburn. London: John Murray, 1909, p. 59. Considered by Gibbon as the worst five years of his life, he tried to remain busy by making early attempts towards writing full histories. His first historical narrative known as the History of Switzerland, which represented Gibbon's love for Switzerland, was never published nor finished. Gibbon mistakenly wrote the history in French dialect (instead of German), and the overall structuring of the Gibbon's book was subpar, compared to his later works. Even under the guidance of Deyverdun (a German translator for Gibbons), Gibbon became too critical of himself, and completely abandoned the project, only writing 60 pages of texts. Cecil, Algernon. Six Oxford thinkers: Edward Gibbon, John Henry Newman, R.W. Church, James Anthony Froude, Walter Pater, Lord Morley of Blackburn. London: John Murray, 1909, p. 60. However, after Gibbon's death, his writings on Switzerland's history were discovered and published by Lord Sheffield in 1815. Soon after abandoning his History of Switzerland, Gibbon made another attempt towards completing a full history.

His second work, Memoires Litteraires de la Grande Bretagne, was a two volume set which described the literary and social conditions of England at the time, such as Lord Lyttelton's history of Henry II and Lardner's work on the Credibility of Gospel History. Cecil, Algernon. Six Oxford thinkers: Edward Gibbon, John Henry Newman, R.W. Church, James Anthony Froude, Walter Pater, Lord Morley of Blackburn. London: John Murray, 1909, p. 61. Gibbon's Memoires Litteraires failed to gain any notoriety, and was considered a flop by fellow historians and literary scholars.

==The History of the Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire: 17761788==

Blue plaque to Gibbon on Bentinck Street, London

Gibbon returned to England in June 1765. His father died in 1770, and after tending to the estate, which was by no means in good condition, there remained quite enough for Gibbon to settle fashionably in London at 7 Bentinck Street, independent of financial concerns. By February 1773, he was writing in earnest, but not without the occasional self-imposed distraction. He took to London society quite easily, joined the better social clubs, including Dr. Johnson's Literary Club, and looked in from time to time on his friend Holroyd in Sussex. He succeeded Oliver Goldsmith at the Royal Academy as 'professor in ancient history' (honorary but prestigious). In late 1774, he was initiated a freemason of the Premier Grand Lodge of England. i.e., in London's Lodge of Friendship No. 3. see Gibbon's freemasonry. And, perhaps least productively in that same year, he was returned to the House of Commons for Liskeard, Cornwall through the intervention of his relative and patron, Edward Eliot. He became the archetypal back-bencher, benignly "mute" and "indifferent," his support of the Whig ministry invariably automatic. Gibbon's indolence in that position, perhaps fully intentional, subtracted little from the progress of his writing. Gibbon lost the Liskeard seat in 1780 when Eliot joined the opposition, taking with him "the Electors of Leskeard are commonly of the same opinion as Mr. Eliot." (Murray, p. 322.) The following year, owing to the good grace of Prime Minister Lord North, he was again returned to Parliament, this time for Lymington on a by-election. Gibbon's Whiggery was solidly conservative: in favour of the propertied oligarchy while upholding the subject's rights under the rule of law; though staunchly against ideas such as the natural rights of man and popular sovereignty, what he referred to as "the wild & mischievous system of Democracy" (Dickinson, "Politics," 17879). Gibbon also served on the government's Board of Trade and Plantations from 1779 until 1782, when the Board was abolished. The subsequent promise of an embassy position in Paris ultimately aborted, serendipitously leaving Gibbon free to focus on his great project. 

After several rewrites, with Gibbon "often tempted to throw away the labours of seven years," the first volume of what would become his life's major achievement, The History of the Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire, was published on 17 February 1776. Through 1777, the reading public eagerly consumed three editions for which Gibbon was rewarded handsomely: two-thirds of the profits amounting to approximately 1,000. Norton, Biblio, pp. 37, 45. Gibbon sold the copyrights to the remaining editions of volume 1 and the remaining 5 volumes to publishers Strahan & Cadell for 8000. The great History earned the author a total of about 9000. Biographer Leslie Stephen wrote that thereafter, "His fame was as rapid as it has been lasting." And as regards this first volume, "Some warm praise from David Hume overpaid the labour of ten years."

Volumes II and III appeared on 1 March 1781, eventually rising "to a level with the previous volume in general esteem." Volume IV was finished in June 1784; Ibid., pp. 49, 57. Both Norton and Womersley (Oxford Dictionary of National Biography, p. 14) establish that vol. IV was substantially complete by the end of 1783. the final two were completed during a second Lausanne sojourn (September 1783 to August 1787) where Gibbon reunited with his friend Deyverdun in leisurely comfort. By early 1787, he was "straining for the goal" and with great relief the project was finished in June. Gibbon later wrote:

It was on the day, or rather the night, of 27 June 1787, between the hours of eleven and twelve, that I wrote the last lines of the last page in a summer-house in my garden. ... I will not dissemble the first emotions of joy on the recovery of my freedom, and perhaps the establishment of my fame. But my pride was soon humbled, and a sober melancholy was spread over my mind by the idea that I had taken my everlasting leave of an old and agreeable companion, and that, whatsoever might be the future date of my history, the life of the historian must be short and precarious. Murray, pp. 333334. 

Volumes IV, V, and VI finally reached the press in May 1788, their publication having been delayed since March so it could coincide with a dinner party celebrating Gibbon's 51st birthday (the 8th). Norton, Biblio, p. 61. Mounting a bandwagon of praise for the later volumes were such contemporary luminaries as Adam Smith, William Robertson, Adam Ferguson, Lord Camden, and Horace Walpole. Smith remarked that Gibbon's triumph had positioned him "at the very head of literary tribe."

==Later years: 17891794==
The years following Gibbon's completion of The History were filled largely with sorrow and increasing physical discomfort. He had returned to London in late 1787 to oversee the publication process alongside Lord Sheffield. With that accomplished, in 1789 it was back to Lausanne only to learn of and be "deeply affected" by the death of Deyverdun, who had willed Gibbon his home, La Grotte. He resided there with little commotion, took in the local society, received a visit from Sheffield in 1791, and "shared the common abhorrence" of the French Revolution.

In a letter to Lord Sheffield on 5 February 1791, Gibbon praised Burke's Reflections on the Revolution in France: "Burke's book is a most admirable medicine against the French disease, which has made too much progress even in this happy country. I admire his eloquence, I approve his politics, I adore his chivalry, and I can even forgive his superstition...The French spread so many lyes about the sentiments of the English nation, that I wish the most considerable men of all parties and descriptions would join in some public act declaring themselves satisfied with, and resolved to support, our present constitution". J. E. Norton (ed.), The Letters of Edward Gibbon. Volume Three. 17841794. Letters 619878 (London: Cassell, 1956), p. 216. 

In 1793, word came of Lady Sheffield's death; Gibbon immediately left Lausanne and set sail to comfort a grieving but composed Sheffield. His health began to fail critically in December, and at the turn of the new year, he was on his last legs.

Gibbon is believed to have suffered from an extreme case of scrotal swelling, probably a hydrocele testis, a condition which causes the scrotum to swell with fluid in a compartment overlying either testicle. the term hydrocele specifies that the compartment is not connected to the peritoneal cavity, whereas the term inguinal hernia specifies a connecting passageway, however narrow. -ed. In an age when close-fitting clothes were fashionable, his condition led to a chronic and disfiguring inflammation that left Gibbon a lonely figure. After more than two centuries, the exact nature of Gibbon's ailment remains a bone of contention. Womersley's version here matches Patricia Craddock's. She, in a very full and graphic account of Gibbon's last days, notes that Sir Gavin de Beer's medical analysis of 1949 "makes it certain that Gibbon did not have a true hydrocele...and highly probable that he was suffering both from a 'large and irreducible hernia' and cirrhosis of the liver." (emphasis added). Also worthy of note are Gibbon's congenial and even joking moods while in excruciating pain as he neared the end. Both authors report this late bit of Gibbonian bawdiness: "Why is a fat man like a Cornish Borough? Because he never sees his member." see Womersley, Oxford Dictionary of National Biography, p.16; Craddock, Luminous Historian, 334342; and Beer, "Malady." As his condition worsened, he underwent numerous procedures to alleviate the condition, but with no enduring success. In early January, the last of a series of three operations caused an unremitting peritonitis to set in and spread, from which he died. The "English giant of the Enlightenment" so styled by the "unrivalled master of Enlightenment studies," historian Franco Venturi (19141994) in his Utopia and Reform in the Enlightenment (Cambridge: 1971), p. 132. See Pocock, Enlightenments of Edward Gibbon, p. 6; x. finally succumbed at 12:45 pm, 16 January 1794 at age 56. He was buried in the Sheffield family graveyard at the parish church in Fletching, Sussex. Gibbon's estate was valued at approx. 26,000. He left most of his property to cousins. As stipulated in his will, Sheffield oversaw the sale of his library at auction to William Beckford for 950. Womersley, Oxford Dictionary of National Biography, 1718. 

==Legacy==
Gibbon's work has been criticised for its scathing view of Christianity as laid down in chapters XV and XVI, a situation which resulted in the banning of the book in several countries. Gibbon's alleged crime was disrespecting, and none too lightly, the character of sacred Christian doctrine, by "treat the Christian church as a phenomenon of general history, not a special case admitting supernatural explanations and disallowing criticism of its adherents". More specifically, the chapters excoriated the church for "supplanting in an unnecessarily destructive way the great culture that preceded it" and for "the outrage of religious intolerance and warfare". Craddock, Luminous Historian, p.60; also see Shelby Thomas McCloy, Gibbon's Antagonism to Christianity (Chapel Hill: Univ. of North Carolina Press, 1933). Gibbon, however, began chapter XV with what appeared to be a moderately positive appraisal of the Church's rise to power and authority. Therein he documented one primary and five secondary causes of the rapid spread of Christianity throughout the Roman Empire: primarily, "the convincing evidence of the doctrine itself, and... the ruling providence of its great Author;" secondarily, "exclusive zeal, the immediate expectation of another world, the claim of miracles, the practice of rigid virtue, and the constitution of the primitive church." (first quote, Gibbon in Craddock, Luminous Historian, p. 61; second quote, Gibbon in Womersley, Decline and Fall, vol. 1, ch. XV, p. 497.) 
Gibbon, though assumed to be entirely anti-religion, was actually supportive to some extent, insofar as it did not obscure his true endeavour  a history that was not influenced and swayed by official church doctrine. Although the most famous two chapters are heavily ironical and cutting about religion, it is not utterly condemned, and its truth and rightness are upheld however thinly.

Gibbon, in letters to Holroyd and others, expected some type of church-inspired backlash, but the utter harshness of the ensuing torrents far exceeded anything he or his friends could possibly have anticipated. Contemporary detractors such as Joseph Priestley and Richard Watson stoked the nascent fire, but the most severe of these attacks was an "acrimonious" piece by the young cleric, Henry Edwards Davis. Henry Edwards Davis, An Examination of the Fifteenth and Sixteenth Chapters of Mr. Gibbon's History of the Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire (London: J. Dodsley, 1778). online. 
Gibbon subsequently published his Vindication in 1779, in which he categorically denied Davis' "criminal accusations", branding him a purveyor of "servile plagiarism." See Gibbon monographs. Davis followed Gibbon's Vindication with yet another reply (1779).

Gibbon's apparent antagonism to Christian doctrine spilled over into the Jewish faith, leading to charges of anti-Semitism. For example, he wrote:

From the reign of Nero to that of Antoninus Pius, the Jews discovered a fierce impatience of the dominion of Rome, which repeatedly broke out in the most furious massacres and insurrections. Humanity is shocked at the recital of the horrid cruelties which they committed in the cities of Egypt, of Cyprus, and of Cyrene, where they dwelt in treacherous friendship with the unsuspecting natives; and we are tempted to applaud the severe retaliation which was exercised by the arms of legions against a race of fanatics, whose dire and credulous superstition seemed to render them the implacable enemies not only of the Roman government, but also of humankind. Womersley, ed., Decline and Fall, vol. 1, ch. XVI, p. 516. see online Gibbon's first footnote here reveals even more about why his detractors reacted so harshly: In Cyrene, Jews massacred 220,000 Greeks; in Cyprus, 240,000; in Egypt, a very great multitude. Many of these unhappy victims were sawed asunder, according to a precedent to which David had given the sanction of his examples. The victorious Jews devoured the flesh, licked up the blood, and twisted the entrails like a girdle around their bodies. see Dion Cassius l.lxviii, p. 1145. As a matter of fact, this is a verbatim citation from Dio Cassius, Historia Romana LXVIII, 32:13: The Jewish Uprising: Meanwhile the Jews in the region of Cyrene had put one Andreas at their head and were destroying both the Romans and the Greeks. They would cook their flesh, make belts for themselves of their entrails, anoint themselves with their blood, and wear their skins for clothing. Many they sawed in two, from the head downwards. Others they would give to wild beasts and force still others to fight as gladiators. In all, consequently, two hundred and twenty thousand perished. In Egypt, also, they performed many similar deeds, and in Cyprus under the leadership of Artemio. There, likewise, two hundred and forty thousand perished. For this reason no Jew may set foot in that land, but even if one of them is driven upon the island by force of the wind, he is put to death. Various persons took part in subduing these Jews, one being Lusius, who was sent by Trajan. 

Gibbon is considered to be a son of the Enlightenment and this is reflected in his famous verdict on the history of the Middle Ages: "I have described the triumph of barbarism and religion." Womersley, Decline and Fall, vol. 3, ch. LXXI, p. 1068. However, politically, he aligned himself with the conservative Edmund Burke's rejection of the democratic movements of the time as well as with Burke's dismissal of the "rights of man." Burke supported the American rebellion, while Gibbon sided with the ministry; but with regard to the French Revolution they shared a perfect revulsion. Despite their agreement on the FR, Burke and Gibbon "were not specially close," owing to Whig party differences and divergent religious beliefs, not to mention Burke's sponsorship of the Civil List and Secret Service Money Act 1782 which abolished, and therefore cost Gibbon his place on, the government's Board of Trade and Plantations in 1782. see Pocock, "The Ironist," : "Both the autobiography...." 

Gibbon's work has been praised for its style, his piquant epigrams and its effective irony. Winston Churchill memorably noted, "I set out upon...Gibbon's Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire was immediately dominated both by the story and the style. ...I devoured Gibbon. I rode triumphantly through it from end to end and enjoyed it all." Winston Churchill, My Early Life: A Roving Commission (New York: Charles Scribner's Sons, 1958), p. 111. Churchill modelled much of his own literary style on Gibbon's. Like Gibbon, he dedicated himself to producing a "vivid historical narrative, ranging widely over period and place and enriched by analysis and reflection." Roland Quinault, "Winston Churchill and Gibbon," in Edward Gibbon and Empire, eds. R. McKitterick and R. Quinault (Cambridge: 1997), 317332, at p. 331; Pocock, "Ironist," : "Both the autobiography...." 

Unusually for the 18th century, Gibbon was never content with secondhand accounts when the primary sources were accessible (though most of these were drawn from well-known printed editions). "I have always endeavoured," he says, "to draw from the fountain-head; that my curiosity, as well as a sense of duty, has always urged me to study the originals; and that, if they have sometimes eluded my search, I have carefully marked the secondary evidence, on whose faith a passage or a fact were reduced to depend." Womersley, Decline and Fall, vol. 2, Preface to Gibbon vol. 4, p. 520. In this insistence upon the importance of primary sources, Gibbon is considered by many to be one of the first modern historians:

In accuracy, thoroughness, lucidity, and comprehensive grasp of a vast subject, the 'History' is unsurpassable. It is the one English history which may be regarded as definitive. ...Whatever its shortcomings the book is artistically imposing as well as historically unimpeachable as a vast panorama of a great period. Stephen, DNB, p. 1134. 

The subject of Gibbon's writing as well as his ideas and style have influenced other writers. Besides his influence on Churchill, Gibbon was also a model for Isaac Asimov in his writing of The Foundation Trilogy, which he said involved "a little bit of cribbin' from the works of Edward Gibbon".

Evelyn Waugh admired Gibbon's style but not his secular viewpoint. In Waugh's 1950 novel Helena, the early Christian author Lactantius worried about the possibility of " 'a false historian, with the mind of Cicero or Tacitus and the soul of an animal,' and he nodded towards the gibbon who fretted his golden chain and chattered for fruit." London: Chapman and Hall, 1950. Chapter 6, p. 122. 

J. C. Stobart, author of The Grandeur that was Rome (1911), wrote of Gibbon that "The mere notion of empire continuing to decline and fall for five centuries is ridiculous...this is one of the cases which prove that History is made not so much by heroes or natural forces as by historians."

==Monographs by Gibbon==

* Essai sur ltude de la Littrature (London: Becket & De Hondt, 1761).
* Critical Observations on the Sixth Book of 'The Aeneid' (London: Elmsley, 1770).
* The History of the Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire (vol. I, 1776; vols. II, III, 1781; vols. IV, V,VI, 17881789). all London: Strahan & Cadell.
* A Vindication of some passages in the fifteenth and sixteenth chapters of the History of the Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire (London: J. Dodsley, 1779).
* Mmoire Justificatif pour servir de Rponse  lExpos, etc. de la Cour de France (London: Harrison & Brooke, 1779).

==Other writings by Gibbon==

* "Lettre sur le gouvernement de Berne" No. IX. Mr. Gibbon to *** on the Government of Berne, in Miscellaneous Works, First (1796) edition, vol. 1 (below). Scholars differ on the date of its composition (Norman, D.M. Low: 175859; Pocock: 176364).
* Mmoires Littraires de la Grande-Bretagne. co-author: Georges Deyverdun (2 vols.: vol. 1, London: Becket & De Hondt, 1767; vol. 2, London: Heydinger, 1768).
* Miscellaneous Works of Edward Gibbon, Esq., ed. John Lord Sheffield (2 vols., London: Cadell & Davies, 1796; 5 vols., London: J. Murray, 1814; 3 vols., London: J. Murray, 1815). includes Memoirs of the Life and Writings of Edward Gibbon, Esq.;
* Autobiographies of Edward Gibbon, ed. John Murray (London: J. Murray, 1896). EG's complete memoirs (six drafts) from the original manuscripts.
* The Private Letters of Edward Gibbon, 2 vols., ed. Rowland E. Prothero (London: J. Murray, 1896).
* Gibbon's Journal to 28 January 1763, ed. D.M. Low (London: Chatto and Windus, 1929).
* Le Journal de Gibbon  Lausanne, ed. Georges A. Bonnard (Lausanne: Librairie de l'Universit, 1945).
* Miscellanea Gibboniana, eds. G.R. de Beer, L. Junod, G.A. Bonnard (Lausanne: Librairie de l'Universit, 1952).
* The Letters of Edward Gibbon, 3 vols., ed. J.E. Norton (London: Cassell & Co., 1956). vol.1: 17501773; vol.2: 17741784; vol.3: 17841794. cited as 'Norton, Letters'.
* Gibbon's Journey from Geneva to Rome, ed. G.A. Bonnard (London: Thomas Nelson and Sons, 1961). journal.
* Edward Gibbon: Memoirs of My Life, ed. G.A. Bonnard (New York: Funk & Wagnalls, 1969;1966). portions of EG's memoirs arranged chronologically, omitting repetition.
* The English Essays of Edward Gibbon, ed. Patricia Craddock (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1972); ISBN 0-19-812496-1.

==See also==
* Work of J.G.A. Pocock#Edward Gibbon|The Work of J.G.A. Pocock: Edward Gibbon section].
* History of the Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire#Further reading|The History of the Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire: Further reading].
* The Miscellaneous Works of Edward Gibbon.
* A Gibbon chronology.

==Notes==

Most of this article, including quotations unless otherwise noted, has been adapted from Stephen's entry on Edward Gibbon in the Dictionary of National Biography. Original text: 

==References==

* Beer, G. R. de. "The Malady of Edward Gibbon, F.R.S." Notes and Records of the Royal Society of London 7:1 (December 1949), 7180.
* Craddock, Patricia B. Edward Gibbon, Luminous Historian 17721794. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 1989. HB: ISBN 0-8018-3720-0. Biography.
* Dickinson, H.T . "The Politics of Edward Gibbon". Literature and History 8:4 (1978), 175196.
*
*Low, D. M., Edward Gibbon. 17371794 (London: Chatto & Windus, 1937).
*Murray, John (ed.), The Autobiographies of Edward Gibbon. Second Edition (London: John Murray, 1897).
* Norton, J. E. A Bibliography of the Works of Edward Gibbon. New York: Burt Franklin Co., 1940, repr. 1970.
* Norton, J .E. The Letters of Edward Gibbon. 3 vols. London: Cassell & Co. Ltd., 1956.
* Pocock, J. G. A. The Enlightenments of Edward Gibbon, 17371764. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1999. HB: ISBN 0-521-63345-1.
* Pocock, J. G. A. "Classical and Civil History: The Transformation of Humanism". Cromohs 1 (1996). Online at the Universit degli Studi di Firenze. Retrieved 20 November 2009.
* Pocock, J. G. A. "The Ironist". Review of David Womersley's The Watchmen of the Holy City. London Review of Books 24:22 (14 November 2002). Online at the London Review of Books (subscribers only). Retrieved 20 November 2009.
* Gibbon, Edward. Memoirs of My Life and Writings. Online at Gutenberg. Retrieved 20 November 2009.
* Stephen, Sir Leslie, "Gibbon, Edward (17371794)". In the Dictionary of National Biography, eds. Sir Leslie Stephen and Sir Sidney Lee. Oxford: 1921, repr. 1963. Vol. 7, 11291135.
* Womersley, David, ed. The History of the Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire. 3 vols. (London and New York: Penguin, 1994).
* Womersley, David. "Introduction," in Womersley, Decline and Fall, vol. 1, xicvi.
* Womersley, David. "Gibbon, Edward (17371794)". In the Oxford Dictionary of National Biography, eds. H.C.G. Matthew and Brian Harrison. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2004. Vol. 22, 818.

==Further reading==

===Before 1985===
* Beer, Gavin de. Gibbon and His World. London: Thames and Hudson, 1968. HB: ISBN 0-670-28981-7.
* Bowersock, G. W., et al. eds. Edward Gibbon and the Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1977.
* Craddock, Patricia B. Young Edward Gibbon: Gentleman of Letters. Baltimore, MD: Johns Hopkins University Press, 1982. HB: ISBN 0-8018-2714-0. Biography.
* Jordan, David. Gibbon and his Roman Empire. Urbana, IL: University of Illinois Press, 1971.
* Keynes, Geoffrey, ed. The Library of Edward Gibbon. 2nd ed. Godalming, England: St. Paul's Bibliographies, 1940, repr. 1980.
* Lewis, Bernard. "Gibbon on Muhammad". Daedalus 105:3 (Summer 1976), 89101.
* Low, D. M. Edward Gibbon 17371794. London: Chatto and Windus, 1937. Biography.
* Momigliano, Arnaldo. "Gibbon's Contributions to Historical Method". Historia 2 (1954), 450463. Reprinted in Momigliano, Studies in Historiography (New York: Harper & Row, 1966; Garland Pubs., 1985), 4055. PB: ISBN 0-8240-6372-4.
* Porter, Roger J. "Gibbon's Autobiography: Filling Up the Silent Vacancy". Eighteenth-Century Studies 8:1 (Autumn 1974), 126.
* Stephen, Leslie, "Gibbon's Autobiography" in Studies of a Biographer, Vol. 1 (1898)
* Swain, J. W. Edward Gibbon the Historian. New York: St. Martin's Press, 1966.
* Turnbull, Paul. "The Supposed Infidelity of Edward Gibbon", Historical Journal 5 (1982), 2341.
* White, Jr. Lynn, ed. The Transformation of the Roman World: Gibbon's Problem after Two Centuries. Berkeley: University of California Press, 1966. HB: ISBN 0-520-01334-4.

===Since 1985===
* Bowersock, G. W. Gibbon's Historical Imagination. Stanford: Stanford University Press, 1988.
* Burrow, J. W. Gibbon (Past Masters). Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1985. HB: ISBN 0-19-287553-1. PB: ISBN 0-19-287552-3.
* Carnochan, W. Bliss. Gibbon's Solitude: The Inward World of the Historian. Stanford: Stanford University Press, 1987. HB: ISBN 0-8047-1363-4.
* Craddock, Patricia B. Edward Gibbon: a Reference Guide. Boston: G.K. Hall, 1987. PB: ISBN 0-8161-8217-5. A comprehensive listing of secondary literature through 1985. See also her supplement covering the period through 1997.
* Ghosh, Peter R. "Gibbon Observed". Journal of Roman Studies 81 (1991), 132156.
* Ghosh, Peter R. "Gibbon's First Thoughts: Rome, Christianity and the Essai sur l'tude de la Litterature 175861". Journal of Roman Studies 85 (1995), 148164.
* Ghosh, Peter R. "The Conception of Gibbon's History", in McKitterick and Quinault, eds. Edward Gibbon and Empire, 271316.
* Ghosh, Peter R. "Gibbon's Timeless Verity: Nature and Neo-Classicism in the Late Enlightenment," in Womersley, Burrow, Pocock, eds. Edward Gibbon: bicentenary essays.
* Ghosh, Peter R. "Gibbon, Edward 17371794 British historian of Rome and universal historian," in Kelly Boyd, ed. Encyclopedia of Historians and Historical Writing (Chicago: Fitzroy Dearborn, 1999), 461463.
* Levine, Joseph M., "Edward Gibbon and the Quarrel between the Ancients and the Moderns," in Levine, Humanism and History: origins of modern English historiography (Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 1987).
* Levine, Joseph M. "Truth and Method in Gibbon's Historiography," in Levine, The Autonomy of History: truth and method from Erasmus to Gibbon (Chicago: Chicago University Press, 1999).
* McKitterick, R., and R. Quinault, eds. Edward Gibbon and Empire. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1997.
* Norman, Brian. "The Influence of Switzerland on the Life and Writings of Edward Gibbon," in Studies on Voltaire and the Eighteenth Century v.2002:03. Oxford: Voltaire Foundation, 2002.
* Pocock, J. G. A. Barbarism and Religion, 4 vols.: vol. 1, The Enlightenments of Edward Gibbon, 17371764, 1999 ISBN 0-521-63345-1; vol. 2, Narratives of Civil Government, 1999 ISBN 0-521-64002-4; vol. 3, The First Decline and Fall, 2003 ISBN 0-521-82445-1; vol. 4, Barbarians, Savages and Empires, 2005 ISBN 0-521-72101-6. all Cambridge Univ. Press.
* Porter, Roy. Gibbon: Making History. New York: St. Martin's Press, 1989, HB: ISBN 0-312-02728-1.
* Turnbull, Paul. "'Une marionnette infidele': the Fashioning of Edward Gibbon's Reputation as the English Voltaire," in Womersley, Burrow, Pocock, eds. Edward Gibbon: bicentenary essays.
* Womersley, David P. The Transformation of The Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1988. HB: ISBN 0-521-35036-0.
* Womersley, David P., John Burrow, and J.G.A. Pocock, eds. Edward Gibbon: bicentenary essays. Oxford: Voltaire Foundation, 1997. HB: ISBN 0-7294-0552-4.
* Womersley, David P. Gibbon and the Watchmen of the Holy City: The Historian and His Reputation, 17761815. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2002. PB: ISBN 0-19-818733-5.

==External links==

*Complete History of the Decline and Fall including Gibbon's Vindication, courtesy: Christian Classics Ethereal Library of Calvin College, Grands Rapids, Michigan, USA.
*Extensive Biography in 1911 Encyclopedia
*Edward Gibbon, Historian of the Roman Empire. Part 1: The Man and his Book
*Edward Gibbon, Historian of the Roman Empire. Part 2: A closer look at The Decline and Fall (Dead link)
*EdwardGibbonStudies.com: Web Center for Edward Gibbon Studies
*
*
*The Life and Death of Edward Gibbon @ Ward's Book of Days
*A Brief Biography of Edward Gibbon
*DeclineandFallResources.com  Original Maps and Footnote Translations
*Biographer Patricia Craddock's comprehensive bibliography through May 1999.
*Craddock's supplement to her Reference Guide.



[[East Pakistan]]

East Pakistan ( ; ), present-day Bangladesh, was a provincial state of Pakistan that existed in the Bengal region of the northeast of South Asia from 1955 until 1971, following the One Unit programme that laid the existence of East Pakistan. 

In 1947, the region of Bengal under the British Empire was divided into East and West Bengal that separated the eastern areas with a Muslim majority from the western areas with a Hindu majority. The partition of Bengal saw the mainstream revival of HinduMuslim riots that drove both Bengali Muslims and Hindus further apart, leading to more unrest in Bengal. In 1947, districts of Bengal with a Muslim majority favoured the division after approving the 3 June Plan presented by the Viceroy of India Lord Mountbatten, and merged with the new province of East Bengal of the Dominion of Pakistan. From 1947 until 1954, East Bengal was an independent administrative unit which was governed by the Pakistan Muslim League led by Nurul Amin. In 1955, the Bengali Prime minister Muhammad Ali Bogra devolved the province of East Bengal and established the state as East Pakistan with Dhaka its state capital. During this time, the 1954 elections were held which saw the complete defeat of Pakistan Muslim League led by the United Front coalition of the Awami League, the Krishak Praja Party, the Democratic Party and Nizam-e-Islam. The Awami League gained the control of East Pakistan after appointing Huseyn Suhrawardy for the office of Prime minister. This authoritarian period that existed from 1958 until 1971, is often regarded as period of mass repression, resentment, and political neglect and ignorance. Allying with the population of West, the East's population unanimously voted for Fatima Jinnah during the 1965 presidential elections against Ayub Khan. The elections were widely believed to be heavily rigged in the favour of Ayub Khan using state patronage and intimidation to influence the indirectly elected electoral college. The economic disparity, impression that West Pakistan despite being less populated than East Pakistan was ruling and prospering at its cost further popularize the Bengali nationalism. The support for state autonomy grew when Awami League introduced the Six point movement in 1966, and participated with full force in the 1970 general elections in which the Awami League had won and secured the exclusive mandate of East-Pakistan. 

After the general elections, President General Yahya Khan attempted to negotiate with both Pakistan Peoples Party and Awami League to share power in the central government but talks failed when President Yahya Khan authorised an armed operation (codename Searchlight) to attack the Awami League. As response to this operation, the Awami League announced the declaration of independence of East Pakistan on 26 March 1971 and began an armed struggle against the Pakistan, with India staunchly supporting Awami League by the means of providing arm ammunition to its guerrilla forces. 

East Pakistan had an area of 147,570 km2 (56,977 mi2), bordering India on three sides (East, North, and West) and the Bay of Bengal to the South. East Pakistan was one of the largest provincial states of Pakistan, with the largest population, largest political representation, and sharing the largest economic share. A nine-month long war ended on 16 December 1971, when the Pakistan Armed Forces were overrun in Dhaka, ultimately signing the instrument of surrender which resulted in the largest number of prisoners of war since World War II. Finally on 16 December 1971, East Pakistan was officially disestablished and was succeeded as the independent state of Bangladesh. 

==Geographical history==

Many notable Muslim Bengali figures were among the Founding fathers of present date, State of Pakistan. The country was born in bloodshed and came into existence on 14 August 1947 confronted by seemingly insurmountable problems. As many as 12 million people Muslims leaving India for Pakistan, and Hindus and Sikhs opting to move to India from the new state of Pakistan which had been involved in the mass transfer of population between the two countries, and perhaps two million refugees had died in the violence that had accompanied the migrations in the borders of West Pakistan. Pakistan's boundaries were established hastily without adequate regard for the new nation's economic viability. Even the minimal requirements of a central government, skilled personnel and officers, equipment, and a capital city with government buildings were missing. Until 1947, the East Wing of Pakistan, separated from the West Wing by 1,600 km of Indian territory, had been heavily dependent on Hindu management. Many Bengali Hindus left for Calcutta after independence, and their place, particularly in commerce, was taken mostly by Muslims who had migrated from the Indian state of Bihar or by West Pakistanis from different provinces.

==Political history==

Bengal was divided into two provinces on 3 July 1946 in preparation for the independence, the Hindu majority of West Bengal and the Muslim majority of East Bengal. The two provinces each had their own Chief Ministers and Governors. In August 1947, the West Bengal became part of India and East Bengal became part of Pakistan. Throughout this time, the tensions between East Bengal and the West Pakistan led to the One-Unit policy by Bengali Prime Minister Muhammad Ali Bogra. In 1955, most of the western wing was combined to form a new West Pakistan province (which contained four provinces and four territories) while East Bengal became the new province of East Pakistan (a single provisional state). In 1955, Bogra appointed communist leader Abu Hussain Sarkar as Chief Minister and Amiruddin Ahmad as Governor.

Following the promulgation of 1956 Constitution, Prime minister Bogra appointed Bengali bureaucrat and retired Major-General Iskander Mirza was as Interior minister and the Army Commander of army General Ayub Khan as the Defence minister whilst Muhammad Ali remained Economic minister. The main objective of the new government was to end disruptive provincial politics and to provide the country with a new constitution. After a revision, the Supreme Court of Pakistan declared that the Pakistan Constituent Assembly must be called. Governor-General Ghulam Mohammad was unable to circumvent the order, and the new Constituent Assembly, elected by the provincial assemblies, met for the first time in July 1955. Bogra, who had little support in the new assembly, fell in August and was replaced by Choudhry. Ghulam Mohammad, plagued by poor health, was succeeded as governor general in September 1955 by Mirza.

===Language Movement and 1954 Provincial Elections===
The communist parties played an influential role in staging the massive protests for the Bengali Language Movement which led the destruction of PML in East Pakistan, 1950s.

Previously in 1952, then Chief Minister Nurul Amin who was firmly against the agitation, stated that the communists had played an integral and major role in staging the massive protests, mass demonstration, and strikes for the Bengali Language Movement. All over the country, the political parties had favored the general elections in Pakistan with the exception of Muslim League. The military, bureaucracy and the United States was nervous with good reasons where the support for the Soviet Union began to rise in both East and West. Finally in 1954, the legislative elections were to be held for the Parliament. Unlike in West, not all of the Hindu population migrated to India, instead a large number of Hindu population was in fact presented in the state. The communist influence deepened and was finally realised in the elections. The United Front, Communist Party of Pakistan and the Awami League returned to power, inflicting sever defeat to Muslim League. Out of 309, the Muslim League only won 10 seats, whereas the communist party had 4 seats of the ten contested. The communists working with other parties had secured 22 additional seats, totalling 26 seats. The right-wing Jamaat-e-Islami had completely failed in the elections. 

In 1955, the United Front named Abu Hussain Sarkar as the Chief minister of the State who ruled the state in two non-consecutive terms until 1958 when the martial law was imposed. 

===Martial law===

In East Pakistan, the political impasse culminated in 1958 in a violent scuffle in the East-Pakistan parliament between the members of the Pakistan Muslim League and the East-Pakistan police, in which the deputy speaker was fatally injured and two ministers badly wounded. Uncomfortable with the workings of democratic system, unruliness in the East Pakistan parliamentary elections and the threat of Baloch separatism in West-Pakistan, Bengali President Iskandar Ali Mirza issued a proclamation that abolished all political parties in both West and East Pakistan, abrogated the two-year old constitution, and imposed the first martial law in the country on 7 October 1958.

President Iskander Mirza announced that "the martial law would be a temporary measure, lasting only until a new constitution was to be drafted. On 27 October, President Mirza swore in a twelve-member cabinet that included Army Commander General Ayub Khan as Defence Minister as well as chief martial law administrator of the country, along with three other senior military officers in ministerial positions. The cabinet included among the eight civilians, one of them being Zulfikar Ali Bhutto, a former Karachi University lecturer.

Roughly after two weeks, President Mirza's relations with Pakistan Armed Forces deteriorated leading Army Commander General Ayub Khan relieving the president from his presidency and forcefully exiling President Mirza to United Kingdom. General Ayub Khan justified his actions after appearing on national radio declaring that: "the armed forces and the people demanded a clean break with the past...". Until 1962, the martial law continued while Field Marshal Ayub Khan purged a number of politicians and civil servants from the government and replaced them with military officers. Ayub called his regime a "revolution to clean up the mess of black marketing, (sic), and corruption.".

===Presidential republic and economy===

The martial law continued until 1962 when the government of Field Marshal Ayub Khan commissioned a constitutional bench under Chief Justice of Pakistan, Muhammad Shahabuddin, containing ten senior justices, each five from East Pakistan and five from West Pakistan. On 6 May 1961, the commission sent its draft to President Ayub Khan who thoroughly examined the draft with consulting with his cabinet. In January 1962, the cabinet finally approved the text of the new constitution, promulgated by President Ayub Khan on 1 March 1962 and finally came into effect on 8 June 1962. With the success of 1962 constitution, East Pakistan became a Presidential republic and abolished all parliamentary institutions in East Pakistan. The 1962 constitution had provided the presidential system for both provincial states (West Pakistan and East Pakistan) that each states were given autonomy to run their separate presidential provincial governments. The responsibilities and authority of the center and the provinces were clearly listed in the Constitution.

During the years between 1960 and 1965, the annual rate of growth of the gross domestic product per capita was 4.4% in the West Pakistan versus 2.6% in East Pakistan. Furthermore, Bengali politicians pushing for more autonomy stated that much of Pakistan's export earnings were generated in East Pakistan by the export of Bengali jute and tea. As late as 1960, approximately 70% of Pakistan's export earnings originated in the East Wing, although this percentage declined as international demand for jute dwindled. By the mid-1960s, East Pakistan was accounting for less than 60% of the nation's export earnings, and by the time of Bangladesh's independence in 1971, this percentage had dipped below 50%. This reality did not dissuade Mujib from demanding in 1966 that separate foreign exchange accounts be kept and that separate trade offices be opened overseas. By the mid-1960s, West Pakistan was benefiting from Ayub's "Decade of Progress," with its successful "green revolution" in wheat, and from the expansion of markets for West Pakistani textiles, while East Pakistan's standard of living remained at an abysmally low level. The Bengalis were also upset that West Pakistan, because it was the seat of government, was the major beneficiary of foreign aid.

===Military government===
With Ayub Khan ousted from office in 1969, Commander of the Pakistani Army, General Yahya Khan became the country's second ruling Chief Martial Law Administrator. Both Bhutto and Mujib strongly disliked General Khan, but patiently endured him and his government as he had promised to hold an election in 1970. During this time, strong nationalistic sentiments in East Pakistan were perceived by the Pakistani Armed Forces and the central military government. Therefore, Khan and his military government wanted to divert the nationalistic threats and violence against non-East Pakistanis. The Eastern Military High Command was under constant pressure from the Awami League, and requested an active duty officer to control the command under such extreme pressure. The high flag rank officers, junior officers and many high command officers from the Pakistan's Armed Forces were highly cautious about their appointment in East-Pakistan, and the assignment of governing East Pakistan and appointment of an officer was considered highly difficult for the Pakistan High Military Command.

====Civil disobedience====

East Pakistan's Armed Forces, under the military administrations of Major-General Muzaffaruddin and Lieutenant-General Sahabzada Yaqub Khan, used an excessive amount of show of military force to curb the uprising in the province. With such action, the situation became highly critical and civil control over the province slipped away from the government. On 24 March, dissatisfied with the performance of his generals, Yahya Khan removed General Muzaffaruddin and General Yaqub Khan from office on 1 September 1969. The appointment of a military administrator was considered quite difficult and challenging with the crisis continually deteriorating. Vice-Admiral Syed Mohammad Ahsan, Chief of Naval Staff of Pakistan Navy, had previously served as political and military adviser of East Pakistan to former President Ayub Khan. Having such a strong background in administration, and being an expert on East Pakistan affairs, General Yahya Khan appointed Vice-Admiral Syed Mohammad Ahsan as Martial Law Administrator, with absolute authority in his command. He was relieved as Chief of Naval Staff, and received extension from the government. On 1 September Admiral Ahsan assumed the command of the Eastern Military High Command, and became a unified commander of Pakistan Armed Forces in East-Pakistan. Under his command, the Pakistani Armed Forces were removed from the cities and deployed along the border. The rate of violence in East Pakistan dropped, nearly coming to an end. Civil rule improved and stabilised in East Pakistan under Martial Law Administrator Admiral Ahsan's era. The next year, in 1970, it was in this charged atmosphere that parliamentary elections were held in the country in December 1970.

===Position towards West-Pakistan===
1971 documentary film about East Pakistan
The tense diplomatic relations between East and West Pakistan reached a climax in 1970 when the Awami League, the largest East Pakistani political party, led by Sheikh Mujibur Rahman, (Mujib), won a landslide victory in the national elections in East Pakistan. The party won 160 of the 162 seats allotted to East Pakistan, and thus a majority of the 300 seats in the Parliament. This gave the Awami League the constitutional right to form an absolute government. Khan invited Mujib to Rawalpindi to take the charge of the office, and negotiations took place between the military government and the Awami Party. Bhutto was shocked with the results, and threatened his Peoples Party's members if they attended the inaugural session at the National Assembly. Bhutto was famously heard saying "break the legs" of any member of his party who dared enter and attend the session. However, fearing East Pakistani separatism, Bhutto demanded Mujib to form a coalition government. After a secret meeting held in Larkana, Mujib agreed to give Bhutto the office of Presidency with Mujib as Prime Minister. General Yahya Khan and his military government were kept unaware of these developments and under pressure from his own military government, refused to allow Rahman to become the Prime Minister of Pakistan. This increased agitation for greater autonomy in East Pakistan. The Military Police arrested Mujib and Bhutto and placed them in Adiala Jail in Rawalpindi. The news spread like a fire in both East and West Pakistan, and the struggle for independence began in East Pakistan.

The senior high command officers in Pakistan Armed Forces, and Zulfikar Ali Bhutto, began to pressure General Yahya Khan to take armed action against Mujib and his party. Bhutto later distanced himself from Yahya Khan after he was arrested by Military Police along with Mujib. Soon after the arrests, a high level meeting was chaired by Yahya Khan. During the meeting, high commanders of Pakistan Armed Forces unanimously recommended an armed and violent military action. East Pakistan's Martial Law Administrator Admiral Ahsan, unified commander of Eastern Military High Command (EMHC), and Air Marshal Mitty Masud, Commander of Eastern Air Force Command (EAFC), were the only officers to object to the plans. When it became obvious that a military action in East Pakistan was inevitable, Admiral Ahsan resigned from his position as Martial Law Administrator in protest, and immediately flew back to Karachi, West Pakistan. Disheartened and isolated, Admiral Ahsan took early retirement from the Navy and quietly settled in Karachi. Once Operation Searchlight and Operation Barisal commenced, Air Marshal Masud flew to West Pakistan, and unlike Admiral Ahsan, tried to stop the violence in East Pakistan. When he failed in his attempts to meet General Yahya Khan, Masud too resigned from his position as Commander of Eastern Air Command, and took retirement from Air Force.

===Final years and war===

Separatist/nationalistic flag of East Bengal

Lieutenant-General Sahabzada Yaqub Khan was sent into East Pakistan in emergency, following a major blow of the resignation of Vice Admiral Ahsan. General Yaqub temporarily assumed the control of the province, as he was made the unified commander of Pakistan Armed Forces. General Yaqub mobilised the entire major forces in East Pakistan, and were re-deployed in East Pakistan.

On 26 March 1971, the day after the military crackdown on civilians in East Pakistan, Ziaur Rahman declared the independence of Bangladesh. All major Awami League leaders including elected leaders of National Assembly and Provincial Assembly fled to neighbouring India and an exile government was formed headed by Mujibur Rahman. While he was in Pakistan Prison, Syed Nazrul Islam was the acting President with Tazuddin Ahmed as the Prime Minister. The exile government took oath on 17 April 1971 at Mujib Nagar, within East Pakistan territory of Kustia district and formally formed the government. Colonel MOG Osmani was appointed the Commander in Chief of Liberation Forces and whole East Pakistan was divided into eleven sectors headed by eleven sector commanders. All sector commanders were Bengali officers from defected Pakistan Army. This started the Bangladesh Liberation War in which the freedom fighters, joined in December 1971 by 400,000 Indian soldiers, faced the Pakistani Armed Forces of 365,000 plus Paramilitary and collaborationist forces. An additional approximately 25,000 ill-equipped civilian volunteers and police forces also sided with the Pakistan Armed Forces. Bloody guerrilla warfare ensued in East Pakistan.

==== Dissolution of East Pakistan ====

The Pakistan Armed Forces were unable to counter such threats. Poorly trained and inexperienced in guerrilla tactics, Pakistan Armed Forces and their assets were successfully sabotaged by the Bangladesh Liberation Forces. On April 1971, Lieutenant-General Tikka Khan succeeded General Yaqub Khan as Commander of unified forces. General Tikka Khan led the massive violent and massacre campaigns in the region. He is held responsible for killing hundreds of thousands of Bengali people in East Pakistan, mostly civilians and unarmed peoples. For his role, General Tikka Khan gained the title as "Butcher of Bengal". General Khan faced an international reaction against Pakistan, and therefore, General Tikka was removed as Commander of Eastern front. He installed a civilian administration under Abdul Motaleb Malik on 31 August 1971, which proved to be ineffective. However, during the meeting, with no high officers willing to assume the command of East Pakistan, Lieutenant-General Amir Abdullah Khan Niazi volunteered for the command of East Pakistan. Inexperienced and the large magnitude of this assignment, the government sent Vice-Admiral Mohammad Shariff as second-in-command of General Niazi. Admiral Shariff served as the deputy unified commander of Pakistan Armed Forces in East Pakistan. However, General Niazi proved to be a failure and ineffective ruler. Therefore, General Niazi and Air Marshal Enamul Haque, Commander of Eastern Air Force Command (EAFC), failed to launch any operation in East Pakistan against Indian or its allies. Except Admiral Shariff who continued to press pressure on Indian Navy iuntil the end of the conflict. Admiral Shariff made it nearly impossible for Indian Navy to land its naval forces on the shores with his well effective plans . The Indian Navy was unable to access East Pakistan and the Pakistan Navy was still offering resistance. The Indian Army, therefore, from all three directions of the province, entered East Pakistan. The Indian Navy then decided to wait near the Bay of Bengal until the Army reached the shore.

The Indian Air Force dismantled the capability of Pakistan Air Force in East Pakistan. Air Marshal Enamul Haque, Commander of Eastern Air Force Command (EAFC), failed to offer any serious resistance to the actions of the Indian Air Force. For most part of the war, the IAF enjoyed complete dominance in the skies over East Pakistan.

====Surrender of the Pakistan Armed Forces====

On 16 December 1971 , the Pakistan Armed Forces surrendered to the joint liberation forces of Mukti Bahini and the Indian army, headed by Lieutenant-General Jagjit Singh Arora, the General Officer Commanding-in-Chief (GOC-in-C) of the Eastern Command of the Indian Army. Lieutenant General AAK Niazi, the last unified commander of Pakistan Armed Forces's Eastern Military High Command, signed the Instrument of Surrender at about 4:31 pm . Over 93,000 personnel, including Lt. General Niazi and Admiral Shariff, were taken as Prisoner of War.

On 16 December 1971, East Pakistan was liberated from Pakistan as the newly independent state of Bangladesh. The Eastern Military High Command, civilian institutions and paramilitary forces were disbanded. Bangladesh quickly gained recognition from most countries after the signing of the Shimla Agreement between India and Pakistan. Bangladesh joined the United Nations in 1974.

==Military==

The border of -Indo-East Pakistan border showed by the U.S. Army, c. 1960.
Since its unification with Pakistan, the East Pakistan Army had consisted of only one infantry brigade, which was made up of two battalions, the 1st East Bengal Regiment and the 1/14 or 3/8 Punjab Regiment in 1948. These two battalions boasted only five rifle companies between them (an infantry battalion normally had 5 companies). Major Nasir Uddin, Juddhey Juddhey Swadhinata, pp49 This weak brigade, under the command of Brigadier-General Ayub Khan (local rank Major-General  GOC of 14th Army Division), together with the East Pakistan Rifles which was tasked with defending East Pakistan during the Kashmir War of 1947. Major Nasir Uddin, Juddhey Juddhey Swadhinata, pp47, pp51 The PAF, Marines, and the Navy had little presence in the region. Only one PAF combatant squadron, No. 14 Squadron Tail Choppers, was active in East Pakistan. This combatant squadron was commanded by an air force Major PQ Mehdi (later four-star general). The East Pakistan military personnel were trained in combat diving, demolitions, and guerrilla/anti-guerrilla tactics by the advisers from the Special Service Group (Navy) who were also charged with intelligence data collection and management cycle.

The East Pakistan Navy had only one active-duty combatant destroyer, the PNS Sylhet; one submarine Ghazi (which was repeatedly deployed in West); four gunboats, inadequate to function in deep water. The joint special operations were managed and undertaken by the Naval Special Service Group (SSG(N)) who were assisted by the army, air force and marines unit. The entire service, the Marines were deployed in East Pakistan, initially tasked with conducting exercises and combat operations in riverine areas and at near shoreline. The small directorate of Naval Intelligence (while the headquarters and personnel, facilities, and directions were coordinated by West) had vital role in directing special and reconnaissance missions, and intelligence gathering, also was charged with taking reasonable actions to slow down the Indian threat. The armed forces of East Pakistan also consisted the paramilitary organisation, the Volunteers from the intelligence unit of the ISI's Covert Action Division (CAD). All of these armed forces were commanded by the unified command structure, the Eastern Military High Command, led by an officer of three-star rank equivalent.

==Governors==

 Tenure Governor of East Pakistan Political Affiliation 
 14 October 1955  March 1956 Amiruddin Ahmad Muslim League 
 March 1956  13 April 1958 A. K. Fazlul Huq Muslim League 
 13 April 1958  3 May 1958 Hamid Ali (acting) Awami League 
 3 May 1958  10 October 1958 Sultanuddin Ahmad Awami League 
 10 October 1958  11 April 1960 Zakir Husain Muslim League 
 11 April 1960  11 May 1962 Lieutenant-General Azam Khan, PA Military Administration 
 11 May 1962  25 October 1962 Ghulam Faruque Independent 
 25 October 1962  23 March 1969 Abdul Monem Khan Civil Administration 
 23 March 1969  25 March 1969 Mirza Nurul Huda Civil Administration 
 25 March 1969  23 August 1969 Major-General Muzaffaruddin, (acting martial law administrator and governor as he was the GOC 14th Infantry Division) PA Military Administration 
 23 August 1969  1 September 1969 Lieutenant-General Sahabzada Yaqub Khan, PA Military Administration 
 1 September 1969  7 March 1971 Vice-Admiral Syed Mohammad Ahsan, PN Military Administration 
 7 March 1971  April 1971 Lieutenant-General Sahabzada Yaqub Khan, PA Military Administration 
 April 1971  31 August 1971 Lieutenant-General Tikka Khan, PA Military Administration 
 31 August 1971  14 December 1971 Abdul Motaleb Malik Independent 
 14 December 1971  16 December 1971 Lieutenant-General Amir Abdullah Khan Niazi, PA Military Administration 
 16 December 1971 Province of East Pakistan dissolved 

==Chief Ministers==

 Tenure Chief Minister of East Pakistan Political Party 
 August 1955  September 1956 Abu Hussain Sarkar Shramik Krishak Samajbadi Dal 
 September 1956  March 1958 Ata-ur-Rahman Khan Awami League 
 March 1958 Abu Hussain Sarkar Shramik Krishak Samajbadi Dal 
 March 1958  18 June 1958 Ata-ur-Rahman Khan Awami League 
 18 June 1958  22 June 1958 Abu Hussain Sarkar Shramik Krishak Samajbadi Dal 
 22 June 1958  25 August 1958 Governor's Rule 
 25 August 1958  7 October 1958 Ata-ur-Rahman Khan Awami League 
 7 October 1958 Post abolished 
 16 December 1971 Province of East Pakistan dissolved 

== Provincial Symbols ==
The main four provincial icons were the Oriental Magpie-Robin, Royal Bengal Tiger, Banyan tree and the Water Lily, some of these were nationalized by Bangladesh in 1972.

Image:Oriental Magpie Robin (Copsychus saularis)- Male at Kolkata I IMG 3003.jpg|Provincial bird of East Pakistan, Oriental Magpie-Robin
Image:Royal Bengal Tiger.jpg|Provincial Animal, Royal Bengal Tiger
Image:Great banyan tree kol.jpg|Provincial Tree, Banyan
Image:Nymphaea pubescens1MTFL.jpg|Provincial flower, Water Lily

==Memorials and Legacy==

The trauma was extremely severe in Pakistan when the news of secession of East Pakistan as Bangladesh arrived  a psychological setback, complete and humiliating defeat that shattered the prestige of Pakistan Armed Forces. , Chapter 3, pp 87. The governor and martial law administrator Lieutenant-General Amir Abdullah Khan Niazi was defamed, his image was maligned and he was stripped of his honors. The people of Pakistan could not come to terms with the magnitude of defeat, and spontaneous demonstrations and mass protests erupted on the streets of major cities in (West) Pakistan. General Yahya Khan surrendered powers to Nurul Amin of Pakistan Muslim League, the first and last Vice-President and Prime minister of Pakistan. 

Prime minister Amin invited Zulfikar Ali Bhutto (sworn as President, later Prime minister) and the Pakistan Peoples Party to take control of Pakistan, and in a color ceremony where Bhutto addressed his daring speech to his nation via national television. At this ceremony, Zulfikar Ali Bhutto waved his fist in the air and pledged to his nation to never again allow the surrender of his country like it happened with East Pakistan; therefore, he launched and orchestrated the large-scale atomic bomb project in 1972. In memorial of East Pakistan, the East-Pakistan diaspora in Pakistan established the East-Pakistan colony in Karachi, Sindh. In accordance, the East-Pakistani diaspora also composed patriotic tributes to Pakistan after the war; songs such as Sohni Dharti (lit. Beautiful land) and "Jeevay, Jeevay Pakistan (lit. long-live, long-live Pakistan), were composed by Bengali singer Shahnaz Rahmatullah in 1970s and 1980s.

To Western observers, the loss of East Pakistan was a blessing  but it was a trauma that was not seen as such; even today it is still not seen that way. In a book, "Scoop! Inside Stories from the Partition to the Present", written by Pakistan-born Indian politician Kuldip Nayar, it is noted that "Losing East Pakistan and Bhutto's releasing of Mujib did not mean anything to Pakistan's policy - as if there was no liberation war. Bhutto's policy, and even today, the policy of Pakistan continues to state that "she will continue to fight for the honor and integrity of Pakistan. East Pakistan is an inseparable and inseverable part of Pakistan". 

==See also==
* Stranded Pakistanis
* Dominion of Pakistan
* West Pakistan
* East Bengal
* Pakistan Movement
* Indo-Pakistani War of 1971
* The Blood telegram
* List of East Pakistan first-class cricketers

==References==

== External links ==
* Government of Bangladesh
* Government of Pakistan

P

P
P
P
*
P


[[E. O. Wilson]]

Edward Osborne "E. O." Wilson (born June 10, 1929) is an American biologist, researcher (sociobiology, biodiversity), theorist (consilience, biophilia), naturalist (conservationist) and author. His biological specialty is myrmecology, the study of ants, on which he is considered to be the world's leading authority. 

Wilson is known for his scientific career, his role as "the father of sociobiology" and "the father of biodiversity", his environmental advocacy, and his secular-humanist and deist ideas pertaining to religious and ethical matters. 

Wilson is currently the Pellegrino University Research Professor, Emeritus in Entomology for the Department of Organismic and Evolutionary Biology at Harvard University, a lecturer at Duke University, and a Fellow of the Committee for Skeptical Inquiry. He is a Humanist Laureate of the International Academy of Humanism. "E.O. Wilson Profile" - Comprehensive list of Degrees, Awards and Positions He is a two-time winner of the Pulitzer Prize for General Non-Fiction and a New York Times bestseller for The Social Conquest of Earth and Letters to a Young Scientist. 

==Early life==
Wilson was born in Birmingham, Alabama. According to his autobiography Naturalist, he grew up mostly around Washington, D.C. and in the countryside around Mobile, Alabama. Edward O. Wilson  Naturalist, Island Press; (April 24, 2006), ISBN 1-59726-088-6 From an early age, he was interested in natural history. His parents, Edward and Inez Wilson, divorced when he was seven. The young naturalist grew up in several cities and towns, moving around with his father and his stepmother.

In the same year that his parents divorced, Wilson blinded himself in one eye in a fishing accident. He suffered for hours, but he continued fishing. He did not complain because he was anxious to stay outdoors. He never went in for medical treatment. Several months later, his right pupil clouded over with a cataract. He was admitted to Pensacola Hospital to have the lens removed. Wilson writes, in his autobiography, that he surgery was a terrifying century ordeal. Wilson was left with full sight in his left eye, with a vision of 20/10. The 20/10 vision prompt him to focus on "little things: "I noticed butterflies and ants more than other kids did, and took an interest in them automatically." 

Although he had lost his stereoscopy, he could see fine print and the hairs on the bodies of small insects. His reduced ability to observe mammals and birds led him to concentrate on insects.

At nine, Wilson undertook his first expeditions at the Rock Creek Park in Washington, DC. He began to collect insects and he gained a passion for butterflies. He would capture them using nets made with brooms, coat hangers, and cheesecloth bags. Going on these expeditions led to Wilsons fascination with ants. He describes in his autobiography how one day he pulled the bark of a rotting tree away and discovered citronella ants underneath. The worker ants he found were short, fat, brilliant yellow, and emitted a strong lemony odor. Wilson said the event left a vivid and lasting impression on . He also earned the Eagle Scout award and served as Nature Director of his Boy Scout summer camp. At the age of 18, intent on becoming an entomologist, he began by collecting flies, but the shortage of insect pins caused by World War II caused him to switch to ants, which could be stored in vials. With the encouragement of Marion R. Smith, a myrmecologist from the National Museum of Natural History in Washington, Wilson began a survey of all the ants of Alabama. This study led him to report the first colony of fire ants in the US, near the port of Mobile. first-hand account, Smithsonian Institution talk, April 22, 2010 

Concerned that he might not be able to afford to go to a university, Wilson attempted to enlist in the United States Army. His plan was to earn U.S. government financial support for his education, but he failed his Army medical examination due to his impaired eyesight. Wilson was able to afford to enroll in the University of Alabama after all. There, he earned his B.S. and M.S. degrees In Biology. He later earned his Ph.D. degree in Biology from Harvard University.

==Retirement==
In 1996 he officially retired from teaching at Harvard and continues to hold the positions of Professor Emeritus and Honorary Curator in Entomology. He and his wife Irene now reside in Lexington, Massachusetts. His daughter, Catherine, and her husband Jonathan, reside in nearby Stow, Massachusetts. 

In December 2013 it was announced that, starting in 2014, Wilson's foundation, the E.O. Wilson Biodiversity Foundation, would be based as an independent foundation at the Nicholas School of the Environment at Duke University. As part of the agreement, Wilson would become a special lecturer at Duke University. 

==Theories and beliefs==

===Epic of evolution===
"The evolutionary epic," Wilson wrote in his book On Human Nature, "is probably the best myth we will ever have." Wilson's intended usage of the word "myth" does not denote falsehood - rather, a grand narrative that provides people with placement in timea meaningful placement that celebrates extraordinary moments of shared heritage. Wilson was not the first to use the term, but his fame prompted its usage as the morphed phrase epic of evolution. 

Wilson explained the need for the epic of evolution: Edward O. Wilson, Foreword of Everybody's Story: Wising Up to the Epic of Evolution By Loyal D. Rue, SUNY Press, 1999, page ix and x,ISBN 0-7914-4392-2, 

The worth of the epic, he said, is that "he true evolutionary epic retold as poetry, is as intrinsically ennobling as any religious epic." 

Cosmologist Brian Swimme concludes in a 1997 interview: 

Naturalistic and liberal religious writers have picked up on Wilson's term and have used it in a number of texts. These authors however have at times used other terms to refer to the idea: Universe Story (Brian Swimme, John F. Haught), Great Story (Connie Barlow, Michael Dowd), Everybody's Story (Loyal Rue ), New Story (Thomas Berry, Al Gore, Brian Swimme) and Cosmic Evolution (Eric Chaisson ). Kaufman, Gordon. The Epic of Evolution as a Framework for Human Orientation, 1997 

===Sociobiology===
Michael McGoodwin paraphrasing and quoting Wilson (pp. 16 and 222) on sociobiology: Edward O. Wilson: On Human Nature - Summary by Michael McGoodwin, prepared 1991 

Although much human diversity in behavior is culturally influenced, some has been shown to be genetic - rapid acquisition of language, human unpredictability, hypertrophy (extreme growth of pre-existing social structures), altruism and religions. "Religious practices that consistently enhance survival and procreation of the practitioners will propagate the physiological controls that favor the acquisition of the practices during single lifetimes." Unthinking submission to the communal will promotes the fitness of the members of the tribe. Even submission to secular religions and cults involve willing subordination of the individual to the group. Religious practices confer biological advantages. 

Wilson used sociobiology and evolutionary principles to explain the behavior of the social insects and then to understand the social behavior of other animals, including humans, thus established sociobiology as a new scientific field. He argued that all animal behavior, including that of humans, is the product of heredity, environmental stimuli, and past experiences, and that free will is an illusion. He has referred to the biological basis of behaviour as the "genetic leash." E. O. Wilson, Consilience: The Unity of Knowledge, New York, Knopf, 1998, pp. 127-128. The sociobiological view is that all animal social behavior is governed by epigenetic rules worked out by the laws of evolution. This theory and research proved to be seminal, controversial, and influential. Wolfe, Tom (1996). Sorry, But Your Soul Just Died. Vol. 158, Issue 13, pp.210ff. Forbes 

The controversy of sociobiological research is in how it applies to humans. The theory established a scientific argument for rejecting the common doctrine of tabula rasa, which holds that human beings are born without any innate mental content and that culture functions to increase human knowledge and aid in survival and success. In the final chapter of the book Sociobiology and in the full text of his Pulitzer Prize-winning On Human Nature, Wilson argues that the human mind is shaped as much by genetic inheritance as it is by culture (if not more). There are limits on just how much influence social and environmental factors can have in altering human behavior.

===Ants and social insects===
Wilson, along with Bert Hlldobler, has done a systematic study of ants and ant behavior, culminating in their encyclopedic work The Ants (1990). Because much self-sacrificing behavior on the part of individual ants can be explained on the basis of their genetic interests in the survival of the sisters, with whom they share 75% of their genes (though the actual case is some species' queens mate with multiple males and therefore some workers in a colony would only be 25% related), Wilson was led to argue for a sociobiological explanation for all social behavior on the model of the behavior of the social insects. In his more recent work, he has sought to defend his views against the criticism of younger scientists such as Deborah Gordon, whose results challenge the idea that ant behavior is as rigidly predictable as Wilson's explanations make it.

Edward O. Wilson, referring to ants, once said that "Karl Marx was right, socialism works, it is just that he had the wrong species", meaning that while ants and other eusocial species appear to live in communist-like societies, they only do so because they are forced to do so from their basic biology, as they lack reproductive independence: worker ants, being sterile, need their ant-queen to survive as a colony and a species and individual ants cannot reproduce without a queen, thus being forced to live in centralised societies. Humans, however, do possess reproductive independence so they can give birth to offspring without the need of a "queen", and in fact humans enjoy their maximum level of Darwinian fitness only when they look after themselves and their offspring, while finding innovative ways to use the societies they live in for their own benefit. 

===Consilience===
In his 1998 book , Wilson discusses methods that have been used to unite the sciences, and might be able to unite the sciences with the humanities. Wilson prefers and uses the term "consilience" to describe the synthesis of knowledge from different specialized fields of human endeavor. He defines human nature as a collection of epigenetic rules, the genetic patterns of mental development. He argues that culture and rituals are products, not parts, of human nature. He says art is not part of human nature, but our appreciation of art is. He argues that concepts such as art appreciation, fear of snakes, or the incest taboo (Westermarck effect) can be studied by scientific methods of the natural sciences. Previously, these phenomena were only part of psychological, sociological, or anthropological studies. Wilson proposes that they can be part of interdisciplinary research.

===The units and target of selection===
Wilson has argued that the "unit of selection is a gene, the basic element of heredity. The target of selection is normally the individual who carries an ensemble of genes of certain kinds." With regard to the use of kin selection in explaining the behavior of eusocial insects, Wilson said to Discover magazine, the "new view that I'm proposing is that it was group selection all along, an idea first roughly formulated by Darwin." Richard Conniff "Discover Interview: E.O. Wilson" June 25, 2006. 

==Spiritual and political beliefs==

===Views on religion===
As paraphrased by Michael McGoodwin 

===Scientific humanism===
Wilson coined the phrase scientific humanism as "the only worldview compatible with science's growing knowledge of the real world and the laws of nature". in Harvard Magazine December 2005 p 33. Wilson argues that it is best suited to improve the human condition. In 2003 he was one of the signers of the Humanist Manifesto. 

===God and religion===
On the question of God, Wilson has described his position as provisional deism. The Creation He has explained his faith as a trajectory away from traditional beliefs: "I drifted away from the church, not definitively agnostic or atheistic, just Baptist & Christian no more." Wilson argues that the belief in God and rituals of religion are products of evolution. Human Nature He argues that they should not be rejected or dismissed, but further investigated by science to better understand their significance to human nature. In his book The Creation, Wilson suggests that scientists ought to "offer the hand of friendship" to religious leaders and build an alliance with them, stating that "Science and religion are two of the most potent forces on Earth and they should come together to save the creation." Naturalist E.O. Wilson is optimistic Harvard Gazette June 15, 2006 

Wilson makes a similar suggestion, an appeal to the religious community, on the lecture circuit. An article on his September 17, 2009 lecture at Midland College, Texas, reports, "he said the appeal received a 'massive reply' and a covenant has been written. 'I think that partnership will work to a substantial degree as time goes on,' Wilson said." Scientist says there is hope to save planet mywesttexas.com September 18, 2009 

Wilson appears in the documentary Behold the Earth, which inquires into America's "divorce from nature" and the relationship between science and religion.

===Ecology===
When discussing the reinvigoration of his original fields of study since the 1960s, Wilson has said that if he could start his life over he would work in microbial ecology. He studied the mass extinctions of the 20th century and their relationship to modern society, arguing strongly for an ecological approach:

His understanding of the scale of the extinction crisis has led him to advocate a number of strategies for forest protection, including the Forests Now Declaration, which calls for new markets-based mechanisms to protect tropical forests.

==Criticism of human sociobiology==
Wilson experienced significant criticism for his sociobiological views from several different communities. The scientific response included several of Wilson's colleagues at Harvard, such as Richard Lewontin and Stephen Jay Gould, who were strongly opposed to his ideas regarding sociobiology. Marshall Sahlins's work The Use and Abuse of Biology was a direct criticism of Wilson's theories. 

Politically, Wilson's sociobiological ideas have been opposed by some Marxists, who maintain that human behavior is culturally based. Sociobiology re-ignited the nature and nurture debate, and Wilson's scientific perspective on human nature led to public debate. He was accused of "racism, misogyny, and eugenics." In one incident, his lecture was attacked by the International Committee Against Racism, a front group of the Progressive Labor Party, where one member poured a pitcher of water on Wilson's head and chanted "Wilson, you're all wet" at an AAAS conference in November 1978. Wilson later spoke of the incident as a source of pride: "I believe...I was the only scientist in modern times to be physically attacked for an idea." 

I believe Gould was a charlatan, Wilson told The Atlantic. I believe that he was ... seeking reputation and credibility as a scientist and writer, and he did it consistently by distorting what other scientists were saying and devising arguments based upon that distortion. 

Religious objections included those of Paul E. Rothrock, who said: "... sociobiology has the potential of becoming a religion of scientific materialism." Mythology of Scientific Materialism. Paul E. Rothrock and Mary Ellen Rothrock 

==Awards and honors==
Wilson at a "fireside chat" during which he received the Addison Emery Verrill Medal in 2007
Dr. E.O. Wilson addresses the audience at the dedication of the E.O. Wilson Biophilia Center at Nokuse Plantation in Walton County, Florida.
Wilson's scientific and conservation honors include:

* Member, National Academy of Sciences, 1969
* U.S. National Medal of Science, 1976
* Pulitzer Prize for On Human Nature, 1979
* Tyler Prize for Environmental Achievement, 1984
* ECI Prize, International Ecology Institute, terrestrial ecology, 1987
* Academy of Achievement Golden Plate Award, 1988
* Crafoord Prize, 1990, a prize awarded by the Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences in certain sciences not covered by the Nobel Prize, and therefore considered the highest award given in the field of ecology
* Pulitzer Prize for The Ants (with Bert Hlldobler), 1991
* International Prize for Biology, 1993
* Carl Sagan Award for Public Understanding of Science, 1994
* The National Audubon Society's Audubon Medal, 1995
* Time Magazines 25 Most Influential People in America, 1995
* Benjamin Franklin Medal for Distinguished Achievement in the Sciences of the American Philosophical Society, 1998. 
* American Humanist Association's 1999 Humanist of the Year
* Lewis Thomas Prize for Writing about Science, 2000
* Nierenberg Prize, 2001
* Distinguished Eagle Scout Award 2004
* Dauphin Island Sea Lab christened its newest research vessel the R/V E.O. Wilson in 2005.
* The Linnean Tercentenary Silver Medal, 2006
* Addison Emery Verrill Medal from the Peabody Museum of Natural History, 2007
* TED Prize 2007 given yearly to honor a maximum of three individuals who have shown that they can, in some way, positively impact life on this planet.
* XIX Premi Internacional Catalunya 2007
* Member of the World Knowledge Dialogue Honorary Board, and Scientist in Residence for the 2008 symposium organized in Crans-Montana (Switzerland).
* Distinguished Lecturer, University of Iowa, 20082009
* E.O. Wilson Biophilia Center on Nokuse Plantation in Walton County, Florida 2009 Video
* Explorers Club Medal, 2009
* BBVA Frontiers of Knowledge Award in the Ecology and Conservation Biology Category, 2010
* Thomas Jefferson Medal in Architecture, 2010
* 2010 Heartland Prize for fiction for his first novel E. O. WILSON AND REBECCA SKLOOT: 2010 CHICAGO TRIBUNE HEARTLAND PRIZES Recorded on November 13, 2010. 
* EarthSky Science Communicator of the Year,2010

==Main works==

* The Theory of Island Biogeography, 1967, Princeton University Press (2001 reprint), ISBN 0-691-08836-5, with Robert H. MacArthur
* The Insect Societies, 1971, Harvard University Press, ISBN 0-674-45490-1
* 1975, Harvard University Press, (Twenty-fifth Anniversary Edition, 2000 ISBN 0-674-00089-7)
* On Human Nature, 1979, Harvard University Press, ISBN 0-674-01638-6, winner of the 1979 Pulitzer Prize for General Nonfiction.
* , 1981, Harvard University Press, ISBN 0-674-34475-8
* , 1983, Harvard University Press, ISBN 0-674-71445-8
* Biophilia, 1984, Harvard University Press, ISBN 0-674-07441-6
* , 1990, Inter-Research, ISSN 0932-2205
* The Ants, 1990, Harvard University Press, ISBN 0-674-04075-9, Winner of the 1991 Pulitzer Prize, with Bert Hlldobler
* The Diversity of Life, 1992, Harvard University Press, ISBN 0-674-21298-3, The Diversity of Life: Special Edition, ISBN 0-674-21299-1
* The Biophilia Hypothesis, 1993, Shearwater Books, ISBN 1-55963-148-1, with Stephen R. Kellert
* to the Ants|Journey to the Ants: A Story of Scientific Exploration], 1994, Harvard University Press, ISBN 0-674-48525-4, with Bert Hlldobler
* Naturalist, 1994, Shearwater Books, ISBN 1-55963-288-7
* In Search of Nature, 1996, Shearwater Books, ISBN 1-55963-215-1, with Laura Simonds Southworth
* , 1998, Knopf, ISBN 0-679-45077-7
* The Future of Life, 2002, Knopf, ISBN 0-679-45078-5
* Pheidole in the New World: A Dominant, Hyperdiverse Ant Genus, 2003, Harvard University Press, ISBN 0-674-00293-8
*From So Simple a Beginning: Darwin's Four Great Books. 2005, W. W. Norton.
*The Creation: An Appeal to Save Life on Earth, September 2006, W. W. Norton & Company, Inc. ISBN 978-0-393-06217-5
*Nature Revealed: Selected Writings 1949-2006, ISBN 0-8018-8329-6
*The Superorganism: The Beauty, Elegance, and Strangeness of Insect Societies, 2009, W.W. Norton & Company, Inc. ISBN 978-0-393-06704-0, with Bert Hlldobler
* , April 2010, W. W. Norton & Company, Inc. ISBN 978-0-393-07119-1
*Kingdom of Ants: Jose Celestino Mutis and the Dawn of Natural History in the New World, 2010, Johns Hopkins University Press, Baltimore, with Jos Mara Gmez Durn
*The Leafcutter Ants: Civilization by Instinct, 2011, W.W. Norton & Company, Inc. ISBN 978-0-393-33868-3, with Bert Hlldobler
*The Social Conquest of Earth, 2012, Liveright Publishing Corporation, New York, ISBN 978-0-87140-413-8
* Letters to a Young Scientist, 2013, WW Norton & Company, ISBN 0871407000

==Edited works==
*From So Simple a Beginning: Darwin's Four Great Books, edited with introductions by Edward O. Wilson (2010 W.W. Norton)

==See also==

*Sociobiology
*Biodiversity
*Biophilia hypothesis
*Westermarck effect
*Green economics
*Evolutionary psychology
*Human behavioral ecology
*Dual inheritance theory

*Richard Machalek
*Barry Lopez
*Bert Hlldobler
*Myrmecology
*Superorganism
*Biomass
*Encyclopedia of Life
*The 2005 Global Intellectuals Poll

==Footnotes==

==External links==

* E.O. Wilson Foundation
* Review of The Social Conquest of Earth by Richard Dawkins



[[Edwin Howard Armstrong]]

Edwin Howard Armstrong (December 18, 1890  January 31, 1954) was an American electrical engineer and inventor. He has been called "the most prolific and influential inventor in radio history". He invented the regenerative circuit while he was an undergraduate and patented it in 1914, followed by the super-regenerative circuit in 1922, and the superheterodyne receiver in 1918. Armstrong was also the inventor of modern frequency modulation (FM) radio transmission. 
 
Armstrong was born in New York City, New York, in 1890. He studied at Columbia University where he was a member of the Epsilon Chapter of the Theta Xi Fraternity. He later became a professor at Columbia University. He held 42 patents and received numerous awards, including the first Institute of Radio Engineers now IEEE Medal of Honor, the French Legion of Honor, the 1941 Franklin Medal and the 1942 Edison Medal. He is a member of the National Inventors Hall of Fame and the International Telecommunications Union's roster of great inventors.

==Early life==

Armstrong in his Signal Corps uniform during World War I

Armstrong was born in the Chelsea district of New York City to John and Emily Armstrong. His father was the American representative of the Oxford University Press, which published Bibles and standard classical works. John Armstrong, who was also a native of New York, began working at the Oxford University Press at a young age and eventually reached the position of Vice President of the American branch. Emily Smith first met John Armstrong in the North Presbyterian Church, which was located at 31st Street and Ninth Avenue. Emily Smith had strong family ties to Chelsea, which centered around the church, in which her family took an active role. 

When the church moved further North the Smith and Armstrong families followed it. In 1895 the Armstrong family moved from their brownstone row house at 347 West 29th Street to another similar house at 26 West 97th Street in the Upper West Side. At the age of eight Armstrong contracted a disease that was known as St. Vitus' Dance, which left him with a lifelong tic when excited or under stress. Because of the illness Armstrong was withdrawn from school for two years. In order to improve his health the Armstrong family moved in 1902 from the Upper West Side into a house at 1032 Warburton Avenue in Yonkers, which overlooked the Hudson river. The Smith family moved into a house next door. 

Armstrong's physical tic and the years he was removed from school led him to become withdrawn. Armstrong showed an interest in electrical and mechanical devices, particularly trains, from an early age. 

He loved heights and constructed a makeshift radio antenna tower in his back yard. Swinging on a bosun's chair, he would hoist himself up and down the tower to the concern of his neighbors.

In late 1917, Armstrong was invited to join the U.S. Army Signal Corps with the rank of captain and was sent to Paris to help set up a wireless communication system for the Army. He returned to the United States in the fall of 1919. 

During his service in both world wars, Armstrong gave the U.S. military free use of his patents. Use of these was critical to the Allied victories.

Unlike many engineers, Armstrong was never a corporate employee. He performed research and development by himself and owned his patents outright. He did not subscribe to conventional wisdom and was quick to question the opinions of his professors and his peers.

==Early work==

Armstrong's "feed back" circuit drawing, from Radio Broadcast vol. 1 no. 1 1922.

As an undergraduate, and later as a professor at Columbia University, Armstrong worked from his parent's attic in Yonkers, New York to develop the regenerative circuit, the superheterodyne receiver, and the superregenerative circuit. He studied under Professor Mihajlo Pupin at the Hartley Laboratories, a separate research unit at Columbia University. Thirty-one years after graduating from Columbia he became Professor of Electrical Engineering, filling the vacancy left by the death of Professor J. H. Morecroft. He held the position until his death. 

Armstrong contributed the most to modern electronics technology. His discoveries revolutionized electronic communications. Regeneration, or amplification via positive feedback is still in use to this day. Also, Armstrong discovered that Lee De Forest's Audion would go into oscillation when feedback was increased. Thus, the Audion could not only detect and amplify radio signals, it could transmit them as well.

While De Forest's addition of a third element to the Audion (the grid) and the subsequent move to modulated (voice) radio is not disputed, De Forest did not put his device to work. Armstrong's research and experimentation with the Audion moved radio reception beyond the crystal set and spark-gap transmitters. Radio signals could be amplified via regeneration to the point of human hearing without a headset. Armstrong later published a paper detailing how the Audion worked, 
 something De Forest could not do. De Forest did not understand the workings of his Audion.

Armstrong's service as a signal officer in World War I led to his design of the superheterodyne circuit. The discovery and development of the technology made radio receivers, then the primary communications devices of the time, more sensitive and selective. Before heterodyning, radio signals often overrode and interfered with each other. Heterodyning also made radio receivers much easier to use, rendering obsolete the multitude of tuning controls on radio sets of the time. The superheterodyne technology is still used today. There was a dispute regarding who invented superheterodyne radio. Walter Schottky claimed that he had independently invented super heterodyne radio.

==FM radio==
Armstrong explaining the superregenerative receiver, New York, 1922
The Philosophy Hall at Columbia University, which housed the basement laboratory where Armstrong developed FM radio.

Even as the regenerative-circuit lawsuit continued, Armstrong was working on another momentous invention. Working in the basement laboratory of Columbia's Philosophy Hall, he invented wide-band frequency modulation (FM) radio. Rather than varying ("modulating") the amplitude of a radio wave to encode an audio signal, the new method varied the frequency. FM enabled the transmission and reception of a wider range of audio frequencies, as well as audio free of "static", a common problem in AM radio. (Armstrong received a patent on wide-band FM on December 26, 1933. )

In 1922, John Renshaw Carson of AT&T, inventor of Single-sideband modulation (SSB modulation), had published a paper in the Proceedings of the IRE arguing that FM did not appear to offer any particular advantage. Armstrong managed to demonstrate the advantages of FM radio despite Carson's skepticism in a now-famous paper on FM in the Proceedings of the IRE in 1936, which was reprinted in the August 1984 issue of Proceedings of the IEEE. 

Today the consensus regarding FM is that narrow band FM is not so advantageous in terms of noise reduction, but wide band FM can bring great improvement in signal to noise ratio if the signal is stronger than a certain threshold. Hence Carson was not entirely wrong, and the Carson bandwidth rule for FM is still important today. Thus, both Carson and Armstrong ultimately contributed significantly to the science and technology of radio. The threshold concept was discussed by Murray G. Crosby (inventor of Crosby system for FM Stereo) who pointed out that for wide band FM to provide better signal to noise ratio, the signal should be above a certain threshold, according to his paper published in Proceedings of the IRE in 1937. Thus Crosby's work supplemented Armstrong's paper in 1936.

In 1934 Armstrong began working for RCA at the request of the president of RCA, David Sarnoff. Sarnoff and Armstrong first met at a boxing match involving Jack Dempsey in 1920. At the time Sarnoff was a young executive with an interest in new technologies, including radio broadcasting. In the early 1920s Armstrong drove off with Sarnoff's secretary, Marion MacInnes, in a French sports car. Armstrong and MacInnes were married in 1923. While Sarnoff was understandably impressed with Armstrong's FM system, he also understood that it was not compatible with his own AM empire. Sarnoff came to regard FM as a threat and refused to support it any further.

From May 1934 until October 1935, Armstrong conducted the first large scale field tests of his FM radio technology from a laboratory constructed by RCA on the 85th floor of the Empire State Building. An antenna attached to the spire of the building fired radio waves at receivers about 80 miles away. However RCA had its eye on television broadcasting, and chose not to buy the patents for the FM technology. 
 A June 17, 1936, presentation at the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) headquarters made headlines nationwide. He played a jazz record over conventional AM radio, then switched to an FM broadcast. "f the audience of 50 engineers had shut their eyes they would have believed the jazz band was in the same room. There were no extraneous sounds," noted one reporter. He added that several engineers described the invention "as one of the most important radio developments since the first earphone crystal sets were introduced." United Press report, "Radio Set-up Eliminates All Noise," Ogden Standard-Examiner, June 18, 1936, p1 

In 1937, Armstrong financed construction of the first FM radio station, W2XMN, a 40 kilowatt broadcaster in Alpine, New Jersey. The signal (at 42.8 MHz) could be heard clearly 100 mi away, despite the use of less power than an AM radio station. 

RCA began to lobby for a change in the law or FCC regulations that would prevent FM radios from becoming dominant. By June 1945, the RCA had pushed the FCC hard on the allocation of electromagnetic frequencies for the fledgling television industry. Although they denied wrongdoing, David Sarnoff and RCA managed to get the FCC to move the FM radio spectrum from 4250 MHz, to 88108 MHz, while getting new low-powered community television stations allocated to a new Channel 1 in the 44-50 MHz range. In fairness to the FCC, the 4250 MHz band was plagued by frequent tropospheric and E-layer stratospheric propagation which caused distant high powered stations to interfere with each other. The problem becomes even more severe on a cyclical basis when sunspot levels reach a maximum every 11 years and lower VHF band signals below 50 MHz can travel across the Atlantic Ocean or from coast to coast within North America on occasion. Sunspot levels were near their cyclical peak when the FCC reallocated FM in 1945. The 88108 MHz range is a technically better location for FM broadcast because it is less susceptible to this kind of frequent interference. (Channel 1 eventually had to be deleted as well, with all TV broadcasts licensed at frequencies 54 MHz or higher, and the band is no longer widely used for emergency first responders either, those services having moved mostly to UHF.)

But the immediate economic impact of the shift, whatever its technical merit, was devastating to early FM broadcasters. This single FCC action would render all Armstrong-era FM receivers useless within a short time as stations were moved to the new band, while it also protected both RCA's AM-radio stronghold and that of the other major competing networks, CBS, ABC and Mutual. Armstrong's radio network did not survive the shift into the high frequencies and was set back by the FCC decision. This change was strongly supported by AT&T, because loss of FM relaying stations forced radio stations to buy wired links from AT&T.

Furthermore, RCA also claimed invention of FM radio and won its own patent on the technology. A patent fight between RCA and Armstrong ensued. RCA's momentous victory in the courts left Armstrong unable to claim royalties on any FM receivers, including televisions, which were sold in the United States. The undermining of the Yankee Network and his costly legal battles brought ruin to Armstrong, by then almost penniless and emotionally distraught. Eventually, after Armstrong's death, many of the lawsuits were decided or settled in his favor, greatly enriching his estate and heirs. But the decisions came too late for Armstrong himself to enjoy his legal vindication.

==Personal life==

Armstrong married Sarnoff's secretary, Marion McInnis, in December 1922. He gave Marion the world's first portable radio as a wedding gift. Armstrong bought a Hispano-Suiza motor car before the wedding, which they drove to Palm Beach, Florida for their honeymoon. He kept the car until his death. McInnis, who was born in 1898, was survived by two nephews and a niece after her death in 1979. 

He was an avid tennis player until an injury in 1940, and drank an Old Fashioned with dinner. 

==Suicide==

Financially broken and mentally beaten after years of legal tussles with RCA and others, Armstrong lashed out at his wife one day with a fireplace poker, striking her on the arm. Ken Burns' documentary film, "Empire of the Air" MacInnis left their apartment to stay with her sister, Marjorie Tuttle, in Granby, Connecticut. 

On January 31, 1954 Armstrong removed the air conditioner from the window and jumped to his death from the thirteenth floor of his New York City apartment. His body was found fully clothed, with a hat, overcoat and gloves, the next morning by a River House employee on a third-floor balcony. The New York Times described the contents of his two-page suicide note to his wife: "he was heartbroken at being unable to see her once again, and expressing deep regret at having hurt her, the dearest thing in his life." The note concluded, "God keep you and Lord have mercy on my Soul." 
 After his death, a friend of Armstrong estimated that 90 percent of his time was spent on litigation against RCA. Upon hearing the news, David Sarnoff supposedly remarked, "I did not kill Armstrong."

MacInnis was able to formally establish Armstrong as the inventor of FM following protracted court proceedings over five of his basic FM patents. Until her death in 1979 she participated in the Armstrong Memorial Research Foundation that she founded. 

Edwin Armstrong was buried in Locust Grove Cemetery, Merrimac, Massachusetts. 

==Legacy==
Armstrong invented a large part of the technology of modern radio. A modern biographer has written 

It took decades following Armstrong's death for FM broadcasting to meet and surpass the saturation of the AM band, and longer still for FM radio to become profitable for broadcasters. Two developments made a difference in the 1960s. One was the development of true stereophonic broadcasting on FM by General Electric, which resulted in the approval of an FM stereo broadcast standard by the FCC in 1961, and the conversion of hundreds of stations to stereo within a few years.

The other was an FCC rulemaking in 1966 that required broadcasters who owned both full-time AM stations and FM properties in the same city to program each of them with separate programming during a majority of the day. This meant FM no longer just simulcast AM with better sound quality, but offered unique program choices expanding what listeners could hear. Programmers took advantage by turning their FM stations into venues for formats from country to progressive rock to jazz and classical music, all with the enhanced quality that stereo sound could bring. For example, some AM stations paused Sunday morning music programming for religious voicetracks by ministers. Sister stations on FM continued the music programming.

Within a few years a majority of households were FM equipped, by the 1980s a majority of cars sold had FM stereo radios and a majority of listening in the U.S. was devoted to FM signals according to the Arbitron rating service. The stereo sound revolution, followed by the programming revolution, accomplished what cleaner and crisper sound alone was unable to achieve, and made FM radio a permanent and important part of the communications landscape.

Armstrong was of the opinion that anyone who had actual contact with the development of radio understood that the radio art was the product of experiment and work based on physical reasoning, rather than on the mathematicians' calculations and formulae (known today as part of "mathematical physics"). His work, as important as it was in its own right, was a part of a continuum of progress in communications and electronics that since his time has brought forward color television, the personal computer, the Internet, cable and satellite radio and TV, personal mobile phones, audio, video and computing, digital stereo radio on both the medium wave and VHF-FM bands, and digital high definition television on VHF, UHF, cable and satellite. Armstrong's FM system was used for communications between NASA and the Apollo program astronauts. He is of no known relation to the well-known Apollo astronaut Neil Armstrong.

After her husband's death, Armstrongs estate finally won the case against RCA. Dana Raymond of Cravath, Swaine & Moore in New York served as counsel in that litigation. Marion Armstrong became extraordinarily wealthy as a result of FMs commercial success and acceptance worldwide.

In 1984 Robert Mondlock copyrighted an original screenplay about Armstrong's life titled "High Fidelity".

==Honors==

Armstrong's house, overlooking the Hudson River, in Yonkers, N.Y., c. 1975. It was demolished in November 1982 due to fire damage.

In 1917 Armstrong was the first recipient of the IRE's, now IEEE Medal of Honor. For his wartime work on radio the French government gave him the Legion of Honor in 1919. He was awarded the 1941 Franklin Medal. He received in 1942 the AIEEs Edison Medal "for distinguished contributions to the art of electric communication, notably the regenerative circuit, the superheterodyne, and frequency modulation". The ITU added him to its roster of great inventors of electricity in 1955. In 1980 he was inducted into the National Inventors Hall of Fame, and was on a U.S. postage stamp in 1983. The Consumer Electronics Hall of Fame inducted him in 2000, "in recognition of his contributions and pioneering spirit that have laid the foundation for consumer electronics."

Philosophy Hall, the Columbia building where Armstrong developed FM, was declared a National Historic Landmark in 2003 in recognition of that fact. Armstrong's home in Yonkers also received designation in both the NHL and the National Register of Historic Places, but both were withdrawn when the house was later demolished. (includes 1 photo) 

Armstrong Hall at Columbia is also named in his honor. The building, at the northeast corner of Broadway and 112th Street, was originally an apartment house but was converted to research space after Columbia bought it. It is now home to the Goddard Institute for Space Studies, a research institute jointly operated by Columbia and the National Aeronautics and Space Administration dedicated to atmospheric and climate science. A storefront in the corner of the building houses Tom's Restaurant, a longtime neighborhood fixture that was featured as the fictional diner "Monk's" for establishing shots in the television series "Seinfeld". The same restaurant also inspired Susanne Vega's song "Tom's Diner".

In addition, Columbia established the Edwin Howard Armstrong Professorship in Computer Science in Armstrong's memory.

Also, the United States Army Communications and Electronics Life Cycle Management Command (CECOM-LCMC) Headquarters at Aberdeen Proving Ground, Maryland is named Armstrong Hall in his honor.

==Patents==

Armstrong received 42 patents in total; a selection are listed below: 
* : "Wireless Receiving System"
* : "Electric Wave Transmission" (Note: Co-patentee with Mihajlo Pupin)
* U.S. Patent 1,336,378: "Antenna with Distributed Positive Resistance"
* : "Method of Receiving High Frequency Oscillation"
* : "Selectively Opposing Impedance to Received Electrical Oscillations" (Note: Co-patentee with M. I. Pupin)
* U.S. Patent 1,424,065: "Signaling System"
* : "Wireless Receiving System for Continuous Wave"
* : "Radio Signaling System" (Note: This is one of the patents issued for wideband FM in 1933.)
* : "Radiosignaling" (Note: This is one of the patents issued for wideband FM in 1933.)
* : "Radiosignaling" (Note: This is one of the patents issued for wideband FM in 1933.)

=== Patent disputes ===

Many of Armstrong's inventions were ultimately claimed by others in patent lawsuits. In particular, the regenerative circuit, which Armstrong patented in 1914 as a "wireless receiving system," was subsequently patented by Lee De Forest in 1916; De Forest then sold the rights to his patent to AT&T. Between 1922 and 1934, Armstrong found himself embroiled in a patent war, between himself, RCA, and Westinghouse on one side, and De Forest and AT&T on the other. At the time, this action was the longest patent lawsuit ever litigated, at 12 years. Armstrong won the first round of the lawsuit, lost the second, and stalemated in a third. Before the Supreme Court of the United States, De Forest was granted the regeneration patent in what is today widely regarded as a misunderstanding of the technical facts by the Supreme Court justices. 

By early 1923, however, Armstrong was a millionaire as a result of licensing his patents to RCA. In 1946 the FCC's decision to use Armstrong's FM system as the standard for NTSC television sound gave Armstrong another chance at royalty payments. However, RCA refused to pay him royalties and encouraged other television makers not to pay them either.

==See also==

*Armstrong oscillatorbasic circuit for reception of AM radio signals
*Armstrong Towertall lattice tower built and used by Edwin Armstrong in 1938
*Armstrong Phase Modulator
*Awards named after E. H. Armstrong
*Autodyne
*Regenerative circuit

==Notes==

==References==
* 
* 
* 
* 

==Further reading==
* Ira Brodsky. The History of Wireless: How Creative Minds Produced Technology for the Masses. St. Louis: Telescope Books, 2008.
* Ken Burns. Empire of the Air. Documentary that first aired on PBS in 1992.
* Gary L. Frost. Early FM Radio: Incremental Technology in Twentieth-Century America. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 2010. ISBN 0-8018-9440-9, ISBN 978-0-8018-9440-4.
*

==External links==

* Armstrong Memorial Research Foundation - The Armstrong Foundation disseminates knowledge of Armstrong's research and achievements
* Houck Collection - A collection of images and documents that belonged to Armstrong's assistant, Harry W. Houck, which have been annotated by Mike Katzdorn.
* Rare Book & Manuscript Library Collections - A collection of images and documents at Columbia University
* Biography
* The Broadcast Archive - A brief biography by Donna Halper
* Ammon, Richard T., "The Rolls Royce Of Reception : Super Heterodynes - 1918 to 1930".
* IEEE History Center's Edwin H. Armstrong : Excerpt from "The Legacy of Edwin Howard Armstrong," by J. E. Brittain Proceedings of the IEEE, vol. 79, no. 2, February 1991
* Hong, Sungook, "A History of the Regeneration Circuit: From Invention to Patent Litigation" University, Seoul, Korea (PDF)
* Who Invented the Superhetrodyne? The history of the invention of the superhetrodyne receiver and related patent disputes
* Yannis Tsividis, "Edwin Armstrong: Pioneer of the Airwaves", 2002. A profile on the web site of Columbia University, Armstrong's alma mater



[[EverQuest]]

EverQuest is a 3D fantasy-themed massively multiplayer online role-playing game (MMORPG) that was released on March 16, 1999. The original design is credited to Brad McQuaid, Steve Clover, and Bill Trost. It was developed by Sony's 989 Studios and its early-1999 spin-off Verant Interactive, and published by Sony Online Entertainment (SOE). 

Since its acquisition of Verant in late 1999, SOE develops, runs, and distributes EverQuest. EverQuests development is ongoing, and the twentieth expansion, Call of the Forsaken, launched October 8, 2013. Additional subscription options of EverQuest, free-to-play Bronze Level, and a one-time fee Silver Level, were made available in March 2012. 

EverQuest has earned numerous awards, including 1999 GameSpot Game of the Year and a 2007 Technology & Engineering Emmy Award. 

==Gameplay==

Many of the elements in EverQuest have been drawn from text-based MUD (Multi-User Dungeon) games, particularly DikuMUDs, which in turn were inspired by traditional role-playing games such as Dungeons & Dragons. In EverQuest, players create a character (also known as an avatar, or colloquially as a char or toon) by selecting one of sixteen races in the game, which range from humans (basic Caucasian-looking human, dark-skinned Erudite, and barbarian), elves (high elves, wood elves, and dark elves), half-elves, dwarves, gnomes, halflings, trolls, and ogres, to cat-people (Vah Shir), lizard-people (Iksar), frog-people (Froglok), and dragon-people (Drakkin). At creation, players select each character's adventuring occupation (such as a wizard, ranger, or cleric  called a class  see below for particulars), a patron deity, and starting city. Customization of the character facial appearance is available at creation (hair, hair color, face style, facial hair, facial hair color, eye color, etc.).

A Sand Giant engaging a group in the Oasis of Marr, a desert zone. The clunky character models, low resolution, and simple user interface suggest this screenshot was taken early in EverQuest's existence.

Players use their character to explore the fantasy world of Norrath, fight monsters and enemies for treasure and experience points, and master trade skills. As they progress, players advance in level, gaining power, prestige, spells, and abilities through actions such as defeating capable opponents, looting the remains of defeated enemies and completing quests (tasks and adventures given by non-player characters (NPCs).

EverQuest allows players to interact with other people through role-play, joining player guilds, and dueling other players (in restricted situations  EverQuest only allows player versus player (PVP) combat on the PvP-specific server, specified arena zones and through agreed upon dueling).

The game-world of EverQuest consists of over five hundred zones. 

Multiple instances of the world exist on various servers. In the past, game server populations were visible during log-in, and showed peaks of more than 3000 players per server. The design of EverQuest, like other massively multiplayer online role-playing games, makes it highly amenable to cooperative play, with each player having a specific role within a given group.

===Classes===
The fourteen classes of the original 1999 version of EverQuest were later expanded to include the Beastlord and Berserker classes with the Shadows of Luclin (2001) and Gates of Discord (2004) expansions, respectively.

The classes can be grouped into five general roles that share similar characteristics, as described below.

====Tank classes====
Members of this archetype have a high number of hitpoints for their level, and can equip heavy armor. They have the ability to taunt enemies into focusing on them, rather than other party members who may be more susceptible to damage and death.

* Warrior: the prototypical "tank" class, able to avoid and mitigate more damage than any other class. In a way, this is offset by their inability to cast spells. Owing to their stalwart defensive prowess, the Warrior often has a crucial role as 'main tank' of a group or raid party, absorbing or mitigating the worst of boss attacks. Their high hit points also allow them to take more punishment than most other classes before succumbing, which gives healers a greater chance to keep them, and thus the party, alive and well. In their role as tank or proverbial 'damage sponge', the Warrior uses their Taunt skill to keep dangerous enemies trained on them, rather than chasing down overly-aggressive wizards or rogues, who often draw fire for their high damage output. All these qualities may help engender a sense of trust in a well-known and well-armored warrior, who can generally go toe-to-toe with a powerful mob for longer than any other class.

* Shadow Knight: a durable tank class; this Warrior/Necromancer hybrid has vampiric and damage-over-time spells. Shadow Knights have the unique ability to Harm Touch (do direct damage) every 72 minutes, the power of which increases in absolute terms but decreases relative to enemies' hit points as a player levels up. Since this class is a hybrid, they must wait longer than the Necromancer to begin receiving spells, and longer yet for the more potent incantations such as Summon Corpse and Feign Death. In most cases the level difference in spell acquirement is +25-30 levels. For example a Necromancer might learn a certain spell at level four that a Shadow Knight is unable to learn until level 34. Eventually, Shadow Knights are able to summon a weak skeleton pet, summon players' corpses who are in the same zone as them, and cast the spell Feign Death, similar to but slightly less reliable than the monk's feign death skill.

* Paladin: the 'virtuous' counterpart to the Shadow Knight, a Paladin is a hybrid Warrior/Cleric. They were originally able to Lay on Hands (heal themselves or another player) once every 72 minutes (real-time); Lay on Hands is now available as an innate ability. At mid-levels, paladins can purchase some resurrection spells. Paladins are tough in melee with some healing, protective, and stun spells. At mid-range levels, they can purchase a "pacify" line of spells that allows them to function as a "puller" for a group. Like Shadow Knights, Paladins have powers which enable them to do comparatively greater damage to undead opponents.

====Damage dealers====
The following classes are able to deal high corporeal damage to opponents. Within the game, these classes are often referred to as 'DPS', which stands for Damage Per Second. There isn't a definitive 'best DPS' class, as damage dealt will depend on numerous factors which vary from one encounter to another (such as the enemy's armor, its positioning, and its magic resistance). Another complication is that while Wizards can readily deal tremendous damage to enemies, their ability to do so is limited by their remaining mana pool, as well as how fast they are able to regenerate mana. That said, Berserkers, Rogues, and Wizards are three classes most commonly cited as the highest overall damage dealers.

These melee damage dealers have a medium number of hit points per level, but cannot wear the heaviest armors and are less likely than a tank class to be able to survive direct attacks for a sustained period of time.
*Beastlord: A unique class which combines some powers from the Monk and Shaman classes along with a powerful pet. Beastlords can imbue their pets with powers and combat enemies with hand-to-hand skills or with weapons. They can "de-buff" enemies with spells, and possess modest healing abilities. This diverse array of skills allows Beastlords to be effective solo adventurers at many levels as well as being handy in a group.
* Berserker: A specialist form of the melee type, the Berserker is primarily a medium-armored, high-damage dealer that uses two-handed weapons and who can hurl axes and other thrown objects in the form of spell-like abilities, namely stunning and snaring their opponents.
* Monk: As masters of martial arts, Monks are the hand-to-hand fighting experts who can learn to use one handed and two handed blunt weapons and are a powerful melee damage-dealer. Monks get many, if not all, combat skills (dual wield, double attack, triple attack, etc.) before any other class. Monks have the ability to feign death with a high degree of reliability, and possess additional skills that enable them to be a strong pulling class. They have the ability to heal themselves, with a moderate cooldown, with the Mend ability.
* Ranger: A versatile hybrid class combining some of a Warrior's fighting prowess with a Druid's spellcasting, Rangers are able to deal large amounts of damage both from a ranged distance and in close quarters. Their most unusual ability is to track unseen NPCs, for which they highly valued as pullers in outdoor zones. Rangers also have the ability to "taunt", and they possess a "harmony" line of spells (like "pacify", but which only works outdoors) which allow them to play the role of tank to a limited degree. They can make use of archery better than any other class. Their line of snare spells (which hampers an enemy's movement) is very useful in XP groups to stop enemies from running away when seriously injured, as well as in kiting.
* Rogue: With their backstab ability, which multiplies damage done to an unguarded enemy's back, Rogues are able to inflict massive amounts of damage, provided that they are in a group that can keep the opponent facing away from the Rogue. Later in life, with the help of alternate advancement abilities, rogues are able to backstab opponents even when facing them. Rogues have the ability to make poisons, pick pockets, and pick locks. Their abilities early on to sneak and hide allow them to walk past both living and undead mobs without being seen.

====Casters====
Caster classes have the lowest hit points per level and can only wear the lightest of armors. Casters draw their power from an internal pool of mana, which takes some time to regenerate and thus demands judicious and efficient use of spells.
* Wizard: The primary nuking class; these casters are able to deal catastrophic damage to enemies over a very short time from a distance, particularly with their Manaburn skill, although the length of encounters often makes manaburn inefficient to use. Wizards are considered the masters of teleportation and have appropriate spells to facilitate group travel to specific locations, including designated "safe spots" when things turn sour for the whole group. A Wizard's direct damage spells are generally from the fire, frost, and magic schools.
* Magician: Usually referred to as Mages, Magicians are similar to the Wizard class but with noticeably less direct-damage spell power. They are able to summon strong elemental pets, from the domains of Earth, Water, Air, and Fire, each with unique strengths and weaknesses. They have the capability to conjure pet armor and weapons, food, drink, and mod rods, which allow players to convert their health into mana. Magicians can summon party members to different parts of a zone with the Call of the Hero spell, which can be helpful in raid zones. Magicians' direct damage spells are generally from the fire school of magic.
* Necromancer: These "masters of death" are able to summon, buff, and heal powerful undead pets and use poison, magic, fire, and disease damage-over-time spells. Necromancers are able to feign death, snare enemies, and summon players' corpses in-zone. They have a combination of skills and abilities, most notably the ability to snare (make a target run/walk slowly), fear (make the target run directly away from the caster) and lifetap (heal the caster and damage the target) that allows them to function as an effective solo class.

All caster classes have the ability to 'Research', an activity where all players can make spells for use by other players. These are made using assortments of different pieces of quest material found in the game.

====Crowd control / utility====
These classes share the ability to keep multiple enemies from attacking the party and have the ability to increase party members' ability to regenerate mana.
* Enchanter: A caster class that has few hit points per level and can wear only the lightest forms of armor, Enchanters are crowd control experts and are the most proficient class at Charming, Stunning, and Mesmerizing enemies. They have the ability to Memory Blur an opponent (causing them to forget they were being attacked) or Pacify an opponent (making them oblivious to antagonists in the area, but which has a small chance of backfiring), both of which may be extremely useful in avoiding unwanted skirmishes. Enchanters have a wide range of utility spells, including the Clarity (AKA "crack") line of spells, which when cast on a player allows them to regenerate mana at an improved rate. In addition to being able to both increase players' rate of attack (with the Haste line of spells), and Slowing that of enemies, Enchanters may also cast Illusions on themselves and others, which may have no real benefit (other than conferring a new look) or may grant tangible benefits such as underwater breathing, flight, or a vampiric touch. Lastly, Enchanters possess the unique Rune line of spells, which creates a magical protective buffer against all forms of damage until it has been worn down. This class is also uniquely suited for the jewelcraft trade, because it is the only class able to enchant metals. It is also one of the four classes able to make spells using the spell research trade skill.

:Enchanters do possess some rudimentary direct-damage and damage-over-time offensive spells, all in the Magic school of casting, although using mana in this way is not always efficient or effective. 

* Bard: a jack-of-all-trades class with fair melee ability, good armor, and the ability to play songs that benefit all nearby comrades, such as "crowd control" effects as well as mana and health regeneration. Bards possess the unique ability to 'fade' from their enemies memories. This makes the bard an excellent pulling class. Bards possess lesser versions of many of the special abilities of other classes. They are known for their ability early on to increase the movement speed of their party faster than any mount or movement buff. Bards can weave the effects of up to four songs at once to confer the greatest advantage to their group. Bards themselves often do not receive the full benefit of their songs, but they can still be an effective solo class at many levels, especially with their strong "kiting" proficiency. "Kiting" is a form of attack based on drawing an enemy within the caster's spell range and casting to deal damage but continually running ahead of the enemy in order to remain outside the attack range of the NPC (or PC for that matter) allowing the aggressor to deal damage without taking any damage themselves. This method, which got its name because the player drags an enemy behind them like a person flying a kite, is used by many classes but happens to be especially effective with the Bard's class. For a very long time the Bard was generally considered the most overpowered class in the game, able to originally "stack" multiple versions of "buffs" and benefit from all of them while other classes could not. The Bard is also the only class able to cast spells from items while running at the same time.

====Healers====
Priest classes have medium level of hit points per level and have access to healing and "buff" spells.
* Cleric: The most powerful healer in the game, and for the first few years of EverQuest the only class capable of resurrection with experience regained, and the only class with the spell Complete Heal. As the game has changed, Complete Heal has become less effective compared to the cleric's many different lines of more powerful and quicker (albeit more mana-intensive) heals. Primarily healers, the cleric also has some "death save" spells, as "Divine Intervention" and can increase spell casting haste with "Blessing of Loyalty". Clerics can wear the heaviest plate-mail type armors. Clerics are great solo classes due to the introduction of the "Vow of Valor" line of spells, which provides the cleric with increased melee damage and a high rate of self regeneration, at the cost of halving their direct heals' power. 
* Druid: A priest class that can cast healing spells, teleport, snare (to slow down enemies movement rate), and moderately-powerful nuking and damage-over-time spells, as well as charming animals to use them as pets. The range of abilities allows druids to play multiple roles in a group or to solo effectively. Their heals are weaker than clerics and better than shamans, but they share some of the healing/cures spells with the shamans. The Druid hitpoint (HP) spells, the "skin" line, also includes a mana regen component, and they can cast "Flight of the Eagle", the fastest group run speed spell in the game. Druids may only wear "leather class" armors. Druids also have a number of transportation spells that allow speedy movement throughout much of the gaming world, just as wizards, but the two classes have different zones or places in the zones that they are able to teleport to. Their combined tracking and foraging skills make them excellent trade-skillers, in terms of finding various components necessary for baking, tailoring, brewing and the like. Druids can, just like shamans, resurrect (rez) other players after a fight, but with the same experienced regained as a paladin, or a lower level cleric.
* Shaman: Shamans can take many roles, and are often considered as a "utility" class. They are excellent in soloing, group and raid situations. With smaller heals than the other two classes, a shaman often has to use several skills at the same time where a cleric could simply heal right through: keeping a heal-over-time (HoT) spell at the tank, slowing the enemy's rate of attack, as well as using their ordinary direct heals. Their buffs are both long duration buffs, which increases hitpoints, agility and mitigation, and short durations buffs, which need to be recast often. While a raiding shaman will primarily heal and enchance the attack rate of melee fighters, a soloing shaman or a shaman in a group will use their strong damage-over-time (DoT) spells, primarily based on poison, curse and disease. Shamans, or "Shammies" may cannibalize their health to restore mana, which means that they are able to keep casting their spells for much longer times than clerics or druids. They wear chain armor, and can summon an animal pet. Because of the range of Shaman's spells, they are sometimes considered a "utility" class. Shamans are the only class able to make potions with the Alchemy skill. 

===Deities===

There are several deities in EverQuest who each have a certain area of responsibility and play a role in the backstory of the game setting. A wide array of armor and weapons are also deity-tied, making it possible for only those who worship that deity to wear/equip them. Additionally, deities determine, to some extent, where characters may and may not go without being attacked on sight.

===Zones===

The EverQuest universe is divided into more than five hundred zones. These zones represent a wide variety of geographical features, including plains, oceans, cities, deserts, and other planes of existence. One of the most popular zones in the game is the Plane of Knowledge, one of the few zones in which all races and classes can coexist harmoniously without interference. The Plane of Knowledge is also home to portals to many other zones, including portals to other planes and to the outskirts of nearly every starting city.

==Development==

EverQuest began as a concept by John Smedley in 1996.

EverQuest II was released in late 2004. Set in an alternate universe similar to that of the original EverQuest, this sequel takes place 500 years after the awakening of The Sleeper. The game has also inspired a number of other spin-offs.

The third iteration in the series, with the working title EverQuest Next, is currently in the early stages of development as first reported in the 2009 10th Anniversary EverQuest Book. At the SOE Fan Faire in August 2010, in-game screenshots, concept art and more information was revealed. However, since then it's been revealed that this early version of the game was scrapped and a new design is being implemented. More details are expected at SOE Live, which is scheduled for August 14, 2013.

===History===

The design and concept of EverQuest is heavily indebted to text-based MUDs, in particular DikuMUD, and as such EverQuest is considered a 3D evolution of the text MUD genre like some of the MMOs that preceded it, such as Meridian 59 and The Realm Online. John Smedley, Brad McQuaid, Steve Clover and Bill Trost, who jointly are credited with creating the world of EverQuest, have repeatedly pointed to their shared experiences playing MUDs such as Sojourn and TorilMUD as the inspiration for the game. Famed book cover illustrator Keith Parkinson created the box covers for earlier installments of EverQuest.

Development of EverQuest began in 1996 when Sony Interactive Studios America (SISA) executive John Smedley secured funding for a 3D game like text-based MUDs following the successful launch of Meridian 59 the previous year. To implement the design, Smedley hired programmers Brad McQuaid and Steve Clover, who had come to Smedley's attention through their work on the single player RPG Warwizard. McQuaid soon rose through the ranks to become executive producer for the EverQuest franchise and emerged during development of EverQuest as a popular figure among the fan community through his in-game avatar, Aradune. Other key members of the development team included Bill Trost, who created the history, lore and major characters of Norrath (including EverQuest protagonist Firiona Vie), Geoffrey "GZ" Zatkin, who implemented the spell system, and artist Milo D. Cooper, who did the original character modeling in the game.

EverQuest launched with modest expectations from Sony on 16 March 1999 under its Verant Interactive brand and quickly became successful. By the end of the year, it had surpassed competitor Ultima Online in number of subscriptions. Numbers continued rising rapidly until mid-2001 when growth slowed. Sony's last reported subscription numbers were given as more than 430,000 players on 14 January 2004. Champions Of Norrath Announcement, Sony.com SOE released a Mac OS X version of EverQuest in 2003, incorporating all expansions through Planes of Power. The OS X version remained available for play until November 2013, when the dedicated OS X server was shuttered.

EverQuest initially launched with volunteer "Guides" who would act as basic customer service/support via 'petitions'. Issues could be forwarded to the Game Master assigned to the server or resolved by the volunteer. Other guides would serve in administrative functions within the program or assisting the Quest Troupe with dynamic and persistent live events throughout the individual servers. Volunteers were compensated with free subscription and expansions to the game. In 2003 the program changed for the volunteer guides taking them away from the customer service focus and placing them into their current roles as roving 'persistent characters' role-playing with the players.

In anticipation of PlayStation's launch, Sony Interactive Studios America made the decision to focus primarily on console titles under the banner 989 Studios, while spinning off its sole computer title, EverQuest, which was ready to launch, to a new computer game division named Redeye (renamed Verant Interactive). Executives initially had very low expectations for EverQuest, but in 2000, following the surprising continued success and unparalleled profits of EverQuest, Sony reorganized Verant Interactive into Sony Online Entertainment (SOE) with Smedley retaining control of the company.

Many of the original EverQuest team, including Brad McQuaid, Steve Clover and Geoffrey Zatkin left SOE by 2002.

===Subscriptions===

Verant, from 1999 to 2001, and SOE, from 2001 to 14 January 2004, issued formal statements giving some indications of the number of EverQuest subscriptions and peak numbers of players online at any given moment. These records show more than 225,000 subscriptions on 1 November 1999, with an increase to more than 450,000 subscriptions by 25 September 2003.

On June 6, 2012, SOE removed the ability to buy game subscription time with Station Cash without any warning to players. SOE apologized for this abrupt change in policy and reinstated the option for an additional week, after which it was removed permanently. Non-recurring Subscriptions Removal Official news and announcements - 2012-06-15 

===Expansions===

There have been 20 expansions to the original game since release. Expansions are purchased separately and provide additional content to the game (for example: raising the maximum character level; adding new races, classes, zones, continents, quests, equipment, game features). Additionally, the game is updated through downloaded patches. The EverQuest expansions:
# The Ruins of Kunark (April 2000)
# The Scars of Velious (December 2000)
# The Shadows of Luclin (December 2001)
# The Planes of Power (October 2002)
# The Legacy of Ykesha (February 2003)
# Lost Dungeons of Norrath (September 2003)
# Gates of Discord (February 2004)
# Omens of War (September 2004)
# Dragons of Norrath (February 2005)
# Depths of Darkhollow (September 2005)
# Prophecy of Ro (February 2006)
# The Serpent's Spine (September 2006)
# The Buried Sea (February 2007)
# Secrets of Faydwer (November 2007)
# Seeds of Destruction (October 2008)
# Underfoot (December 2009)
# House of Thule (October 2010)
# Veil of Alaris (November 2011)
# Rain of Fear (November 2012) (Followed by the major content patches Shadow of Fear in April 2013 and Heart of Fear in July 2013.)
# Call of the Forsaken (October 2013) (Followed by the major content patches Hate Rising in January 2014.)

==Servers==

The game runs on multiple game servers, each with a unique name for identification. These names were originally the deities of the world of Norrath. In technical terms, each game server is actually a cluster of server machines. Once a character is created, it can be played only on that server unless the character is transferred to a new server by the customer service staff, generally for a fee. Each server often has a unique community and people often include the server name when identifying their character outside of the game.

===OS X===

SOE devoted one server (Al'Kabor) to an OS X version of the game. The game was never developed beyond the Planes of Power expansion. In January 2012, SOE announced plans to shut down the server, but based on the passionate response of the player base, rescinded the decision and changed Al'Kabor to a free-to-play subscription model. EQMac will carry on!, SOE forums At about the same time, SOE revised the Macintosh client software to run natively on Intel processors. Players running on older, PowerPC-based systems lost access to the game at that point. EQMac Login News, SOE forums Finally in November 2013, SOE closed Al'Kabor. EQ Mac Sunsetting: A Letter from John Smedley SOE official forum, October 18, 2013 

===European===

Two SOE servers were set up to better support players in and around Europe: Antonius Bayle and Kane Bayle. Kane Bayle was merged into Antonius Bayle.

With the advent of the New Dawn promotion, three additional servers were set up and maintained by Ubisoft: Venril Sathir (British), Sebilis (French) and Kael Drakkal (German). The downside of the servers was that while it was possible to transfer to them, it was impossible to transfer off.

The servers were subsequently acquired by SOE and all three were merged into Antonius Bayle server. 

==Controversies, social issues, and game problems==

===Sale of in-game objects/real world economics===
EverQuest has been the subject of various criticisms. One example involves the sale of in-game objects for real currency (often through eBay). The developers of EQ have always forbidden the practice.

Because items can be traded within the game and also because of illegal online trading on websites, virtual currency to real currency exchange rates have been calculated. The BBC reported that in 2002 work done by Edward Castronova showed that EverQuest was the 77th richest country in the world, sandwiched between Russia and Bulgaria and its GDP per capita was higher than that of the People's Republic of China and India. In 2004, a follow-up analysis of the entire online gaming industry indicated that the combined GDP of the online "worlds" populated by the two million players was approximately the same as that of Namibia. 

Companies created characters, leveled them to make them powerful, and then resold the characters or specialized in exchanging money between games. A player could exchange a house in The Sims Online for EverQuest platinum pieces, depending solely on market laws of supply and demand.

Sony officially discourages the payment of real-world money for online goods, except on certain "Station Exchange" servers in EverQuest II, launched in July 2005. The program facilitates buying in-game items for real money from fellow players for a nominal fee. At this point this system only applies to select EverQuest II servers; none of the pre-Station Exchange EverQuest II or EverQuest servers are affected. 

===Intellectual property and role-playing===
Another well-publicized incident from October 2000, usually referred to as the "Mystere incident", involved Verant banning a player for creating controversial fan fiction, causing outrage among EverQuest players and sparking a major industry-wide debate about players' rights and the line between roleplaying and intellectual property infringement. The case was used by several academics in discussing such rights in the digital age. cf. Garlick M., "Player, Pirate or Conducer? A consideration of the rights of online gamers", Yale Journal of Law & Technology, 2004-2005. 

Fans have created the open source server emulator EQEmu, allowing users to run their own servers with custom rules.

===Addiction===

The game is renowned and berated (by some psychologists specializing in computer addiction) for its addictive qualities. Many players refer to it half-jokingly as "EverCrack" (a disparaging comparison to crack cocaine). There has been one well-publicized suicide of an EverQuest user named Shawn Woolley that resulted in his mother, Liz, founding Online Gamers Anonymous. 

===Sociological aspects of MMORPGs===

Massively multiplayer online role-playing games (MMORPGs) are described by some players as "chat rooms with a graphical interface". The sociological aspects of EverQuest (and other MMORPGs) are explored in a series of online studies on a site known as "the HUB". The studies make use of data gathered from player surveys and discuss topics like virtual relationships, player personalities, gender issues, and more.

===Organized protests===
In May 2004, Woody Hearn of GU Comics called for all EverQuest gamers to boycott the Omens of War expansion in an effort to force SOE to address existing issues with the game rather than release another "quick-fire" expansion. The call to boycott was rescinded after SOE held a summit to address player concerns, improve (internal and external) communication, and correct specific issues within the game.

===Prohibition in Brazil===
On 17 January 2008, the Judge of the 17th Federal Court of Minas Gerais State forbade the sales of the game in the whole Brazilian territory. The reason was that the game leads the players to a loss of moral virtue and takes them into "heavy" psychological conflicts because of the game quests. 

==EverQuest universe==
Since EverQuests release, Sony Online Entertainment has added several EverQuest-related games. These include:

*EverQuest Hero's Call (Pocket PC, January 2003)
*EverQuest Online Adventures (PlayStation 2, February 2003)
*Lords of EverQuest (PC, December 2003)
*Champions of Norrath (PlayStation 2, February 2004)
*EverQuest Hero's Call 2 (Pocket PC, April 2004)
*EverQuest II (PC, November 2004)
*, sequel to Champions of Norrath (PlayStation 2, February 2005)
*EverQuest Role-Playing Game (a role-playing game produced in collaboration with White Wolf which uses the d20 system).
*Legends of Norrath (a virtual card game which launched sometime in 2007 or early 2008 which also awards EverQuest and EverQuest II players with in-game items).
*EverQuest Next (newest story-based EverQuest game.)
*EverQuest Next Landmark (only world-building Everquest game.)

A line of novels have been published in the world of EverQuest, including:
*Rogue's Hour, by Scott Ciencin (October 2004)
*Ocean of Tears, by Stewart Wieck (October 2005)
*Truth and Steel, by Thomas M. Reid (September 2006)
*The Blood Red Harp, by Elaine Cunningham (October 2006)

==Notes==

==References==
*

==External links==
*
*Official EverQuest news



[[Human evolution]]

Human evolution is the evolutionary process leading up to the appearance of modern humans. While it began with the last common ancestor of all life, the topic usually covers only the evolutionary history of primates, in particular the genus Homo, and the emergence of Homo sapiens as a distinct species of hominids (or "great apes"). The study of human evolution involves many scientific disciplines, including physical anthropology, primatology, archaeology, ethology, linguistics, evolutionary psychology, embryology and genetics. 

Genetic studies show that primates diverged from other mammals about in the Late Cretaceous period, and the earliest fossils appear in the Paleocene, around . "Nova  Meet Your Ancestors". PBS. Retrieved 20081024. The family Hominidae diverged from the Hylobatidae (Gibbon) family 15-20 million years ago, and around , the Ponginae (orangutans) diverged from the Hominidae family. Dawkins R (2004) The Ancestor's Tale.
^ "Query: Hominidae/Hylobatidae". Time Tree. 2009. Retrieved December 2013. Bipedalism is the basic adaption of the Hominin line, and the earliest bipedal Hominin is considered to be either Sahelanthropus or Orrorin, with Ardipithecus, a full bipedal, coming somewhat later. The gorilla and chimpanzee diverged around the same time, about 4-6 million years ago, and either Sahelanthropus or Orrorin may be our last shared ancestor with them. The early bipedals eventually evolved into the australopithecines and later the genus Homo.

The earliest documented members of the genus Homo are Homo habilis which evolved around ; the earliest species for which there is positive evidence of use of stone tools. The brains of these early hominins were about the same size as that of a chimpanzee, although it has been suggested that this was the time in which the human SRGAP2 gene doubled, producing a more rapid wiring of the frontal cortex. During the next million years a process of encephalization began, and with the arrival of Homo erectus in the fossil record, cranial capacity had doubled to 850 cm3. Java Man, Curtis, Swisher and Lewin, ISBN 0-349-11473-0 Homo erectus and Homo ergaster were the first of the hominina to leave Africa, and these species spread through Africa, Asia, and Europe between . This increase in human brain size is equivalent to every generation having an additional 125,000 neurons more than their parents. It is believed that these species were the first to use fire and complex tools. According to the Recent African Ancestry theory, modern humans evolved in Africa possibly from Homo heidelbergensis, Homo rhodesiensis or Homo antecessor and migrated out of the continent some 50,000 to 100,000 years ago, replacing local populations of Homo erectus, Homo denisova, Homo floresiensis and Homo neanderthalensis. Also ISBN 978-0-521-46786-5 (paperback) 

Archaic Homo sapiens, the forerunner of anatomically modern humans, evolved between 400,000 and 250,000 years ago. Recent DNA evidence suggests that several haplotypes of Neanderthal origin are present among all non-African populations, and Neanderthals and other hominids, such as Denisova hominin may have contributed up to 6% of their genome to present-day humans, suggestive of a limited inter-breeding between these species. Anatomically modern humans evolved from archaic Homo sapiens in the Middle Paleolithic, about 200,000 years ago. The transition to behavioral modernity with the development of symbolic culture, language, and specialized lithic technology happened around 50,000 years ago according to many anthropologists although some suggest a gradual change in behavior over a longer time span. 

== History of study ==

Fossil Hominid Evolution Display at The Museum of Osteology, Oklahoma City, Oklahoma, USA

=== Before Darwin ===

The word homo, the name of the biological genus to which humans belong, is Latin for "human". It was chosen originally by Carolus Linnaeus in his classification system. The word "human" is from the Latin humanus, the adjectival form of homo. The Latin "homo" derives from the Indo-European root *dhghem, or "earth". Linnaeus and other scientists of his time also considered the great apes to be the closest relatives of humans based on morphological and anatomical similarities.

=== Darwin ===

The possibility of linking humans with earlier apes by descent became clear only after 1859 with the publication of Charles Darwin's On the Origin of Species, in which he argued for the idea of the evolution of new species from earlier ones. Darwin's book did not address the question of human evolution, saying only that "Light will be thrown on the origin of man and his history".

The first debates about the nature of human evolution arose between Thomas Huxley and Richard Owen. Huxley argued for human evolution from apes by illustrating many of the similarities and differences between humans and apes, and did so particularly in his 1863 book Evidence as to Man's Place in Nature. However, many of Darwin's early supporters (such as Alfred Russel Wallace and Charles Lyell) did not initially agree that the origin of the mental capacities and the moral sensibilities of humans could be explained by natural selection, though this later changed. Darwin applied the theory of evolution and sexual selection to humans when he published The Descent of Man in 1871. 

=== First fossils ===

A major problem at that time was the lack of fossil intermediaries. Despite the 1891 discovery by Eugne Dubois of what is now called Homo erectus at Trinil, Java, it was only in the 1920s when such fossils were discovered in Africa, that intermediate species began to accumulate. In 1925, Raymond Dart described Australopithecus africanus. The type specimen was the Taung Child, an Australopithecine infant which was discovered in a cave. The child's remains were a remarkably well-preserved tiny skull and an endocranial cast of the brain.

Although the brain was small (410 cm3), its shape was rounded, unlike that of chimpanzees and gorillas, and more like a modern human brain. Also, the specimen showed short canine teeth, and the position of the foramen magnum was evidence of bipedal locomotion. All of these traits convinced Dart that the Taung baby was a bipedal human ancestor, a transitional form between apes and humans.

=== The East African fossils ===

Louis Leakey examining skulls from Olduvai Gorge, Tanzania.

During the 1960s and 1970s, hundreds of fossils were found, particularly in East Africa in the regions of the Olduvai gorge and Lake Turkana. The driving force in the East African researches was the Leakey family, with Louis Leakey and his wife Mary Leakey, and later their son Richard and daughter in-law Meave being among the most successful fossil hunters and palaeoanthropologists. From the fossil beds of Olduvai and Lake Turkana they amassed fossils of australopithecines, early Homo and even Homo erectus.

These finds cemented Africa as the cradle of humankind. In the 1980s, Ethiopia emerged as the new hot spot of palaeoanthropology as "Lucy", the most complete fossil member of the species Australopithecus afarensis, was found by Donald Johanson in Hadar in the desertic Middle Awash region of northern Ethiopia. This area would be the location of many new hominin fossils, particularly those uncovered by the teams of Tim White in the 1990s, such as Ardipithecus ramidus.

=== The genetic revolution ===

The genetic revolution in studies of human evolution started when Vincent Sarich and Allan Wilson measured the strength of immunological cross-reactions of blood serum albumin between pairs of creatures, including humans and African apes (chimpanzees and gorillas). The strength of the reaction could be expressed numerically as an immunological distance, which was in turn proportional to the number of amino acid differences between homologous proteins in different species. By constructing a calibration curve of the ID of species' pairs with known divergence times in the fossil record, the data could be used as a molecular clock to estimate the times of divergence of pairs with poorer or unknown fossil records.

In their seminal 1967 paper in Science, Sarich and Wilson estimated the divergence time of humans and apes as four to five million years ago, at a time when standard interpretations of the fossil record gave this divergence as at least 10 to as much as 30 million years. Subsequent fossil discoveries, notably Lucy, and reinterpretation of older fossil materials, notably Ramapithecus, showed the younger estimates to be correct and validated the albumin method. Application of the molecular clock principle revolutionized the study of molecular evolution.

=== The quest for the earliest hominin ===

In the 1990s, several teams of paleoanthropologists were working throughout Africa looking for evidence of the earliest divergence of the Hominin lineage from the great apes. In 1994, Meave Leakey discovered Australopithecus anamensis. The find was overshadowed by Tim White's 1995 discovery of Ardipithecus ramidus, which pushed back the fossil record to .

In 2000, Martin Pickford and Brigitte Senut discovered in the Tugen Hills of Kenya a 6-million-year-old bipedal hominin which they named Orrorin tugenensis. And in 2001, a team led by Michel Brunet discovered the skull of Sahelanthropus tchadensis which was dated as , and which Brunet argued was a bipedal, and therefore a hominid.

=== Human dispersal ===

 

Anthropologists in the 1980s were divided regarding some details of reproductive barriers and migratory dispersals of the Homo genus. Subsequently, genetics has been used to investigate and resolve these issues. According to the Sahara pump theory evidence suggests that genus Homo have migrated out of Africa at least three times (e.g. Homo erectus, Homo heidelbergensis and Homo sapiens).

The Out-of-Africa model proposed that modern H. sapiens speciated in Africa recently (approx. 200,000 years ago) and the subsequent migration through Eurasia resulted in nearly complete replacement of other Homo species. This model has been developed by Chris Stringer and Peter Andrews. 
In contrast, the multiregional hypothesis proposed that Homo genus contained only a single interconnected population as it does today (not separate species), and that its evolution took place worldwide continuously over the last couple million years. This model was proposed in 1988 by Milford H. Wolpoff. PDF 

Progress in DNA sequencing, specifically mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) and then Y-chromosome DNA advanced the understanding of human origins. Sequencing mtDNA and Y-DNA sampled from a wide range of indigenous populations revealed ancestral information relating to both male and female genetic heritage. Aligned in genetic tree differences were interpreted as supportive of a recent single origin. Analyses have shown a greater diversity of DNA patterns throughout Africa, consistent with the idea that Africa is the ancestral home of mitochondrial Eve and Y-chromosomal Adam. 

Out of Africa has gained support from research using female mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) and the male Y chromosome. After analysing genealogy trees constructed using 133 types of mtDNA, researchers concluded that all were descended from a female African progenitor, dubbed Mitochondrial Eve. Out of Africa is also supported by the fact that mitochondrial genetic diversity is highest among African populations. 

A broad study of African genetic diversity, headed by Sarah Tishkoff, found the San people had the greatest genetic diversity among the 113 distinct populations sampled, making them one of 14 "ancestral population clusters". The research also located the origin of modern human migration in south-western Africa, near the coastal border of Namibia and Angola. the results were published in the online edition of the journal Science. 
The fossil evidence was insufficient for Richard Leakey to resolve this debate. 
Studies of haplogroups in Y-chromosomal DNA and mitochondrial DNA have largely supported a recent African origin. 
Evidence from autosomal DNA also predominantly supports a Recent African origin.
However evidence for archaic admixture in modern humans had been suggested by some studies. 

Recent sequencing of Neanderthal and Denisovan ^ Reich D, Green RE, Kircher M, et al. (December 2010). "Genetic history of an archaic hominin group from Denisova Cave in Siberia" Nature 468 (7327) 105360. PMID 21179161 genomes shows that some admixture occurred. Modern humans outside Africa have 2-4% Neanderthal alleles in their genome, and some Melanesians have an additional 4-6% of Denisovan alleles.
These new results do not contradict the Out of Africa model, except in its strictest interpretation. After recovery from a genetic bottleneck that might be due to the Toba supervolcano catastrophe, a fairly small group left Africa and briefly interbred with Neanderthals, probably in the middle-east or even North Africa before their departure. Their still predominantly African descendants spread to populate the world. A fraction in turn interbred with Denisovans, probably in south-east Asia, before populating Melanesia. HLA haplotypes of Neanderthal and Denisova origin have been identified in modern Eurasian and Oceanian populations. 

There are still differing theories on whether there was a single exodus or several. A multiple dispersal model involves the Southern Dispersal theory, Searching for traces of the Southern Dispersal, by Dr. Marta Mirazn Lahr, et al. which has gained support in recent years from genetic, linguistic and archaeological evidence. In this theory, there was a coastal dispersal of modern humans from the Horn of Africa around 70,000 years ago. This group helped to populate Southeast Asia and Oceania, explaining the discovery of early human sites in these areas much earlier than those in the Levant. 

A second wave of humans may have dispersed across the Sinai peninsula into Asia, resulting in the bulk of human population for Eurasia. This second group possibly possessed a more sophisticated tool technology and was less dependent on coastal food sources than the original group. Much of the evidence for the first group's expansion would have been destroyed by the rising sea levels at the end of each glacial maximum. The multiple dispersal model is contradicted by studies indicating that the populations of Eurasia and the populations of Southeast Asia and Oceania are all descended from the same mitochondrial DNA lineages, which support a single migration out of Africa that gave rise to all non-African populations. 

== Anatomical changes ==

The hominoids are descendants of a common ancestor.

Human evolution is characterized by a number of morphological, developmental, physiological, and behavioral changes that have taken place since the split between the last common ancestor of humans and chimpanzees. The most significant of these adaptations are bipedalism, increased brain size, lengthened ontogeny (gestation and infancy), and decreased sexual dimorphism. The relationship between these changes is the subject of ongoing debate. Other significant morphological changes included the evolution of a power and precision grip, a change first occurring in H. erectus. 

=== Bipedalism ===

Bipedalism is the basic adaption of the Hominin line and is considered the main cause behind a suite of skeletal changes shared by all bipedal hominins. The earliest bipedal Hominin is considered to be either Sahelanthropus or Orrorin, with Ardipithecus, a full bipedal, coming somewhat later. The knuckle walkers, the gorilla and chimpanzee, diverged around the same time, and either Sahelanthropus or Orrorin may be our last shared ancestor. 

The early bipedals eventually evolved into the australopithecines and later the genus Homo. There are several theories of the adaptation value of bipedalism. It is possible that bipedalism was favored because it freed up the hands for reaching and carrying food, saved energy during locomotion, enabled long distance running and hunting, enhanced field of vision and helped avoid hyperthermia by reducing the surface area exposed to direct sun; all this mainly for thriving in the new grassland type environment rather than the previous forest type. 

Anatomically the evolution of bipedalism has been accompanied by a large number of skeletal changes, not just to the legs and pelvis, but also to the vertebral column, feet and ankles, and skull. The femur evolved into a slightly more angular position to move the center of gravity toward the geometric center of the body. The knee and ankle joints became increasingly robust to better support increased weight. To support the increased weight on each vertebra in the upright position, the human vertebral column became S-shaped and the lumbar vertebrae became shorter and wider. In the feet the big toe moved into alignment with the other toes to help in forward locomotion. The arms and forearms shortened relative to the legs making it easier to run. The foramen magnum migrated under the skull and more anterior. 

The most significant changes are in the pelvic region, where the long downward facing iliac blade was shortened and became wide as a requirement for keeping the center of gravity stable while walking; bipedal hominids have a shorter but broad, bowl-like pelvis due to this. A drawback is that the birth canal of these apes is smaller than regular knuckle-walking apes, though there has been a widening of it in comparison to that of australopithecine and modern humans, permitting the passage of newborns due to the increase in cranial size but this is limited to the upper portion, since further increase can hinder normal bipedal movement. 

The shortening of the pelvis and smaller birth canal evolved as a requirement for bipedalism and had significant effects on the process of human birth which is much more difficult in modern humans than in other primates. During human birth, because of the variation in size of the pelvic region, the fetal head must be in a transverse position (compared to the mother) during entry into the birth canal and rotate about 90 degrees upon exit. The smaller size of the birth canal became an obstacle when the brain size began to increase in early humans, prompted a shorter gestation period and the reason why humans give birth to immature offspring, who are unable to walk much before 12 months and have greater neoteny, compared to other primates, who are motile at a much earlier age. The increased brain growth after birth and the increased dependency of children on mothers had a big effect upon the female reproductive cycle, and the more frequent appearance of monogamous relationships in humans when compared with other hominids. Delayed human sexual maturity also led to the evolution of menopause with one explanation saying that elderly women could better pass on their genes by taking care of their daughter's offspring, as compared to having more of their own. 

=== Encephalization ===

The human species developed a much larger brain than that of other primates  typically 1,330 cm3 in modern humans, over twice the size of that of a chimpanzee or gorilla. The pattern of encephalization started with Homo habilis, which at approximately 600 cm3 had a brain slightly larger than that of chimpanzees, and continued with Homo erectus (8001,100 cm3), reaching a maximum in Neanderthals with an average size of (1,2001,900 cm3), larger even than Homo sapiens. The pattern of human postnatal brain growth differs from that of other apes (heterochrony) and allows for extended periods of social learning and language acquisition in juvenile humans. However, the differences between the structure of human brains and those of other apes may be even more significant than differences in size. Leonard, William R. , J. Josh Snodgrass, and Marcia L. Robertson. 2007. Effects of Brain Evolution on Human Nutrition and Metabolism. Annu. Rev. Nutr. 27:31127 

The increase in volume over time has affected areas within the brain unequally  the temporal lobes, which contain centers for language processing, have increased disproportionately, as has the prefrontal cortex which has been related to complex decision-making and moderating social behavior. Encephalization has been tied to an increasing emphasis on meat in the diet, or with the development of cooking, and it has been proposed that intelligence increased as a response to an increased necessity for solving social problems as human society became more complex.

=== Sexual dimorphism ===

The reduced degree of sexual dimorphism is visible primarily in the reduction of the male canine tooth relative to other ape species (except gibbons) and reduced brow ridges and general robustness of males. Another important physiological change related to sexuality in humans was the evolution of hidden estrus. Humans and bonobos are the only apes in which the female is fertile year round and in which no special signals of fertility are produced by the body (such as genital swelling during estrus).

Nonetheless, humans retain a degree of sexual dimorphism in the distribution of body hair and subcutaneous fat, and in the overall size, males being around 15% larger than females. These changes taken together have been interpreted as a result of an increased emphasis on pair bonding as a possible solution to the requirement for increased parental investment due to the prolonged infancy of offspring.

=== Other changes ===

A number of other changes have also characterized the evolution of humans, among them an increased importance on vision rather than smell; a smaller gut; loss of body hair; evolution of sweat glands; a change in the shape of the dental arcade from being u-shaped to being parabolic; development of a chin (found in Homo sapiens alone), development of styloid processes; development of a descended larynx.

== Evidence ==

The evidence on which scientific accounts of human evolution is based comes from many fields of natural science. The main sources of knowledge about the evolutionary process has traditionally been the fossil record, but since the development of genetics beginning in the 1970s, DNA analysis has come to occupy a place of comparable importance. The studies of ontogeny, phylogeny and especially evolutionary developmental biology of both vertebrates and invertebrates offer considerable insight into the evolution of all life, including how humans evolved. The specific study of the origin and life of humans is anthropology, particularly paleoanthropology which focuses on the study of human prehistory. Stanford, Craig, John S. Allen, and Susan C. Anton (Author) 2012. Biological Anthropology (2nd Edition). Prentice Hall. ISBN 0136011608 ch. 1 

=== Evidence from molecular biology ===

Family tree showing the extant hominoids: humans (genus Homo), chimpanzees and bonobos (genus Pan), gorillas (genus Gorilla), orangutans (genus Pongo), and gibbons (four genera of the family Hylobatidae: Hylobates, Hoolock, Nomascus, and Symphalangus). All except gibbons are hominids.

The closest living relatives of humans are bonobos and chimpanzees (both genus Pan) and gorillas (genus Gorilla). With the sequencing of both the human and chimpanzee genome, current estimates of the similarity between their DNA sequences range between 95% and 99%. Ajit, Varki and David L. Nelson. 2007. Genomic Comparisons of Humans and Chimpanzees. Annu. Rev. Anthropol. 2007. 36:191209: "Sequence differences from the human genome were confirmed to be 1% in areas that can be precisely aligned, representing 35 million single base-pair differences. Some 45 million nucleotides of insertions and deletions unique to each lineage were also discovered, making the actual difference between the two genomes 4%." Ken Sayers, Mary Ann Raghanti, and C. Owen Lovejoy. 2012 (forthcoming, october) Human Evolution and the Chimpanzee Referential Doctrine. Annual Review of Anthropology, Vol. 41 By using the technique called the molecular clock which estimates the time required for the number of divergent mutations to accumulate between two lineages, the approximate date for the split between lineages can be calculated. The gibbons (family Hylobatidae) and orangutans ( genus Pongo) were the first groups to split from the line leading to the humans, then gorillas followed by the chimpanzees and bonobos. The splitting date between human and chimpanzee lineages is placed around 4-8 million years ago during the late Miocene epoch. Ruvolo, M. 1997. Genetic Diversity in Hominoid Primates. Annual Review of Anthropology, Vol. 26, (1997), pp. 515-540 

Genetic evidence has also been employed to resolve the question of whether there was any gene flow between early modern humans and Neanderthals, and to enhance our understanding of the early human migration patterns and splitting dates. By comparing the parts of the genome that are not under natural selection and which therefore accumulate mutations at a fairly steady rate, it is possible to reconstruct a genetic tree incorporating the entire human species since the last shared ancestor.

Each time a certain mutation (Single-nucleotide polymorphism) appears in an individual and is passed on to his or her descendants a haplogroup is formed including all of the descendants of the individual who will also carry that mutation. By comparing mitochondrial DNA which is inherited only from the mother, geneticists have concluded that the last female common ancestor whose genetic marker is found in all modern humans, the so-called mitochondrial Eve, must have lived around 200,000 years ago.

==== Genetics ====

Human evolutionary genetics studies how one human genome differs from the other, the evolutionary past that gave rise to it, and its current effects. Differences between genomes have anthropological, medical and forensic implications and applications. Genetic data can provide important insight into human evolution.

=== Evidence from the fossil record ===

Replica of fossil skull of Homo habilis. Fossil number KNM ER 1813, found at Koobi Fora, Kenya. 

Replica of fossil skull of Homo ergaster (African Homo erectus). Fossil number Khm-Heu 3733 discovered in 1975 in Kenya.

There is little fossil evidence for the divergence of the gorilla, chimpanzee and hominin lineages. Begun, David R. 2010. Miocene Hominids and the Origins of the African Apes and Humans. Annual Review of Anthropology, Vol. 39: 67 -84 The earliest fossils that have been proposed as members of the hominin lineage are Sahelanthropus tchadensis dating from , Orrorin tugenensis dating from and Ardipithecus kadabba dating to . Each of these have been argued to be a bipedal ancestor of later hominins but, in each case, the claims have been contested. It is also possible that one or more of these species are ancestors of another branch of African apes, or that they represent a shared ancestor between hominins and other apes.

The question of the relationship between these early fossil species and the hominin lineage is still to be resolved. From these early species, the australopithecines arose around and diverged into robust (also called Paranthropus) and gracile branches, one of which (possibly A. garhi) probably went on to become ancestors of the genus Homo. The australopithecine species that is best represented in the fossil record is Australopithecus afarensis with more than one hundred fossil individuals represented, found from Northern Ethiopia (such as the famous "Lucy"), to Kenya, and South Africa. Fossils of robust australopithecines such as A. robustus (or alternatively Paranthropus robustus) and A./P. boisei are particularly abundant in South Africa at sites such as Kromdraai and Swartkrans, and around Lake Turkana in Kenya.

The earliest members of the genus Homo are Homo habilis which evolved around . Homo habilis is the first species for which we have positive evidence of the use of stone tools. They developed the oldowan lithic technology, named after the Olduvai gorge in which the first specimens were found. Some scientists consider Homo rudolfensis, a larger bodied group of fossils with similar morphology to the original H. habilis fossils, to be a separate species while others consider them to be part of H. habilissimply representing species internal variation, or perhaps even sexual dimorphism. The brains of these early hominins were about the same size as that of a chimpanzee, and their main adaptation was bipedalism as an adaptation to terrestrial living.

During the next million years, a process of encephalization began and, with the arrival of Homo erectus in the fossil record, cranial capacity had doubled. Homo erectus were the first of the hominina to leave Africa, and this species spread through Africa, Asia, and Europe between . One population of H. erectus, also sometimes classified as a separate species Homo ergaster, stayed in Africa and evolved into Homo sapiens. It is believed that these species were the first to use fire and complex tools.

The earliest transitional fossils between H. ergaster/erectus and Archaic H. sapiens are from Africa, such as Homo rhodesiensis, but seemingly transitional forms were also found at Dmanisi, Georgia. These descendants of African H. erectus spread through Eurasia from ca. 500,000 years ago evolving into H. antecessor, H. heidelbergensis and H. neanderthalensis. The earliest fossils of anatomically modern humans are from the Middle Paleolithic, about 200,000 years ago such as the Omo remains of Ethiopia; later fossils from Skhul in Israel and Southern Europe begin around 90,000 years ago.

As modern humans spread out from Africa, they encountered other hominins such as Homo neanderthalensis and the so-called Denisovans, who may have evolved from populations of Homo erectus that had left Africa around . The nature of interaction between early humans and these sister species has been a long standing source of controversy, the question being whether humans replaced these earlier species or whether they were in fact similar enough to interbreed, in which case these earlier populations may have contributed genetic material to modern humans. 

This migration out of Africa is estimated to have begun about 70,000 years BP and modern humans subsequently spread globally, replacing earlier hominins either through competition or hybridization. They inhabited Eurasia and Oceania by 40,000 years BP, and the Americas by at least 14,500 years BP. 

== Before Homo ==

=== Early evolution of primates ===

Evolutionary history of the primates can be traced back 65 million years. UOgtlW_McLMJ: homepage.mac. com/wis/Personal/lectures/human-origins/PrimateEvolution. pdf+Evolutionary+history+of+the+primates+can+be+traced+back+65+million+years&hl=en&gl=uk&pid=bl&srcid=ADGEEShYZ8jNDCJf14_9R1 K57XDZoO_tjGBXOaN1mGjKFUMW-JPo5krN3XawzJMeHmDEMPYgd2 W6Xc0sxDe1dgwvt286sEfh1p7XKhlNCTMLzafKmk2YupFVPvZRsxziCoJPWe0QcxWQ&sig=AHIEtbRN435iCnVKZXljYr62XtjyG7pz5 A page 9 oxfordjournals. org/content/25/7/1493.full. pdf&pf=p&sclient=psy-ab&site=&source=hp&rlz=1 W1GPCK_enGB446&pbx=1&oq=mbe. oxfordjournals. org/content/25/7/1493.full. pdf&aq=f&aqi=&aql=&gs_sm=&gs_upl=&bav=on.2,or. r_gc. r_pw.,cf. osb&fp=3640775752d61e11&biw=1600&bih=721 1999 - Willoughby - 2005 escholarship. org/uc/item/92w669xb. pdf+Evolutionary+history+of+the+primates+can+be+traced+back+65+million+years&hl=en&gl=uk&pid=bl&srcid=ADGEESink7_hCsJNHgzuuBV8HF3Q2eog8KPRzEJrpA0jPqprfBCHK2DN17MX_czgECJXjbDkeFP-5ekFfpVppV7szMA9 F3i_xCxDe0oUmeHFt1OQkanvGwGKqdaWoysy8-XnpBzrEd20&sig=AHIEtbSCejRPHhlmdFegNgpdqnBl8bJkWg[http://escholarship.org/uc/item/92w669xb International Journal of Comparative Psychology UCLA ] - Martin - 2002 doi:10.1016/B0-08-043076-7/03083-7 - Tavar, C. R. Marshall, O. Will, C. Soligo, & R. D. Martin - 2001 YE1tsko7JaAJ:www.cmb.usc. edu/people/stavare/STpapers-pdf/SWTMM03.pdf+oldest+fossil+primates&hl=en&gl=uk&pid=bl&srcid=ADGEEShc2Qb7S_6ZuO0ZXNPX_acnaqNKoRD8IrALCp-grn9qnW6 H70 M4Rxg7F_f7fAz8JtKxSqcmkWsOlJr4v0VLfXkMVikQuMYt0x1FG77eBLAaLDbX9oaT2VlmKFsSjGv4wVkInScA&sig=AHIEtbTwrA1 O7hj1cpy8nR9dNH6OBobgdg doi:10.1038/416726a 2012-01-01 The oldest known primate-like mammal species, D. Rose -1994 DOI: 10.1002/evan.1360030505 - Fleagle, C. Gilbert 2011-2012 [http://alltheworldsprimates.org/John_Fleagle_Public.aspx ] - Roach 2008 [http://news.nationalgeographic.com/news/2008/03/080303-american-primate.html ] - McMains - 2011 [http://gazette.jhu.edu/2011/12/05/found-in-wyoming-new-fossils-of-oldest-american-primate/ ] - & [http://news.sky.com/home/world-news/article/15284582 ] 2012-01-01 the Plesiadapis, came from North America, but they were widespread in Eurasia and Africa during the tropical conditions of the Paleocene and Eocene.

Notharctus

David Begun concluded that early primates flourished in Eurasia and that a lineage leading to the African apes and humans, including Dryopithecus, migrated south from Europe or Western Asia into Africa. The surviving tropical population of primates, which is seen most completely in the upper Eocene and lowermost Oligocene fossil beds of the Faiyum depression southwest of Cairo, gave rise to all living specieslemurs of Madagascar, lorises of Southeast Asia, galagos or "bush babies" of Africa, and the anthropoids: platyrrhine or New World monkeys, catarrhines or Old World monkeys, and the great apes, including humans.

The earliest known catarrhine is Kamoyapithecus from uppermost Oligocene at Eragaleit in the northern Kenya Rift Valley, dated to 24 million years ago. Its ancestry is thought to be species related to Aegyptopithecus, Propliopithecus, and Parapithecus from the Fayum, at around 35 million years ago. In 2010, Saadanius was described as a close relative of the last common ancestor of the crown catarrhines, and tentatively dated to 2928 million years ago, helping to fill an 11-million-year gap in the fossil record. 

Reconstructed tailless Proconsul skeleton

In the early Miocene, about 22 million years ago, the many kinds of arboreally adapted primitive catarrhines from East Africa suggest a long history of prior diversification. Fossils at 20 million years ago include fragments attributed to Victoriapithecus, the earliest Old World Monkey. Among the genera thought to be in the ape lineage leading up to 13 million years ago are Proconsul, Rangwapithecus, Dendropithecus, Limnopithecus, Nacholapithecus, Equatorius, Nyanzapithecus, Afropithecus, Heliopithecus, and Kenyapithecus, all from East Africa.

The presence of other generalized non-cercopithecids of middle Miocene age from sites far distantOtavipithecus from cave deposits in Namibia, and Pierolapithecus and Dryopithecus from France, Spain and Austriais evidence of a wide diversity of forms across Africa and the Mediterranean basin during the relatively warm and equable climatic regimes of the early and middle Miocene. The youngest of the Miocene hominoids, Oreopithecus, is from coal beds in Italy that have been dated to 9 million years ago.

Molecular evidence indicates that the lineage of gibbons (family Hylobatidae) diverged from Great Apes some 18-12 million years ago, and that of orangutans (subfamily Ponginae) diverged from the other Great Apes at about 12 million years; there are no fossils that clearly document the ancestry of gibbons, which may have originated in a so-far-unknown South East Asian hominoid population, but fossil proto-orangutans may be represented by Sivapithecus from India and Griphopithecus from Turkey, dated to around 10 million years ago. 

=== Divergence of the human clade from other great apes ===

A reconstruction of a female Australopithecus afarensis (National Museum of Natural History)

Species close to the last common ancestor of gorillas, chimpanzees and humans may be represented by Nakalipithecus fossils found in Kenya and Ouranopithecus found in Greece. Molecular evidence suggests that between 8 and 4 million years ago, first the gorillas, and then the chimpanzees (genus Pan) split off from the line leading to the humans; human DNA is approximately 98.4% identical to that of chimpanzees when comparing single nucleotide polymorphisms (see human evolutionary genetics). The fossil record of gorillas and chimpanzees is limited. Both poor preservation (rain forest soils tend to be acidic and dissolve bone) and sampling bias probably contribute to this problem.

Other hominins likely adapted to the drier environments outside the equatorial belt, along with antelopes, hyenas, dogs, pigs, elephants, and horses. The equatorial belt contracted after about 8 million years ago. There is very little fossil evidence for the split of the hominin lineage from the lineages of gorillas and chimpanzees. The earliest fossils that have been argued to belong to the human lineage are Sahelanthropus tchadensis (7 Ma) and Orrorin tugenensis (6 Ma), followed by Ardipithecus (5.54.4 Ma), with species Ar. kadabba and Ar. ramidus;

=== Genus Australopithecus ===

The Australopithecus genus evolved in eastern Africa around 4 million years ago before spreading throughout the continent and eventually becoming extinct 2 million years ago. During this time period various forms of australopiths existed, including Australopithecus anamensis, A. afarensis, A. sediba, and A. africanus. There is still some debate amongst academics whether certain African hominid species of this time, such as A. robustus and A. boisei, constitute members of the same genus; if so, they would be considered to be robust australopiths whilst the others would be considered gracile australopiths. However, if these species do indeed constitute their own genus, then they may be given their own name, the Paranthropus.

* Australopithecus (41.8 Ma), with species Au. anamensis, Au. afarensis, Au. africanus, Au. bahrelghazali, Au. garhi, and Au. sediba;
* Kenyanthropus (32.7 Ma), with species Kenyanthropus platyops;
* Paranthropus (31.2 Ma), with species P. aethiopicus, P. boisei, and P. robustus;

== Genus Homo ==

current view of the temporal and geographical distribution of hominid populations [http://biology.plosjournals.org/perlserv/?request=slideshow&type=figure&doi=10.1371/journal.pbio.0020340&id=15540 Figure 1. Phylogeny of Primate Lice from Morphological and Molecular Data, in Other interpretations differ mainly in the taxonomy and geographical distribution of hominid species.|right|thumb|325px]]

A reconstruction of Homo habilis

Skulls of 1. Gorilla 2. Australopithecus 3. Homo erectus 4. Neanderthal (La Chapelle aux Saints) 5. Steinheim Skull 6. modern Homo sapiens. Notice the decreasing prognathism and thickness of the browridge, and the increasing size of the forehead.

Homo sapiens is the only extant species of its genus, Homo. While some other, extinct Homo species might have been ancestors of Homo sapiens, many were likely our "cousins", having speciated away from our ancestral line. There is not yet a consensus as to which of these groups should count as separate species and which as subspecies. In some cases this is due to the dearth of fossils, in other cases it is due to the slight differences used to classify species in the Homo genus. The Sahara pump theory (describing an occasionally passable "wet" Sahara Desert) provides one possible explanation of the early variation in the genus Homo.

Based on archaeological and paleontological evidence, it has been possible to infer, to some extent, the ancient dietary practices of various Homo species and to study the role of diet in physical and behavioral evolution within Homo. (scroll up to view chapter 1 & part of chapter 2, which is a serendipitous result from another search. Subsequent attempts get a targeted search result gave returns without chapter 1). 

According to the Toba catastrophe theory to which some anthropologists and archeologists subscribe, the supereruption of Lake Toba on Sumatra island in Indonesia roughly 70,000 years ago had global consequences, "The new batch - 150,000 years ago". BBC - Science & Nature - The evolution of man. killing most humans then alive and creating a population bottleneck that affected the genetic inheritance of all humans today. 

=== H. habilis and H. gautengensis ===

Homo habilis lived from about 2.4 to 1.4 Ma. Homo habilis evolved in South and East Africa in the late Pliocene or early Pleistocene, 2.52 Ma, when it diverged from the australopithecines. Homo habilis had smaller molars and larger brains than the australopithecines, and made tools from stone and perhaps animal bones. One of the first known hominids, it was nicknamed 'handy man' by discoverer Louis Leakey due to its association with stone tools. Some scientists have proposed moving this species out of Homo and into Australopithecus due to the morphology of its skeleton being more adapted to living on trees rather than to moving on two legs like Homo sapiens. Wood, B. & Collard, M. (1999) The changing face of Genus Homo. Evol. Anth. 8(6) 195-207 

It was considered to be the first species of the genus Homo until May 2010, when a new species, Homo gautengensis was discovered in South Africa, that most likely arose earlier than Homo habilis. 

=== H. rudolfensis and H. georgicus ===

These are proposed species names for fossils from about 1.91.6 Ma, whose relation to Homo habilis is not yet clear.

* Homo rudolfensis refers to a single, incomplete skull from Kenya. Scientists have suggested that this was another Homo habilis, but this has not been confirmed. 
* Homo georgicus, from Georgia, may be an intermediate form between Homo habilis and Homo erectus, or a sub-species of Homo erectus. 

=== H. ergaster and H. erectus ===

The first fossils of Homo erectus were discovered by Dutch physician Eugene Dubois in 1891 on the Indonesian island of Java. He originally named the material Pithecanthropus erectus based on its morphology, which he considered to be intermediate between that of humans and apes. Homo erectus (H erectus) lived from about 1.8 Ma to about 70,000 years ago (which would indicate that they were probably wiped out by the Toba catastrophe; however, Homo erectus soloensis and Homo floresiensis survived it). Often the early phase, from 1.8 to 1.25 Ma, is considered to be a separate species, Homo ergaster, or it is seen as a subspecies of Homo erectus, Homo erectus ergaster.

In the early Pleistocene, 1.51 Ma, in Africa some populations of Homo habilis are thought to have evolved larger brains and made more elaborate stone tools; these differences and others are sufficient for anthropologists to classify them as a new species, Homo erectus. This was made possible by the evolution of locking knees and a different location of the foramen magnum (the hole in the skull where the spine enters). They may have used fire to cook their meat.

A famous example of Homo erectus is Peking Man; others were found in Asia (notably in Indonesia), Africa, and Europe. Many paleoanthropologists now use the term Homo ergaster for the non-Asian forms of this group, and reserve Homo erectus only for those fossils that are found in Asia and meet certain skeletal and dental requirements which differ slightly from H. ergaster.

=== H. cepranensis and H. antecessor ===

These are proposed as species that may be intermediate between H. erectus and H. heidelbergensis.

* H. antecessor is known from fossils from Spain and England that are dated 1.2 Ma500 ka. 
* H. cepranensis refers to a single skull cap from Italy, estimated to be about 800,000 years old. 

=== H. heidelbergensis ===

Reconstruction of Homo heidelbergensis which may be the direct ancestor of both Homo neanderthalensis and Homo sapiens.

H. heidelbergensis (Heidelberg Man) lived from about 800,000 to about 300,000 years ago. Also proposed as Homo sapiens heidelbergensis or Homo sapiens paleohungaricus. 

=== H. rhodesiensis, and the Gawis cranium ===

* H. rhodesiensis, estimated to be 300,000125,000 years old. Most current researchers place Rhodesian Man within the group of Homo heidelbergensis, though other designations such as Archaic Homo sapiens and Homo sapiens rhodesiensis have been proposed.
* In February 2006 a fossil, the Gawis cranium, was found which might possibly be a species intermediate between H. erectus and H. sapiens or one of many evolutionary dead ends. The skull from Gawis, Ethiopia, is believed to be 500,000250,000 years old. Only summary details are known, and the finders have not yet released a peer-reviewed study. Gawis man's facial features suggest its being either an intermediate species or an example of a "Bodo man" female. 

=== Neanderthal and Denisova hominin ===

Dermoplastic reconstruction of a Neanderthal

H. neanderthalensis, alternatively designated as Homo sapiens neanderthalensis, lived in Europe and Asia from 400,000 to about 30,000 years ago. Evidence from sequencing mitochondrial DNA indicated that no significant gene flow occurred between H. neanderthalensis and H. sapiens, and, therefore, the two were separate species that shared a common ancestor about 660,000 years ago. However, the 2010 sequencing of the Neanderthal genome indicated that Neanderthals did indeed interbreed with anatomically modern humans circa 45,000 to 80,000 years ago (at the approximate time that modern humans migrated out from Africa, but before they dispersed into Europe, Asia and elsewhere). 

Nearly all modern non-African humans have 1% to 4% of their DNA derived from Neanderthal DNA, and this finding is consistent with recent studies indicating that the divergence of some human alleles dates to one Ma, although the interpretation of these studies has been questioned. Neanderthals and homo sapiens could have co-existed in Europe for as long as 10,000 years, during which human populations exploded vastly outnumbering Neanderthals, possibly outcompeting them by sheer numerical strength. 

In 2008, archaeologists working at the site of Denisova Cave in the Altai Mountains of Siberia uncovered a small bone fragment from the fifth finger of a juvenile member of a population now referred to as Denisova hominins, or simply Denisovans. Artifacts, including a bracelet, excavated in the cave at the same level were carbon dated to around 40,000 BP. As DNA had survived in the fossil fragment due to the cool climate of the Denisova Cave, both mtDNA and nuclear genomic DNA were sequenced. 

While the divergence point of the mtDNA was unexpectedly deep in time, the full genomic sequence suggested the Denisovans belonged to the same lineage as Neanderthals, with the two diverging shortly after their line split from that lineage giving rise to modern humans. Modern humans are known to have overlapped with Neanderthals in Europe for more than 10,000 years, and the discovery raises the possibility that Neanderthals, modern humans and the Denisova hominin may have co-existed. The existence of this distant branch creates a much more complex picture of humankind during the Late Pleistocene than previously thought. Evidence has also been found that as much as 6% of the genomes of some modern Melanesians derive from Denisovans, indicating limited interbreeding in Southeast Asia. 

Alleles thought to have originated in Neanderthal and the Denisova hominin have been identified at several genetic loci in the genomes of modern humans outside of Africa. HLA types from Denisovans and Neanderthal represent more than half the HLA alleles of modern Eurasians, indicating strong positive selection for these introgressed alleles.

=== H. floresiensis ===

Restoration model of Homo floresiensis

H. floresiensis, which lived from approximately 100,000 to 12,000 before present, has been nicknamed hobbit for its small size, possibly a result of insular dwarfism. H. floresiensis is intriguing both for its size and its age, being an example of a recent species of the genus Homo that exhibits derived traits not shared with modern humans. In other words, H. floresiensis shares a common ancestor with modern humans, but split from the modern human lineage and followed a distinct evolutionary path. The main find was a skeleton believed to be a woman of about 30 years of age. Found in 2003 it has been dated to approximately 18,000 years old. The living woman was estimated to be one meter in height, with a brain volume of just 380 cm3 (considered small for a chimpanzee and less than a third of the H. sapiens average of 1400 cm3). 

However, there is an ongoing debate over whether H. floresiensis is indeed a separate species. Some scientists hold that H. floresiensis was a modern H. sapiens with pathological dwarfism. This hypothesis is supported in part, because some modern humans who live on Flores, the island where the skeleton was found, are pygmies. This, coupled with pathological dwarfism, could possibly create a hobbit-like human. The other major attack on H. floresiensis is that it was found with tools only associated with H. sapiens. 

The hypothesis of pathological dwarfism, however, fails to explain additional anatomical features that are unlike those of modern humans (diseased or not) but much like those of ancient members of our genus. Aside from cranial features, these features include the form of bones in the wrist, forearm, shoulder, knees, and feet. Additionally, this hypothesis fails to explain the find of multiple examples of individuals with these same characteristics, indicating they were common to a large population, and not limited to one individual.

=== H. sapiens ===

H. sapiens (the adjective sapiens is Latin for "wise" or "intelligent") have lived from about 250,000 years ago to the present. Between 400,000 years ago and the second interglacial period in the Middle Pleistocene, around 250,000 years ago, the trend in skull expansion and the elaboration of stone tool technologies developed, providing evidence for a transition from H. erectus to H. sapiens. The direct evidence suggests there was a migration of H. erectus out of Africa, then a further speciation of H. sapiens from H. erectus in Africa. A subsequent migration within and out of Africa eventually replaced the earlier dispersed H. erectus. This migration and origin theory is usually referred to as the recent single origin or Out of Africa theory. Current evidence does not preclude some multiregional evolution or some admixture of the migrant H. sapiens with existing Homo populations. This is a hotly debated area of paleoanthropology.

Current research has established that humans are genetically highly homogenous; that is, the DNA of individuals is more alike than usual for most species, which may have resulted from their relatively recent evolution or the possibility of a population bottleneck resulting from cataclysmic natural events such as the Toba catastrophe. shtml Supervolcanoes, BBC2, 3 February 2000 Distinctive genetic characteristics have arisen, however, primarily as the result of small groups of people moving into new environmental circumstances. These adapted traits are a very small component of the Homo sapiens genome, but include various characteristics such as skin color and nose form, in addition to internal characteristics such as the ability to breathe more efficiently at high altitudes.

H. sapiens idaltu, from Ethiopia, is an extinct sub-species from about 160,000 years ago.

== Use of tools ==

"A sharp rock", an Oldowan pebble tool, the most basic of human stone tools

The harnessing of fire was a pivotal milestone in human history.

Acheulean hand-axes from Kent. Homo erectus flint work. The types shown are (clockwise from top) cordate, ficron and ovate.

Venus of Willendorf, an example of Paleolithic art, dated 24-26,000 years ago

The use of tools has been interpreted as a sign of intelligence, and it has been theorized that tool use may have stimulated certain aspects of human evolution, especially the continued expansion of the human brain. Paleontology has yet to explain the expansion of this organ over millions of years despite being extremely demanding in terms of energy consumption. The brain of a modern human consumes about 13 watts (260 kilocalories per day), a fifth of body's total energy consumption. 

 Increased tool use would allow hunting for energy-rich meat products, and would enable processing more energy-rich plant products. Researchers have suggested that early hominids were thus under evolutionary pressure to increase their capacity to create and use tools. 

Precisely when early humans started to use tools is difficult to determine, because the more primitive these tools are (for example, sharp-edged stones) the more difficult it is to decide whether they are natural objects or human artifacts. There is some evidence that the australopithecines (4 Ma) may have used broken bones as tools, but this is debated. 

It should be noted that many species make and use tools, but it is the human genus that dominates the areas of making and using more complex tools. The oldest known tools are the "Oldowan stone tools" from Ethiopia, 2.5-2.6 million years old, which predates the earliest known "Homo" species. There is no known evidence that any "Homo" specimens appeared by 2.5 Ma. A Homo fossil was found near some Oldowan tools, and its age was noted at 2.3 million years old, suggesting that maybe the Homo species did indeed create and use these tools. It is a possibility but does not yet represent solid evidence. Freeman, Scott; Jon C. Herron. Evolutionary Analysis (4th ed.)., Pearson Education, Inc. (2007). ISBN 978-0-13-227584-2 pp. 786-788 Third metacarpal styloid process enables the hand bone to lock into the wrist bones, allowing for greater amounts of pressure to be applied to the wrist and hand from a grasping thumb and fingers. It allows humans the dexterity and strength to make and use complex tools. This unique anatomical feature separates humans from apes and other nonhuman primates, and is not seen in human fossils older than 1.8 million years. 

Bernard Wood noted that "Paranthropus" co-existed with the early Homo species in the area of the "Oldowan Industrial Complex" over roughly the same span of time. Although there is no direct evidence which identifies Paranthropus as the tool makers, their anatomy lends to indirect evidence of their capabilities in this area. Most paleoanthropologists agree that the early "Homo" species were indeed responsible for most of the Oldowan tools found. They argue that when most of the Oldowan tools were found in association with human fossils, Homo was always present, but Paranthropus was not. 

In 1994 Randall Susman used the anatomy of opposable thumbs as the basis for his argument that both the Homo and Paranthropus species were toolmakers. He compared bones and muscles of human and chimpanzee thumbs, finding that humans have 3 muscles which are lacking in chimpanzees. Humans also have thicker metacarpals with broader heads, allowing more precise grasping than the chimpanzee hand can perform. Susman posited that modern anatomy of the human thumb is an evolutionary response to the requirements associated with making and handling tools and that both species were indeed toolmakers. 

=== Stone tools ===

Stone tools are first attested around 2.6 Ma, when H. habilis in Eastern Africa used so-called pebble tools, choppers made out of round pebbles that had been split by simple strikes. This marks the beginning of the Paleolithic, or Old Stone Age; its end is taken to be the end of the last Ice Age, around 10,000 years ago. The Paleolithic is subdivided into the Lower Paleolithic (Early Stone Age, ending around 350,000300,000 years ago), the Middle Paleolithic (Middle Stone Age, until 50,00030,000 years ago), and the Upper Paleolithic.

The period from 700,000300,000 years ago is also known as the Acheulean, when H. ergaster (or erectus) made large stone hand axes out of flint and quartzite, at first quite rough (Early Acheulian), later "retouched" by additional, more subtle strikes at the sides of the flakes. After 350,000 BP (Before Present) the more refined so-called Levallois technique was developed, a series of consecutive strikes, by which scrapers, slicers ("racloirs"), needles, and flattened needles were made. Finally, after about 50,000 BP, ever more refined and specialized flint tools were made by the Neanderthals and the immigrant Cro-Magnons (knives, blades, skimmers). In this period they also started to make tools out of bone.

== Transition to behavioral modernity ==

Until about 50,00040,000 years ago the use of stone tools seems to have progressed stepwise. Each phase (H. habilis, H. ergaster, H. neanderthalensis) started at a higher level than the previous one, but after each phase started, further development was slow. Currently paleoanthropologists are debating whether these Homo species possessed some or many of the cultural and behavioral traits associated with modern humans such as language, complex symbolic thinking, technological creativity etc. It seems that they were culturally conservative maintaining simple technologies and foraging patterns over very long periods.

Around 50,000 BP modern human culture started to evolve more rapidly. The transition to behavioral modernity has been characterized as a Eurasian "Great Leap Forward", or as the "Upper Palaeolithic Revolution", Ofer Bar-Yosef. The Upper Paleolithic Revolution. Annual Review of Anthropology. Vol. 31, (2002), pp. 363-393 because of the sudden appearance of distinctive signs of modern behavior in the archaeological record. Some scholars consider the transition to have been more gradual, with some features already appearing among Archaic African Homo sapiens already around 200,000 years ago. April Nowell. 2010. Defining Behavioral Modernity in the Context of Neandertal and Anatomically Modern Human Populations. Annual Review of Anthropology Vol. 39: 437-452. DOI: 10.1146/annurev. anthro.012809.105113 Francesco d'Errico and Chris B. Stringer. 2011. Evolution, revolution or saltation scenario for the emergence of modern cultures? Phil. Trans. R. Soc. B 12 April 2011 vol. 366 no. 1567 1060-1069. 

Modern humans started burying their dead, using animal hides to make clothing, hunting with more sophisticated techniques (such as using trapping pits or driving animals off cliffs), and engaging in cave painting. As human culture advanced, different populations of humans introduced novelty to existing technologies: artifacts such as fish hooks, buttons and bone needles show signs of variation among different populations of humans, something that had not been seen in human cultures prior to 50,000 BP. Typically, H. neanderthalensis populations do not vary in their technologies.

Among concrete examples of Modern human behavior, anthropologists include specialization of tools, use of jewellery and images (such as cave drawings), organization of living space, rituals (for example, burials with grave gifts), specialized hunting techniques, exploration of less hospitable geographical areas, and barter trade networks. Debate continues as to whether a "revolution" led to modern humans ("the big bang of human consciousness"), or whether the evolution was more gradual. 

== Recent and current human evolution ==

Natural selection occurs in modern human populations. For example, the population which is at risk of the severe debilitating disease kuru has significant over-representation of an immune variant of the prion protein gene G127 V versus non-immune alleles. The frequency of this genetic variant is due to the survival of immune persons. Other reported evolutionary trends in other populations include a lengthening of the reproductive period, reduction in cholesterol levels, blood glucose and blood pressure. 

It has been argued that human evolution has accelerated since the development of agriculture and civilization some 10,000 years ago. It is claimed that this has resulted in substantial genetic differences between different current human populations. Cochran G & Harpending H. 2009. The 10,000 Year Explosion. Basic Books N.Y. Lactase persistence is an example of such recent evolution. Recent human evolution seems largely however to have been confined to genetic resistance to some infectious disease, which have appeared in human populations by crossing the species barrier from domesticated animals. Diamond, Jarrad (2002), "Guns, Germs and Steel" (Penguin) 
Without a selection pressure or opportunity for speciation, such as geographic isolation, recent human evolution has been predominantly subject to genetic drift.

== Species list ==

This list is in chronological order across the page by genus.

* Sahelanthropus
** Sahelanthropus tchadensis
* Orrorin
** Orrorin tugenensis
* Ardipithecus
** Ardipithecus kadabba
** Ardipithecus ramidus

* Australopithecus
** Australopithecus anamensis
** Australopithecus afarensis
** Australopithecus bahrelghazali
** Australopithecus africanus
** Australopithecus garhi
** Australopithecus sediba
* Paranthropus
** Paranthropus aethiopicus
** Paranthropus boisei
** Paranthropus robustus
* Kenyanthropus
** Kenyanthropus platyops

* Homo
** Homo gautengensis
** Homo habilis
** Homo rudolfensis
** Homo ergaster
** Homo georgicus
** Homo erectus
** Homo cepranensis
** Homo antecessor
** Homo heidelbergensis
** Homo rhodesiensis
** Homo neanderthalensis
** Homo sapiens idaltu
** Homo sapiens (Cro-Magnon)
** Homo sapiens sapiens
** Homo floresiensis
** Denisova hominin
** Red Deer Cave people

== See also ==

* List of human evolution fossils
* Timeline of human evolution
* Archaeogenetics
* The Ancestor's Tale
* Biocultural evolution
* Dual inheritance theory
* Dysgenics
* Evolutionary anthropology
* Evolutionary medicine
* Evolutionary neuroscience
* Evolution of hair
* Evolution of human intelligence
* Evolution of morality
* Evolutionary origin of religions
* Evolutionary psychology
* Hominid intelligence
* Homininae
* Human behavioral ecology
* Human evolution (origins of society and culture)
* Human skeletal changes due to bipedalism
* Human vestigiality
* March of Progress
* Molecular paleontology
* Origin of language
* Origin of speech
* Obstetrical Dilemma
* Pan prior
* Prehistory
* Sahara pump theory
* Sexual selection in human evolution

== References ==

== Further reading ==

* 
* 
* Flinn, M. V., Geary, D. C., & Ward, C. V. (2005). Ecological dominance, social competition, and coalitionary arms races: Why humans evolved extraordinary intelligence. Evolution and Human Behavior, 26 10-46. 
* Gibbons, Ann. The First Human: The Race to Discover our Earliest Ancestor. Anchor Books (2007). ISBN 978-1-4000-7696-3
* .
* 
* 
* two ancestral ape chromosomes fused to give rise to human chromosome 2
* Johanson, Donald & Wong, Kate. Lucy's Legacy: The Quest for Human Origins. Three Rivers Press (2009). ISBN 978-0-307-39640-2
* (Note: this book contains very useful, information dense chapters on primate evolution in general, and human evolution in particular, including fossil history).
* Leakey, Richard & Lewin, Roger. Origins Reconsidered: In Search of What Makes us Human. Little, Brown and Company (1992). ISBN 0-316-90298-5
* Lewin, Roger. Bones of Contention: Controversies in the Search for Human Origins. Penguin Books (1987). ISBN 0-14-022638-9
* Morwood, Mike & van Oosterzee, Penny. A New Human: The Startling Discovery and Strange Story of the 'Hobbits' of Flores, Indonesia. Smithsonian Books (2007). ISBN 978-0-06-089908-0
* Oppenheimer, Stephen. Out of Eden: The Peopling of the World. Constable (2003). ISBN 1-84119-697-5
* 
* Roberts, Alice. The Incredible Human Journey: The Story of how we Colonised the Planet. Bloomsbury (2009). ISBN 978-0-7475-9839-8
* Shreeve, James. The Neanderthal Enigma: Solving the Mystery of Modern Human Origins. Viking (1996). ISBN 0-670-86638-5
* Stringer, Chris. The Origin of Our Species. Allen Lane (2011). ISBN 978-1-84614-140-9
* Stringer, Chris & Andrews, Peter. The Complete World of Human Evolution. Thames & Hudson (2005). ISBN 0-500-05132-1
* Stringer, Chris & McKie, Robin. African Exodus: The Origins of Modern Humanity. Jonathan Cape (1996). ISBN 0-224-03771-4
* Tattersall, Ian. The Fossil Trail: How We Know What We Think We Know About Human Evolution. Oxford University Press (2008). ISBN 978-0195367669 
* van Oosterzee, Penny. The Story of Peking Man. Allen & Unwin (1999). ISBN 1-86508-632-0
* Walker, Allan & Shipman, Pat. The Wisdom of the Bones: In Search of Human Origins. Weidenfeld and Nicholson (1996). ISBN 0-297-81670-5
* Wade, Nicholas. Before the Dawn: Recovering the Lost History of our Ancestors. Penguin Press (2006). ISBN 978-0-7156-3658-9
* (Note: this book contains very accessible descriptions of human and non-human primates, their evolution, and fossil history).
* 

http://news.nationalgeographic.com/news/2009/10/091001-oldest-human-skeleton-ardi-missing-link-chimps-ardipithecus-ramidus.html

== External links ==

* BBC: The Evolution of Man
* Illustrations from Evolution (textbook)
* 
* Smithsonian  The Human Origins Program
* Becoming Human: Paleoanthropology, Evolution and Human Origins, presented by Arizona State University's Institute of Human Origins
* 
* Bones, Stones and Genes: The Origin of Modern Humans, Howard Hughes Medical Institute 2011 Holiday Lecture Series
* 
* BBC: Finds test human origins theory ("Homo habilis and Homo erectus are sister species that overlapped in time"), retrieved June 2013
* Researchers say human foot not unique, more like those of great apes

 



[[Evliya elebi]]

Mehmed Zilli (25 March 1611  after 1682), known as Evliya elebi (), was an Ottoman Turk who travelled through the territory of the Ottoman Empire and neighboring lands over a period of forty years, recording his commentary in a travelogue called Seyhatnme. http://www.saudiaramcoworld.com/issue/201102/the.unread.masterpiece.of.evliya.elebi.htm 

== Life ==
Evliya elebi was born in 1611 Constantinople to a wealthy family from Ktahya. His father was Dervi Mehmed Zilli, an Ottoman court jeweller, and mother an Abkhazian relative of the later grand vizier Melek Ahmed Pasha. Robert Dankoff, An Ottoman Mentality: The World of Evliya elebi, BRILL, 2004, ISBN 978-90-04-13715-8, p. xii. Evliya elebi received a court education from the Imperial ulema. He may have joined the Glen sufi order, as he shows an intimate knowledge of the sufi lodge in Cairo, and a graffito in which he referred to himself as "Evliya-y Glen" (Evliya of the Glen). A devout Muslim opposed to fanaticism, Evliya could recite the Koran from memory and joked freely about Islam. Though employed as a religious expert and entertainer to the Ottoman grandees, Evliya refused employment that would keep him from travelling. , page 303-304, Simon Sebag Montefiore, Weidenfeld & Nicholson, 2011. ISBN 978-0-297-85265-0 His journal writing began in Constantinople, taking notes on buildings, markets, customs and culture, and in 1640 it was extended with accounts of his travels beyond the confines of the city. The collected notes of Evilya elebi's travels form a ten-volume work called the Seyahatname ("Travelogue").

He fought the Habsburgs in Transylvania.
 
Evliya elebi died sometime after 1682: it is unclear whether he was in Constantinople or Cairo at the time.

==Travels==

===Mostar===
Mostar
According to Evliya elebi, the name Mostar means "bridge-keeper." Of the bridge, 28 meters long and 20 meters high, elebi wrote that "the bridge is like a rainbow arch soaring up to the skies, extending from one cliff to the other. ...I, a poor and miserable slave of Allah, have passed through 16 countries, but I have never seen such a high bridge. It is thrown from rock to rock as high as the sky." http://www.saudiaramcoworld.com/issue/199805/hearts.and.stones.htm 

===Rotterdam===
elebi claimed to have encountered Native Americans as a guest in Rotterdam during his visit of 1663. He wrote:  cursed those Jesuits, saying, "Our world used to be peaceful, but it has been filled by greedy colonialists, who make war every year and shorten our lives. 

===Azerbaijan===
Of oil merchants in Baku elebi wrote: "By Allah's decree oil bubbles up out of the ground, but in the manner of hot springs, pools of water are formed with oil congealed on the surface like cream. Merchants wade into these pools and collect the oil in ladles and fill goatskins with it, these oil merchants then sell them in different regions. Revenues from this oil trade are delivered annually directly to the Safavid Shah."

===Crimean Khanate===
Crimean Tatar refugees.
Evliya elebi remarked on the impact of Cossack raids from Azak upon the territories of the Crimean Khanate, destroying trade routes and severely depopulating the regions. By the time of elebi's arrival, many of the towns visited were affected by the Cossack, and the only place he reported as safe was the Ottoman fortress at Arabat. http://books.google.com.pk/books?id=-PFoAAAAMAAJ&q=Evliya+Celebi&dq=qirim+khan+giray&source=gbs_word_cloud_r&cad=5 

elebi wrote of the slave trade in the Crimea:

===Parthenon===
In 1667 elebi expressed his marvel at the Parthenon's sculptures and described the building as "like some impregnable fortress not made by human agency." He composed a poetic supplication that the Parthenon, as "a work less of human hands than of Heaven itself, should remain standing for all time." 

==The Seyhatnme==

Although many of the descriptions the Seyhatnme were written in an exaggerated manner or were plainly inventive fiction or 3rd-source misinterpretation, his notes remain a useful guide to the culture and lifestyles of the 17th century Ottoman Empire. The first volume deals exclusively with Constantinople, the final volume with Egypt.

Currently there is no English translation of the entire Seyahatname, although there are translations of various parts of the. The longest single English translation was published in 1834 by Ritter Joseph von Hammer-Purgstall, an Austrian orientalist: it may be found under the name "Evliya Efendi." Von Hammer's work covers the first two volumes (Constantinople and Anatolia) but its language is antiquated . Other translations include Erich Prokosch's nearly complete translation into German of the tenth volume, the 2004 introductory work entitled The World of Evliya elebi: An Ottoman Mentality written by University of Chicago professor Robert Dankoff, and Dankoff and Sooyong Kim's 2010 translation of select excerpts of the ten volumes, An Ottoman Traveller: Selections from the Book of Travels of Evliya elebi.

Evliya is noted for having collected specimens of the languages in each region he traveled in. There are some 30 Turkic dialects and languages cataloged in the Seyhatnme. elebi notes the similarities between several words from the German and Persian, though he denies any common Indo-European heritage. The Seyhatnme also contains the first transcriptions of many Caucasian languages and Tsakonian, and the only extant specimens of written Ubykh outside the linguistic literature.

In the 10 volumes of his Seyhatnme, he describes the following journeys:

# Constantinople and surrounding areas (1630)
# Anatolia, the Caucasus, Crete and Azerbaijan (1640)
# Syria, Palestine, Armenia and Rumelia (1648)
# Eastern Anatolia, Iraq, and Iran (1655)
# Russia and the Balkans (1656)
# Military Campaigns in Hungary (1663/64)
# Austria, the Crimea, and the Caucasus for the second time (1664)
# Greece and then the Crimea and Rumelia for the second time (16671670)
# the Hajj to Mecca (1671)
# Egypt and the Sudan (1672)

==Popular culture==
stanbul Kanatlarmn Altnda (Istanbul Under My Wings, 1996) is a film about the lives of Hezarfen Ahmet elebi, his brother Lagari Hasan elebi, and the Ottoman society in the early 17th century, during the reign of Murad IV, as witnessed and narrated by Evliya elebi.

elebi appears in Orhan Pamuk's novel The White Castle, and is featured in the The Adventures of Captain Bathory (Dobrodrustv kapitna Bthoryho) novels by Slovak writer Juraj ervenk.

United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, UNESCO included the 400th anniversary of Evliya Celebi's birth in its timetable for the celebration of anniversaries. http://portal.unesco.org/en/ev.php-URL_ID=47164&URL_DO=DO_TOPIC&URL_SECTION=201.html 

==Bibliography==

===In Turkish===
* Nuran Tezcan, Semih Tezcan (Edit.), Doumunun 400. Ylnda Evliya elebi, T.C. Kltr ve Turizm Bakanl Yaynlar, Ankara 2011
* Robert Dankoff, Nuran Tezcan, Evliya elebi'nin Nil Haritas - Drr-i b misl n ahbr- Nl,Yap Kredi Yaynlar 2011
* Evliya elebi. Evliya elebi Seyahatnmesi. Beyolu, stanbul: Yap Kredi Yaynlar Ltd. ti., 1996-. 10 vols.
* Evliya elebi: Seyahatnamesi. 2 Vol. Cocuk Klasikleri Dizisi. Berlin 2005. ISBN 975-379-160-7 (A selection translated into modern Turkish for children)

===In English===
* Robert Dankoff: An Ottoman Mentality. The World of Evliya elebi. Leiden: E.J. Brill, 2004.
* Klaus Kreiser, "Evliya elebi," http://www.ottomanhistorians.com; eds. C. Kafadar, H. Karateke, C. Fleischer. October 2005.
* Evliya elebis Book of Travels. Evliya elebi in Albania and Adjacent Regions (Kosovo, Montenegro). The Relevant Sections of the Seyahatname. Trans. and Ed. Robert Dankoff. Leiden and Boston 2000. ISBN 90-04-11624-9
* Evliya elebi in Diyarbekir: The Relevant Section of The Seyahatname. Trans. and Ed. Martin van Bruinessen and Hendrik Boeschoten. New York : E.J. Brill, 1988.
* The Intimate Life of an Ottoman Statesman: Melek Ahmed Pasha (1588-1662) as Portrayed in Evliya elebi's Book of Travels. Albany: State University of New York Press, 1991.
* Narrative of travels in Europe, Asia, and Africa, in the seventeenth century, by Evliy Efend. Trans. Ritter Joseph von Hammer. London: Oriental Translation Fund of Great Britain and Ireland, 1846.
* (+ contents)
* (+ contents)
* Evliya elebi: Selected Stories by Evliya elebi, edited by Zeynep stn, translated by Havva Aslan, Profil Yaynclk, Istanbul 2007 ISBN 978-975-996-072-8

===In German===
* Im Reiche des Goldenen Apfels. Des trkischen Weltenbummlers Evli elebis denkwrdige Reise in das Giaurenland und die Stadt und Festung Wien anno 1665. Trans. R. Kreutel, Graz, et al. 1987.
* Kairo in der zweiten Hlfte des 17. Jahrhunderts. Beschrieben von Evliya elebi. Trans. Erich Prokosch. Istanbul 2000. ISBN 975-7172-35-9
* Ins Land der geheimnisvollen Func: des trkischen Weltenbummlers, Evliy elebi, Reise durch Obergypten und den Sudan nebst der osmanischen Provinz Habes in den Jahren 1672/73. Trans. Erich Prokosch. Graz: Styria, 1994.
* Evliya elebis Reise von Bitlis nach Van: ein Auszug aus dem Seyahatname. Trans. Christiane Bulut. Wiesbaden: Harrassowitz, 1997.
* Manisa nach Evliy elebi: aus dem neunten Band des Seyat-nme. Trans. Nuran Tezcan. Boston: Brill, 1999.
* Evliy elebis Anatolienreise aus dem dritten Band des Seyatnme. Trans. Korkut M. Buday. New York: E.J. Brill, 1996.
* Klaus Kreiser: Edirne im 17. Jahrhundert nach Evliy eleb. Ein Beitrag zur Kenntnis der osmanischen Stadt. Freiburg 1975. ISBN 3-87997-045-9
* Helena Turkov: Die Reisen und Streifzge Evliy elebs in Dalmatien und Bosnien in den Jahren 1659/61. Prag 1965.

==See also==
*Abbas Ibn Firnas
*Ahmad ibn Fadlan
*Turkish literature
*Ottoman Empire
*Turkish culture
*Exploration
*Evliya elebi Way
*Parthenon
*Stari Most
*Embroidery

==References==

==External links==

* Ottoman text edition (1896)



[[Ancient Egyptian religion]]

Ancient Egyptian religion was a complex system of polytheistic beliefs and rituals which were an integral part of ancient Egyptian society. It centered on the Egyptians' interaction with many deities who were believed to be present in, and in control of, the forces and elements of nature. The practices of Egyptian religion were efforts to provide for the gods and gain their favor. Formal religious practice centered on the pharaoh, the king of Egypt. Although a human, the Pharaoh was believed to be descended from the gods. He acted as the intermediary between his people and the gods, and was obligated to sustain the gods through rituals and offerings so that they could maintain order in the universe. The state dedicated enormous resources to Egyptian rituals and to the construction of the temples.

Individuals could interact with the gods for their own purposes, appealing for their help through prayer or compelling them to act through magic. These practices were distinct from, but closely linked with, the formal rituals and institutions. The popular religious tradition grew more prominent in the course of Egyptian history as the status of the Pharaoh declined. Another important aspect was the belief in the afterlife and funerary practices. The Egyptians made great efforts to ensure the survival of their souls after death, providing tombs, grave goods, and offerings to preserve the bodies and spirits of the deceased.

The religion had its roots in Egypt's prehistory and lasted for more than 3,000 years. The details of religious belief changed over time as the importance of particular gods rose and declined, and their intricate relationships shifted. At various times, certain gods became preeminent over the others, including the sun god Ra, the creator god Amun, and the mother goddess Isis. For a brief period, in the aberrant theology promulgated by the Pharaoh Akhenaten, a single god, the Aten, replaced the traditional pantheon. Ancient Egyptian religion and mythology left behind many writings and monuments, along with significant influences on ancient and modern cultures.

==Theology==
The beliefs and rituals now referred to as "Ancient Egyptian religion" were integral within every aspect of Egyptian culture. Their language possessed no single term corresponding to the modern European concept of religion. Ancient Egyptian religion was not a monolithic institution, but consisted of a vast and varying set of beliefs and practices, linked by their common focus on the interaction between the world of humans and the world of the divine. The characteristics of the gods who populated the divine realm were inextricably linked to the Egyptians' understanding of the properties of the world in which they lived.

===Deities===

The gods Osiris, Anubis, and Horus, in order from left to right
The Egyptians believed that the phenomena of nature were divine forces in and of themselves. These deified forces included the elements, animal characteristics, or abstract forces. The Egyptians believed in a pantheon of gods, which were involved in all aspects of nature and human society. Their religious practices were efforts to sustain and placate these phenomena and turn them to human advantage. . This polytheistic system was very complex, as some deities were believed to exist in many different manifestations, and some had multiple mythological roles. Conversely, many natural forces, such as the sun, were associated with multiple deities. The diverse pantheon ranged from gods with vital roles in the universe to minor deities or "demons" with very limited or localized functions. It could include gods adopted from foreign cultures, and sometimes humans: deceased Pharaohs were believed to be divine, and occasionally, distinguished commoners such as Imhotep also became deified.

The depictions of the gods in art were not meant as literal representations of how the gods might appear if they were visible, as the gods' true natures were believed to be mysterious. Instead, these depictions gave recognizable forms to the abstract deities by using symbolic imagery to indicate each god's role in nature. Thus, for example, the funerary god Anubis was portrayed as a jackal, a creature whose scavenging habits threatened the preservation of the body, in an effort to counter this threat and employ it for protection. His black skin was symbolic of the color of mummified flesh and the fertile black soil that Egyptians saw as a symbol of resurrection. This iconography was not fixed, and many of the gods could be depicted in more than one form.

Many gods were associated with particular regions in Egypt where their cults were most important. However, these associations changed over time, and they did not mean that the god associated with a place had originated there. For instance, the god Monthu was the original patron of the city of Thebes. Over the course of the Middle Kingdom, however, he was displaced in that role by Amun, who may have arisen elsewhere. The national popularity and importance of individual gods fluctuated in a similar way.

Amun-Ra kamutef, wearing the plumed headdress of Amun and the sun disk representing Ra

===Associations between deities===
The Egyptian gods had complex interrelationships, which partly reflected the interaction of the forces they represented. The Egyptians often grouped gods together to reflect these relationships. Some groups of deities were of indeterminate size, and were linked by their similar functions. These often consisted of minor deities with little individual identity. Other combinations linked independent deities based on the symbolic meaning of numbers in Egyptian mythology; for instance, pairs of deities usually represent the duality of opposite phenomena. One of the more common combinations was a family triad consisting of a father, mother, and child, who were worshipped together. Some groups had wide-ranging importance. One such group, the Ennead, assembled nine deities into a theological system that was involved in the mythological areas of creation, kingship, and the afterlife.

The relationships between deities could also be expressed in the process of syncretism, in which two or more different gods were linked to form a composite deity. This process was a recognition of the presence of one god "in" another when the second god took on a role belonging to the first. These links between deities were fluid, and did not represent the permanent merging of two gods into one; therefore, some gods could develop multiple syncretic connections. Sometimes syncretism combined deities with very similar characteristics. At other times it joined gods with very different natures, as when Amun, the god of hidden power, was linked with Ra, the god of the sun. The resulting god, Amun-Ra, thus united the power that lay behind all things with the greatest and most visible force in nature.

===Unifying tendencies===
Many deities could be given epithets that seem to indicate that they were greater than any other god, suggesting some kind of unity beyond the multitude of natural forces. In particular, this is true of a few gods who, at various times in history, rose to supreme importance in Egyptian religion. These included the royal patron Horus, the sun god Ra, and the mother goddess Isis. During the New Kingdom (c. 15501070 BC), Amun held this position. The theology of the period described in particular detail Amun's presence in and rule over all things, so that he, more than any other deity, embodied the all-encompassing power of the divine.

Because of theological statements like this, many past Egyptologists, such as Siegfried Morenz, believed that beneath the polytheistic traditions of Egyptian religion there was an increasing belief in a unity of the divine, moving toward monotheism. Instances in Egyptian literature where "god" is mentioned without reference to any specific deity would seem to give this view added weight. However, in 1971 Erik Hornung pointed out that the traits of an apparently supreme being could be attributed to many different gods, even in periods when other gods were preeminent, and further argued that references to an unspecified "god" are meant to refer flexibly to any deity. He therefore argued that, while some individuals may have henotheistically chosen one god to worship, Egyptian religion as a whole had no notion of a divine being beyond the immediate multitude of deities. Yet the debate did not end there; Jan Assmann and James P. Allen have since asserted that the Egyptians did to some degree recognize a single divine force. In Allen's view, the notion of an underlying unity of the divine coexisted inclusively with the polytheistic tradition. It is possible that only the Egyptian theologians fully recognized this underlying unity, but it is also possible that ordinary Egyptians identified the single divine force with a single god in particular situations.

===Atenism===

The Egyptians did have an aberrant period of some form of monotheism during the New Kingdom, in which the pharaoh Akhenaten abolished the official worship of other gods in favor of the sun-disk Aten. This is often seen as the first instance of true monotheism in history, although the details of Atenist theology are still unclear. The exclusion of all but one god was a radical departure from Egyptian tradition and some see Akhenaten as a practitioner of monolatry rather than monotheism, . as he did not actively deny the existence of other gods; he simply refrained from worshipping any but the Aten. Under Akhenaten's successors Egypt reverted to its traditional religion, and Akhenaten himself came to be reviled as a heretic.

==Other important concepts==

===Cosmology===
The air god Shu, assisted by other gods, holds up Nut, the sky, as Geb, the earth, lies beneath.
The Egyptian conception of the universe centered on Ma'at, a word that encompasses several concepts in English, including "truth," "justice," and "order." It was the fixed, eternal order of the universe, both in the cosmos and in human society. It had existed since the creation of the world, and without it the world would lose its cohesion. In Egyptian belief, Ma'at was constantly under threat from the forces of disorder, so all of society was required to maintain it. On the human level this meant that all members of society should cooperate and coexist; on the cosmic level it meant that all of the forces of naturethe godsshould continue to function in balance. . This latter goal was central to Egyptian religion. The Egyptians sought to maintain Ma'at in the cosmos by sustaining the gods through offerings and by performing rituals which staved off disorder and perpetuated the cycles of nature. . 

The most important part of the Egyptian view of the cosmos was the conception of time, which was greatly concerned with the maintenance of Ma'at. Throughout the linear passage of time, a cyclical pattern recurred, in which Ma'at was renewed by periodic events which echoed the original creation. Among these events were the annual Nile flood and the succession from one king to another, but the most important was the daily journey of the sun god Ra.

When envisioning the shape of the cosmos, the Egyptians saw the earth as a flat expanse of land, personified by the god Geb, over which arched the sky goddess Nut. The two were separated by Shu, the god of air. Beneath the earth lay a parallel underworld and undersky, and beyond the skies lay the infinite expanse of Nu, the chaos that had existed before creation. The Egyptians also believed in a place called the Duat, a mysterious region associated with death and rebirth, that may have lain in the underworld or in the sky. Each day, Ra traveled over the earth across the underside of the sky, and at night he passed through the Duat to be reborn at dawn. Allen, James P., "The Cosmology of the Pyramid Texts", in . 

In Egyptian belief, this cosmos was inhabited by three types of sentient beings. One was the gods; another was the spirits of deceased humans, who existed in the divine realm and possessed many of the gods' abilities. Living humans were the third category, and the most important among them was the pharaoh, who bridged the human and divine realms.

Colossal statue of the Pharaoh Ramesses II

===Divine pharaoh===

Egyptologists have long debated the degree to which the Pharaoh was considered a god. It seems most likely that the Egyptians viewed royal authority itself as a divine force. Therefore, although the Egyptians recognized that the Pharaoh was human and subject to human weakness, they simultaneously viewed him as a god, because the divine power of kingship was incarnated in him. He therefore acted as intermediary between Egypt's people and the gods. He was key to upholding Ma'at, both by maintaining justice and harmony in human society and by sustaining the gods with temples and offerings. For these reasons, he oversaw all state religious activity. However, the Pharaohs real-life influence and prestige could differ from that depicted in official writings and depictions, and beginning in the late New Kingdom his religious importance declined drastically. Van Dijk, Jacobus, The Amarna Period and the Later New Kingdom", in . 

The king was also associated with many specific deities. He was identified directly with Horus, who represented kingship itself, and he was seen as the son of Ra, who ruled and regulated nature as the Pharaoh ruled and regulated society. By the New Kingdom he was also associated with Amun, the supreme force in the cosmos. Upon his death, the king became fully deified. In this state, he was directly identified with Ra, and was also associated with Osiris, god of death and rebirth and the mythological father of Horus. Many mortuary temples were dedicated to the worship of deceased pharaohs as gods. 

=== Afterlife ===
The Egyptians had elaborate beliefs about death and the afterlife. They believed that humans possessed a ka, or life-force, which left the body at the point of death. In life, the ka received its sustenance from food and drink, so it was believed that, to endure after death, the ka must continue to receive offerings of food, whose spiritual essence it could still consume. Each person also had a ba, the set of spiritual characteristics unique to each individual. Unlike the ka, the ba remained attached to the body after death. Egyptian funeral rituals were intended to release the ba from the body so that it could move freely, and to rejoin it with the ka so that it could live on as an akh. However, it was also important that the body of the deceased be preserved, as the Egyptians believed that the ba returned to its body each night to receive new life, before emerging in the morning as an akh.

Originally, however, the Egyptians believed that only the pharaoh had a ba, Callender, Gae, "The Middle Kingdom", in . and only he could become one with the gods; dead commoners passed into a dark, bleak realm that represented the opposite of life. The nobles received tombs and the resources for their upkeep as gifts from the king, and their ability to enter the afterlife was believed to be dependent on these royal favors. In early times the deceased pharaoh was believed to ascend to the sky and dwell among the stars. Over the course of the Old Kingdom (c. 26862181 BC), however, he came to be more closely associated with the daily rebirth of the sun god Ra and with the underworld ruler Osiris as those deities grew more important.

During the late Old Kingdom and the First Intermediate Period (c. 21812055 BC), the Egyptians gradually came to believe that possession of a ba and the possibility of a paradisiacal afterlife extended to everyone. . In the fully developed afterlife beliefs of the New Kingdom, the soul had to avoid a variety of supernatural dangers in the Duat, before undergoing a final judgment known as the "Weighing of the Heart". In this judgment, the gods compared the actions of the deceased while alive (symbolized by the heart) to Ma'at, to determine whether he or she had behaved in accordance with Ma'at. If the deceased was judged worthy, his or her ka and ba were united into an akh. Several beliefs coexisted about the akh's destination. Often the dead were said to dwell in the realm of Osiris, a lush and pleasant land in the underworld. The solar vision of the afterlife, in which the deceased soul traveled with Ra on his daily journey, was still primarily associated with royalty, but could extend to other people as well. Over the course of the Middle and New Kingdoms, the notion that the akh could also travel in the world of the living, and to some degree magically affect events there, became increasingly prevalent.

==Writings==

While the Egyptians had no unified religious scripture, they produced many religious writings of various types. Together the disparate texts provide a very extensive, but still incomplete, understanding of Egyptian religious practices and beliefs.

===Mythology===

Ra (at center) travels through the underworld in his barque, accompanied by other gods
Egyptian myths were metaphorical stories intended to illustrate and explain the gods' actions and roles in nature. The details of the events they recounted could change to convey different symbolic perspectives on the mysterious divine events they described, so many myths exist in different and conflicting versions. Mythical narratives were rarely written in full, and more often texts only contain episodes from or allusions to a larger myth. Knowledge of Egyptian mythology, therefore, is derived mostly from hymns that detail the roles of specific deities, from ritual and magical texts which describe actions related to mythic events, and from funerary texts which mention the roles of many deities in the afterlife. Some information is also provided by allusions in secular texts. Finally, Greeks and Romans such as Plutarch recorded some of the extant myths late in Egyptian history.

Among the significant Egyptian myths were the creation myths. According to these stories, the world emerged as a dry space in the primordial ocean of chaos. Because the sun is essential to life on earth, the first rising of Ra marked the moment of this emergence. Different forms of the myth describe the process of creation in various ways: a transformation of the primordial god Atum into the elements that form the world, as the creative speech of the intellectual god Ptah, and as an act of the hidden power of Amun. Regardless of these variations, the act of creation represented the initial establishment of maat and the pattern for the subsequent cycles of time. 

The most important of all Egyptian myths was the myth of Osiris and Isis. It tells of the divine ruler Osiris, who was murdered by his jealous brother Set, a god often associated with chaos. Osiris' sister and wife Isis resurrected him so that he could conceive an heir, Horus. Osiris then entered the underworld and became the ruler of the dead. Once grown, Horus fought and defeated Set to become king himself. Set's association with chaos, and the identification of Osiris and Horus as the rightful rulers, provided a rationale for Pharaonic succession and portrayed the Pharaohs as the upholders of order. At the same time, Osiris' death and rebirth were related to the Egyptian agricultural cycle, in which crops grew in the wake of the Nile inundation, and provided a template for the resurrection of human souls after death.

Another important mythic motif was the journey of Ra through the Duat each night. In the course of this journey, Ra met with Osiris, who again acted as an agent of regeneration, so that his life was renewed. He also fought each night with Apep, a serpentine god representing chaos. The defeat of Apep and the meeting with Osiris ensured the rising of the sun the next morning, an event that represented rebirth and the victory of order over chaos.

===Ritual and magical texts===
The procedures for religious rituals were frequently written on papyri, which were used as instructions for those performing the ritual. These ritual texts were kept mainly in the temple libraries. Temples themselves are also inscribed with such texts, often accompanied by illustrations. Unlike the ritual papyri, these inscriptions were not intended as instructions, but were meant to symbolically perpetuate the rituals even if, in reality, people ceased to perform them. Magical texts likewise describe rituals, although these rituals were part of the spells used for specific goals in everyday life. Despite their mundane purpose, many of these texts also originated in temple libraries and later became disseminated among the general populace.

===Hymns and prayers===
The Egyptians produced numerous prayers and hymns, written in the form of poetry. Hymns and prayers follow a similar structure and are distinguished mainly by the purposes they serve. Hymns were written to praise particular deities. Foster, John L., "Lyric", in . Like ritual texts, they were written on papyri and on temple walls, and they were probably recited as part of the rituals they accompany in temple inscriptions. Most are structured according to a set literary formula, designed to expound on the nature, aspects, and mythological functions of a given deity. They tend to speak more explicitly about fundamental theology than other Egyptian religious writings, and became particularly important in the New Kingdom, a period of particularly active theological discourse. Prayers follow the same general pattern as hymns, but address the relevant god in a more personal way, asking for blessings, help, or forgiveness for wrongdoing. Such prayers are rare before the New Kingdom, indicating that in earlier periods such direct personal interaction with a deity was not believed possible, or at least was less likely to be expressed in writing. They are known mainly from inscriptions on statues and stelae left in sacred sites as votive offerings. Ockinga, Boyo, "Piety", in . 

===Funerary texts===

Section of the Book of the Dead for the scribe Hunefer, depicting the Weighing of the Heart.
Among the most significant and extensively preserved Egyptian writings are funerary texts designed to ensure that deceased souls reached a pleasant afterlife. The earliest of these are the Pyramid Texts. They are a loose collection of hundreds of spells inscribed on the walls of royal pyramids during the Old Kingdom, intended to magically provide the king with the means to join the company of the gods in the afterlife. The spells appear in differing arrangements and combinations, and few of them appear in all of the pyramids.

At the end of the Old Kingdom a new body of funerary spells, which included material from the Pyramid Texts, began appearing in tombs, inscribed primarily on coffins. This collection of writings is known as the Coffin Texts, and was not reserved for royalty, but appeared in the tombs of non-royal officials. In the New Kingdom, several new funerary texts emerged, of which the best-known is the Book of the Dead. Unlike the earlier books, it often contains extensive illustrations, or vignettes. The book was copied on papyrus and sold to commoners to be placed in their tombs.

The Coffin Texts included sections with detailed descriptions of the underworld and instructions on how to overcome its hazards. In the New Kingdom, this material gave rise to several "books of the netherworld", including the Book of Gates, the Book of Caverns, and the Amduat. Unlike the loose collections of spells, these netherworld books are structured depictions of Ra's passage through the Duat, and by analogy, the journey of the deceased person's soul through the realm of the dead. They were originally restricted to pharaonic tombs, but in the Third Intermediate Period they came to be used more widely.

==Practices==
First pylon and colonnade of the Temple of Isis at Philae.

===Temples===

Temples existed from the beginning of Egyptian history, and at the height of the civilization they were present in most of its towns. They included both mortuary temples to serve the spirits of deceased pharaohs and temples dedicated to patron gods, although the distinction was blurred because divinity and kingship were so closely intertwined. The temples were not primarily intended as places for worship by the general populace, and the common people had a complex set of religious practices of their own. Instead, the state-run temples served as houses for the gods, in which physical images which served as their intermediaries were cared for and provided with offerings. This service was believed to be necessary to sustain the gods, so that they could in turn maintain the universe itself. . Thus, temples were central to Egyptian society, and vast resources were devoted to their upkeep, including both donations from the monarchy and large estates of their own. Pharaohs often expanded them as part of their obligation to honor the gods, so that many temples grew to enormous size. However, not all gods had temples dedicated to them, as many gods who were important in official theology received only minimal worship, and many household gods were the focus of popular veneration rather than temple ritual.

The earliest Egyptian temples were small, impermanent structures, but through the Old and Middle Kingdoms their designs grew more elaborate, and they were increasingly built out of stone. In the New Kingdom, a basic temple layout emerged, which had evolved from common elements in Old and Middle Kingdom temples. With variations, this plan was used for most of the temples built from then on, and most of those that survive today adhere to it. In this standard plan, the temple was built along a central processional way that led through a series of courts and halls to the sanctuary, which held a statue of the temple's god. Access to this most sacred part of the temple was restricted to the pharaoh and the highest-ranking priests. The journey from the temple entrance to the sanctuary was seen as a journey from the human world to the divine realm, a point emphasized by the complex mythological symbolism present in temple architecture. Well beyond the temple building proper was the outermost wall. In the space between the two lay many subsidiary buildings, including workshops and storage areas to supply the temple's needs, and the library where the temple's sacred writings and mundane records were kept, and which also served as a center of learning on a multitude of subjects.

Theoretically it was the duty of the pharaoh to carry out temple rituals, as he was Egypt's official representative to the gods. In reality, ritual duties were almost always carried out by priests. During the Old and Middle Kingdoms, there was no separate class of priests; instead, many government officials served in this capacity for several months out of the year before returning to their secular duties. Only in the New Kingdom did professional priesthood become widespread, although most lower-ranking priests were still part-time. All were still employed by the state, and the pharaoh had final say in their appointments. Shafer 1997, p. 9 However, as the wealth of the temples grew, the influence of their priesthoods increased, until it rivaled that of the pharaoh. In the political fragmentation of the Third Intermediate Period (c. 1070664 BC), the high priests of Amun at Karnak even became the effective rulers of Upper Egypt. Wilkinson 2000, pp. 9, 2526 The temple staff also included many people other than priests, such as musicians and chanters in temple ceremonies. Outside the temple were artisans and other laborers who helped supply the temple's needs, as well as farmers who worked on temple estates. All were paid with portions of the temple's income. Large temples were therefore very important centers of economic activity, sometimes employing thousands of people. Wilkinson 2000, pp. 9293 

===Official rituals and festivals===
State religious practice included both temple rituals involved in the cult of a deity, and ceremonies related to divine kingship. Among the latter were coronation ceremonies and the sed festival, a ritual renewal of the pharaoh's strength that took place periodically during his reign. Thompson, Stephen E., "Cults: Overview", in Redford 2001, vol. I, 326332 There were numerous temple rituals, including rites that took place across the country and rites limited to single temples or to the temples of a single god. Some were performed daily, while others took place annually or on rarer occasions. Wilkinson 2000, p. 95 The most common temple ritual was the morning offering ceremony, performed daily in temples across Egypt. In it, a high-ranking priest, or occasionally the pharaoh, washed, anointed, and elaborately dressed the god's statue before presenting it with offerings. Afterward, when the god had consumed the spiritual essence of the offerings, the items themselves were taken to be distributed among the priests. 

The less frequent temple rituals, or festivals, were still numerous, with dozens occurring every year. These festivals often entailed actions beyond simple offerings to the gods, such as reenactments of particular myths or the symbolic destruction of the forces of disorder. Dunand and Zivie-Coche, pp. 9395; Shafer 1997, p. 25 Most of these events were probably celebrated only by the priests and took place only inside the temple. However, the most important temple festivals, like the Opet Festival celebrated at Karnak, usually involved a procession carrying the god's image out of the sanctuary in a model barque to visit other significant sites, such as the temple of a related deity. Commoners gathered to watch the procession and sometimes received portions of the unusually large offerings given to the gods on these occasions. Shafer 1997, pp. 2728 

===Animal cults===
The Apis bull
At many sacred sites, the Egyptians worshipped individual animals which they believed to be manifestations of particular deities. These animals were selected based on specific sacred markings which were believed to indicate their fitness for the role. Some of these cult animals retained their positions for the rest of their lives, as with the Apis bull worshipped in Memphis as a manifestation of Ptah. Other animals were selected for much shorter periods. These cults grew more popular in later times, and many temples began raising stocks of such animals from which to choose a new divine manifestation. Dunand and Zivie-Coche 2005, pp. 21, 83 A separate practice developed in the Twenty-sixth Dynasty, when people began mummifying any member of a particular animal species as an offering to the god whom the species represented. Millions of mummified cats, birds, and other creatures were buried at temples honoring Egyptian deities. Quirke and Spencer 1992, pp. 78, 9294 Worshippers paid the priests of a particular deity to obtain and mummify an animal associated with that deity, and the mummy was placed in a cemetery near the god's cult center.

===Oracles===
The Egyptians used oracles to ask the gods for knowledge or guidance. Egyptian oracles are known mainly from the New Kingdom and afterward, though they probably appeared much earlier. People of all classes, including the king, asked questions of oracles, and, especially in the late New Kingdom their answers could be used to settle legal disputes or inform royal decisions. Kruchten, Jean-Marie, "Oracles", in Redford 2001, pp. 609611 The most common means of consulting an oracle was to pose a question to the divine image while it was being carried in a festival procession, and interpret an answer from the barque's movements. Other methods included interpreting the behavior of cult animals, drawing lots, or consulting statues through which a priest apparently spoke. The means of discerning the god's will gave great influence to the priests who spoke and interpreted the god's message. Frankfurter 1998, pp. 145152 

===Popular religion===
While the state cults were meant to preserve the stability of the Egyptian world, lay individuals had their own religious practices that related more directly to daily life. Sadek 1988, pp. 12 This popular religion left less evidence than the official cults, and because this evidence was mostly produced by the wealthiest portion of the Egyptian population, it is uncertain to what degree it reflects the practices of the populace as a whole. Wilkinson 2003, pp. 46 

Popular religious practice included ceremonies marking important transitions in life. These included birth, because of the danger involved in the process, and naming, because the name was held to be a crucial part of a person's identity. The most important of these ceremonies were those surrounding death (see "Funerary practices" below), because they ensured the soul's survival beyond it. Dunand and Zivie-Coche 2005, pp. 128131 Other religious practices sought to discern the gods' will or seek their knowledge. These included the interpretation of dreams, which could be seen as messages from the divine realm, and the consultation of oracles. People also sought to affect the gods' behavior to their own benefit through magical rituals (see "Magic" below). Baines, in Shafer 1991, pp. 164171 

Individual Egyptians also prayed to gods and gave them private offerings. Evidence of this type of personal piety is sparse before the New Kingdom. This is probably due to cultural restrictions on depiction of nonroyal religious activity, which relaxed during the Middle and New Kingdoms. Personal piety became still more prominent in the late New Kingdom, when it was believed that the gods intervened directly in individual lives, punishing wrongdoers and saving the pious from disaster. Official temples were important venues for private prayer and offering, even though their central activities were closed to laypeople. Egyptians frequently donated goods to be offered to the temple deity and objects inscribed with prayers to be placed in temple courts. Often they prayed in person before temple statues or in shrines set aside for their use. Yet in addition to temples, the populace also used separate local chapels, smaller but more accessible than the formal temples. These chapels were very numerous, and probably staffed by members of the community. Lesko, Barbara S. "Cults: Private Cults", in Redford 2001, vol. I, pp. 336339 Households, too, often had their own small shrines for offering to gods or deceased relatives. Sadek 1988, pp. 7678 

The deities invoked in these situations differed somewhat from those at the center of state cults. Many of the important popular deities, such as the fertility goddess Taweret and the household protector Bes, had no temples of their own. However, many other gods, including Amun and Osiris, were very important in both popular and official religion. David 2002, pp. 273, 276277 Some individuals might be particularly devoted to a single god. Often they favored deities affiliated with their own region, or with their role in life. The god Ptah, for instance, was particularly important in his cult center of Memphis, but as the patron of craftsmen he received the nationwide veneration of many in that occupation. Traunecker 2001, p. 98 

===Magic===

The word "magic" is used to translate the Egyptian term heka, which meant, as James P. Allen puts it, "the ability to make things happen by indirect means". Allen 2000, pp. 156157 Heka was believed to be a natural phenomenon, the force which was used to create the universe and which the gods employed to work their will. Humans could also use it, however, and magical practices were closely intertwined with religion. In fact, even the regular rituals performed in temples were counted as magic. Individuals also frequently employed magical techniques for personal purposes. Although these ends could be harmful to other people, no form of magic was considered inimical in itself. Instead, magic was seen primarily as a way for humans to prevent or overcome negative events. Baines, in . 

Amulet in the shape of the Eye of Horus, a common magical symbol
Magic was closely associated with the priesthood. Because temple libraries contained numerous magical texts, great magical knowledge was ascribed to the lector priests who studied these texts. These priests often worked outside their temples, hiring out their magical services to laymen. Other professions also commonly employed magic as part of their work, including doctors, scorpion-charmers, and makers of magical amulets. It is also likely that the peasantry used simple magic for their own purposes, but because this magical knowledge would have been passed down orally, there is limited evidence of it.

Language was closely linked with heka, to such a degree that Thoth, the god of writing, was sometimes said to be the inventor of heka. Therefore, magic frequently involved written or spoken incantations, although these were usually accompanied by ritual actions. Often these rituals invoked the power of an appropriate deity to perform the desired action, using the power of heka to compel it to act. Sometimes this entailed casting the practitioner or subject of a ritual in the role of a character in mythology, thus inducing the god to act toward that person as it had in the myth. Rituals also employed sympathetic magic, using objects believed to have a magically significant resemblance to the subject of the rite. The Egyptians also commonly used objects believed to be imbued with heka of their own, such as the magically protective amulets worn in great numbers by ordinary Egyptians.

===Funerary practices===

Because it was considered necessary for the survival of the soul, preservation of the body was a central part of Egyptian funerary practices. Originally the Egyptians buried their dead in the desert, where the arid conditions mummified the body naturally. In the Early Dynastic Period, however, they began using tombs for greater protection, and the body was insulated from the desiccating effect of the sand and was subject to natural decay. Thus the Egyptians developed their elaborate embalming practices, in which the corpse was artificially desiccated and wrapped to be placed in its coffin. The quality of the process varied according to cost, however, and those who could not afford it were still buried in desert graves.

The Opening of the Mouth ceremony being performed before the tomb 
Once the mummification process was complete, the mummy was carried from the deceased person's house to the tomb in a funeral procession that included his or her friends and relatives, along with a variety of priests. Before the burial, these priests performed several rituals, including the Opening of the mouth ceremony intended to restore the dead person's senses and give him or her the ability to receive offerings. Then the mummy was buried and the tomb sealed. Afterward, relatives or hired priests gave food offerings to the deceased in a nearby mortuary chapel at regular intervals. Over time, families inevitably neglected offerings to long-dead relatives, so most mortuary cults only lasted one or two generations. However, while the cult lasted, the living sometimes wrote letters asking deceased relatives for help, in the belief that the dead could affect the world of the living as the gods did.

The first Egyptian tombs were mastabas, rectangular brick structures where kings and nobles were entombed. Each of them contained a subterranean burial chamber and a separate, aboveground chapel for mortuary rituals. In the Old Kingdom the mastaba developed into the pyramid, which symbolized the primeval mound of Egyptian myth. Pyramids were reserved for royalty, and were accompanied by large mortuary temples sitting at their base. Middle Kingdom pharaohs continued to build pyramids, but the popularity of mastabas waned. Increasingly, commoners with sufficient means were buried in rock-cut tombs with separate mortuary chapels nearby, an approach which was less vulnerable to tomb robbery. By the beginning of the New Kingdom even the pharaohs were buried in such tombs, and they continued to be used until the decline of the religion itself.

Tombs could contain a great variety of other items, including statues of the deceased to serve as substitutes for the body in case it was damaged. Because it was believed that the deceased would have to do work in the afterlife, just as in life, burials often included small models of humans to do work in place of the deceased. The tombs of wealthier individuals could also contain furniture, clothing, and other everyday objects intended for use in the afterlife, along with amulets and other items intended to provide magical protection against the hazards of the spirit world. Further protection was provided by funerary texts included in the burial. The tomb walls also bore artwork, including images of the deceased eating food which were believed to allow him or her to magically receive sustenance even after the mortuary offerings had ceased.

==History==

===Predynastic and Early Dynastic periods===
Narmer, a Predynastic ruler, accompanied by men carrying the standards of various local gods
The beginnings of Egyptian religion extend into prehistory, and evidence for them comes only from the sparse and ambiguous archaeological record. Careful burials during the Predynastic period imply that the people of this time believed in some form of an afterlife. At the same time, animals were ritually buried, a practice which may reflect the development of zoomorphic deities like those found in the later religion. The evidence is less clear for gods in human form, and this type of deity may have emerged more slowly than those in animal shape. Each region of Egypt originally had its own patron deity, but it is likely that as these small communities conquered or absorbed each other, the god of the defeated area was either incorporated into the other god's mythology or entirely subsumed by it. This resulted in a complex pantheon in which some deities remained only locally important while others developed more universal significance. As the time changed and the shifting of the empires changed like the middle kingdom, new kingdom, and old kingdom, usually the religion followed stayed within the border of that territory.

The Early Dynastic period began with the unification of Egypt around 3000 BC. This event transformed Egyptian religion, as some deities rose to national importance and the cult of the divine pharaoh became the central focus of religious activity. Horus was identified with the king, and his cult center in the Upper Egyptian city of Nekhen was among the most important religious sites of the period. Another important center was Abydos, where the early rulers built large funerary complexes.

===Old and Middle Kingdoms===
During the Old Kingdom, the priesthoods of the major deities attempted to organize the complicated national pantheon into groups linked by their mythology and worshipped in a single cult center, such as the Ennead of Heliopolis which linked important deities such as Atum, Ra, Osiris, and Set in a single creation myth. Meanwhile, pyramids, accompanied by large mortuary temple complexes, replaced mastabas as the tombs of pharaohs. In contrast with the great size of the pyramid complexes, temples to gods remained comparatively small, suggesting that official religion in this period emphasized the cult of the divine king more than the direct worship of deities. The funerary rituals and architecture of this time greatly influenced the more elaborate temples and rituals used in worshipping the gods in later periods.

The pyramid complex of Djedkare Isesi
Early in the Old Kingdom, Ra grew in influence, and his cult center at Heliopolis became the nation's most important religious site. Malek, Jaromir, "The Old Kingdom", in . By the Fifth Dynasty, Ra was the most prominent god in Egypt, and had developed the close links with kingship and the afterlife that he retained for the rest of Egyptian history. Around the same time, Osiris became an important afterlife deity. The Pyramid Texts, first written at this time, reflect the prominence of the solar and Osirian concepts of the afterlife, although they also contain remnants of much older traditions. Malek in . The texts are an extremely important source for understanding early Egyptian theology. David 2002, p. 92 

In the 22nd century BC, the Old Kingdom collapsed into the disorder of the First Intermediate Period, with important consequences for Egyptian religion. Old Kingdom officials had already begun to adopt the funerary rites originally reserved for royalty, but now, less rigid barriers between social classes meant that these practices and the accompanying beliefs gradually extended to all Egyptians, a process called the "democratization of the afterlife". Seidlmayer, Stephen, "The First Intermediate Period". in . The Osirian view of the afterlife had the greatest appeal to commoners, and thus Osiris became one of the most important gods. . 

Eventually rulers from Thebes reunified the Egyptian nation in the Middle Kingdom (c. 20551650 BC). These Theban pharaohs initially promoted their patron god Monthu to national importance, but during the Middle Kingdom, he was eclipsed by the rising popularity of Amun. In this new Egyptian state, personal piety grew more important and was expressed more freely in writing, a trend which continued in the New Kingdom. 

===New Kingdom===
The Middle Kingdom crumbled in the Second Intermediate Period (c. 16501550 BC), but the country was again reunited by Theban rulers, who became the first pharaohs of the New Kingdom. Under the new regime, Amun became the supreme state god. He was syncretized with Ra, the long-established patron of kingship, and his temple at Karnak in Thebes became Egypt's most important religious center. Amun's elevation was partly due to the great importance of Thebes, but it was also due to the increasingly professional priesthood. Their sophisticated theological discussion produced detailed descriptions of Amun's universal power.

Increased contact with outside peoples in this period led to the adoption of many Near Eastern deities into the pantheon. At the same time, the subjugated Nubians absorbed Egyptian religious beliefs, and in particular, adopted Amun as their own.

Akhenaten and his family worshipping the Aten
The New Kingdom religious order was disrupted when Akhenaten acceded, and replaced Amun with the Aten as the state god. Eventually he eliminated the official worship of most other gods, and moved Egypt's capital to a new city at Amarna. This part of Egyptian history, the Amarna period, is named after this. In doing so, Akhenaten claimed unprecedented status: only he could worship the Aten, and the populace directed their worship toward him. The Atenist system lacked well-developed mythology and afterlife beliefs, and the Aten seemed distant and impersonal, so the new order did not appeal to ordinary Egyptians. Thus, many probably continued to worship the traditional gods in private. Nevertheless, the withdrawal of state support for the other deities severely disrupted Egyptian society. Akhenaten's successors restored the traditional religious system, and eventually they dismantled all Atenist monuments.

Before the Amarna period, popular religion had trended toward more personal relationships between worshippers and their gods. Akhenaten's changes had reversed this trend, but once the traditional religion was restored, there was a backlash. The populace began to believe that the gods were much more directly involved in daily life. Amun, the supreme god, was increasingly seen as the final arbiter of human destiny, the true ruler of Egypt. The pharaoh was correspondingly more human and less divine. The importance of oracles as a means of decision-making grew, as did the wealth and influence of the oracles' interpreters, the priesthood. These trends undermined the traditional structure of society and contributed to the breakdown of the New Kingdom. , in . 

===Later periods===
In the 1st millennium BC, Egypt was significantly weaker than in earlier times, and in several periods foreigners seized the country and assumed the position of pharaoh. The importance of the pharaoh continued to decline, and the emphasis on popular piety continued to increase. Animal cults, a characteristically Egyptian form of worship, became increasingly popular in this period, possibly as a response to the uncertainty and foreign influence of the time. Isis grew more popular as a goddess of protection, magic, and personal salvation, and became the most important goddess in Egypt.

Serapis
In the 4th century BC, Egypt became a Hellenistic kingdom under the Ptolemaic dynasty (30530 BC), which assumed the pharaonic role, maintaining the traditional religion and building or rebuilding many temples. The kingdom's Greek ruling class identified the Egyptian deities with their own. From this cross-cultural syncretism emerged Serapis, a god who combined Osiris and Apis with characteristics of Greek deities, and who became very popular among the Greek population. Nevertheless, for the most part the two belief systems remained separate, and the Egyptian deities remained Egyptian.

Ptolemaic-era beliefs changed little after Egypt became a province of the Roman Empire in 30 BC, with the Ptolemaic kings replaced by distant emperors. The cult of Isis appealed even to Greeks and Romans outside Egypt, and in Hellenized form it spread across the empire. In Egypt itself, as the empire weakened, official temples fell into decay, and without their centralizing influence religious practice became fragmented and localized. Meanwhile, Christianity spread across Egypt, and in the third and fourth centuries AD, edicts by Christian emperors and iconoclasm by local Christians eroded traditional beliefs. While it persisted among the populace for some time, Egyptian religion slowly faded away.

===Legacy===
Altar to Thoth of a Kemetic follower.
Egyptian religion produced the temples and tombs which are ancient Egypt's most enduring monuments, but it also influenced other cultures. In pharaonic times many of its symbols, such as the sphinx and winged solar disk, were adopted by other cultures across the Mediterranean and Near East, as were some of its deities, such as Bes. Some of these connections are difficult to trace. The Greek concept of Elysium may have derived from the Egyptian vision of the afterlife. In late antiquity, the Christian conception of Hell was most likely influenced by some of the imagery of the Duat. Biblical accounts of Jesus and Mary may have been influenced by that of Isis and Orisis. Egyptian beliefs also influenced or gave rise to several esoteric belief systems developed by Greeks and Romans, who considered Egypt as a source of mystic wisdom. Hermeticism, for instance, derived from the tradition of secret magical knowledge associated with Thoth.

Traces of ancient beliefs remained in Egyptian folk traditions into modern times, but its influence on modern societies greatly increased with the French Campaign in Egypt and Syria in 1798 and their seeing the monuments and images. As a result of it, Westerners began to study Egyptian beliefs firsthand, and Egyptian religious motifs were adopted into Western art. Egyptian religion has since had a significant influence in popular culture. Due to continued interest in Egyptian belief, in the late 20th century, several new religious groups have formed based on different reconstructions of ancient Egyptian religion.

==See also==
*List of Egyptian mythology topics
*Egyptian pantheon
*Kemetism
*Prehistoric religion
*Religions of the Ancient Near East
*Traditional African religion

==References==

==Bibliography==

*
*
*
*
*
*
* in .
*
*
*
* in .
*, in .
*
*, in .
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
* in .
*
*
* in .
*, in .
*
* in .
*
*

==Further reading==
*.
*.
*.
*.
*.
*.
*.
*.
*.
*.

==External links==
*: readable HTML book with images and footnotes
*.
*.
*.
*.

----

 



[[Educational psychology]]

Educational psychology is the scientific study of human learning. The study of learning processes, both cognitive and affective, allows researchers to understand individual differences in behavior, personality, intellect, and self-concept. The field of educational psychology heavily relies on testing, measurement, assessment, evaluation, and training to enhance educational activities and learning processes. Snowman, Jack (1997). Educational Psychology: What Do We Teach, What Should We Teach?. "Educational Psychology", 9, 151-169 This can involve studying instructional processes within the classroom setting.

Educational psychology can in part be understood through its relationship with other disciplines. It is informed primarily by psychology, bearing a relationship to that discipline analogous to the relationship between medicine and biology. It is also informed by neuroscience. Educational psychology in turn informs a wide range of specialities within educational studies, including instructional design, educational technology, curriculum development, organizational learning, special education and classroom management. Educational psychology both draws from and contributes to cognitive science and the learning sciences. In universities, departments of educational psychology are usually housed within faculties of education, possibly accounting for the lack of representation of educational psychology content in introductory psychology textbooks. Lucas, J.L.; Blazek, M.A. & Riley, A.B. (2005). The lack of representation of educational psychology and school psychology in introductory psychology textbooks. Educational Psychology, 25, 34751. 

The field of educational psychology involves the study of memory, conceptual processes, and individual differences (via cognitive psychology) in conceptualizing new strategies for learning processes in humans. Educational psychology has been built upon theories of Operant conditioning, functionalism, structuralism, constructivism, humanistic psychology, Gestalt psychology, and information processing. Snowman, Jack (1997). Educational Psychology: What Do We Teach, What Should We Teach?. "Educational Psychology", 9, 151-169 

Educational Psychology has seen rapid growth and development as a profession in the last twenty years. Farrell, P. (2010). School psychology: Learning lessons from history and moving forward. School Psychology International, 31(6), 581-598. School psychology began with the concept of intelligence testing leading to provisions for special education students, whom could not follow the regular classroom curriculum in the early part of the 20th century. Farrell, P. (2010). School psychology: Learning lessons from history and moving forward. School Psychology International, 31(6), 581-598. However, "School Psychology" itself has built a fairly new profession based upon the practices and theories of several psychologists among many different fields. Educational Psychologists are working side by side with psychiatrists, social workers, teachers, speech and language therapists, and counselors in attempt to understand the questions being raised when combining behavioral, cognitive, and social psychology in the classroom setting. Farrell, P. (2010). School psychology: Learning lessons from history and moving forward. School Psychology International, 31(6), 581-598. 

==History==

===Early years===
Educational Psychology is a fairly new and growing field of study. Though it can date back as early as the days of Plato and Aristotle, it was not identified as a specific practice. It was unknown that everyday teaching and learning in which individuals had to think about individual differences, assessment, development, the nature of a subject being taught, problem solving, and transfer of learning was the beginning to the field of educational psychology. These topics are important to education and as a result it is important to understanding human cognition, learning, and social perception. 

====Plato and Aristotle====

Educational psychology dates back to the time of Aristotle and Plato. Plato and Aristotle researched individual differences in the field of education, training of the body and the cultivation of psycho-motor skills, the formation of good character, the possibilities and limits of moral education. Some other educational topics they spoke about were the effects of music, poetry, and the other arts on the development of individual, role of teacher, and the relations between teacher and student. Plato saw knowledge as an innate ability, which evolves through experience and understanding of the world. Such a statement has evolved into a continuing argument of nature vs. nurture in understanding conditioning and learning today. Aristotle observed the phenomenon of "association." His four laws of association included succession, contiguity, similarity, and contrast. His studies examined recall and facilitated learning processes Toomas Lott (2011). "Plato on the Rationality of Belief, Trames", 15, 339-364. 

====John Locke====

John Locke followed by contrasting Plato's theory of innate learning processes. Rather, he introduced the term "tabula rasa" meaning "blank slate." Locke explained that learning was primarily understood through experience only, and we were all born without knowledge. Locke introduced this idea as "empiricism," or the understanding that knowledge is only built on knowledge and experience.

===Before 1890===
Philosophers of education such as Juan Vives, Johann Pestalozzi, Friedrich Frbel, and Johann Herbart had examined, classified and judged the methods of education centuries before the beginnings of psychology in the late 1800s.

====Juan Vives====

Juan Vives (14931540) proposed induction as the method of study and believed in the direct observation and investigation of the study of nature. His studies focus of humanistic learning, which opposed scholasticism and was influenced by a variety of sources including philosophy, psychology, politics,religion, and history. Zimmerman, B.J. & Schunk, D.H. (Eds.) (2003). Educational psychology: A century of contributions. Mahwah, NJ, US: Erlbaum. He was one of the first to emphasize that the location of the school is important to learning. Vives, J, & Watson, F. (1913). On education : a translation of the de tradendis disciplinis of juan luis vives . Cambridge : The University Press. He suggested that the school should be located away from disturbing noises; the air quality should be good and there should be plenty of food for the students and teachers. Vives emphasized the importance of understanding individual differences of the students and suggested practice as an important tool for learning. 

Vives introduced his educational ideas in his writing, "De anima et vita" in 1538. In this publication, Vives explores moral philosophy as a setting for his educational ideals; with this, he explains that the different parts of the soul (similar to that of Aristotle's ideas) are each responsible for different operations, which function distinctively. The first book covers the different "souls": "The Vegatative Soul;" this is the soul of nutrition, growth, and reproduction, "The Sensitive Soul," which involves the five external senses; "The Cogitative soul," which includes internal senses and cognitive facilities. The second book involves functions of the rational soul: mind, will, and memory. Lastly, the third book explains the analysis of emotions. Casini, Lorenzo (2010). "Quid sit anima": Juan Luis Vives on the soul and its relation to the body". Renaissance Studies, 24, 496- 517 

====Johann Pestalozzi====

Johann Pestalozzi (17461827), a German educational reformer, emphasized the child rather than the content of the school. Glover, J, & Ronning, R. (Ed.). (1987). Pestalozzi fostered an educational reform backed by the idea that early education was crucial for children, and could be manageable for mothers. Eventually, this experience with early education would lead to a "wholesome person characterized by morality" Horlacher, Rebekka (2011). Schooling as a means of popular education: Pestalozzi's method as a popular education experiment. "Paedagogica Historica": 47, 65-75 Pestalozzi has been acknowledged for opening institutions for education, writing books for mother's teaching home education, and elementary books for students, mostly focusing on the kindergarten level. In his later years, he published teaching manuals and methods of teaching. Horlacher, Rebekka (2011). Schooling as a means of popular education: Pestalozzi's method as a popular education experiment. "Paedagogica Historica": 47, 65-75. 

During the time of The Enlightenment, Pestalozzi's ideals introduced "educationalisation." This created the bridge between social issues and education by introducing the idea of social issues to be solved through education. Horlacher describes the most prominent example of this during The Enlightenment to be "improving agricultural production methods." Horlacher, Rebekka (2011). Schooling as a means of popular education: Pestalozzi's method as a popular education experiment. "Paedagogica Historica": 47, 65-75. 

====Johann Herbart====

Johann Herbart (17761841) is considered the father of educational psychology. Hergenhahn, B.R. (2009). An introduction to the history of psychology. Belmont, CA: Wadsworth. He believed that learning was influenced by interest in the subject and the teacher. He thought that teachers should consider the students existing mental sets, what they already know, when presenting new information or material. Herbart came up with what is now known as the formal steps. They are 5 steps that teachers should use are:

# Review material that has already been learned by the teacher 
# Prepare the student for new material by giving them an overview of what they are learning next 
# Present the new material. 
# Relate the new material to the old material that has already been learned. 
# Show how the student can apply the new material and show the material they will learn next. 

===18901920===

====William James====

William James
The period of 18901920 is considered the golden era of educational psychology where aspirations of the new discipline rested on the application of the scientific methods of observation and experimentation to educational problems. From 1840 to 1920 37 million people immigrated to the United States. This created an expansion of elementary schools and secondary schools. The increase in immigration also provided educational psychologists the opportunity to use intelligence testing to screen immigrants at Ellis Island. Darwinism influenced the beliefs of the prominent educational psychologists. Even in the earliest years of the discipline, educational psychologists recognized the limitations of this new approach. The pioneering American psychologist William James commented that: 

James is the father of psychology in America but he also made contributions to educational psychology. In his famous series of lectures Talks to Teachers on Psychology, published in 1899 and now regarded as the first educational psychology textbook, James defines education as "the organization of acquired habits of conduct and tendencies to behavior". He states that teachers should "train the pupil to behavior" so that he fits into the social and physical world. Teachers should also realize the importance of habit and instinct. They should present information that is clear and interesting and relate this new information and material to things the student already knows about. He also addresses important issues such as attention, memory, and association of ideas.

====Alfred Binet====

Alfred Binet published Mental Fatigue in 1898, in which he attempted to apply the experimental method to educational psychology. In this experimental method he advocated for two types of experiments, experiments done in the lab and experiments done in the classroom. In 1904 he was appointed the Minister of Public Education. This is when he began to look for a way to distinguish children with developmental disabilities. Binet strongly supported special education programs because he believed that "abnormality" could be cured. The Binet-Simon test was the first intelligence test and was the first to distinguish between "normal children" and those with developmental disabilities. Binet believed that it was important to study individual differences between age groups and children of the same age. He also believed that it was important for teachers to take into account individual students strengths and also the needs of the classroom as a whole when teaching and creating a good learning environment. He also believed that it was important to train teachers in observation so that they would be able to see individual differences among children and adjust the curriculum to the students. Binet also emphasized that practice of material was important. In 1916 Lewis Terman revised the Binet-Simon so that the average score was always 100. The test became known as the Stanford-Binet and was one of the most widely used tests of intelligence. Terman, unlike Binet, was interested in using intelligence test to identify gifted children who had high intelligence. In his longitudinal study of gifted children, who became known as the Termites, Terman found that gifted children become gifted adults. 

====Edward Thorndike====

Edward Thorndike (18741949) supported the scientific movement in education. He based teaching practices on empirical evidence and measurement. Thorndike developed the theory of instrumental conditioning or the law of effect. The law of effect states that associations are strengthened when it is followed by something pleasing and associations are weakened when followed by something not pleasing. He also found that learning is done a little at a time or in increments, learning is an automatic process and all the principles of learning apply to all mammals. Thorndike's research with Robert Woodworth on the theory of transfer found that learning one subject will only influence your ability to learn another subject if the subjects are similar. This discovery led to less emphasis on learning the classics because they found that studying the classics does not contribute to overall general intelligence. Thorndike was one of the first to say that individual differences in cognitive tasks were due to how many stimulus response patterns a person had rather than a general intellectual ability. He contributed word dictionaries that were scientifically based to determine the words and definitions used. The dictionaries were the first to take into consideration the users maturity level. He also integrated pictures and easier pronunciation guide into each of the definitions. Thorndike contributed arithmetic books based on learning theory. He made all the problems more realistic and relevant to what was being studied, not just to improve the general intelligence. He developed tests that were standardized to measure performance in school related subjects. His biggest contribution to testing was the CAVD intelligence test which used a multidimensional approach to intelligence and the first to use a ratio scale. His later work was on programmed instruction, mastery learning and computer-based learning:

====John Dewey====

John Dewey (18591952) had a major influence on the development of progressive education in the United States. He believed that the classroom should prepare children to be good citizens and facilitate creative intelligence. He pushed for the creation of practical class that could be applied outside of a school setting. He also thought that education should be student-oriented not subject-oriented. For Dewey education was social that helped bring together generations of people. He states that students learn by doing. He believed in an active mind that was able to be educated through observation and problem solving and inquiry. In his 1910 book How We Think he emphasizes that material should be provided in way that is stimulating and interesting to the student and it encourages original thoughts and problem solving. Dewey J. (1910). How we think. New York D.C. Heath & Co. He also stated that material should be relative to the student's own experience. 

====Jean Piaget====

Jean Piaget (18961980) developed the theory of cognitive development. The theory stated that intelligence developed in four different stages. The stages are the sensorimotor stage from birth to 2 years old, the preoperational state from 2 years old to 7 years old, the concrete operational stage from 7 years old to 10 years old, and formal operational stage from 11 years old and up. He also believed that learning was constrained to the child's cognitive development. Piaget influenced educational psychology because he was the first to believe that cognitive development was important and something that should be paid attention to in education. Most of the research on Piagetian theory was mainly tested and done by American educational psychologists

===1920-present===
The amount of people receiving a high school and college education increased dramatically from 1920 to 1960. Because of very little jobs available to the teens coming out of eighth grade there was an increase in high school attendance in the 1930s . The progressive movement in the United State took off at this time and led to the idea of progressive education. John Flanagan, an educational psychologist, developed tests for combat trainees and instructions in combat training. In 1954 the work of Kenneth Clark and his wife on the effects of segregation on black and white children was influential in the Supreme Court case Brown v. Board of Education. From the 1960s to present day educational psychology has switched from a behaviorist perspective to a more cognitive based perspective because of the influence and development of cognitive psychology at this time. 

====Jerome Bruner====

Jerome Bruner was the first to apply the cognitive approaches in educational psychology. He was the one who introduced the ideas of Jean Piaget into educational psychology. He advocated for discovery learning where teachers create a problem solving environment that allows the student to question, explore and experiment. In his book The Process of Education Bruner stated that the structure of the material and the cognitive abilities of the person are important in learning. He emphasized the importance of the subject matter. He also believed that how the subject was structured was important for the students understanding of the subject and it is the goal of the teacher to structure the subject in a way that was easy for the student to understand. In the early 1960s Bruner went to Africa to teach math and science to schoolchildren, which influenced his view as schooling as a cultural institution. Bruner was also influential in the development of MACOS, Man a Course of Study, which was an educational program that combined anthropology and science. The program explored human evolution and social behavior. He also helped with the development of the head start program. He was interested in the influence of culture on education and looked at the impact of poverty on educational development. 

====Benjamin Bloom====

Benjamin Bloom (19131999) spent over 50 years at the University of Chicago where he worked in the department of education. He believed that all students can learn. He developed taxonomy of educational objectives. The objectives were divided into three domains: cognitive, affective, and psychomotor. The cognitive domain deals with how we think. Clark, D. (n.d.). Bloom's taxonomy of learning domains. Retrieved from http://www.nwlink.com/~donclark/hrd/bloom.html It is divided into categories that are on a continuum from easiest to more complex. The categories are knowledge or recall, comprehension application, analysis, synthesis and evaluation. The affective domain deals with emotions and has 5 categories. The categories are receiving phenomenon, responding to that phenomenon, valuing, organization, and internalizing values. The psychomotor domain deals with the development of motor skills, movement and coordination and has 7 categories, that also goes from simplest to complex. The 7 categories of the psychomotor domain are perception, set, guided response, mechanism, complex overt response, adaptation, and origination. The taxonomy provided broad educational objectives that could be used to help expand the curriculum to match the ideas in the taxonomy. The taxonomy is considered to have a greater influence internationally than in the United States. Internationally, the taxonomy is used in every aspect of education from training of the teachers to the development of testing material. Bloom believed in communicating clear learning goals and promoting an active student. He thought that teachers should provide feedback to the students on their strengths and weaknesses. Bloom also did research on college students and their problem solving processes. He found that they differ in understanding the basis of the problem and the ideas in the problem. He also found that students differ in process of problem solving in their approach and attitude toward the problem. 

====Nathaniel Gage====

Nathaniel Gage is important in educational psychology because he did research to improve teaching and understand the processes involved in teaching. In 1963 he was the editor of the Handbook of Research on Teaching, which became an influential book in educational psychology. The handbook helped set up research on teaching and made research on teaching important to educational psychology. He also was influential in the founding of the Stanford Center for Research and Development in teaching, which not only contributed important research on teaching but also influenced the teaching of important educational psychologists. 

==Perspectives==

===Cognitive===
An example of an item from a cognitive abilities test
Each person has an individual profile of characteristics, abilities and challenges that result from predisposition, learning and development. These manifest as individual differences in intelligence, creativity, cognitive style, motivation and the capacity to process information, communicate, and relate to others. The most prevalent disabilities found among school age children are attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD), learning disability, dyslexia, and speech disorder. Less common disabilities include intellectual disability, hearing impairment, cerebral palsy, epilepsy, and blindness. 

Although theories of intelligence have been discussed by philosophers since Plato, intelligence testing is an invention of educational psychology, and is coincident with the development of that discipline. Continuing debates about the nature of intelligence revolve on whether intelligence can be characterized by a single factor known as general intelligence, Spearman, C. (1904) "General intelligence" objectively determined and measured. American Journal of Psychology, 15, 20193. multiple factors (e.g., Gardner's theory of multiple intelligences Gardner, Howard. (1983) Frames of Mind: The Theory of Multiple Intelligences. New York: Basic Books. ), or whether it can be measured at all. In practice, standardized instruments such as the Stanford-Binet IQ test and the WISC Wechsler, D. (1949). The Wechsler Intelligence Scale for Children. New York: Psychological Corp. are widely used in economically developed countries to identify children in need of individualized educational treatment. Children classified as gifted are often provided with accelerated or enriched programs. Children with identified deficits may be provided with enhanced education in specific skills such as phonological awareness. In addition to basic abilities, the individual's personality traits are also important, with people higher in conscientiousness and hope attaining superior academic achievements, even after controlling for intelligence and past performance. Day, L.; Hanson, K.; Maltby, J.; Proctor, C.L. & Wood, A.M. (in press). Hope uniquely predicts objective academic achievement above intelligence, personality, and previous academic achievement. Journal of Research in Personality. 

===Behavioral===
Applied behavior analysis, a research-based science utilizing behavioral principles of operant conditioning, is effective in a range of educational settings. Alberto, P. & Troutman, A. (2003) Applied behavior analysis for teachers (6th ed.). Columbus, OH, USA: Prentice-Hall-Merrill. For example, teachers can alter student behavior by systematically rewarding students who follow classroom rules with praise, stars, or tokens exchangeable for sundry items. McGoey, K.E. & DuPaul, G.J. (2000) Token reinforcement and response cost procedures: Reducing the disruptive behavior of preschool children with attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder. School Psychology Quarterly, 15, 33043. Theodore, L.A.; Bray, M.A.; Kehle, T.J. & Jenson, W.R. (2001) Randomization of group contingencies and reinforcers to reduce classroom disruptive behavior. Journal of School Psychology, 39, 26777. Despite the demonstrated efficacy of awards in changing behavior, their use in education has been criticized by proponents of self-determination theory, who claim that praise and other rewards undermine intrinsic motivation. There is evidence that tangible rewards decrease intrinsic motivation in specific situations, such as when the student already has a high level of intrinsic motivation to perform the goal behavior. Lepper, M. R.; Greene, D. & Nisbett, R.E. (1973). Undermining children's intrinsic interest with extrinsic reward: A test of the "overjustification" hypothesis. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 28, 12937. But the results showing detrimental effects are counterbalanced by evidence that, in other situations, such as when rewards are given for attaining a gradually increasing standard of performance, rewards enhance intrinsic motivation. Cameron, J.; Pierce, W.D.; Banko, K.M. & Gear, A. (2005). Achievement-based rewards and intrinsic motivation: A test of cognitive mediators. Journal of Educational Psychology, 97, 64155. Pierce, W.D. & Cameron, J. (2002). A summary of the effects of reward contingencies on interest and performance. The Behavior Analyst Today, 3, 22226. ABO Many effective therapies have been based on the principles of applied behavior analysis, including pivotal response therapy which is used to treat autism spectrum disorders.

===Social===
Among current educational psychologists, the cognitive perspective is more widely held than the behavioral perspective, perhaps because it admits causally related mental constructs such as traits, beliefs, memories, motivations and emotions. Cognitive theories claim that memory structures determine how information is perceived, processed, stored, retrieved and forgotten. Among the memory structures theorized by cognitive psychologists are separate but linked visual and verbal systems described by Allan Paivio's dual coding theory. Educational psychologists have used dual coding theory and cognitive load theory to explain how people learn from multimedia presentations. Mayer, R.E. (2001). Multimedia learning. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press. 

Three experiments reported by Krug, Davis and Glover Krug, D.; Davis, T.B.; Glover, J.A. (1990). Massed versus distributed repeated reading: A case of forgetting helping recall? Journal of Educational Psychology, 82, 36671. demonstrated the advantage of delaying a 2nd reading of a text passage by one week (distributed) compared with no delay between readings (massed).
The spaced learning effect, a cognitive phenomenon strongly supported by psychological research, has broad applicability within education. Dempster, F.N. (1989). Spacing effects and their implications for theory and practice. Educational Psychology Review, 1, 30930. For example, students have been found to perform better on a test of knowledge about a text passage when a second reading of the passage is delayed rather than immediate (see figure). Educational psychology research has confirmed the applicability to education of other findings from cognitive psychology, such as the benefits of using mnemonics for immediate and delayed retention of information. Carney, R.N. & Levin, J.R. (2000). Fading mnemonic memories: Here's looking anew, again! Contemporary Educational Psychology, 25, 499508. 

Problem solving, according to prominent cognitive psychologists, is fundamental to learning. It resides as an important research topic in educational psychology. A student is thought to interpret a problem by assigning it to a schema retrieved from long-term memory. A problem students run into while reading is called "activation." This is when the student's representations of the text are present during working memory. This causes the student to read through the material without absorbing the information and being able to retain it. When working memory is absent from the readers representations of the working memory they experience something called "deactivation." When deactivation occurs, the student has an understanding of the material and is able to retain information. If deactivation occurs during the first reading, the reader does not need to undergo deactivation in the second reading. The reader will only need to reread to get a "gist" of the text to spark their memory. When the problem is assigned to the wrong schema, the student's attention is subsequently directed away from features of the problem that are inconsistent with the assigned schema. Kalyuga, S.; Chandler, P.; Tuovinen, J. & Sweller, J. (2001). When problem solving is superior to studying worked examples. Journal of Educational Psychology, 93, 57988. The critical step of finding a mapping between the problem and a pre-existing schema is often cited as supporting the centrality of analogical thinking to problem solving.

===Developmental===

Developmental psychology, and especially the psychology of cognitive development, opens a special perspective for educational psychology. This is so because education and the psychology of cognitive development converge on a number of crucial assumptions. First, the psychology of cognitive development defines human cognitive competence at successive phases of development. Education aims to help students acquire knowledge and develop skills which are compatible with their understanding and problem-solving capabilities at different ages. Thus, knowing the students' level on a developmental sequence provides information on the kind and level of knowledge they can assimilate, which, in turn, can be used as a frame for organizing the subject matter to be taught at different school grades. This is the reason why Piaget's theory of cognitive development was so influential for education, especially mathematics and science education. Furth, H.G. & Wachs, H. (1975). Thinking goes to school: Piaget's theory in practice. Oxford: Oxford University Press In the same direction, the neo-Piagetian theories of cognitive development suggest that in addition to the concerns above, sequencing of concepts and skills in teaching must take account of the processing and working memory capacities that characterize successive age levels. Demetriou, A. & Valanides, N. (1998). A three level of theory of the developing mind: Basic principles and implications for instruction and assessment. In R.J. Sternberg & W.M. Williams (Eds.), Intelligence, instruction, and assessment (pp. 14999). Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum. Demetriou, A.; Spanoudis, G. & Mouyi, A. (2010). A Three-level Model of the Developing Mind: Functional and Neuronal Substantiation. In M. Ferrari and L. Vuletic (Eds.), The Developmental Relations between Mind, Brain, and Education: Essays in honor of Robbie Case. New York: Springer. 
 
Second, the psychology of cognitive development involves understanding how cognitive change takes place and recognizing the factors and processes which enable cognitive competence to develop. Education also capitalizes on cognitive change, because the construction of knowledge presupposes effective teaching methods that would move the student from a lower to a higher level of understanding. Mechanisms such as reflection on actual or mental actions vis--vis alternative solutions to problems, tagging new concepts or solutions to symbols that help one recall and mentally manipulate them are just a few examples of how mechanisms of cognitive development may be used to facilitate learning. Case, R. (1985). Intellectual development: Birth to adulthood. New York: Academic Press. 

Finally, the psychology of cognitive development is concerned with individual differences in the organization of cognitive processes and abilities, in their rate of change, and in their mechanisms of change. The principles underlying intra- and inter-individual differences could be educationally useful, because knowing how students differ in regard to the various dimensions of cognitive development, such as processing and representational capacity, self-understanding and self-regulation, and the various domains of understanding, such as mathematical, scientific, or verbal abilities, would enable the teacher to cater for the needs of the different students so that no one is left behind. Case, R. (1992). The role of central conceptual structures in the development of children's mathematical and scientific thought. In A. Demetriou, M. Shayer, & A. Efklides (Eds.), Neo-Piagetian theories of cognitive development: Implications and applications to education (pp. 5265). London: Routledge. 

===Constructivist===

Constructivism is a category of learning theory in which emphasis is placed on the agency and prior "knowing" and experience of the learner, and often on the social and cultural determinants of the learning process. Educational psychologists distinguish individual (or psychological) constructivism, identified with Piaget's theory of cognitive development, from social constructivism. A dominant influence on the latter type is Lev Vygotsky's work on sociocultural learning, describing how interactions with adults, more capable peers, and cognitive tools are internalized to form mental constructs. Elaborating on Vygotsky's theory, Jerome Bruner and other educational psychologists developed the important concept of instructional scaffolding, in which the social or information environment offers supports for learning that are gradually withdrawn as they become internalized. Seifert, Kelvin & Sutton, Rosemary. Educational Psychology: Second Edition. Global Text Project, 2009, pp. 3337. 

==Conditioning and learning==

An abacus provides concrete experiences for learning abstract concepts.
To understand the characteristics of learners in childhood, adolescence, adulthood, and old age, educational psychology develops and applies theories of human development. Often represented as stages through which people pass as they mature, developmental theories describe changes in mental abilities (cognition), social roles, moral reasoning, and beliefs about the nature of knowledge.

For example, educational psychologists have conducted research on the instructional applicability of Jean Piaget's theory of development, according to which children mature through four stages of cognitive capability. Piaget hypothesized that children are not capable of abstract logical thought until they are older than about 11 years, and therefore younger children need to be taught using concrete objects and examples. Researchers have found that transitions, such as from concrete to abstract logical thought, do not occur at the same time in all domains. A child may be able to think abstractly about mathematics, but remain limited to concrete thought when reasoning about human relationships. Perhaps Piaget's most enduring contribution is his insight that people actively construct their understanding through a self-regulatory process. Woolfolk, A.E.; Winne, P.H. & Perry, N.E. (2006). Educational Psychology (3rd Canadian ed.). Toronto, Canada: Pearson. 

Piaget proposed a developmental theory of moral reasoning in which children progress from a nave understanding of morality based on behavior and outcomes to a more advanced understanding based on intentions. Piaget's views of moral development were elaborated by Kohlberg into a stage theory of moral development. There is evidence that the moral reasoning described in stage theories is not sufficient to account for moral behavior. For example, other factors such as modeling (as described by the social cognitive theory of morality) are required to explain bullying.

Rudolf Steiner's model of child development interrelates physical, emotional, cognitive, and moral development Woods, Ashley and Woods, Steiner Schools in England, University of West of England, Bristol: Research Report RR645, section 1.5, "Findings from the survey and case studies" in developmental stages similar to those later described by Piaget. Carrie Y. Nordlund, "Art Experiences in Waldorf Education," Ph.D. Dissertation, University of Missouri-Columbia, May 2006 

Developmental theories are sometimes presented not as shifts between qualitatively different stages, but as gradual increments on separate dimensions. Development of epistemological beliefs (beliefs about knowledge) have been described in terms of gradual changes in people's belief in: certainty and permanence of knowledge, fixedness of ability, and credibility of authorities such as teachers and experts. People develop more sophisticated beliefs about knowledge as they gain in education and maturity. Cano, F. (2005). Epistemological beliefs and approaches to learning: Their change through secondary school and their influence on academic performance. British Journal of Educational Psychology, 75, 20321. 

===Motivation===
Motivation is an internal state that activates, guides and sustains behavior. Motivation can have several impacting effects on how students learn and how they behave towards subject matter: 
* Provide direction towards goals
* Enhance cognitive processing abilities and performance
* Direct behavior toward particular goals
* Lead to increased effort and energy
* Increase initiation of and persistence in activities

Educational psychology research on motivation is concerned with the volition or will that students bring to a task, their level of interest and intrinsic motivation, the personally held goals that guide their behavior, and their belief about the causes of their success or failure. As intrinsic motivation deals with activities that act as their own rewards, extrinsic motivation deals with motivations that are brought on by consequences or punishments. A form of attribution theory developed by Bernard Weiner Weiner, B. (2000). Interpersonal and intrapersonal theories of motivation from an attributional perspective. Educational Psychology Review, 12, 114. describes how students' beliefs about the causes of academic success or failure affect their emotions and motivations. For example, when students attribute failure to lack of ability, and ability is perceived as uncontrollable, they experience the emotions of shame and embarrassment and consequently decrease effort and show poorer performance. In contrast, when students attribute failure to lack of effort, and effort is perceived as controllable, they experience the emotion of guilt and consequently increase effort and show improved performance. Weiner, B. (2000). Interpersonal and intrapersonal theories of motivation from an attributional perspective. Educational Psychology Review, 12, 114. 

The self-determination theory (SDT) was developed by psychologists Edward Deci and Richard Ryan. SDT focuses on the importance of intrinsic and extrinsic motivation in driving human behavior and posits inherent growth and development tendencies. It emphasizes the degree to which an individual's behavior is self-motivated and self-determined. When applied to the realm of education, the self-determination theory is concerned primarily with promoting in students an interest in learning, a value of education, and a confidence in their own capacities and attributes. 

Motivational theories also explain how learners' goals affect the way they engage with academic tasks. Elliot, A.J. (1999). Approach and avoidance motivation and achievement goals. Educational Psychologist, 34, 16989. Those who have mastery goals strive to increase their ability and knowledge. Those who have performance approach goals strive for high grades and seek opportunities to demonstrate their abilities. Those who have performance avoidance goals are driven by fear of failure and avoid situations where their abilities are exposed. Research has found that mastery goals are associated with many positive outcomes such as persistence in the face of failure, preference for challenging tasks, creativity and intrinsic motivation. Performance avoidance goals are associated with negative outcomes such as poor concentration while studying, disorganized studying, less self-regulation, shallow information processing and test anxiety. Performance approach goals are associated with positive outcomes, and some negative outcomes such as an unwillingness to seek help and shallow information processing. Elliot, A.J. (1999). Approach and avoidance motivation and achievement goals. Educational Psychologist, 34, 16989. 

Locus of control is a salient factor in the successful academic performance of students. During the 1970s and '80s, Cassandra B. Whyte did significant educational research studying locus of control as related to the academic achievement of students pursuing higher education coursework. Much of her educational research and publications focused upon the theories of Julian B. Rotter in regard to the importance of internal control and successful academic performance. Whyte, C. (1980). An Integrated Counseling and Learning Assistance Center. New Directions Sourcebook. Jossey-Bass, Inc. San Francisco. Whyte reported that individuals who perceive and believe that their hard work may lead to more successful academic outcomes, instead of depending on luck or fate, persist and achieve academically at a higher level. Therefore, it is important to provide education and counseling in this regard. Whyte, C. (1978). Effective Counseling Methods for High-Risk College Freshmen. Measurement and Evaluation in Guidance, 6 (4), 198200. 

==Technology==
Bloom's taxonomy of educational objectives: categories in the cognitive domain Anderson, L.W. & Krathwohl, D.R. (2001). A taxonomy for learning, teaching, and assessing: A revision of Bloom's taxonomy of educational objectives. New York, USA: Addison-Wesley Longman. 
Instructional design, the systematic design of materials, activities and interactive environments for learning, is broadly informed by educational psychology theories and research. For example, in defining learning goals or objectives, instructional designers often use a taxonomy of educational objectives created by Benjamin Bloom and colleagues. Bloom also researched mastery learning, an instructional strategy in which learners only advance to a new learning objective after they have mastered its prerequisite objectives. Bloom Bloom, B.S. (1984). The two sigma problem: The search for methods of group instruction as effective as one-to-one tutoring. Educational Researcher, 13 (6), 416. discovered that a combination of mastery learning with one-to-one tutoring is highly effective, producing learning outcomes far exceeding those normally achieved in classroom instruction. Gagn, another psychologist, had earlier developed an influential method of task analysis in which a terminal learning goal is expanded into a hierarchy of learning objectives Gronlund, N.E. (2000). How to write and use instructional objectives (6th ed.). Columbus, OH, USA: Merrill. connected by prerequisite relationships.
The following list of technological resources incorporate computer-aided instruction and intelligence for educational psychologists and their students: 
* Intelligent tutoring system
* Educational technology
* Cognitive tutor
* Cooperative learning
* Collaborative learning
* Problem-based learning
* Computer-supported collaborative learning
* Constructive alignment

Technology is essential to the field of educational psychology, not only for the psychologist themselves as far as testing, organization, and resources, but also for students. Educational Psychologists whom reside in the K- 12 setting focus the majority of their time with Special Education students. It has been found that students with disabilities learning through technology such as IPad applications and videos are more engaged and motivated to learn in the classroom setting. Liu et al. explain that learning- baed technology allows for students to be more focused, and learning is more efficient with learning technologies. The authors explain that learning technology also allows for students with social- emotional disabilities to participate in distance learning. Liu, Gi Zen; Wu, No- Wei; Chen, Ye- Wen. Identifying Emerging Trends for implementing learning technology in special education. "Research in Development disabilities", 2013, 36183628 

==Applications==

===Teaching===

A class size experiment in the United States found that attending small classes for 3 or more years in the early grades increased high school graduation of students from low income families. Finn, J.D.; Gerber, S.B.; Boyd-Zaharias, J. (2005). Small classes in the early grades, academic achievement, and graduating from high school. Journal of Educational Psychology, 97, 21433. 
Research on classroom management and pedagogy is conducted to guide teaching practice and form a foundation for teacher education programs. The goals of classroom management are to create an environment conducive to learning and to develop students' self-management skills. More specifically, classroom management strives to create positive teacherstudent and peer relationships, manage student groups to sustain on-task behavior, and use counseling and other psychological methods to aid students who present persistent psychosocial problems. Emmer, E.T. & Stough, L.M. (2001). Classroom management: A critical part of educational psychology with implications for teacher education. Educational Psychologist, 36, 10312. 

Introductory educational psychology is a commonly required area of study in most North American teacher education programs. When taught in that context, its content varies, but it typically emphasizes learning theories (especially cognitively oriented ones), issues about motivation, assessment of students' learning, and classroom management. A developing Wikibook about educational psychology gives more detail about the educational psychology topics that are typically presented in preservice teacher education.
* Special education
* Lesson plan

===Counseling===

====Training====
In order to become an educational psychologist, students can complete an undergraduate degree in their choice. They then must go to graduate school to study education psychology, counseling psychology, and/ or school counseling. Most students today are also receiving their doctorate degrees in order to hold the "psychologist" title.Educational psychologists work in a variety of settings. Some work in university settings where they carry out research on the cognitive and social processes of human development, learning and education. Educational psychologists may also work as consultants in designing and creating educational materials, classroom programs and online courses.Educational psychologists who work in k12 school settings (closely related are school psychologists in the US and Canada) are trained at the master's and doctoral levels. In addition to conducting assessments, school psychologists provide services such as academic and behavioral intervention, counseling, teacher consultation, and crisis intervention. However, school psychologists are generally more individual-oriented towards students. Love, P. (2009). Educational psychologists: the early search for an identity. Educational Psychology In Practice, 25(1), 3-8. 

====Employment outlook====
Employment for psychologists in the United States is expected to grow faster than most occupations through the year 2014, with anticipated growth of 1826%. One in four psychologists are employed in educational settings. In the United States, the median salary for psychologists in primary and secondary schools is US$58,360 as of May 2004. Bureau of Labor Statistics, U.S. Department of Labor. Occupational Outlook Handbook. 200607 Edition. Psychologists. retrieved from http://www.bls.gov/oco/ocos056.htm on June 30, 2006. 

In recent decades the participation of women as professional researchers in North American educational psychology has risen dramatically. Evans, J.; Hsieh, P.P. & Robinson, D.H. (2005). Women's Involvement in educational psychology journals from 1976 to 2004. Educational Psychology Review, 17, 26371. 

==Methods of research==
Educational psychology, as much as any other field of psychology heavily relies on a balance of pure observation and quantitative methods in psychology. The study of education generally combines the studies of history, sociology, and ethics with theoretical approaches. Smeyers and Depaepe explain that historically, the study of education and child rearing have been associated with the interests of policymakers and practitioners within the educational field, however, the recent shift to sociology and psychology has opened the door for new findings in education as a social science. Now being its own academic discipline, educational psychology has proven to be helpful for social science researchers. Smeyers, Paul; Depaepe, Marc. The Lure of Psychology for Education and Educational Research. "The Journal of Educational Philosophy", (2012) 46, 315-331. 

Quantitative research is the backing to most observable phenomenon in psychology. This involves observing, creating, and understanding a distribution of data based upon the studies subject matter. Researchers use particular variables to interpret their data distributions from their research and employ statistics as a way of creating data tables and analyzing their data. Psychology has moved from the "common sense" reputations initially posed by Thomas Reid to the methodology approach comparing independent and dependent variables through natural observation, experiments, or combinations of the two. Though results are still, with statistical methods, objectively true based upon significance variables or p- values. Smeyers, Paul; Depaepe, Marc. The Lure of Psychology for Education and Educational Research. "The Journal of Educational Philosophy", (2012) 46, 315-331. 

==See also==

* Applied psychology
* Classroom management
* Cognitive sciences
* Instructional theory
* Learning sciences
* Learning theory (education)
* List of educational psychologists
* List of publications in psychology
* Living educational theory- an educational psychology action research method
* Motivation theory
* School psychologist
* Special education

==References==

==Further reading==
* Barry, W.J. (2012). Challenging the Status Quo Meaning of Educational Quality: Introducing Transformational Quality (TQ) Theory. Educational Journal of Living Theories. 4, 1-29. http://ejolts.net/node/191

Among the most prominent journals in educational psychology are:

* Review of Educational Research
* Learning and Instruction
* American Educational Research Journal
* Journal of the Learning Sciences
* Academy of Management Learning & Education
* Educational Researcher
* Computers & Education
* Educational Research Review
* Journal of Research in Science Teaching
* Reading Research Quarterly
* Science Education
* Early Childhood Research Quarterly
* Review of Research in Education
* Advances in Health Sciences Education
* Internet and Higher Education
* Journal of Engineering Education
* International Journal of Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning
* Sociology of Education
* British Educational Research Journal
* Journal of Computer Assisted Learning

==External links==

* Educational Psychology Resources by Athabasca University
* Division 15 of the American Psychological Association
* Psychology of Education Section of the British Psychological Society
* Explorations in Learning & Instructional Design: Theory Into Practice Database
* Classics in the History of Psychology
* The Standards for Educational and Psychological Testing

===Videos===
* The Psychology of Educational Quality-Transformational Quality (TQ) Theory

 


[[EFTPOS]]

EFTPOS (pronounced )  electronic funds transfer at point of sale  is an electronic payment system involving electronic funds transfers based on the use of payment cards, such as debit or credit cards, at terminals located at points of sale. In Australia and New Zealand it is also the brand name of a specific system used for such payments. The Australian and New Zealand systems are country specific and do not interconnect. EFTPOS technology originated in the United States in 1981 and was quickly adopted by other countries.

Debit and credit cards are embossed plastic cards complying with ISO/IEC 7810 ID-1 standard. The cards have an embossed bank card number conforming with the ISO/IEC 7812 numbering standard.

== History ==

EFTPOS technology originated in the United States in 1981 and was rolled out in 1982. Initially, a number of nationwide systems were set up, such as Interlink, which were limited to participating correspondent banking relationships, not being linked to each other. Consumers and merchants were slow to accept it, and there was minimal marketing. As a result, growth and market penetration of EFTPOS was minimal up to the turn of the century. Since 2002 the use of EFTPOS has grown significantly, and it has become the standard payment method, displacing the use of cash. Subsequently, networks facilitating the process of money transfer and payment settlement between the consumer and the merchant grew from a small number of nationwide systems to the majority of payment processing transactions. For EFTPOS, US based systems allow the use of debit cards or credit cards. Now, "prepaid" cards can also be used.

In a short time, other countries adopted the EFTPOS technology, but these systems too were limited to the national borders. Each country adopted various interbank co-operative models. In New Zealand Bank of New Zealand started issuing EFTPOS debit cards in 1985 with the first merchant terminals being installed in petrol stations. In Australia, the major Australian banks started issuing debit or EFTPOS cards (each under a different brand name) starting in 1986 and merchants started installing EFTPOS terminals at the same time. Debit cards issued by all banks could be used at all EFTPOS terminals nationally, but debit cards issued in other countries could not. Prior to 1986, the Australian banks organized a widespread uniform credit card, called Bankcard, which had been in existence since 1974. There was a dispute between the banks whether Bankcard (or credit cards in general) should be permitted into the proposed EFTPOS system. At that time several banks were actively promoting MasterCard and Visa credit cards. Store cards and proprietary cards were shut out of the new system.

In recent years, MasterCard and Visa have introduced a debit card which is widely accepted internationally. International transactions are generally in the local currency, requiring a currency exchange by the card company to the currency of the primary account. Other charges may also apply.

== Australia ==
Australian eftpos logo

In Australia, debit and credit cards are the most common non-cash payment methods at points of sale (POS) or via ATMs. APCA: Cards and Accepting Devices EFTPOS. Merchant banking services. EFTPOS. Bank of Queensland Australia Not all merchants provide eftpos facilities, but those who wish to accept EFTPOS payments must enter an agreement with one of the seven merchant service providers, which rent an EFTPOS terminal to the merchant. The eftpos system in Australia is managed by Eftpos Payments Australia Ltd, which also sets the EFTPOS interchange fee. Proposed changes to the interchange fees standard For credit cards to be accepted by a merchant a separate agreement must be entered into with each credit card company, each of which has its own flexible merchant fee rate. 

The clearing arrangements for EFTPOS are regulated by Australian Payments Clearing Association (APCA). The system for ATM and EFTPOS interchanges is called Consumer Electronic Clearing System (CECS) also called CS3. CECS required authorisations from the Australian Competition and Consumer Commission (ACCC), which was obtained in 2001 and reaffirmed in 2009. ACCC reap proves CECS ATM and EFTPOS clearings are the subject of individual bilateral arrangements between the institutions involved. Australian Payment System 

===Debit cards===
Australian financial institutions provide their customers a plastic card, which can be used as a debit card or as an ATM card, and sometimes as a credit card. The card merely provides the means by which a customer's linked bank or other accounts can be accessed using an EFTPOS terminal or ATM. These cards can also be used on some vending machines and other automatic payment mechanisms, such as ticket vending machines. Australian debit cards cannot be used for online and telephone banking transactions, unless if they are also a credit card.

Each Australian bank has given a different name to its debit cards, such as:
* Commonwealth Bank of Australia: Keycard
* Westpac Banking Corporation: Handycard
* National Australia Bank: FlexiCard
* ANZ Bank: Access card
* Bendigo Bank: Cashcard

Some banks offer alternative debit card facilities to their customers using the Visa or MasterCard clearance system. For example, St George Bank offers a Visa Debit Card, Visa Debit Card - St.George Bank. Stgeorge.com.au. Retrieved on 2013-09-27. as does the National Australia Bank. The main difference with regular debit cards is that these cards can be used outside Australia where the respective credit card is accepted.

Those merchants that enter the EFTPOS payment system must accept debit cards issued by any Australian bank, and some also accept various credit cards and other cards. Some merchants set minimum transaction amounts for EFTPOS transactions, which can be different for debit and credit card transactions. Some merchant impose a surcharge on the use of EFTPOS. These can vary between merchants and on the type of card being used, and generally are not imposed on debit card transactions, and widely not on MasterCard and a Visa credit card transactions.

A feature of a debit card is that an EFTPOS transaction will only be accepted if there is an available credit balance in the bank cheque or savings account linked to the card.

Australian debit cards normally cannot be used outside Australia. They can only be used outside Australia if they carry the MasterCard/Maestro/Cirrus or Visa/Plus or other similar logos, in which case the non-Australian transaction will be processed through those transaction systems. Similarly, non-Australian debit and credit cards can only be used at Australian EFTPOS terminals or ATMs if they have these logos or the MasterCard or Visa logos. Diners Club and/or American Express cards will be accepted only if the merchant has an agreement with those card companies. The Discover card is accepted in Australia as a Diners Club card . The EFTPOS system is not available for non-bank or non-credit card based transactions, so that store cards and proprietor cards, such as Fleetcard and Motorcard, cannot be processed using an EFTPOS terminal.

===Bank-issued credit cards===
Australian banks also offer their customers credit cards, which are linked to accounts maintained by the credit card company. When issued through a bank, these cards may also act as debit cards by being associated with one or more linked personal accounts. The customer would indicate which account is to be accessed (debited) by pressing one of three account buttons on the EFTPOS terminal or ATM. The buttons are CHQ, SAV and CR. These historically denoted cheque, savings and credit account, but no longer need be linked to those specific account types.

In addition, credit card companies issue prepaid cards which act like generic gift cards, which are anonymous and not linked to any bank accounts. These cards are accepted by merchants who accept credit cards and are processed through the EFTPOS terminal in the same way as credit cards.

===Cash out===
A number of merchants permit customers using a debit card to withdraw cash as part of the EFTPOS transaction. Nab  Eftpos In Australia, this facility (known as debit card cashback in many other countries) is known as "cash out". For the merchant, cash out is a way of reducing their net cash takings, saving on banking of cash. There is no additional cost to the merchant in providing cash out because banks charge a merchant a debit card transaction fee per EFTPOS transaction, and not on the transaction value. Cash out is a facility provided by the merchant, and not the bank, so the merchant can limit or vary how much cash can be withdrawn at a time, or suspend the facility at any time. When available, cash out is convenient for the customer, who can bypass having to visit a bank branch or ATM. Cash out is also cheaper for the customer, since only one bank transaction is involved. For people in some remote areas, cash out may be the only way they can withdraw cash from their personal accounts. However, most merchants who provide the facility set a relatively low limit on cash out, generally $50, and some also charge for the service. Some merchants in Australia only allow cash out with the purchase of goods; other merchants allow cash out whether or not customers buy any goods. Cash out is not available in association with credit card sales because on credit card transactions the merchant is charged a percentage commission based on the transaction value, and also because cash withdrawals are treated differently from purchase transactions by the credit card company. (However, though inconsistent with a merchant's agreement with each credit card company, the merchant may treat a cash withdrawal as part of an ordinary credit card sale.)

===Cardholder verification===
EFTPOS transactions involving a debit, credit or prepaid card can be authenticated in a number of ways. The oldest system requires the printing and signing of a receipt, with the merchant verifying the signature on the receipt against the signature on the card. It is not very common in Australia for a merchant to require a cardholder to provide photo identification. More recently, authentication was by a personal identification number (PIN) that was entered into a PIN pad at the terminal and transmitted to the bank for verification. However, financial institutions are in the process of rolling out smart cards with integrated circuits ("chips") that will enable verification of the PIN at the EFTPOS terminal. NAB General Security tips Visa Australia kills signatures by 2013 PIN management is governed by international standard ISO 9564. At ATMs, only PIN verification is available, and all new credit cards are now issued with PINs regardless of whether or not they have a chip. In 2014, banks have indicated that the option for a customer to sign receipts is to be phased out, and that only PIN authentication is to be available. For some merchants, transactions below a specific threshold value (up to $100) can be approved without authentication (either signature or PIN).

As a further security measure, if a user enters an incorrect PIN three times, the card may be locked out of EFTPOS and require reactivation over the phone or at a bank branch. In the case of an ATM, the card will not be returned, and the cardholder will need to visit the branch to retrieve the card, or request a new card to be issued.

All debit cards now have a magnetic stripe on which is encoded the card's service codes, consisting of three-digit values. These codes are used to convey instructions to merchant terminals on how a card should be processed. The first digit indicates if a card can be used internationally or is valid for domestic use only. It is also used to signal if the card is chip-enabled. The second digit indicates if the transaction must be sent online for authorization always or if transactions that are below floor limit can take place without authorization. The third digit is used to indicate the preferred card verification method (e.g. PIN) and the environment where the card can be used (e.g. at point of sale only). Merchant terminals are required to recognize and act on service codes or send all transactions for online authorization. Visa Australia | Visa Debit. Visa-asia.com. Retrieved on 2013-09-27. 

===Contactless smart card===
In late 2000s, MasterCard and Visa introduced contactless smart debit cards under the brand names MasterCard PayPass and Visa payWave. This system is a form of EFTPOS transaction, an alternative to the previous swipe or chip systems. 

These cards contain an RFID chip and antenna loop embedded in the plastic. To pay using this system, the customer passes the card within 4 cm of a reader at a merchant checkout. Using this method, the customer does not need to authenticate his or her identity by PIN entry or signature, as on a regular machine for transactions under $100. For transactions over $100 PIN entry is required. 

The facility is not available with cards not branded with the MasterCard or Visa logos, or do not have an embedded chip. Bank debit cards and other credit cards do not currently offer contactless EFTPOS payments. 

eftpos Payments Australia Limited (ePAL) is developing a contactless payment system for debit cards based on the EMV technology as well as extension of debit cards for use for on-line transactions, and a mobile payment system. Eftpos Annual Report 2011 

=== History ===
The name and logo for EFTPOS in Australia were originally owned by the National Australia Bank and were trade marks from 1986 until 1991. The major Australian banks started issuing debit or EFTPOS cards (each under a different brand name) starting in 1986 and merchants started installing EFTPOS terminals at the same time.

In April 2009, a company, EFTPOS Payments Australia Ltd (ePal) was formed to manage and promote the EFTPOS system in Australia. APCA PaymentsMonitor publication  Industry establishes new company to manage EFTPOS 
ePal regulation commenced in January 2011. The initial members of EFTPOS Payments Australia Ltd were:
* Australia and New Zealand Banking Group
* Australian Settlements Limited
* Bank of Queensland
* Bendigo and Adelaide Bank
* Cashcard
* Citigroup
* Commonwealth Bank of Australia
* Coles Group (now Wesfarmers)
* Cuscal
* Indue
* National Australia Bank
* Suncorp-Metway
* Westpac Banking Corporation
* Woolworths Limited

In 2006 Commonwealth Bank and MasterCard ran a six-month trial of the contactless smart card system PayPass in Sydney and Wollongong, 
 
supplementing the traditional EFTPOS swipe or chip system. The system was rolled out across Australia in 2009; 
 other systems being rolled out are Westpac Bank's MasterCard PayPass and Visa payWave branded cards. 

In Australia, store cards have been excluded from participation in the EFTPOS and ATM systems. Consequently, several larger store accounts have entered into co-branding arrangements with credit card networks for the store-based accounts to be widely accepted. This was the case with Coles (previously, Coles-Myer) which co-branded with MasterCard, and David Jones which co-branded with American Express. Woolworths organized its own credit card called Everyday Rewards.

=== Usage ===
As of December 2010, there were over 707,000 EFTPOS terminals in Australia and over 28,000 ATMs. APCA ATM and EFTPOS statistics Of the terminals, over 60,000 offered cash withdrawals. In 2010, 183 million transactions, APCA Card Transaction Volume worth A$12 billion, APCA Card Transaction Value were made using Australian EFTPOS terminals per month.

In 2011, these figures increased to 750,000 terminals, with 325,000 individual businesses, processing over 2 billion transactions with combined value of approximately $131 billion for the year. The World of EFTPOS | Overview 

=== Network ===
The EFT network in Australia is made up of seven proprietary networks in which peers have interchange agreements, making an effective single network. RBA paper on Australian Payment systems A merchant who wishes to accept EFTPOS payments must enter an agreement with one of the seven merchant service providers, which rent the terminal to the merchant. All the merchant's EFTPOS transactions are processed through one of these gateways. Some of these peers are:
* Australia and New Zealand Banking Group
* Commonwealth Bank of Australia
* National Australia Bank
* Westpac Banking Corporation
* Cuscal Home. Cuscal. Retrieved on 2013-09-27. 
* FDI (Cashcard)
* Other

Other organisations may have peering agreements with the one or more of the central peers.

The network uses the AS 2805 protocol.

==New Zealand==

120px
Eftpos is highly popular in New Zealand. The system is operated by two providers, Paymark Limited (formerly Electronic Transaction Services Limited) which processes 75% of all electronic transactions in New Zealand, and EFTPOS NZ. Although the term eftpos is popularly used to describe the system, EFTPOS is a trademark of EFTPOS NZ the smaller of the two providers. Both providers run an interconnected financial network that allows the processing of not only of debit cards at point of sale terminals but also credit cards and charge cards.

=== History ===
120px
The Bank of New Zealand introduced EFTPOS to New Zealand in 1985 through a pilot scheme with petrol stations.

In 1989 the system was officially launched and two providers owned by the major banks now run the system. The largest of the two providers, Paymark Limited (formerly Electronic Transaction Services Limited) is owned equally by ASB Bank, Westpac, Bank of New Zealand and ANZ Bank New Zealand (formerly ANZ National Bank). The second is operated by EFTPOS NZ which is fully owned by VeriFone Systems, following its sale by ANZ New Zealand in December 2012. 

During July 2006 the five billionth EFTPOS payment was processed, and at the start of 2012 the 10 billionth transaction was processed. 

=== Usage ===
EFTPOS is highly popular in New Zealand, and being used for about 60% of all retail transactions.In 2009, there were 200 EFTPOS transactions per person. 

== See also ==
* Interac
* Maestro
* Visa Debit

== References ==

==External links==
*eftpos Official website



[[Epistle to the Laodiceans]]

220px
The Epistle to the Laodiceans is a possible lost letter of Paul, the original existence of which is inferred from an instruction to the church in Colossae to send their letter to the church in Laodicea, and likewise obtain a copy of the letter "from Laodicea" (Greek ek laodikeas  ). 

Several ancient texts purporting to be the missing "Epistle to the Laodiceans" have been known to have existed, most of which are now lost. These were generally considered, both at the time and by modern scholarship, to be attempts to supply a forged copy of a lost document. The exception is a Latin "Epistle to the Laodiceans", which is actually a short compilation of verses from other Pauline epistles, principally Philippians, and on which scholarly opinion is divided as to whether it is the lost Marcionite forgery or alternatively an orthodox replacement of the Marcionite text. In either case it is generally considered a "clumsy forgery" and an attempt to seek to fill the "gap" suggested by Colossians 4:16. Miracle and mission Page 151 James A. Kelhoffer - 2000 "Schneemelcher writes of this letter, "It is a rather clumsy forgery, the purpose of which is to have in the Pauline corpus the Epistle of the Laodiceans mentioned in Col. 4:16" (NTApo, 2.44)." 

Some ancient sources, such as Hippolytus, and some modern scholars consider that the epistle "from Laodicea" was never a lost epistle, but simply Paul recycling one of his other letters (the most common candidate is the contemporary Letter to the Ephesians), just as he asks for the copying and forwarding of the Letter to Colossians to Laodicea.

== The Colossians 4:16 mention ==
Paul, the earliest known Christian author, wrote several letters (or epistles) in Greek to various churches. Paul apparently dictated all his epistles through a secretary (or amanuensis), but wrote the final few paragraphs of each letter by his own hand. Harris, p. 316-320. Harris cites , , , , Joseph Barber Lightfoot in his Commentary on the Epistle to the Galatians writes: "At this point the apostle takes the pen from his amanuensis, and the concluding paragraph is written with his own hand. From the time when letters began to be forged in his name(; ) it seems to have been his practice to close with a few words in his own handwriting, as a precaution against such forgeries... In the present case he writes a whole paragraph, summing up the main lessons of the epistle in terse, eager, disjointed sentences. He writes it, too, in large, bold characters (Gr. pelikois grammasin), that his handwriting may reflect the energy and determination of his soul." Many survived and are included in the New Testament, but others are known to have been lost. The Epistle to the Colossians states "After this letter has been read to you, see that it is also read in the church of the Laodiceans and that you in turn read the letter from Laodicea." Colossians 4:16, NIV translation The last words can be interpreted as "letter written to the Laodiceans", but also "letter written from Laodicea". The New American Standard Bible (NASB) translates this verse in the latter manner, and translations in other languages such as the Dutch Statenvertaling translate it likewise: "When this letter is read among you, have it also read in the church of the Laodiceans; and you, for your part read my letter (that is coming) from Laodicea." NASB translation Statenvertaling, (Jongbloed 1637 edd.) Those who read here "letter written to the Laodiceans" presume that, at the time that the Epistle to the Colossians was written, Paul also had written an epistle to the Laodicean Church.

==Identification with the Epistle to the Ephesians==
Some scholars have suggested that this refers to the canonical Epistle to the Ephesians, contending that it was a circular letter (an encyclical) to be read to many churches in the Laodicean area. See, for example: Theodore Beza, Novum Testamentum, cum versione Latina veteri, et nova Theodori Bez; James Ussher, Annales Veteris et Novi Testamenti; and modern scholars John Lightfoot, Fenton John Anthony Hort, and others. Others dispute this view. See, for instance: N. A. Dahl, Theologische Zeitschrift 7 (1951); and W. G. Kummel, et al., Introduction to the New Testament. 

== The Marcionist Epistle to the Laodiceans ==
According to the Muratorian fragment, Marcion's canon contained an epistle entitled Epistle to the Laodiceans which is commonly thought to be a forgery written to conform to his own point of view. This is not at all clear, however, since none of the text survives. The Muratorian fragment It is not known what this letter might have contained. Some scholars suggest it may have been the Vulgate epistle described below, See, e.g. Adolf von Harnack while others believe it must have been more explicitly Marcionist in its outlook. Others believe it to be the Epistle to the Ephesians. http://www.marcionite-scripture.info/07Laodiceans.pdf 

== The Latin Vulgate Epistle to the Laodiceans ==
For centuries some Western Latin Bibles used to contain a small Epistle from Paul to the Laodiceans. The oldest known Bible copy of this epistle is in a Fulda manuscript written for Victor of Capua in 546. It is mentioned by various writers from the fourth century onwards, notably by Pope Gregory the Great, to whose influence may ultimately be due the frequent occurrence of it in Bibles written in England; for it is commoner in English Bibles than in others. John Wycliffe included Paul's letter to the Laodiceans in his Bible translation from the Latin to English. However this epistle is not without controversy because there is no evidence of a Greek text.

A letter entitled Epistle to the Laodiceans, consisting of 20 short lines, is found in some editions of the Vulgate, which is a Latin translation from Greek. It is almost unanimously believed to be pseudepigraphical, being a pastiche of phrases taken from the genuine Pauline epistles. M.R. James, Epistle to the Laodiceans, translation and commentary It contains almost no doctrine, teachings, or narrative not found elsewhere, and its exclusion from the Biblical canon has little effect.

The text was almost unanimously considered pseudepigraphal when Biblical canon was decided upon, and does not appear in any Greek copies of the Bible at all, nor is it known in Syriac or other versions. Paul's Epistle to the Laodiceans from The Reluctant Messenger Jerome, who wrote the Latin Vulgate translation, wrote in the 4th century, "it is rejected by everyone" Jerome, Lives of Illustrious Men, Chapter 5. and included it in the Vulgate, which is the reason for translating the letter into Latin. However, it evidently gained a certain degree of respect. It appeared in over 100 surviving early Latin copies of the Bible. According to Biblia Sacra iuxta vulgatum versionem, there are Latin Vulgate manuscripts containing this epistle dating between the 6th and 12th century, including Latin manuscripts F (Codex Fuldensis), M, Q, B, D (Ardmachanus), C, and Lambda.

The apocryphal epistle is generally considered a transparent attempt to supply this supposed lost sacred document. Some scholars suggest that it was created to offset the popularity of the Marcionite epistle. 

Wilhelm Schneemelcher's standard work, New Testament Apocrypha (Chapter 14 Apostolic Pseudepigrapha) includes a section on the Latin Epistle to the Laodiceans and a translation of the Latin text. 

== References ==

Laodiceans



[[Extermination camp]]

The Holocaust: Nazi extermination and concentration camps in occupied Poland.

Extermination camps (or death camps) were camps during World War II (193945) built primarily, but not exclusively, by Nazi Germany to systematically kill millions of people by execution (primarily by gassing) and extreme work under starvation conditions. Initiated with the Action T4 programme, it was adapted, expanded and applied to victims from many groups; however, Jews became the main Nazi targets. This genocide of the Jewish people was the Third Reich's "Final Solution to the Jewish question". " Die Endlsung der Judenfrage"  Adolf Hitler (In English, "The final solution of the Jewish problem"). Furet, Franois. Unanswered Questions: Nazi Germany and the Genocide of the Jews. Schocken Books (1989), p. 182; ISBN 978-0-8052-4051-1 The Nazi attempts at Jewish genocide are now collectively known as the Holocaust. Doris Bergen, Germany and the Camp System, part of Auschwitz: Inside the Nazi State, Community Television of Southern California, 2004-2005 

While not on the same scale as that perpertrated by the Nazis, the fascist Ustae forces of the Independent State of Croatia also operated extermination camps.

== Background ==

U.S. aerial photograph of Auschwitz II (Birkenau) showing crematoria II and III
Initiated in 1939 by the Action T4 programme to exterminate "life unworthy of life" (in German: "Lebensunwertes Leben") a Nazi designation for the segments of populace which had no right to life and thus were to be "euthanized". Initially Jews along with numerous other groups, were interned in concentration camps or restricted to ghettos. However, in 1941 the Nazis 'solved' die Endlsung der Judenfrage (The Final Solution of the Jewish Question) by the systematic killing of Europe's Jews. This adaption of the Action T4 programme by Nazi leaders during the first half of 1941, was derived from the then accepted ideas of racial hygiene and racial science. The initial, formal killings of the Final Solution were undertaken by the SS Einsatzgruppen (Task Forces) death squads who followed the Wehrmacht during the Operation Barbarossa invasion of the USSR in June 1941.

When the Nazis began to establish separate camps specifically for mass extermination, this was not a coordinated strategy. That changed with the Wannsee Conference chaired by Reinhard Heydrich in January 1942 in which the principle was made clear that the Jews of Europe were to be exterminated. Responsibility for the logistics were to be executed by the administrator, Adolf Eichmann.

In 1942, the Reichsfhrer Heinrich Himmler ordered the Lublin District SS- und Polizeifhrer Odilo Globocnik to build the first extermination camps during "The Final Solution" (194143), the operation to annihilate every Jew in the General Government (occupied Poland). Initially, the victims' corpses were buried in mass graves, but later were cremated. After Russian forces began to advance, previously buried victims were also exhumed and burned in Sonderaktion 1005, a Nazi attempt to destroy evidence of the Holocaust.

== Definitions ==

The Nazis distinguished between extermination camps and concentration camps.

The terms extermination camp (Vernichtungslager) and death camp (Todeslager) are interchangeable usages, each referring to camps whose primary function was genocide, not for punishing crime or containing political prisoners, but for the systematic killing of the prisoners delivered there. The Nazis did not expect the majority of prisoners taken to the Belzec, Sobibr or Treblinka extermination camps to survive more than a few hours beyond arrival. The first extermination camps were under the direct command of SSPolizei-fhrer Globocnik, and operated by SS Police battalions and Trawnikis  volunteers from Eastern Europe.

These differed from concentration camps, such as Dachau and Belsen, which were initially prison camps for people defined as socially or politically undesirable in Nazi society. 
The SS-Totenkopfverbnde managed the Nazi concentration camps such as Dachau and Ravensbrck. As early as September 1942, Dr. Johann Paul Kremer, M.D., an SS physician, witnessed a gassing of prisoners, and in his diary wrote: "They don't call Auschwitz the camp of annihilation Lager der Vernichtung for nothing!" The distinction was evident during the Nuremberg trials, when Dieter Wisliceny (a deputy to Adolf Eichmann) was asked to name the extermination camps, and he identified Auschwitz and Majdanek as such. Then, when asked "How do you classify the camps Mauthausen, Dachau, and Buchenwald?" he replied, "They were normal concentration camps, from the point of view of the department of Eichmann." Overy, Richard. Interrogations, p. 3567. Penguin 2002. ISBN 978-0-14-028454-6 

Extermination camps are distinguished from the Arbeitslager (forced labor camps) established in German-occupied countries to use the prisoners, including prisoners of war, as slave labor. In most camps (excepting PoW camps for the non-Soviet soldiers and certain labor camps), the high death rates resulted from execution, starvation, disease, exhaustion, and physical brutality.

== The death camps ==
Mass Deportations: the routes to the extermination camps

In the early years of the Holocaust, the Jews were primarily sent to concentration camps, but from 1942 onwards they were mostly deported to the extermination camps. For political and logistical reasons, the most infamous extermination camps Nazi Germany built were in Occupied Poland, where most of the intended victims lived; Poland had the greatest European Jewish populace. "The evacuation of Jews to Poland", Jewish Virtual Library.'.' Retrieved 2009-07-28. On top of that, the camps outside of the Third Reich proper could be kept secret from the German civil populace. Ellen Land-Weber, "Conditions for Polish Jews During WWII" in To Save a Life: Stories of Holocaust Rescue.'.' Retrieved 2009-07-28. 

Operationally, there were two types of death camp.

===Pure extermination camps===
Jewish children rounded up for deportation to the Chemno extermination camp.
Gas vans producing poisonous carbon monoxide exhaust fumes were initially developed at the Chelmno extermination camp, before being used elsewhere. Lifshitz, pp. 101102 

The camps at Treblinka, Beec, and Sobibr were constructed during Operation Reinhard (October 1941  November 1943), for the extermination of Poland's Jews. Prisoners were promptly killed upon arrival. Initially, the camps used carbon monoxide gas chambers; at first, the corpses were buried, but then incinerated atop pyres. Later, gas chambers and crematoria were built in Treblinka and Belzec; Zyklon-B was used in Belzec. See: M. Lifshitz, "Zionism" ( , "") p. 304. Compare with H. Abraham, "History of Israel and the nations in the era of Holocaust and uprising ( , "     ")" 

Whereas the Auschwitz II (AuschwitzBirkenau) and Majdanek camps were parts of a labor camp complex, the Operation Reinhard camps and the Chemno camp were exclusively for the quick extermination of many people (primarily Jews) within hours of their arrival. Aktion Reinhard: Belzec, Sobibr & Treblinka, Nizkor Project Some able-bodied prisoners delivered to the death camp were not immediately killed, but were forced into labor units (Sonderkommando) to work at the extermination process, removing corpses from the gas chambers and burning them. Because the extermination camps were physically small (only several hundred metres long and wide) and equipped with minimal housing and support installations, the Nazis deceived the prisoners upon their arrival, telling them that they were at a temporary transit stop, and soon would continue to an Arbeitslager (work camp) farther east.

===Concentrationextermination camps===

====Nazi====
Some prisoners were selected for slave labor, instead of immediate death; they were kept alive as camp inmates, available to work wherever the rulers required. Three extermination camps  Auschwitz, Majdanek, and the Ustae run Jasenovac  were later retrofitted with Zyklon-B gas chambers and crematoria, remaining operational until war's end in 1945. 

Maly Trostenets extermination camp in the USSR initially operated as a prison camp. It became an extermination camp later in the war with victims initially undergoing mass shootings. This was supplemented with exhaust fume gassing in a van from October 1943.

Sajmite concentration camp operated by the Nazis in Yugoslavia had a gas van stationed for use from March to June 1942. Once the industrial killings were completed, the van was returned to Berlin. After a refit the van was then sent to Maly Trostinets for use at the camp there.

Janowska concentration camp near Lwow in Poland operated a selection process for the detainees. Some prisoners were assigned to work. Others were either transported to Belzec or victims of mass shootings on two slopes in the Piaski sand-hills behind the camp.

The Warsaw concentration camp was an associated group of the German Nazi concentration camps, possibly including an extermination camp, located in German-occupied Warsaw. The various details regarding the camp are very controversial and remain subject of historical research and public debate.

====Ustae====
Germany's Fhrer Adolf Hitler (left) with Ustae Poglavnik Ante Paveli (right) at the Berghof outside of Berchtesgaden, Germany.

On 10 April 1941, the Independent State of Croatia (NDH) was established, supported by Nazi Germany and fascist Italy, and adopted similar racial and political doctrines. Camps were established by the fascist Ustae government for contributing to the Nazi "final solution" to the "Jewish problem", the killing of Roma people and the elimination of political opponents, but most significantly to achieve the destruction of the Serbian population of the NDH. Genocide and Fascism; The Eliminationist Drive in Fascist Europe by Aristotle Kallis, Routledge, New York, NY 2009 pages 236-244 M. Shelach (ed.), "History of the holocaust: Yugoslavia". The degree of cruelty with which the Serb population was persecuted shocked even the Germans. The sadistic brutality of the Ustae shocked even the Nazis. "Nazi Collaborators", Yesterday TV, UK, 12.00, 11 Jan 2014 

Jadovno concentration camp was located in a secluded area about 20 kilometres (12 mi) from the town of Gospi. It held thousands of Serbs and Jews over a period of 122 days from May to August 1941. Prisoners were usually but by no means exclusively killed by being pushed into deep ravines located near the camp.

Jasenovac concentration camp was a complex of five sub-camps that replaced Jadovno. Many inmates arriving at Jasenovac were scheduled for systematic extermination. An important criterion for selection was the duration of a prisoner's anticipated detention. Strong men capable of labour and sentenced to less than three years of incarceration were allowed to live. All inmates with indeterminate sentences or sentences of three years or more were immediately scheduled for execution, regardless of their fitness. State Commission, 1946, pp. 9-11, 46-47 Some of the mass executions were mechanical following Nazi methodology. Others were performed manually utilising tools such as mallets and agricultural knives and often in conjunction with throwing the victims off the end of a ramp into the River Sava.

====Soviet Union====
Robert Conquest argues that the regime in labour camps in the Soviet Union, principally those in Siberia, was designed to bring about the death of prisoners after extracting 36 months' labour from them. Aleksandr Solzhenitsyn concurs with him.

====Other====
More recently the Khmer Rouge regime in Cambodia made extensive use of camps in which a high proportion of the inmates perished. High inmate death rates are a reported feature of internment camps for political prisoners in North Korea.

== Extermination ==

===Nazi===

====Development====
The English-language memorial in Auschwitz-Birkenau camp, Auschwitz II
Carpathian Ruthenian Jews arrive at AuschwitzBirkenau, May 1944. Without being registered to the camp system, most were killed in gas chambers hours after arriving.

Heinrich Himmler visited the outskirts of Minsk in 1941 to witness mass shooting. He was told by the commanding officer there that the shootings were proving psychologically damaging to those being asked to pull the triggers. Thus Himmler knew another method of mass killing was required. "Auschwitz: The Nazis and the Final Solution" Yesterday television channel, 18:00, 18 November 2013] After the war, the diary of the Auschwitz Commandant, Rudolf Hss, revealed that psychologically "unable to endure wading through blood any longer", many Einsatzkommandos  the killers  either went mad or killed themselves. Hoss , Rudolf (2005). "I, the Commandant of Auschwitz," in Lewis, Jon E. (ed.), True War Stories, p. 321. Carroll & Graf Publishers. ISBN 978-0-7867-1533-6. 

The Nazis had first used gassing with carbon monoxide cylinders to kill 70,000 disabled people in Germany in what they called a 'euthanasia programme' to disguise that mass murder was taking place. Despite the lethal effects of carbon monoxide, this was seen as unsuitable for use in the East due to the cost of transporting the Carbon Monoxide in cylinders. 

Each extermination camp operated differently, yet each had designs for quick and efficient industrialized killing. While Hss was away on an official journey in late August 1941 his deputy, Karl Fritzsch, tested out an idea. At Auschwitz clothes infected with lice were treated with crystallised prussic acid. The crystals were made to order by the IG Farben chemicals company for which the brand name was Zyklon-B. Once released from their container, Zyklon-B crystals in the air released a lethal cyanide gas. Fritzch tried out the effect of Zyklon B on Soviet POWs, who were locked up in cells in the basement of the bunker for this experiment. Hss on his return was briefed and impressed with the results and this became the camp strategy for extermination as it was also to be at Majdanek. Besides gassing, the camp guards continued killing prisoners via mass shooting, starvation, torture, etc. 

====Operation====

SS Obersturmfhrer Kurt Gerstein, of the Institute for Hygiene of the Waffen-SS, during the war told a Swedish diplomat of life in a death camp, of how, on 19 August 1942, he arrived at Belzec extermination camp (which was equipped with carbon monoxide gas chambers) and was shown the unloading of 45 train cars filled with 6,700 Jews, many already dead, but the rest were marched naked to the gas chambers, where:

Unterscharfhrer Hackenholt was making great efforts to get the engine running. But it doesn't go. Captain Wirth comes up. I can see he is afraid, because I am present at a disaster. Yes, I see it all and I wait. My stopwatch showed it all, 50 minutes, 70 minutes, and the diesel did not start. The people wait inside the gas chambers. In vain. They can be heard weeping, "like in the synagogue", says Professor Pfannenstiel, his eyes glued to a window in the wooden door. Furious, Captain Wirth lashes the Ukrainian assisting Hackenholt twelve, thirteen times, in the face. After 2 hours and 49 minutes  the stopwatch recorded it all  the diesel started. Up to that moment, the people shut up in those four crowded chambers were still alive, four times 750 persons, in four times 45 cubic meters. Another 25 minutes elapsed. Many were already dead, that could be seen through the small window, because an electric lamp inside lit up the chamber for a few moments. After 28 minutes, only a few were still alive. Finally, after 32 minutes, all were dead ... Dentists hammered out gold teeth, bridges, and crowns. In the midst of them stood Captain Wirth. He was in his element, and, showing me a large can full of teeth, he said: "See, for yourself, the weight of that gold! It's only from yesterday, and the day before. You can't imagine what we find every day  dollars, diamonds, gold. You'll see for yourself!" 

The Nazi death camp Auschwitz built in the Polish areas annexed by Nazi Germany
Auschwitz Camp Commandant Rudolf Hss reported that the first time Zyklon B gas was used on the Jews, many suspected they were to be killed  despite having been deceived into believing they were to be deloused and then returned to the camp. As a result, the Nazis identified and isolated "difficult individuals" who might alert the prisoners, and removed them from the mass  lest they incite revolt among the deceived majority of prisoners en route to the gas chambers. The "difficult" prisoners were led to a site out of view to be killed off discreetly.

A prisoner Sonderkommando (Special Detachment) effected the most of the processes of extermination; they accompanied the Jews into the gas chamber (a chamber room, usually outfitted to appear as a large shower room, with (nonworking) water nozzles, tile walls, etc.) and remained with them until just before the chamber door closed. To psychologically maintain the "calming effect" of the delousing deception, an SS guard stood at the door, as if awaiting the prisoners. The Sonderkommando hurried them to undress and enter the "shower room" as quickly as possible; to that effect, they also assisted the aged and the very young in undressing. Hss, pp. 321322. 

To further persuade the prisoners that nothing harmful was happening, the Sonderkommando deceived them with small talk about camp life. Fearing that the delousing "disinfectant" might harm their children, many mothers hid their infants beneath their piled clothes. Camp Commandant Hss reported that the "men of the Special Detachment were particularly on the look-out for this", and encouraged the women to take their children into the "shower room". Likewise, the Sonderkommando comforted older children who might cry "because of the strangeness of being undressed in this fashion". Hss, pp. 322323. 

Yet, not every prisoner was deceived by such psychological warfare tactics; Commandant Hss reported of Jews "who either guessed, or knew, what awaited them, nevertheless ... found the courage to joke with the children, to encourage them, despite the mortal terror visible in their own eyes". Some women would suddenly "give the most terrible shrieks while undressing, or tear their hair, or scream like maniacs"; the Sonderkommando immediately took them away for execution by shooting. Hss, p. 323. In such circumstances, others, meaning to save themselves at the gas chamber's threshold, betrayed the identities and "revealed the addresses of those members of their race still in hiding". Hss, p. 324. 

Once the door of the filled gas chamber was sealed, pellets of Zyklon B were dropped through special holes in the roof. Nazi regulations required that the Camp Commandant supervise the preparations, the gassing (through a peephole), and the aftermath looting of the corpses. Commandant Hss reported that the gassed victims "showed no signs of convulsion"; the Auschwitz camp physicians attributed that to the "paralyzing effect on the lungs" of the Zyklon-B gas, which killed before the victim began suffering convulsions. Hss, pp. 320, 328. 

As a matter of political training, some high-ranked Nazi Party leaders and SS officers were sent to AuschwitzBirkenau to witness the gassings; Hss reported that "all were deeply impressed by what they saw ... some ... who had previously spoken most loudly, about the necessity for this extermination, fell silent once they had actually seen the 'final solution of the Jewish problem'." As the Auschwitz Camp Commandant Rudolf Hss justified the extermination by explaining the need for "the iron determination with which we must carry out Hitler's orders"; yet saw that even " Eichmann, who certainly tough enough, had no wish to change places with me." Hss, p. 328. 

====Corpse disposal====
After the gassings, the Sonderkommando removed the corpses from the gas chamber, then extracted any gold teeth, and  to minimize the distinct smell of burning human hair  they shaved the corpses, before delivering them to the crematoria or to the fire pits, thus maintaining secret the existence of the extermination camp. The Sonderkommando were responsible for burning the corpses, and stoking the fires, draining body fat, and turning over the "mountain of burning corpses" for even combustion and a peak fire-temperature. Commandant Hss was impressed by the diligence of the Sonderkommando prisoners, despite their being "well aware that ... they, too, would meet exactly the same fate", yet always doing their jobs "in such a matter-of-course manner that they might, themselves, have been the exterminators". Hss further reported that the men ate and smoked "even when engaged in the grisly job of burning corpses", in the course of which they occasionally encountered the corpse of a relative, but, although they "were obviously affected by this ... it never led to any incident" of revolt, as in the case of a Sonderkommando who so encountered the corpse of his wife, yet behaved "as though nothing had happened". Hss, pp. 325326. 

The corpses were incinerated in crematoria and the ashes either buried or scattered; yet, at Sobibr, Treblinka, Belzec, and Chelmno, the corpses were incinerated on pyres. The efficiency of industrialised killing at Auschwitz-Birkenau produced too many corpses to adequately burn or bury, so the crematoria (manufactured to specification by Topf und Shne) were put into use to handle the disposals around the clock, day and night. 

===Ustae===
This May 1945 picture shows Jaseonovac victims bodies disposed off without burial, thrown into the river Sava near Sisak.
Stone Flower monument to the victims at Jasenovac.

Most commonly Jadovno victims were bound together in a line and the first few victims were murdered with rifle butts or other objects. Afterwards, an entire row of inmates were pushed into the ravine. Hand grenades were hurtled inside in order to kill off the victims. Dogs would also be thrown in to feed on the wounded and the dead. In some cases, inmates were also killed by gunfire, as well as with knives and blunt objects.

The Jasenovac mechanical means of mass killing included following Nazi methods and the use initially of gas vans and later Zyklon B in stationary gas chambers. The Jasenovac guards have also been reported to have cremated living inmates in the crematorium. A notable difference of the Ustae guards compared to the SS at the Nazi camps was the widespread use of manual methods in the mass killings. These involved instruments such as mallets and agricultural knives which evolved to often to be done in a manner where still alive victims were thrown off the end of a ramp into the River Sava.

== Death toll ==

===Nazi===
The estimated total number of people executed in the Nazi camps in the table below is over three million:

 Camp Estimated deaths Operational Occupied territory Current country of location Primary means for mass killings 
 1,100,000 \"It is estimated that the SS and police deported at a minimum 1.3 million people to Auschwitz complex between 1940 and 1945. Of these, the camp authorities murdered 1.1 million.\" (Number includes victims killed in other Auschwitz camps.) May 1940  January 1945 Province of Upper Silesia Poland Zyklon B gas chambers 
 Beec 600,000 Between March and December 1942, the Germans deported some 434,500 Jews, and an indeterminate number of Poles and Roma (Gypsies) to Belzec, to be killed. http://www.ushmm.org/wlc/article.php?lang=en&ModuleId=10005191 17 March 1942  end of June 1943 Poland Carbon monoxide gas chambers 
 Chemno 320,000 In total, the SS and the police killed some 152,000 people in Chelmno. http://www.ushmm.org/wlc/en/article.php?ModuleId=10005194 8 December 1941  March 1943,June 1944  18 January 1945 District of Reichsgau Wartheland Poland Carbon monoxide vans 
 Majdanek 80,000 A recent study reduced the estimated number of deaths at Majdanek, in \"Majdanek Victims Enumerated\", by Pawel P. Reszka, Lublin, in the Gazeta Wyborcza 12 December 2005, reproduced on the site of the AuschwitzBirkenau Museum, Lublin scholar Tomasz Kranz established that figure, which the Majdanek museum staff consider authoritative. Earlier calculations were greater: ca. 360,000, in a much-cited 1948 publication by Judge Zdzislaw Lukaszkiewicz, of the Main Commission for the Investigation of Nazi Crimes in Poland; and ca. 235,000, in a 1992 article by Dr. Czesaw Rajca, formerly of the Majdanek museum. October 1, 1941  July 22, 1944 Poland Zyklon B gas chambers 
 Maly Trostinets 200,000 Yad Vashem, Summer of 1941 to 28 June 1944 Belarus Mass shootings, Carbon monoxide van 
 Sajmite 23,00047,000 28 October 1941July 1944 Independent State of Croatia Serbia Carbon monoxide van 
 Sobibr 250,000 In all, the Germans and their auxiliaries killed at least 167,000 people at Sobibr. http://www.ushmm.org/wlc/article.php?lang=en&ModuleId=10005192 16 May 1942  17 October 1943 General Government district Poland Carbon monoxide gas chambers 
 Treblinka 800,000 The Hfle Telegram indicates some 700,000 killed by 31 December 1942, yet the camp functioned until 1943, hence the true deaths total likely is greater. 22 July 1942  19 October 1943 General Government district Poland Carbon monoxide gas chambers 
 Total 3,115,0003,215,000 

At the Maly Trostenets extermination camp in Belarus, USSR, some 65,000 Jews were executed, whilst the estimated number of gentiles (non-Jews, i.e. communists, priests, soldiers, etc.) varies between 100,000 to 400,000. See Maly Trostinec at the camps Yad Vashem website 

===Ustae===

Death toll estimates vary for a number of reasons such as lack of records and political bias.

Estimates for Jadovno generally offer a range of 10,000  72,000 deaths at the camp over a period of 122 days (May to August 1941).

Estimates vary from 100,000 to 700,000 in Jasenovac (August 1941  April 1945). The television documentary, "Nazi Collaborators" on Dinko Sakic stated Franjo Tuman was among those who claimed that the figures were exaggerated. The documentary also stated over 300 000 people were killed at Jasenovac. 

== The post-war period ==
The Auschwitz cross before Block 11, Auschwitz I

In 1944, as the Red Army advanced into eastern Poland, the Nazis either partly or completely dismantled the eastern-most extermination camps to conceal the mass killings done there, and the buried remains (excepting AuschwitzBirkenau, which was partially demolished in 1947). Because most of the death camps in the far east of the country (Belzec and Sobibr) had been constructed with local lumber, the physical installations were quickly deteriorated, eroded, and destroyed, by the natural elements.

In the post-war period, the Communist government of the People's Republic of Poland (194490) created monuments at the extermination camp sites, that mentioned no ethnic, religious, or national particulars of the Nazi victims. The extermination camps sites have been accessible to Western visitors to Poland; the camps are tourist attractions, especially the most-infamous Nazi death camp, Auschwitz concentration camp, near the town of Owicim (Auschwitz). March of the Living is organized yearly since 1988. In the early 1990s, Jewish Holocaust organisations disputed with Polish Catholic groups about: "What religious symbols of martyrdom are appropriate as memorials in a Nazi death camp such as Auschwitz?" The Jews opposed to the erection of Christian memorials at a quarry adjacent to the Auschwitz camp, wherein featured the Auschwitz cross  a Roman cross erected near death camp Auschwitz I, where mostly Poles were killed, rather than at Auschwitz II (Auschwitz-Birkenau), where mostly Jews were killed.

=== Holocaust denial ===

Holocaust denier: David Irving at the National Archives, 2003
Documentary evidence: A Reichsbahn consignment note for delivering prisoners (Hftlinge) to Sobibr in November 1943

Holocaust deniers are people and organisations who assert that the Holocaust did not occur, or that it did not occur in the historically recognized manner and extent. Holocaust denial goes beyond respected practices of historical revisionism to distort and deny history along preconceived notions, in what is called negationism.

Extermination camp research is difficult because of extensive attempts by the SS and Nazi regime to conceal the existence of the extermination camps. As a result of Sonderaktion 1005, camps were dismantled, records destroyed, and mass graves were dug up. Furthermore, extermination camps that remained uncleared were liberated by Soviet troops, who had different standards of documentation and openness than the Western allies. The existence of the extermination camps is firmly established by testimonies of camp survivors and Final Solution perpetrators, material evidence (the remaining camps, etc.), Nazi photographs and films of the killings, and camp administration records.

Holocaust deniers often start by pointing out legitimate public misconceptions about the extermination camps. For example, widely published images in America were mostly of typhoid victims and Soviet POWs at the Buchenwald and Dachau concentration camps  the first to be liberated by American troops and the most available imagery in America. In early news reports and for years afterwards these images were often used by the news media somewhat inaccurately in conjunction with descriptions of extermination camps and Jewish suffering. Holocaust deniers, after pointing out such common errors, put it forward as evidence that extermination camps did not exist and the limited evidence about them is mostly a hoax arising out of a deliberate Jewish conspiracy.

Holocaust denial is highly discredited by scholars and is a criminal offence in Austria, Belgium, France, Germany, Lithuania, the Netherlands, Poland, and Switzerland.

== See also ==
* German camps in occupied Poland during World War II
* Soap made from human corpses
* World War II crimes in Poland

== References ==

=== Bibliography ===
* Bartov, Omer (ed.). The Holocaust: origins, implementation, aftermath. London: Routledge, 2000 ISBN 0-415-15035-3
* Gilbert, Martin. Holocaust Journey: travelling in search of the past, Phoenix, 1997. An account of the sites of the extermination camps as they are today, plus historical information about them and about the fate of the Jews of Poland.
* Klee, Ernst. "'Turning the tap on was no big deal': the gassing doctors during the Nazi period and afterwards," in Dachau Review, vol. 2, 1990.
* Levi, Primo. The Drowned and the Saved. London: Michael Joseph, 1986 ISBN 0-7181-3063-4

== External links ==
*The Implementation of the Final Solution: The Death Camps on the Yad Vashem website
* The Holocaust History Project
* Holocaust and concentration camps information
* The Holocaust Education & Archive Research Team
* Official U.S. National Archive Footage of Nazi camps
* Belzec, Sobibor, Treblinka. Holocaust Denial and Operation Reinhard.

 



[[Enterprise]]

Enterprise (occasionally used with the archaic spelling Enterprize) may refer to:

==Economics and business==
* Any organization, including businesses, non-profits, and government agencies
* A business
* A company
* Enterprises in the Soviet Union were economic organizations responsible for production, distribution or another function (the socialist equivalent to a company in capitalism)
* Entrepreneurship, the practice of starting new organizations, particularly new businesses
* Enterprise architecture
* Enterprize Canada, a Canadian student-run entrepreneurial business plan competition and conference
* Enterprise Capital Fund, a type of venture capital in the UK
* Enterprise for High School Students, a non-profit organization
* Enterprise GP Holdings, energy holding company
* Enterprise Holdings, the parent company of Enterprise Rent-A-Car and several other car-rental agencies
* Enterprise Plc, a civil engineering and maintenance company in the United Kingdom
* Enterprise Products, natural gas and crude oil pipeline company
* Valutech Enterprises discounted electronics retail store

==Vessels==
===Watercraft===
* HMS Enterprise, any of fifteen ships of the British Royal Navy (four others did not use the HMS prefix)
* USS Enterprise, any of several ships of the United States Navy including (see List of ships of the United States Navy named Enterprise):
** (1936) Yorktown-class aircraft carrier, and the most decorated US Navy ship
** (1961), the world's first nuclear-powered aircraft carrier
** (2025), a Gerald R. Ford-class aircraft carrier scheduled to be constructed
* Enterprise (1776), a ship of the Continental Navy during the American Revolution
* Enterprise (1814), a privately owned steamboat captained by Henry Miller Shreve
* Enterprise (slave ship), an American merchant ship forced by weather into Bermuda in 1835, resulting in the liberation of most of the 78 slaves on board.
* Enterprize (1829), Australian topsail schooner used for the founding of Melbourne, Australia
** Enterprize Replica, a replica of the 1829 Enterprize
* Enterprise (1855), a 19th-century steamer on the Columbia and Fraser rivers in Northwest America
* Enterprise (1862), pioneer stern wheeler on the upper Fraser River
* Enterprise, a sailing ship caught in a storm off St. Ives, Cornwall in 1903
* SS Flying Enterprise, built in 1944 and originally commissioned as the SS Cape Kumukaki (C1-B)
* London Enterprise, an oil tanker built for London & Overseas Freighters in 1950 and scrapped c. 1974
*London Enterprise, a Panamax oil tanker built for London & Overseas Freighters in 1983
* Enterprise (dinghy), a class of sailing dinghy
* Discoverer Enterprise, deepwater drillship that gives its name to the Enterprise class of large drillships

===Aircraft===
* Enterprise (balloon), a hot air balloon used by the Union Army during the American Civil War
* Goodyear L class blimp Enterprise, World War II US Navy designation L-5

===Spacecraft===
* Space Shuttle Enterprise
* VSS Enterprise, the inaugural vessel of the Virgin Galactic suborbital tourism fleet
* IXS Enterprise, NASA Concept "Warp" ship

==Computing==
* Enterprise (computer), an 8-bit home computer from the UK, also known as Flan and Elan
* Enterprise software, business oriented computer application/software
* Enterprise storage, the storage, protection, and retrieval of data in large-scale environments
* Enterprise resource planning (ERP), an Information Technology term referring to a hardware or software system that serves all departments within an enterprise
* Windows 8 Enterprise, a marketing edition of Windows 8

==Geographic locations==
===United States===
* Enterprise, Alabama, a city
* Enterprise, Amador County, California, an unincorporated community
* Enterprise, Butte County, California, a former settlement
* Enterprise, Lake County, California, an unincorporated community
* Enterprise, Shasta County, California, an unincorporated community
* Enterprise, Florida, an unincorporated community
* Enterprise, Kansas, a city
* Enterprise, Minnesota, an abandoned townsite
* Enterprise, Mississippi, a town
* Enterprise, Nevada, an unincorporated census-designated place
* Enterprise, Oregon, a city
* Enterprise, Utah, a city
**Enterprise, Morgan County, Utah, a census-designated place
*Enterprise, Wirt County, West Virginia
* Enterprise, Wisconsin, a town
* Enterprise (community), Wisconsin, an unincorporated community
* Enterprise Township, Michigan
* Enterprise Township, Jackson County, Minnesota
* Enterprise Township, Valley County, Nebraska

===Canada===
* Enterprise, Northwest Territories, a hamlet
* Enterprise, a hamlet in the township of Stone Mills, Ontario
* Enterprise No. 142, Saskatchewan, a rural municipality

===Guyana===
* Enterprise, Guyana, a village

==In fiction==
* Trek: Enterprise|Enterprise], later Star Trek: Enterprise, a television series running 20012005
* Enterprise, a ship in the game Final Fantasy III
* Enterprise, an airship in the game Final Fantasy IV
* Enterprise, a starship in H. Beam Piper's novel Space Viking
* Enterprise, the title ship in the 19591961 television series Riverboat
* Starship Enterprise, any of several ships by that name in the Star Trek fictional universe
**Enterprise (NX-01), the main setting of Star Trek: Enterprise
**USS Enterprise (NCC-1701), the main setting of the original Star Trek television series and several Star Trek films
**USS Enterprise (NCC-1701-A), the main setting of the fifth and sixth Star Trek films
**USS Enterprise (NCC-1701-B), launched at the start of Star Trek: Generations
**USS Enterprise (NCC-1701-C), appears in the Star Trek: Next Generation episode "Yesterday's Enterprise"
**USS Enterprise (NCC-1701-D), the main setting of Star Trek: The Next Generation
**USS Enterprise (NCC-1701-E), the main setting for the films Star Trek: First Contact, Star Trek: Insurrection, and Star Trek Nemesis
**USS Enterprise (NCC-1701-F), a non-player ship of the Star Trek Online Massive Multiplayer Roleplaying Video Game
**USS Enterprise (NCC-1701-J), appears in the episode of Star Trek: Enterprise "Azati Prime" in the 26th century

==Newspapers==
* The Press-Enterprise, a former newspaper published 1885-1983, now merged into currently published paper in Riverside, California
* High Point Enterprise, a newspaper published in High Point, North Carolina
* The Beaumont Enterprise, a newspaper published in Beaumont, Texas
* The Enterprise (Brockton), a newspaper published in Brockton, Massachusetts

==Other==
* Enterprise (ride), an amusement ride
* Enterprise (train service), an inter-city train service between Belfast and Dublin
* Social enterprise
* Enterprise Records, a record label
* USS Enterprise (BLDG 7115), a U.S. Navy Recruit Barracks named in honor of the Navy's Enterprise ships

==See also==
* Entreprise, a variant spelling and the name of a sailing vessel
* Entreprenant, the French word for Enterprising and the name of several sailing vessels



[[Excommunication]]

An imaginative depiction of Pope Gregory IX excommunicating Emperor Frederick II.

Details of the excommunication penalty at the foundling wheel. Venice, Italy.

Excommunication is an institutional act of religious censure used to deprive, suspend, or limit membership in a religious community or (as in the present discipline of the Catholic Church) to restrict certain rights within it, such as the reception to Holy Communion. Some Protestants use the term disfellowship instead.

The word excommunication means putting a specific individual or group out of communion. In some religions, excommunication includes spiritual condemnation of the member or group. Excommunication may involve banishment, shunning, and shaming, depending on the religion, the offense that caused excommunication, or the rules or norms of the religious community. The grave act is often remedied by sincere penance, public recantation, sometimes through the Sacrament of Confession, piety, and/or through mortification of the flesh.

__TOC__

== Christianity ==
In Jesus says that an offended person should first draw the offender's fault to the offender's attention privately; then, if the offender refuses to listen, bring one or two others, that there may be more than a single witness to the charge; next, if the offender still refuses to listen, bring the matter before the church, and if the offender refuses to listen to the church, treat the offender as "a Gentile and a tax collector".

 directs the church at Corinth to excommunicate a man for sexual immorality (incest). In , the man, having repented and suffered the "punishment by the majority" is restored to the church. Fornication is not the only ground for excommunication, according to the apostle: in , Paul says, "I am writing to you not to associate with anyone who bears the name of brother if he is guilty of sexual immorality or greed, or is an idolater, reviler, drunkard, or swindler - not even to eat with such a one."

In , Paul writes to "mark those who cause divisions contrary to the doctrine which ye have learned and avoid them." Also, in , the writer advises believers that "whosoever transgresseth, and abideth not in the doctrine of Christ, hath not God. He that abideth in the doctrine of Christ, he hath both the Father and the Son. If there come any unto you, and bring not this doctrine, receive him not into your house residence or abode, or "inmates of the house" (family), neither bid him God speed: for he that biddeth him God speed is partaker of his evil deeds."

=== Roman Catholic Church ===

Former German Catholic priest Martin Luther was excommunicated by Pope Leo X in 1520.

Plaque on exterior of the Chiesa della Piet in Venice, the church of the orphanage. This is where the foundling wheel once stood. The inscription declares, citing a 12 November 1548 papal bull of Pope Paul III, that God inflicts "maledictions and excommunications" on all who abandon a child of theirs whom they have the means to rear, and that they cannot be absolved unless they first refund all expenses incurred.

In Roman Catholic canon law, excommunication is a censure and thus a "medicinal penalty" intended to invite the person to change behavior or attitude, repent, and return to full communion. It is not an "expiatory penalty" designed to make satisfaction for the wrong done, much less a "vindictive penalty" designed solely to punish.

Excommunication can be either latae sententiae (automatic, incurred at the moment of committing the offense for which canon law imposes that penalty) or ferendae sententiae (incurred only when imposed by a legitimate superior or declared as the sentence of an ecclesiastical court). 

Excommunication was once considered to sever someone from the Catholic Church. The Code of Canon Law of 1917 maintained that disposition, declaring that excommunication excluded a person from the communion of the faithful. 1917 Code of Canon Law, canon 2257 1 The 1983 revision of the Code of Canon Law removed this statement from the account of the effects of excommunication in the Catholic Church. 1<983 Code of Canon Law, canon 1331 1 Thus in current Catholic canon law, excommunicated Catholics - unless they cease for some other reason to belong to the Church - are still Catholics and remain bound by obligations such as attending Mass, even though they are barred from receiving the Eucharist and from taking an active part in the liturgy (reading, bringing the offerings, etc.). "Even those who have joined another religion, have become atheists or agnostics, or have been excommunicated remain Catholics. Excommunicates lose rights, such as the right to the sacraments, but they are still bound to the obligations of the law; their rights are restored when they are reconciled through the remission of the penalty." New Commentary on the Code of Canon Law, ed. by John P. Beal, James A. Coriden, Thomas J. Green, Paulist Press, 2000, p. 63 (commentary on canon 11). They are urged to retain a relationship with the Church, as the goal is to encourage them to repent and return to active participation in its life.

All excommunicated persons are barred from participating in the liturgy in a ministerial capacity (e.g., as a reader if a layperson or as a deacon or priest if a clergyman) and from receiving the Eucharist or other sacraments, but they are not barred from attending these (e.g., an excommunicated person may not receive the Eucharist but is not barred from attending Mass). They are also forbidden to exercise any ecclesiastical office or the like. 

These are the only effects for those who have incurred a latae sententiae excommunication. For instance, a priest may not refuse Communion publicly to those who are under an automatic excommunication, as long as it has not been officially declared to have been incurred by them, even if the priest knows that they have incurred it. On the other hand, if the priest knows that excommunication has been imposed on someone or that an automatic excommunication has been declared (and is no longer merely an undeclared automatic excommunication), he is forbidden to administer Holy Communion to that person. (see canon 915).

Other effects of an excommunication that has been imposed or declared are:
# an obligation on others to prevent the excommunicated person from acting in a ministerial capacity in the liturgy or, if this proves impossible, to suspend the liturgical service;
# invalidity of acts of ecclesiastical governance by the excommunicated person. 

In the Catholic Church, excommunication is normally resolved by a declaration of repentance, profession of the Creed (if the offense involved heresy), or renewal of obedience (if that was a relevant part of the offending act) by the excommunicated person and the lifting of the censure (absolution) by a priest or bishop empowered to do this. "The absolution can be in the internal (private) forum only, or also in the external (public) forum, depending on whether scandal would be given if a person were privately absolved and yet publicly considered unrepentant." Since excommunication excludes from reception of the sacraments, absolution from excommunication is required before absolution can be given from the sin that led to the censure. In many cases, the whole process takes place on a single occasion in the privacy of the confessional. For some more serious wrongdoings, absolution from excommunication is reserved to a bishop, another ordinary, or even the Pope. These can delegate a priest to act on their behalf.

Before the 1983 Code of Canon Law, there were two degrees of excommunication: The excommunicate was either a vitandus (shunned, literally "to be avoided" by other Catholics), or a toleratus (tolerated, allowing Catholics to continue to have business and social relationships with the excommunicated person). This distinction no longer applies.

In the Middle Ages, formal acts of public excommunication were sometimes accompanied by a ceremony wherein a bell was tolled (as for the dead), the Book of the Gospels was closed, and a candle snuffed out  hence the idiom "to condemn with bell, book, and candle." Such ceremonies are not held today.

Interdict is a censure similar to excommunication. It too excludes from ministerial functions in public worship and from reception of the sacraments, but not from the exercise of governance. 

=== Eastern Orthodox churches ===
In the Eastern Orthodox churches, excommunication is the exclusion of a member from the Eucharist. It is not expulsion from the churches. This can happen for such reasons as not having confessed within that year; excommunication can also be imposed as part of a penitential period. It is generally done with the goal of restoring the member to full communion. The Orthodox churches do have a means of expulsion, by pronouncing anathema, but this is reserved only for acts of serious and unrepentant heresy. The Moscow Patriarchate declared Sergius Bulgakov a heretic in this fashion because of his pronouncements on Sancta Sofia being something like a fourth dimension to the Trinity.

=== Lutheranism ===
Although Lutheranism technically has an excommunication process, some denominations and congregations do not use it. The Lutheran definition, in its earliest and most technical form, would be found in Martin Luther's Small Catechism, defined beginning at Questions No. 277-283, in "The Office of Keys." Luther endeavored to follow the process that Jesus laid out in the 18th chapter of the Gospel of Matthew. According to Luther, excommunication requires:

::1. The confrontation between the subject and the individual against whom he has sinned.
::2. If this fails, the confrontation between the subject, the harmed individual, and two or three witnesses to such acts of sin.
::3. The informing of the pastor of the subject's congregation.
::4. A confrontation between the pastor and the subject.

Beyond this, there is little agreement. Many Lutheran denominations operate under the premise that the entire congregation (as opposed to the pastor alone) must take appropriate steps for excommunication, and there are not always precise rules, to the point where individual congregations often set out rules for excommunicating laymen (as opposed to clergy). For example, churches may sometimes require that a vote must be taken at Sunday services; some congregations require that this vote be unanimous. 

The Lutheran process, though rarely used, has created unusual situations in recent years due to its somewhat democratic excommunication process. One example was an effort to get serial killer Dennis Rader excommunicated from his denomination (the Evangelical Lutheran Church in America) by individuals who tried to "lobby" Rader's fellow church members into voting for his excommunication. http://www.dakotavoice.com/200508/20050816_5.asp 

=== Anglican Communion ===

==== Church of England ====
The Church of England does not have any specific canons regarding how or why a member can be excommunicated, although it has a canon according to which ecclesiastical burial may be refused to someone "declared excommunicate for some grievous and notorious crime and no man to testify to his repentance". 

==== Episcopal Church of the United States of America ====
The ECUSA is in the Anglican Communion, and shares many canons with the Church of England which would determine its policy on excommunication.

=== Reformed view ===
In the Reformed churches, excommunication has generally been seen as the culmination of church discipline, which is one of the three marks of the Church. The Westminster Confession of Faith sees it as the third step after "admonition" and "suspension from the sacrament of the Lord's Supper for a season." Westminster Confession of Faith, xxx.4. Yet, John Calvin argues in his Institutes of the Christian Religion that church censures do not "consign those who are excommunicated to perpetual ruin and damnation," but are designed to induce repentance, reconciliation and restoration to communion. Calvin notes, "though ecclesiastical discipline does not allow us to be on familiar and intimate terms with excommunicated persons, still we ought to strive by all possible means to bring them to a better mind, and recover them to the fellowship and unity of the Church." John Calvin, Institutes of the Christian Religion, IV.12.10. 

At least one modern Reformed theologian argues that excommunication is not the final step in the disciplinary process. Jay E. Adams argues that in excommunication, the offender is still seen as a brother, but in the final step they become "as the heathen and tax collector" (Matthew 18:17). Adams writes, "Nowhere in the Bible is excommunication (removal from the fellowship of the Lord's Table, according to Adams) equated with what happens in step 5; rather, step 5 is called "removing from the midst, handing over to Satan," and the like." Jay E. Adams, Handbook of Church Discipline (Grand Rapids: Zondervan, 1986), 74. 

Former Yale president and theologian, Jonathan Edwards, addresses the notion of excommunication as "removal from the fellowship of the Lord's Table" in his treatise entitled "The Nature and End of Excommunication". Edwards argues that "Particularly, we are forbidden such a degree of associating ourselves with (excommunicants), as there is in making them our guests at our tables, or in being their guests at their tables; as is manifest in the text, where we are commanded to have no company with them, no not to eat". Edwards insists, "That this respects not eating with them at the Lords supper, but a common eating, is evident by the words, that the eating here forbidden, is one of the lowest degrees of keeping company, which are forbidden. Keep no company with such a one, saith the apostle, no not to eat  as much as to say, no not in so low a degree as to eat with him. But eating with him at the Lords supper, is the very highest degree of visible Christian communion. Who can suppose that the apostle meant this: Take heed and have no company with a man, no not so much as in the highest degree of communion that you can have? Besides, the apostle mentions this eating as a way of keeping company which, however, they might hold with the heathen. He tells them, not to keep company with fornicators. Then he informs them, he means not with fornicators of this world, that is, the heathens; but, saith he, if any man that is called a brother be a fornicator, etc. with such a one keep no company, no not to eat. This makes it most apparent, that the apostle doth not mean eating at the Lords table; for so, they might not keep company with the heathens, any more than with an excommunicated person."

===Anabaptist tradition===
When believers were baptized and taken into membership of the church by Anabaptists, it was not only done as symbol of cleansing of sin but was also done as a public commitment to identify with Jesus Christ and to conform one's life to the teaching and example of Jesus as understood by the church. Practically, that meant membership in the church entailed a commitment to try to live according to norms of Christian behavior widely held by the Anabaptist tradition.

In the ideal, discipline in the Anabaptist tradition requires the church to confront a notoriously erring and unrepentant church member, first directly in a very small circle and, if no resolution is forthcoming, expanding the circle in steps eventually to include the entire church congregation. If the errant member persists without repentance and rejects even the admonition of the congregation, that person is excommunicated or excluded from church membership. Exclusion from the church is recognition by the congregation that this person has separated himself or herself from the church by way of his or her visible and unrepentant sin. This is done ostensibly as a final resort to protect the integrity of the church. When this occurs, the church is expected to continue to pray for the excluded member and to seek to restore him or her to its fellowship. There was originally no inherent expectation to shun (completely sever all ties with) an excluded member, however differences regarding this very issue led to early schisms between different Anabaptist leaders and those who followed them.

====Amish====
Jakob Ammann, founder of the Amish sect, believed that the shunning of those under the ban should be systematically practiced among the Swiss Anabaptists as it was in the north and as was outlined in the Dordrecht Confession. Ammann's uncompromising zeal regarding this practice was one of the main disputes that led to the schism between the Anabaptist groups that became the Amish and those that eventually would be called Mennonite. Recently more moderate Amish groups have become less strict in their application of excommunication as a discipline. This has led to splits in several communities, an example of which is the Swartzetruber Amish who split from the main body of Old Order Amish because of the latter's practice of lifting the ban from members who later join other churches. In general, the Amish will excommunicate baptized members for failure to abide by their Ordnung (church rules) as it is interpreted by the local Bishop if certain repeat violations of the Ordnung occur.

Excommunication among the Old Order Amish results in shunning or the Meidung, the severity of which depends on many factors, such as the family, the local community as well as the type of Amish. Some Amish communities cease shunning after one year if the person joins another church later on, especially if it is another Mennonite church. At the most severe, other members of the congregation are prohibited almost all contact with an excommunicated member including social and business ties between the excommunicant and the congregation, sometimes even marital contact between the excommunicant and spouse remaining in the congregation or family contact between adult children and parents.

====Mennonites====
In the Mennonite Church excommunication is rare and is carried out only after many attempts at reconciliation and on someone who is flagrantly and repeatedly violating standards of behavior that the church expects. Occasionally excommunication is also carried against those who repeatedly question the church's behavior and/or who genuinely differ with the church's theology as well, although in almost all cases the dissenter will leave the church before any discipline need be invoked. In either case, the church will attempt reconciliation with the member in private, first one on one and then with a few church leaders. Only if the church's reconciliation attempts are unsuccessful, the congregation formally revokes church membership. Members of the church generally pray for the excluded member.

Some regional conferences (the Mennonite counterpart to dioceses of other denominations) of the Mennonite Church have acted to expel member congregations that have openly welcomed non-celibate homosexuals as members. This internal conflict regarding homosexuality has also been an issue for other moderate denominations, such as the American Baptists and Methodists.

The practice among Old Order Mennonite congregations is more along the lines of Amish, but perhaps less severe typically. An Old Order member who disobeys the Ordnung (church regulations) must meet with the leaders of the church. If a church regulation is broken a second time there is a confession in the church. Those who refuse to confess are excommunicated. However upon later confession, the church member will be reinstated. An excommunicated member is placed under the ban. This person is not banned from eating with their own family. Excommunicated persons can still have business dealings with church members and can maintain marital relations with a marriage partner, who remains a church member.

====Hutterites====
The separatist, communal, and self-contained Hutterites also use excommunication and shunning as form of church discipline. Since Hutterites have communal ownership of goods, the effects of excommunication could impose a hardship upon the excluded member and family leaving them without employment income and material assets such as a home. However, often arrangements are made to provide material benefits to the family leaving the colony such as an automobile and some transition funds for rent, etc. One Hutterite colony in Manitoba (Canada) had a protracted dispute when leaders attempted to force the departure of a group that had been excommunicated but would not leave. About a dozen lawsuits in both Canada and the United States were filed between the various Hutterite factions and colonies concerning excommunication, shunning, the legitimacy of leadership, communal property rights, and fair division of communal property when factions have separated.

=== The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ===

The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints (LDS Church) practices excommunication as penalty for those who commit serious sins, i.e., actions that significantly impair the name or moral influence of the church or pose a threat to other people. According to the church leadership Handbook, the purposes of church discipline are (1) to save the souls of transgressors, (2) to protect the innocent, and (3) to safeguard the purity, integrity, and good name of the church.

The LDS Church also practices the lesser sanctions of private counsel and caution, informal probation, formal probation, and disfellowshipment.

Disfellowshipped is used for serious sins that do not rise to the level of excommunication. Disfellowshipment denies some privileges but does not include a loss of church membership. Once disfellowshipped, persons may not take the sacrament or enter church temples, nor may they offer public prayers or sermons. Disfellowshipped persons may continue to attend most church functions and are permitted to wear temple garments, pay tithes and offerings, and participate in church classes if their conduct is orderly. Disfellowshipment typically lasts for one year, after which one may be reinstated as a member in good standing.

In the more grievous or recalcitrant cases, excommunication becomes a disciplinary option. Excommunication is generally reserved for what are seen as the most serious sins, including committing serious crimes such as murder, child abuse, and incest; committing adultery; involvement in or teaching of polygamy; involvement in homosexual conduct; apostasy; participation in an abortion; teaching false doctrine; or openly criticizing church leaders. A 2006 revision to the Handbook states that formally joining another church constitutes apostasy and is an excommunicable offense; however, merely attending another church does not constitute apostasy.

An excommunication can occur only after a formal disciplinary council. The procedure followed by a church disciplinary council is described in church handbooks and the Doctrine and Covenants Formerly called a "church court," the councils were renamed to avoid focusing on guilt and instead to emphasize the availability of repentance.

The decision to excommunicate a Melchizedek priesthood holder is generally the province of the leadership of a stake. In such a disciplinary council, the stake presidency and stake high council attend. The twelve members of the high council are split in half: one group represents the member in question and is charged with "prevent insult or injustice"; the other group represents the church as a whole. The member under scrutiny is invited to attend the disciplinary proceedings, but the council can go forward without him. In making a decision, the leaders of the high council consult with the stake presidency, but the decision about which discipline is necessary is the stake president's alone. It is possible to appeal a decision of a stake disciplinary council to the church's First Presidency.

For females and for male members not initiated into the Melchizedek priesthood, a ward disciplinary council is held. In such cases, a bishop determines whether excommunication or a lesser sanction is warranted. He does this in consultation with his two counselors, with the bishop making the final determination after prayer. The decision of a ward disciplinary council can be appealed to the stake president.

The following list of variables serves as a general set of guidelines for when excommunication or lesser action may be warranted, beginning with those more likely to result in severe sanction:

#Violation of covenants: Covenants are made in conjunction with specific ordinances in the LDS Church. Violated covenants that might result in excommunication are usually those surrounding marriage covenants, temple covenants, and priesthood covenants.
#Position of trust or authority: The person's position in the church hierarchy factors into the decision. It is considered more serious when a sin is committed by an area seventy; a stake, mission, or temple president; a bishop; a patriarch; or a full-time missionary.
#Repetition: Repetition of a sin is more serious than a single instance.
#Magnitude: How often, how many individuals were impacted, and who is aware of the sin factor into the decision.
#Age, maturity, and experience: Those who are young in age, or immature in their understanding, are typically afforded leniency.
#Interests of the innocent: How the discipline will impact innocent family members may be considered.
#Time between transgression and confession: If the sin was committed in the distant past, and there has not been repetition, leniency may be considered.
#Voluntary confession: If a person voluntarily confesses the sin, leniency is suggested.
#Evidence of repentance: Sorrow for sin, and demonstrated commitment to repentance, as well as faith in Jesus Christ all play a role in determining the severity of discipline.

Notices of excommunication may be made public, especially in cases of apostasy, where members could be misled; however, the specific reasons for individual excommunications are typically kept confidential and are seldom made public by church leadership.

Those who are excommunicated lose their church membership and the right to partake of the sacrament. Such persons are usually allowed to attend church meetings but participation is limited: they cannot offer public prayers or preach sermons and cannot enter temples. Excommunicated members are also barred from wearing or purchasing temple garments and from paying tithes. Excommunicated members may be re-baptized after a waiting period and sincere repentance, as judged by a series of interviews with church leaders. 

Some critics have charged that LDS Church leaders have used the threat of excommunication to silence or punish church members and researchers who disagree with established policy and doctrine, who study or discuss controversial subjects, or who may be involved in disputes with local, stake leaders or general authorities; see, e.g., Brian Evenson, a former BYU professor and writer whose fiction came under criticism from BYU officials and LDS Leadership. "BYU Professor Under Fire for Violent Book", Sunstone, August 1995. Evenson wrote: "I had a strong defense for my position writing fiction, but as I met with administrators, including President Rex Lee and Provost (now General Authority) Bruce Hafen, it became clear that they weren't interested in hearing why I was writing; they were interested in getting me to stop writing." Evenson, Brian. "When Religion Encourages Abuse: Writing Father of Lies." First published in The Event, 8 October 1998, p. 5., accessed 15 November 2012 "Report: Academic Freedom and Tenure: Brigham Young University", Academe, SeptemberOctober 1997 Another notable case of excommunication from the LDS Church was the "September Six," a group of intellectuals and professors, five of whom were excommunicated and the sixth disfellowshipped.

However, church policy dictates that local leaders are responsible for excommunication, without influence from church headquarters. The church thus argues that this policy is evidence against any systematic persecution of scholars.

=== Jehovah's Witnesses ===

Jehovah's Witnesses practice something similar to excommunication, using the term "disfellowshipping", in cases where, it is believed, a member has unrepentantly committed one or more of several documented "serious sins". 

The verses of Scripture that Witnesses appeal to for expelling unrepentant believers is 1 Corinthians 5:11-13 and 2 John 10, where it says "quit mixing in company with anyone called a brother that is a fornicator or greedy person or an idolater or a reviler or a drunkard or an extortioner, not even eating with such a man....remove the wicked man from your midst" and "never receive him in your home or say a greeting to him." They interpret this to mean that any baptized believer who engages in "gross sins", mentioned in the Bible is, to be expelled from the congregation and shunned.

When a member confesses to or is accused of a serious sin, a judicial committee of at least three elders is formed. This committee investigates the case and determines the magnitude of the sin committed. If the person is deemed guilty of a disfellowshipping offence, the committee then decides, on the basis of the person's attitude and "works befitting repentance" (), whether the person is to be considered repentant. The "works" may include trying to correct the wrong, making apologies to any offended individuals, and compliance with earlier counsel. If deemed guilty but repentant, the person is not disfellowshipped but is formally reproved and has restrictions imposed, which preclude the individual from various activities such as presenting talks, offering public prayers or making comments at meetings.

If the person is deemed guilty and unrepentant, he or she will be disfellowshipped. Unless an appeal is made within seven days, the disfellowshipping is made formal by an announcement at the congregation's next Service Meeting. Appeals are granted to determine if procedural errors are felt to have occurred that may have affected the outcome.

Disfellowshipping is a severing of friendly relationships between all Jehovah's Witnesses and the one disfellowshipped. Interaction with extended family is typically restricted to a minimum, such as presence at the reading of wills and providing essential care for the elderly. Within a household, family contact and marital intimacies may continue, but without spiritual fellowship such as family Bible study and religious discussions. Parents of disfellowshipped minors living in the family home may continue to attempt to convince the child about the religion's teachings. Jehovah's Witnesses believe that this form of discipline encourages the disfellowshipped individual to conform to biblical standards and prevents the person from influencing other members of the congregation. Along with breaches of the Witnesses' moral code, openly disagreeing with the teachings Jehovah's Witnesses is considered grounds for shunning. These persons are labeled as an "apostate", w06 1/15 pp. 21-25 - The Watchtower2006 and are described in Watch Tower Society literature as "mentally diseased". The Watchtower, 7/11 Descriptions of "apostates" appearing in the Witnesses literature have been the subject of investigation in the UK to determine if they violate religious hatred laws. Sociologist Andrew Holden claims many Witnesses who would otherwise defect because of disillusionment with the organization and its teachings, retain affiliation out of fear of being shunned and losing contact with friends and family members. Pratt, International Standard Bible Encyclopedia, 1:192. Shunning employs what is known as relational aggression in psychological literature. When used by church members and member-spouse parents against excommunicant parents it contains elements of what psychologists call parental alienation. Extreme shunning may cause trauma to the shunned (and to their dependents) similar to what is studied in the psychology of torture. 

Disassociation is a form of shunning where a member expresses verbally or in writing that they do not wish to be associated with Jehovah's Witnesses, rather than for having committed any specific 'sin'. Watchtower 1/15/82 p. 31 Questions From Readers | "It would be best if he did this in a brief letter to the elders, but even if he unequivocally states orally that he is renouncing his standing as a Witness, the elders can deal with the matter.1 John 2:19." Elders may also decide that an individual has disassociated, without any formal statement by the individual, by their actions, such as joining another religion Watchtower 10/15/86 p. 31 Questions From Readers | " the person no longer wants to have anything to do with Jehovahs people and is determined to remain in a false religion? They would then simply announce to the congregation that such one has disassociated himself and thus is no longer one of Jehovahs Witnesses. or military organization. Watchtower 1/15/82 p. 31 Questions From Readers | "The second situation involves a person who renounces his standing in the congregation by joining a secular organization whose purpose is contrary to counsel such as that found at Isaiah 2:4,  neither will they learn war anymore." Individuals who are deemed by the elders to have disassociated are given no right of appeal. Kingdom Ministry 8/02 p. 3 par. 1 Display Christian Loyalty When a Relative Is Disfellowshipped | "the principles of which apply equally to those who are disfellowshipped and to those who disassociate themselves." Watchtower 4/15/88 p. 27 par. 10 Discipline That Can Yield Peaceable Fruit | "Christians refuse to fellowship with someone who has been expelled for unrepentant sin By also avoiding persons who have deliberately disassociated themselves, 

Each year, congregation elders are instructed to consider meeting with disfellowshipped individuals to determine changed circumstances and encourage them to pursue reinstatement. Watchtower 8/15/92 p. 31 A Step on the Way Back | "Thus, beginning in September the elders in each congregation will review the names of those in the territory who are disfellowshipped and will arrange to visit all whom they feel might respond." Reinstatement is not automatic after a certain time period, nor is there a minimum duration; disfellowshipped persons may talk to elders at any time but must apply in writing to be considered for reinstatement into the congregation. Watchtower 11/15/06 pp. 27-28 par. 9 Always Accept Jehovahs Discipline | "Repentance is a very important factor in connection with reinstatement into the Christian congregation. A disfellowshipped person is not automatically accepted back into the congregation after a certain amount of time has passed. Before he can be reinstated, his heart condition must undergo a great change. He must come to realize the gravity of his sin and the reproach he brought upon Jehovah and the congregation. The sinner must repent, pray earnestly for forgiveness, and conform to Gods righteous requirements. When requesting reinstatement, he should be able to give evidence that he has repented and is producing works that befit repentance.Acts 26:20." Watchtower 4/15/91 p. 21 par. 6 Imitate Gods Mercy Today | "In time he may seek reinstatement in the clean congregation. When elders then meet with him, they will try to determine whether he has repented and left his sinful course. (Matthew 18:18) If that is the case, he may be reinstated, in line with the pattern at 2 Corinthians 2:5-8." Elders consider each case individually, and are instructed to ensure "that sufficient time has passed for the disfellowshipped person to prove that his profession of repentance is genuine." A judicial committee meets with the individual to determine their repentance, and if this is established, the person is reinstated into the congregation and may participate with the congregation in their formal ministry (such as house-to-house preaching), "Our Kingdom Ministry"December 1974, | "Question Box" |  Watch Tower Bible and Tract Society of Pennsylvania but is prohibited from commenting at meetings or holding any privileges for a period set by the judicial committee. If possible, the same judicial committee members who disfellowshipped the individual are selected for the reinstatement hearing. If the applicant is in a different area, the person will meet with a local judicial committee that will communicate with either the original judicial committee if available or a new one in the original congregation.

A Witness who has been formally reproved or reinstated cannot be appointed to any special privilege of service for at least one year. Serious sins involving child sex abuse permanently disqualify the sinner from appointment to any congregational privilege of service, regardless of whether the sinner was convicted of any secular crime. Watchtower 1/1/97 p. 29 Let Us Abhor What Is Wicked | "For the protection of our children, a man known to have been a child molester does not qualify for a responsible position in the congregation." 

===Christadelphians===
Isabelo de los Reyes, founder of the Aglipayan Church was excommunicated by Pope Leo XIII in 1903 as a schismatic apostate.
Similarly to many groups having their origins in the 1830s Restoration Movement, In fact, the earliest use of the term in their literature refers to the disfellowship of their founder, John Thomas, by Alexander Campbell: The Christadelphian 10:103 (January 1873). 32. Christadelphians call their form of excommunication "disfellowshipping", though they do not practice "shunning". Disfellowshipping can occur for moral reasons, changing beliefs, or (in some ecclesias) for not attending communion (referred to as "the emblems" or "the breaking of bread"). A distinction can be detected between these three reasons in that which of the three applies is usually made clear in the notice which the ecclesia will post in the Ecclesial News section of The Christadelphian. This is since one purpose is to make other ecclesias aware lest the member try to circumvent the suspension by simply going to another ecclesia. See "Christadelphians, fellowship" in Bryan R. Wilson, Sects and Society, University of California, 1961 

In such cases, the person involved is usually required to discuss the issues. The expected practice is to discuss first with 2 or 3 witnesses, as per Matt.18:15-20. See Wilson, op.cit. If they do not conform, the church ('meeting' or 'ecclesia') is recommended by the management committee ("Arranging Brethren") to vote on disfellowshipping the person. These procedures were formulated 1863 onwards by early Christadelphians, and then in 1883 codified by Robert Roberts in A Guide to the Formation and Conduct of Christadelphian Ecclesias (colloquially "The Ecclesial Guide"). Robert Roberts, A Guide to the Formation and Conduct of Christadelphian Ecclesias (Birmingham: 1883). Available online However Christadelphians justify and apply their practice not only from this document but also from passages such as the exclusion in 1Co.5 and recovery in 2Co.2. See discussion of 1Co.5 in Ashton, M. The challenge of Corinthians, Birmingham, 2006; previously serialised in The Christadelphian 2002-2003 http://www.thechristadelphian.com 

Christadelphians typically avoid the term "excommunication" which many associate with the Catholic Church; and may feel the word carries implications they do not agree with, such as undue condemnation and punishment, as well as failing to recognise the remedial intention of the measure. The term "withdraw from" is frequently found as a synonym for "disfellowship" in older Christadelphian ecclesial news entries, but this usage is less common today since it is now more widely realised that the term "withdraw from" in 2Th.3:6, 1Tim.6:5 is not describing the full "turn over to Satan" 1Co5:5,1Tim.1:20. See Booker G. 1 & 2 Thessalonians, Nicholls A.H.Letters to Timothy and Titus, Birmingham 

* Behavioural cases. Many cases regarding moral issues tend to involve relational matters such as marriage outside the faith, divorce and remarriage (which is considered adultery in some circumstances by some ecclesias), or homosexuality. Generally Christadelphians do not consider remarriage as adultery, but adultery is often at the root of a marriage breakup. See Reflections on Marriage and Divorce, The Christadelphian, Birmingham. Reinstatement for moral issues is determined by the ecclesia's assessment of whether the individual has "turned away" from (ceased) the course of action considered immoral by the church. This can be complex when dealing with cases of divorce and subsequent remarriage, with different positions adopted by different ecclesias, but generally within the main "Central" grouping, such cases can be accommodated. Carter, J. Marriage and Divorce, CMPA Birmingham 1955 Some minority "fellowships" do not accommodate this under any circumstances.

* Doctrinal cases. Changes of belief on what Christadelphians call "first principle" doctrines are difficult to accommodate unless the individual agrees to not teach or spread them, since the body has a documented Statement of Faith which informally serves as a basis of ecclesial membership and interecclesial fellowship. Those who are disfellowshipped for reasons of differing belief rarely return, because they are expected to conform to an understanding with which they do not agree. Holding differing beliefs on fundamental matters is considered as error and apostasy, which can limit a person's salvation. However in practice disfellowship for doctrinal reasons is now unusual e.g. News from the Ecclesias, in The Christadelphian, in a typical year (Jan.-Dec. 2006) contained only two suspensions for doctrinal reasons in the UK, both indicating that the member had already left of his/her own choice. 

In the case of adultery and divorce, the passage of time usually means a member can be restored if he or she wants to be. In the case of ongoing behaviour, cohabitation, homosexual activity, then the terms of the suspension have not been met.

The mechanics of "refellowship" follow the reverse of the original process; the individual makes an application to the "ecclesia", and the "Arranging Brethren" give a recommendation to the members who vote. Christadelphians interpret the "epitimia of the majority" 2Co.2:6 in different ways; some consider it the majority of all members, some the majority of elders. See Whittaker H.A., Second Corinthians, Biblia If the "Arranging Brethren" judge that a vote may divide the ecclesia, or personally upset some members, they may seek to find a third party ecclesia which is willing to "refellowship" the member instead. According to the Ecclesial Guide a third party ecclesia may also take the initiative to "refellowship" another meeting's member. However this cannot be done unilaterally, as this would constitute heteronomy over the autonomy of the original ecclesia's members. An exception noted in Roberts' Ecclesial Guide is where the original meeting is known for having a position out of step with other ecclesias. In practice however such cases are extremely unusual and the attempt to refellowship another ecclesia's member when the original ecclesia considers that they have not "mended their ways" may cause an interecclesial breach. The original ecclesia may notify the Christadelphian Magazine that the third party ecclesia is interfering in their own discipline of their own member, and news of refellowship will be blocked from News From the Ecclesias, and consequently the community as a whole will not recognise the refellowship. See Booker, G. Biblical Fellowship Biblia, Perry, A. Fellowship Matters Willow Books. 

===Society of Friends (Quakers)===
Among many of the Society of Friends groups (Quakers) one is read out of meeting for behaviour inconsistent with the sense of the meeting. However it is the responsibility of each meeting, quarterly meeting, and yearly meeting, to act with respect to their own members. For example, during the Vietnam War many Friends were concerned about Friend Richard Nixon's position on war which seemed at odds with their beliefs; however, it was the responsibility of Nixon's own meeting, the East Whittier Meeting of Whittier, California, to act if indeed that meeting felt the leaning. They did not. 

In the 17th century, before the founding of abolitionist societies, Avant-garde Friends who too forcefully tried to convince their coreligionists of the evils of slavery were read out of meeting. Benjamin Lay was read out of the Philadelphia Yearly Meeting for this. During the American Revolution over 400 Friends were read out of meeting for their military participation or support. 

== Buddhism ==
There is no direct equivalent to excommunication in Buddhism. However, in the Theravadan monastic community monks can be expelled from monasteries for heresy and/or other acts. In addition, the monks have four vows, called the four defeats, which are abstaining from sexual intercourse, stealing, murder, and refraining from lying about spiritual gains (e.g., having special power or ability to perform miracles). If even one is broken, the monk is automatically a layman again and can never become a monk in his or her current life.

Most Japanese Buddhist sects hold ecclesiastical authority over its followers and have their own rules for excommunicating members of the sangha, lay or bishopric. The lay Japanese Buddhist organization Ska Gakkai was excommunicated from the Nichiren Shoshu sect in 1991 (1997).

== Hinduism ==
Hinduism has been too diverse to be seen as a monolithic religion, and with a conspicuous absence of any listed dogma or ecclesia (organised church), has no concept of excommunication and hence no Hindu may be ousted from the Hindu religion, although a person may easily lose caste status for a very wide variety of infringements of caste prohibitions. This may or may not be recoverable. However, some of the modern organized sects within Hinduism may practice something equivalent to excommunication today, by ousting a person from their own sect.

In medieval and early-modern times (and sometimes even now) in South Asia, excommunication from one's caste (jati or varna) used to be practiced (by the caste-councils) and was often with serious consequences, such as abasement of the person's caste status and even throwing him into the sphere of the untouchables or bhangi. In the 19th century, a Hindu faced excommunication for going abroad, since it was presumed he would be forced to break caste restrictions and, as a result, become polluted. 

After excommunication, it would depend upon the caste-council whether they would accept any form of repentance (ritual or otherwise) or not. Such current examples of excommunication in Hinduism are often more political or social rather than religious, for example the excommunication of lower castes for refusing to work as scavengers in Tamil Nadu. 

An earlier example of excommunication in Hinduism is that of Shastri Yagnapurushdas, who voluntarily left and was later expelled from the Vadtal Gadi of the Swaminarayan Sampraday by the then Vadtal acharya in 1906. He went on to form his own institution, Bochasanwasi Swaminarayan Sanstha or BSS (now BAPS) claiming Gunatitanand Swami was the rightful spiritual successor to Swaminarayan. Page 54 

== Islam ==

Excommunication as it exists in Christian faiths does not exist in Islam. The nearest approximation is takfir, a declaration that an individual or group is kafir (or kuffar in plural), a non-believer. This does not prevent an individual from taking part in any Islamic rite or ritual, and since the matter of whether a person is kafir is a rather subjective matter, a declaration of takfir is generally considered null and void if the target refutes it or if the Islamic community in which he or she lives refuses to accept it.

Takfir has usually been practiced through the courts. More recently, cases have taken place where individuals have been considered kuffar. These decisions followed lawsuits against individuals, mainly in response to their writings that some have viewed as anti-Islamic. The most famous cases are of Salman Rushdie, Nasr Abu Zayd, and Nawal El-Saadawi. The repercussions of such cases have included divorce, since under traditional interpretations of Islamic law, Muslim women are not permitted to marry non-Muslim men.

However, takfir remains a highly contentious issue in Islam, primarily because there is no universally accepted authority in Islamic law. Indeed, according to classical commentators, the reverse seems to hold true, in that Muhammad reportedly equated the act of declaring someone a kafir itself to blasphemy if the accused individual maintained that he was a Muslim.

== Judaism ==

Cherem is the highest ecclesiastical censure in Judaism. It is the total exclusion of a person from the Jewish community. Except for cases in the Charedi community, cherem stopped existing after The Enlightenment, when local Jewish communities lost their political autonomy, and Jews were integrated into the gentile nations in which they lived. A siruv order, equivalent to a contempt of court, issued by a Rabbinical court may also limit religious participation.

==See also==
* Banishment in the Bible
* Disconnection
* Interdict

==Notes==

==References==
* Encyclopedia of American Religions, by J. Gordon Melton ISBN 0-8103-6904-4
* Ludlow, Daniel H. ed, Encyclopedia of Mormonism, Macmillan Publishing, 1992.
* Esau, Alvin J., "The Courts and the Colonies: The Litigation of Hutterite Church Disputes", Univ of British Columbia Press, 2004.
* Gruter, Margaret, and Masters Roger, Ostracism: A Social and Biological Phenomenon, (Amish) Ostracism on Trial: The Limits of Individual Rights, Gruter Institute, 1984.
* Beck, Martha N., Leaving the Saints: How I Lost the Mormons and Found My Faith, Crown, 2005.
* Stammer, Larry B., "Mormon Author Says He's Facing Excommunication", Los Angeles Times, Los Angeles, CA.: 9 December 2004. pg. A.34.
* D'anna, Lynnette, "Post-Mennonite Women Congregate to Address Abuse", Herizons, 3/1/93.
* Anonymous, "Atlanta Mennonite congregation penalized over gays", The Atlanta Journal the Atlanta Constitution, Atlanta, GA: 2 January 1999. pg. F.01.
* Garrett, Ottie, Garrett Irene, True Stories of the X-Amish: Banned, Excommunicated, Shunned, Horse Cave KY: Nue Leben, Inc., 1998.
* Garret, Ruth, Farrant Rick, Crossing Over: One Woman's Escape from Amish Life, HarperSanFrancisco, 2003.
* Hostetler, John A. (1993), Amish Society, The Johns Hopkins University Pres: Baltimore.
* MacMaster, Richard K. (1985), Land, Piety, Peoplehood: The Establishment of Mennonite Communities in America 1683-1790, Herald Press: Kitchener & Scottdale.
* Scott, Stephen (1996), An Introduction to Old Order and Conservative Mennonite Groups, Good Books: Intercourse, Pennsylvania.
* Juhnke, James, Vision, Doctrine, War: Mennonite Identity and Organization in America, 18901930, (The Mennonite Experience in America #3), Scottdale, PA, Herald Press, Pp 393, 1989.

==External links==
* Excommunication, the Ban, Church Discipline and Avoidance (from Global Anabaptist Mennonite Encyclopedia Online)
* Ostracism on Trial: The Limits of Individual Rights (Amish)
* Catholic Encyclopaedia on excommunication
* The two sides of excommunication
* Episcopal Church of America excommunication
* Jehovah's Witnesses press release regarding expulsion of child molesters

 

 



[[Electrochemical cell]]

A demonstration electrochemical cell setup resembling the Daniell cell. The two half-cells are linked by a salt bridge carrying ions between them. Electrons flow in the external circuit.

An electrochemical cell is a device capable of either deriving electrical energy from chemical reactions or facilitating chemical reactions through the introduction of electrical energy. A common example of an electrochemical cell is a standard 1.5-volt "battery". (Actually a single "Galvanic cell"; a battery properly consists of multiple cells, connected in either parallel or series pattern.)

== Half-cells ==
The Bunsen cell, invented by Robert Bunsen.
An electrochemical cell consists of two half-cells. Each half-cell consists of an electrode and an electrolyte. The two half-cells may use the same electrolyte, or they may use different electrolytes. The chemical reactions in the cell may involve the electrolyte, the electrodes, or an external substance (as in fuel cells that may use hydrogen gas as a reactant). In a full electrochemical cell, species from one half-cell lose electrons (oxidation) to their electrode while species from the other half-cell gain electrons (reduction) from their electrode. 

A salt bridge (e.g., filter paper soaked in KNO3) is often employed to provide ionic contact between two half-cells with different electrolytes, yet prevent the solutions from mixing and causing unwanted side reactions. An alternative to a salt bridge is to allow direct contact (and mixing) between the two half-cells, for example in simple electrolysis of water. 

As electrons flow from one half-cell to the other through an external circuit, a difference in charge is established. If no ionic contact were provided, this charge difference would quickly prevent the further flow of electrons. A salt bridge allows the flow of (negative) ions to maintain a steady-state charge distribution between the oxidation and reduction vessels, while keeping the contents otherwise separate. Other devices for achieving separation of solutions are porous pots and gelled solutions. A porous pot is used in the Bunsen cell (right).

=== Equilibrium reaction ===

Each half-cell has a characteristic voltage. Various choices of substances for each half-cell give different potential differences. Each reaction is undergoing an equilibrium reaction between different oxidation states of the ions: When equilibrium is reached, the cell cannot provide further voltage. In the half-cell that is undergoing oxidation, the closer the equilibrium lies to the ion/atom with the more positive oxidation state the more potential this reaction will provide. Likewise, in the reduction reaction, the closer the equilibrium lies to the ion/atom with the more negative oxidation state the higher the potential.

=== Cell potential ===

The cell potential can be predicted through the use of electrode potentials (the voltages of each half-cell). These half-cell potentials are defined relative to the assignment of 0 volts to the standard hydrogen electrode (SHE). (See table of standard electrode potentials). The difference in voltage between electrode potentials gives a prediction for the potential measured. When calculating the difference in voltage, one must first rewrite the half-cell reaction equations to obtain a balanced oxidation-reduction equation.

# Reverse the reduction reaction with the smallest potential ( to create an oxidation reaction/ overall positive cell potential)
# Half-reactions must be multiplied by integers to achieve electron balance.

Note that the cell potential does not change when the reaction is multiplied by a constant.

Cell potentials have a possible range of roughly zero to 6 volts. Cells using water-based electrolytes are usually limited to cell potentials less than about 2.5 volts, because the very powerful oxidizing and reducing agents that would be required to produce a higher cell potential tend to react with the water. Higher cell potentials are possible with cells using other solvents instead of water. For instance, lithium cells with a voltage of 3 volts are commonly available.

The cell potential depends on the concentration of the reactants, as well as their type. As the cell is discharged, the concentration of the reactants decreases, and the cell potential also decreases.

== See also ==

* Activity (chemistry)
* Cell notation
* Electrochemical potential



[[Ecdysis]]

Series of pictures showing the progression of ecdysis in the blue crab (Callinectes sapidus) Ecdysis is the moulting of the cuticula in many invertebrates. This process of moulting is the defining feature of the clade Ecdysozoa, comprising the arthropods, nematodes, velvet worms, horsehair worms, tardigrades, and Cephalorhyncha. Since the cuticula of these animals often forms an inelastic exoskeleton, it is shed during growth and a new, larger covering is formed. The remnants of the old, empty exoskeleton are called exuviae. 

After moulting, an arthropod is described as teneral, a callow; it is "fresh", pale and soft-bodied. Within one or two hours, the cuticle hardens and darkens following a tanning process similar to that of the tanning of leather. It is during this short phase that the animal expands, since growth is otherwise constrained by the rigidity of the exoskeleton. Growth of the limbs and other parts normally covered by hard exoskeleton is achieved by transfer of body fluids from soft parts before the new skin hardens. A spider with a small abdomen may be undernourished but more probably has recently undergone ecdysis. Some arthropods, especially large insects with tracheal respiration, expand their new exoskeleton by swallowing or otherwise taking in air. The maturation of the structure and colouration of the new exoskeleton might take days or weeks in a long-lived insect; this can make it difficult to identify an individual if it has recently undergone ecdysis. 

Ecdysis also allows damaged tissue and missing limbs to be regenerated or substantially re-formed. Complete regeneration may require a series of moults, the stump becoming a little larger with each moult until it is a normal, or near normal, size. 

==Etymology==

The term ecdysis comes from (), "to take off, strip off". 

==Process==

In preparation for ecdysis, the arthropod becomes inactive for a period of time, undergoing apolysis (separation of the old exoskeleton from the underlying epidermal cells). For most organisms, the resting period is a stage of preparation during which the secretion of fluid from the moulting glands of the epidermal layer and the loosening of the underpart of the cuticle occur.
Once the old cuticle has separated from the epidermis, the digesting fluid is secreted into the space in between them. However, this fluid remains inactive until the upper part of the new cuticle has been formed. At this stage, the animal is known as pharate. 
Then, by crawling movements, the animal pushes forward in the old integumentary shell, which splits down the back allowing the animal to emerge. Often, this initial crack is caused by an increase in blood pressure within the body (in combination with movement), forcing an expansion across its exoskeleton, leading to an eventual crack that allows for certain organisms such as spiders to extricate themselves.
While the old cuticle is being digested, the new layer is secreted. All cuticular structures are shed at ecdysis, including the inner parts of the exoskeleton, which includes terminal linings of the alimentary tract and of the tracheae if they are present.

==Insects==
This beetle (Harmonia axyridis) has recently eclosed (emerged). The pupal exuviae are in the background, head down, the attitude favourable for ecdysis. Its wings have filled out, but it is still a callow. It has turned head up so that its wings can dangle and thus harden in the correct form.
Each stage in the development of an insect between moults in endopterygota is called an instar, or stadium, and each stage between moults in exopterygota is called a nymph. Endopterygota tend to have few instars (45), while other insects such as Exopterygota can have anywhere up to 15 nymph stages. Endopterygota insects have more alternatives to moulting, such as expansion of the cuticle and collapse of air sacs to allow growth of internal organs.

The process of moulting in insects begins with the separation of the cuticle from the underlying epidermal cells (apolysis) and ends with the shedding of the old cuticle (ecdysis). In many of them it is initiated by an increase in the hormone ecdysone. This hormone causes:
*apolysis  the separation of the cuticle from the epidermis
*secretion of new cuticle materials beneath the old
*degradation of the old cuticle

After apolysis, moulting fluid is secreted into the space between the old cuticle and the epidermis (the exuvial space), this contains inactive enzymes which are activated only after the new epicuticle is secreted. This prevents them from digesting the new procuticle as it is laid down. The lower regions of the old cuticle  the endocuticle and mesocuticle  are then digested by the enzymes and subsequently absorbed. The exocuticle and epicuticle resist digestion and are hence shed at ecdysis.

==Spiders==
Female crab spider Synema decens, teneral after final ecdysis, still dangling from drop line, about to be mated, opisthosoma still shrunken

Spiders generally change their skin for the first time while still inside the egg sac, and the spiderling that emerges generally looks fairly recognisably like the adult. However, there may be confusion in trying to identify the species if one does not realise that it is a juvenile one is working with. Even if one does know this, it may not be possible to identify it with any confidence, since most keys refer to adult characters.

The number of moults varies, both between species and genders, but generally will be between five times and nine times before the spider reaches maturity. Not surprisingly, males generally being smaller than females, the males of many species mature faster and do not undergo ecdysis as many times as the females before maturing. 

Members of the Mygalomorphae generally are very long-lived, sometimes 20 years or more, and typically they moult annually even after they mature.

Spiders stop feeding some time before moulting, usually several days. The physiological processes of releasing the old exoskeleton from the tissues beneath typically cause various colour changes, such as darkening. If the old exoskeleton is not too thick it also may be possible to see new structures, such as setae, from outside. However, nervous contact with the old exoskeleton is maintained till a very late stage in the process.

Commonly the new, teneral exoskeleton is wrinkled because it has to accommodate a larger frame than the previous instar, while fitting into the previous exoskeleton until it has been shed. 

Most species of spiders hang from silk during the entire process, either dangling from a drop line, or fastening their claws into webbed fibres attached to a suitable base. The discarded, dried exoskeleton typically remains hanging where it was abandoned once the spider has left. 

To open the old exoskeleton, the spider generally contracts its abdomen (opisthosoma) to supply enough fluid to pump into the prosoma with sufficient pressure to crack it open along its lines of weakness. The carapace lifts off from the front, like a helmet, as its surrounding skin ruptures, but it remains attached at the back. Now the spider works its limbs free and typically winds up dangling by a new thread of silk attached to its own exuviae, which in turn hang from the original silk attachment. 

At this point the spider is a callow; it is teneral and vulnerable. As it dangles, its exoskeleton hardens and takes shape. The process may take minutes in small spiders, or some hours in the larger Mygalomorphs. Some spiders, such as some Synema species, members of the Thomisidae (crab spiders) mate while the female is still callow, during which time she is unable to eat the male. 

==Eurypterids==
Eurypterids are a group of chelicerates that became extinct in the late Permian. They underwent ecdysis in a similar manner to extant chelicerates, and most fossils are thought to be of exuviae, rather than cadavers. 

==References==

==External links==
*



[[Ebor, New South Wales]]

Ebor is a village on Waterfall Way on the Northern Tablelands, New South Wales, Australia. It is situated about 80 km east of Armidale and about a third of the way between Armidale and the coast. At the 2006 census, Ebor and the surrounding area had a population of 160. There is a post office and coffee shop, a hotel/motel and a primary school.

The surrounding district is a noted rich sheep and cattle grazing area. The main tourist attractions are Ebor Falls, Wollomombi Falls, the cool temperate rainforest walks in New England National Park and recreational trout fishing. The Dutton Trout Hatchery on Point Lookout Road was established in 1950 and is one of the largest hatcheries in the state. Visitors can see the various stages of trout development prior to their release in the mountain streams. New England County Tourist Assoc., New England County, Summerland Printers, Ballina, n.d. 

==History==
Ebor Post Office opened on 2 March 1868, closed in 1869 and reopened in 1910. 

==Climate==
Ebor is at fairly high altitude, about 1300 m and by Australian standards, has cold winters with overnight frost and occasional light snow falls. The average rain fall is 950 mm.

==References==

==External links==
* Ebor General Cemetery
* 



[[Pre-Islamic period of Afghanistan]]

Archaeological exploration of the pre-Islamic period of Afghanistan began in Afghanistan in earnest after World War II and proceeded until the late 1970s when the nation was invaded by the Soviet Union. Archaeologists and historians suggest that humans were living in Afghanistan at least 50,000 years ago, and that farming communities of the region were among the earliest in the world. Urbanized culture has existed in the land between 3000 and 2000 BC. Artifacts typical of the Paleolithic, Mesolithic, Neolithic, Bronze, and Iron ages have been found inside Afghanistan. 

Afghanistan was inhabited by the Aryan tribes and controlled by the Medes until about 500 BC when Darius the Great (Darius I) marched with his Persian army to make it part of the Achaemenid Empire. In 330 BC, Alexander the Great of Macedonia invaded the land after defeating Darius III of Persia in the Battle of Gaugamela. Much of Afghanistan became part of the Seleucid Empire followed by the Greco-Bactrian Kingdom. The area south of the Hindu Kush had been given by Seleucus I Nicator to Chandragupta Maurya and became part of the Maurya Empire. The land was inhabited by various tribes and ruled by many different kingdoms for the next two millenniums. Before the arrival of Islam in the 7th century, there were a number of religions practiced in ancient Afghanistan, including Zoroastrianism, Paganism, Buddhism and Hinduism. The Kaffirstan region, in the Hindu Kush, resisted conversion until the 1890s.

==Prehistoric era==
Louis Dupree, the University of Pennsylvania, the Smithsonian Institution and others suggest that humans were living in Afghanistan at least 50,000 years ago, and that farming communities of the region were among the earliest in the world. John Ford Shroder, University of Nebraska. Archived 2009-10-31. 

Afghanistan seems in prehistory, as well as in ancient and modern times, to have been closely connected by culture and trade with the neighbouring regions to the east, west, and north. Urban civilization, which includes modern-day Iran, Afghanistan, and Pakistan, may have begun as early as 3000 to 2000 BC. Archaeological finds indicate the possible beginnings of the Bronze Age, which would ultimately spread throughout the ancient world from Afghanistan. It is also believed that the region had early trade contacts with Mesopotamia.

==Aryans and the Medes rule (1500 BC&ndash;551 BC)==

The yellow represents the territory controlled by the Medes, also known as the Median Empire.
Between 2000&ndash;1200 BC, a branch of Indo-European-speaking tribes known as the Aryans began migrating into the region. This is part of a dispute in regards to the Aryan invasion theory. They appear to have split into old Persian peoples, Nuristani, and Indian groups at an early stage, possibly between 1500 and 1000 BC in what is today Afghanistan or much earlier as eastern remnants of the Indo-Aryans drifted much further west as with the Mitanni. The Aryans dominated the modern day plateau, while the Indo-Aryans ultimately headed towards the Indian subcontinent. The Avesta is believed to have been composed possibly as early as 1800 BC and written in ancient Ariana (Aryana), the earliest name of Afghanistan which indicates an early link with today's Iranian tribes to the west, or adjacent regions in Central Asia or northeastern Iran in the 6th century BC. Autochthonous Aryans-corr.doc Due to the similarity between early Avestan and Sanskrit (and other related early Indo-European languages such as Latin and Ancient Greek), it is believed that the split between the old Persians and Indo-Aryan tribes had taken place at least by 1000 BC. There are striking similarities between the Old Afghan language of Avestan and Sanskrit, which may support the notion that the split was contemporary with the Indo-Aryans living in Afghanistan at a very early stage. Also, the Avesta itself divides into Old and New sections and neither mention the Medes who are known to have ruled Afghanistan starting around 700 BC. This suggests an early time-frame for the Avesta that has yet to be exactly determined as most academics believe it was written over the course of centuries if not millennia. Much of the archaeological data comes from the Bactria-Margiana Archaeological Complex (BMAC and Indus Valley Civilization) that probably played a key role in early Aryanic civilization in Afghanistan.

It has also been surmised by many researchers that the Aryan prophet Zoroaster was born somewhere in ancient Aryana, possibly in the ancient northern Persia, and the timeframe of his life literally spans millennia from as early 2000 BC to as late as 600 BC. Zoroastrianism spread throughout the region alongside early pagan beliefs and centuries later Buddhism.

The Medes, a Western Persian people, arrived from what is today Kurdistan sometime around the 700s BC and came to dominate most of ancient Afghanistan. They were an early tribe that forged the first empire on the present Iranian plateau and were rivals of the Persians whom they initially dominated in the province of Fars to the south. Median domination of Afghanistan would last until the Persians challenged and ultimately replaced them from their original base in Fars in southern Iran near ancient Elam.

==Achaemenid invasion and Zoroastrianism (550 BC&ndash;331 BC)==

Arachosia, Aria and Bactria were the ancient more eastern satraps of the Achaemenid Empire that made up most of what is now Afghanistan during 500 B.C. The inhabitants of Arachosia were known as Pactyans, possibly today's Pakhtuns or Pashtuns.
The city of Bactria (which later became Balkh), is believed to have been the home of Zarathustra, who founded the Zoroastrian religion. The Avesta refers to eastern Bactria as being the home of the Zoroastrian faith, but this can be a reference to either a region in modern Afghanistan or Border line of Afghan-Pakistan. Regardless of the debate as to where Zoroaster was from, Zoroastrianism spread to become one of the world's most influential religions and became the main faith of the old Aryan people for centuries. It also remained the official religion of Persia until the defeat of the Sassanian ruler Yazdegerd IIIover a thousand years after its foundingby Muslim Arabs. In what is today southern Iran, the Persians emerged to challenge Median supremacy on the Iranian plateau. By 550 BC, the Persians had replaced Median rule with their own dominion and even began to expand past previous Median imperial borders. Both Gandhara and Kamboja Mahajanapadas of the Buddhist texts soon fell a prey to the Achaemenian Dynasty during the reign of Achaemenid, Cyrus the Great (558&ndash;530 BC), or in the first year of Darius I, marking the region or of the more Eastern provinces of the empire. According to Pliny's evidence, Cyrus the Great (Cyrus II) had destroyed Kapisa in Capiscene Naturalis Historia, VI, 25, 92 which was a Kamboja city. The former region of Gandhara and Kamboja (upper Indus) had constituted seventh satrapy of the Achaemenid Empire and annually contributed 170 talents of gold dust as a tribute to the Achaemenids.

Bactria had a special position in old Afghanistan, being the capital of a vice-kingdom. By the 4th century BC, Persian control of outlying areas and the internal cohesion of the empire had become somewhat tenuous. Although distant provinces like Bactriana had often been restless under Achaemenid rule, Bactrian troops nevertheless fought in the decisive Battle of Gaugamela in 330 BC against the advancing armies of Alexander the Great. The Achaemenids were decisively defeated by Alexander and retreated from his advancing army of Greco-Macedonians and their allies. Darius III, the last Achaemenid ruler, tried to flee to Bactria but was assassinated by a subordinate lord, the Bactrian-born Bessus, who proclaimed himself the new ruler of Persia as Artaxerxes (V). Bessus was unable to mount a successful resistance to the growing military might of Alexander's army so he fled to his native Bactria, where he attempted to rally local tribes to his side but was instead turned over to Alexander who proceeded to have him tortured and executed for having committed regicide.

==Alexander the Great to Greco-Bactrian rule (330 BC&ndash;ca. 150 BC)==

Empire of Alexander the Great
It had taken Alexander only six months to conquer Persia (Iran), but it took him nearly three years (from about 330 BC&ndash;327 BC) to subdue Afghanistan. Moving eastward from Persia, the Macedonian leader encountered fierce resistance from the local tribes of Aria (satrapy), Drangiana (now part of Afghanistan, Pakistan and Eastern Iran), Arachosia (South and Eastern Afghanistan, North-West Pakistan) and Bactria (North and Central Afghanistan).

Upon Alexander's death in 323 BC, his empire, which had never been politically consolidated, broke apart as his companions began to divide it amongst themselves. Alexander's cavalry commander, Seleucus, took nominal control of the eastern lands and founded the Seleucid dynasty. Under the Seleucids, as under Alexander, Greek colonists and soldiers colonized Bactria, roughly corresponding to modern Afghanistan's borders. However, the majority of Macedonian soldiers of Alexander the Great wanted to leave the east and return home to Greece. Later, Seleucus sought to guard his eastern frontier and moved Ionian Greeks (also known as Yavanas to many local groups) to Bactria in the 3rd century BC.

===Maurya Empire===

Bilingual edict (Greek and Aramaic) by Emperor Ashoka, from Kandahar - Afghan National Museum. (Click image for translation).
While the Diadochi were warring amongst themselves, the Mauryan Empire was developing in the northern part of the Indian subcontinent. The founder of the empire, Chandragupta Maurya, confronted a Macedonian invasion force led by Seleucus I in 305 BC and following a brief conflict, an agreement was reached as Seleucus ceded Gandhara and Arachosia (centered around ancient Kandahar) and areas south of Bagram (corresponding to the extreme south-east of modern Afghanistan) to the Mauryans. During the 120 years of the Mauryans in southern Afghanistan, Buddhism was introduced and eventually become a major religion alongside Zoroastrianism and local pagan beliefs. The ancient Grand Trunk Road was built linking what is now Kabul to various cities in the Punjab and the Gangetic Plain. Commerce, art, and architecture (seen especially in the construction of stupas) developed during this period. It reached its high point under Emperor Ashoka whose edicts, roads, and rest stops were found throughout the subcontinent. Although the vast majority of them throughout the subcontinent were written in Prakrit, Afghanistan is notable for the inclusion of 2 Greek and Aramaic ones alongside the court language of the Mauryans.

Inscriptions made by the Mauryan Emperor Ashoka, a fragment of Edict 13 in Greek, as well as a full Edict, written in both Greek and Aramaic has been discovered in Kandahar. It is said to be written in excellent Classical Greek, using sophisticated philosophical terms. In this Edict, Ashoka uses the word Eusebeia ("Piety") as the Greek translation for the ubiquitous "Dharma" of his other Edicts written in Prakrit:
:"Ten years (of reign) having been completed, King Piodasses (Ashoka) made known (the doctrine of) Piety (, Eusebeia) to men; and from this moment he has made men more pious, and everything thrives throughout the whole world. And the king abstains from (killing) living beings, and other men and those who (are) huntsmen and fishermen of the king have desisted from hunting. And if some (were) intemperate, they have ceased from their intemperance as was in their power; and obedient to their father and mother and to the elders, in opposition to the past also in the future, by so acting on every occasion, they will live better and more happily." (Trans. by G.P. Carratelli History of Afghanistan )

The last ruler in the region was probably Subhagasena (Sophagasenus of Polybius), who, in all probability, belonged to the Ashvaka (q.v.) background.

===Greco-Bactrians===

Coin of the Greco-Bactrian king Eucratides (171-145 BC)
In the middle of the 3rd century BC, an independent, Hellenistic state was declared in Bactria and eventually the control of the Seleucids and Mauryans was overthrown in western and southern Afghanistan. Graeco-Bactrian rule spread until it included a large territory which stretched from northeastern Iran in the west to the Punjab in India in the east by about 170 BC. Graeco-Bactrian rule was eventually defeated by a combination of internecine disputes that plagued Greek and Hellenized rulers to the west, continual conflict with Indian kingdoms, as well as the pressure of two groups of nomadic invaders from Central Asiathe Parthians and Sakas.

==Kushan Empire (150 BC&ndash;300 AD)==

Silver tetradrachm of Kushan king Heraios (1&ndash;30 AD) in Greco-Bactrian style, with horseman crowned by the Greek goddess of victory Nike.Greek legend: VV V -  -  "Of the Tyrant Heraios, Sanav, the Kushan" (the meaning of "Sanav" is unknown).
In the 3rd and 2nd centuries BC, the Parthians, a nomadic Iranian peoples, arrived in ancient Afghanistan. The Parthians established control in most of what is now Iran as early as the middle of the 3rd century BC; about 100 years later another Indo-European group from the norththe Tocharian Kushans (a subgroup of the tribe called the Yuezhi by the Chinese)entered the region Afghanistan and established an empire lasting almost four centuries.

The Kushan Empire spread from the Kabul River valley to defeat other Central Asian tribes that had previously conquered parts of the northern central Iranian Plateau once ruled by the Parthians. By the middle of the 1st century BC, the Kushans' base of control became Afghanistan and their empire spanned from the north of the Pamir mountains to the Ganges river valley in India. Early in the 2nd century under Kanishka, the most powerful of the Kushan rulers, the empire reached its greatest geographic and cultural breadth to become a center of literature and art. Kanishka extended Kushan control to the mouth of the Indus River on the Arabian Sea, into Kashmir, and into what is today the Chinese-controlled area north of Tibet. Kanishka was a patron of religion and the arts. It was during his reign that Buddhism, which was promoted in northern India earlier by the Mauryan emperor Ashoka (c. 260 BC&ndash;232 BC), reached its zenith in Central Asia. Though the Kushanas supported local Buddhists and Hindus as well as the worship of various local deities.

==Sassanian invasion (300&ndash;650)==

In the 3rd century, Kushan control fragmented into semi-independent kingdoms that became easy targets for conquest by the rising Iranian dynasty, the Sassanians (c. 224&ndash;561) which annexed Afghanistan by 300 AD. Sassanian control was tenuous at times as numerous challenges from Central Asian tribes led to instability and constant warfare in the region.

The disunited Kushan and Sassanian kingdoms were in a poor position to meet the threat of a new wave of nomadic, Indo-European invaders from the north. The Hephthalites (or White Huns) swept out of Central Asia around the 4th century into Bactria and to the south, overwhelming the last of the Kushan and Sassanian kingdoms. Some have speculated that the name Afghanistan land of the Afghans derives from which could be an adjective such as brave, chivlarious, valour, which was to use for the people in today's Afghanistan. Historians believe that Hepthalite control continued for a century and was marked by constant warfare with the Sassanians to the west who exerted nominal control over the region.

By the middle of the 6th century the Hephthalites were defeated in the territories north of the Amu Darya (the Oxus River of antiquity) by another group of Central Asian nomads, the Gktrks, and by the resurgent Sassanians in the lands south of the Amu Darya. It was the ruler of western Gktrks, Sijin (aka Sinjibu, Silzibul and Yandu Muchu Khan) who led the forces against the Hepthalites who were defeated at the Battle of Chach (Tashkent) and at the Battle of Bukhara.

==Kabul Shahi==

Kushano-Hephthalite kingdoms around 600 AD

The Shahi dynasties ruled portions of the Kabul Valley (in eastern Afghanistan) and the old province of Gandhara (northern Pakistan and Kashmir) from the decline of the Kushan Empire in the 3rd century to the early 9th century. Shahi Family. Encyclopdia Britannica. 2006. Encyclopdia Britannica Online. 16 October 2006. They are split into two eras the Buddhist-Shahis and the later Hindu-Shahis with the change-over occurring around 870, and ruled up until the Islamic conquest of Afghanistan.

When Xuanzang visited the region early in the 7th century, the Kabul region was ruled by a Kshatriya king, who is identified as the Shahi Khingal, and whose name has been found in an inscription found in Gardez. The Turkic Shahi regency was overthrown and replaced by a Mohyal Shahi dynasty of Brahmins who began the first phase of the Brahmana Hindu Shahi dynasty.

These Hindu kings of Kabul and Gandhara may have had links to some ruling families in neighboring Kashmir and other areas to the east. The Shahis were rulers of predominantly Buddhist, Zoroastrian, Hindu and Muslim populations and were thus patrons of numerous faiths, and various artifacts and coins from their rule have been found that display their multicultural domain. In 964 AD, the last Mohyal Shahi was succeeded by the Janjua overlord, Jayapala, of the Panduvanshi dynasty. The last Shahi emperors Jayapala, Anandapala and Tirlochanpala fought the Muslim Ghaznavids of Ghazna and were gradually defeated. Their remaining army were eventually exiled into northern India.

==Archaeological remnants==
One of the Buddhas of Bamiyan, Buddhism was widespread in the region before the Islamic conquest of Afghanistan.

Most of the Zoroastrian, Greek, Hellenistic, Buddhist, Hindu and other indigenous cultures were replaced by the coming of Islam and little influence remains in Afghanistan today. Along ancient trade routes, however, stone monuments of the once flourishing Buddhist culture did exist as reminders of the past. The two massive sandstone Buddhas of Bamyan, thirty-five and fifty-three meters high overlooked the ancient route through Bamyan to Balkh and dated from the 3rd and 5th centuries. They survived until 2001, when they were destroyed by the Taliban. In this and other key places in Afghanistan, archaeologists have located frescoes, stucco decorations, statuary, and rare objects from as far away as China, Phoenicia, and Rome, which were crafted as early as the 2nd century and bear witness to the influence of these ancient civilizations upon Afghanistan.

One of the early Buddhist schools, the Mahsghika-Lokottaravda, were known to be prominent in the area of Bamiyan. The Chinese Buddhist monk Xuanzang visited a Lokottaravda monastery in the 7th century CE, at Bamiyan, Afghanistan, and this monastery site has since been rediscovered by archaeologists. Birchbark and palm leaf manuscripts of texts in this monastery's collection, including Mahyna stras, have been discovered at the site, and these are now located in the Schyen Collection. Some manuscripts are in the Gndhr language and Kharoh script, while others are in Sanskrit and written in forms of the Gupta script. Manuscripts and fragments that have survived from this monastery's collection include well-known Buddhist texts such as the Mahparinirva Stra (from the gamas), the Diamond Stra (Vajracchedik Prajpramit), the Medicine Buddha Stra, and the rmldev Sihanda Stra. 

In 2010, reports stated that about 42 Buddhist relics have been discovered in the Logar Province of Afghanistan, which is south of Kabul. Some of these items date back to the 2nd century according to Archaeologists. The items included two Buddhist temples (Stupas), Buddha statues, frescos, silver and gold coins and precious beads. 

==See also==
*Pre Islamic Hindu and Buddhist heritage of Afghanistan
*Pre-Islamic scripts in Afghanistan
*Zunbils

==References==

==Other sources==
* Ahmed, Akbar S. 1980. Pukhtun economy and society. London: Routledge and Kegan Paul.
* Bryant, Edwin. 'The Quest for the Origins of Vedic Culture: The Indo-Aryan Migration Debate' (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2003).
* Dupree, Louis. 'Afghanistan' (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1997).
* Ewans, Martin. Afghanistan: A Short History of Its People and Politics, Harper Perennial; 1st Perennial ed edition (September 1, 2002)
* Harmatta, Jnos, ed., 1994. History of civilizations of Central Asia, Volume II. The development of sedentary and nomadic civilizations: 700 B.C. to A.D. 250. Paris, UNESCO Publishing.
* Hill, John E. 2004. The Western Regions according to the Hou Hanshu. Draft annotated English translation.
* Hill, John E. 2004. The Peoples of the West from the Weilue  by Yu Huan : A Third Century Chinese Account Composed between 239 and 265 AD. Draft annotated English translation. 
* Holt, Frank L. Thundering Zeus: The Making of Hellenistic Bactria, University of California Press (March, 1999)
* Kriwaczek, Paul. In Search of Zarathustra: Across Iran and Central Asia to Find the World's First Prophet, Vintage (March 9, 2004)
* Litvinsky, B. A., ed., 1996. History of civilizations of Central Asia, Volume III. The crossroads of civilizations: A.D. 250 to 750. Paris, UNESCO Publishing.
* Olmstead, A.T. History of the Persian Empire, University Of Chicago Press (February 15, 1959)
* Reat, Ross. 'Buddhism: A History', (Jain Publishing Company, 1996).
* Rowland, Benjamin, Jr. Ancient Art from Afghanistan: Treasures of the Kabul Museum, Ayer Co Pub (October, 1981)
* Sarianidi, Viktor. 1985. The Golden Hoard of Bactria: From the Tillya-tepe Excavations in Northern Afghanistan. Harry N. Abrams, Inc. New York.
* Shayegan, Rahim. The Avesta and the Bactria-Margiana Archaeological Complex
* Witzel, Michael. Autochthonous Aryans? The Evidence from Old Indian and Iranian Texts

==External links==

*Library of Congress Country Studies: Afghanistan
*Encyclopdia Britannica: Afghanistan
*Afghanistan Online: Chronological History of Afghanistan
*Afghanistan History
*Afghanistan History
*Association for the Protection of Afghan Archaeology
*Buddhist Manuscripts from ancient Afghanistan



[[Gravitational redshift]]

The gravitational redshift of a light wave as it moves upwards against a gravitational field (produced by the yellow star below).
In astrophysics, gravitational redshift or Einstein shift is the process by which electromagnetic radiation originating from a source that is in a gravitational field is reduced in frequency, or redshifted, when observed in a region of a weaker gravitational field. This is a direct result of Gravitational time dilation - as one moves away from a source of gravitational field, the rate at which time passes is increased relative to the case when one is near the source. As frequency is inverse of time (specifically, time required for completing one wave oscillation), frequency of the electromagnetic radiation is reduced in an area of a higher gravitational potential (i.e., equivalently, of lower gravitational field) . There is a corresponding reduction in energy when electromagnetic radiation is red-shifted, as given by Planck's relation, due to the electromagnetic radiation propagating in opposition to the gravitational gradient. There also exists a corresponding blueshift when electromagnetic radiation propagates from an area of a weaker gravitational field to an area of a stronger gravitational field.
 
If applied to optical wavelengths, this manifests itself as a change in the colour of visible light as the wavelength of the light is increased toward the red part of the light spectrum. Since frequency and wavelength are inversely proportional, this is equivalent to saying that the frequency of the light is reduced towards the red part of the light spectrum, giving this phenomenon the name redshift.

==Definition==
Redshift is often denoted with the dimensionless variable , defined as the fractional change of the wavelength 
See for example equation 29.3 of Gravitation by Misner, Thorne and Wheeler.
 

Where
 is the wavelength of the electromagnetic radiation (photon) as measured by the observer.
 is the wavelength of the electromagnetic radiation (photon) when measured at the source of emission.

The gravitational redshift of a photon can be calculated in the framework of General Relativity (using the Schwarzschild metric) as

with the Schwarzschild radius

, 

where denotes Newton's gravitational constant,
 the mass of the gravitating body,
 the speed of light, and
 the distance between the center of mass of the gravitating body and the point at which the photon is emitted. The redshift is not defined for photons emitted inside the Schwarzschild radius, the distance from the body where the escape velocity is greater than the speed of light. Therefore this formula only applies when is at least as large as . When the photon is emitted at a distance equal to the Schwarzschild radius, the redshift will be infinitely large. When the photon is emitted at an infinitely large distance, there is no redshift.

In the Newtonian limit, i.e. when is sufficiently large compared to the Schwarzschild radius , the redshift can be approximated by a binomial expansion to become

==History==
The gravitational weakening of light from high-gravity stars was predicted by John Michell in 1783 and Pierre-Simon Laplace in 1796, using Isaac Newton's concept of light corpuscles (see: emission theory) and who predicted that some stars would have a gravity so strong that light would not be able to escape. The effect of gravity on light was then explored by Johann Georg von Soldner (1801), who calculated the amount of deflection of a light ray by the sun, arriving at the Newtonian answer which is half the value predicted by general relativity. All of this early work assumed that light could slow down and fall, which was inconsistent with the modern understanding of light waves.

Once it became accepted that light is an electromagnetic wave, it was clear that the frequency of light should not change from place to place, since waves from a source with a fixed frequency keep the same frequency everywhere. One way around this conclusion would be if time itself were alteredif clocks at different points had different rates.

This was precisely Einstein's conclusion in 1911. He considered an accelerating box, and noted that according to the special theory of relativity, the clock rate at the bottom of the box was slower than the clock rate at the top. Nowadays, this can be easily shown in accelerated coordinates. The metric tensor in units where the speed of light is one is:

:

and for an observer at a constant value of r, the rate at which a clock ticks, R(r), is the square root of the time coefficient, R(r)=r. The acceleration at position r is equal to the curvature of the hyperbola at fixed r, and like the curvature of the nested circles in polar coordinates, it is equal to 1/r.

So at a fixed value of g, the fractional rate of change of the clock-rate, the percentage change in the ticking at the top of an accelerating box vs at the bottom, is:

:

The rate is faster at larger values of R, away from the apparent direction of acceleration. The rate is zero at r=0, which is the location of the acceleration horizon.

Using the principle of equivalence, Einstein concluded that the same thing holds in any gravitational field, that the rate of clocks R at different heights was altered according to the gravitational field g. When g is slowly varying, it gives the fractional rate of change of the ticking rate. If the ticking rate is everywhere almost this same, the fractional rate of change is the same as the absolute rate of change, so that:
:

Since the rate of clocks and the gravitational potential have the same derivative, they are the same up to a constant. The constant is chosen to make the clock rate at infinity equal to 1. Since the gravitational potential is zero at infinity:
:
where the speed of light has been restored to make the gravitational potential dimensionless.

The coefficient of the in the metric tensor is the square of the clock rate, which for small values of the potential is given by keeping only the linear term:
:

and the full metric tensor is:

:

where again the c's have been restored. This expression is correct in the full theory of general relativity, to lowest order in the gravitational field, and ignoring the variation of the space-space and space-time components of the metric tensor, which only affect fast moving objects.

Using this approximation, Einstein reproduced the incorrect Newtonian value for the deflection of light in 1909. But since a light beam is a fast moving object, the space-space components contribute too. After constructing the full theory of general relativity in 1916, Einstein solved for the space-space components in a post-Newtonian approximation, and calculated the correct amount of light deflection  double the Newtonian value. Einstein's prediction was confirmed by many experiments, starting with Arthur Eddington's 1919 solar eclipse expedition.

The changing rates of clocks allowed Einstein to conclude that light waves change frequency as they move, and the frequency/energy relationship for photons allowed him to see that this was best interpreted as the effect of the gravitational field on the massenergy of the photon. To calculate the changes in frequency in a nearly static gravitational field, only the time component of the metric tensor is important, and the lowest order approximation is accurate enough for ordinary stars and planets, which are much bigger than their Schwarzschild radius.

==Important points to stress==
* The receiving end of the light transmission must be located at a higher gravitational potential in order for gravitational redshift to be observed. In other words, the observer must be standing "uphill" from the source. If the observer is at a lower gravitational potential than the source, a gravitational blueshift can be observed instead.

* Tests done by many universities continue to support the existence of gravitational redshift. General Relativity 

* Gravitational redshift is not only predicted by general relativity. Other theories of gravitation require gravitational redshift, although their detailed explanations for why it appears vary. (Any theory that includes conservation of energy and massenergy equivalence must include gravitational redshift.)

* Gravitational redshift does not assume the Schwarzschild metric solution to Einstein's field equation  in which the variable cannot represent the mass of any rotating or charged body.

==Initial verification==
A number of experimenters initially claimed to have identified the effect using astronomical measurements, and the effect was eventually considered to have been finally identified in the spectral lines of the star Sirius B by W.S. Adams in 1925. However, measurements of the effect before the 1960s have been critiqued by (e.g., by C.M. Will), and the effect is now considered to have been definitively verified by the experiments of Pound, Rebka and Snider between 1959 and 1965.

The PoundRebka experiment of 1959 measured the gravitational redshift in spectral lines using a terrestrial 57Fe gamma source. This was documented by scientists of the Lyman Laboratory of Physics at Harvard University. A commonly cited experimental verification is the PoundSnider experiment of 1965. James W. Brault, a graduate student of Robert Dicke at Princeton University, measured the gravitational redshift of the sun using optical methods in 1962.

More information can be seen at Tests of general relativity.

==Application==
Gravitational redshift is studied in many areas of astrophysical research.

==Exact Solutions==
A table of exact solutions of the Einstein field equations consists of the following:

 Non-rotating Rotating 
 Uncharged Schwarzschild Kerr 
 Charged ReissnerNordstrm KerrNewman 

The more often used exact equation for gravitational redshift applies to the case outside of a non-rotating, uncharged mass which is spherically symmetric. The equation is:

, where

* is the gravitational constant,
* is the mass of the object creating the gravitational field,
* is the radial coordinate of the point of emission (which is analogous to the classical distance from the center of the object, but is actually a Schwarzschild coordinate),
* is the radial coordinate of the observer (in the formula, this observer is at an infinitely large distance), and
* is the speed of light.

==Gravitational redshift versus gravitational time dilation==
When using special relativity's relativistic Doppler relationships to calculate the change in energy and frequency (assuming no complicating route-dependent effects such as those caused by the frame-dragging of rotating black holes), then the Gravitational redshift and blueshift frequency ratios are the inverse of each other, suggesting that the "seen" frequency-change corresponds to the actual difference in underlying clockrate. Route-dependence due to frame-dragging may come into play, which would invalidate this idea and complicate the process of determining globally agreed differences in underlying clock rate.

While gravitational redshift refers to what is seen, gravitational time dilation refers to what is deduced to be "really" happening once observational effects are taken into account.

==See also==
* Tests of general relativity
* Equivalence principle
* Gravitational time dilation
* Redshift

==Notes==

==Primary sources==
* 

* 

* 

* Albert Einstein, "Relativity: the Special and General Theory." (@Project Gutenberg).

* R.V. Pound and G.A. Rebka, Jr. "Gravitational Red-Shift in Nuclear Resonance" Phys. Rev. Lett. 3 439441 (1959)

* R.V. Pound and J.L. Snider "Effect of gravity on gamma radiation" Phys. Rev. 140 B 788803 (1965)

* R.V. Pound, "Weighing Photons" Classical and Quantum Gravity 17 23032311 (2000)

==References==
* 



[[Easter Rising]]

The Easter Rising (), also known as the Easter Rebellion, was an armed insurrection staged in Ireland during Easter Week, 1916. The Rising was mounted by Irish republicans with the aims of ending British rule in Ireland, seceding from the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland, and establishing an independent Irish Republic at a time when the United Kingdom was heavily engaged in World War I. It was the most significant uprising in Ireland since the rebellion of 1798. "Soldiers are we" by Charles Townshend, History Today, 1 April 2006 

Organised by seven members of the Military Council of the Irish Republican Brotherhood, Leaders and Men of the Easter Rising: Dublin 1916
Francis X. Martin 1967 p105 the Rising began on Easter Monday, 24 April 1916, and lasted for six days. Members of the Irish Volunteers  led by schoolmaster and Irish language activist Patrick Pearse, joined by the smaller Irish Citizen Army of James Connolly, along with 200 members of Cumann na mBan  seized key locations in Dublin and proclaimed the Irish Republic independent of the United Kingdom. There were some actions in other parts of Ireland: however, except for the attack on the Royal Irish Constabulary barracks at Ashbourne, County Meath, they were minor.

With vastly superior numbers and the use of artillery, the British army quickly suppressed the Rising, and Pearse agreed to an unconditional surrender on Saturday 29 April. Most of the leaders were executed following courts-martial, but the Rising succeeded in bringing physical force republicanism back to the forefront of Irish politics. Support for republicanism continued to rise in Ireland as a result of the ongoing war in Europe and the Middle East, especially as a result of the Conscription Crisis of 1918 and the failure of the Irish Convention. Revolutions across Europe further emboldened Irish revolutionaries. In December 1918, republicans (by then represented by the Sinn Fin party) won 73 Irish seats out of 105 in the 1918 General Election to the British Parliament, on a policy of abstentionism and Irish independence. On 21 January 1919 they convened the First Dil and declared the independence of the Irish Republic, and later that same day the Irish War of Independence began with the Soloheadbeg ambush.

==Background==
The Acts of Union 1800 united the Kingdom of Great Britain and the Kingdom of Ireland as the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland, abolishing the Irish Parliament and giving Ireland representation at Westminster. From early on, many Irish nationalists opposed the union and what was seen as the exploitation of the country. MacDonagh, Oliver, Ireland: The Union and its aftermath, George Allen & Unwin, 1977, ISBN 0-04-941004-0, pp. 1417 

Opposition took various forms: constitutional (the Repeal Association; the Home Rule League), social (disestablishment of the Church of Ireland; the Land League) and revolutionary (Rebellion of 1848; Fenian Rising). Mansergh, Nicholas, The Irish Question 18401921, George Allen & Unwin, 1978, ISBN 0-04-901022-0 p. 244 Constitutional nationalism enjoyed its greatest success in the 1880s and 1890s when the Irish Parliamentary Party under Charles Stewart Parnell succeeded in having two Home Rule bills introduced by the Liberal government of William Ewart Gladstone, though both failed. The First Home Rule Bill of 1886 was defeated in the House of Commons, while the Second Home Rule Bill of 1893 was passed by the Commons but rejected by the House of Lords. After the fall of Parnell, younger and more radical nationalists became disillusioned with parliamentary politics and turned toward more extreme forms of separatism. The Gaelic Athletic Association, the Gaelic League and the cultural revival under W. B. Yeats and Lady Augusta Gregory, together with the new political thinking of Arthur Griffith expressed in his newspaper Sinn Fin and the organisations the National Council and the Sinn Fin League led to the identification of Irish people with the concept of a Gaelic nation and culture, completely independent of Britain. MacDonagh, Oliver, Ireland: The Union and its aftermath, pp. 7274 Feeney, Brian, Sinn Fin: A Hundred Turbulent Years, O'Brien Press, 2002, ISBN 0-86278-695-9 p. 22 This was sometimes referred to by the generic term Sinn Fin. Feeney, Brian, Sinn Fin: A Hundred Turbulent Years, p. 37 

The Third Home Rule Bill was introduced by British Prime Minister H. H. Asquith in 1912. The Irish Unionists, led by Sir Edward Carson, opposed home rule in the light of what they saw as an impending Roman Catholic-dominated Dublin government. They formed the Ulster Volunteer Force on 13 January 1913, creating the first armed group of the Home Rule Crisis.

The Irish Republican Brotherhood (IRB) saw an opportunity to create an armed organisation to advance its own ends, and on 25 November 1913 the Irish Volunteers, whose stated object was "to secure and to maintain the rights and liberties common to all the people of Ireland", was formed. Its leader was Eoin MacNeill, who was not an IRB member. Foy and Barton, The Easter Rising, pp. 78 A Provisional Committee was formed that included people with a wide range of political views, and the Volunteers' ranks were open to "all able-bodied Irishmen without distinction of creed, politics or social group." Macardle, The Irish Republic, pp. 9092 Another militant group, the Irish Citizen Army, was formed by trade unionists as a result of the Dublin Lockout of that year. Townshend, Easter 1916, p. 49 However, the increasing militarisation of Irish politics was overshadowed soon after by the outbreak of a larger conflictthe First World War Townshend, Easter 1916, pp. 5960  and Ireland's involvement in the conflict.

Though large numbers of Irishmen had willingly joined Irish regiments and divisions of the New British Army at the outbreak of war in 1914, BBC - The forgotten soldiers (Article highlighting pre- and post-war attitudes to participation of Irish in Great War) the growing likelihood of enforced conscription created a backlash. Opposition to the War was based particularly on the fact that implementation of the Government of Ireland Act 1914 (as previously recommended in March by the Irish Convention) was being increasingly and controversially linked with a "dual policy" enactment of the Military Service Bill, a dual policy that would require Irish conscription to begin if there would be any hope of Ireland seeing the implementation of the Government of Ireland Act 1914. Dave Hennessy (2004). The Hay Plan & Conscription In Ireland During WW1, p.5 The linking of conscription and Home Rule outraged the Irish secessionist parties at Westminster, (including the IPP, the AFIL and others, who walked out in protest and returned to Ireland to organise opposition. 

==Planning the Rising==
Tom Clarke

The Supreme Council of the IRB met on 5 September 1914, a month after the British government had declared war on Germany. At this meeting, they decided to stage a rising before the war ended and to accept whatever help Germany might offer. Caulfield, Max, The Easter Rebellion, p. 18 Responsibility for the planning of the rising was given to Tom Clarke and Sen MacDermott. Foy and Barton, The Easter Rising, p. 16 The Irish Volunteersthe smaller of the two forces resulting from the September 1914 split over support for the British war effort Foy and Barton, The Easter Rising, p. 13 set up a "headquarters staff" that included Patrick Pearse Sean Farrell Moran, Patrick Pearse and the Politics of Redemption: The Mind of the Easter Rising, (1994), Ruth Dudley Edwards, Patrick Pearse and the Triumph of Failure, (1977), Joost Augustin, "Patrick Pearse," (2009) as Director of Military Organisation, Joseph Plunkett as Director of Military Operations and Thomas MacDonagh as Director of Training. amonn Ceannt was later added as Director of Communications. Townshend, Easter 1916, p. 92 In May 1915, Clarke and MacDermott established a Military Committee within the IRB, consisting of Pearse, Plunkett and Ceannt, to draw up plans for a rising. Foy and Barton, The Easter Rising, pp. 16, 19 This dual rle allowed the Committee, to which Clarke and MacDermott added themselves shortly afterward, to promote their own policies and personnel independently of both the Volunteer Executive and the IRB Executivein particular Volunteer Chief of Staff Eoin MacNeill, who supported a rising only on condition of an increase in popular support following unpopular moves by the London government, such as the introduction of conscription or an attempt to suppress the Volunteers or its leaders, and IRB President Denis McCullough, who held similar views. Townshend, Easter 1916, p. 94 IRB members held officer rank in the Volunteers throughout the country and would take their orders from the Military Committee, not from MacNeill. Macardle, The Irish Republic, p. 119 

Plunkett had travelled to Germany in April 1915 to join Roger Casement. Casement had gone there from the United States the previous year with the support of Clan na Gael leader John Devoy, and after discussions with the German Ambassador in Washington, Count von Bernstorff, to try to recruit an "Irish Brigade" from among Irish prisoners of war and secure German support for Irish independence. Townshend, Easter 1916, p. 104 Foy and Barton, The Easter Rising, p. 105 Together, Plunkett and Casement presented a plan which involved a German expeditionary force landing on the west coast of Ireland, while a rising in Dublin diverted the British forces so that the Germans, with the help of local Volunteers, could secure the line of the River Shannon. McNally and Dennis, Easter Rising 1916: Birth of the Irish Republic, p. 30 

James Connollyhead of the Irish Citizen Army (ICA), a group of armed socialist trade union men and womenwas unaware of the IRB's plans, and threatened to start a rebellion on his own if other parties failed to act. If they had gone it alone, the IRB and the Volunteers would possibly have come to their aid; Eoin Neeson, Myths from Easter 1916, p. ? however, the IRB leaders met with Connolly in January 1916 and convinced him to join forces with them. They agreed to act together the following Easter and made Connolly the sixth member of the Military Committee. Thomas MacDonagh would later become the seventh and final member.

==Build-up to Easter Week==
General Post Office, Dublin. Centre of the Easter Rising

In an effort to thwart informers and, indeed, the Volunteers' own leadership, Pearse issued orders in early April for three days of "parades and manoeuvres" by the Volunteers for Easter Sunday (which he had the authority to do, as Director of Organization). The idea was that the republicans within the organisation (particularly IRB members) would know exactly what this meant, while men such as MacNeill and the British authorities in Dublin Castle would take it at face value. However, MacNeill got wind of what was afoot and threatened to "do everything possible short of phoning Dublin Castle" to prevent the rising.

MacNeill was briefly convinced to go along with some sort of action when Mac Diarmada revealed to him that a shipment of German arms was about to land in County Kerry, planned by the IRB in conjunction with Roger Casement; he was certain that the authorities' discovery of such a shipment would inevitably lead to suppression of the Volunteers, thus the Volunteers were justified in taking defensive action (including the originally planned manoeuvres). Michael Tierney, Eoin MacNeill, pp. 199, 214 Casementdisappointed with the level of support offered by the Germansreturned to Ireland on a German U-boat and was captured upon landing at Banna Strand in Tralee Bay. The arms shipment was lost when the German ship carrying it, Aud, was scuttled after interception by the Royal Navy, after the local Volunteers had failed to rendezvous with it.

The following day, MacNeill reverted to his original position when he found out that the ship carrying the arms had been scuttled. With the support of other leaders of like mind, notably Bulmer Hobson and The O'Rahilly, he issued a countermand to all Volunteers, cancelling all actions for Sunday. This only succeeded in putting the rising off for a day, although it greatly reduced the number of Volunteers who turned out.

British Naval Intelligence had been aware of the arms shipment, Casement's return, and the Easter date for the rising through radio messages between Germany and its embassy in the United States that were intercepted by the Navy and deciphered in Room 40 of the Admiralty.  Broin, Leon, Dublin Castle & the 1916 Rising, p. 138 The information was passed to the Under-Secretary for Ireland, Sir Matthew Nathan, on 17 April, but without revealing its source, and Nathan was doubtful about its accuracy.  Broin, Leon, Dublin Castle & the 1916 Rising, p. 79 When news reached Dublin of the capture of the Aud and the arrest of Casement, Nathan conferred with the Lord Lieutenant, Lord Wimborne. Nathan proposed to raid Liberty Hall, headquarters of the Citizen Army, and Volunteer properties at Father Matthew Park and at Kimmage, but Wimborne insisted on wholesale arrests of the leaders. It was decided to postpone action until after Easter Monday, and in the meantime Nathan telegraphed the Chief Secretary, Augustine Birrell, in London seeking his approval.  Broin, Leon, Dublin Castle & the 1916 Rising, pp. 8187 By the time Birrell cabled his reply authorising the action, at noon on Monday 24 April 1916, the Rising had already begun.

==The Rising in Dublin==

===Easter Monday===
One of two flags flown over the GPO during the Rising

Early on Monday morning, 24 April 1916, roughly 1,200 Volunteers and Citizen Army members took over strongpoints in Dublin city centre. A joint force of about 400 Volunteers and Citizen Army gathered at Liberty Hall under the command of Commandant James Connolly.

The rebel headquarters was located at the General Post Office (GPO) where James Connolly, overall military commander and four other members of the Military Council: Patrick Pearse, Tom Clarke, Sen Mac Dermott and Joseph Plunkett were located. McNally, Michael and Dennis, Peter, Easter Rising 1916: Birth of the Irish Republic, p. 41 After occupying the Post Office, the Volunteers hoisted two republican flags and Pearse read a Proclamation of the Republic Foy and Barton, The Easter Rising, pp. 192, 195 

Elsewhere, rebel forces took up positions at the Four Courts, the centre of the Irish legal establishment, at Jacob's Biscuit Factory and Boland's Mill and at the hospital complex at South Dublin Union and the adjoining Distillery at Marrowbone Lane. Another contingent, under Michal Mallin, dug in on St. Stephen's Green. McNally, Michael and Dennis, Peter, Easter Rising 1916: Birth of the Irish Republic, p39- 40 

However, although it was lightly guarded, Volunteer and Citizen Army forces under Sen Connolly failed to take Dublin Castle, the centre of British rule in Ireland, shooting dead a police sentry and overpowering the soldiers in the guardroom, but failing to press home the attack. The Under-secretary, Sir Matthew Nathan, was alerted by the shots and helped close the castle gates. Foy and Barton, The Easter Rising, pp. 8485 The rebels occupied the Dublin City Hall and adjacent buildings. Foy and Barton, The Easter Rising, pp. 8790 They also failed to take Trinity College, which was located in the heart of the city centre and which was defended by only a handful of armed unionist students. Townshend p163-164 At midday a small team of Volunteers and Fianna members attacked the Magazine Fort in the Phoenix Park and disarmed the guards, with the intent to seize weapons and blow up the building as a signal that the rising had begun. They set explosives but failed to obtain any arms. Caulfield, Max, The Easter Rebellion, pp. 4850 

In at least two incidents, at Jacobs McGarry p142 and Stephens Green, Stephens p18 the Volunteers and Citizen Army shot dead civilians who were trying to attack them or dismantle their barricades. Elsewhere, they hit civilians with their rifle butts to drive them off. McGarry, The Risng, p142-143, Townshend, Easter 1916, p174 

The British military were caught totally unprepared by the rebellion and their response of the first day was generally un-coordinated. Two troops of British cavalry, one at the Four Courts and the other on O'Connell Street, were sent out to investigate what was happening, and took fire and casualties from rebel forces Caulfield, Max, the Easter Rebellion, pp. 5455 Agony at Easter:The 1916 Irish Uprising, Thomas M. Coffey, pages 38, 44, 155 On Mount Street, a group of Volunteer Training Corps men stumbled upon the rebel position and four were killed before they reached Beggars Bush barracks. Paul OBrien, Blood on the Streets, the Battle for Mount Street, p22-23 

The only substantial combat of the first day of the Rising took place at the South Dublin Union where a piquet from the Royal Irish Regiment encountered an outpost of amonn Ceannt's force at the north-western corner of the South Dublin Union. The British troops, after taking some casualties, managed to regroup and launch several assaults on the position before they forced their way inside and the small rebel force in the tin huts at the eastern end of the Union surrendered. Caulfield, Max, The Easter Rebellion, pp. 7680 However, the Union complex as a whole remained in rebel hands.

Three of the unarmed Dublin Metropolitan Police were shot dead on the first day of the Rising and their Commissioner pulled them off the streets. Partly as result of the withdrawal of the police, a wave of looting broke out in the city centre, especially in the O'Connell Street area. A total of 425 people were arrested after the Rising for looting. Townshend p263-264 

===Tuesday to Saturday===
A British armoured truck, hastily built from the smokeboxes of several steam locomotives at Inchicore railway works 

Lord Wimborne, the Lord Lieutenant, declared martial law on Tuesday evening and handed over civil power to Brigadier-General W. H. M. Lowe. British forces initially put their efforts into securing the approaches to Dublin Castle and isolating the rebel headquarters, which they believed was in Liberty Hall. The British commander, Lowe, worked slowly, unsure of the size of the force he was up against, and with only 1,269 troops in the city when he arrived from the Curragh Camp in the early hours of Tuesday 25 April. City Hall was taken from the rebel unit that had attacked Dublin Castle on Tuesday morning. Tim Pat Coogan, The Easter Rising p107 Townshend p191 

The rebels had failed to take either of Dublin's two main train stations or either of its ports, at Dublin Port and Kingstown. As a result, during the following week, the British were able to bring in thousands of reinforcements from England and from their garrisons at the Curragh and Belfast. By the end of the week, British strength stood at over 16,000 men. McGarry, p167-169 Their firepower was provided by field artillery summoned from their garrison at Athlone which they positioned on the northside of the city at Phibsborough and at Trinity College, and by the patrol vessel Helga, which sailed up the Liffey, having been summoned from the port at Kingstown. On Wednesday, 26 April, the guns at Trinity College and Helga shelled Liberty Hall, and the Trinity College guns then began firing at rebel positions, first at Boland's Mill and then in O'Connell Street. 

"Birth of the Irish Republic" by Walter Paget, depicting the GPO during the shelling

The principal rebel positions at the GPO, the Four Courts, Jacob's Factory and Boland's Mill saw little combat. The British surrounded and bombarded them rather than assault them directly. One Volunteer in the GPO recalled, "we did practically no shooting as there was no target". McGarry p 175 Similarly, the rebel position at St Stephen's Green, held by the Citizen Army under Michael Mallin, was made untenable after the British placed snipers and machine guns in the Shelbourne Hotel and surrounding buildings. As a result, Mallin's men retreated to the Royal College of Surgeons building where they remained for the rest of the week. However, where the insurgents dominated the routes by which the British tried to funnel reinforcements into the city, there was fierce fighting.

Reinforcements were sent to Dublin from England, and disembarked at Kingstown on the morning of 26 April. Heavy fighting occurred at the rebel-held positions around the Grand Canal as these troops advanced towards Dublin. The Sherwood Foresters were repeatedly caught in a cross-fire trying to cross the canal at Mount Street. Seventeen Volunteers were able to severely disrupt the British advance, killing or wounding 240 men. Coogan p 122 Despite there being alternative routes across the canal nearby, General Lowe ordered repeated frontal assaults on the Mount Street position. Caulfield p251 The British eventually took the position, which had not been reinforced by the nearby rebel garrison at Boland's Mills, on Thursday O'Brien p69 but the fighting there inflicted up to two thirds of their casualties for the entire week for a cost of just four dead Volunteers. McGarry p173 

The rebel position at the South Dublin Union (site of the present day St. James's Hospital) and Marrowbone Lane, further west along the canal, also inflicted heavy losses on British troops. The South Dublin Union was a large complex of buildings and there was vicious fighting around and inside the buildings. Cathal Brugha, a rebel officer, distinguished himself in this action and was badly wounded. By the end of the week, the British had taken some of the buildings in the Union, but others remained in rebel hands. Caulfield p287-292 British troops also took casualties in unsuccessful frontal assaults on the Marrowbone Lane Distillery. Annie Ryan, Witnesses, p128-133 
Placements of Rebel forces and British troops around the River Liffey in Dublin

The third major scene of combat during the week was at North King Street, behind the Four Courts, where the British, on Thursday, tried to take a well-barricaded rebel position. By the time of the rebel headquarter's surrender, the South Staffordshire Regiment under Colonel Taylor had advanced only 150 yd down the street at a cost of 11 dead and 28 wounded. Coogan p152-155 The enraged troops broke into the houses along the street and shot or bayonetted 15 male civilians whom they accused of being rebel fighters. Coogan, p155, McGarry p187 

Elsewhere, at Portobello Barracks, an officer named Bowen Colthurst summarily executed six civilians, including the pacifist nationalist activist, Francis Sheehy-Skeffington. Caulfield p198 These instances of British troops killing Irish civilians would later be highly controversial in Ireland.

==Surrender==
The headquarters garrison at the GPO, after days of shelling, was forced to abandon their headquarters when fire caused by the shells spread to the GPO. Connolly had been incapacitated by a bullet wound to the ankle and had passed command on to Pearse. The O'Rahilly was killed in a sortie from the GPO. They tunnelled through the walls of the neighbouring buildings in order to evacuate the Post Office without coming under fire and took up a new position in 16 Moore Street. On Saturday 29 April, from this new headquarters, after realising that they could not break out of this position without further loss of civilian life, Pearse issued an order for all companies to surrender. Townshend p243-246 Pearse surrendered unconditionally to Brigadier-General Lowe. The surrender document read:

The GPO was the only major rebel post to be physically taken during the week. The others surrendered only after Pearse's surrender order, carried by a nurse named Elizabeth O'Farrell, reached them. Townshend, p246-247 Sporadic fighting therefore continued until Sunday, when word of the surrender was got to the other rebel garrisons. Townshend p246-250 Command of British forces had passed from Lowe to General John Maxwell, who arrived in Dublin just in time to take the surrender. Maxwell was made temporary military governor of Ireland. McGarry, p203-204 

==The Rising outside Dublin==
Irish Volunteer units mobilised on Easter Sunday in several places outside of Dublin, but due to Eoin MacNeill's countermanding order, most of them returned home without fighting. In addition, due to the interception of the German arms aboard the Aud, the provincial Volunteer units were very poorly armed.

In the south, around 1,200 Volunteers mustered in Cork, under Toms Mac Curtain on the Sunday, but they dispersed after receiving nine contradictory orders by dispatch from the Volunteer leadership in Dublin. Much to the anger of many Volunteers, MacCurtain, under pressure from Catholic clergy, agreed to surrender his men's arms to the British on Wednesday. Townshend p235 The only violence in Cork occurred when the Kent brothers resisted arrest by the RIC, shooting one. One brother was killed in the shootout and another later executed. Townshend, p238 

Similarly, in the north, several Volunteer companies were mobilised at Coalisland in County Tyrone including 132 men from Belfast led by IRB President Dennis McCullough. However, in part due to the confusion caused by the countermanding order, the Volunteers there dispersed without fighting. Townshend p226 

===Ashbourne===
The only large-scale engagement outside the city of Dublin occurred at Ashbourne, County Meath. The Volunteers Dublin Brigade, 5th Battalion (also known as the Fingal Battalion), led by Thomas Ashe and his second in command Richard Mulcahy, composed of some 60 men, mobilised at Swords, where they seized the RIC Barracks and the Post Office. They did the same in the nearby villages of Donabate and Garristown before attacking the RIC barracks at Ashtown TownshendEaster 1916, The Irish Rebellion, p215-216 

During the attack on the barracks, an RIC patrol from Slane happened upon the firefight  leading to a five-hour gun battle, in which eight RIC constables were killed and 15 wounded. Two Volunteers were also killed and five wounded. Townshend p218-221 One civilian was also mortally wounded. Fearghal McGarry, The Rising, Ireland Easter 1916, p235-237 Ashe's men camped at Kilsalaghan, near Dublin until they received orders to surrender on Saturday. Townshend p221 

Volunteer contingents also mobilised nearby in counties Meath and Louth, but proved unable to link up with the North Dublin unit until after it had surrendered. In County Louth, Volunteers shot dead an RIC man near the village of Castlebellingham on 24 April, in an incident in which 15 RIC men were also taken prisoner. Townshend p224 

===Enniscorthy===
Irish War News, produced during the Rising

In County Wexford, some 100 Volunteers led by Robert Brennan, Seamus Doyle and J R Etchingham took over Enniscorthy on Thursday 27 April until the following Sunday. Boyle, John F. The Irish Rebellion of 1916: a brief history of the revolt and its suppression (Chapter IV: Outbreaks in the Country). BiblioBazaar, LLC, 2009. Pages 127152. The made a brief and unsuccessful attack on the RIC barracks, but unable to take it, resolved to blockade it instead. During their occupation of the town, they made such gestures as flying the tricolour over the Atheneum theatre, which they had made their headquarters, and parading uniformed in the streets. Townshend p 241 

A small party set off for Dublin, but turned back when they met a train full of British troops (part of a 1,000-strong force, which included the Connaught Rangers Boyle, John F. The Irish Rebellion of 1916: a brief history of the revolt and its suppression (Chapter IV: Outbreaks in the Country). BiblioBazaar, LLC, 2009. Pages 127152. ) on their way to Enniscorthy. On Saturday, two Volunteer leaders were escorted by the British to Arbour Hill Prison, where Pearse ordered them to surrender. Townshend p241-242 

===Galway===
In the west, Liam Mellows led 600700 Volunteers in abortive attacks on several police stations, at Oranmore and Clarinbridge in County Galway. There was also a skirmish at Carnmore in which two RIC men were killed. However, his men were poorly armed, with only 25 rifles and 300 shotguns, many of them being equipped only with pikes. Toward the end of the week, Mellows followers were increasingly poorly fed and heard that large British reinforcements were being sent westwards. In addition, the British cruiser arrived in Galway Bay and shelled the fields around Athenry where the rebels were based. Townshend p227-230 

On 29 April, the Volunteers, judging the situation to be hopeless, dispersed from the town of Athenry. Many of these Volunteers were arrested in the period following the rising, while others, including Mellows had to go "on the run" to escape. By the time British reinforcements arrived in the west, the rising there had already disintegrated. McGary p233 

==Casualties==
The British Army reported casualties of 116 dead, 368 wounded and nine missing. Sixteen policemen died, and 29 were wounded. Rebel and civilian casualties were 318 dead and 2,217 wounded. The Volunteers and ICA recorded 64 killed in action, but otherwise Irish casualties were not divided into rebels and civilians. Foy and Barton, The Easter Rising, page 325 All 16 police fatalities and 22 of the British soldiers killed were Irishmen Kilberd, Declan: 1916, Rebellion Handbook, p.50-55 British families came to Dublin Castle in May 1916 to reclaim the bodies and funerals were arranged. British bodies which were not claimed were given military funerals in Grangegorman Military Cemetery.

The majority of the casualties, both killed and wounded, were civilians. Both sides, British and rebel, shot civilians deliberately on occasion when they refused to obey orders such as to stop at checkpoints. McGarry, p184-185 On top of that, there were two instances of British troops killing civilians out of revenge or frustration, at Portobello Barracks, where six were shot and North King Street, where 15 were killed. McGarry, p186-187 

However the majority of civilian casualties were killed by indirect fire from artillery, heavy machine guns and incendiary shells. The British, who used such weapons extensively, therefore seem to have caused most non-combatant deaths. One Royal Irish Regiment officer recalled, "they troops regarded everyone as an enemy and fired at everything that moved". both 'indirect fire' and quote from McGarry p184 

==Aftermath==
Sackville Street (now O'Connell Street), Dublin, after the Rising
The burial spot of the Leaders of the Rising, in the old prison yard of Arbour Hill prison. The memorial was designed by G. McNicholl. The Proclamation of 1916 is inscribed on the wall in both Irish and English
British soldiers searching the River Tolka in Dublin for arms and ammunition after the Easter Rising. May 1916

===Arrests and executions===
General Maxwell quickly signalled his intention "to arrest all dangerous Sinn Feiners", including "those who have taken an active part in the movement although not in the present rebellion", Townshend, Easter 1916, page 273 reflecting the popular belief that Sinn Fin, a separatist organisation that was neither militant nor republican, was behind the Rising.

A total of 3,430 men and 79 women were arrested, although most were subsequently released. In attempting to arrest members of the Kent family in County Cork on 2 May, a Head Constable was shot dead in a gun battle. Richard Kent was also killed, and Thomas and William Kent were arrested.

In a series of courts martial beginning on 2 May 90 people were sentenced to death. Fifteen of those (including all seven signatories of the Proclamation) had their sentences confirmed by Maxwell and were executed at Kilmainham Gaol by firing squad between 3 and 12 May (among them the seriously wounded Connolly, shot while tied to a chair due to a shattered ankle). Not all of those executed were leaders: Willie Pearse described himself as "a personal attach to my brother, Patrick Pearse"; John MacBride had not even been aware of the Rising until it began, but had fought against the British in the Boer War fifteen years before; Thomas Kent did not come out at allhe was executed for the killing of a police officer during the raid on his house the week after the Rising. The most prominent leader to escape execution was amon de Valera, Commandant of the 3rd Battalion, who did so partly due to his American birth. The president of the courts martial was Charles Blackader.

1,480 men were interned in England and Wales under Regulation 14B of the Defence of the Realm Act 1914, many of whom, like Arthur Griffith, had little or nothing to do with the affair. Camps such as Frongoch internment camp became "Universities of Revolution" where future leaders like Michael Collins, Terence McSwiney and J. J. O'Connell began to plan the coming struggle for independence. Sir Roger Casement was tried in London for high treason and hanged at Pentonville Prison on 3 August.

*3 May: Patrick Pearse, Thomas MacDonagh and Thomas J. Clarke
*4 May: Joseph Plunkett, William Pearse, Edward Daly and Michael O'Hanrahan
*5 May: John MacBride
*8 May: Eamonn Ceannt, Michael Mallin, Sean Heuston and Conn Colbert
*12 May: James Connolly and Sean MacDiarmada

===Inquiry===
A Royal Commission was set up to enquire into the causes of the Rising. It began hearings on 18 May under the chairmanship of Lord Hardinge of Penshurst. The Commission heard evidence from Sir Matthew Nathan, Augustine Birrell, Lord Wimborne, Sir Neville Chamberlain (Inspector-General of the Royal Irish Constabulary), General Lovick Friend, Major Ivor Price of Military Intelligence and others.  Broin, Leon, Dublin Castle & the 1916 Rising pp. 153159 The report, published on 26 June, was critical of the Dublin administration, saying that "Ireland for several years had been administered on the principle that it was safer and more expedient to leave the law in abeyance if collision with any faction of the Irish people could thereby be avoided." Townshend, Charles, Easter 1916: The Irish Rebellion p. 297 Birrell and Nathan had resigned immediately after the Rising. Wimborne had also reluctantly resigned, but was re-appointed, and Chamberlain resigned soon after.

===Reaction of the Dublin public===

At first, many members of the Dublin public were simply bewildered by the outbreak of the Rising. According to historian Charles Townshend, "In many areas the reaction of civilians was puzzlement, they simply had no idea what was going on." Townshend Easter 1916, The Irish Rebellion James Stephens, who was in Dublin during the week, thought, "None of these people were prepared for Insurrection. The thing had been sprung on them so suddenly they were unable to take sides". James Stephens, The Insurrection in Dublin, p. 57 

There was considerable hostility towards the Volunteers in some parts of the city. When occupying positions in the South Dublin Union and Jacob's factory, the rebels got involved in physical confrontations with civilians trying to prevent them from taking over the buildings. The Volunteers shooting and clubbing of civilians made them extremely unpopular in these localities. Fearghal McGarry, The Rising:Ireland Easter 1916, p143 There was outright hostility to the Volunteers from the "separation women" (so-called because they were paid "Separation Money" by the British government), who had husbands and son fighting in the British Army in World War I, and among unionists. The Easter Rising, Brian Barton & Michael Foy, Sutton Publishing Ltd. Gloucestershire, UK, ISBN 0-7509-3433-6, pp. 203-9 Supporters of the Irish Parliamentary Party also felt the rebellion was a betrayal of their party. Ernie OMalley, On Another Man's Wound, p 60, The loyalists spoke with an air of contempt, the troops will settle the matter in an hour or two, these pro-Germans will run away... The Redmondites were more bitter, I hope theyll all be hanged, ... Shootings too good for them. Trying to stir up trouble for us all 

The fact that the Rising had caused a great deal of death and destruction as well as disruption to food supplies also contributed to the antagonism toward the rebels. After the surrender, the Volunteers were hissed at, pelted with refuse, and denounced as "murderers" and "starvers of the people". McGarry, p252 Volunteer Robert Holland for example remembered being "subjected to very ugly remarks and cat-calls from the poorer classes" as they marched to surrender. He also reported being abused by people he knew as he was being marched through the Kilmainham area into captivity and said the British troops saved them from being manhandled by the crowd. Annie Ryan, Witnesses, Inside the Easter Rising, p. 135 

However, there was not universal hostility towards the defeated insurgents. Some onlookers were cowed rather than hostile and it appeared to the Volunteers that some of those watching in silence were sympathetic. McGarry, The Rising, Ireland Easter 1916 pp. 252-256 Canadian journalist and writer Frederick Arthur McKenzie wrote that in poorer areas, "there was a vast amount of sympathy with the rebels, particularly after the rebels were defeated." The Impact of the 1916 Rising: Among the Nations, Edited by Run ODonnell, Irish Academic Press Dublin 2008, ISBN 978-0-7165-2965-1, pp. 196-97 Thomas Johnson, the Labour leader, thought there was, "no sign of sympathy for the rebels, but general admiration for their courage and strategy" Townshend, Easter 1916, pp. 265-268 

The aftermath of the Rising, and in particular the British reaction to it, helped to sway a large section of Irish nationalist opinion away from hostility or ambivalence and towards support for the rebels of Easter 1916. Dublin businessman and Quaker, James G. Douglas, for example, hitherto a Home Ruler, wrote that his political outlook changed radically during the course of the Rising due to the British military occupation of the city and that he became convinced that parliamentary methods would not be sufficient to remove the British presence. 

===Rise of Sinn Fin===
A meeting called by Count Plunkett on 19 April 1917 led to the formation of a broad political movement under the banner of Sinn Fin J. Bowyer Bell, The Secret Army: The IRA, page 27 which was formalised at the Sinn Fin Ard Fheis of 25 October 1917. The Conscription Crisis of 1918 further intensified public support for Sinn Fin before the general elections to the British Parliament on 14 December 1918, which resulted in a landslide victory for Sinn Fin, whose MPs gathered in Dublin on 21 January 1919 to form Dil ireann and adopt the Declaration of Independence. Robert Kee The Green Flag: Ourselves Alone 

==Legacy==
The Garden of Remembrance was opened in 1966, to mark the anniversary of the Rising. The Garden is "dedicated to all those who gave their lives in the fight for Ireland's freedom"
A plaque commemorating the Easter Rising at the General Post Office, Dublin, with the Irish text in Gaelic script, and the English text in regular Latin script

Shortly after the Easter Rising, poet Francis Ledwidge wrote "OConnell Street" and "Lament for the Poets of 1916" which both describe his sense of loss and an expression of holding the same "dreams", as the Easter Rising's Irish Republicans, he would also go on to write lament for Thomas MacDonagh for his fallen friend and fellow Irish Volunteer.
A few months after the Easter Rising, W. B. Yeats commemorated some of the fallen figures of the Irish Republican movement, as well as expressed his torn emotions regarding these events, in the poem Easter, 1916. Some survivors of the Rising went on to become leaders of the independent Irish state and those who died were venerated by many as martyrs. Their graves in the former military prison of Arbour Hill in Dublin became a national monument and the text of the Proclamation was taught in schools. An annual commemoration, in the form of a military parade, was held each year on Easter Sunday, culminating in a huge national celebration on the 50th anniversary in 1966. RT the Irish national broadcaster, as one of its first major undertakings made a series of commemorative programmes for the 1966 anniversary of the Rising. Roibrd  Farachin, head of programming said, "While still seeking historical truth, the emphasis will be on homage, on salutation". 

With the outbreak of the Troubles in Northern Ireland, government, academics and the media began to revise the country's militant past, and particularly the Easter Rising. The coalition government of 197377, in particular the Minister for Posts and Telegraphs, Conor Cruise O'Brien, began to promote the view that the violence of 1916 was essentially no different from the violence then taking place in the streets of Belfast and Derry.

Cruise O'Brien and others asserted that the Rising was doomed to military defeat from the outset, and that it failed to account for the determination of Ulster Unionists to remain in the United Kingdom. 

While the Rising and its leaders continued to be venerated by Irish republicans, with murals in republican areas of Belfast and other towns celebrating the actions of Pearse and his comrades, and a number of parades held annually in remembrance of the Rising, the Irish government discontinued its annual parade in Dublin in the early 1970s, and in 1976 it took the unprecedented step of proscribing (under the Offences against the State Act) a 1916 commemoration ceremony at the GPO organised by Sinn Fin and the Republican commemoration Committee. Irish Times, 22 April 1976 

A Labour Party TD, David Thornley, embarrassed the government (of which Labour was a member) by appearing on the platform at the ceremony, along with Mire Comerford, a survivor of the Rising, and Fiona Plunkett, sister of Joseph Plunkett. Irish times, 26 April 1976 

With the advent of a Provisional IRA ceasefire and the beginning of what became known as the Peace Process during the 1990s, the official view of the Rising became more positive and in 1996 an 80th anniversary commemoration at the Garden of Remembrance in Dublin was attended by the Taoiseach and leader of Fine Gael, John Bruton. Reconstructing the Easter Rising, Colin Murphy, The Village, 16 February 2006 In 2005, the Taoiseach, Bertie Ahern, announced the government's intention to resume the military parade past the GPO from Easter 2006, and to form a committee to plan centenary celebrations in 2016. Irish Times, 22 October 2005 The 90th anniversary was celebrated with a military parade in Dublin on Easter Sunday, 2006, attended by the President of Ireland, the Taoiseach and the Lord Mayor of Dublin. There is now an annual ceremony at Easter attended by relatives of those who fought, by the President, the Taoiseach, ministers, senators and TDs, and by usually large and respectful crowds.

==Dates for the Centenary of the 1916 Easter Rising==
The Easter Rising lasted from Easter Monday 24 April 1916 to Easter Saturday 29 April 1916, so the actual calendrical centenary is from 24 to 29 April 2016. But 1916 commemorations normally occur at Easter, which is a moveable feast, rather than at the calendrical anniversary. In 2016, Easter falls on Sunday March 27, 2016, with Easter Monday on March 28, 2016 and Easter Saturday on April 3rd, 2016. 

==In popular culture==
* The Plough and the Stars is a play by Sen O'Casey that takes place during the Easter Rising.
* Michael Collins is a 1996 movie by Neil Jordan starring Liam Neeson on the life and career of Michael Collins. The film opens with the final throes of the Rising.
* 1916, A Novel of the Irish Rebellion is a 1998 historical novel by Morgan Llywelyn describing the lead up to and the events of the Easter Rising from the perspective of a student of Patrick Pearse. Most of the leaders of the Rising are depicted as characters.
*Rebels: The Irish Rising of 1916 is a 2000 historical novel by Peter de Rosa, chronicling the Rising and the events leading up to it.
* Rebel Heart is a 2001 BBC miniseries starring James D'Arcy. The first episode focusses especially on the Easter Rising. 
* Blood Upon the Rose is a graphic novel by Gerry Hunt published in 2009, which depicted the events of the Easter Rising. Edward Madigan, "Review of Gerry Hunts Blood Upon the Rose, part one", Pue's Occurrences, 2 November 2009 
*At Swim, Two Boys is a 2001 novel by Irish writer Jamie O'Neill, set in Dublin before and during the 1916 Easter Rising.
*The Red and the Green is a 1965 novel by Iris Murdoch that covers the events leading up to and during the Easter Rising.

==See also==
*Easter, 1916
*List of Irish uprisings
*Francis Sheehy-Skeffington - pacifist who was shot and killed by crown forces during Rising.

==Notes==

==Bibliography==

*Bell, J. Bowyer, The Secret Army: The IRA ISBN 1-85371-813-0
*Caulfield, Max, The Easter Rebellion, Dublin 1916 ISBN 1-57098-042-X
*Coogan, Tim Pat, 1916: The Easter Rising ISBN 0-304-35902-5
*Coogan, Tim Pat, The IRA (Fully Revised & Updated), HarperCollins, London, 2000, ISBN 0-00-653155-5
*De Rosa, Peter. Rebels: The Irish Rising of 1916. Fawcett Columbine, New York. 1990. ISBN 0-449-90682-5
*Foy, Michael and Barton, Brian, The Easter Rising ISBN 0-7509-2616-3
*Greaves, C. Desmond, The Life and Times of James Connolly
*Kee, Robert, The Green Flag ISBN 0-14-029165-2
*Kostick, Conor & Collins, Lorcan, The Easter Rising, A Guide to Dublin in 1916 ISBN 0-86278-638-X
*Lyons, F.S.L., Ireland Since the Famine ISBN 0-00-633200-5
*Martin, F.X. (ed.), Leaders and Men of the Easter Rising, Dublin 1916
*Macardle, Dorothy, The Irish Republic
*McNally, Michael and Dennis, Peter, Easter Rising 1916: Birth of the Irish Republic (2007), Osprey Publishing, ISBN 978-1-84603-067-3
*Moran, Sean Farrell, Patrick Pearse and the Politics of Redemption, (1994)
*Murphy, John A., Ireland In the Twentieth Century
*Neeson, Eoin, Myths from Easter 1916, Aubane Historical Society, Cork, 2007, ISBN 978-1-903497-34-0
* Broin, Leon, Dublin Castle & the 1916 Rising, Sidgwick & Jackson, 1970
*Purdon, Edward, The 1916 Rising
*Townshend, Charles, Easter 1916: The Irish Rebellion
*The Memoirs of John M. Regan, a Catholic Officer in the RIC and RUC, 190948, Joost Augusteijn, editor, Witnessed Rising, ISBN 978-1-84682-069-4.
*Clayton, Xander: AUD, Plymouth 2007.
*Eberspcher, Cord/Wiechmann, Gerhard: "Erfolg Revolution kann Krieg entscheiden". Der Einsatz von S.M.H. LIBAU im irischen Osteraufstand 1916 ("Success revolution may decide war". The use of S.M.H. LIBAU in the Irish Easter rising 1916), in: Schiff & Zeit, Nr. 67, Frhjahr 2008, S. 216.
*Edited by Run ODonnell, The Impact of the 1916 Rising: Among the Nations, Irish Academic Press Dublin 2008, ISBN 978-0-7165-2965-1

==External links==

*The 1916 Rising  an Online Exhibition. National Library of Ireland
*The Letters of 1916  Crowdsourcing Project Trinity College Dublin
*Essay on the Rising, by Garret FitzGerald
*Special 90th Anniversary supplement from The Irish Times
*Easter Rising 50th Anniversary audio & video footage from RT (Irish public television)
*Primary and secondary sources relating to the Easter Rising (Sources database, National Library of Ireland)
*Easter Rising site and walking tour of 1916 Dublin
*News articles and letters to the editor in "The Age", 27 April 1916
*Podcast about the 1916 Easter Rising
*Press comments 19161996
*The 1916 Rising by Norman Teeling a 10-painting suite acquired by An Post for permanent display at the General Post Office (Dublin)
*BBC History  The Easter Rising
*The Irish Story archive on the Rising
*Easter Rising website
*Lenin's Essay on the Uprising
*Bureau of Military History - Witness Statements Online (pdf files)

 



[[Eschrichtiidae]]

Eschrichtiidae or the gray whales is a family of baleen whale (suborder Mysticeti) with a single extant species, the gray whale (Eschrichtius robustus). The family, however, also includes three described fossil genera: Archaeschrichtius and Eschrichtioides from the Miocene and Pliocene of Italy respectively, and Gricetoides from the Pliocene of North Carolina. The names of the extant genus and the family honours Danish zoologist Daniel Eschricht. 

==Taxonomic history==
A number of 18th century authors E.g. ; ; described the gray whale as Balaena gibbosa, the "whale with six bosses", apparently based on a brief note by : 

The gray whale was first described as a distinct species by based on a subfossil found in the brackish Baltic Sea, apparently a specimen from the now extinct north Atlantic population. Lilljeborg, however, identified it as "Balaenoptera robusta", a species of rorqual whale. realized that the rib and scapula of the specimen was different from those of any known rorquals, and therefore erected a new genus for it, Eschrichtius. 
 were convinced that the bones described by Lilljeborg could not belong to a living species but that they were similar to fossils that Van Beneden had described from the harbour of Antwerp (most of his named species are now considered nomina dubia) and therefore named the gray whale Plesiocetus robustus, reducing Lilljeborg's and Gray's names to synonyms. 

 produced one of the earliest descriptions of living Pacific gray whales, and notwithstanding that he was among the whalers who nearly drove them to extinction in the lagoons of the Baja California, they were and still are associated with him and his description of the species. At this time, however, the extinct Atlantic population was considered a separate species (Eschrischtius robustus) from the living Pacific population (Rhachianectes glaucus). 

Things got increasingly confused as 19th century scientists introduced new species at an alarming rate (e.g. Eschrichtius pusillus, E. expansus, E. priscus, E. mysticetoides), often based on fragmentary specimens, and taxonomists started to use several generic and specific names interchangeably and not always correctly (e.g. Agalephus gobbosus, Balaenoptera robustus, Agalephus gibbosus). Things got even worse in the 1930s when it was finally realised that the extinct Atlantic population was the same species as the extant Pacific population, and the new combination Eschrichtius gibbosus was proposed. 

In his morphological analysis, found that eschrichtiids and Cetotheriidae (Cetotherium, Mixocetus and Metopocetus) form a monophyletic sister group of Balaenopteridae. 

A specimen from the Late Pliocene of northern Italy, named "Cetotherium" gastaldii by and renamed "Balaenoptera" gastaldii by , was identified as a basal eschrichtiid by who recombined it to Eschrichtioides gastaldii. 

 found that the gray whale is phylogenetically distinct from rorqual whales and that previous morphological studies were correct in the conclusion that the evolution of gulp feeding was a single event in the rorqual lineage. 

==Evolution==
Fossils of Eschrichtiidae have been found in all major oceanic basins in the Northern Hemisphere, and the family is believed date back to the Late Miocene. Today, gray whales are only present in the northern Pacific, but a population was also present in the northern Atlantic before being driven to extinction by European whalers three centuries ago. 

Fossil eschrichtiids from before the Holocene are rare compared to other fossil mysticetes. The only Pleistocene fossil from the Pacific referred to E. eschrichtius is a partial skeleton and an associated skull from California, estimated to be about 200 thousand years old. However, a late Pliocene fossil from Hokkaido, Japan, referred to Eschrichtius sp. is estimated to be and a similar unnamed fossil has been reported from California. 

In their description of Archaeschrichtius ruggieroi from the late Miocene of Italy, argued that eschrichtiids most likely originated in the Mediterranean Basin about and remained there, either permanently or intermittently, at least until the Early Pliocene (53 Mya), (but see Messinian salinity crisis.)

==References==
===Notes===

===Sources===

* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 



[[Edmund I]]

Edmund I (; 921  26 May 946), called the Elder, the Deed-doer, the Just, or the Magnificent, was King of England from 939 until his death. He was a son of Edward the Elder and half-brother of thelstan. Athelstan died on 27 October 939, and Edmund succeeded him as king.

==Military threats==
Edmund came to the throne as the son of Edward the Elder, Edmund I (king of England), Encyclopedia Brittanica grandson of Alfred the Great, great-grandson of thelwulf of Wessex, great-great grandson of Egbert of Wessex and great-great-great grandson of Ealhmund of Kent. Shortly after his proclamation as king, he had to face several military threats. King Olaf III Guthfrithson conquered Northumbria and invaded the Midlands; when Olaf died in 942, Edmund reconquered the Midlands. In 943, Edmund became the god-father of King Olaf of York. In 944, Edmund was successful in reconquering Northumbria. David Nash Ford, Edmund the Magnificent, King of the English (AD 921-946), Early British Kingdoms. In the same year, his ally Olaf of York lost his throne and left for Dublin in Ireland. Olaf became the king of Dublin as Amlab Cuarn and continued to be allied to his god-father. In 945, Edmund conquered Strathclyde but ceded the territory to King Malcolm I of Scotland in exchange for a treaty of mutual military support. Edmund thus established a policy of safe borders and peaceful relationships with Scotland. During his reign, the revival of monasteries in England began.

==Louis IV of France==
One of Edmund's last political movements of which there is some knowledge is his role in the restoration of Louis IV of France to the throne. Louis, son of Charles the Simple and Edmund's half-sister Eadgifu, had resided at the West-Saxon court for some time until 936, when he returned to be crowned King of France. In the summer of 945, he was captured by the Norsemen of Rouen and subsequently released to Duke Hugh the Great, who held him in custody. The chronicler Richerus claims that Eadgifu wrote letters both to Edmund and to Otto I, Holy Roman Emperor in which she requested support for her son. Edmund responded to her plea by sending angry threats to Hugh, who brushed them aside. Richerus, Historiae, Book 2, chapters 4950. See MGH online. Flodoard's Annales, one of Richerus' sources, report:

==Death and succession==
"The Murder of King Edmund at Pucklechurch", drawn by R. Smirke, published in Ashburton's History of England, 1793
On 26 May 946, Edmund was murdered by Leofa, an exiled thief, while attending St Augustine's Day mass in Pucklechurch (South Gloucestershire). "Here King Edmund died on St Augustines Day May. It was widely known how he ended his days, that Liofa stabbed him at Pucklechurch. And thelfld of Damerham, daughter of Ealdorman lfgar, was then his queen." Anglo-Saxon Chronicle, MS D, tr. Michael Swanton. John of Worcester and William of Malmesbury add some lively detail by suggesting that Edmund had been feasting with his nobles, when he spotted Leofa in the crowd. He attacked the intruder in person, but in the event, Leofa killed him. Leofa was killed on the spot by those present. John of Worcester, Chronicon AD 946; William of Malmesbury, Gesta regum, book 2, chapter 144. The description of the circumstances remained a popular feature in medieval chronicles, such as Higden's Polychronicon: "But William, libro ij de Regibus, seyth (says) that this kyng kepyng a feste at Pulkirchirche, in the feste of seynte Austyn, and seyng a thefe, Leof by name, sytte er amonge hys gestes, whom he hade made blynde afore for his trespasses  (quem rex prios propter scelera eliminaverat, whom the King previously due to his crimes did excile)  , arysede (arrested) from the table, and takenge that man by the heire of the hedde, caste him unto the grownde. Whiche kynge was sleyn  (sed nebulonis arcano evisceratus est)  with a lyttle knyfe the e man hade in his honde ; and also he hurte mony men soore with the same knyfe; neverthelesse he was kytte (cut) at the laste into smalle partes by men longyng to the kynge." Polychronicon, 1527. See Google Books 

Edmund's sister Eadgyth, wife to Otto I, Holy Roman Emperor, died (earlier) the same year, as Flodoard's Annales for 946 report. Edmundus rex Transmarinus defungitur, uxor quoque regis Othonis, soror ipsius Edmundi, decessit. "Edmund, king across the sea, died, and the wife of King Otto, sister of the same Edmund, died also." (tr. Dorothy Whitelock, English Historical Documents c. 5001042. 2nd ed. London, 1979. p. 345). 

Edmund was succeeded as king by his brother Eadred, king from 946 until 955. Edmund's sons later ruled England as:
*Eadwig, King of England from 955 until 957, king of only Wessex and Kent from 957 until his death on 1 October 959.
*Edgar the Peaceful, king of only Mercia and Northumbria from 957 until his brother's death in 959, then king of England from 959 until 975.

==See also==
* lfgifu of Shaftesbury
* Burial places of British royalty
* Edmund the Just, fictional king of Narnia

==Notes==

==References==
*Flodoard, Annales, ed. Philippe Lauer, Les Annales de Flodoard. Collection des textes pour servir  l'tude et  l'enseignement de l'histoire 39. Paris: Picard, 1905.

==Ancestry==

 
 



[[Endothermic]]

In thermodynamics, the term endothermic describes a process or reaction in which the system absorbs energy from its surroundings in the form of heat. The term was coined by Marcellin Berthelot from the Greek roots endo-, derived from the word "endon" () meaning "within" and the root "therm" (-) meaning "hot." The intended sense is that of a reaction that depends on taking in heat if it is to proceed. The opposite of an endothermic process is an exothermic process, one that releases, "gives out" energy in the form of heat. Thus in each term (endothermic & exothermic) the prefix refers to where heat goes as the reaction occurs.

The concept is frequently applied in physical sciences to, for example, chemical reactions, where thermal energy (heat) is converted to chemical bond energy.

Endothermic (and exothermic) analysis only accounts for the enthalpy (H) change of a reaction. The full energy analysis of a reaction is the Gibbs free energy (G), which includes an entropy (S) and temperature term in addition to the enthalpy. A reaction could be a Spontaneous process at a certain temperature if the products have a lower total free energy (an exergonic reaction) even if the enthalpy of the products is higher. Entropy and enthalpy are different terms, so the change in entropic energy could overcome an opposite change in enthalpic energy.

==Contrast between thermodynamic and biological terminology==
Because of a historical accident, students encounter a possible source of confusion between the terminology of physics and biology. Whereas the thermodynamic terms "exothermic" and "endothermic" respectively refer to processes that give out heat energy and processes that absorb heat energy, in biology the sense is effectively inverted. The metabolic terms "ectothermic" and "endothermic" respectively refer to organisms that rely largely on external heat to achieve a full working temperature, and to organisms that produce heat from within as a major factor in controlling their bodily temperature.

==Examples==
* Photosynthesis
* Cracking of alkanes
* Melting ice
* Vaporising Rubbing Alcohol
* Thermal decomposition reactions
* Forming a cation from an atom in the gas phase
* Dissolving ammonium chloride in water
* High-energy neutrons can also produce tritium from lithium-7 in an endothermic reaction, consuming 2.466 MeV. This was discovered when the 1954 Castle Bravo nuclear test produced an unexpectedly high yield. 
 

:

 +  + + 

==See also==
*Endergonic
*Exothermic
*Exergonic
*Exergonic reaction

== References ==
Notes

==External links==
*Endothermic Definition - MSDS Hyper-Glossary



[[Earle Page]]

 

Sir Earle Christmas Grafton Page, (8 August 188020 December 1961) was an Australian politician who briefly served as the 11th Prime Minister of Australia in 1939. To date, he is the second-longest serving federal parliamentarian in Australian history, with 41 years, 361 days in Parliament. 

==Early life==
Born in Grafton, New South Wales, Page was educated at Sydney Boys High School and the University of Sydney, where he graduated in medicine at the top of his year in 1901. He worked at Sydney's Royal Prince Alfred Hospital, where he met Ethel Blunt, a nurse, whom he married in 1906. In 1903 he joined a private practice in Grafton and in 1904 he became one of the first people in the country to own a car. He practised in Sydney and Grafton before joining the Australian Army as a medical officer in the First World War, serving in Egypt. After the war he went into farming and was elected Mayor of Grafton. 

==Political career==
In 1919 Page was elected to the House of Representatives from Cowper in northeastern New South Wales. He ran as a candidate of the Farmers and Settlers Association of New South Wales, one of several farmers' groups that won seats in that election. Shortly before parliament opened in 1920, the Farmers and Settlers Association merged with several other rural-based parties to form the Country Party. He became the party's leader in 1921, ousting William McWilliams. The young party found itself with the balance of power in the House after the 1922 election. The Nationalist government of Billy Hughes lost its majority, and could not govern without Country Party support. However, the Country Party had been formed partly due to discontent with Hughes' rural policy, and Page's animosity toward Hughes was such that he would not even consider supporting him. When it was apparent that the Nationalists would have to turn to the Country Party in order to stay in office, Page demanded and got Hughes' resignation as the price for supporting the Nationalist government. 

Page then began negotiations with Hughes' successor as leader of the Nationalists, Stanley Bruce. His terms were stiff; he wanted his Country Party to have five seats in an 11-man Cabinet, including the post of Treasurer and the second rank in the ministry for himself. These demands were unprecedented for such a new party in a Westminster system. Nonetheless, as the Country Party was the Nationalists' only realistic coalition partner, Bruce accepted Page's terms. For all intents and purposes, Page was the first Deputy Prime Minister of Australia (a title that did not officially exist until 1968). Since then, the leader of the Country/National Party has been the second-ranking member in nearly every non-Labor government. 

Page continued his professional medical practice, and on 22 October 1924 he had to tell his best friend, Thomas Shorten Cole (18701957), the news that his wife Mary Ann Crane had just died on the operating table from complications of intestinal or stomach cancer  reputed by their daughter Dorothy May Cole to be "the worst day of his life". 

He was a strong believer in orthodox finance and conservative policies, except where the welfare of farmers was concerned: then he was happy to see government money spent freely. He was also a "high protectionist": a supporter of high tariff barriers to protect Australian rural industries. 

The Bruce-Page government was defeated by Labor in 1929 (with Bruce losing his own seat), and Page went into opposition. In 1931, a group of dissident Labor MPs led by Joseph Lyons merged with the Nationalists to form the United Australia Party, with Lyons as leader. Page and the Country Party continued in coalition with the UAP. The UAP-Country Coalition won a comprehensive victory in the 1931 election. However, the UAP was in a strong enough position (only four seats short of a majority) that Lyons was able to form an exclusively UAP minority government with confidence and supply support from the Country Party--to date, the last time that the party has not had any posts in a non-Labor government. In 1934, however, the UAP suffered an eight-seat swing, forcing Lyons to take the Country Party back into his government in a full-fledged Coalition. Page became Minister for Commerce. He was made a Knight Grand Cross of the Order of St Michael and St George (GCMG) in the New Years Day Honours of 1938. 

===Prime Minister===

When Lyons died suddenly in 1939, the Governor-General Lord Gowrie appointed Page as caretaker Prime Minister. He held the office for three weeks until the UAP elected former deputy leader Robert Menzies as its new leader, and hence Prime Minister. While ten Australian Prime Ministers were knighted (and Bruce was elevated to the peerage), Page is the only one who was knighted before becoming Prime Minister.

Sir Earle Page
Page had been close to Lyons, but disliked Menzies, whom he charged publicly with having been disloyal to Lyons. When Menzies was elected UAP leader, Page refused to serve under him, and made an extraordinary personal attack on him in the House, accusing him not only of ministerial incompetence but of physical cowardice (for failing to enlist during World War I). His party soon rebelled, though, and Page was deposed as Country Party leader and replaced by Archie Cameron. 

In 1940 Page and Menzies patched up their differences for the sake of the war effort, and Page returned to the Cabinet as Minister for Commerce. Nevertheless, Page's accusations were not forgotten and were occasionally raised in parliament by Menzies' opponents (notably Eddie Ward). In 1941, the government fell; and Page spent the eight years of the Curtin and Chifley Labor governments on the opposition backbench. He was made a Companion of Honour (CH) in June 1942. 

===New states===
In 1949 Page put forward a discussion paper on the redrawing of state boundaries. He proposed that Australia would be divided into 12 states. Queensland would be split into four states: Eden-Monaro and East Gippsland would become another state, Mount Gambier to Mildura and Cape Otway another state, and the Northern Territory divided into two. Horsham Times 18 August 1949 Page had a particular interest in forming a new state of New England, in his own area of northeast New South Wales. 

===Return to the ministry===
Menzies returned to the Prime Ministership in 1949, and Page was made Minister for Health. He held this post until 1956, when he was 76, then retired to the backbench. Upon the death of Billy Hughes in October 1952, Page became the Father of the House of Representatives and Father of the Parliament. 

==Family==
Page and his wife Ethel had five children: a daughter Mary born in 1909 and four sons. Ethel Page died in 1958. On 20 July 1959 Page married his secretary Jean Thomas. Page's grandson, Don Page, is a National MP in the NSW Parliament and served as Deputy Leader of the NSW Nationals from 2003 to 2007. Another grandson is Canberra poet Geoff Page. His nephew was Robert Page, a soldier and war hero. His second wife, Jean Page, died on 20 June 2011. Sydney Morning Herald, 9 July 2011 

===Earle Charles Page===
Page's son, Earle Charles Page, was born in 1911 at South Grafton and attended Newington College (19221927), during the headmastership of the Rev Dr Charles Prescott. Newington College Register of Past Students 18631998 (Sydney, 1999), p 150 At Newington he won the Wigram Allen Scholarship in 1927, awarded by Sir George Wigram Allen, for general proficiency, with Dave Cowper receiving it for classics and Bill Morrow for mathematics in the same year. Newington College Register of Past Students 18631998 (Sydney, 1999) Part 2  The Lists In 1932 he graduated in veterinary science from the University of Sydney. Alumni Sidneienses Retrieved 9 July 2013 He played Rugby Union and was selected for Combined Australian Universities, and as a reserve for NSW. He was managing a rural property for his father at the time of his death in 1933 by lightning strike. The other Pages boys were Donald (b. 1912), Iven (b. 1914) and Douglas (b. 1916). NNDB profile of Earle Page; retrieved 6 July 2013 

==Later life and death==
Bust of Earle Page, Prime Ministers Avenue in the Ballarat Botanical Gardens
Page was the first Chancellor of the University of New England, which was established in 1954. By the 1961 election, Page was gravely ill, suffering from lung cancer. Although he was too sick to actively campaign, Page refused to even consider retiring from Parliament and soldiered on for his 17th general election. In one of the great upsets of Australian electoral history, he lost his seat to Labor challenger Frank McGuren, whom he had defeated soundly in 1958. Page had gone into the election holding Cowper with what appeared to be an insurmountable 11-point majority, but McGuren managed to win the seat on a swing of 13%. 

Page had campaigned sporadically before going to Royal Prince Alfred Hospital in Sydney for emergency surgery. He went comatose a few days before the election and never regained consciousness. He died on 20 December, 11 days after the election, without ever knowing that he had been defeated. Page had represented Cowper for just four days short of 42 years, making him the longest-serving Australian federal parliamentarian who represented the same seat throughout his career. Only Billy Hughes served in Parliament longer than Page, but Hughes represented four different electorates in New South Wales and Victoria. 

==Honours==
* The Canberra suburb of Page is named after him, as is the House of Representatives Division of Page.
* Earle Page College, a residential college of the University of New England, was founded in his honour, and is the venue for the Earle Page Annual Politics Dinner, which has had numerous prominent national and international guest lecturers.
* In 1957, a new building at Royal Prince Alfred Hospital was opened by Page and named the Page Chest Pavilion.
* In 1975 he was honored on a postage stamp bearing his portrait issued by Australia Post. 

==Further reading==
* Hughes, Colin A (1976), Mr Prime Minister. Australian Prime Ministers 19011972, Oxford University Press, Melbourne, Victoria, Ch.12. ISBN 0-19-550471-2
* In their autobiographies Ann (Mozley) Moyal and Ulrich Ellis wrote of their experience of working with Page. Moyal, Ann. Breakfast with Beaverbrook: memoirs of an independent woman (Hale & Iremonger, 1995) and Ulrich Ellis A Pen in Politics (Gininderra Press, 2007). Both had helped Page with his autobiography Truant Surgeon: The Inside Story of Forty Years of Australian Political Life (Angus & Robertson, 1963).

==References==

==External links==

*
*
*



[[Ephrem the Syrian]]

Ephrem the Syrian ( (Mr Aprm Sryy); Various other renderings of the name from different Syriac dialects exist. The modern West Syriac pronunciation is Mor Afraim Suryoyo, while the East has Mar Aprim Suryaya. Greek: ; ; ca. 306  373) was a deacon and a prolific Syriac-language hymnographer and theologian of the 4th century from the region of Syria. His works are hailed by Christians throughout the world, and many denominations venerate him as a saint. He has been declared a Doctor of the Church in Roman Catholicism. He is especially beloved in the Syriac Orthodox Church.

Ephrem wrote a wide variety of hymns, poems, and sermons in verse, as well as prose biblical exegesis. These were works of practical theology for the edification of the church in troubled times. So popular were his works, that, for centuries after his death, Christian authors wrote hundreds of pseudepigraphal works in his name. Ephrem's works witness to an early form of Christianity in which Western ideas take little part. He has been called the most significant of all of the fathers of the Syriac-speaking church tradition. Parry (1999), p. 180 

==Life==
Ephrem was born around the year 306 in the city of Nisibis (the modern Turkish town of Nusaybin, on the border with Syria, in the Roman province of Mesopotamia, which had come into Roman hands only in 298). Internal evidence from Ephrem's hymnody suggests that both his parents were part of the growing Christian community in the city, although later hagiographers wrote that his father was a pagan priest. Numerous languages were spoken in the Nisibis of Ephrem's day, mostly dialects of Aramaic. The Christian community used the Syriac dialect. The culture included pagan religions, Judaism and early Christian sects.

Jacob, the second bishop of Nisibis, was appointed in 308, and Ephrem grew up under his leadership of the community. Jacob of Nisibis is recorded as a signatory at the First Council of Nicea in 325. Ephrem was baptized as a youth and almost certainly became a son of the covenant, an unusual form of Syrian proto-monasticism. Jacob appointed Ephrem as a teacher (Syriac , a title that still carries great respect for Syriac Christians). He was ordained as a deacon either at his baptism or later. Parry (1999), pp. 180-181 He began to compose hymns and write biblical commentaries as part of his educational office. In his hymns, he sometimes refers to himself as a "herdsman" (, alln), to his bishop as the "shepherd" (, ry), and to his community as a 'fold' (, dayr). Ephrem is popularly credited as the founder of the School of Nisibis, which, in later centuries, was the centre of learning of the Syriac Orthodox Church.
Newly excavated Church of Saint Jacob in Nisibis, where Ephrem taught and ministered
In 337, Emperor Constantine I, who had legalised and promoted the practice of Christianity in the Roman Empire, died. Seizing on this opportunity, Shapur II of Persia began a series of attacks into Roman North Mesopotamia. Nisibis was besieged in 338, 346 and 350. During the first siege, Ephrem credits Bishop Jacob as defending the city with his prayers. In the third siege, of 350, Shapur rerouted the River Mygdonius to undermine the walls of Nisibis. The Nisibenes quickly repaired the walls while the Persian elephant cavalry became bogged down in the wet ground. Ephrem celebrated what he saw as the miraculous salvation of the city in a hymn that portrayed Nisibis as being like Noah's Ark, floating to safety on the flood.

One important physical link to Ephrem's lifetime is the baptistery of Nisibis. The inscription tells that it was constructed under Bishop Vologeses in 359. In that year, Shapur attacked again. The cities around Nisibis were destroyed one by one, and their citizens killed or deported. Constantius II was unable to respond; the campaign of Julian in 363 ended with his death in battle. His army elected Jovian as the new emperor, and to rescue his army, he was forced to surrender Nisibis to Persia (also in 363) and to permit the expulsion of the entire Christian population.

Ephrem, with the others, went first to Amida (Diyarbakr), eventually settling in Edessa (modern anlurfa) in 363. Ephrem, in his late fifties, applied himself to ministry in his new church and seems to have continued his work as a teacher, perhaps in the School of Edessa. Edessa had always been at the heart of the Syriac-speaking world, and the city was full of rival philosophies and religions. Ephrem comments that orthodox Nicene Christians were simply called "Palutians" in Edessa, after a former bishop. Arians, Marcionites, Manichees, Bardaisanites and various gnostic sects proclaimed themselves as the true church. In this confusion, Ephrem wrote a great number of hymns defending Nicene orthodoxy. A later Syriac writer, Jacob of Serugh, wrote that Ephrem rehearsed all-female choirs to sing his hymns set to Syriac folk tunes in the forum of Edessa. After a ten-year residency in Edessa, in his sixties, Ephrem succumbed to the plague as he ministered to its victims. The most reliable date for his death is 9 June 373.

==Writings==
The interior of the Church of Saint Jacob in Nisibis
Over four hundred hymns composed by Ephrem still exist. Granted that some have been lost, Ephrem's productivity is not in doubt. The church historian Sozomen credits Ephrem with having written over three million lines. Ephrem combines in his writing a threefold heritage: he draws on the models and methods of early Rabbinic Judaism, he engages skillfully with Greek science and philosophy, and he delights in the Mesopotamian/Persian tradition of mystery symbolism.

The most important of his works are his lyric, teaching hymns (, madr). These hymns are full of rich, poetic imagery drawn from biblical sources, folk tradition, and other religions and philosophies. The madr are written in stanzas of syllabic verse and employ over fifty different metrical schemes. Each madr had its ql (), a traditional tune identified by its opening line. All of these ql are now lost. It seems that Bardaisan and Mani composed madr, and Ephrem felt that the medium was a suitable tool to use against their claims. The madr are gathered into various hymn cycles. Each group has a title  Carmina Nisibena, On Faith, On Paradise, On Virginity, Against Heresies  but some of these titles do not do justice to the entirety of the collection (for instance, only the first half of the Carmina Nisibena is about Nisibis). Each madr usually had a refrain (, ), which was repeated after each stanza. Later writers have suggested that the madr were sung by all-women choirs with an accompanying lyre.

Particularly influential were his Hymns Against Heresies. Mourachian, Mark. "Hymns Against Heresies: Comments on St. Ephrem the Syrian". Sophia 37:2, (Winter 2007), pp. 30-31. Ephrem used these to warn his flock of the heresies that threatened to divide the early church. He lamented that the faithful were "tossed to and fro and carried around with every wind of doctrine, by the cunning of men, by their craftiness and deceitful wiles." Eph 4:14, as quoted in Mourachian (2007) He devised hymns laden with doctrinal details to inoculate right-thinking Christians against heresies such as docetism. The Hymns Against Heresies employ colourful metaphors to describe the Incarnation of Christ as fully human and divine. Ephrem asserts that Christ's unity of humanity and divinity represents peace, perfection and salvation; in contrast, docetism and other heresies sought to divide or reduce Christ's nature and, in doing so, rend and devalue Christ's followers with their false teachings.

Ephrem also wrote verse homilies (, mmr). These sermons in poetry are far fewer in number than the madr. The mmr were written in a heptosyllabic couplets (pairs of lines of seven syllables each).

The third category of Ephrem's writings is his prose work. He wrote a biblical commentary on the Diatessaron (the single gospel harmony of the early Syriac church), the Syriac original of which was found in 1957. His Commentary on Genesis and Exodus is an exegesis of Genesis and Exodus. Some fragments exist in Armenian of his commentaries on the Acts of the Apostles and Pauline Epistles.

He also wrote refutations against Bardaisan, Mani, Marcion and others.

Ephrem wrote exclusively in the Syriac language, but translations of his writings exist in Armenian, Coptic, Georgian, Greek and other languages. Some of his works are only extant in translation (particularly in Armenian). Syriac churches still use many of Ephrem's hymns as part of the annual cycle of worship. However, most of these liturgical hymns are edited and conflated versions of the originals.

The most complete, critical text of authentic Ephrem was compiled between 1955 and 1979 by Dom Edmund Beck, OSB, as part of the Corpus Scriptorum Christianorum Orientalium.

==Greek Ephrem==
Ephrem's artful meditations on the symbols of Christian faith and his stand against heresy made him a popular source of inspiration throughout the church. This occurred to the extent that there is a huge corpus of Ephrem pseudepigraphy and legendary hagiography. Some of these compositions are in verse, often a version of Ephrem's heptosyllabic couplets. Most of these works are considerably later compositions in Greek. Students of Ephrem often refer to this corpus as having a single, imaginary author called "Greek Ephrem", or Ephraem Graecus (as opposed to the real Ephrem the Syrian). This is not to say that all texts ascribed to Ephrem in Greek are by others, but many are. Although Greek compositions are the main source of pseudepigraphal material, there are also works in Latin, Slavonic and Arabic. There has been very little critical examination of these works, and many are still treasured by churches as authentic.

The best known of these writings is the Prayer of Saint Ephrem, which is recited at every service during Great Lent and other fasting periods in Eastern Christianity.

==Veneration as a saint==
Icon of St. Ephrem (right), together with St. George (top) and St. John Damascene
Icon of St. Ephrem

Soon after Ephrem's death, legendary accounts of his life began to circulate. One of the earlier "modifications" is the statement that Ephrem's father was a pagan priest of Abnil or Abizal. However, internal evidence from his authentic writings suggest that he was raised by Christian parents. This legend may be anti-pagan polemic or may reflect his father's status prior to converting to Christianity.

The second legend attached to Ephrem is that he was a monk. In Ephrem's day, monasticism was in its infancy in Egypt. He seems to have been a part of the members of the covenant, a close-knit, urban community of Christians that had "covenanted" themselves to service and had refrained from sexual activity. Some of the Syriac terms that Ephrem used to describe his community were later used to describe monastic communities, but the assertion that he was monk is anachronistic. Later hagiographers often painted a picture of Ephrem as an extreme ascetic, but the internal evidence of his authentic writings show him to have had a very active role, both within his church community and through witness to those outside of it. Ephrem is venerated as an example of monastic discipline in Eastern Christianity. In the Eastern Orthodox scheme of hagiography, Ephrem is counted as a Venerable Father (i.e., a sainted Monk). His feast day is celebrated on 28 January and on the Saturday of the Venerable Fathers (Cheesefare Saturday), which is the Saturday before the beginning of Great Lent.

Ephrem is popularly believed to have taken legendary journeys. In one of these he visits Basil of Caesarea. This links the Syrian Ephrem with the Cappadocian Fathers and is an important theological bridge between the spiritual view of the two, who held much in common. Ephrem is also supposed to have visited Saint Pishoy in the monasteries of Scetes in Egypt. As with the legendary visit with Basil, this visit is a theological bridge between the origins of monasticism and its spread throughout the church.

On 5 October 1920, Pope Benedict XV proclaimed Ephrem a Doctor of the Church. This proclamation was made before critical editions of Ephrem's authentic writings were available.

The most popular title for Ephrem is Harp of the Spirit (Syriac: , ). He is also referred to as the Deacon of Edessa, the Sun of the Syrians and a Pillar of the Church.

His Roman Catholic feast day of 9 June conforms to his date of death. For 48 years (19201969), it was on 18 June.

Ephrem is honored with a feast day on the liturgical calendar of the Episcopal Church (USA) on June 10.

==Quotations==
About Ephrem:
* "The greatest poet of the patristic age and, perhaps, the only theologian-poet to rank beside Dante."  Robert Murray.
* "This (Efrem) who became a crown of glory for all the Arameans, and through him they became near the spiritual splendors. He who became a great orator among the Syrians." & "He who gazed diligently in his mind on the great Moses, and after the model of the Hebrew women he taught the Aramaean women to give praise with their madrashe"  James of Sarugh

By Ephrem:
* "The boldness of our love is pleasing to you, O Lord, just as it pleased you that we should steal from your bounty."  Ephrem the Syrian, Hymns on Faith 16:5.
* "Remember me, ye heirs of God, ye brethren of Christ; supplicate the Savior earnestly for me, that I may be freed through Christ from him that fights against me day by day."  The Fear at the End of Life
* "You (Jesus) alone and your Mother are more beautiful than any others, for there is no blemish in you nor any stains upon your Mother. Who of my children can compare in beauty to these?"  Ephraim the Syrian, Nisibene Hymns 27:8; ca. 361 AD.

==See also==
* Syriac language
* Syriac Christianity
* Hymn
* List of Syriacs
* Christian mystics
* Prayer of Saint Ephrem
* Syrian Monastery in Scetes, Egypt
* Codex Ephraemi Rescriptus

==Notes==

==Translations==
* 
* 
* 

==References==
* 
* 
* 
* den Biesen, Kees (2011). Annotated Bibliography of Ephrem the Syrian. Lulu.com.
* 
*
*

==External links==
* Margonitho: Mor Ephrem the Syrian
* Anastasis article
* Hugoye: Influence of Saint Ephraim the Syrian, part 1
* Hugoye: Influence of Saint Ephraim the Syrian, part 2
* 
* Encyclopdia Britannica 1911: "Ephraem Syrus"
* St. Ephraem 'Faith Adoring the Mystery'
* Benedict XVI on St. Ephrem and his role in history
* Jefrem Sirin (Wikipedia Russia)



[[Amiga Enhanced Chip Set]]

The Enhanced Chip Set (ECS) is the second generation of the Amiga computer's chipset, offering minor improvements over the original chipset (OCS) design. ECS was introduced in 1990 with the launch of the Amiga 3000. Amigas produced from 1990 onwards featured a mix of OCS and ECS chips, such as later versions of the Amiga 500 and the Commodore CDTV. Other ECS models were the Amiga 500+ in 1991 and lastly the Amiga 600 in 1992. 

Notable improvements were the Super Agnus and the Hires Denise chips. The sound and floppy controller chip, Paula, remained unchanged from the OCS design. Super Agnus supports 2 MB of CHIP RAM, whereas the original Agnus/Fat Agnus and subsequent Fatter Agnus can address 512 KB and 1 MB, respectively. The ECS Denise chip offers Productivity (640&times;480 non-interlaced) and SuperHires (1280&times;200 or 1280&times;256) display modes (also available in interlaced mode), which are however limited to only 4 on-screen colors. Essentially, a 35 ns pixel mode was added plus the ability to run arbitrary horizontal and vertical scan rates. This made other display modes possible, but only the aforementioned modes were supported originally out of the box. For example, the Linux Amiga framebuffer device driver allows the use of several other display modes. Other improvements were the ability of the blitter to copy regions larger than 1024&times;1024 pixels in one operation and the ability to display sprites in border regions (outside of any display window where bitplanes are shown). ECS also allows software switching between NTSC and PAL video modes.

These improvements largely favored application software, which benefited from higher resolution and VGA-like display modes, rather than gaming software. As an incremental update, ECS was intended to be backward compatible with software designed for OCS machines, though some pre-ECS games were found to be incompatible. Additionally, features from the improved Kickstart 2 operating system were used in subsequent software, and since these two technologies largely overlap, some users misjudged the significance of ECS. It is possible to upgrade some OCS machines, such as the Amiga 500, to obtain partial or full ECS functionality by replacing OCS chips with ECS versions. ECS was followed by the third generation AGA chipset with the launch of the Amiga 4000 in 1992.

==See also==
* OCS
* Amiga Ranger Chipset
* AGA
* Amiga custom chips
* AAA
* AA+
* Hombre chipset
* List of home computers by video hardware



[[European Space Operations Centre]]

The European Space Operations Centre (ESOC) serves as the main mission control centre for the European Space Agency (ESA) and is located in Darmstadt, Germany. ESOC's primary function is the operation of unmanned spacecraft on behalf of ESA and the launch and early orbit phases (LEOP) of ESA and third-party missions. ESA Spacecraft Operations - About us & frequently asked questions The Centre is also responsible for a range of operations-related activities within ESA and in cooperation with ESA's industry and international partners, including ground systems engineering, software development, flight dynamics and navigation, development of mission control tools and techniques and space debris studies. ESAs Ground Systems Engineering Team 

ESOC's current major activities comprise operating planetary and solar missions, such as Mars Express and Rosetta, astronomy & fundamental physics missions, such as Gaia (spacecraft) and XMM Newton, and Earth observation missions such as CryoSat2 and Swarm (spacecraft).

ESOC is responsible for developing, operating and maintaining ESA's European Tracking (ESTRACK) Network of ground stations. Teams at the Centre are also involved in research and development related to advanced mission control concepts and Space Situational Awareness, and standardisation activities related to frequency management; mission operations; tracking, telemetry and telecommanding; and space debris. What are the core activities related to Operations? 

==Missions==
ESOC's current missions comprise the following: ESA Space Operations 

Planetary and solar missions
* Mars Express
* Venus Express
* Rosetta
* Cluster II

Astronomy and fundamental physics missions
* Gaia
* INTEGRAL
* XMM-Newton

Earth observation missions
* CryoSat-2
* Swarm

In addition, the ground segment and mission control teams for several missions are in preparation ESA Space Operations and training, including:

* BepiColombo
* LISA Pathfinder
* ADM-Aeolus
* Sentinel

==ESTRACK==

ESOC hosts the control centre for the Agency's European Tracking (ESTRACK) station network. The core network comprises 10 stations in seven countries: Kourou (French Guiana), Maspalomas, Villafranca and Cebreros (Spain), Redu (Belgium), Santa Maria (Portugal), Kiruna (Sweden), Perth and New Norcia (Australia) and Malarge (Argentina). Operators are on duty at ESOC 24 hours/day, year round, to conduct tracking passes, ESTRACK Control Centre uploading telecommands and downloading telemetry and data.

==Activities==

XMM-Newton model at ESOC

In addition to 'pure' mission operations, a number of other activities take place at the Centre, most of which are directly related to ESA's broader space operations activities.

* Flight dynamics: A team is responsible for all orbital calculations and orbit determinations. ESOC Flight Dynamics 
* Mission analysis: Selection and calculation of possible orbits and launch windows ESOC Flight Dynamics 
* Software development: Mission control systems and spacecraft management tools Mission operations and control system software 
* ESA Navigation Facility: Calculating and predicting GPS and Galileo satellite orbits ESA Navigation Facility 
* Ground station engineering: Developing deep-space tracking technology Ground Station Engineering 
* Space debris: Coordinating ESA's debris research, provision of conjunction warning services and cooperating with agencies worldwide ESA Space Debris Office 
* Frequency management: Helping manage radio spectrum used by all satellite operators Frequency management 

==History==
The European Space Operations Centre was formally inaugurated in Darmstadt, Germany, on 8 September 1967 by the then-Minister of Research of the Federal Republic of Germany, Gerhard Stoltenberg. Its role was to provide satellite control for the European Space Research Organisation (ESRO), which is today known as its successor organisation, the European Space Agency (ESA). ESA pays tribute to ESOC's 40th anniversary 

The 90-person ESOC facility was, as it is today, located on the west side of Darmstadt; it employed the staff and resources previously allocated to the European Space Data Centre (ESDAC), which had been established in 1963 to conduct orbit calculations. ESA pays tribute to ESOC's 40th anniversary These were augmented by mission control staff transferred from ESTEC to operate satellites and manage the ESTRACK tracking station network. History of the European Space Agency 1958  1987 EUROPE INTO SPACE:THE AUGER YEARS, page 35 

Within just eight months, ESOC, as part of ESRO, was already operating its first mission, ESRO-2B, a scientific research satellite and the first of many operated from ESOC for ESRO, and later ESA. ESA pays tribute to ESOC's 40th anniversary 

By July 2012, ESOC had operated over 56 missions ESA mission history spanning science, Earth observation, orbiting observatories, meteorology and space physics.

==Location and expansion==
ESOC in Darmstadt

ESOC is located on the west side of the city of Darmstadt, Google map some 500 m from the main train station, at Robert-Bosch-Strae 5. In 2011, ESA announced the first phase of the ESOC II modernisation and expansion project valued at 60 million. ESA operations centre to be expanded The new construction will be located across Robert-Bosch-Strae, opposite the current centre.

==Employees==
At ESOC, ESA employs approximately 800, comprising some 250 permanent staff and about 550 contractors. Staff from ESOC are routinely dispatched to work at other ESA establishments, ESTRACK stations, the ATV Control Centre (Toulouse), the Columbus Control Centre (Oberpfaffenhofen) and at partner facilities in several countries. About us & frequently asked questions (FAQ) 

==References==

==External links==

* European Space Operations Centre website
* ESA Operations website
* ESTRACK station website



[[European Space Agency]]

The European Space Agency (ESA) (French: Agence spatiale europenne - ASE) is an intergovernmental organization dedicated to the exploration of space, with 20 member states. Established in 1975 and headquartered in Paris, France, ESA has a staff of more than 2,000 with an annual budget of about 4.28 billion / US$5.51 billion (2013). 

ESA's space flight program includes human spaceflight, mainly through the participation in the International Space Station program, the launch and operations of unmanned exploration missions to other planets and the Moon, Earth observation, science, telecommunication as well as maintaining a major spaceport, the Guiana Space Center at Kourou, French Guiana, and designing launch vehicles. The main European launch vehicle Ariane 5 is operated through Arianespace with ESA sharing in the costs of launching and further developing this launch vehicle.

ESA science missions are based at ESTEC in Noordwijk, Netherlands, Earth Observation missions at ESRIN in Frascati, Italy, ESA Mission Control (ESOC) is in Darmstadt, Germany, the European Astronaut Center (EAC) that trains astronauts for future missions is situated in Cologne, Germany, and the European Space Astronomy Center is located in Villanueva de la Caada, Spain.

==History==

===Foundation===

ESTEC buildings in Noordwijk, Netherlands. ESTEC was the main technical centre of ESRO and remains so for the successor organization, ESA

After World War II, many European scientists left Western Europe in order to work in the United States. Although the 1950s boom made it possible for Western European countries to invest in research and specifically in space related activities, Western European scientists realized solely national projects would not be able to compete with the two main superpowers. In 1958, only months after the Sputnik shock, Edoardo Amaldi and Pierre Auger, two prominent members of the Western European scientific community at that time, met to discuss the foundation of a common Western European space agency. The meeting was attended by scientific representatives from eight countries, including Harrie Massey (UK).

The Western European nations decided to have two different agencies, one concerned with developing a launch system ELDO (European Launch Development Organization) and the precursor of the European Space Agency, ESRO (European Space Research Organisation). The latter was established on 20 March 1964 by an agreement signed on 14 June 1962. From 1968 to 1972, ESRO carried out numerous successful projects. Seven research satellites were launched into orbit.

ESA in its current form was founded with the ESA Convention in 1975, when ESRO was merged with ELDO. ESA has 10 founding member states: Belgium, Denmark, France, Germany, Italy, the Netherlands, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland and the United Kingdom. These signed the ESA Convention in 1975 and deposited the instruments of ratification by 1980, when the convention came into force. During this interval the agency functioned in a de facto fashion. ESA launched its first major scientific mission in 1975, Cos-B, a space probe monitoring gamma-ray emissions in the universe first worked on by ESRO.

===Modern day===
Mock-up of the Ariane 1

Beginning in the 1970s, when the space race between the US and the Soviet Union had cooled down and space budgets were cut dramatically in both countries, ESA established itself as a front-runner in space exploration. ESA joined NASA in the IUE, the world's first high-orbit telescope, which was launched in 1978 and operated very successfully for 18 years. A number of successful Earth-orbit projects followed, and in 1986 ESA began Giotto, its first deep-space mission, to study the Comets Halley and Grigg-Skjellerup. Hipparcos, a star-mapping mission, was launched in 1989 and in the 1990s SOHO, Ulysses and the Hubble Space Telescope were all jointly carried out with NASA. Recent scientific missions in cooperation with NASA include the CassiniHuygens space probe, to which ESA contributed by building the Titan landing module Huygens.

As the successor of ELDO, ESA has also constructed rockets for unmanned scientific and commercial payloads. Ariane 1, launched in 1979, brought mostly commercial payloads into orbit from 1984 onward. The next two developments of the Ariane rocket were intermediate stages in the development of a more advanced launch system, the Ariane 4, which operated between 1988 and 2003 and established ESA as the world leader in commercial space launches in the 1990s. Although the succeeding Ariane 5 experienced a failure on its first flight, it has since firmly established itself within the heavily competitive commercial space launch market with 56 successful launches as of September 2011. The successor launch vehicle of Ariane 5, the Ariane 6 is already in the definition stage and is envisioned to enter service in the 2020s.

The beginning of the new millennium saw ESA become, along with agencies like NASA, JAXA, ISRO, CSA and Roscosmos, one of the major participants in scientific space research. While ESA had relied on cooperation with NASA in previous decades, especially the 1990s, changed circumstances (such as tough legal restrictions on information sharing by the United States military) led to decisions to rely more on itself and on cooperation with Russia. A 2011 press issue thus stated: 

Most notable for its new self-confidence are ESA's own recent successful missions SMART-1, a probe testing cutting-edge new space propulsion technology, the Mars Express and Venus Express missions as well as the development of the Ariane 5 rocket and its role in the ISS partnership. ESA maintains its scientific and research projects mainly for astronomy-space missions such as Corot, launched on 27 December 2006, a milestone in the search for extrasolar planets.

==Mission statement==
Since the Cold War ended with the fall of the Soviet Union's "iron curtain", space agencies around the world had to refocus and revise their visions and goals. During an interview with JAXA, the Japanese national space agency, Jean-Jacques Dordain ESA's Director General (since 2003) outlined briefly the European Space Agency's mission: 

Article II, Purpose, Convention of establishment of a European Space Agency, SP-1271(E) from 2003 also defines ESA's mission statement: 

==Member states and budget==

===Membership and contribution to ESA===
ESA member countries.svg|thumb|300px|]
Space Agency tight.png|thumb|300px|]

ESA is an intergovernmental organisation of 20 member states. Member states participate to varying degrees in the mandatory (25% of total expenditures in 2008) and optional space programmes (75% of total expenditures in 2008). The 2008 budget amounted to 3.0 billion the 2009 budget to 3.6 billion. esa.int  ESA budget for 2009 The total budget amounted to about 3.7 billion in 2010, 3.99 billion in 2011 and 4.02 billion in 2012. esa.int  ESA budget for 2011 

The following table lists all the member states and adjunct members, their ESA convention ratification dates, and their contributions in 2013: esa.int  ESA budget 2013. 

 Member state ESA Convention National Programme Contr.(mill. ) Contr.(%) % gov. budget 
 FFG % % 
 Belgium BELSPO % % 
 CCMTSA % % 
 DTU Space % % 
 TEKES % % 
 CNES % % 
 DLR % % 
 ISARS % % 
 EI % % 
 ASI % % 
 Luxinnovation % % 
 NSO % % 
 NSC % % 
 CBK PAN % % 
 FCT % % 
 ROSA % % 
 INTA % % 
 SNSB % % 
 SSO % % 
 UKSA % % 
 Associate Members 
 CSA % % 
 Total Members and Associates % 
 Framework Agreement establishing the legal basis for cooperation between ESA and the European Union came into force in May 2004. ESP % 
 ECS states various various % 
 Other income   % 
 Total ESA % 

===Associate members===
Currently the only associated member of ESA is Canada. Previously associated members were Austria, Norway and Finland, all of which later joined ESA as full members.

====Canada====
Since 1 January 1979, Canada has had the special status of a Cooperating State within ESA. By virtue of this accord, the Canadian Space Agency takes part in ESA's deliberative bodies and decision-making and also in ESA's programmes and activities. Canadian firms can bid for and receive contracts to work on programmes. The accord has a provision ensuring a fair industrial return to Canada. 

===Budget appropriation and allocation===

The budget of ESA was 2.977 billion in 2005, 2.904 billion in 2006 and grew to 3.018 billion in 2008, 3.600 billion in 2009, 3.745 billion in 2010, 3.994 billion in 2011 and 4.020 billion in 2012. Every 34 years, ESA member states agree on a budget plan for several years at an ESA member states conference. This plan can be amended in future years, however provides the major guideline for ESA for several years. The last major conference was held at the end of 2008, setting the budget for the years to 2012.

The 2011 funding allocations for major areas of ESA activity are shown on the pie-chart on the right. The section called 'Other' includes Technology Development, Space Situational Awareness and spending related to European Cooperating States. 

Countries typically have their own space programmes that differ in how they operate organisationally and financially with ESA. For example, the French space agency CNES has a total budget of 2015 million, of which 755 million is paid as direct financial contribution to ESA. Several space-related projects are joint projects between national space agencies and ESA (e.g. COROT). Also, ESA is not the only European space organisation (for example European Union Satellite Centre).

===Enlargement===

After the decision of the ESA Council of 21/22 March 2001, the procedure for accession of the European states was detailed as described here. 
Nations that want to become a full member of ESA do so in 3 stages. First a Cooperation Agreement is signed between the country and ESA. In this stage, the country has very limited financial responsibilities. If a country wants to cooperate more fully with ESA, it signs a European Cooperating State (ECS) Agreement. The ECS Agreement makes companies based in the country eligible for participation in ESA procurements. The country can also participate in all ESA programmes, except for the Basic Technology Research Programme. While the financial contribution of the country concerned increases, it is still much lower than that of a full member state. The agreement is normally followed by a Plan For European Cooperating State (or PECS Charter). This is a 5-year programme of basic research and development activities aimed at improving the nation's space industry capacity. At the end of the 5-year period, the country can either begin negotiations to become a full member state or an associated state or sign a new PECS Charter. ESA is likely to expand quite rapidly in the coming years. Many countries, most of which joined the EU in both 2004 and 2007, have started to cooperate with ESA on various levels:

 Applicant state Cooperation Agreement ECS Agreement PECS Charter(s) ESA Convention National Programme 
 1st: 5 November 2003 2nd: 26 September 2008 3rd: 17 October 2013 2014 or 2015 Kosmonauta.net  rbzis Etyeken  a hatr a csillagos g Importance of Space Domain Within Visegrad Defense and Security Cooperation HSO 
 TBTAK 
 22 September 2010 Dozen Estonian companies to create solutions for European Space Agency through MoEC 
 SSAU 
 through MoHEST 
 through MoES 
 through MoCW 
 Slovensko a ESA. kozmonautika.sk. Retrieved on 2013-08-21. planned 2014 through MoE 
 through MoE Previously participation was announced by the Lithuanian Ministry of Education and Science. Lietuva stoja  Europos kosmoso agentr (Lithuanian) 
 ISA 
 through MCfST. 

===EU countries and the European Space Agency===

So far the only EU member states that have not signed an ESA Cooperation Agreement are Bulgaria and Croatia. However, Bulgaria is in the process of signing a Cooperation Agreement.

's progress towards ESA:
* On 9 April 2009, the Bulgarian Government announced Bulgaria's intention to participate in the activities of ESA through IKI-BAN. Bulgarian Academy of Sciences  Space Research Institute (page 18) 
* On 21 November 2011, Bulgaria became an official observer of ESA. The observer status that was granted allows Bulgaria to attend the ESA Council meetings for those matters of common interest between ESA and the EU. 
* On the same date, Bulgaria entered negotiations with ESA about signing a Cooperation Agreement. 

==Launch vehicle fleet==
ESA has a fleet of different launch vehicles in service with which it competes in all sectors of the launch market. ESA's fleet consists of three major rocket designs: Ariane 5, Soyuz-2 and Vega. Rocket launches are carried out by Arianespace, which has 23 shareholders representing the industry that manufactures the Ariane 5 as well as CNES, at the spaceport in French Guiana. Because many communication satellites have equatorial orbits, launches from French Guiana are able to take larger payloads into space than from spaceports at higher latitudes. In addition, equatorial launches give spacecraft an extra 'push' of nearly 500 m/s due to the higher rotational velocity of the Earth at the equator compared to near the Earth's poles where rotational velocity approaches zero.

===Ariane 5===

An Ariane 5
The Ariane 5 rocket is ESA's primary launcher. It has been in service since 1997 and replaced Ariane 4. Two different variants are currently in use. The heaviest and most used version, the Ariane 5 ECA, delivers two communications satellites of up to 10 tonnes into GTO. It failed during its first test flight in 2002, but has since made 43 consecutive successful flights (as of April 2014). The other version, Ariane 5 ES, is used to launch the Automated Transfer Vehicle (ATV) to the International Space Station (ISS). 

In November 2012, ESA agreed to build an upgraded variant called Ariane 5 ME (Mid-life Evolution) which will hold greater payloads and is scheduled for its maiden flight in 2018. Some of its new features will also be adopted by the next-generation launcher, Ariane 6, planned to replace Ariane 5 in the 2020s.

ESA's Ariane 1, 2, 3 and 4 launchers (the last of which was ESA's long-time workhorse) have been retired.

===Soyuz===

Soyuz-2 (also called the Soyuz-ST or Soyuz-STK) is a Russian medium payload launcher (ca. 3 metric tons to GTO) which was brought into ESA service in October 2011. ESA entered into a 340 million joint venture with the Russian Federal Space Agency over the use of the Soyuz launcher. Under the agreement, the Russian agency manufactures Soyuz rocket parts for ESA, which are then shipped to French Guiana for assembly.

ESA benefits because it gains a medium payload launcher, complementing its fleet while saving on development costs. In addition, the Soyuz rocketwhich has been the Russian's space launch workhorse for some 40 yearsis proven technology with a very good safety record. Russia benefits in that it gets access to the Kourou launch site. Launching from Kourou rather than Baikonur will allow the Russians to almost double the Soyuz payload (3.0 tonnes vs. 1.7 tonnes to GTO), because of Kourou's closer proximity to the equator. Both agencies benefit from the long term strategic cooperation, which is also intended to enable future joint technology developments.

The maiden launch from Kourou was on 21 October 2011, for two European space navigation satellites. 
Three hours and 49 minutes after blast-off, the ESA announced that the two Galileo IOV-1 & IOV-2 satellites had successfully reached their final orbit 23,222 kilometres above Earth, and that their launch had been a complete success. The second Soyuz launch from French Guiana on the 16th of December 2011 was also a success.
It was followed by another two successful launches from Kourou in 2012, making the first 4 launches with the Soyuz from South America successful.

===Vega===

Vega is ESA's carrier for small satellites. Developed by seven ESA members lead by Italy, it is capable of carrying a payload with a mass of between 300 and 1500 kg to an altitude of 700 km, for low polar orbit. Its maiden launch from Kourou was on 13 February 2012.

The rocket has three solid propulsion stages, an additional liquid propulsion upper module, but no strap-on boosters. For a small-cargo carrier, it is remarkable that Vega is able to place multiple payloads into different orbits. 

===Ariane launch vehicle development funding===

Historically, the Ariane family rockets have been funded primarily "with money contributed by ESA governments seeking to participate in the program rather than through competitive industry bids. This meant that governments commit multiyear funding to the development with the expectation of a roughly 90% return on investment in the form of industrial workshare." ESA is proposing changes to this scheme by moving to competitive bids for the development of the Ariane 6. 
 

==Human space flight==

===History===
Ulf Merbold became the first ESA astronaut to fly into space.
At the time ESA was formed, its main goals did not encompass human space flight; rather it considered itself to be primarily a scientific research organisation for unmanned space exploration in contrast to its American and Soviet counterparts. It is therefore not surprising that the first non-Soviet European in space was not an ESA astronaut on a European space craft; it was Czechoslovak Vladimr Remek who in 1978 became the first non-Soviet European in space (the first European in space being Yuri Gagarin of the Soviet Union) &mdash; on a Soviet Soyuz spacecraft, followed by the Pole Mirosaw Hermaszewski and East German Sigmund Jhn in the same year. This Soviet co-operation programme, known as Intercosmos, primarily involved the participation of Eastern bloc countries. In 1982, however, Jean-Loup Chrtien became the first non-Communist Bloc astronaut on a flight to the Soviet Salyut 7 space station.

Because Chrtien did not officially fly into space as an ESA astronaut, but rather as a member of the French CNES astronaut corps, the German Ulf Merbold is considered the first ESA astronaut to fly into space. He participated in the STS-9 Space Shuttle mission that included the first use of the European-built Spacelab in 1983. STS-9 marked the beginning of an extensive ESA/NASA joint partnership that included dozens of space flights of ESA astronauts in the following years. Some of these missions with Spacelab were fully funded and organizationally and scientifically controlled by ESA (such as two missions by Germany and one by Japan) with European astronauts as full crew members rather than guests on board. Beside paying for Spacelab flights and seats on the shuttles, ESA continued its human space flight co-operation with the Soviet Union and later Russia, including numerous visits to Mir.

During the latter half of the 1980s, European human space flights changed from being the exception to routine and therefore, in 1990, the European Astronaut Centre in Cologne, Germany was established. It selects and trains prospective astronauts and is responsible for the co-ordination with international partners, especially with regard to the International Space Station. As of 2006, the ESA astronaut corps officially included twelve members, including nationals from most large European countries except the United Kingdom.

In the summer of 2008, the ESA started to recruit new astronauts so that final selection would be due in spring 2009. Almost 10,000 people registered as astronaut candidates before registration ended in June 2008. 8,413 fulfilled the initial application criteria. Of the applicants, 918 were chosen to take part in the first stage of psychological testing, which narrowed down the field to 192. After two-stage psychological tests and medical evaluation in early 2009, as well as formal interviews, six new members of the European Astronaut Corps were selected - five men and one woman. 

===Astronaut Corps===

The astronauts of the European Space Agency are:

* Jean-Franois Clervoy 
* Samantha Cristoforetti 
* Frank De Winne 
* Pedro Duque 
* Reinhold Ewald 
* Lopold Eyharts 
* Alexander Gerst 
* Umberto Guidoni 

* Christer Fuglesang 
* Andr Kuipers 
* Andreas Mogensen 
* Paolo Nespoli 
* Claude Nicollier 
* Luca Parmitano 
* Timothy Peake 
* Philippe Perrin 

* Thomas Pesquet 
* Thomas Reiter 
* Hans Schlegel 
* Gerhard Thiele 
* Michel Tognini 
* Roberto Vittori 

===Manned launch vehicles===

In the 1980s France pressed for an independent European manned launch vehicle. Around 1978 it was decided to pursue a reusable spacecraft model and starting in November 1987 a project to create a mini-shuttle by the name of Hermes was introduced. The craft itself was modelled comparable to the first proposals of the Space Shuttle and consisted of a small reusable spaceship that would carry 3 to 5 astronauts and 3 to 4 metric tons of payload for scientific experiments. With a total maximum weight of 21 metric tons it would have been launched on the Ariane 5 rocket, which was being developed at that time. It was planned solely for use in Low-Earth orbit space flights. The planning and pre-development phase concluded in 1991; however, the production phase was never fully implemented because at that time the political landscape had changed significantly. With the fall of the Soviet Union ESA looked forward to cooperation with Russia to build a next-generation human space vehicle. Thus the Hermes programme was cancelled in 1995 after about 3 billion dollars had been spent. The Columbus space station programme had a similar fate.

In the 21st century ESA started new programmes in order to create its own manned spacecraft, most notable among its various projects and proposals is Hopper, whose prototype by EADS, called Phoenix, has already been tested. While projects such as Hopper are neither concrete nor to be realised within the next decade, other possibilities for human spaceflight in cooperation with the Russian Space Agency have emerged. Following talks with the Russian Space Agency in 2004 and June 2005, a cooperation between ESA and the Russian Space Agency was announced to jointly work on the Russian-designed Kliper, a reusable spacecraft that would be available for space travel beyond LEO (e.g. the moon or even Mars). It was speculated that Europe would finance part of it. However, a 50 million participation study for Kliper, which was expected to be approved in December 2005, was finally not approved by the ESA member states. The Russian state tender for the Kliper project was subsequently cancelled in the summer of 2006.

In June 2006 ESA member states granted 15 million to the Crew Space Transportation System (CSTS) study, a two-year study to design a spacecraft capable of going beyond Low-Earth orbit based on the current Soyuz design. This project is pursued with Roskosmos instead of the previously cancelled Kliper proposal. A decision on the actual implementation and construction of the CSTS spacecraft is contemplated for 2008, with the major design decisions being made before the summer of 2007.
In mid-2009 EADS Astrium was awarded a 21 million study into designing a manned variation of the European ATV vehicle which is believed to now be the basis of the Advanced Crew Transportation System design. 

In November 2012 ESA decided to join NASA's Orion programme. The ATV would form the basis of a propulsion unit for NASA's new manned spacecraft. ESA may also seek to work with NASA on Orion's launch system as well in order to secure a seat on the spacecraft for its own astronauts. Project Orion raises hopes that Britain could have its own man on the moon | Science | The Observer. Guardian. Retrieved on 2013-08-21. 

==Cooperation with other countries and organisations==
ESA has signed cooperation agreements with the following states that currently neither plan to integrate as tightly with ESA institutions as Canada, nor envision future membership of ESA: Argentina, Brazil, China, India (for the Chandrayan mission), and Russia. 

Additionally, ESA has joint projects with the European Union, NASA of the United States and is participating in the International Space Station together with the United States (NASA), Russia and Japan (JAXA).

===European Union===
and EU.png|thumb|200px|]
ESA is not an agency or body of the European Union (EU), and has non-EU countries Switzerland and Norway as members. There are however ties between the two, with various agreements in place and being worked on, to define the legal status of ESA with regard to the EU. 

There are common goals between the ESA and the EU. The ESA has an EU liaison office in Brussels. On certain projects, the EU and ESA cooperate, such as the upcoming Galileo satellite navigation system. Space policy has since December 2009 been an area for voting in the European Council. Under the European Space Policy of 2007, the EU, ESA and its Member States committed themselves to increasing coordination of their activities and programmes and to organising their respective roles relating to space. 

The Lisbon Treaty of 2009 reinforces the case for space in Europe and strengthens the role of ESA as an R&D space agency. Article 189 of the Treaty gives the EU a mandate to elaborate a European space policy and take related measures, and provides that the EU should establish appropriate relations with ESA.

Former Italian astronaut Umberto Guidoni, during his tenure as a Member of the European Parliament from 2004 to 2009, stressed the importance of the European Union as a driving force for space exploration, "since other players are coming up such as India and China it is becoming ever more important that Europeans can have an independent access to space. We have to invest more into space research and technology in order to have an industry capable of competing with other international players." 

The first EU-ESA International Conference on Human Space Exploration took place in Prague on 22 and 23 October 2009. A road map which would lead to a common vision and strategic planning in the area of space exploration was discussed. Ministers from all 29 EU and ESA members as well as members of parliament were in attendance. 

===National space organisations of member states===
*The Centre National d'tudes Spatiales (CNES) (National Centre for Space Study) is the French government space agency (administratively, a "public establishment of industrial and commercial character"). Its headquarters are in central Paris. CNES is the main participant on the Ariane project. Indeed CNES designed and tested all Ariane family rockets (mainly from its centre in vry near Paris)
*The UK Space Agency is a partnership of the UK government departments which are active in space. Through the UK Space Agency, the partners provide delegates to represent the UK on the various ESA governing bodies. Each partner funds its own programme.
*The Italian Space Agency (Agenzia Spaziale Italiana or ASI) was founded in 1988 to promote, coordinate and conduct space activities in Italy. Operating under the Ministry of the Universities and of Scientific and Technological Research, the agency cooperates with numerous entities active in space technology and with the president of the Council of Ministers. Internationally, the ASI provides Italy's delegation to the Council of the European Space Agency and to its subordinate bodies.
*The German Aerospace Center (DLR) (German: Deutsches Zentrum fr Luft- und Raumfahrt e. V.) is the national research centre for aviation and space flight of the Federal Republic of Germany and of other member states in the Helmholtz Association. Its extensive research and development projects are included in national and international cooperative programmes. In addition to its research projects, the centre is the assigned space agency of Germany bestowing headquarters of German space flight activities and its associates.
*The Instituto Nacional de Tcnica Aeroespacial (INTA) (National Institute for Aerospace Technique) is a Public Research Organization specialized in aerospace research and technology development in Spain. Between other functions, it serves as a platform for space research and acts as a significant testing facility for the aeronautic and space sector in the country.

===NASA===
ESA has a long history of collaboration with NASA. Since ESA's astronaut corps was formed, the Space Shuttle has been the primary launch vehicle used by ESA's astronauts to get into space through partnership programmes with NASA. In the 1980s and 1990s, the Spacelab programme was an ESA-NASA joint research programme that had ESA develop and manufacture orbital labs for the Space Shuttle for several flights on which ESA participate with astronauts in experiments.

In robotic science mission and exploration missions, NASA has been ESA's main partner. CassiniHuygens was a joint NASA-ESA mission, the Infrared Space Observatory, INTEGRAL, SOHO, and others. Also, the Hubble space telescope is a joint project of NASA and ESA. Future unmanned projects that are in development right now and are ESA-NASA joint projects include the James Webb Space Telescope or the Laser Interferometer Space Antenna. NASA has committed to provide support to ESA's proposed MarcoPolo-R mission to return an asteroid sample to Earth for further analysis. NASA and ESA will also likely join together for a Mars Sample Return Mission.

===Cooperation with other space agencies===
Since China has started to invest more money into space activities, the Chinese Space Agency has sought international partnerships. ESA is, beside the Russian Space Agency, one of its most important partners. Recently the two space agencies cooperated in the development of the Double Star Mission. 

ESA entered into a major joint venture with Russia in the form of the CSTS, the preparation of French Guyana spaceport for launches of Soyuz-2 rockets and other projects. With India ESA agreed to send instruments into space aboard the ISRO's Chandrayaan-1 in 2008. ESA is also cooperating with Japan, the most notable current project in collaboration with JAXA is the BepiColombo mission to Mercury.

Speaking to reporters at an air show near Moscow in August 2011, ESA head Jean-Jacques Dordain said ESA and Russia's Roskosmos space agency would "carry out the first flight to Mars together." 

===International Space Station===

ISS module Columbus at Kennedy Space Center

With regard to the International Space Station (ISS) ESA is not represented by all of its member states: 10 of the 20 ESA member states currently participate in the project. Ten ESA member states are participating: Belgium, Denmark, France, Germany, Italy, Netherlands, Norway, Spain, Sweden and Switzerland. Austria, Finland and Ireland chose not to participate, because of lack of interest or concerns about the expense of the project. The United Kingdom withdrew from the preliminary agreement because of concerns about the expense of the project. Portugal, Luxembourg, Greece, the Czech Republic, Romania and Poland joined ESA after the agreement had been signed. ESA is taking part in the construction and operation of the ISS with contributions such as Columbus, a science laboratory module that was brought into orbit by NASA's STS-122 Space Shuttle mission and the Cupola observatory module that was completed in July 2005 by Alenia Spazio for ESA. The current estimates for the ISS are approaching 100 billion in total (development, construction and 10 years of maintaining the station) of which ESA has committed to paying 8 billion. About 90% of the costs of ESA's ISS share will be contributed by Germany (41%), France (28%) and Italy (20%). German ESA astronaut Thomas Reiter was the first long-term ISS crew member.

ESA has developed the Automated Transfer Vehicle (ATV) for ISS resupply. Each ATV has a cargo capacity of 7667 kg. The first ATV, Jules Verne, was launched on 9 March 2008 and on 3 April 2008 successfully docked with the ISS. This manoeuvre, considered a major technical feat, involved using automated systems to allow the ATV to track the ISS, moving at 27,000 km/h, and attach itself with an accuracy of 2 cm.

As of 2013, the spacecraft establishing supply links to the ISS are the Russian Progress and Soyuz, European ATV, Japanese Kounotori (HTV), and the USA COTS program vehicles Dragon and Cygnus.

European Life and Physical Sciences research on board the International Space Station (ISS) is mainly based on the European Programme for Life and Physical Sciences in Space programme that was initiated in 2001.

==Miscellaneous==

===Languages===
According to Annex 1, Resolution No. 8 of the Convention for the establishment of a European Space Agency, English, French and German may be used in all meetings of the Agency, with interpretation provided into these three languages. All official documents are available in English and French with all documents concerning the ESA Council being available in German as well.

===Facilities===
*Headquarters of ESA, Paris, France
*European Space Operations Centre (ESOC), Darmstadt, Germany
*Centre Spatial Guyanais, Kourou, French Guiana
*European Space Research and Technology Centre (ESTEC), Noordwijk, The Netherlands
*ESA Centre for Earth Observation (ESRIN), Frascati, Italy
*European Astronaut Centre (EAC), Cologne, Germany
*European Space Astronomy Centre (ESAC), Madrid, Spain 
*ESTRACK European Space Tracking Network
*European Centre for Space Applications and Telecommunications (ECSAT), Harwell Science and Innovation Campus, United Kingdom 

== See also ==
* Agencies of the European Union and Enhanced co-operation
* European integration, section Space
* European Launcher Development Organisation (ELDO)
* European Space Policy
* European Space Research Organisation (ESRO)
* Eurospace
* List of directors general of the European Space Agency
* List of projects of the European Space Agency
* Skylon (a spacecraft), a design for a spaceplane by the British company Reaction Engines Limited (REL)
* Space policy of the European Union

==Notes==

==References==

==Further reading==

* ESA Bulletin () is a quarterly magazine about the work of ESA that can be subscribed to free of charge.
* Bonnet, Roger; Manno, Vittorio (1994). International Cooperation in Space: The Example of the European Space Agency (Frontiers of Space). Harvard University Press. ISBN 0-674-45835-4.
* Johnson, Nicholas (1993). Space technologies and space science activities of member states of the European Space Agency. .
* Peeters, Walter (2000). Space Marketing: A European Perspective (Space Technology Library). ISBN 0-7923-6744-8.
* Zabusky, Stacia (1995 and 2001). Launching Europe: An Ethnography of European Cooperation in Space Science. ISBN B00005OBX2.
* Harvey, Brian (2003). Europe's Space Programme: To Ariane and Beyond. ISBN 1-85233-722-2.

==External links==

*
*A European strategy for space  Europa
*Convention for the establishment of a European Space Agency, September 2005
* Convention for the Establishment of a European Space Agency, Annex I: Privileges and Immunities

 



[[Embouchure]]

The embouchure of a trumpeter.
The embouchure is the use of facial muscles and the shaping of the lips to the mouthpiece of woodwind instruments or the mouthpiece of the brass instruments.

The word is of French origin and is related to the root bouche (fr.), 'mouth'.

The proper embouchure allows the instrumentalist to play the instrument at its full range with a full, clear tone and without strain or damage to one's muscles.

==Brass embouchure==

While performing on a brass instrument, the sound is produced by the player buzzing his or her lips into a mouthpiece. Pitches are changed in part through altering the amount of muscular contraction in the lip formation. The performer's use of the air, tightening of cheek and jaw muscles, as well as tongue manipulation can affect how the embouchure works.

Even today, many brass pedagogues take a rigid approach to teaching how a brass player's embouchure should function. Many of these authors also disagree with each other regarding which technique is correct. Research suggests efficient brass embouchures depend on the player using the method that suits that player's particular anatomy (see below). Individual differences in dental structure, lip shape and size, jaw shape and the degree of jaw malocclusion, and other anatomical factors will affect whether a particular embouchure technique will be effective or not .

In 1962, Philip Farkas hypothesized The Art of Brass Playing, Philip Farkas, 1962 that the air stream traveling through the lip aperture should be directed straight down the shank of the mouthpiece. He believed that it would be illogical to "violently deflect" the air stream downward at the point of where the air moves past the lips. In this text, Farkas also recommends that the lower jaw be protruded so that the upper and lower teeth are aligned.

In 1970, Farkas published a second text A Photographic Study of 40 Virtuoso Horn Players, Philip Farkas, 1970 which contradicted his earlier writing. Out of 40 subjects, Farkas showed that 39 subjects directed the air downward to varying degrees and 1 subject directed the air in an upward direction at various degrees. The lower jaw position seen in these photographs show more variation from his earlier text as well.

This supports what was written by trombonist and brass pedagogue Donald S. Reinhardt in 1942. Pivot System For Trumpet, Donald S. Reinhardt, 1942 Pivot System for Trombone, Donald S. Reinhardt, 1942 In 1972, The Encyclopedia of the Pivot System, Donald S. Reinhardt, 1972 Reinhardt described and labeled different embouchure patterns according to such characteristics as mouthpiece placement and the general direction of the air stream as it travels past the lips. According to this later text, players who place the mouthpiece higher on the lips, so that more upper lip is inside the mouthpiece, will direct the air downwards to varying degrees while playing. Performers who place the mouthpiece lower, so that more lower lip is inside the mouthpiece, will direct the air to varying degrees in an upward manner. In order for the performer to be successful, the air stream direction and mouthpiece placement need to be personalized based on individual anatomical differences. Lloyd Leno confirmed the existence of both upstream and downstream embouchures. "A Study of Lip Vibrations with High-Speed Photography", International Trombone Association Journal, Lloyd Leno, 1987 

More controversial was Reinhardt's description and recommendations regarding a phenomenon he termed a "pivot". According to Reinhardt, a successful brass embouchure depends on a motion wherein the performer moves both the mouthpiece and lips as a single unit along the teeth in an upward and downward direction. As the performer ascends in pitch, he or she will either move the lips and mouthpiece together slightly up towards the nose or pull them down together slightly towards the chin, and use the opposite motion to descend in pitch. Whether the player uses one general pivot direction or the other, and the degree to which the motion is performed, depends on the performer's anatomical features and stage of development. The placement of the mouthpiece upon the lips doesn't change, but rather the relationship of the rim and lips to the teeth. While the angle of the instrument may change as this motion follows the shape of the teeth and placement of the jaw, contrary to what many brass performers and teachers believe, the angle of the instrument does not actually constitute the motion Reinhardt advised as a pivot.

Later research supports Reinhardt's claim that this motion exists and might be advisable for brass performers to adopt. John Froelich "The Mouthpiece Forces Used During Trombone Performances", International Trombone Association Journal, John Froelich, 1990 describes how mouthpiece pressure towards the lips (vertical forces) and shear pressure (horizontal forces) functioned in three test groups, student trombonists, professional trombonists, and professional symphonic trombonists. Froelich noted that the symphonic trombonists used the least amount of both direct and shear forces and recommends this model be followed. Other research notes that virtually all brass performers rely upon the upward and downward embouchure motion. The Correlation Between Doug Elliott's Embouchure Types and Playing and Selected Physical Characteristics Among Trombonists (David Wilken, doctoral dissertation, Ball State University, 2000) An Analysis, Clarification, and Revaluation of Donald Reinhardt's Pivot System for Brass Instruments (David Ray Turnbull, doctoral thesis, Arizona State University, 2001 Other authors and pedagogues remain skeptical about the necessity of this motion, but scientific evidence supporting this view has not been sufficiently developed at this time to support this view.

Some noted brass pedagogues prefer to instruct the use of the embouchure from a less analytical point of view. Arnold Jacobs, a tubist and well-regarded brass teacher, believed that it was best for the student to focus on his or her use of the air and musical expression to allow the embouchure to develop naturally on its own. Arnold Jacobs: Song and Wind, Brian Frederiksen, 1996 Other instructors, such as Carmine Caruso, believed that the brass player's embouchure could best be developed through coordination exercises and drills that bring all the muscles into balance that focus the student's attention on his or her time perception. Musical Calisthenics for Brass, Carmine Caruso, 1979 Still other authors who have differing approaches to embouchure development include Louis Maggio, Original Louis Maggio System for Brass, C. MacBeth Jeff Smiley, The Balanced Embouchure, Jeff Smiley and Jerome Callet. Superchops, Jerome Callet Trumpet Secrets, Jerome Callet 

===Farkas embouchure===

Most professional performers, as well as instructors, use a combination called a puckered smile. Farkas told people to blow as if they were trying to cool soup. Raphael Mendez advised saying the letter "M". The skin under your lower lip will be taut with no air pocket. Your lips do not overlap nor do they roll in or out. The corners of the mouth are held firmly in place. To play with an extended range you should use a pivot, tongue arch and lip to lip compression.

According to Farkas the mouthpiece should have 2/3 upper lip and 1/3 lower lip (French horn), 2/3 lower lip and 1/3 upper lip (trumpet and cornet), and more latitude for lower brass (trombone, baritone, and tuba). For trumpet, some also advocate 1/2 upper lip and 1/2 lower lip . Farkas claimed placement was more important for the instruments with smaller mouthpieces. Your lips should not overlap each other, nor should they roll in or out. The mouth corners should be held firm. Farkas speculated that the horn should be held in a downward angle to allow the air stream to go straight into the mouthpiece, although his later text shows that air stream direction actually is either upstream or downstream and is dependent upon the ratio of upper or lower lip inside the mouthpiece, not the horn angle. Farkas advised to moisten the outside of your lips, then form your embouchure and gently place the mouthpiece on it. He also recommended there must be a gap of  inch or so between your teeth so that the air flows freely.

===Arban vs. Saint-Jacome===

Arban and Saint-Jacome were both cornet soloists and authors of well respected and still used method books. Arban stated undogmatically that he believed the mouthpiece should be placed 1/3 on the top lip. St. Jacome to the contrary said dogmatically that the mouthpiece should be placed "two-thirds for the upper and the rest for the under according to all professors and one-third for the upper and two-thirds for the under according to one sole individual, whom I shall not name." Original text: http://www.purtle.com/saint-jacome-method-original-text.html 

====(Subset) Buzzing embouchure====
The Farkas set is the basis of most lip buzzing embouchures. Mendez did teach lip buzzing and got great results. One can initiate this type of buzz by using the same sensation as spitting seeds, but maintaining a continued flow of air. This technique assists the development of the Farkas approach by preventing the player from using an aperture that is too open.

===Stevens-Costello embouchure The Complete Stevens-Costello Embouchure Technique (Rev 2006) by Roy Stevens & Bill Moriarity, Colin Publications ===

Stevens-Costello embouchure has its origins in the William Costello embouchure and was further developed by Roy Stevens. It uses a slight rolling in of both lips and touching evenly all the way across. It also uses mouthpiece placement of about 40% to 50% top lip and 60% to 50% lower lip. The teeth will be about 1/4 to 1/2 inch apart and the teeth are parallel or the jaw slightly forward.

There is relative mouthpiece pressure to the given air column. One exercise to practice the proper weight to air relationship is the palm exercise where you hold your horn by laying it on its side in the palm of your hand. Do not grasp it. Place your lips on the mouthpiece and blow utilizing the weight of the horn in establishing a sound.

===Maggio embouchure===

A rare, puckered embouchure, sometimes used by jazz players for extremely high "screamer" notes. Maggio claimed that the pucker embouchure gives more endurance than some systems. Carlton MacBeth is the main proponent of the pucker embouchure. The Maggio system was established because Louis Maggio had sustained an injury which prevented him from playing. In this system you cushion the lips by extending them or puckering (like a monkey). This puckering enables the players to overcome physical malformations. It also lets the player play for an extended time in the upper register. The pucker can make it easy to use to open an aperture. Lots of very soft practice can help overcome this. Claude Gordon was student of Louis Maggio and Herbert L. Clarke and systematized the concepts of these teachers. Claude Gordon made use of pedal tones for embouchure development as did Maggio and Herbert L. Clarke. All three stressed that the mouthpiece should be placed higher on the top lip for a more free vibration of the lips.

===Tongue-controlled embouchure===

This embouchure method, advocated by a minority of brass pedagogues such as Jerome Callet, has not yet been sufficiently researched to support the claims that this system is the most effective approach for all brass performers.

Advocates of Callet's approach believe that this method was recommended and taught by the great brass instructors of the early 20th Century. Two French trumpet technique books, authored by Jean-Baptiste Arban, and St. Jacome, were translated into English for use by American players. According to some, due to a misunderstanding arising from differences in pronunciation between French and English, the commonly used brass embouchure in Europe was interpreted incorrectly. Callet attributes this difference in embouchure technique as the reason the great players of the past were able to play at the level of technical virtuosity which they did, although the increased difficulty of contemporary compositions for brass seem to indicate that the level of brass technique achieved by today's performers equals or even exceeds that of most performers from the late 19th and early 20th centuries.

Callet's method of brass embouchure consists of the tongue remaining forward and through the teeth at all times. The corners of the mouth always remain relaxed, and only a small amount of air is used. The top and bottom lips curl inward and grip the forward tongue. The tongue will force the teeth, and subsequently the throat, wide open, supposedly resulting in a bigger, more open sound. The forward tongue resists the pressure of the mouthpiece, controls the flow of air for lower and higher notes, and protects the lips and teeth from damage or injury from mouthpiece pressure. Because of the importance of the tongue in this method many refer to this as a "tongue-controlled embouchure." This technique facilitates the use of a smaller mouthpiece, and larger bore instruments. It results in improved intonation and stronger harmonically related partials across the player's range.]

==Woodwind embouchure==
Flute embouchure

===Flute embouchure===

A variety of transverse flute embouchures are employed by professional flautists, though the most natural form is perfectly symmetrical, the corners of the mouth relaxed (i.e. not smiling), the lower lip placed along and at a short distance from the embouchure hole. It must be stressed, however, that achieving a symmetrical, or perfectly centred blowing hole ought not to be an end in itself. Indeed Marcel Moyse, the owner of the next quotation, did not play with a symmetrical embouchure.

The end-blown xiao, kaval, shakuhachi and hocchiku flutes demand especially difficult embouchures, sometimes requiring many lessons before any sound can be produced.

The embouchure is an important element to tone production. The right embouchure, developed with "time, patience, and intelligent work", will produce a beautiful sound and a correct intonation. The embouchure is produced with the muscles around the lips: principally the orbicularis oris muscle and the depressor anguli oris, whilst avoiding activiation of zygomaticus major, which will produce a smile, flattening the top lip against the maxillary (upper jaw) teeth. Beginner flute-players tend to suffer fatigue in these muscles, and notably struggle to use the depressor muscle, which necessarily helps to keep the top lip directing the flow of air across the embouchure hole. These muscles have to be properly warmed up and exercised before practicing. Tone development exercises including long notes and harmonics must be done as part of the warm up every day.

Some further adjustments to the embouchure are necessary when moving from the transverse orchestral flute to the piccolo. With the piccolo, it becomes necessary to place the near side of the embouchure hole slightly higher on the lower lip, i.e. above the lip margin, and greater muscle tone from the lip muscles is needed to keep the stream/pressure of air directed across the smaller embouchure hole, particularly when playing in higher piccolo registers.

===Reed instrument embouchure===

With the woodwinds, aside from the flute, piccolo, and recorder, the sound is generated by a reed and not with the lips. The embouchure is therefore based on sealing the area around the reed and the mouthpiece. This serves to prevent air from escaping while simultaneously supporting the reed allowing it to vibrate, and to constrict the reed preventing it from vibrating too much. With woodwinds, it is important to ensure that the mouthpiece is not placed too far into the mouth, which would result in too much vibration (no control), often creating a sound an octave (or harmonic twelfth for the clarinet) above the intended note. If the mouthpiece is not placed far enough into the mouth, no noise will be generated, as the reed will not vibrate.

The embouchure for single reed woodwinds like the clarinet and saxophone is formed by resting the reed upon the bottom lip, which rests on the teeth and is supported by the chin muscles and the buccinator muscles on the sides of the mouth. The top teeth then rest on top of the mouthpiece. In both saxophone and clarinet playing, the corners of the mouth are brought inwards (similar to a drawstring bag) in order to create a seal. With the less common double-lip embouchure, the top lip is placed under (around) the top teeth. In both instances, the position of the tongue in the mouth plays a vital role in focusing and accelerating the air stream blown by the player. This results in a more mature and full sound, rich in overtones.

The double reed woodwinds, the oboe and bassoon, have no mouthpiece. Instead the reed is two pieces of cane extending from a metal tube (oboe - staple) or placed on a bocal (bassoon, English horn). The reed is placed directly on the lips and then played like the double-lip embouchure described above. Compared to the single reed woodwinds, the reed is very small and subtle changes in the embouchure can have a dramatic effect on tuning, tone and pitch control.

==Polyphonic embouchure (finger-embouchure)==
Waterflute with 45 finger-embouchure holes, allowing an intricate but polyphonic embouchure-like control by inserting one finger into each of several of the instrument's mouths at the same time.
Recent "waterflute" installations as fountains in public parks allow for a kind of reverse-embouchure. Whereas traditional instruments are supplied with compressible fluid (air) from the mouth of a player, the new waterflutes supply incompressible fluid (water) to the player, and sound is made when the player resists this supply of fluid. Water flows out through mouths of the instrument and the player blocks this flow of water to make sound. As a result, the player can put one finger in each of several of the instrument's mouths, to play a chord, while independently controlling the embouchure of the sound made at each mouth. Additionally, the player's own mouth is free to sing along with the instrument, while the player can independently affect the sound of each of several different musical parts with this "finger embouchure". Such instruments are referred to as hydraulophones. Finger-embouchure can be used to make a wide variety of sounds, ranging from a buzzing sound like that made by a defective faucet, to a very pure tone similar to the sound made by a glass harmonica. Finger embouchure can also be used to affect the intonation or temperament. For example, a skilled hydraulist can use finger-embouchure to remain in a just intonation while changing keys, or to fluidly vary the intonation of a chord while it is sounding.

==See also==

*Double buzz relating to the brass players embouchure
*Saxophone embouchure
*Roy Stevens relating to the Stevens-Costello method
*Embouchure collapse

==Further reading==
*"Brass Playing Is No Harder Than Deep Breathing" by Claude Gordon https://www.purtle.com/brass-playing-no-harder-deep-breathing-claude-gordon 
*"Super Chops", "Trumpet Secrets" by Jerry Callet http://www.super-chops.com 
*"Screamin - The Final Embouchure Method" video by Bill Carmichael http://www.screamin.net 
*"Sail the Seven C's" Book & CD by Clyde Hunt http://www.bflatmusic.com/ 
*"Embouchure Enhancement" by Roddy Lewis http://www.r-o-d-d-y-t-r-u-m-p-e-t.cc/home.html 
*"A New Approach to Altissimo Trumpet Playing" by John Lynch http://www.asymmetric-mouthpiece.com/the_book.htm 
*" Trumpet A-Z","Trumpet FAQ'S", "Pros Talk Embouchure" by Clint 'Pops' McLaughlin http://www.BbTrumpet.com 
*"Brass Tactics" by Chase Sanborn http://www.brasstactics.net/ 
*"The Buzzing Book" by James Thompson http://userwww.service.emory.edu/~mmoor02/ABSPress.html#studies 
*"The Complete Stevens-Costello Embouchure Technique (Rev 2006)" by Roy Stevens & Bill Moriarity http://www.charlescolin.com 

==References==
 

==External links==

* Flute Embouchure Photos
* Jerome Callet's Superchops Embouchure Clinic
* Trumpet Playing and Brass Playing Articles by Claude Gordon student Jeff Purtle
* Bahb Civiletti's TCE page
* Rune's Trumpet-think Discussion about embouchures
* Diagrams of embouchures
* Trumpet College Discussion about all embouchures
* Beginners guide to embouchures
* OJ's Discussion about all embouchures
* Saxophone embouchures
* Roy Roman's Stevens-Costello Embouchure Instruction
* Al Geller's Stevens-Costello Embouchure Instruction
* Tribute Site about Roy Stevens
* http://www.embouchure.nl, information



[[The Elephant 6 Recording Company]]

The Elephant 6 Recording Company (or simply Elephant 6) is a collective of American musicians who spawned many notable independent bands of the 1990s, including The Apples in Stereo, The Olivia Tremor Control, Neutral Milk Hotel, Beulah, Elf Power, of Montreal, and Circulatory System. They are marked by a shared admiration of 1960s pop music. 

==History==

===Foundation===
The collective was officially founded in Denver, Colorado by childhood friends Robert Schneider, Bill Doss, Will Cullen Hart and Jeff Mangum, along with founding Apples in Stereo members Jim McIntyre and Hilarie Sidney. Schneider, Doss, Hart and Mangum grew up making music and sharing cassette tapes in Ruston, Louisiana while attending high school together. They started several bands and pet projects; Doss and Hart with The Olivia Tremor Control (then called Synthetic Flying Machine), Mangum with Neutral Milk Hotel, and Schneider with The Apples in Stereo. Together, they held a mutual admiration for the music of the 1960s, especially the Beach Boys, considering the unfinished Smile project to be its "Holy Grail". 

Wishing to emulate the Beach Boys' Brother Records, Schneider created the Elephant 6 record label when he moved to Denver, Colorado in late 1991 to attend the University of Colorado at Boulder. According to Schneider, Hart coined the name "Elephant 6" and Schneider added "Recording Company." In Denver, Schneider and new friends founded The Apples (which eventually became The Apples in Stereo). Recorded at the newly-built Pet Sounds Studio, and released in June 1993, The Apples' Tidal Wave 7" EP was the first Elephant 6 product. Hart designed the Art Nouveau-inspired Elephant 6 logo for the label of The Apples EP.

Doss had moved to Athens, Georgia where he joined Hart and Mangum in Synthetic Flying Machine, which became The Olivia Tremor Control. They released California Demise as their first recording, and The Elephant 6's second. Afterwards, the base for The Elephant 6 moved from Denver to Athens. 

===Success, disbandment and continuation===
Several Elephant 6 projects began to find commercial success in the late 1990s, including Beulah, The Minders, Elf Power, Dressy Bessy, The Music Tapes, and of Montreal, as well as the founding bands. Most of the bands subsequently signed with major record labels; E6 as an entity slowly deteriorated until the collective called it quits &mdash; due to recording difficulties and lack of organization &mdash; in 2002. The collective's bands all moved on to various labels and projects of their own.

However, many band members are still friends and even tour together under various guises. Many live together on the Orange Twin Conservation Community in Athens. The term "Elephant 6" has since come to refer to a broad range of bands and spin-off projects that the record label has spawned.

In 2007 The Apples in Stereo featured the Elephant 6 logo on their album New Magnetic Wonder, announcing "The Elephant 6 Recording Company re-opens our doors and windows, and invites the world: join together with your friends and make something special, something meaningful, something to remember when you are old." This marked the first major release in five years to bear the Elephant 6 logo.

In 2008, the Elephant 6 logo was also used when Julian Koster released his long awaited Music Tapes For Clouds and Tornadoes under the name The Music Tapes. He also assembled The Elephant 6 Holiday Surprise Tour which featured contributions from Will Cullen Hart and Bill Doss of Olivia Tremor Control, Scott Spillane of the Gerbils, Andrew Reiger and Laura Carter of Elf Power, Theo Hilton of Nana Grizol, John Fernandes and Eric Harris of OTC, The Music Tapes and Circulatory System, Robbie Cucchiaro of The Music Tapes, Charlie Johnston and Suzanne Allison of The 63 Crayons, Nesey Gallons, Jeff Mangum, and Peter Erchick. This ensemble tour was widely seen as a resurgence of Elephant 6 as a productive, cohesive entity. The show took place in the UK, curated by Jeff Mangum of Neutral Milk Hotel as part of the All Tomorrow's Parties festival in March 2012 in Minehead, England. ATP curated by Jeff Mangum 

In recent years, Robert Schneider has explored a number of experimental music projects, such as the Teletron mind-controlled synthesizer and Non-Pythagorean scale of his own invention. Indeed, since the inception of Elephant 6, members of the collective showed a strong interest and participation in experimental music, particularly The Olivia Tremor Control and Von Hemmling.

==See also==
* Indie rock
* Psychedelic folk
* List of record labels

==References==

==Sources==
*

==External links==
*Elephant6.com  The official site about the collective.
*E6 Townhall  An official Elephant Six message board.
*E6 2008 Concert on NPR Music

 



[[Echolocation]]

Echolocation may refer to:

==Navigation using sound==
* Acoustic location, the general use of sound to locate objects
** Animal echolocation, non-human animals emitting sound waves and listening to the echo in order to locate objects or navigate
** Human echolocation, the use of sound by people to navigate
** Sonar (sound navigation and ranging), the use of sound to navigate or to locate other watercraft, usually by submarines
** Echo sounding, listening to the echo of sound pulses to measure the distance to the bottom of the sea, a special case of Sonar
** Medical ultrasonography, the use of ultrasound echos to look inside the body

==Other==
* Echolocation (album), a 2001 album by Fruit Bats
* Echolocation (Rock Band from UK), an English rock band from Leicester UK

==See also==
* Radar, locating objects by detecting the echo of emitted radio waves
* Time to Echolocate, a 2005 album by The Ebb and Flow



[[Evangelicalism]]

Evangelicalism is a world-wide Protestant movement maintaining that the essence of the gospel consists in the doctrine of salvation by faith in Christ's atonement. The movement gained great momentum in the 18th and 19th centuries with the emergence of Methodism and the Great Awakenings in the British Isles and North America. Pietism, Nicolaus Zinzendorf and the Moravian Church, Presbyterianism and Puritanism have influenced Evangelicalism.

Influential leaders in the English-speaking world have included John Wesley, George Whitefield and Jonathan Edwards. The United States has the largest concentration of Evangelicals by country, with roughly a quarter of the world's Evangelicals (over 90 million). Many Evangelicals now live outside the English-speaking world and over 42 million live in Brazil alone. . The movement continues to draw adherents globally in the 21st century, especially in the developing world.

== Characteristics ==
Christian historian David Bebbington says, "Although 'evangelical', with a lower-case initial, is occasionally used to mean 'of the gospel', the term 'Evangelical', with a capital letter, is applied to any aspect of the movement beginning in the 1730s." He notes four distinctive aspects of Evangelical faith: conversionism, biblicism, crucicentrism, and activism, noting, "Together they form a quadrilateral of priorities that is the basis of Evangelicalism." This definition has been influential. 

Conversionism, or being "born again" is based on passages in and that call for a complete change of life. Biblicism is defined as having a high regard for biblical authority and an identification with the biblical story. Crucicentrism draws attention to teachings that proclaim the saving death and resurrection of the Son of God, Jesus Christ, offering forgiveness of sins and new life. Activism describes the tendency towards active expression and sharing of the gospel in diverse ways that include preaching and social action.

Development in the doctrine of assurance underlies what differentiates Evangelicalism from what went before. Bebbington says, "The dynamism of the Evangelical movement was possible only because its adherents were assured in their faith." He goes on:

This new assurance made way for the possibility of Revivalism, another key discontinuity with the Protestantism of the previous era. 

Religion scholar Randall Balmer says that:

== Usage ==
The term Evangelical has its etymological roots in the Greek word for "gospel" or "good news":  (evangelion), from eu- "good" and angelion "message". In that sense, to be an Evangelical would mean to be a believer of the Gospel, that is the message of Jesus Christ.

By the English Middle Ages the term had been expanded to include not only the message, but also the New Testament which contained the message, as well as more specifically the Gospels in which the life, death and resurrection of Jesus are portrayed. The first published use of the term "evangelical" in English was in 1531 by William Tyndale, who wrote "He exhorteth them to proceed constantly in the evangelical truth." One year later, the earliest recorded use in reference to a theological distinction was by Sir Thomas More, who spoke of "Tyndale his evangelical brother Barns". 

By the time of the Reformation, Protestant theologians began to embrace the term evangelical as referring to "gospel truth". Martin Luther referred to the evangelische Kirche or evangelical Church to distinguish Protestants from Catholics in the Roman Catholic Church. In Germany, Switzerland and Denmark, and especially among Lutherans, the term has continued to be used in a broad sense. This can be seen in the names of certain Lutheran denominations such as the Evangelical Lutheran Church in America, the Wisconsin Evangelical Lutheran Synod, the Evangelical Lutheran Church in Canada, and the Evangelical Church in Germany.

=== Current usage ===
Although often used in a religious context, the term may also characterize a generic missionary, reforming, or redeeming impulse or purpose. For example, the Times Literary Supplement refers to "the rise and fall of evangelical fervor within the Socialist movement". 

The contemporary North American usage of the term reflects the impact of the FundamentalistModernist Controversy of the early 20th century. Evangelicalism may sometimes be perceived as the middle ground between the theological liberalism of the mainline denominations and the cultural separatism of fundamentalism. Evangelicalism has therefore been described as "the third of the leading strands in American Protestantism, straddl the divide between fundamentalists and liberals". In 2004 Andrew Crouch wrote in Christianity Today: "The emerging movement is a protest against much of evangelicalism as currently practiced. It is post-evangelical in the way that neo-evangelicalism (in the 1950s) was post-fundamentalist. It would not be unfair to call it postmodern evangelicalism." . 

While the North American perception has a certain importance in understanding some usage of the term, it by no means dominates a wider global view: elsewhere the fundamentalist debate had less direct influence.

D.W. Cloud wrote: "In the first half of the 20th century, evangelicalism in America was largely synonymous with fundamentalism. George Marsden in Reforming Fundamentalism (1995) writes, "There was not a practical distinction between fundamentalist and evangelical: the words were interchangeable" (p. 48). When the National Association of Evangelicals (NAE) formed in 1942, for example, participants included such fundamentalist leaders as Bob Jones, Sr., John R. Rice, Charles Woodbridge, Harry Ironside, and David Otis Fuller." . 

By the mid-1950s, largely due to the ecumenical evangelism of Billy Graham, the terms Evangelicalism and fundamentalism began to refer to two different approaches. Fundamentalism aggressively attacked its liberal enemies; Evangelicalism downplayed liberalism and emphasized outreach and conversion of new members.

While some conservative Evangelicals believe the label has broadened too much beyond its more limiting traditional distinctives, this trend is nonetheless strong enough to create significant ambiguity in the term. . As a result, the dichotomy between "Evangelical" and "mainline" denominations is increasingly complex, particularly with such innovations as the "emergent church" movement.

== History ==

=== Influences from 17th century ===
The work of the Pietists Philipp Jakob Spener and August Hermann Francke highly influenced Evangelicalism. The Francke Foundations in Halle became the training ground for many priests of the New World, above all for the United States. The German Pietists believed the personal experience of enlightenment was the central reason to find the way to the good, and the spreading of the faith was best pursued by individual piety. . 

=== 18th century ===
John Wesley preaching
Evangelicalism emerged in the early 18th century in Britain and New England. Howell Harris and Daniel Rowland of Wales are the first discernibly Evangelical preachers. At the same time, in Massachusetts, Jonathan Edwards was involved in a revival in Northampton; he was heavily influenced by Pietismone historian has stressed his "American Pietism." George Whitfield, converted in 1735, was next; his mentor Charles Wesley reported an evangelical conversion in 1738. In the same week John Wesley felt his heart 'strangely warmed'. Pietism directly influenced John Wesley, who had translated 33 Pietist hymns from German to English. Numerous German Pietist hymns became part of the English Evangelical repertoire. 

Whitfield joined forces with Edwards to "fan the flame of revival" in the Thirteen Colonies in 173940. Evangelical preachers emphasized personal salvation and piety more than ritual and tradition. Pamphlets and printed sermons crisscrossed the Atlantic, encouraging the revivalists. . Soon the First Great Awakening stirred Protestants up and down the Thirteen Colonies. The Awakening resulted from powerful preaching that gave listeners a sense of deep personal revelation of their need of salvation by Jesus Christ. Pulling away from ritual and ceremony, the Great Awakening made Christianity intensely personal to the average person by fostering a deep sense of spiritual conviction and redemption, and by encouraging introspection and a commitment to a new standard of personal morality. It reached people who were already church members. It changed their rituals, their piety and their self-awareness. To the evangelical imperatives of Reformation Protestantism, 18th century American Christians added emphases on divine outpourings of the Holy Spirit and conversions that implanted within new believers an intense love for God. Revivals encapsulated those hallmarks and forwarded the newly created Evangelicalism into the early republic. . 

=== 19th century ===
The start of the 19th century saw an increase in missionary work and many of the major missionary societies were founded around this time (see Timeline of Christian missions). Both the Evangelical and high church movements sponsored missionaries.

The Second Great Awakening (which actually began in 1790) was primarily an American revivalist movement and resulted in substantial growth of the Methodist and Baptist churches. Charles Grandison Finney was an important preacher of this period.

William Wilberforce, British evangelical abolitionist
In Britain in addition to stressing the traditional Wesleyan combination of "Bible, cross, conversion, and activism," the revivalist movement sought a universal appeal, hoping to include rich and poor, urban and rural, and men and women. Special efforts were made to attract children and to generate literature to spread the revivalist message. . 

"Christian conscience" was used by the British Evangelical movement to promote social activism. Evangelicals believed activism in government and the social sphere was an essential method in reaching the goal of eliminating sin in a world drenched in wickedness. . The Evangelicals in the Clapham Sect included figures such as William Wilberforce who successfully campaigned for the abolition of slavery.

In the late 19th century, the revivalist Holiness movement, based on the doctrine of "entire sanctification," took a more extreme form in rural America and Canada, where it ultimately broke away from institutional Methodism. In urban Britain the Holiness message was less exclusive and censorious. . 

John Nelson Darby was a 19th-century Irish Anglican minister who devised modern dispensationalism, an innovative Protestant theological interpretation of the Bible that was incorporated in the development of modern Evangelicalism. Cyrus Scofield further promoted the influence of dispensationalism through the explanatory notes to his Scofield Reference Bible. According to scholar Mark S. Sweetnam, who takes a cultural studies perspective, dispensationalism can be defined in terms of its Evangelicalism, its insistence on the literal interpretation of Scripture, its recognition of stages in God's dealings with humanity, its expectation of the imminent return of Christ to rapture His saints, and its focus on both apocalypticism and premillennialism. . 

Notable figures of the latter half of the 19th century include Charles Spurgeon in London and Dwight L. Moody in Chicago. Their powerful preaching reached very large audiences. . 

An advanced theological perspective came from the Princeton theologians from the 1850s to the 1920s, such as Charles Hodge, Archibald Alexander and B.B. Warfield. , v. 

=== 20th century ===
Services at the Pentecostal Church of God in Lejunior, Kentucky, 1946
Evangelicalism in the early part of the 20th century was dominated by the Fundamentalist movement after 1910; it rejected liberal theology and emphasized the inerrancy of the Scriptures.

Following the Welsh Revival, the Azusa Street Revival in 1906 began the spread of Pentecostalism in North America.

In the postWorld War II period, a split developed amongst Evangelicals, as they disagreed among themselves about how a Christian ought to respond to an unbelieving world. The Evangelicals urged that Christians must engage the culture directly and constructively, . and they began to express reservations about being known to the world as fundamentalists. As Kenneth Kantzer put it at the time, the name fundamentalist had become "an embarrassment instead of a badge of honor". . 

The term neo-evangelicalism was coined by Harold Ockenga in 1947 to identify a distinct movement within self-identified fundamentalist Christianity at the time, especially in the English-speaking world. It described the mood of positivism and non-militancy that characterized that generation. The new generation of Evangelicals set as their goal to abandon a militant Bible stance. Instead, they would pursue dialogue, intellectualism, non-judgmentalism, and appeasement. They further called for an increased application of the gospel to the sociological, political, and economic areas.

The self-identified fundamentalists also cooperated in separating their "neo-Evangelical" opponents from the fundamentalist name, by increasingly seeking to distinguish themselves from the more open group, whom they often characterized derogatorily by Ockenga's term, "neo-Evangelical" or just Evangelical.

The evangelical revivalist Billy Graham in Duisburg, Germany, 1954
The fundamentalists saw the Evangelicals as often being too concerned about social acceptance and intellectual respectability, and being too accommodating to a perverse generation that needed correction. In addition, they saw the efforts of evangelist Billy Graham, who worked with non-Evangelical denominations, such as the Roman Catholics (which they claimed to be heretical), as a mistake.

The post-war period also saw growth of the ecumenical movement and the founding of the World Council of Churches, which was generally regarded with suspicion by the Evangelical community.

In the United Kingdom, John Stott and Martyn Lloyd-Jones emerged as key leaders in Evangelical Christianity.

The charismatic movement began in the 1960s and resulted in Pentecostal theology and practice being introduced into many mainline denominations. New charismatic groups such as the Association of Vineyard Churches and Newfrontiers trace their roots to this period (see also British New Church Movement).

The closing years of the 20th century saw controversial postmodern influences entering some parts of Evangelicalism, particularly with the emerging church movement.

== Types of Evangelicalism ==

=== Conservative Evangelicalism ===

Chinese evangelical church in Madrid, Spain

Toward the end of the 20th century, some have tended to confuse Evangelicalism and fundamentalism, but as noted above they are not the same. The labels represent very distinct differences of approach that both groups are diligent to maintain, although because of fundamentalism's dramatically smaller size it often gets classified simply as an ultra-conservative branch of Evangelicalism.

Both groups seek to maintain an identity as theological conservatives; Evangelicals, however, seek to distance themselves from stereotypical perceptions of the "fundamentalist" posture of antagonism toward the larger society and advocate involvement in the surrounding community rather than separation from it. However, despite the differences, some people, particularly those with a non-denominational background, may consider themselves both Evangelical and fundamentalist because they believe in the engaging practices of Evangelicalism and take a fundamental view of the Bible.

On the American political spectrum, Evangelical Christians traditionally are socially conservative. Based on their belief that the biblical view of marriage is only between one man and one woman, they oppose both state and church recognition of same-sex marriage. Since the 1970s they have also opposed legalizing abortion on demand. (See below for more details).

=== Open Evangelicalism ===

Open Evangelical refers to a particular Christian school of thought or Churchmanship, primarily in the United Kingdom (especially in the Church of England). Open Evangelicals describe their position as combining a traditional Evangelical emphasis on the nature of scriptural authority, the teaching of the ecumenical creeds and other traditional doctrinal teachings, with an approach towards culture and other theological points of view which tends to be more inclusive than that taken by other Evangelicals. Some open Evangelicals aim to take a middle position between conservative and charismatic Evangelicals, while others would combine conservative theological emphases with more liberal social positions. . 

=== Post-evangelicalism ===

British author Dave Tomlinson characterizes post-evangelicalism as a movement comprising various trends of dissatisfaction among Evangelicals. The term is used by others with comparable intent, often to distinguish Evangelicals in the so-called emerging church movement from post-evangelicals and anti-Evangelicals. Tomlinson argues that "linguistically, the distinction evangelical and post-evangelical is similar to the one that sociologists make between the modern and postmodern eras". 

There persists considerable and inevitable confusion as to how best to classify the non-traditional/non-conservative forms of Evangelicalism. Some call the emerging church movement a version or manifestation of post-evangelicalism, whereas others distinguish both under the broader umbrella of the "evangelical left" movement. As such developments are still relatively new, it remains to be seen how the categories and semantics will settle.

== Global statistics ==
According to a 2011 Pew Forum study on global Christianity, 285,480,000 or 13.1 percent of all Christians are Evangelicals. . The largest concentration of Evangelicals can be found in the United States, with 28.9% of the population or 91.76 million, less than a quarter of the world figure. The next most populous is Brazil, with 26.3% or 51.33 million. The World Evangelical Alliance is "a network of churches in 128 nations that have each formed an Evangelical alliance and over 100 international organizations joining together to give a worldwide identity, voice and platform" to an estimated more than 420 million Evangelical Christians. The Alliance was formed in 1951 by Evangelicals from 21 countries. It has worked to support its members to work together globally.

In most of the world, the 21st-century growth rate of Evangelical Christians is faster than the population growth rate. . 

== Africa ==
In the 21st century, there are Evangelical churches active in Sudan, Angola, Mozambique, Zimbabwe, Malawi, Rwanda, Uganda, Ghana, Kenya, Zambia, South Africa, and Nigeria. They have grown especially since independence came in the 1960s, . the strongest movements are based on Pentecostal-charismatic beliefs, and comprise a way of life that has led to upward social mobility and demands for democracy. There is a wide range of theology and organizations, including some sponsored by European missionaries and others that have emerged from African culture such as the Apostolic and Zionist Churches which enlist 40% of black South Africans, and their Aladura counterparts in western Africa.

In Nigeria the Evangelical Church Winning All (formerly "Evangelical Church of West Africa") is the largest church organization with five thousand congregations and over three million members. It sponsors two seminaries and eight Bible colleges, and 1600 missionaries who serve in Nigeria and other countries with the Evangelical Missionary Society (EMS). There have been serious confrontations since 1999 between Muslims and Evangelical Christians standing in opposition to the expansion of Sharia law in northern Nigeria. The confrontation has radicalized and politicized the Christians. Violence has been escalating.

In Kenya, mainstream Evangelical denominations have taken the lead in promoting political activism and backers, with the smaller Evangelical sects of less importance. Daniel arap Moi was president 1978 to 2002 and claimed to be an Evangelical; he proved intolerant of dissent or pluralism or decentralization of power.

The Berlin Missionary Society (BMS) was one of four German Protestant mission societies active in South Africa before 1914. It emerged from the German tradition of Pietism after 1815 and sent its first missionaries to South Africa in 1834. There were few positive reports in the early years, but it was especially active 18591914. It was especially strong in the Boer republics. The World War cut off contact with Germany, but the missions continued at a reduced pace. After 1945 the missionaries had to deal with decolonisation across Africa and especially with the apartheid government. At all times the BMS emphasized spiritual inwardness, and values such as morality, hard work and self-discipline. It proved unable to speak and act decisively against injustice and racial discrimination and was disbanded in 1972. . 

Since 1974, young professionals have been the active proselytizers of Evangelicalism in the cities of Malawi. . 

In Mozambique, Evangelical Protestant Christianity emerged around 1900 from black migrants whose converted previously in South Africa. They were assisted by European missionaries, but, as industrial workers, they paid for their own churches and proselytizing. They prepared southern Mozambique for the spread of Evangelical Protestantism. During its time as a colonial power in Mozambique, the Catholic Portuguese government tried to counter the spread of Evangelical Protestantism. . 

== Latin America ==
In modern Latin America, the word "Evangelical" is often simply a synonym for "Protestant". 

=== Brazil ===
Universal Church of the Kingdom of God church in So Paulo

Protestantism in Brazil largely originated with German immigrants and British and American missionaries in the 19th century, following up on efforts that began in the 1820s. . 

In the late nineteenth century, while the vast majority of Brazilians were nominal Catholics, the nation was underserved by priests, and for large numbers their religion was only nominal. The Catholic Church in Brazil was de-established in 1890, and responded by increasing the number of dioceses and the efficiency of its clergy. Many Protestants came from a large German immigrant community, but they were seldom engaged in proselytism and grew mostly by natural increase.

Methodists were active along with Presbyterians and Baptists. The Scottish missionary Dr. Robert Reid Kalley, with support from the Free Church of Scotland, moved to Brazil in 1855, founding the first Evangelical church among the Portuguese-speaking population there in 1856. It was organized according to the Congregational policy as the Igreja Evanglica Fluminense; it became the mother church of Congregationalism in Brazil. . The Seventh-day Adventists arrived in 1894, and the YMCA was organized in 1896. The missionaries promoted schools colleges and seminaries, including a the liberal arts college in So Paulo, later known as Mackenzie, and an agricultural school in Lavras. The Presbyterian schools in particular later became the nucleus of the governmental system. In 1887 Protestants in Rio de Janeiro formed a hospital. The missionaries largely reached a working-class audience, as the Brazilian upper-class was wedded either to Catholicism or to secularism. By 1914, Protestant churches founded by American missionaries had 47,000 communicants, served by 282 missionaries. In general, these missionaries were more successful than they had been in Mexico, Argentina or elsewhere in Latin America. . 

There were 700,000 Protestants by 1930, and increasingly they were in charge of their own affairs. In 1930, the Methodist Church of Brazil became independent of the missionary societies and elected its own bishop. Protestants were largely from a working-class, but their religious networks help speed their upward social mobility. . 

Protestants accounted for fewer than 5% of the population until the 1960s, but grew exponentially by proselytizing and by 2000 made up over 15% of Brazilians affiliated with a church. Pentecostals and charismatic groups account for the vast majority of this expansion.

Pentecostal missionaries arrived early in the 20th century. Pentecostal conversions surged during the 1950s and 1960s, when native Brazilians began founding autonomous churches. The most influential included Brasil Para o Cristo (Brazil for Christ), founded in 1955 by Manoel de Mello. With an emphasis on personal salvation, on God's healing power, and on strict moral codes these groups have developed broad appeal, particularly among the booming urban migrant communities. In Brazil, since the mid-1990's, groups committed to uniting black identity, antiracism, and Evangelical theology have rapidly proliferated. . Pentecostalism arrived in Brazil with Swedish and American missionaries in 1911. it grew rapidly, but endured numerous schisms and splits. In some areas the Evangelical Assemblies of God churches have taken a leadership role in politics since the 1960s. They claimed major credit for the election of Fernando Collor de Mello as president of Brazil in 1990. . 

According to the 2000 Census, 15.4% of the Brazilian population was Protestant. A recent research conducted by the Datafolha institute shows that 25% of Brazilians are Protestants, of which 19% are followers of Pentecostal denominations. The 2010 Census found out that 22.2% were Protestant at that date. Protestant denominations saw a rapid growth in their number of followers since the last decades of the 20th century. . They are politically and socially conservative, and emphasize that God's favor translates into business success. . The rich and the poor remained traditional Catholics, while most Evangelical Protestants were in the new lower-middle classknown as the "C class" (in a AE classification system). . 

Chesnut argues that Pentecostalism has become "one of the principal organizations of the poor," for these churches provide the sort of social network that teach members the skills they need to thrive in a rapidly developing meritocratic society.

One large Evangelical church is the Universal Church of the Kingdom of God (IURD), a neoPentecostal denomination begun in 1977. It now has a presence in many countries, and claims millions of members worldwide. . 

=== Guatemala ===
Protestants remained a small portion of the population until the late-twentieth century, when various Protestant groups experienced a demographic boom that coincided with the increasing violence of the Guatemalan Civil War. Two Guatemalan heads of state, General Efran Ros Montt and Jorge Serrano Elias, have been practicing Evangelical Protestants. They are the only two Protestant heads of state in the history of Latin America. 

General Efrain Rios Montt, an Evangelical from the Pentecostal tradition, came to power through a coup. He escalated the war against leftist guerrilla insurgents as a holy war against atheistic forces of evil.

== Asia ==

=== Korea ===

Protestant missionary proselytism in Asia was most successful in Korea. American Presbyterians and Methodists arrived in the 1880s and were well received. Between 1907 and 1945, when Korea was a Japanese colony, Christianity became in part an expression of nationalism in opposition to Japan's efforts to promote the Japanese language and the Shinto religion. . In 1914, out of 16 million people, there were 86,000 Protestants and 79,000 Catholics; by 1934, the numbers were 168,000 and 147,000. Presbyterian missionaries were especially successful. . Since the Korean War (195053), many Korean Christians have migrated to the U.S., while those who remained behind have risen sharply in social and economic status. Most Korean Protestant churches in the 21st century emphasize their Evangelical heritage. Korean Protestantism is characterized by theological conservatism coupled with an emotional revivalistic style. Most churches sponsor revival meetings once or twice a year. Missionary work is a high priority, with 13,000 men and women serving in missions across the world, putting Korea in second place just behind the US. . 

Sukman argues that since 1945, Protestantism has been widely seen by Koreans as the religion of the middle class, youth, intellectuals, urbanites, and modernists. It has been a powerful force supporting South Korea's pursuit of modernity and emulation of the United States, and opposition to the old Japanese colonialism and to the authoritarianism of North Korea. . There are 8.6 million adherents to Protestant Christianity (approximately 19% of the Korean population) in which many identify themselves as Evangelicals.

South Korea has been referred as an "evangelical superpower" for being the home to some of the largest and most dynamic Christian churches in the world; South Korea is also second to the U.S. in the number of missionaries sent abroad. 

== United Kingdom ==

There are 5.5 million Evangelicals in the UK, or 8.8% of the population. In Britain, according to a 2005 study conducted by the Assemblies of God, Evangelicals give 7.5% of their income to their churches and a further 3% to Christian charities. . The Evangelical Alliance, formed in 1846, conducts statistical surveys of the beliefs and behaviour of Evangelicals. . 

== United States ==

===20th century===
By the 1890s, most American Protestants belonged to Evangelical denominations, except for the high church Episcopalians and German Lutherans. In the early 20th century, a divide opened up between the Fundamentalists and the Mainline Protestant denominations, chiefly over the inerrancy of the Bible. The fundamentalists were those Evangelicals who sought to defend their religious traditions, and feared that modern scientific leanings were leading away from the truth. A favored mode of fighting back was to prohibit the teaching of Darwinism or macro-evolution as fact in the public schools, a movement that reached its peak in the Scopes Trial of 1925, and resumed in the 1980s. The more modernistic Protestants largely abandoned the term "evangelical" and tolerated evolutionary theories in modern science and even in Biblical studies.

Evangelicals held the view that the modernist and liberal parties in the Protestant churches had surrendered their heritage as Evangelicals by accommodating the views and values of secularism. At the same time, the modernists criticized fundamentalists for their separatism and their rejection of the Social Gospel.

During and after World War II, Evangelicals increasingly organized, and expanded their vision to include the entire world. There was a great expansion of Evangelical activity within the United States, "a revival of revivalism." Youth for Christ was formed; it later became the base for Billy Graham's revivals. The National Association of Evangelicals formed in 1942 as a counterpoise to the mainline Federal Council of Churches. In 194243, the Old-Fashioned Revival Hour had a record-setting national radio audience.

Even more dramatic was the expansion of international missionary activity by the Evangelicals. They had enthusiasm and self-confidence after the national victory in the world war. Many Evangelicals came from poor rural districts, but wartime and postwar prosperity dramatically increased the funding resources available for missionary work. While mainline Protestant denominations cut back on their missionary activities, from 7000 to 3000 overseas workers between 1935 and 1980, the Evangelicals increased their career foreign missionary force from 12,000 in 1935 to 35,000 in 1980. Meanwhile Europe was falling behind, as North Americans comprised 41% of all the world's Protestant missionaries in 1936, rising to 52% in 1952 and 72% in 1969. The most active denominations were the Assemblies of God, which nearly tripled from 230 missionaries in 1935 to 626 in 1952, and the United Pentecostal Church International, formed in 1945. The Southern Baptists more than doubled from 405 to 855, as did the Church of the Nazarene from 88 to 200. . Overseas missionaries began to prepare for the postwar challenge, most notably the Far Eastern Gospel Crusade (FEGC; now named "Send International"). After Nazi Germany and fascist Japan had been destroyed, the newly mobilized Evangelicals were now prepared to combat atheistic communism, secularism, Darwinism, liberalism, Catholicism, and (in overseas missions) paganism. . 

=== 21st century ===
Today, Evangelicals are often concerned with their own negligence to live up to Christian standards in contrast to the world. Christianity Today author Mark Galli says "It's now pretty much agreed that the Evangelical church mirrors the dysfunctions of secular society, from premarital sex stats to divorce rates to buying habits. Much to our dismay, we are hardly a light to the world, nor an icon of the abundant, transformed life." . Despite this perceived setback, Evangelicals continue to successfully maintain the evangelism aspect that is an integral part of their movement.

=== Meaning of Evangelicalism in the US ===

The Institute for the Study of American Evangelicals states:

=== Demographics ===
An event at Gateway Church's 114 Southlake Campus
The 2004 survey of religion and politics in the United States identified the Evangelical percentage of the population at 26.3 percent while Roman Catholics are 22 percent and mainline Protestants make up 16 percent. In the 2007 Statistical Abstract of the United States, the figures for these same groups are 28.6 percent (Evangelical), 24.5 percent (Roman Catholic), and 13.9 percent (mainline Protestant.) The latter figures are based on a 2001 study of the self-described religious identification of the adult population for 1990 and 2001 from the Graduate School and University Center at the City University of New York. A 2008 study showed that in the year 2000 about 9 percent of Americans attended an Evangelical service on any given Sunday. , 240pp. . The Economist estimated in May 2012 that "over one-third of Americans, more than 100M, can be considered evangelical," arguing that the percentage is often undercounted because many black Christians espouse Evangelical theology but prefer to refer to themselves as "born again Christians" rather than "evangelical." 

The movement is highly diverse and encompasses a vast number of people. Because the group is diverse, not all of them use the same terminology for beliefs. For instance, several recent studies and surveys by sociologists and political scientists that utilize more complex definitional parameters have estimated the number of Evangelicals in the U.S. at about 2530% of the population, or roughly between 70 and 80 million people. . 

The National Association of Evangelicals is a U.S. agency which coordinates cooperative ministry for its member denominations.

=== Types of Evangelical ===

John C. Green, a senior fellow at the Pew Forum on Religion and Public Life, used polling data to separate Evangelicals into three camps, which he labels as traditionalist, centrist and modernist: 

# The traditionalists, characterized by high affinity for certain Protestant beliefs, (especially penal substitutionary atonement, justification by faith, the authority of scripture, the priesthood of all believers, etc.) which, when fused with the highly political milieu of Western culture (especially American culture), has resulted in the political disposition that has been labeled the Christian right, with figures like Jerry Falwell and the television evangelist Pat Robertson as its most visible spokesmen.
# Centrist evangelicals, described as socially conservative, mostly avoiding politics, who still support much of traditional Christian theology.
# Modernist evangelicals, a small minority in the movement, have low levels of church-attendance and "have much more diversity in their beliefs". 

=== Politics ===

==== Christian right ====

Evangelical political influence in America was first evident in the 1830s with movements such as abolition of slavery and the prohibition movement, which closed saloons and taverns in state after state until it succeeded nationally in 1919. . The Christian right is a coalition of numerous groups of traditionalist and observant church-goers of every kind: especially Catholics on issues such as birth control and abortion, Southern Baptists, Missouri Synod Lutherans and others. "The Triumph of the Religious Right", The Economist November 11, 2004. 

Evangelical political activists are not all on the right. There is a small group of liberal white Evangelicals. . Most African Americans belong to Baptist, Methodist or other denominations that share Evangelical beliefs; they are firmly in the Democratic coalition and (except for gay and abortion issues) are generally liberal in politics. Heineman, God is a Conservative, pp 712, 173 

==== Christian left ====

Typically, members of the Evangelical left affirm the primary tenets of Evangelical theology, such as the doctrines of Incarnation, atonement, and resurrection, and also see the Bible as a primary authority for the church. A major theological difference, however, which in turn leads to many of the social/political differences, is the issue of how strictly to interpret the Bible, as well as what particular values and principles predominantly constitute the "biblical worldview" believed to be binding upon all followers. Inevitably, battles over how to characterize each other and themselves ensue, with the Evangelical left and right often hyperbolically regarding each other as "mainline/non-evangelical" and "fundamentalist" respectively.

Unlike conservative Evangelicals, the Evangelical left is generally opposed to capital punishment and supportive of gun control. In many cases, Evangelical leftists are pacifistic. Some promote the legalization of same-sex marriage or protection of access to abortion for the society at large without necessarily endorsing the practice themselves. There is considerable dispute over how to even characterize the various segments of the Evangelical theological and political spectra, and whether a singular discernible rift between "right" and "left" is oversimplified. However, to the extent that some simplifications are necessary to discuss any complex issue, it is recognized that modern trends like focusing on non-contentious issues (like poverty) and downplaying hot-button social issues (like abortion) tend to be key distinctives of the modern "evangelical left" or "emergent church" movement.

=== Recurrent themes ===

==== Abortion ====
Since 1980, a central issue motivating conservative Evangelicals' political activism is abortion. The 1973 decision in Roe v. Wade by the Supreme Court, which legalized abortion, proved decisive in bringing together Catholics (who had opposed abortion since the 1890s) and Evangelicals in a political coalition, which became known as the Religious Right when it successfully mobilized its voters behind presidential candidate Ronald Reagan in 1980. . 

==== Secularism ====
In the United States, Supreme Court decisions that outlawed organized prayer in school and restricted church-related schools also played a role in mobilizing the Religious Right. Heineman, Kenneth J. (1998). God is a Conservative: Religion, Politics and Morality in Contemporary America. pp. 44123. ISBN 978-0-8147-3554-1. In addition, questions of sexual morality and homosexuality have been energizing factorsand above all, the notion that "elites" are pushing America into secularism.

==== Christian nation ====
Opponents criticise the Evangelicals, whom they say actually want a Christian AmericaAmerica being a nation in which Christianity is given a privileged position. . Survey data shows that "between 64 and 75 percent do not favor a 'Christian Nation' amendment", though between 60 and 75 percent also believe that Christianity and Political Liberalism are incompatible. Smith, Christian (2002). Christian America?: What Evangelicals Really Want. p. 207. Evangelical leaders, in turn, counter that they merely seek freedom from the imposition by national elites of an equally subjective secular worldview, and feel that it is their opponents who are violating their rights. 

==== Other issues ====

According to recent reports in the New York Times, some Evangelicals have sought to expand their movement's social agenda to include poverty, combating AIDS in the Third World, and protecting the environment. This is highly contentious within the Evangelical community, since more conservative Evangelicals believe that this trend is compromising important issues and prioritizing popularity and consensus too highly. Personifying this division were the Evangelical leaders James Dobson and Rick Warren, the former who warned of the dangers of a Barack Obama victory in 2008 from his point of view, in contrast with the latter who declined to endorse either major candidate on the grounds that he wanted the church to be less politically divisive and that he agreed substantially with both men. 

== See also ==

* 10/40 Window
* Child evangelism movement
* 4/14 Window
* Bible believer
* Broad church
* British Conservative Evangelicalism
* Christian eschatological differences
* Evangelical Council of Venezuela
* Evangelical Fellowship of Canada
* Fundamentalism
* List of evangelical Christians
* List of evangelical seminaries and theological colleges
* National Association of Evangelicals
* World Evangelical Alliance

== Notes ==

==Bibliography==
* .
* .
* .

== Further reading ==
* ; online.
* .
* 
* ; alternative ISBN on back cover, 2-8309-0687-X; 324 pp.
* .
* .
* .
* .
* .
* .
* .
* , 622 pp.
* .
* .
* .
* .
* .
* .
* .
* , 225 pp; covers evangelical politics from the 1940s to the 1990s that examines how a diverse, politically pluralistic movement became, largely, the Christian Right.
* .
* 
* .
* .
* .
* .

=== Missions ===
* .
* , 583 pp.
* .
* , 400pp.
* .
* .
* .
* .
* .
* .
* Amazon excerpts, text search and table of contents.
* , 7 volumes.
* .
* .
* , 792 pp.
* ; 391 pp.
* . 349pp; important essays by scholars.
* , 280 pp; focus on the 19th and 20th centuries.
* .
* .

== External links ==

* .
* .
* .
* .
*  Statistics from around the world including numbers of Evangelicals by country.

 



[[Euphonium]]

The euphonium is a conical-bore, baritone-voiced brass instrument.

The euphonium derives its name from the Greek word euphonos, meaning "well-sounding" or "sweet-voiced" (eu means "well" or "good" and phonos means "of sound", so "of good sound"). The euphonium is a valved instrument; nearly all current models are piston valved, though rotary valved models do exist.

A person who plays the euphonium is sometimes called a euphoniumist, euphophonist, or a euphonist, while British players often colloquially refer to themselves as euphists, or euphologists. Similarly, the instrument itself is often referred to as eupho or euph.

== Name recognition and misconceptions ==

The euphonium is part of the family of brass band instruments. It is sometimes confused with the baritone horn. The euphonium and the baritone differ in that the bore size of the baritone horn is often smaller than that of the euphonium, and the baritone is primarily cylindrical bore, whereas the euphonium is predominantly conical bore. The two instruments are easily interchangeable to the player, with some modification of breath and embouchure, since the two have essentially identical range and fingering. The cylindrical baritone offers a brighter sound and the conical euphonium offers a mellower sound.

The so-called American baritone, featuring three valves on the front of the instrument and a curved, forward-pointing bell, was dominant in American school bands throughout most of the 20th century, its weight, shape and configuration conforming to the needs of the marching band. While this instrument is in reality a conical-cylindrical bore hybrid, neither fully euphonium nor baritone, it was almost universally labeled a "baritone" by both band directors and composers, thus contributing to the confusion of terminology in the United States.

Several late 19th century music catalogs (such as Pepper and Lyon & Healy) sold a euphonium-like instrument called the "B Bass" (to distinguish it from the E and BB bass). In these catalog drawings, the B Bass had thicker tubing than the baritone; both had 3 valves. Along the same lines, drum and bugle corps introduced the "Bass-baritone", and distinguished it from the baritone. The thicker tubing of the 3-valve B Bass allowed for production of strong false-tones, providing chromatic access to the pedal register.

== History and development ==
The serpent, the oldest ancestor of all low brass instruments

As a baritone-voiced brass instrument, the euphonium traces its ancestry to the ophicleide and ultimately back to the serpent. The search for a satisfactory foundational wind instrument that could support masses of sound above it took some time. While the serpent was used for over two centuries dating back to the late Renaissance, it was notoriously difficult to control its pitch and tone quality due to its disproportionately small open finger holes. The ophicleide- which was used in bands and orchestras for a few decades in the early- to mid-19th century- used a system of keys and was an improvement over the serpent but was still unreliable, especially in the high register.

With the invention of the piston valve system c. 1818, the construction of brass instruments with an even sound and facility of playing in all registers became possible. The euphonium is alleged to have been invented, as a "wide-bore, valved bugle of baritone range", by Ferdinand Sommer of Weimar in 1843, though Carl Moritz in 1838 and Adolphe Sax in 1843 have also been credited. While Sax's family of saxhorns were invented at almost the same time and the bass saxhorn looks very similar to a euphonium, they are constructed differently. Saxhorns have a nearly cylindrical bore and do not allow the fundamental to be produced; thus, the bass saxhorn is more closely related to the baritone horn than the euphonium.

The "British-style" compensating euphonium was developed by David Blaikley in 1874, and has been in use in Britain ever since; since this time, the basic construction of the euphonium in Britain has changed little.

== Construction and general characteristics ==

The euphonium is pitched in concert B, meaning that when no valves are in use the instrument will produce partials of the B harmonic series. It is generally orchestrated as a non-transposing instrument like the trombone, written at concert pitch in the bass clef with higher passages in the tenor clef. Treble clef euphonium parts transposing down a major ninth are included in much concert band music: The major-ninth is transposition for the sake of trumpet players doubling on euphonium. in the British-style brass band tradition, euphonium music is always written this way. In continental European band music, parts for the euphonium may be written in the bass clef as a B transposing instrument sounding a major second lower than written.

Professional models have three top-action valves, played with the first three fingers of the right hand, plus a "compensating" fourth valve, generally found midway down the right side of the instrument, played with the left index finger; such an instrument is shown in the above picture. Beginner models often have only the three top-action valves, while some intermediate "student" models may have a fourth top-action valve, played with the fourth finger of the right hand. Compensating systems are expensive to build, and there is in general a substantial difference in price between compensating and non-compensating models. For a thorough discussion of the valves and the compensation system, see the article on brass instruments.

A euphonium (L) and tuba (R), the two lowest conical-bore instruments

The euphonium has an extensive range, comfortably from E2 to about B4 for intermediate players (using pitch notation]). In professional hands this may extend from B0 to as high as B5. The lowest notes obtainable depend on the valve set-up of the instrument. All instruments are chromatic down to E2, but 4-valved instruments extend that down to at least C2. Non-compensating four-valved instruments suffer from intonation problems from E2 down to C2 and cannot produce the low B1; compensating instruments do not have such intonation problems and can play the low B-natural. Thus, only on 4-valved, compensating instruments is a full chromatic scale from the pedal range up possible. 
From B1 down lies the "pedal range", i.e. the fundamentals of the instrument's harmonic series. They are easily produced on the euphonium as compared to other brass instruments, and the extent of the range depends on the make of the instrument in exactly the same way as just described. Thus, on a compensating four-valved instrument, the lowest note possible is B0, sometimes called double pedal B, which is six ledger lines below the bass clef.

As with the other conical-bore instruments, the cornet, flugelhorn, horn, and tuba, the euphonium's tubing gradually increases in diameter throughout its length, resulting in a softer, gentler tone compared to cylindrical-bore instruments such as the trumpet, trombone, sudrophone, and baritone horn. While a truly characteristic euphonium sound is rather hard to define precisely, most players would agree that an ideal sound is dark, rich, warm, and velvety, with virtually no hardness to it. On the other hand, the desired sound varies geographically; European players, especially British ones, generally use a faster, more constant vibrato and a more veiled tone, while Americans tend to prefer a more straightforward, open sound with slower and less frequent vibrato. This also has to do with the different models preferred by British and American players. 

Though the euphonium's fingerings are no different from those of the trumpet or tuba, beginning euphoniumists will likely experience significant problems with intonation, response, and range compared to other beginning brass players. In addition, it is very difficult for students, even of high-school age, to develop the rich sound characteristic of the euphonium, due partly to the instrument models used in schools and partly to the lack of awareness of good euphonium sound models.

== Popular models ==

Very generally speaking, the most popular professional models of euphonium in the United Kingdom are Besson Prestige and Sovereign models. The most popular in the United States are the Wilson 2900 and 2950. In both cases, these models have gained popularity through the use and sponsorship of extremely highly respected players and teachers; in Britain, by Steven Mead, and in America, by Dr. Brian Bowman. In recent years, the Yamaha YEP-842 Custom has gained popularity in the United States due to similar activities by Adam Frey. http://www.euphonium.com Most recently, Demondrae Thurman has worked in conjunction with Miraphone to develop the Ambassador 5050.

In recent years, the Besson company got into financial difficulties and various aspects of the business and name were acquired by Buffet Crampon of France. The remaining assets were acquired by the German company Schreiber-Keilwerth who lost no time in bringing rival instruments, with the York brand name, to market. In 2010, Schrieber-Keilwerth was also acquired by Buffet Crampon, and the York brand was dropped.

Other highly regarded professional models found around the world are the Yamaha 642, the Hirsbrunner Standard, Exclusive, and Stealth, the Sterling Virtuoso, and the Meinl-Weston 451 and 551.

A well-selling and school-inventoried intermediate-model horn in the United States is the Yamaha YEP-321 (and silver-plate 321S), which has four valves and is non-compensating (though a removable 5th valve was offered as an option early on, but discontinued pushing buyers to their "professional" instruments). Other similar models of euphonium are made by Besson, Willson, Jupiter, and under the names of many storied American manufacturers now within the Conn-Selmer umbrella among others. Besson produces a four-valve non-compensating euphonium with the fourth valve on the side.

Double bell euphonium being played

=== Double-belled euphonium ===

A creation unique to the United States was the double-bell euphonium, featuring a second smaller bell in addition to the main one; the player could switch bells for certain passages or even for individual notes by use of an additional valve, operated with the left hand. Ostensibly, the smaller bell was intended to emulate the sound of a trombone (it was cylindrical-bore) and was possibly intended for performance situations in which trombones were not available. The extent to which the difference in sound and timbre was apparent to the listener, however, is up for debate. Harry Whittier of the Patrick S. Gilmore band introduced the instrument in 1888, and it was used widely in both school and service bands for several decades. Harold Brasch (see "List of important players" below) brought the British-style compensating euphonium to the United States c. 1939, but the double-belled euphonium may have remained in common use even into the 1950s and 1960s. In any case, they have become rare (they were last in Conn's advertisements in the 1940s, and King's catalog in the 1960s), 1963 H.N. White/King catalog (Baritone/Euphonium), http://www.hnwhite.com/Euphoniums%20and%20Baritones.htm and are generally unknown to younger players. They are chiefly known now through their mention in the song "Seventy-Six Trombones" from the musical The Music Man by Meredith Willson.

King marching euphonium

=== Marching euphonium ===

A marching version of the euphonium may be found in marching band, though it is often replaced by its smaller, easier-to-carry cousin, the marching baritone (which has a similar bell and valve configuration to a trumpet). Marching euphoniums are used almost exclusively in drum and bugle corps, and some corps (such as the Blue Devils and Phantom Regiment) march all-euphonium sections. Depending on the manufacturer, the weight of these instruments can be straining to the average marcher and require great strength to hold during practices and performances.
Another form of the marching euphonium is the convertible euphonium. Recently widely produced, the horn resembles a convertible tuba, being able to change from a concert upright to a marching forward bell on either the left or right shoulder. These are mainly produced by Jupiter or Yamaha, but other less expensive versions can be found.

===Five valve euphonium===
The five valve euphonium (noncompensating) is an extremely rare variation of the euphonium manufactured in the late 19th and early 20th centuries by Britain's Besson musical instrument company and Highams of Manchester Musical Instrument Company. Besson and Highams's Clearbore five valve vintage euphoniums are among the rarest and most valuable in existence.

The Besson five valve euphonium featured the standard three piston valves horizontally on top, but had an additional two piston valves off the side. The standard euphonium has eight possible fingering and non-fingering positions by which sound is produced. The Besson and the Highams 'clearbore' model rare fourth and fifth extra 'side' valves change the possible fingering and non-fingering positions from eight to thirty-two.

The term 'five valve euphonium' does not refer to variations of the double bell euphonium made by various brass instrument companies during the same time period. Some of the double-bell euphoniums had five valves, with the fifth valve either on top with the other four, or by itself off to the side, but the double-bell fifth valve was used for switching the sound to the second smaller trombone-sized bell, and not for changing the fingering pitch of the instrument. Also, Cerveny Musical Instruments manufactures several euphoniums with five vertical rotary valves today, but this is an unrelated recent development.

== Performance venues and professional job opportunities ==

The euphonium has historically been exclusively a band instrument (rather than an orchestra or jazz instrument), whether of the wind or brass variety, where it is frequently featured as a solo instrument. Because of this, the euphonium has been called the "king of band instruments", or the "cello of the band", because of its similarity in timbre and ensemble role to the stringed instrument. Euphoniums typically have extremely important parts in many marches (such as those by John Philip Sousa), and in brass band music of the British tradition.

Other performance venues for the euphonium are the tuba-euphonium quartet or larger tuba-euphonium ensemble; the brass quintet, where it can supply the tenor voice, though the trombone is much more common in this role; or in mixed brass ensembles. Though these are legitimate performance venues, paid professional jobs in these areas are almost non-existent; they are much more likely to be semi-professional or amateur in nature. Most of the United States Armed Forces service bands include a tuba-euphonium quartet made up of players from the band that occasionally performs in its own right.

The euphonium is not traditionally an orchestral instrument and has never been common in symphony orchestras. However, there are a handful of works, mostly from the late Romantic period, in which composers wrote a part for baryton (German) or tenor tuba (most notably, Holst's Planets Suite, which has many solos for baritone and euphonium), and these are universally played on euphonium, frequently by a trombone player. In addition, the euphonium is sometimes used in older orchestral works as a replacement for its predecessors, such as the ophicleide, or, less correctly, the bass trumpet or the Wagner tuba, both of which are significantly different instruments, and still in use today. At the bottom of the article are some of the well-known orchestral works in which the euphonium is commonly used (whether or not the composer originally specified it).

Finally, while the euphonium was not historically part of the standard jazz big band or combo, the instrument's technical facility and large range make it well-suited to a jazz solo role, and a jazz euphonium niche has been carved out over the last 40 or so years, largely starting with the pioneer Rich Matteson (see "List of important players" below). The euphonium can also double on a trombone part in a jazz combo. Jazz euphoniums are most likely to be found in tuba-euphonium groups, though modern funk or rock bands occasionally feature a brass player doubling on euphonium, and this trend is growing.

Due to this dearth of performance opportunities, aspiring euphonium players in the United States are in a rather inconvenient position when seeking future employment. Often, college players must either obtain a graduate degree and go on to teach at the college level, or audition for one of the major or regional military service bands. Because these bands are relatively few in number and the number of euphonium positions in the bands is small (24 in most service bands), job openings do not occur very often and when they do are highly competitive; before the current slate of openings in four separate bands, the last opening for a euphonium player in an American service band was in May 2004. A career strictly as a solo performer, unaffiliated with any university or performing ensemble, is a very rare sight, but some performers, such as Riki McDonnell, have managed to do it.

In Britain the strongest euphonium players are most likely to find a position in a brass band, but even though they often play at world-class levels, the members of the top brass bands are in most cases unpaid amateurs. There are hundreds, if not thousands, of brass bands in Britain ranging in standard from world class to local bands. Almost all brass bands in Britain perform regularly, particularly during the summer months. A large number of bands also enter contests against other brass bands of a similar standard. Each band requires two euphoniums (principal and second) and consequently there are considerable opportunities for euphonium players.

Due to limited vocational opportunities, there are a considerable number of relatively serious, quasi-professional avocational euphonium players participating in many higher-caliber unpaid ensembles. 

== College use in the United States ==

Unlike a generation or two ago, many colleges with music programs now offer students the opportunity to major in euphonium. However, due to the small number of euphonium students at most schools (2-4 is common), it is possible, and even likely, that they will study with a professor whose major instrument is not the euphonium. Most often tubas and euphoniums will be combined into a studio taught by one professor, and at small schools they may be grouped with trombones and/or French horns as well, taught by one low brass professor. Dr. Henry Howey, Dr. Brian Bowman, Demondrae Thurman, and Dr. Marc Dickman serve as the only four full-time euphonium college professors in the US, with professors like Dr. Matt Tropman, Dr. Stephen Arthur Allen and Dr.Daniel Burdick, also primarily euphonium players, teaching as lecturers. Other professors, such as Adam Frey, are adjunct faculty at multiple universities near one another. Dr. Ross Walter of Virginia Commonwealth University is the Assistant Professor of Low Brass and Euphonium is his primary instrument. Universities will usually require professors in this situation to have a high level of proficiency on all the instruments they teach, and some of the best college euphonium studios are taught by non-euphonium players.

== Notable euphoniumists ==

The euphonium world is and has become more crowded than is commonly thought, and there have been many noteworthy players throughout the instrument's history. Traditionally, three main national schools of euphonium playing have been discernible: American, British, and Japanese. Now, euphoniumists are able to learn this specific art in many other countries around the world today.

German Ferdinand Sommer, if one discounts the claims of Moritz and Sax each of whose horns also approached a euphonium in nature, in addition to being credited with inventing the euphonium as the Sommerhorn in 1843, as a soloist on the horn, qualifies as the first euphonium player to significantly advance and alter the understanding of the instrument. Baritone History, North Dakota State University, at http://www.nd.edu/~baritone/history.html retrieved 10/15/2011 Bone, Lloyd E., The Euphonium Sourcebook, University of Indiana Press, 2007 edition, P.7 Below are a select few of the players most famous and influential in their respective countries, and whose contributions to the euphonium world are undeniable, in terms of recordings, commissions, pedagogy, and increased recognition of the instrument.

=== United Kingdom ===
* Alfred James Phasey (1834-1888), English ophicleide, baritone and euphonium artist credited with modifying the bore of the baritone saxhorn, precursor of the baritone horn, to enlarge it and make it more reasonant thereby creating the first true euphonium which he went on to popularize as a performer and author of an early instructional method for tenor brass. Bouldersdome, H. J., The Late Mr. A. J. Phasey, The British Bandsman, November 1888, Derby, England, P.33 
* Steven Mead, English euphonium soloist and professor at the Royal Northern College of Music noted internationally for advancing the British euphonium sound. Roy Newsome, The Modern Brass Band: From the 1930s to the New Millennium, Ashgate Publishing, Ltd., 2006, p. 252. ISBN 0-7546-0717-8. 
* David Thornton, principal euphonium of the Brighouse and Rastrick Band and student of Steven Mead noted for winning several prestigious international competitions and advancing the British euphonium sound through broadcast as well as recording media. 

=== United States===
* Simone Mantia (18731951), an Italian-born American baritone horn/euphonium virtuoso and also trombone artist at the start of the 20th century. Playing as soloist with the Sousa and the Pryor Bands, Mantia was the first euphonium virtuoso to record and popularized this non-orchestral instrument in the United States. Bierley, Paul A., The Incredible Band of John Philip Sousa, Board of Trustees of the University of Illinois, Urbana, IL. 2006 Lehman, Arthur, A Quick Analysis of Simone Mantia's Artistry On the Euphonium, 2008, http://www.dwerden.com/eu-articles-lehman-Mantia2008.cfm, retrieved 4/1/2011 
* Leonard Falcone (18991985), Italian-born American baritone/euphonium soloist, arranger, professor, Director of Bands at Michigan State University, and teacher of many noted euphonium artists. Falcone advanced an operatic passionate baritone style and is the namesake of the Leonard Falcone International Tuba and Euphonium Festival, the leading venue for the instrument in the United States. Michigan State University Archives - Leonard Falcone Collection https://www.msu.edu/unit/msuarhc/falcone1.htm retrieved 4/24/2011 Life and Work of Leonard Falcone, Myrna Delford Welch, University of Illinois Press, 1973 Wikipedia Page Leonard Falcone International Tuba and Euphonium Festival 
* Arthur W. Lehman, (19172009), American euphonium soloist known as 'Art', Recording Artist, United States Marine Band, noted euphonium author of works such as The Art of Euphonium. Lehman was a student of Harold Brasch and Simone Mantia and advanced the concept of a rich resonant sound with no vibrato pioneered by Mantia. Schudel, Matt (2009-06-28). "Arthur W. Lehman, 91, Retired Sergeant Played Euphonium With the Marine Band". The Washington Post. http://www.washingtonpost.com/wp-dyn/content/article/2009/06/27/AR2009062702268.html. Retrieved 2/24/2011 
* Brian Bowman, former soloist with the U.S. Navy Band (197175) and U.S. Air Force Band (197691); now professor of euphonium at the University of North Texas, co-editor of "Arban's Method for Trombone and Euphonium". Bowman innovated a fusion of the mellow British sound with deep passion heard in Falcone recordings, becoming the best known American artist at the end of the 20th century through recording, teaching and the first euphonium recital at Carnegie Hall. Morin, Alexander J., Classical music: the listener's companion, Backbeat Books, SanFrancisco CA, 2002, Page 1113 Brian Bowman Euphonium, The Instrumentalist, Volume 63, 2008, P.34 

=== Japan ===
* Toru Miura, professor of euphonium at the Kunitachi College of Music; soloist and clinician who was awarded a lifetime achievement award by the International Tuba Euphonium Association (formerly TUBA) for his role in promoting the instrument. Artist profile: Toru Miura, Jeju International Wind Ensemble Festival 2007, at http://jiwef.org/english/competition/sub_01_07_view.php?jd_no=31&jd_typ=15&PHPSESSID=06d3bdf28359df449e07590a1deac751 , retrieved 4/12/2011 

== Literature ==

The euphonium repertoire consists of solo literature and orchestral or, more commonly, band parts written for the euphonium. Since its invention in 1843, the euphonium has always had an important role in ensembles, but solo literature was slow to appear, consisting of only a handful of lighter solos until the 1960s. Since then, however, the breadth and depth of the solo euphonium repertoire has increased dramatically.

In the current age, there has been a huge number of new commissions and repertoire development and promotion through Steven Meads World of the Euphonium Series and the Beyond the Horizon series from Euphonium.com. There has also been a vast number of new commissions by more and more players and a proliferation of large scale Consortium Commissions that are occurring including current ones in 2008 and 2009 organized by Brian Meixner (Libby Larson), Adam Frey (The Euphonium Foundation Consortium), and Jason Ham (David Gillingham).

Amilcare Ponchielli, composer of the first original euphonium solo

Upon its invention, it was clear that the euphonium had, compared to its predecessors the serpent and ophicleide, a wide range and had a consistently rich, pleasing sound throughout that range. It was flexible both in tone quality and intonation and could blend well with a variety of ensembles, gaining it immediate popularity with composers and conductors as the principal tenor-voices solo instrument in brass band settings, especially in Britain. It is no surprise, then, that when British composers  some of the same ones who were writing for brass bands  began to write serious, original music for the concert band in the early 20th century, they used the euphonium in a very similar role.

When American composers also began writing for the concert band as its own artistic medium in the 1930s and 1940s, they continued the British brass and concert band tradition of using the euphonium as the principal tenor-voiced solo.
This is not to say that composers, then and now, valued the euphonium only for its lyrical capabilities. Indeed, examination of a large body of concert band literature reveals that the euphonium functions as a "jack of all trades."

Though the euphonium was, as previously noted, embraced from its earliest days by composers and arrangers in band settings, orchestral composers have, by and large, not taken advantage of this capability. There are, nevertheless, several orchestral works, a few of which are standard repertoire, in which composers have called for instruments, such as the Wagner tuba, for which euphonium is commonly substituted today.

In contrast to the long-standing practice of extensive euphonium use in wind bands and orchestras, there was until approximately forty years ago literally no body of solo literature written specifically for the euphonium, and euphoniumists were forced to borrow the literature of other instruments. Fortunately, given the instrument's multifaceted capabilities discussed above, solos for many different instruments are easily adaptable to performance on the euphonium.

The earliest surviving solo composition written specifically for euphonium or one of its saxhorn cousins is the Concerto per Flicorno Basso (1872) by Amilcare Ponchielli. For almost a century after this, the euphonium solo repertoire consisted of only a dozen or so virtuosic pieces, mostly light in character. However, in the 1960s and 1970s, American composers began to write the first of the "new school" of serious, artistic solo works specifically for euphonium. Since then, there has been a virtual explosion of solo repertoire for the euphonium. In a mere four decades, the solo literature has expanded from virtually zero to thousands of pieces. More and more composers have become aware of the tremendous soloistic capabilities of the euphonium, and have constantly "pushed the envelope" with new literature in terms of tessitura, endurance, technical demands, and extended techniques.

Finally, the euphonium has, thanks to a handful of enterprising individuals, begun to make inroads in jazz, pop and other non-concert performance settings.

== See also ==

* William Bell (tuba player)
* Baritone and Euphonium Manufacturers

==References==
Explanatory notes

Citations

Sources
* http://lowbrassnmore.com/euponiumhistory.htm Retrieved on 28 January 2008 
* http://www.nikknakks.net/euphonium/ Retrieved on 28 January 2008 
* http://www.docstoc.com/docs/2198574/HISTORY-OF-THE-BARITONE-AND-THE-EUPHONIUM

== External links ==

* Euphonium.com Focused on the IEI, new repertoire, a forum for the euphonium, and the activities of Adam Frey.
* Euphonium.net Steven Mead's personal website.
* The International Tuba-Euphonium Association, a professional organization for tubists and euphonists.
* Tuba News, a free monthly online publication for tuba and euphonium players.
* Tuba-Euphonium Press, publishing house for new euphonium and tuba music.
* Brass-Forum.co.uk, a UK-based brass discussion forum.
* Tuba-Euphonium Forum, a discussion forum for euphonium and tuba.
* Acoustics of Brass Instruments from Music Acoustics at the University of New South Wales.
* Euphonium fingering chart Compensating Euphonium/Baritone in Treble Clef
* Euphonium Music Guide A list of original euphonium literature.
* 



[[Entire function]]

In complex analysis, an entire function, also called an integral function, is a complex-valued function that is holomorphic over the whole complex plane. Typical examples of entire functions are polynomials and the exponential function, and any sums, products and compositions of these, such as the trigonometric functions sine and cosine and their hyperbolic counterparts sinh and cosh, as well as derivatives and integrals of entire functions such as the error function. If an entire function f(z) has a root at w, then f(z)/(zw) is an entire function. On the other hand, neither the natural logarithm nor the square root is an entire function, nor can they be continued analytically to an entire function.

A transcendental entire function is an entire function that is not a polynomial.

==Properties==
Every entire function f(z) can be represented as a power series
:
that converges everywhere in the complex plane, hence uniformly on compact sets. The radius of convergence is infinite, which implies that

:
or
:

Any power series satisfying this criterion will represent an entire function.

If the real part of an entire function is known in a neighborhood of a point then both the real and imaginary parts are known for the whole complex plane, up to an imaginary constant. For instance, if the real part is known in a neighborhood of zero, then we can find the coefficients for n>0 from the following derivatives with respect to a real variable r:

:

:
(Likewise, if the imaginary part is known in a neighborhood then the function is determined up to a real constant.) In fact, if the real part is known just on an arc of a circle, then the function is determined up to an imaginary constant. (For instance, if it the real part is known on part of the unit circle, then it is known on the whole unit circle by analytic extension, and then the coefficients of the infinite series are determined from the coefficients of the Fourier series for the real part on the unit circle. Note however that an entire function is not determined by its real part on all curves. In particular, if the real part is given on any curve in the complex plane where the real part of some other entire function is zero, then any multiple of that function can be added to the function we are trying to determine. If the curve forms a loop, then the only functions whose real part is zero on the curve are those that are everywhere equal to some imaginary number. )

The Weierstrass factorization theorem asserts that any entire function can be represented by a product involving its zeroes (or "roots").

The entire functions on the complex plane form an integral domain (in fact a Prfer domain). They also form a commutative unital associative algebra over the complex numbers.

Liouville's theorem states that any bounded entire function must be constant. Liouville's theorem may be used to elegantly prove the fundamental theorem of algebra.

As a consequence of Liouville's theorem, any function that is entire on the whole Riemann sphere (complex plane and the point at infinity) is constant. Thus any non-constant entire function must have a singularity at the complex point at infinity, either a pole for a polynomial or an essential singularity for a transcendental entire function. Specifically, by the CasoratiWeierstrass theorem, for any transcendental entire function f and any complex w there is a sequence (zm)mN with and .

Picard's little theorem is a much stronger result: any non-constant entire function takes on every complex number as value, possibly with a single exception. When an exception exists, it is called a lacunary value of the function. The possibility of a lacunary value is illustrated by the exponential function, which never takes on the value 0. One can take a logarithm of an entire function that never hits 0, and this will also be an entire function (according to the Weierstrass factorization theorem). The logarithm hits every complex number except possibly one number, which implies that the first function will hit any value other than 0 an infinite number of times. Similarly, an entire function that does not hit a particular value will hit every other value an infinite number of times.

Liouville's theorem is a special case of the following statement:

Theorem: Assume M, R are positive constants and that n is a non-negative integer. An entire function f satisfying the inequality for all z with , is necessarily a polynomial, of degree at most n. The converse is also true as for any polynomial of degree n the inequality holds for any |z|  1. Similarly, an entire function f satisfying the inequality for all z with , is necessarily a polynomial, of degree at least n.

If (and only if) the coefficients of the power series are all real then the function (obviously) takes real values for real arguments, and the value of the function at the complex conjugate of z will be the complex conjugate of the value at z. Such functions are sometimes called self-conjugate (the conjugate function, , being given by See for example 

==Growth==

Entire functions may grow as fast as any increasing function: for any increasing function g :  [0,+) there exists an entire function f(z) such that f(x) > g( |x| ) for all real x. Such a function f may be easily found of the form:

:

for a constant c and a strictly increasing sequence of positive integers nk. Any such sequence defines an entire function f(z), and if the powers are chosen appropriately we may satisfy the inequality f(x) > g( |x| ) for all real x. (For instance, it certainly holds if one chooses c:=g(2) and, for any integer k  1, although this gives powers that may be about twice as high as needed.)

== Order and type ==
The order (at infinity) of an entire function f(z) is defined using the limit superior as:

:

where Br is the disk of radius r and denotes the supremum norm of f(z) on Br. The order is a non-negative real number or infinity (except if f(z)=0 for all z). The order of f(z) is the infimum of all m such that f(z) = O(exp(|z|m)) as z  . (A function like shows that this does not mean f(z) = O(exp(|z|m)) if f(z) is of order m.)

If 0<<, one can also define the type:

:

If the order is 1 and the type is , the function is said to be "of exponential type ". If it is of order less than 1 it is said to be of exponential type 0.

If

:

then the order and type can be found by the formulas

:

:

If we denote the nth derivative of a function f() by f(n)(), then we may restate these formulas in terms of the derivatives at any arbitrary point z0:

:

:

The type may be infinite, as in the case of the reciprocal gamma function, or zero (see example below under #Order 1).

===Examples===
Here are some examples of functions of various orders:

====Order ====
For arbitrary positive numbers  and  one can construct an example of an entire function of order  and type  using:
:

====Order 0====
*Polynomials (other than 0)
*

====Order 1/4====
*

====Order 1/3====
*

====Order 1/2====
* with a  0 (for which the type is given by  = |a|)

====Order 1====
*exp(az) with a  0 ( = |a|)
*sin(z)
*cosh(z)
*the Bessel function J0(z)
*the reciprocal gamma function 1/(z) ( is infinite)
*

====Order 3/2====
* Airy function Ai(z)

====Order 2====
*exp(az2) with a  0 ( = |a|)

====Order infinity====
*exp(ez)

== Genus of an entire function ==
Entire functions of finite order have Hadamard's canonical representation:

:

where zk are the non-zero roots of f, P a polynomial (whose degree we shall call q), and p is the smallest non-negative integer such that the series

:

converges. The non-negative integer g = max{p, q} is called the genus of the entire function f.

If the order  is not an integer, then g = [ is the integer part of . If the order is a positive integer, then there are two possibilities: g = or g =+1.

For example, sin, cos and exp are entire functions of genus 1.

==Other examples==
According to J. E. Littlewood, the Weierstrass sigma function is a 'typical' entire function. This statement can be made precise in the theory of random entire functions: the asymptotic behaviour of almost all entire functions is similar to that of the sigma function. Other examples include the Fresnel integrals, the Jacobi theta function, and the reciprocal Gamma function. The exponential function and the error function are special cases of the Mittag-Leffler function. According to the fundamental theorem of Paley and Wiener, Fourier transforms of functions with bounded support are entire functions or order 1 and finite type.

Other examples are solutions of linear differential equations with polynomial coefficients. If the coefficient at the highest derivative is constant, then all solutions of such equations are entire functions. For example, the exponential function, sine, cosine, Airy functions and Parabolic cylinder functions arise in this way. The class of entire functions is closed with respect to compositions. This makes it possible to study dynamics of entire functions.

An entire function of the square root of a complex number is entire if the original function is even, for example .

If a sequence of polynomials all of whose roots are real converges in a neighborhood of the origin to a limit which is not identically equal to zero, then this limit
is an entire function. Such entire functions form the LaguerrePlya class, which can also be characterized in terms of the Hadamard product, namely, f belongs to this class if and only if in the Hadamard representation all zn are real, p  1, and P(z) = a + bz + cz2, where b and c are real, and c  0. For example, the sequence of polynomials converges, as n increases, to exp((zd)2). The polynomials have all real roots, and converge to cos(z). Interestingly, the polynomials also converge to cos(z), showing the buildup of the Hadamard product for cosine.

==See also==
* Jensen's formula
* Carlson's theorem
* Exponential type
* PaleyWiener theorem

==Notes==
 

==References==
*
*
*



[[Essay]]

Essays of Michel de Montaigne
Essays are generally long pieces of writing written from an author's personal point of view, but the definition is vague, overlapping with those of an article, a pamphlet and a short story.

Essays can consist of a number of elements, including: literary criticism, political manifestos, learned arguments, observations of daily life, recollections, and reflections of the author. Almost all modern essays are written in prose, but works in verse have been dubbed essays (e.g. Alexander Pope's An Essay on Criticism and An Essay on Man). While brevity usually defines an essay, voluminous works like John Locke's An Essay Concerning Human Understanding and Thomas Malthus's An Essay on the Principle of Population are counterexamples.
In some countries (e.g., the United States and Canada), essays have become a major part of formal education. Secondary students are taught structured essay formats to improve their writing skills, and admission essays are often used by universities in selecting applicants and, in the humanities and social sciences, as a way of assessing the performance of students during final exams.

The concept of an "essay" has been extended to other mediums beyond writing. A film essay is a movie that often incorporates documentary film making styles and which focuses more on the evolution of a theme or an idea. A photographic essay is an attempt to cover a topic with a linked series of photographs; it may or may not have an accompanying text or captions.

==Definitions==
John Locke's 1690 An Essay Concerning Human Understanding.
An essay has been defined in a variety of ways. One definition is a "prose composition with a focused subject of discussion" or a "long, systematic discourse". Gale  Free Resources  Glossary  DE. Gale.cengage.com. Retrieved March 23, 2011. 
It is difficult to define the genre into which essays fall. Aldous Huxley, a leading essayist, gives guidance on the subject. Aldous Huxley, Collected Essays, "Preface". He notes that "the essay is a literary device for saying almost everything about almost anything", and adds that "by tradition, almost by definition, the essay is a short piece". Furthermore, Huxley argues that "essays belong to a literary species whose extreme variability can be studied most effectively within a three-poled frame of reference". 
These three poles (or worlds in which the essay may exist) are:
* The personal and the autobiographical: The essayists that feel most comfortable in this pole "write fragments of reflective autobiography and look at the world through the keyhole of anecdote and description".
* The objective, the factual, and the concrete-particular: The essayists that write from this pole "do not speak directly of themselves, but turn their attention outward to some literary or scientific or political theme. Their art consists on setting forth, passing judgement upon, and drawing general conclusions from the relevant data".
* The abstract-universal: In this pole "we find those essayists who do their work in the world of high abstractions", who are never personal and who seldom mention the particular facts of experience.
Huxley adds that "the most richly satisfying essays are those which make the best not of one, not of two, but of all the three worlds in which it is possible for the essay to exist".

The word essay derives from the French infinitive essayer, "to try" or "to attempt". In English essay first meant "a trial" or "an attempt", and this is still an alternative meaning. The Frenchman Michel de Montaigne (15331592) was the first author to describe his work as essays; he used the term to characterize these as "attempts" to put his thoughts into writing, and his essays grew out of his commonplacing. Inspired in particular by the works of Plutarch, a translation of whose Oeuvres Morales (Moral works) into French had just been published by Jacques Amyot, Montaigne began to compose his essays in 1572; the first edition, entitled Essais, was published in two volumes in 1580. For the rest of his life he continued revising previously published essays and composing new ones. Francis Bacon's essays, published in book form in 1597, 1612, and 1625, were the first works in English that described themselves as essays. Ben Jonson first used the word essayist in English in 1609, according to the Oxford English Dictionary.

==History==

===Europe===
English essayists included Robert Burton (15771641) and Sir Thomas Browne (16051682). In France, Michel de Montaigne's three volume Essais in the mid 1500s contain over 100 examples widely regarded as the predecessor of the modern essay. In Italy, Baldassare Castiglione wrote about courtly manners in his essay Il libro del cortegiano. In the 17th century, the Jesuit Baltasar Gracin wrote about the theme of wisdom. essay (literature)  Britannica Online Encyclopedia. Britannica.com. Retrieved March 22, 2011. During the Age of Enlightenment, essays were a favored tool of polemicists who aimed at convincing readers of their position; they also featured heavily in the rise of periodical literature, as seen in the works of Joseph Addison, Richard Steele and Samuel Johnson. In the 18th and 19th centuries, Edmund Burke and Samuel Taylor Coleridge wrote essays for the general public. The early 19th century in particular saw a proliferation of great essayists in English  William Hazlitt, Charles Lamb, Leigh Hunt and Thomas de Quincey all penned numerous essays on diverse subjects. In the 20th century, a number of essayists tried to explain the new movements in art and culture by using essays (e.g., T.S. Eliot). Whereas some essayists used essays for strident political themes, Robert Louis Stevenson and Willa Cather wrote lighter essays. Virginia Woolf, Edmund Wilson, and Charles du Bos wrote literary criticism essays. 

===Japan===

As with the novel, essays existed in Japan several centuries before they developed in Europe, with a genre of essays known as zuihitsu  loosely connected essays and fragmented ideas  having existed since almost the beginnings of Japanese literature. Many of the most noted early works of Japanese literature are in this genre. Notable examples include The Pillow Book (c. 1000) by court lady Sei Shnagon, and Tsurezuregusa (1330) by Japanese Buddhist monk Yoshida Kenk being particularly renowned. Kenk described his short writings similarly to Montaigne, referring to them as "nonsensical thoughts" written in "idle hours". Another noteworthy difference from Europe is that women have traditionally written in Japan, though the more formal, Chinese-influenced writings of male writers were more prized at the time.

==As an educational tool==
University students, like these students doing research at a university library, are often assigned essays as a way to get them to analyse what they have read. 

In countries like the United States and the United Kingdom, essays have become a major part of a formal education in the form of free response questions. Secondary students in these countries are taught structured essay formats to improve their writing skills, and essays are often used by universities in these countries in selecting applicants (see admissions essay). In both secondary and tertiary education, essays are used to judge the mastery and comprehension of material. Students are asked to explain, comment on, or assess a topic of study in the form of an essay. During some courses, university students will often be required to complete one or more essays that are prepared over several weeks or months. In addition, in fields such as the humanities and social sciences, mid-term and end of term examinations often require students to write a short essay in two or three hours.

In these countries, so-called academic essays, which may also be called "papers", are usually more formal than literary ones. They may still allow the presentation of the writer's own views, but this is done in a logical and factual manner, with the use of the first person often discouraged. Longer academic essays (often with a word limit of between 2,000 and 5,000 words) are often more discursive. They sometimes begin with a short summary analysis of what has previously been written on a topic, which is often called a literature review.

Longer essays may also contain an introductory page in which words and phrases from the title are tightly defined. Most academic institutions will require that all substantial facts, quotations, and other porting material used in an essay be referenced in a bibliography or works cited page at the end of the text. This scholarly convention allows others (whether teachers or fellow scholars) to understand the basis of the facts and quotations used to support the essay's argument, and thereby help to evaluate to what extent the argument is supported by evidence, and to evaluate the quality of that evidence. The academic essay tests the student's ability to present their thoughts in an organized way and is designed to test their intellectual capabilities.

One essay guide of a US university makes the distinction between research papers and discussion papers. The guide states that a "research paper is intended to uncover a wide variety of sources on a given topic". As such, research papers "tend to be longer and more inclusive in their scope and with the amount of information they deal with." While discussion papers "also include research, ...they tend to be shorter and more selective in their approach...and more analytical and critical". Whereas a research paper would typically quote "a wide variety of sources", a discussion paper aims to integrate the material in a broader fashion. Sections 3.1 through 3.3. of the Simon Fraser University CNS essay handbook. 

One of the challenges facing US universities is that in some cases, students may submit essays which have been purchased from an essay mill (or "paper mill") as their own work. An "essay mill" is a ghostwriting service that sells pre-written essays to university and college students. Since plagiarism is a form of academic dishonesty or academic fraud, universities and colleges may investigate papers suspected to be from an essay mill by using Internet plagiarism detection software, which compares essays against a database of known mill essays and by orally testing students on the contents of their papers.

==Forms and styles==
This section describes the different forms and styles of essay writing. These forms and styles are used by a range of authors, including university students and professional essayists.

===Cause and effect===
The defining features of a "cause and effect" essay are causal chains that connect from a cause to an effect, careful language, and chronological or emphatic order. A writer using this rhetorical method must consider the subject, determine the purpose, consider the audience, think critically about different causes or consequences, consider a thesis statement, arrange the parts, consider the language, and decide on a conclusion. Chapter 7: Cause and Effect in Glenn, Cheryl. Making Sense: A Real World Rhetorical Reader. Ed. Denise B. Wydra, et al. Second ed. Boston, MA: Bedford/St. Martin's, 2005. 

===Classification and division===
Classification is the categorization of objects into a larger whole while division is the breaking of a larger whole into smaller parts. Chapter 5: Classification and Division in Glenn, Cheryl. Making Sense: A Real World Rhetorical Reader. Ed. Denise B. Wydra, et al. Second ed. Boston, MA: Bedford/St. Martin's, 2005. 

===Compare and contrast===
Compare and contrast essays are characterized by a basis for comparison, points of comparison, and analogies. It is grouped by object (chunking) or by point (sequential). Comparison highlights the similarities between two or more similar objects while contrasting highlights the differences between two or more objects. When writing a compare/contrast essay, writers need to determine their purpose, consider their audience, consider the basis and points of comparison, consider their thesis statement, arrange and develop the comparison, and reach a conclusion. Compare and contrast is arranged emphatically. Chapter 6: Comparison and Contrast in Glenn, Cheryl. Making Sense: A Real World Rhetorical Reader. Ed. Denise B. Wydra, et al. Second ed. Boston, MA: Bedford/St. Martin's, 2005. 

===Descriptive===
Descriptive writing is characterized by sensory details, which appeal to the physical senses, and details that appeal to a reader's emotional, physical, or intellectual sensibilities. Determining the purpose, considering the audience, creating a dominant impression, using descriptive language, and organizing the description are the rhetorical choices to be considered when using a description. A description is usually arranged spatially but can also be chronological or emphatic. The focus of a description is the scene. Description uses tools such as denotative language, connotative language, figurative language, metaphor, and simile to arrive at a dominant impression. Chapter 2: Description in Glenn, Cheryl. Making Sense: A Real World Rhetorical Reader. Ed. Denise B. Wydra, et al. Second ed. Boston, MA: Bedford/St. Martin's, 2005. One university essay guide states that "descriptive writing says what happened or what another author has discussed; it provides an account of the topic". Section 2.1 of the Simon Fraser University CNS Essay Handbook. Available online at: sfu.ca 
Lyric essays are an important form of descriptive essays.

===Dialectic===
In the dialectic form of essay, which is commonly used in Philosophy, the writer makes a thesis and argument, then objects to their own argument (with a counterargument), but then counters the counterargument with a final and novel argument. This form benefits from presenting a broader perspective while countering a possible flaw that some may present.

===Exemplification===
An exemplification essay is characterized by a generalization and relevant, representative, and believable examples including anecdotes. Writers need to consider their subject, determine their purpose, consider their audience, decide on specific examples, and arrange all the parts together when writing an exemplification essay. Chapter 4: Exemplification in Glenn, Cheryl. Making Sense: A Real World Rhetorical Reader. Ed. Denise B. Wydra, et al. Second ed. Boston, MA: Bedford/St. Martin's, 2005. 
Malthus' Essay on the Principle of Population

===Familiar===
A familiar essay is one in which the essayist speaks as if to a single reader. He speaks about both himself and a particular subject. Anne Fadiman notes that "the genre's heyday was the early nineteenth century," and that its greatest exponent was Charles Lamb. She also suggests that while critical essays have more brain than heart, and personal essays have more heart than brain, familiar essays have equal measures of both. Fadiman, At Large and At Small, xi. 

===History (thesis)===
A history essay, sometimes referred to as a thesis essay, will describe an argument or claim about one or more historical events and will support that claim with evidence, arguments and references. The text makes it clear to the reader why the argument or claim is as such. History Essay Format & Thesis Statement, (February 2010) 

===Narrative===
A narrative uses tools such as flashbacks, flash-forwards, and transitions that often build to a climax. The focus of a narrative is the plot. When creating a narrative, authors must determine their purpose, consider their audience, establish their point of view, use dialogue, and organize the narrative. A narrative is usually arranged chronologically. Chapter 3 Narration in Glenn, Cheryl. Making Sense: A Real World Rhetorical Reader. Ed. Denise B. Wydra, et al. Second ed. Boston, MA: Bedford/St. Martin's, 2005. 

===Critical===
A critical essay is an argumentative piece of writing, aimed at presenting objective analysis of the subject matter, narrowed down to a single topic. The main idea of all the criticism is to provide an opinion either of positive or negative implication. As such, a critical essay requires research and analysis, strong internal logic and sharp structure. Each argument should be supported with sufficient evidence, relevant to the point.

===Economics===
An economic essay can start with a thesis, or it can start with a theme. It can take a narrative course and a descriptive course. It can even become an argumentative essay if the author feels the need. After the introduction the author has to do his/her best to expose the economic matter at hand, to analyse it, evaluate it, and draw a conclusion. If the essay takes more of a narrative form then the author has to expose each aspect of the economic puzzle in a way that makes it clear and understandable for the reader

===Other logical structures===
The logical progression and organizational structure of an essay can take many forms. Understanding how the movement of thought is managed through an essay has a profound impact on its overall cogency and ability to impress. A number of alternative logical structures for essays have been visualized as diagrams, making them easy to implement or adapt in the construction of an argument. 

==Magazine or newspaper==
Essays often appear in magazines, especially magazines with an intellectual bent, such as The Atlantic and Harpers. Magazine and newspaper essays use many of the essay types described in the section on forms and styles (e.g., descriptive essays, narrative essays, etc.). Some newspapers also print essays in the op-ed section.
An 1895 cover of Harpers, a US magazine that prints a number of essays per issue.

==Employment==
Employment essays detailing experience in a certain occupational field are required when applying for some jobs, especially government jobs in the United States. Essays known as Knowledge Skills and Executive Core Qualifications are required when applying to certain US federal government positions.

A KSA, or "Knowledge, Skills, and Abilities," is a series of narrative statements that are required when applying to Federal government job openings in the United States. KSAs are used along with resumes to determine who the best applicants are when several candidates qualify for a job. The knowledge, skills and abilities necessary for the successful performance of a position are contained on each job vacancy announcement. KSAs are brief and focused essays about one's career and educational background that presumably qualify one to perform the duties of the position being applied for.

An Executive Core Qualification, or ECQ, is a narrative statement that is required when applying to Senior Executive Service positions within the US Federal government. Like the KSAs, ECQs are used along with resumes to determine who the best applicants are when several candidates qualify for a job. The Office of Personnel Management has established five executive core qualifications that all applicants seeking to enter the Senior Executive Service must demonstrate.

==Non-literary types==

===Visual Arts===
In the visual arts, an essay is a preliminary drawing or sketch upon which a final painting or sculpture is based, made as a test of the work's composition (this meaning of the term, like several of those following, comes from the word essays meaning of "attempt" or "trial").

===Music===
In the realm of music, composer Samuel Barber wrote a set of "Essays for Orchestra," relying on the form and content of the music to guide the listener's ear, rather than any extra-musical plot or story.

===Film===
A film essay (or "cinematic essay") consists of the evolution of a theme or an idea rather than a plot per se; or the film literally being a cinematic accompaniment to a narrator reading an essay. From another perspective, an essay film could be defined as a documentary film visual basis combined with a form of commentary that contains elements of self-portrait (rather than autobiography), where the signature (rather than the life story) of the filmmaker is apparent. The cinematic essay often blends documentary, fiction, and experimental film making using a tones and editing styles. Cinematic Essay Film Genre. chicagomediaworks.com. Retrieved March 22, 2011. 

The genre is not well-defined but might include propaganda works of early Soviet parliamentarians like Dziga Vertov, present-day filmmakers including Chris Marker, Lim, Dennis (July 31, 2012). "Chris Marker, 91, Pioneer of the Essay Film". The New York Times. Retrieved July 31, 2012. Michael Moore (Roger & Me (1989), Bowling for Columbine (2002) and Fahrenheit 9/11 (2004)), Errol Morris (The Thin Blue Line (1988)), Morgan Spurlock (Me|Supersize Me: A Film of Epic Proportions]) and Agns Varda. Jean-Luc Godard describes his recent work as "film-essays". Discussion of film essays. Chicago Media Works. Two filmmakers whose work was the antecedent to the cinematic essay include Georges Mlis and Bertolt Brecht. Mlis made a short film (The Coronation of Edward VII (1902)) about the 1902 coronation of King Edward VII, which mixes actual footage with shots of a recreation of the event. Brecht was a playwright who experimented with film and incorporated film projections into some of his plays. Orson Welles made an essay film in his own pioneering style which was released in 1974 called F for Fake, which dealt specifically with art forger Elmyr de Hory and with the themes of deception, "fakery," and authenticity in general.

David Winks Gray's article "The essay film in action" states that the "essay film became an identifiable form of film making in the 1950s and '60s". He states that since that time, essay films have tended to be "on the margins" of the film making world. Essay films have a "peculiar searching, questioning tone" which is "between documentary and fiction" but without "fitting comfortably" into either genre. Gray notes that just like written essays, essay films "tend to marry the personal voice of a guiding narrator (often the director) with a wide swath of other voices". . San Francisco Film Society. The University of Wisconsin Cinematheque website echoes some of Gray's comments; it calls a film essay an "intimate and allusive" genre that "catches filmmakers in a pensive mood, ruminating on the margins between fiction and documentary" in a manner that is "refreshingly inventive, playful, and idiosyncratic". "Talking Pictures: The Art of the Essay Film". Cinema.wisc.edu. Retrieved March 22, 2011. 

===Photography===
"After School Play Interrupted by the Catch and Release of a Stingray" is a simple time-sequence photo essay.

A photographic essay is an attempt to cover a topic with a linked series of photographs. Photo essays range from purely photographic works to photographs with captions or small notes to full text essays with a few or many accompanying photographs. Photo essays can be sequential in nature, intended to be viewed in a particular order, or they may consist of non-ordered photographs which may be viewed all at once or in an order chosen by the viewer. All photo essays are collections of photographs, but not all collections of photographs are photo essays. Photo essays often address a certain issue or attempt to capture the character of places and events.

==See also==

* Abstract (summary)
* Admissions essay
* Body (writing)
* Book report
* Dissertation
* Essay thesis
* Five paragraph essay
* Introduction
* List of essayists
* Plagiarism
* SAT Essay
* Schaffer paragraph
* Treatise
* Writing

==References==

==Further reading==
* Theodor W. Adorno, "The Essay as Form" in: Theodor W. Adorno, The Adorno Reader, Blackwell Publishers 2000.
* Beaujour, Michel. Miroirs d'encre: Rhtorique de l'autoportrait'. Paris: Seuil, 1980. of the Literary Self-Portrait. Trans. Yara Milos. New York: NYU Press, 1991.
* Bensmaa, Reda. The Barthes Effect: The Essay as Reflective Text. Trans. Pat Fedkiew. Minneapolis: Univ. of Minnesota Press, 1987.
* D'Agata, John (Editor), The Lost Origins of the Essay. St Paul: Graywolf Press, 2009.
* Giamatti, Louis. "The Cinematic Essay", in Godard and the Others: Essays in Cinematic Form. London, Tantivy Press, 1975.
* Lopate, Phillip. "In Search of the Centaur: The Essay-Film", in Beyond Document: Essays on Nonfiction Film. Edited by Charles Warren, Wesleyan University Press, 1998. pp. 243270.
* Warburton, Nigel. The basics of essay writing. Routledge, 2006. ISBN 0-415-24000-X, ISBN 978-0-415-24000-0

== External links ==

* Essay writing category on EnglishGrammar.org
* Essay eTexts at Project Gutenberg
* The Dialectical Essay: A detailed writing guide Sewanee University
* In Praise of the Undergraduate Essay by Dan Edelstein, Stanford University
* The Age of the Essay Criticism of the modern essay, by Paul Graham
* 
* How to write an essay - Infographic

 



[[Error detection and correction]]

In information theory and coding theory with applications in computer science and telecommunication, error detection and correction or error control are techniques that enable reliable delivery of digital data over unreliable communication channels. Many communication channels are subject to channel noise, and thus errors may be introduced during transmission from the source to a receiver. Error detection techniques allow detecting such errors, while error correction enables reconstruction of the original data.

==Definitions==
The general definitions of the terms are as follows:
* Error detection is the detection of errors caused by noise or other impairments during transmission from the transmitter to the receiver. 
* Error correction is the detection of errors and reconstruction of the original, error-free data.

==History==
The most famous early systematic use of error detection was by Jewish scribes in the precise copying of the Jewish bible, beginning before Christ. An emphasis on minute details of words and spellings evolved into the idea of a perfect text in 135 CE, and with it increasingly forceful strictures that a deviation in even a single letter would make a Torah scroll invalid. Rambam, The Laws of Tefillin, Mezuzot, and Torah Scrolls, 1:2 Menachem Cohen, The Idea of the Sanctity of the Biblical Text and the Science of Textual Criticism in HaMikrah V'anachnu, ed. Uriel Simon, HaMachon L'Yahadut U'Machshava Bat-Z'mananu and Dvir, Tel-Aviv, 1979. The scribes used methods such as summing the number of words per line and per page (Numerical Masorah), and checking the middle paragraph, word and letter against the original. The page was thrown out if a single mistake was found, and three mistakes on a single page would result in the entire manuscript being destroyed (the equivalent of retransmission on a telecommunications channel). The effectiveness of their methods was verified by the accuracy of copying through the centuries demonstrated by discovery of the Dead Sea Scrolls in 19471956, dating from c.150 BCE-75 CE. Fagan, Brian M., and Charlotte Beck, The Oxford Companion to Archeology, entry on the "Dead sea scrolls", Oxford University Press, 1996. 

==Introduction==
The general idea for achieving error detection and correction is to add some redundancy (i.e., some extra data) to a message, which receivers can use to check consistency of the delivered message, and to recover data determined to be corrupted. Error-detection and correction schemes can be either systematic or non-systematic: In a systematic scheme, the transmitter sends the original data, and attaches a fixed number of check bits (or parity data), which are derived from the data bits by some deterministic algorithm. If only error detection is required, a receiver can simply apply the same algorithm to the received data bits and compare its output with the received check bits; if the values do not match, an error has occurred at some point during the transmission. In a system that uses a non-systematic code, the original message is transformed into an encoded message that has at least as many bits as the original message.

Good error control performance requires the scheme to be selected based on the characteristics of the communication channel. Common channel models include memory-less models where errors occur randomly and with a certain probability, and dynamic models where errors occur primarily in bursts. Consequently, error-detecting and correcting codes can be generally distinguished between random-error-detecting/correcting and burst-error-detecting/correcting. Some codes can also be suitable for a mixture of random errors and burst errors.

If the channel capacity cannot be determined, or is highly variable, an error-detection scheme may be combined with a system for retransmissions of erroneous data. This is known as automatic repeat request (ARQ), and is most notably used in the Internet. An alternate approach for error control is hybrid automatic repeat request (HARQ), which is a combination of ARQ and error-correction coding.

==Implementation==
Error correction may generally be realized in two different ways:
* Automatic repeat request (ARQ) (sometimes also referred to as backward error correction): This is an error control technique whereby an error detection scheme is combined with requests for retransmission of erroneous data. Every block of data received is checked using the error detection code used, and if the check fails, retransmission of the data is requested  this may be done repeatedly, until the data can be verified.
* Forward error correction (FEC): The sender encodes the data using an error-correcting code (ECC) prior to transmission. The additional information (redundancy) added by the code is used by the receiver to recover the original data. In general, the reconstructed data is what is deemed the "most likely" original data.

ARQ and FEC may be combined, such that minor errors are corrected without retransmission, and major errors are corrected via a request for retransmission: this is called hybrid automatic repeat-request (HARQ).

== Error detection schemes ==
Error detection is most commonly realized using a suitable hash function (or checksum algorithm). A hash function adds a fixed-length tag to a message, which enables receivers to verify the delivered message by recomputing the tag and comparing it with the one provided.

There exists a vast variety of different hash function designs. However, some are of particularly widespread use because of either their simplicity or their suitability for detecting certain kinds of errors (e.g., the cyclic redundancy check's performance in detecting burst errors).

Random-error-correcting codes based on minimum distance coding can provide a suitable alternative to hash functions when a strict guarantee on the minimum number of errors to be detected is desired. Repetition codes, described below, are special cases of error-correcting codes: although rather inefficient, they find applications for both error correction and detection due to their simplicity.

=== Repetition codes ===

A repetition code is a coding scheme that repeats the bits across a channel to achieve error-free communication. Given a stream of data to be transmitted, the data is divided into blocks of bits. Each block is transmitted some predetermined number of times. For example, to send the bit pattern "1011", the four-bit block can be repeated three times, thus producing "1011 1011 1011". However, if this twelve-bit pattern was received as "1010 1011 1011"  where the first block is unlike the other two  it can be determined that an error has occurred.

Repetition codes are very inefficient, and can be susceptible to problems if the error occurs in exactly the same place for each group (e.g., "1010 1010 1010" in the previous example would be detected as correct). The advantage of repetition codes is that they are extremely simple, and are in fact used in some transmissions of numbers stations. 

=== Parity bits ===

A parity bit is a bit that is added to a group of source bits to ensure that the number of set bits (i.e., bits with value 1) in the outcome is even or odd. It is a very simple scheme that can be used to detect single or any other odd number (i.e., three, five, etc.) of errors in the output. An even number of flipped bits will make the parity bit appear correct even though the data is erroneous.

Extensions and variations on the parity bit mechanism are horizontal redundancy checks, vertical redundancy checks, and "double," "dual," or "diagonal" parity (used in RAID-DP).

=== Checksums ===

A checksum of a message is a modular arithmetic sum of message code words of a fixed word length (e.g., byte values). The sum may be negated by means of a ones'-complement operation prior to transmission to detect errors resulting in all-zero messages.

Checksum schemes include parity bits, check digits, and longitudinal redundancy checks. Some checksum schemes, such as the Damm algorithm, the Luhn algorithm, and the Verhoeff algorithm, are specifically designed to detect errors commonly introduced by humans in writing down or remembering identification numbers.

=== Cyclic redundancy checks (CRCs) ===

A cyclic redundancy check (CRC) is a single-burst-error-detecting cyclic code and non-secure hash function designed to detect accidental changes to digital data in computer networks. It is not suitable for detecting maliciously introduced errors. It is characterized by specification of a so-called generator polynomial, which is used as the divisor in a polynomial long division over a finite field, taking the input data as the dividend, and where the remainder becomes the result.

Cyclic codes have favorable properties in that they are well suited for detecting burst errors. CRCs are particularly easy to implement in hardware, and are therefore commonly used in digital networks and storage devices such as hard disk drives.

Even parity is a special case of a cyclic redundancy check, where the single-bit CRC is generated by the divisor x + 1.

=== Cryptographic hash functions ===

The output of a cryptographic hash function, also known as a message digest, can provide strong assurances about data integrity, whether changes of the data are accidental (e.g., due to transmission errors) or maliciously introduced. Any modification to the data will likely be detected through a mismatching hash value. Furthermore, given some hash value, it is infeasible to find some input data (other than the one given) that will yield the same hash value. If an attacker can change not only the message but also the hash value, then a keyed hash or message authentication code (MAC) can be used for additional security. Without knowing the key, it is infeasible for the attacker to calculate the correct keyed hash value for a modified message.

=== Error-correcting codes ===

Any error-correcting code can be used for error detection. A code with minimum Hamming distance, d, can detect up to d  1 errors in a code word. Using minimum-distance-based error-correcting codes for error detection can be suitable if a strict limit on the minimum number of errors to be detected is desired.

Codes with minimum Hamming distance d = 2 are degenerate cases of error-correcting codes, and can be used to detect single errors. The parity bit is an example of a single-error-detecting code.

== Error correction ==
===Automatic repeat request (ARQ)===

Automatic Repeat reQuest (ARQ) is an error control method for data transmission that makes use of error-detection codes, acknowledgment and/or negative acknowledgment messages, and timeouts to achieve reliable data transmission. An acknowledgment is a message sent by the receiver to indicate that it has correctly received a data frame.

Usually, when the transmitter does not receive the acknowledgment before the timeout occurs (i.e., within a reasonable amount of time after sending the data frame), it retransmits the frame until it is either correctly received or the error persists beyond a predetermined number of retransmissions.

Three types of ARQ protocols are Stop-and-wait ARQ, Go-Back-N ARQ, and Selective Repeat ARQ.

ARQ is appropriate if the communication channel has varying or unknown capacity, such as is the case on the Internet. However, ARQ requires the availability of a back channel, results in possibly increased latency due to retransmissions, and requires the maintenance of buffers and timers for retransmissions, which in the case of network congestion can put a strain on the server and overall network capacity. A. J. McAuley, Reliable Broadband Communication Using a Burst Erasure Correcting Code, ACM SIGCOMM, 1990. 

===Error-correcting code===
An error-correcting code (ECC) or forward error correction (FEC) code is a system of adding redundant data, or parity data, to a message, such that it can be recovered by a receiver even when a number of errors (up to the capability of the code being used) were introduced, either during the process of transmission, or on storage. Since the receiver does not have to ask the sender for retransmission of the data, a back-channel is not required in forward error correction, and it is therefore suitable for simplex communication such as broadcasting. Error-correcting codes are frequently used in lower-layer communication, as well as for reliable storage in media such as CDs, DVDs, hard disks, and RAM.

Error-correcting codes are usually distinguished between convolutional codes and block codes:

* Convolutional codes are processed on a bit-by-bit basis. They are particularly suitable for implementation in hardware, and the Viterbi decoder allows optimal decoding.

* Block codes are processed on a block-by-block basis. Early examples of block codes are repetition codes, Hamming codes and multidimensional parity-check codes. They were followed by a number of efficient codes, ReedSolomon codes being the most notable due to their current widespread use. Turbo codes and low-density parity-check codes (LDPC) are relatively new constructions that can provide almost optimal efficiency.

Shannon's theorem is an important theorem in forward error correction, and describes the maximum information rate at which reliable communication is possible over a channel that has a certain error probability or signal-to-noise ratio (SNR). This strict upper limit is expressed in terms of the channel capacity. More specifically, the theorem says that there exist codes such that with increasing encoding length the probability of error on a discrete memoryless channel can be made arbitrarily small, provided that the code rate is smaller than the channel capacity. The code rate is defined as the fraction k/n of k source symbols and n encoded symbols.

The actual maximum code rate allowed depends on the error-correcting code used, and may be lower. This is because Shannon's proof was only of existential nature, and did not show how to construct codes which are both optimal and have efficient encoding and decoding algorithms.

===Hybrid schemes===

Hybrid ARQ is a combination of ARQ and forward error correction. There are two basic approaches: 
* Messages are always transmitted with FEC parity data (and error-detection redundancy). A receiver decodes a message using the parity information, and requests retransmission using ARQ only if the parity data was not sufficient for successful decoding (identified through a failed integrity check).
* Messages are transmitted without parity data (only with error-detection information). If a receiver detects an error, it requests FEC information from the transmitter using ARQ, and uses it to reconstruct the original message.

The latter approach is particularly attractive on an erasure channel when using a rateless erasure code.

== Applications ==
Applications that require low latency (such as telephone conversations) cannot use Automatic Repeat reQuest (ARQ); they must use forward error correction (FEC). By the time an ARQ system discovers an error and re-transmits it, the re-sent data will arrive too late to be any good.

Applications where the transmitter immediately forgets the information as soon as it is sent (such as most television cameras) cannot use ARQ; they must use FEC because when an error occurs, the original data is no longer available. (This is also why FEC is used in data storage systems such as RAID and distributed data store).

Applications that use ARQ must have a return channel; applications having no return channel cannot use ARQ. Applications that require extremely low error rates (such as digital money transfers) must use ARQ. Reliability and inspection engineering also make use of the theory of error-correcting codes. 
 
=== Internet ===
In a typical TCP/IP stack, error control is performed at multiple levels:
* Each Ethernet frame carries a CRC-32 checksum. Frames received with incorrect checksums are discarded by the receiver hardware.
* The IPv4 header contains a checksum protecting the contents of the header. Packets with mismatching checksums are dropped within the network or at the receiver.
* The checksum was omitted from the IPv6 header in order to minimize processing costs in network routing and because current link layer technology is assumed to provide sufficient error detection (see also RFC 3819).
* UDP has an optional checksum covering the payload and addressing information from the UDP and IP headers. Packets with incorrect checksums are discarded by the operating system network stack. The checksum is optional under IPv4, only, because the Data-Link layer checksum may already provide the desired level of error protection.
* TCP provides a checksum for protecting the payload and addressing information from the TCP and IP headers. Packets with incorrect checksums are discarded within the network stack, and eventually get retransmitted using ARQ, either explicitly (such as through triple-ack) or implicitly due to a timeout.

=== Deep-space telecommunications ===
Development of error-correction codes was tightly coupled with the history of deep-space missions due to the extreme dilution of signal power over interplanetary distances, and the limited power availability aboard space probes. Whereas early missions sent their data uncoded, starting from 1968 digital error correction was implemented in the form of (sub-optimally decoded) convolutional codes and ReedMuller codes. K. Andrews et al., The Development of Turbo and LDPC Codes for Deep-Space Applications, Proceedings of the IEEE, Vol. 95, No. 11, Nov. 2007. The ReedMuller code was well suited to the noise the spacecraft was subject to (approximately matching a bell curve), and was implemented at the Mariner spacecraft for missions between 1969 and 1977.

The Voyager 1 and Voyager 2 missions, which started in 1977, were designed to deliver color imaging amongst scientific information of Jupiter and Saturn. This resulted in increased coding requirements, and thus the spacecraft were supported by (optimally Viterbi-decoded) convolutional codes that could be concatenated with an outer Golay (24,12,8) code.

The Voyager 2 craft additionally supported an implementation of a ReedSolomon code: the concatenated ReedSolomonViterbi (RSV) code allowed for very powerful error correction, and enabled the spacecraft's extended journey to Uranus and Neptune. Both craft use V2 RSV coding due to ECC system upgrades after 1989.

The CCSDS currently recommends usage of error correction codes with performance similar to the Voyager 2 RSV code as a minimum. Concatenated codes are increasingly falling out of favor with space missions, and are replaced by more powerful codes such as Turbo codes or LDPC codes.

The different kinds of deep space and orbital missions that are conducted suggest that trying to find a "one size fits all" error correction system will be an ongoing problem for some time to come. For missions close to Earth the nature of the channel noise is different from that which a spacecraft on an interplanetary mission experiences. Additionally, as a spacecraft increases its distance from Earth, the problem of correcting for noise gets larger.

=== Satellite broadcasting (DVB) ===

The demand for satellite transponder bandwidth continues to grow, fueled by the desire to deliver television (including new channels and High Definition TV) and IP data. Transponder availability and bandwidth constraints have limited this growth, because transponder capacity is determined by the selected modulation scheme and Forward error correction (FEC) rate.

Overview
* QPSK coupled with traditional Reed Solomon and Viterbi codes have been used for nearly 20 years for the delivery of digital satellite TV.
* Higher order modulation schemes such as 8PSK, 16QAM and 32QAM have enabled the satellite industry to increase transponder efficiency by several orders of magnitude.
* This increase in the information rate in a transponder comes at the expense of an increase in the carrier power to meet the threshold requirement for existing antennas.
* Tests conducted using the latest chipsets demonstrate that the performance achieved by using Turbo Codes may be even lower than the 0.8 dB figure assumed in early designs.

=== Data storage ===

Error detection and correction codes are often used to improve the reliability of data storage media. A "parity track" was present on the first magnetic tape data storage in 1951. The "Optimal Rectangular Code" used in group code recording tapes not only detects but also corrects single-bit errors. Some file formats, particularly archive formats, include a checksum (most often CRC32) to detect corruption and truncation and can employ redundancy and/or parity files to recover portions of corrupted data. Reed Solomon codes are used in compact discs to correct errors caused by scratches.

Modern hard drives use CRC codes to detect and ReedSolomon codes to correct minor errors in sector reads, and to recover data from sectors that have "gone bad" and store that data in the spare sectors. My Hard Drive Died | Scott A. Moulton RAID systems use a variety of error correction techniques, to correct errors when a hard drive completely fails. Filesystems such as ZFS or Btrfs, as well as some RAID implementations, support data scrubbing and resilvering, which allows bad blocks to be detected and (hopefully) recovered before they are used. The recovered data may be re-written to exactly the same physical location, to spare blocks elsewhere on the same piece of hardware, or to replacement hardware.

=== Error-correcting memory ===

DRAM memory may provide increased protection against soft errors by relying on error correcting codes. Such error-correcting memory, known as ECC or EDAC-protected memory, is particularly desirable for high fault-tolerant applications, such as servers, as well as deep-space applications due to increased radiation.

Error-correcting memory controllers traditionally use Hamming codes, although some use triple modular redundancy.

Interleaving allows distributing the effect of a single cosmic ray potentially upsetting multiple physically neighboring bits across multiple words by associating neighboring bits to different words. As long as a single event upset (SEU) does not exceed the error threshold (e.g., a single error) in any particular word between accesses, it can be corrected (e.g., by a single-bit error correcting code), and the illusion of an error-free memory system may be maintained. 
 

A few systems support memory scrubbing.

== See also ==
* Forward error correction
* Link adaptation
* List of algorithms for error detection and correction
* List of checksum algorithms
* List of error-correcting codes
* Reliability (computer networking)
* Burst error-correcting code

==References==

==Further reading==
* 

== External links ==
* The on-line textbook: Information Theory, Inference, and Learning Algorithms, by David MacKay, contains chapters on elementary error-correcting codes; on the theoretical limits of error-correction; and on the latest state-of-the-art error-correcting codes, including low-density parity-check codes, turbo codes, and fountain codes.
* Compute parameters of linear codes  an on-line interface for generating and computing parameters (e.g. minimum distance, covering radius) of linear error-correcting codes.
* ECC Page

 
Detection and correction

[[Euclidean domain]]

In mathematics, more specifically in abstract algebra and ring theory, a Euclidean domain (also called a Euclidean ring) is a ring that can be endowed with a certain structure &ndash; namely a Euclidean function, to be described in detail below &ndash; which allows a suitable generalization of the Euclidean division of the integers. This generalized Euclidean algorithm can be put to many of the same uses as Euclid's original algorithm in the ring of integers: in any Euclidean domain, one can apply the Euclidean algorithm to compute the greatest common divisor of any two elements. In particular, the greatest common divisor of any two elements exists and can be written as a linear combination 
of them (Bzout identity). Also every ideal in a Euclidean domain is principal, which implies a suitable generalization of the Fundamental Theorem of Arithmetic: every Euclidean domain is a unique factorization domain.

It is important to compare the class of Euclidean domains with the larger class of principal ideal domains (PIDs). An arbitrary PID has much the same "structural properties" of a Euclidean domain (or, indeed, even of the ring of integers), but when an explicit algorithm for Euclidean division is known, one may use Euclidean algorithm and extended Euclidean algorithm to compute greatest common divisors and Bzout's identity. In particular, the existence of efficient algorithms for Euclidean division of integers and of polynomials in one variable over a field is of basic importance in computer algebra.

So, given an integral domain R, it is often very useful to know that R has a Euclidean function: in particular, this implies that R is a PID. However, if there is no "obvious" Euclidean function, then determining whether R is a PID is generally a much easier problem than determining whether it is a Euclidean domain.

Euclidean domains appear in the following chain of class inclusions:

: Commutative rings  integral domains  integrally closed domains  unique factorization domains  principal ideal domains  Euclidean domains  fields

==Definition==
Let R be an integral domain. A Euclidean function on R is a function 
 satisfying the following fundamental division-with-remainder property:

*(EF1) If a and b are in R and b is nonzero, then there are q and r in R such that a bq + r and either r = 0 or f(r) < f(b).

A Euclidean domain is an integral domain which can be endowed with at least one Euclidean function. It is important to note that a particular Euclidean function f is not part of the structure of a Euclidean domain: in general, a Euclidean domain will admit many different Euclidean functions.

Most algebra texts require a Euclidean function to have the following additional property:

*(EF2) For all nonzero a and b in R, f(a)  f(ab).

However, one can show that (EF2) is superfluous in the following sense: any domain R which 
can be endowed with a function g satisfying (EF1) can also be endowed with a function f satisfying (EF1) and (EF2): indeed, for one can define f(a) as follows 

:

In words, one may define f(a) to be the minimum value attained by g on the set of all non-zero elements of the principal ideal generated by a.

=== Notes on the definition ===

Many authors use other terms such as "degree function", "valuation function", "gauge function" or "norm function", in place of "Euclidean function". Some authors also require the domain of the Euclidean function be the entire ring R; this can always be accommodated by adding 1 to the values at all nonzero elements, and defining the function to be 0 at the zero element of R, but the result is somewhat awkward in the case of K. The definition is sometimes generalized by allowing the Euclidean function to take its values in any well-ordered set; this weakening does not affect the most important implications of the Euclidean property.

The property (EF1) can be restated as follows: for any principal ideal I of R with nonzero generator b, all nonzero classes of the quotient ring R/I have a representative r with f(r) < f(b). Since the possible values of f are well-ordered, this property can be established by proving f(r) < f(b) for any r (not in I) with minimal value of f(r) in its class. Note that for a Euclidean function that is so established there need not exist an effective method to determine q and r in (EF1).

==Examples==
Examples of Euclidean domains include:

*Any field. Define f(x) = 1 for all nonzero x.
*Z, the ring of integers. Define f(n) = |n|, the absolute value of n. Fraleigh & Katz (1967), p. 377, Example 1 
*Z, the ring of Gaussian integers. Define f(a + bi) = a2 + b2, the squared norm of the Gaussian integer a + bi.
* Z (where  is a primitive (non-real) cube root of unity), the ring of Eisenstein integers. Define f(a + b) = a2 &minus; ab + b2, the norm of the Eisenstein integer a + b.
*K, the ring of polynomials over a field K. For each nonzero polynomial P, define f(P) to be the degree of P. Fraleigh & Katz (1967), p. 377, Example 2 
*KX, the ring of formal power series over the field K. For each nonzero power series P, define f(P) as the degree of the smallest power of X occurring in P. In particular, for two nonzero power series P and Q, f(P)f(Q) iff P divides Q.
*Any discrete valuation ring. Define f(x) to be the highest power of the maximal ideal M containing x (equivalently, to the power of the generator of the maximal ideal that x is associated to). The previous case KX is a special case of this.
*A Dedekind domain with finitely many nonzero prime ideals P1, ..., P'n. Define , where is the discrete valuation corresponding to the ideal P'i. (Samuel 1971)

Example of domains that are not Euclidean domains include
* Every domain that is not a principal ideal domain, such as the ring of polynomials in at least two indeterminates over a field, or the ring of univariate polynomials with integer coefficients
* The ring of integers of consisting of the numbers such that a and b are integers. It is a principal ideal domain that is not Euclidean.
* The ring is also a principal ideal domain that is not Euclidean.

==Properties==
Let R be a domain and f a Euclidean function on R. Then:

* R is a principal ideal domain (PID). In fact, if I is a nonzero ideal of R then any element a of I\{0} with minimal value (on that set) of f(a) is a generator of I. Fraleigh & Katz (1967), p. 377, Theorem 7.4 As a consequence R is also a unique factorization domain and a Noetherian ring. With respect to general principal ideal domains, the existence of factorizations (i.e., that R is an atomic domain) is particularly easy to prove in Euclidean domains: choosing a Euclidean function f satisfying (EF2), x cannot have any decomposition into more than f(x) nonunit factors, so starting with x and repeatedly decomposing reducible factors is bound to produce a factorization into irreducible elements.

* Any element of R at which f takes its globally minimal value is invertible in R. If an f satisfying (EF2) is chosen, then the converse also holds, and f takes its minimal value exactly at the invertible elements of R.

*If the Euclidean property is algorithmic, i.e., if there is a division algorithm that for given a and nonzero b produces a quotient q and remainder r with a bq + r and either r 0 or f(r) < f(b), then an extended Euclidean algorithm can be defined in terms of this division operation. Fraleigh & Katz (1967), p. 380, Theorem 7.7 

Not every PID is Euclidean. For example, for d = &minus;19, &minus;43, &minus;67, &minus;163, the ring of integers of is a PID which is not Euclidean, but the cases d = &minus;1, &minus;2, &minus;3, &minus;7, &minus;11 are Euclidean. 

However, in many finite extensions of Q with trivial class group, the ring of integers is Euclidean (not necessarily with respect to the absolute value of the field norm; see below).
Assuming the extended Riemann hypothesis, if K is a finite extension of Q and the ring of integers of K is a PID with an infinite number of units, then the ring of integers is Euclidean. 
In particular this applies to the case of totally real quadratic number fields with trivial class group.
In addition (and without assuming ERH), if the field K is a Galois extension of Q, has trivial class group and unit rank strictly greater than three, then the ring of integers is Euclidean. 
An immediate corollary of this is that if the number field is Galois over Q, its class group is trivial and the extension has degree greater than 8 then the ring of integers is necessarily Euclidean.

== Norm-Euclidean fields ==

Algebraic number fields K come with a canonical norm function on them: the absolute value of the field norm N that takes an algebraic element  to the product of all the conjugates of . This norm maps the ring of integers of a number field K, say O'K, to the nonnegative rational integers, so it is a candidate to be a Euclidean norm on this ring. If this norm satisfies the axioms of a Euclidean function then the number field K is called norm-Euclidean or simply Euclidean. Strictly speaking it is the ring of integers that is Euclidean since fields are trivially Euclidean domains, but the terminology is standard. 

If a field is not norm-Euclidean then that does not mean the ring of integers is not Euclidean, just that the field norm does not satisfy the axioms of a Euclidean function. In fact, the rings of integers of number fields may be divided in several classes:
*Those that are not principal and therefore not Euclidean, such as the integers of 
*Those that are principal and not Euclidean, such as the integers of 
*Those that are Euclidean and not norm-Euclidean, such as the integers of 
*Those that are norm-Euclidean, such as Gaussian integers (integers of )

The norm-Euclidean quadratic fields have been fully classified, they are where d takes the values
:&minus;11, &minus;7, &minus;3, &minus;2, &minus;1, 2, 3, 5, 6, 7, 11, 13, 17, 19, 21, 29, 33, 37, 41, 57, 73 . 

Every Euclidean imaginary quadratic field is norm-Euclidean and is one of the five first fields in the preceding list.

The generalized Riemann hypothesis implies that, if the ring of integers of a number field is principal and has infinitely many units, then it is Euclidean.

== See also ==
*Valuation (algebra)

== Notes ==
 

== References ==
* John B. Fraleigh, Victor J. Katz. A first course in abstract algebra. Addison-Wesley Publishing Company. 5 ed., 1967. ISBN 0-201-53467-3

* Pierre Samuel, "About Euclidean rings", Journal of Algebra 19 (1971) 282-301.

Domain

[[Euclidean algorithm]]

Euclid's method for finding the greatest common divisor (GCD) of two starting lengths BA and DC, both defined to be multiples of a common "unit" length. The length DC being shorter, it is used to "measure" BA, but only once because remainder EA is less than CD. EA now measures (twice) the shorter length DC, with remainder FC shorter than EA. Then FC measures (three times) length EA. Because there is no remainder, the process ends with FC being the GCD. On the right Nicomachus' example with numbers 49 and 21 resulting in their GCD of 7 (derived from Heath 1908:300).

In mathematics, the Euclidean algorithm, or Euclid's algorithm, is a method for computing the greatest common divisor (GCD) of two (usually positive) integers, also known as the greatest common factor (GCF) or highest common factor (HCF). It is named after the Greek mathematician Euclid, who described it in Books VII and X of his Elements. Thomas L. Heath, The Thirteen Books of Euclid's Elements, 2nd ed. Original publication: Cambridge University Press, 1925, 1956, Dover Publications 

The GCD of two positive integers is the largest integer that divides both of them without leaving a remainder (the GCD of two integers in general is defined in a more subtle way).

In its simplest form, Euclid's algorithm starts with a pair of positive integers, and forms a new pair that consists of the smaller number and the difference between the larger and smaller numbers. The process repeats until the numbers in the pair are equal. That number then is the greatest common divisor of the original pair of integers.

The main principle is that the GCD does not change if the smaller number is subtracted from the larger number. For example, the GCD of 252 and 105 is exactly the GCD of 147 (= 252 &minus; 105) and 105. Since the larger of the two numbers is reduced, repeating this process gives successively smaller numbers, so this repetition will necessarily stop sooner or later  when the numbers are equal (if the process is attempted once more, one of the numbers will become 0).

The earliest surviving description of the Euclidean algorithm is in Euclid's Elements (c. 300 BC), making it one of the oldest numerical algorithms still in common use. The original algorithm was described only for natural numbers and geometric lengths (real numbers), but the algorithm was generalized in the 19th century to other types of numbers, such as Gaussian integers and polynomials in one variable. This led to modern abstract algebraic notions, such as Euclidean domains. The Euclidean algorithm has been generalized further to other mathematical structures, such as knots and multivariate polynomials.

The algorithm has many theoretical and practical applications. It may be used to generate almost all the most important traditional musical rhythms used in different cultures throughout the world. It is a key element of the RSA algorithm, a public-key encryption method widely used in electronic commerce. It is used to solve Diophantine equations, such as finding numbers that satisfy multiple congruences (Chinese remainder theorem) or multiplicative inverses of a finite field. It can also be used to construct continued fractions, in the Sturm chain method for finding real roots of a polynomial, and in several modern integer factorization algorithms. Finally, it is a basic tool for proving theorems in modern number theory, such as Lagrange's four-square theorem and the fundamental theorem of arithmetic (unique factorization).

If implemented using remainders of Euclidean division rather than subtractions, Euclid's algorithm computes the GCD of large numbers efficiently: it never requires more division steps than five times the number of digits (in base 10) of the smaller integer. This was proved by Gabriel Lam in 1844, and marks the beginning of computational complexity theory. Methods for improving the algorithm's efficiency were developed in the 20th century.

By reversing the steps in the Euclidean algorithm, the GCD can be expressed as a sum of the two original numbers each multiplied by a positive or negative integer, e.g., the GCD of 252 and 105 is 21, and 21  105 +  252. This important property is known as Bzout's identity.

==Background  Greatest common divisor==

The Euclidean algorithm calculates the greatest common divisor (GCD) of two natural numbers a and b. The greatest common divisor g is the largest natural number that divides both a and b without leaving a remainder. Synonyms for the GCD include the greatest common factor (GCF), the highest common factor (HCF), and the greatest common measure (GCM). The greatest common divisor is often written as gcd(a, b) or, more simply, as (a, b), although the latter notation is also used for other mathematical concepts, such as two-dimensional vectors.

If gcd(a, b) = 1, then a and b are said to be coprime (or relatively prime). This property does not imply that a or b are themselves prime numbers. For example, neither 6 nor 35 is a prime number, since they both have two prime factors: 6 = 2  3 and 35 = 5  7. Nevertheless, 6 and 35 are coprime. No natural number other than 1 divides both 6 and 35, since they have no prime factors in common.

A 24-by-60 rectangle is covered with ten 12-by-12 square tiles, where 12 is the GCD of 24 and 60. More generally, an a-by-b rectangle can be covered with square tiles of side-length c only if c is a common divisor of a and b.

Let g = gcd(a, b). Since a and b are both multiples of g, they can be written a = mg and b = ng, and there is no larger number G > g for which this is true. The natural numbers m and n must be coprime, since any common factor could be factored out of m and n to make g greater. Thus, any other number c that divides both a and b must also divide g. The greatest common divisor g of a and b is the unique (positive) common divisor of a and b that is divisible by any other common divisor c. 

The GCD can be visualized as follows. Consider a rectangular area a by b, and any common divisor c that divides both a and b exactly. The sides of the rectangle can be divided into segments of length c, which divides the rectangle into a grid of squares of side length c. The greatest common divisor g is the largest value of c for which this is possible. For illustration, a 24-by-60 rectangular area can be divided into a grid of: 1-by-1 squares, 2-by-2 squares, 3-by-3 squares, 4-by-4 squares, 6-by-6 squares or 12-by-12 squares. Therefore, 12 is the greatest common divisor of 24 and 60. A 24-by-60 rectangular area can be divided into a grid of 12-by-12 squares, with two squares along one edge (24/12 = 2) and five squares along the other (60/12 = 5).

The GCD of two numbers a and b is the product of the prime factors shared by the two numbers, where a same prime factor can be used multiple times, but only as long as the product of these factors divides both a and b. For example, since 1386 can be factored into 2  3  3  7  11, and 3213 can be factored into 3  3  3  7  17, the greatest common divisor of 1386 and 3213 equals 63 = 3  3  7, the product of their shared prime factors. If two numbers have no prime factors in common, their greatest common divisor is 1 (obtained here as an instance of the empty product), in other words they are coprime. A key advantage of the Euclidean algorithm is that it can find the GCD efficiently without having to compute the prime factors. Factorization of large integers is believed to be a computationally very difficult problem, and the security of many modern cryptography systems is based upon its infeasibility. 

Another definition of the GCD is helpful in advanced mathematics, particularly ring theory. The greatest common divisor g of two nonzero numbers a and b is also their smallest positive integral linear combination, that is, the smallest positive number of the form ua + vb where u and v are integers. The set of all integral linear combinations of a and b is actually the same as the set of all multiples of g (mg, where m is an integer). In modern mathematical language, the ideal generated by a and b is the ideal generated by g alone (an ideal generated by a single element is called a principal ideal, and all ideals of the integers are principal ideals). Some properties of the GCD are in fact easier to see with this description, for instance the fact that any common divisor of a and b also divides the GCD (it divides both terms of ua + vb). The equivalence of this GCD definition with the other definitions is described below.

The GCD of three or more numbers equals the product of the prime factors common to all the numbers, but it can also be calculated by repeatedly taking the GCDs of pairs of numbers. For example,

: 1=gcd(a, b, c) = gcd(a, gcd(b, c)) = gcd(gcd(a, b), c) = gcd(gcd(a, c), b).

Thus, Euclid's algorithm, which computes the GCD of two integers, suffices to calculate the GCD of arbitrarily many integers.

==Description==
The simple form of Euclid's algorithm uses only subtraction and comparison. Starting with a pair of positive integers, form a new pair consisting of the smaller number and the difference between the larger number and the smaller number. This process repeats until the numbers in the new pair are equal to each other; that value is the greatest common divisor of the original pair. If one number is much smaller than the other, many subtraction steps will be needed before the larger number is reduced to a value less than or equal to the other number in the pair.

The common form of Euclid's algorithm replaces subtracting the small positive number from the big number (possibly many times) with finding the remainder in long division. This form of Euclid's algorithm also starts with a pair of positive integers, then forms a new pair consisting of the smaller number and the remainder obtained by dividing the larger number by the smaller number. The process repeats until one number is zero. The other number then is the greatest common divisor of the original pair.

===Procedure===
The Euclidean algorithm proceeds in a series of steps such that the output of each step is used as an input for the next one. Let k be an integer that counts the steps of the algorithm, starting with zero. Thus, the initial step corresponds to k = 0, the next step corresponds to k = 1, and so on.

Each step begins with two nonnegative remainders r'k&minus;1 and r'k&minus;2. Since the algorithm ensures that the remainders decrease steadily with every step, r'k&minus;1 is less than its predecessor r'k&minus;2. The goal of the kth step is to find a quotient q'k and remainder r'k such that the equation is satisfied

: 1=r'k2 = q'k r'k1 + r'k

where r'k < r'k&minus;1. In other words, multiples of the smaller number r'k&minus;1 are subtracted from the larger number r'k&minus;2 until the remainder is smaller than the r'k&minus;1.

In the initial step (k = 0), the remainders r2 and r1 equal a and b, the numbers for which the GCD is sought. In the next step (k = 1), the remainders equal b and the remainder r0 of the initial step, and so on. Thus, the algorithm can be written as a sequence of equations

: 1=a = q0 b + r0
: 1=b = q1 r0 + r1
: 1=r0 = q2 r1 + r2
: 1=r1 = q3 r2 + r3
: 1=

If a is smaller than b, the first step of the algorithm swaps the numbers. For example, if a < b, the initial quotient q0 equals zero, and the remainder r0 is a. Thus, r'k is smaller than its predecessor r'k1 for all k  0.

Since the remainders decrease with every step but can never be negative, a remainder r'N must eventually equal zero, at which point the algorithm stops. The final nonzero remainder r'N1 is the greatest common divisor of a and b. The number N cannot be infinite because there are only a finite number of nonnegative integers between the initial remainder r0 and zero.

===Proof of validity===
The validity of the Euclidean algorithm can be proven by a two-step argument. In the first step, the final nonzero remainder r'N1 is shown to divide both a and b. Since it is a common divisor, it must be less than or equal to the greatest common divisor g. In the second step, it is shown that any common divisor of a and b, including g, must divide r'N1; therefore, g must be less than or equal to r'N1. These two conclusions are inconsistent unless r'N1 = g.

To demonstrate that r'N1 divides both a and b (the first step), r'N1 divides its predecessor r'N2

: 1=r'N2 = q'N r'N1

since the final remainder r'N is zero. r'N1 also divides its next predecessor r'N3

: 1=r'N3 = q'N1 r'N2 + r'N1

because it divides both terms on the right-hand side of the equation. Iterating the same argument, r'N1 divides all the preceding remainders, including a and b. None of the preceding remainders r'N2, r'N3, etc. divide a and b, since they leave a remainder. Since r'N1 is a common divisor of a and b, r'N1  g.

In the second step, any natural number c that divides both a and b (in other words, any common divisor of a and b) divides the remainders r'k. By definition, a and b can be written as multiples of c: a = mc and b = nc, where m and n are natural numbers. Therefore, c divides the initial remainder r0, since r0 = a  q0b = mc  q0nc = (m  q0n)c. An analogous argument shows that c also divides the subsequent remainders r1, r2, etc. Therefore, the greatest common divisor g must divide r'N1, which implies that g  r'N1. Since the first part of the argument showed the reverse (r'N1  g), it follows that g = r'N1. Thus, g is the greatest common divisor of all the succeeding pairs: Knuth, p. 320. 

: 1=g = gcd(a, b) = gcd(b, r0) = gcd(r0, r1) =  = gcd(r'N2, r'N1) = r'N1.

===Worked example===
Subtraction-based animation of the Euclidean algorithm. The initial green rectangle has dimensions a = 1071 and b = 462. Square 462&times;462 orange tiles are added until a green 462&times;147 rectangle remains. The green 462&times;147 rectangle is tiled with square 147&times;147 blue tiles until a green 21&times;147 rectangle remains. The green 21&times;147 rectangle is tiled with 21&times;21 square red tiles, leaving no green remaining. Thus, 21 is the greatest common divisor of 1071 and 462.

For illustration, the Euclidean algorithm can be used to find the greatest common divisor of a = 1071 and b = 462. To begin, multiples of 462 are subtracted from 1071 until the remainder is less than 462. Two such multiples can be subtracted (q0 = 2), leaving a remainder of 147

: 1=1071 = 2  462 + 147.

Then multiples of 147 are subtracted from 462 until the remainder is less than 147. Three multiples can be subtracted (q1 = 3), leaving a remainder of 21

: 1=462 = 3  147 + 21.

Then multiples of 21 are subtracted from 147 until the remainder is less than 21. Seven multiples can be subtracted (q2 = 7), leaving no remainder

: 1=147 = 7  21 + 0.

Since the last remainder is zero, the algorithm ends with 21 as the greatest common divisor of 1071 and 462. This agrees with the gcd(1071, 462) found by prime factorization above. In tabular form, the steps are

Step k Equation Quotient and remainder 
 0 1=1071 = q0 462 + r0 1=q0 = 2 and r0 = 147 
 1 1=462 = q1 147 + r1 1=q1 = 3 and r1 = 21 
 2 1=147 = q2 21 + r2 1=q2 = 7 and r2 = 0; algorithm ends 

===Visualization===
The Euclidean algorithm can be visualized in terms of the tiling analogy given above for the greatest common divisor. Assume that we wish to cover an a-by-b rectangle with square tiles exactly, where a is the larger of the two numbers. We first attempt to tile the rectangle using b-by-b square tiles; however, this leaves an r0-by-b residual rectangle untiled, where r0 < b. We then attempt to tile the residual rectangle with r0-by-r0 square tiles. This leaves a second residual rectangle r1-by-r0, which we attempt to tile using r1-by-r1 square tiles, and so on. The sequence ends when there is no residual rectangle, i.e., when the square tiles cover the previous residual rectangle exactly. The length of the sides of the smallest square tile is the GCD of the dimensions of the original rectangle. For example, the smallest square tile in the adjacent figure is 21-by-21 (shown in red), and 21 is the GCD of 1071 and 462, the dimensions of the original rectangle (shown in green).

===Euclidean division===

At every step k, the Euclidean algorithm computes a quotient q'k and remainder r'k from two numbers r'k1 and r'k2

: 1=r'k2 = q'k r'k1 + r'k

where the magnitude of r'k is strictly less than that of r'k1. The theorem which underlies the definition of the Euclidean division ensures that such a quotient and remainder always exist and are unique. 

In Euclid's original version of the algorithm, the quotient and remainder are found by repeated subtraction; that is, r'k1 is subtracted from r'k2 repeatedly until the remainder r'k is smaller than r'k1. After that r'k and r'k1 are exchanged and the process is iterated. Euclidean division reduces all the steps between two exchanges into a single step, which is thus more efficient. Moreover, the quotients are not needed, thus one may replace Euclidean division by the modulo operation, which gives only the remainder. Thus the iteration of the Euclidean algorithm becomes simply

: 1=r'k = r'k2 mod r'k1.

===Implementations===
Implementations of the algorithm may be expressed in pseudocode. For example, the division-based version may be programmed as Knuth, pp. 319320. 

 function gcd(a, b)
 while b  0
 t := b
 b := a mod b
 a := t
 return a

At the beginning of the kth iteration, the variable b holds the latest remainder r'k1, whereas the variable a holds its predecessor, r'k2. The step b := a mod b is equivalent to the above recursion formula r'k  r'k2 mod r'k1. The dummy variable t holds the value of r'k1 while the next remainder r'k is being calculated. At the end of the loop iteration, the variable b holds the remainder r'k, whereas the variable a holds its predecessor, r'k1.

In the subtraction-based version which was Euclid's original version, the remainder calculation (b = a mod b) is replaced by repeated subtraction. Knuth, pp. 318319. Contrary to the division-based version, which works with arbitrary integers as input, the subtraction-based version supposes that the input consists of positive integers and stops when a = b:

 function gcd(a, b)
 while a  b
 if a > b
 a := a  b
 else
 b := b  a
 return a

The variables a and b alternate holding the previous remainders r'k1 and r'k2. Assume that a is larger than b at the beginning of an iteration; then a equals r'k2, since r'k2 > r'k1. During the loop iteration, a is reduced by multiples of the previous remainder b until a is smaller than b. Then a is the next remainder r'k. Then b is reduced by multiples of a until it is again smaller than a, giving the next remainder r'k+1, and so on.

The recursive version is based on the equality of the GCDs of successive remainders and the stopping condition gcd(r'N1, 0) = r'N1.

 function gcd(a, b)
 if b = 0
 return a
 else
 return gcd(b, a mod b)

For illustration, the gcd(1071, 462) is calculated from the equivalent gcd(462, 1071 mod 462) = gcd(462, 147). The latter GCD is calculated from the gcd(147, 462 mod 147) = gcd(147, 21), which in turn is calculated from the gcd(21, 147 mod 21) = gcd(21, 0) = 21.

===Method of least absolute remainders===
In another version of Euclid's algorithm, the quotient at each step is increased by one if the resulting negative remainder is smaller in magnitude than the typical positive remainder. Previously, the equation

: 1=r'k2 = q'k r'k1 + r'k

assumed that 1=r'k1 > r'k > 0. However, an alternative negative remainder 1=e'k can be computed:

: 1=r'k2 = (q'k + 1) r'k1 + e'k
if 1=r'k1 > 0 or
: 1=r'k2 = (q'k  1) r'k1 + e'k
if 1=r'k1 < 0.

If 1=e'k < r'k, then 1=r'k is replaced by 1=e'k. As 1=r'k1 = r'k  e'k, this new 1=r'k satisfies
: 1=r'k < r'k1 / 2. 
Leopold Kronecker has shown that this version requires the least number of steps of any version of Euclid's algorithm. 

==Historical development==
The Euclidean algorithm was probably invented centuries before Euclid, shown here holding dividers

The Euclidean algorithm is one of the oldest algorithms still in common use. Knuth, p. 318. It appears in Euclid's Elements (c. 300 BC), specifically in Book 7 (Propositions 12) and Book 10 (Propositions 23). In Book 7, the algorithm is formulated for integers, whereas in Book 10, it is formulated for lengths of line segments. (In modern usage, one would say it was formulated there for real numbers. But lengths, areas, and volumes, represented as real numbers in modern usage, are not measured in the same units and there is no natural unit of length, area, or volume, and the concept of real numbers was unknown at that time.) The latter algorithm is geometrical. The GCD of two lengths a and b corresponds to the greatest length g that measures a and b evenly; in other words, the lengths a and b are both integer multiples of the length g.

The algorithm was probably not discovered by Euclid, who compiled results from earlier mathematicians in his Elements. The mathematician and historian B. L. van der Waerden suggests that Book VII derives from a textbook on number theory written by mathematicians in the school of Pythagoras. The algorithm was probably known by Eudoxus of Cnidus (about 375 BC). The algorithm may even pre-date Eudoxus, judging from the use of the technical term  (anthyphairesis, reciprocal subtraction) in works by Euclid and Aristotle. 

Centuries later, Euclid's algorithm was discovered independently both in India and in China, primarily to solve Diophantine equations that arise in astronomy and making accurate calendars. In the late 5th century, the Indian mathematician and astronomer Aryabhata described the algorithm as the "pulverizer", perhaps because of its effectiveness in solving Diophantine equations. Although a special case of the Chinese remainder theorem had already been described by Chinese mathematician and astronomer Sun Tzu, the general solution was published by Qin Jiushao in his 1247 book Shushu Jiuzhang ( Mathematical Treatise in Nine Sections). The Euclidean algorithm was first described in Europe in the second edition of Bachet's Problmes plaisants et dlectables (Pleasant and enjoyable problems, 1624). In Europe, it was likewise used to solve Diophantine equations and in developing continued fractions. The extended Euclidean algorithm was published by the English mathematician Nicholas Saunderson, who attributed it to Roger Cotes as a method for computing continued fractions efficiently. 

In the 19th century, the Euclidean algorithm led to the development of new number systems, such as Gaussian integers and Eisenstein integers. In 1815, Carl Gauss used the Euclidean algorithm to demonstrate unique factorization of Gaussian integers, although his work was first published in 1832. Gauss mentioned the algorithm in his Disquisitiones Arithmeticae (published 1801), but only as a method for continued fractions. Peter Gustav Lejeune Dirichlet seems to have been the first to describe the Euclidean algorithm as the basis for much of number theory. Lejeune Dirichlet noted that many results of number theory, such as unique factorization, would hold true for any other system of numbers to which the Euclidean algorithm could be applied. Lejeune Dirichlet's lectures on number theory were edited and extended by Richard Dedekind, who used Euclid's algorithm to study algebraic integers, a new general type of number. For example, Dedekind was the first to prove Fermat's two-square theorem using the unique factorization of Gaussian integers. Richard Dedekind in Dedekind also defined the concept of a Euclidean domain, a number system in which a generalized version of the Euclidean algorithm can be defined (as described below). In the closing decades of the 19th century, however, the Euclidean algorithm gradually became eclipsed by Dedekind's more general theory of ideals. 

 \"Euclidean algorithm is the granddaddy of all algorithms, because it is the oldest nontrivial algorithm that has survived to the present day.\" 
 Donald Knuth, The Art of Computer Programming, Vol. 2: Seminumerical Algorithms, 2nd edition (1981), p. 318. 

Other applications of Euclid's algorithm were developed in the 19th century. In 1829, Charles Sturm showed that the algorithm was useful in the Sturm chain method for counting the real roots of polynomials in any given interval. 

The Euclidean algorithm was the first integer relation algorithm, which is a method for finding integer relations between commensurate real numbers. Several novel integer relation algorithms have been developed in recent years, such as the FergusonForcade algorithm (1979) of Helaman Ferguson and R.W. Forcade, and its relatives, the LLL algorithm, the HJLS algorithm, and the PSLQ algorithm. 

In 1969, Cole and Davie developed a two-player game based on the Euclidean algorithm, called The Game of Euclid, which has an optimal strategy. The players begin with two piles of a and b stones. The players take turns removing m multiples of the smaller pile from the larger. Thus, if the two piles consist of x and y stones, where x is larger than y, the next player can reduce the larger pile from x stones to x  my stones, as long as the latter is a nonnegative integer. The winner is the first player to reduce one pile to zero stones. 

==Mathematical applications==

===Bzout's identity===
Bzout's identity states that the greatest common divisor g of two integers a and b can be represented as a linear sum of the original two numbers a and b. In other words, it is always possible to find integers s and t such that g = sa + tb. 

The integers s and t can be calculated from the quotients q0, q1, etc. by reversing the order of equations in Euclid's algorithm. Beginning with the next-to-last equation, g can be expressed in terms of the quotient q'N1 and the two preceding remainders, r'N2 and r'N3.

: 1=g = r'N1 = r'N3  q'N1 r'N2

Those two remainders can be likewise expressed in terms of their quotients and preceding remainders,

: 1=r'N2 = r'N4  q'N2 r'N3
: 1=r'N3 = r'N5  q'N3 r'N4.

Substituting these formulae for r'N2 and r'N3 into the first equation yields g as a linear sum of the remainders r'N4 and r'N5. The process of substituting remainders by formulae involving their predecessors can be continued until the original numbers a and b are reached

: 1=r2 = r0  q2 r1
: 1=r1 = b  q1 r0
: 1=r0 = a  q0 b.

After all the remainders r0, r1, etc. have been substituted, the final equation expresses g as a linear sum of a and b: g = sa + tb. Bzout's identity, and therefore the previous algorithm, can both be generalized to the context of Euclidean domains.

===Principal ideals and related problems===
Bzout's identity provides yet another definition of the greatest common divisor g of two numbers a and b. Consider the set of all numbers ua + vb, where u and v are any two integers. Since a and b are both divisible by g, every number in the set is divisible by g. In other words, every number of the set is an integer multiple of g. This is true for every common divisor of a and b. However, unlike other common divisors, the greatest common divisor is a member of the set; by Bzout's identity, choosing u = s and v = t gives g. A smaller common divisor cannot be a member of the set, since every member of the set must be divisible by g. Conversely, any multiple m of g can be obtained by choosing u = ms and v = mt, where s and t are the integers of Bzout's identity. This may be seen by multiplying Bzout's identity by m,

: 1=mg = msa + mtb.

Therefore, the set of all numbers ua + vb is equivalent to the set of multiples m of g. In other words, the set of all possible sums of integer multiples of two numbers (a and b) is equivalent to the set of multiples of gcd(a, b). The GCD is said to be the generator of the ideal of a and b. This GCD definition led to the modern abstract algebraic concepts of a principal ideal (an ideal generated by a single element) and a principal ideal domain (a domain in which every ideal is a principal ideal).

Certain problems can be solved using this result. For example, consider two measuring cups of volume a and b. By adding/subtracting u multiples of the first cup and v multiples of the second cup, any volume ua + vb can be measured out. These volumes are all multiples of g = gcd(a, b).

===Extended Euclidean algorithm===

The integers s and t of Bzout's identity can be computed efficiently using the extended Euclidean algorithm. This extension adds two recursive equations to Euclid's algorithm 

: 1=s'k = s'k2  q'k's'k1
: 1=t'k = t'k2  q'k't'k1

with the starting values

: 1=s2 = 1, t2 = 0
: 1=s1 = 0, t1 = 1.

Using this recursion, Bzout's integers s and t are given by s = s'N and t = t'N, where N is the step on which the algorithm terminates with r'N = 0.

The validity of this approach can be shown by induction. Assume that the recursion formula is correct up to step k  1 of the algorithm; in other words, assume that

: 1=r'j = s'j a + t'j b

for all j less than k. The kth step of the algorithm gives the equation

: 1=r'k = r'k2  q'k'r'k1.

Since the recursion formula has been assumed to be correct for r'k2 and r'k1, they may be expressed in terms of the corresponding s and t variables

: 1=r'k = (s'k2 a + t'k2 b)  q'k(s'k1 a + t'k1 b).

Rearranging this equation yields the recursion formula for step k, as required

: 1=r'k = s'k a + t'k b = (s'k2  q'k's'k1) a + (t'k2  q'k't'k1) b.

=== Matrix method ===

The integers s and t can also be found using an equivalent matrix method. The sequence of equations of Euclid's algorithm

: 1=a = q0 b + r0
: 1=b = q1 r0 + r1
: 1=
: 1=r'N2 = q'N r'N1 + 0

can be written as a product of 2-by-2 quotient matrices multiplying a two-dimensional remainder vector

:

Let M represent the product of all the quotient matrices

:

This simplifies the Euclidean algorithm to the form

:

To express g as a linear sum of a and b, both sides of this equation can be multiplied by the inverse of the matrix M. The determinant of M equals (1)N+1, since it equals the product of the determinants of the quotient matrices, each of which is negative one. Since the determinant of M is never zero, the vector of the final remainders can be solved using the inverse of M

:

Since the top equation gives

: 1=g = (1)N+1 ( m22 a  m12 b)

the two integers of Bzout's identity are s = (1)N+1m22 and t = (1)N'm12. The matrix method is as efficient as the equivalent recursion, with two multiplications and two additions per step of the Euclidean algorithm.

===Euclid's lemma and unique factorization===
Bzout's identity is essential to many applications of Euclid's algorithm, such as demonstrating the unique factorization of numbers into prime factors. To illustrate this, suppose that a number L can be written as a product of two factors u and v, that is, L = uv. If another number w also divides L but is coprime with u, then w must divide v, by the following argument: If the greatest common divisor of u and w is 1, then integers s and t can be found such that

: 1=1 = su + tw

by Bzout's identity. Multiplying both sides by v gives the relation

: 1=v = suv + twv = sL + twv

Since w divides both terms on the right-hand side, it must also divide the left-hand side, v. This result is known as Euclid's lemma. Specifically, if a prime number divides L, then it must divide at least one factor of L. Conversely, if a number w is coprime to each of a series of numbers a1, a2, , a'n, then w is also coprime to their product, a1  a2    a'n. 

Euclid's lemma suffices to prove that every number has a unique factorization into prime numbers. To see this, assume the contrary, that there are two independent factorizations of L into m and n prime factors, respectively

: 1=L = p1p2p'm = q1q2q'n

Since each prime p divides L by assumption, it must also divide one of the q factors; since each q is prime as well, it must be that p = q. Iteratively dividing by the p factors shows that each p has an equal counterpart q; the two prime factorizations are identical except for their order. The unique factorization of numbers into primes has many applications in mathematical proofs, as shown below.

===Linear Diophantine equations===
Plot of a linear Diophantine equation, 9x + 12y = 483. The solutions are shown as blue circles.

Diophantine equations are equations in which the solutions are restricted to integers; they are named after the 3rd-century Alexandrian mathematician Diophantus. A typical linear Diophantine equation seeks integers x and y such that 

: 1=ax + by = c

where a, b and c are given integers. This can be written as an equation for x in modular arithmetic

: 1=ax  c mod b.

Let g be the greatest common divisor of a and b. Both terms in ax + by are divisible by g; therefore, c must also be divisible by g, or the equation has no solutions. By dividing both sides by c/g, the equation can be reduced to Bezout's identity

: 1=sa + tb = g

where s and t can be found by the extended Euclidean algorithm. This provides one solution to the Diophantine equation, x1 = s (c/g) and y1 = t (c/g).

In general, a linear Diophantine equation has no solutions, or an infinite number of solutions. To find the latter, consider two solutions, (x1, y1) and (x2, y2)

: 1=ax1 + by1 = c = ax2 + by2

or equivalently

: 1=a(x1  x2) = b(y2  y1).

Therefore, the smallest difference between two x solutions is b/g, whereas the smallest difference between two y solutions is a/g. Thus, the solutions may be expressed as

: 1=x = x1  bt/g
: 1=y = y1 + at/g.

By allowing t to vary over all possible integers, an infinite family of solutions can be generated from a single solution (x1, y1). If the solutions are required to be positive integers (x > 0, y > 0), only a finite number of solutions may be possible. This restriction on the acceptable solutions allows systems of Diophantine equations to be solved with more unknowns than equations; this is impossible for a system of linear equations when the solutions can be any real number.

===Multiplicative inverses and the RSA algorithm===
A finite field is a set of numbers with four generalized operations. The operations are called addition, subtraction, multiplication and division and have their usual properties, such as commutativity, associativity and distributivity. An example of a finite field is the set of 13 numbers {0, 1, 2, , 12} using modular arithmetic. In this field, the results of any mathematical operation (addition/subtraction/multiplication/division) is reduced modulo 13; that is, multiples of 13 are added or subtracted until the result is brought within the range 012. For example, the result of 5  7 = 35 mod 13 = 9. Such finite fields can be defined for any prime p; using more sophisticated definitions, they can also be defined for any power m of a prime p m. Finite fields are often called Galois fields, and are abbreviated as GF(p) or GF(p m).

In such a field with m numbers, every nonzero element a has a unique modular multiplicative inverse, a1 such that aa1 = a1a  1 mod m. This inverse can be found by solving the congruence equation ax  1 mod m, or the equivalent linear Diophantine equation 

: 1=ax + my = 1.

This equation can be solved by the Euclidean algorithm, as described above. Finding multiplicative inverses is an essential step in the RSA algorithm, which is widely used in electronic commerce; specifically, the equation determines the integer used to decrypt the message. Note that although the RSA algorithm uses rings rather than fields, the Euclidean algorithm can still be used to find a multiplicative inverse where one exists. The Euclidean algorithm also has other applications in error-correcting codes; for example, it can be used as an alternative to the BerlekampMassey algorithm for decoding BCH and ReedSolomon codes, which are based on Galois fields. "Error correction coding: mathematical methods and algorithms", page 266, Todd K. Moon, John Wiley and Sons, 2005, ISBN 0-471-64800-0 

===Chinese remainder theorem===
Euclid's algorithm can also be used to solve multiple linear Diophantine equations. Such equations arise in the Chinese remainder theorem, which describes a novel method to represent an integer x. Instead of representing an integer by its digits, it may be represented by its remainders x'i modulo a set of N coprime numbers m'i. 

: 1=x1  x mod m1
: 1=x2  x mod m2
:
: 1=x'N  x mod m'N

The goal is to determine x from its N remainders x'i. The solution is to combine the multiple equations into a single linear Diophantine equation with a much larger modulus M that is the product of all the individual moduli m'i, and define the M'i

: 1=M'i = M / m'i

Thus, each M'i is the product of all the moduli except m'i. The solution depends on finding N new numbers h'i such that

:M'i'h'i &equiv; 1 mod m'i

With these numbers h'i, any integer x can be reconstructed from its remainders x'i by the equation

: 1=x  (x1M1h1 + x2M2h2 +  + x'N'M'N'h'N ) mod M

Since these numbers h'i are the multiplicative inverses of the M'i, they may be found using Euclid's algorithm as described in the previous subsection.

===SternBrocot tree===
The sequence of subtractions used by the Euclidean algorithm gives a path from the root of the SternBrocot tree to any given rational number. This fact can be used to prove that there is a 1-1 correspondence between the vertices of tree and the positive rational numbers.

For example, 3/4 can be found by starting at the root, going to the left once, then to the right twice.

The SternBrocot tree, and the SternBrocot sequences of order i for i = 1, 2, 3, 4.

:

The Euclidean algorithm has almost the same relationship to the CalkinWilf tree. The difference is that the path is reversed: instead of producing a path from the root of the tree to a target, it produces a path from the target to the root.

===Continued fractions===
The Euclidean algorithm has a close relationship with continued fractions. The sequence of equations can be written in the form

:

The last term on the right-hand side always equals the inverse of the left-hand side of the next equation. Thus, the first two equations may be combined to form

:

The third equation may be used to substitute the denominator term r1/r0, yielding

:

The final ratio of remainders r'k/r'k1 can always be replaced using the next equation in the series, up to the final equation. The result is a continued fraction

:

In the worked example above, the gcd(1071, 462) was calculated, and the quotients q'k were 2, 3 and 7, respectively. Therefore, the fraction 1071/462 may be written

:

as can be confirmed by calculation.

===Factorization algorithms===
Calculating a greatest common divisor is an essential step in several integer factorization algorithms, such as Pollard's rho algorithm, Knuth, pp. 369371. Shor's algorithm, Dixon's factorization method and the Lenstra elliptic curve factorization. The Euclidean algorithm may be used to find this GCD efficiently. Continued fraction factorization uses continued fractions, which are determined using Euclid's algorithm. Knuth, pp. 380384. 

==Algorithmic efficiency==
Number of steps in the Euclidean algorithm for gcd(x,y). Red points indicate relatively few steps (quick), whereas yellow, green and blue points indicate successively more steps (slow). The largest blue area follows the line y = x, where  represents the Golden ratio.

The computational efficiency of Euclid's algorithm has been studied thoroughly. Knuth, pp. 339364. This efficiency can be described by the number of division steps the algorithm requires, multiplied by the computational expense of each step. The first known analysis of Euclid's algorithm is due to A.-A.-L. Reynaud in 1811, who showed that the number of division steps on input (u, v) is bounded by v; later he improved this to v/2 + 2. Later, in 1841, P.-J.-E. Finck showed that the number of division steps is at most 2 log2 v + 1, and hence Euclid's algorithm runs in time polynomial in the size of the input; also see. His analysis was refined by Gabriel Lam in 1844, who showed that the number of steps required for completion is never more than five times the number h of base-10 digits of the smaller number b. Since the computational expense of each step is also typically of order h, the overall expense grows like h2.

===Number of steps===
The number of steps to calculate the GCD of two natural numbers, a and b, may be denoted by T(a, b). Knuth, p. 344. If g is the GCD of a and b, then a = mg and b = ng for two coprime numbers m and n. Then

: 1=T(a, b) = T(m, n)

as may be seen by dividing all the steps in the Euclidean algorithm by g. By the same argument, the number of steps remains the same if a and b are multiplied by a common factor w: T(a, b) = T(wa, wb). Therefore, the number of steps T may vary dramatically between neighboring pairs of numbers, such as T(a, b) and T(a, b + 1), depending on the size of the two GCDs.

The recursive nature of the Euclidean algorithm gives another equation

: 1=T(a, b) = 1 + T(b, r0) = 2 + T(r0, r1) =  = N + T(r'N2, r'N1) = N + 1

where T(x, 0) = 0 by assumption. 

====Worst-case number of steps====

If the Euclidean algorithm requires N steps for a pair of natural numbers a > b > 0, the smallest values of a and b for which this is true are the Fibonacci numbers F'N+2 and F'N+1, respectively. Knuth, p. 343. This can be shown by induction. If N = 1, b divides a with no remainder; the smallest natural numbers for which this is true is b = 1 and a = 2, which are F2 and F3, respectively. Now assume that the result holds for all values of N up to M  1. The first step of the M-step algorithm is a = q0b + r0, and the second step is b = q1r0 + r1. Since the algorithm is recursive, it required M  1 steps to find gcd(b, r0) and their smallest values are F'M+1 and F'M. The smallest value of a is therefore when q0 = 1, which gives a = b + r0 = F'M+1 + F'M = F'M+2. This proof, published by Gabriel Lam in 1844, represents the beginning of computational complexity theory, and also the first practical application of the Fibonacci numbers. 

This result suffices to show that the number of steps in Euclid's algorithm can never be more than five times the number of its digits (base 10). For if the algorithm requires N steps, then b is greater than or equal to F'N+1 which in turn is greater than or equal to 'N&minus;1, where  is the golden ratio. Since b  'N&minus;1, then N &minus; 1  log'b. Since log10 > 1/5, (N &minus; 1)/5 < log10 log'b = log10b. Thus, N  5 log10b. Thus, the Euclidean algorithm always needs less than O(h) divisions, where h is the number of digits in the smaller number b.

====Average number of steps====
The average number of steps taken by the Euclidean algorithm has been defined in three different ways. The first definition is the average time T(a) required to calculate the GCD of a given number a and a smaller natural number b chosen with equal probability from the integers 0 to a  1 

:

However, since T(a, b) fluctuates dramatically with the GCD of the two numbers, the averaged function T(a) is likewise "noisy". Knuth, p. 353. 

To reduce this noise, a second average (a) is taken over all numbers coprime with a

:

There are (a) coprime integers less than a, where  is Euler's totient function. This tau average grows smoothly with a Knuth, p. 357. 

:

with the residual error being of order a(1/6) + , where  is infinitesimal. The constant C (Porter's Constant http://mathworld.wolfram.com/PortersConstant.html )in this formula equals
:

where  is the EulerMascheroni constant and ' is the derivative of the Riemann zeta function. The leading coefficient (12/2) ln 2 was determined by two independent methods. 

Since the first average can be calculated from the tau average by summing over the divisors d of a Knuth, p. 354. 

:

it can be approximated by the formula 

:

where (d) is the Mangoldt function. Knuth, p. 355. 

A third average Y(n) is defined as the mean number of steps required when both a and b are chosen randomly (with uniform distribution) from 1 to n 

:

Substituting the approximate formula for T(a) into this equation yields an estimate for Y(n) Knuth, p. 356. 
:

===Computational expense per step===
In each step k of the Euclidean algorithm, the quotient q'k and remainder r'k are computed for a given pair of integers r'k2 and r'k1

: 1=r'k2 = q'k r'k1 + r'k.

The computational expense per step is associated chiefly with finding q'k, since the remainder r'k can be calculated quickly from r'k2, r'k1, and q'k

: 1=r'k = r'k2  q'k r'k1.

The computational expense of dividing h-bit numbers scales as O(h(+1)), where  is the length of the quotient. Knuth, pp. 257261. 

For comparison, Euclid's original subtraction-based algorithm can be much slower. A single integer division is equivalent to the quotient q number of subtractions. If the ratio of a and b is very large, the quotient is large and many subtractions will be required. On the other hand, it has been shown that the quotients are very likely to be small integers. The probability of a given quotient q is approximately ln|u/(u  1)| where u = (q + 1)2. Knuth, p. 352. For illustration, the probability of a quotient of 1, 2, 3, or 4 is roughly 41.5%, 17.0%, 9.3%, and 5.9%, respectively. Since the operation of subtraction is faster than division, particularly for large numbers, the subtraction-based Euclid's algorithm is competitive with the division-based version. This is exploited in the binary version of Euclid's algorithm. 

Combining the estimated number of steps with the estimated computational expense per step shows that the Euclid's algorithm grows quadratically (h2) with the average number of digits h in the initial two numbers a and b. Let h0, h1, , h'N1 represent the number of digits in the successive remainders r0, r1, , r'N1. Since the number of steps N grows linearly with h, the running time is bounded by

:

===Efficiency of alternative methods===
Euclid's algorithm is widely used in practice, especially for small numbers, due to its simplicity. For comparison, the efficiency of alternatives to Euclid's algorithm may be determined.

One inefficient approach to finding the GCD of two natural numbers a and b is to calculate all their common divisors; the GCD is then the largest common divisor. The common divisors can be found by dividing both numbers by successive integers from 2 to the smaller number b. The number of steps of this approach grows linearly with b, or exponentially in the number of digits. Another inefficient approach is to find the prime factors of one or both numbers. As noted above, the GCD equals the product of the prime factors shared by the two numbers a and b. Present methods for prime factorization are also inefficient; many modern cryptography systems even rely on that inefficiency. 

The binary GCD algorithm is an efficient alternative that substitutes division with faster operations by exploiting the binary representation used by computers. Knuth, pp. 321323. However, this alternative also scales like O(h). It is generally faster than the Euclidean algorithm on real computers, even though it scales in the same way. Additional efficiency can be gleaned by examining only the leading digits of the two numbers a and b. Knuth, p. 328. The binary algorithm can be extended to other bases (k-ary algorithms), with up to fivefold increases in speed. 

A recursive approach for very large integers (with more than 25,000 digits) leads to subquadratic integer GCD algorithms, such as those of Schnhage, Volume 1423 in Lecture notes in Computer Science. and Stehl and Zimmermann. These algorithms exploit the 22 matrix form of the Euclidean algorithm given above. These subquadratic methods generally scale as O(h (log h)2 (log log h)). 

==Generalizations==
As described above, the Euclidean algorithm is used to find the greatest common divisor of two natural numbers (positive integers). However, it may be generalized to the real numbers, and to other mathematical objects, such as polynomials, quadratic integers and Hurwitz quaternions. In the latter cases, the Euclidean algorithm is used to demonstrate the crucial property of unique factorization, i.e., that such numbers can be factored uniquely into irreducible elements, the counterparts of prime numbers. Unique factorization is essential to many proofs of number theory.

===Rational and real numbers===
Euclid's algorithm can be applied to real numbers, as described by Euclid in Book 10 of his Elements. The goal of the algorithm is to identify a real number g such that two given real numbers, a and b, are integer multiples of it: a = mg and b = ng, where m and n are integers. This identification is equivalent to finding an integer relation among the real numbers a and b; that is, it determines integers s and t such that sa + tb = 0. Euclid uses this algorithm to treat the question of incommensurable lengths. 

The real-number Euclidean algorithm differs from its integer counterpart in two respects. First, the remainders r'k are real numbers, although the quotients q'k are integers as before. Second, the algorithm is not guaranteed to end in a finite number N of steps. If it does, the fraction a/b is a rational number, i.e., the ratio of two integers

: 1=a/b = mg/ng = m/n

and can be written as a finite continued fraction q1, q2, , q'N. If the algorithm does not stop, the fraction a/b is an irrational number and can be described by an infinite continued fraction q1, q2, . Examples of infinite continued fractions are the golden ratio  = 1, 1,  and the square root of two, 2 = 2, 2, . Generally speaking, the algorithm is unlikely to stop, since almost all ratios a/b of two real numbers are irrational.

An infinite continued fraction may be truncated at a step k q1, q2, , q'k to yield an approximation to a/b that improves as k is increased. The approximation is described by convergents m'k/n'k; the numerator and denominators are coprime and obey the recursion

:m'k = q'k m'k1 + m'k2
:n'k = q'k n'k1 + n'k2

where m1 = n2 = 1 and m2 = n1 = 0 are the initial values of the recursion. The convergent m'k/n'k is the best rational number approximation to a/b with denominator n'k:

:

===Polynomials===

Polynomials in a single variable x can be added, multiplied and factored into irreducible polynomials, which are the analogs of the prime numbers for integers. The greatest common divisor polynomial g(x) of two polynomials a(x) and b(x) is defined as the product of their shared irreducible polynomials, which can be identified using the Euclidean algorithm. The basic procedure is similar to integers. At each step k, a quotient polynomial q'k(x) and a remainder polynomial r'k(x) are identified to satisfy the recursive equation

: 1=r'k2(x) = q'k(x) r'k1(x) + r'k(x)

where r2(x) = a(x) and r1(x) = b(x). The quotient polynomial is chosen so that the leading term of q'k(x) r'k1(x) equals the leading term of r'k2(x); this ensures that the degree of each remainder is smaller than the degree of its predecessor deg < deg. Since the degree is a nonnegative integer, and since it decreases with every step, the Euclidean algorithm concludes in a finite number of steps. The final nonzero remainder is the greatest common divisor of the original two polynomials, a(x) and b(x). 

For example, consider the following two quartic polynomials, which each factor into two quadratic polynomials

: 1=a(x) = x4  4x3 + 4 x2  3x + 14 = (x2  5x + 7)(x2 + x + 2)

and

: 1=b(x) = x4 + 8x3 + 12x2 + 17x + 6 = (x2 + 7x + 3)(x2 + x + 2).

Dividing a(x) by b(x) yields a remainder r0(x) = x3 + (2/3) x2 + (5/3) x  (2/3). In the next step, b(x) is divided by r0(x) yielding a remainder r1(x) = x2 + x + 2. Finally, dividing r0(x) by r1(x) yields a zero remainder, indicating that r1(x) is the greatest common divisor polynomial of a(x) and b(x), consistent with their factorization.

Many of the applications described above for integers carry over to polynomials. The Euclidean algorithm can be used to solve linear Diophantine equations and Chinese remainder problems for polynomials; continued fractions of polynomials can also be defined.

The polynomial Euclidean algorithm has other applications as well, such as Sturm chains, a method for counting the number of real roots of a polynomial within a given interval on the real axis. This has applications in several areas, such as the RouthHurwitz stability criterion in control theory.

Finally, the coefficients of the polynomials need not be drawn from integers, real numbers or even the complex numbers. For example, the coefficients may be drawn from a general field, such as the finite fields GF(p) described above. The corresponding conclusions about the Euclidean algorithm and its applications hold even for such polynomials. 

===Gaussian integers===
Distribution of Gaussian primes u + vi in the complex plane, with norms u2 + v2 less than 500

The Gaussian integers are complex numbers of the form  = u + vi, where u and v are ordinary integers and i is the square root of negative one. By defining an analog of the Euclidean algorithm, Gaussian integers can be shown to be uniquely factorizable, by the argument above. See also Werke, 2:67148. This unique factorization is helpful in many applications, such as deriving all Pythagorean triples or proving Fermat's theorem on sums of two squares. In general, the Euclidean algorithm is convenient in such applications, but not essential; for example, the theorems can often be proven by other arguments.

The Euclidean algorithm developed for two Gaussian integers  and  is nearly the same as that for normal integers, but differs in two respects. As before, the task at each step k is to identify a quotient q'k and a remainder r'k such that

: 1=r'k = r'k2  q'k r'k1

where r'k2 = , r'k1 = , and every remainder is strictly smaller than its predecessor, |r'k| < |r'k1|. The first difference is that the quotients and remainders are themselves Gaussian integers, and thus are complex numbers. The quotients q'k are generally found by rounding the real and complex parts of the exact ratio (such as the complex number /) to the nearest integers. The second difference lies in the necessity of defining how one complex remainder can be "smaller" than another. To do this, we define a norm function f(u + vi) = u2 + v2, which converts every Gaussian integer u + vi into a normal integer. After each step k of the Euclidean algorithm, the norm of the remainder f(r'k) is smaller than the norm of the preceding remainder, f(r'k1). Since the norm is a nonnegative integer and decreases with every step, the Euclidean algorithm for Gaussian integers ends in a finite number of steps. The final nonzero remainder is the gcd(,), the Gaussian integer of largest norm that divides both  and ; it is unique up to multiplication by a unit, 1 or i.

Many of the other applications of the Euclidean algorithm carry over to Gaussian integers. For example, it can be used to solve linear Diophantine equations and Chinese remainder problems for Gaussian integers; continued fractions of Gaussian integers can also be defined.

===Euclidean domains===
A set of elements under two binary operations, + and , is called a Euclidean domain if it forms a commutative ring R and, roughly speaking, if a generalized Euclidean algorithm can be performed on them. The two operations of such a ring need not be the addition and multiplication of ordinary arithmetic; rather, they can be more general, such as the operations of a mathematical group or monoid. Nevertheless, these general operations should respect many of the laws governing ordinary arithmetic, such as commutativity, associativity and distributivity.

The generalized Euclidean algorithm requires a Euclidean function, i.e., a mapping f from R into the set of nonnegative integers such that, for any two nonzero elements a and b in R, there exist q and r in R such that a = qb + r and f(r) < f(b). An example of this mapping is the norm function used to order the Gaussian integers above. The function f can be the magnitude of the number, or the degree of a polynomial. The basic principle is that each step of the algorithm reduces f inexorably; hence, if f can be reduced only a finite number of times, the algorithm must stop in a finite number of steps. This principle relies heavily on the natural well-ordering of the non-negative integers; roughly speaking, this requires that every non-empty set of non-negative integers has a smallest member.

The fundamental theorem of arithmetic applies to any Euclidean domain: Any number from a Euclidean domain can be factored uniquely into irreducible elements. Any Euclidean domain is a unique factorization domain (UFD), although the converse is not true. The Euclidean domains and the UFD's are subclasses of the GCD domains, domains in which a greatest common divisor of two numbers always exists. In other words, a greatest common divisor may exist (for all pairs of elements in a domain), although it may not be possible to find it using a Euclidean algorithm. A Euclidean domain is always a principal ideal domain (PID), an integral domain in which every ideal is a principal ideal. Again, the converse is not true: not every PID is a Euclidean domain.

The unique factorization of Euclidean domains is useful in many applications. For example, the unique factorization of the Gaussian integers is convenient in deriving formulae for all Pythagorean triples and in proving Fermat's theorem on sums of two squares. Unique factorization was also a key element in an attempted proof of Fermat's Last Theorem published in 1847 by Gabriel Lam, the same mathematician who analyzed the efficiency of Euclid's algorithm, based on a suggestion of Joseph Liouville. Lam's approach required the unique factorization of numbers of the form x + y, where x and y are integers, and  = e2i/n is an nth root of 1, that is, n = 1. Although this approach succeeds for some values of n (such as n=3, the Eisenstein integers), in general such numbers do not factor uniquely. This failure of unique factorization in some cyclotomic fields led Ernst Kummer to the concept of ideal numbers and, later, Richard Dedekind to ideals.

====Unique factorization of quadratic integers====

Distribution of Eisenstein primes u + v in the complex plane, with norms less than 500. The number  equals the cube root of 1.

The quadratic integer rings are helpful to illustrate Euclidean domains. Quadratic integers are generalizations of the Gaussian integers in which the imaginary unit i is replaced by a number . Thus, they have the form u + v , where u and v are integers and  has one of two forms, depending on a parameter D. If D does not equal a multiple of four plus one, then

: 1= = D.

If, however, D does equal a multiple of four plus one, then

: 1= = (1 + D)/2.

If the function f corresponds to a norm function, such as that used to order the Gaussian integers above, then the domain is known as norm-Euclidean. The norm-Euclidean rings of quadratic integers are exactly those where D = 11, 7, 3, 2, 1, 2, 3, 5, 6, 7, 11, 13, 17, 19, 21, 29, 33, 37, 41, 57 or 73. The quadratic integers with D = 1 and 3 are known as the Gaussian integers and Eisenstein integers, respectively.

If f is allowed to be any Euclidean function, then the list of possible D values for which the domain is Euclidean is not yet known. The first example of a Euclidean domain that was not norm-Euclidean (with D = 69) was published in 1994. In 1973, Weinberger proved that a quadratic integer ring with D > 0 is Euclidean if, and only if, it is a principal ideal domain, provided that the generalized Riemann hypothesis holds. 

===Noncommutative rings===
It is also possible to apply the Euclidean algorithm to noncommutative rings such as the set of Hurwitz quaternions. Let  and  represent two elements from such a ring. They have a common right divisor  if  =  and  =  for some choice of  and  in the ring. Similarly, they have a common left divisor if  =  and  =  for some choice of  and  in the ring. Since multiplication is not commutative, there are two versions of the Euclidean algorithm, one for right divisors and one for left divisors. Choosing the right divisors, the first step in finding the gcd(, ) by the Euclidean algorithm can be written

: 1=0 =   0 = (  0)

where 0 represents the quotient and 0 the remainder. This equation shows that any common right divisor of  and  is likewise a common divisor of the remainder 0. The analogous equation for the left divisors would be

: 1=0 =   0 = (  0)

With either choice, the process is repeated as above until the greatest common right or left divisor is identified. As in the Euclidean domain, the "size" of the remainder 0 must be strictly smaller than , and there must be only a finite number of possible sizes for 0, so that the algorithm is guaranteed to terminate.

Most of the results for the GCD carry over to noncommutative numbers. For example, Bzout's identity states that the right gcd(, ) can be expressed as a linear combination of  and . In other words, there are numbers  and  such that

: 1=right =  + 

The analogous identity for the left GCD is nearly the same

: 1=left =  + 

Bzout's identity can be used to solve Diophantine equations.

==Generalizations to other mathematical structures==
The Euclidean algorithm can be applied in knot theory. 

The Euclidean algorithm has three general features that together ensure it will not continue indefinitely. First, it can be written as a sequence of recursive equations

: 1=r'k = r'k2  q'k r'k1

where each remainder is strictly smaller than its predecessor, |r'k| < |r'k1|. Second, the size of each remainder has a strict lower limit, such as |r'k|  0. Third, there is only a finite number of sizes smaller than a given remainder |r'k|. Generalizations of Euclid's algorithm with these basic features have been applied to other mathematical structures, such as tangles and transfinite ordinal numbers. 

An important generalization of the Euclidean algorithm is the concept of a Grbner basis in algebraic geometry. As shown above, the GCD g of two integers a and b is the generator of their ideal. In other words, for any choice of the integers s and t, there is another integer m such that

: 1=sa + tb = mg.

Although this remains true when s, t, m, a and b represent polynomials of a single variable, it is not true for rings of more than one variable. In that case, a finite set of generator polynomials g1, g2, etc. can be defined such that any linear combination of two multivariable polynomials a and b can be expressed as multiples of the generators

: 1=sa + tb = k m'k'g'k

where s, t and m'k are multivariable polynomials. Any such multivariable polynomial f can be expressed as such a sum of generator polynomials plus a unique remainder polynomial r, sometimes called the normal form of polynomial f

: 1=f = r + k q'k'g'k

although the quotient polynomials q'k may not be unique. The set of these generator polynomials is known as a Grbner basis. 

==See also==
* Binary GCD algorithm
* Greatest common divisor of two polynomials
* Integer relation algorithm
* Lehmer's GCD algorithm

==Notes==

* a. Some widely used textbooks, such as I. N. Herstein's Topics in Algebra and Serge Lang's Algebra, use the term "Euclidean algorithm" to refer to Euclidean division.

==References==

==Bibliography==
* 
* 
* 
* 
* . See also Vorlesungen ber Zahlentheorie
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
*
* 
* 

==External links==

* Demonstrations of Euclid's algorithm
* 
* Euclid's Algorithm at cut-the-knot
* 
* The Euclidean Algorithm at MathPages
* Euclid's Game at cut-the-knot
* Music and Euclid's algorithm

Algorithm



[[European Centre for Medium-Range Weather Forecasts]]

The European Centre for Medium-Range Weather Forecasts (ECMWF) is an independent intergovernmental organisation supported by 20 European Member States and 14 Co-operating States. At its headquarters in Reading, England, one of the largest supercomputer complexes in Europe TOP500 Supercomputer Sites is linked by high-speed telecommunication lines to the computer systems of the national weather services of its supporting states. The Centre's computer system contains the world's largest archive of numerical weather prediction data.

== Objectives ==

ECMWF is renowned worldwide as providing the most accurate medium-range global weather forecasts to 15 days and seasonal forecasts to 12 months. Its products are provided to the European National Weather Services, as a complement to the national short-range and climatological activities. The National Meteorological Services of Member States and Co-operating States use ECMWFs products for their own national duties, in particular to give early warning of potentially damaging severe weather.

ECMWF was established in 1975, in recognition of the need to pool the scientific and technical resources of Europes meteorological services and institutions for the production of medium-range weather forecasts and of the economic and social benefits expected from it. The Centre employs about 160 staff members and 70 consultants coming from Member and Co-operating States.

The primary purposes of the Centre are the development of a capability for medium-range weather forecasting and provision of medium-range weather forecasts to the Member States. The objectives of the Centre shall be to develop, and operate on a regular basis, global models and data-assimilation systems for the dynamics, thermodynamics and composition of the Earth's fluid envelope and interacting parts of the Earth-system, with a view to preparing forecasts by means of numerical methods, providing initial conditions for the forecasts, and contributing to monitoring the relevant parts of the Earth-system.

The main objectives of the ECMWF are:
*Development of numerical methods for medium-range weather forecasting
*Preparation of medium-range weather forecasts for distribution to the member states
*Scientific and technical research directed to the improvement of these forecasts
*Collection and storage of appropriate meteorological data.

== Work and Projects ==
ECMWF uses the computer modelling technique of numerical weather prediction (NWP) to forecast the weather from its present measured state. The calculations require a constant input of meteorological data, collected by satellites and earth observation systems such as automatic and manned stations, aircraft, ships and weather balloons.

The data are fed into ECMWF's databases and assimilated into its NWP models to produce:
* medium-range forecasts, predicting the weather up to 15 days ahead
* monthly forecasts, predicting the weather on a weekly basis 30 days ahead
* seasonal forecasts up to 12 months ahead.

Over the past three decades ECMWF's activities and wide-ranging programme of research and development have played a pioneering role in the remarkable advancement of weather forecasting and data assimilation systems. ECMWF has dramatically improved the accuracy and reliability of weather forecasting, working in collaboration with Member and Co-operating States, the European Union and partners such as the World Meteorological Organization (WMO), the European Organisation for the Exploitation of Meteorological Satellites (EUMETSAT) and the European Space Agency (ESA).

ECMWF, through its partnerships with EUMETSAT, ESA, the EU and the European Science community has established a leading position for Europe in the exploitation of satellite data for operational numerical weather prediction, and in the exploitation of satellite data for operational seasonal forecasting with coupled atmosphere-ocean-land models. The increasing amount of satellite data and the development of more sophisticated ways of extraction information from that data have made a major contribution to improving the accuracy and utility of NWP forecasts. ECMWF continuously endeavours to improve the use of satellite observations for NWP.

===Reanalysis===
ECMWF makes significant contributions to support research on climate variability. ECMWF has pioneered an innovative approach known as reanalysis, which involves feeding weather observations collected over decades into a NWP system to recreate past atmospheric, sea- and land-surface conditions over specific time periods to obtain a clearer picture of how the climate has changed. Reanalysis provides a most comprehensive and accurate four-dimensional picture of our atmosphere and effectively allows monitoring of the variability and change of global climate, thereby contributing also to the understanding and attribution of climate change.

To date, and with support from Europe's National Meteorological Services and the European Commission, ECMWF has conducted two major reanalyses of the global atmosphere: the first ECMWF re-analysis (ERA-15) project generated reanalyses from December 1978 to February 1994; the ERA-40 project generated reanalyses from September 1957 to August 2002.

===Operational forecast model===

The ECMWF is best known in the United States for its global operational forecast model, known officially as the "Integrated Forecast System" but usually known informally as the "ECMWF" or "Euro". The model runs both in a "deterministic forecast" mode and as an ensemble. The ECMWF model runs every 12 hours and forecasts out to 10 days. The ECMWF model is primarily used as comparison against the Global Forecast System, which is based in the United States and is run by the National Centers for Environmental Prediction. However, unlike the GFS, which is in the public domain under provisions of United States law, the ECMWF model is proprietary and copyrighted. Nonetheless, a limited amount of output from the model has been publicly released through both the ECMWF and various sites.

===Early warning of severe weather events===
ECMWF's strategy underlines its commitment to maintaining the current rapid rate of improvement of its global medium-range forecasts and products. The ECMWF strategy puts the early warning of severe weather as its principal goal. ECMWF can contribute to the development of strategies to mitigate and adapt to climate change. In particular, ECMWFs emphasis on the provision of reliable predictions of severe weather can be seen as a key contribution to help society adapt to the dangers and threats associated with global warming. Also scientists and researchers around the world use ECMWFs forecast products to monitor the environment and analyse climate change.

Forecasts of severe weather events are vital to warn authorities and the public, and to allow appropriate mitigating action to be taken. Early warnings, made a few days ahead of potential events, are of significant benefit, giving additional time to allow contingency plans to be put into place. The increased time gained by issuing accurate warnings of severe weather will be crucial to save lives, for instance by evacuating a large number of people from endangered areas (e.g. storm surges in the North Sea), or taking cautionary actions to avoid major threats to goods and services (e.g. extreme winds).

One example was the model's prediction of Hurricane Sandy in October 2012 making landfall on the East Coast of the United States seven days before it actually happened. 
It also predicted the intensity and track of the November 2012 nor'easter, which impacted the east coast a week after Sandy.

ECMWF's Extreme Forecast Index (EFI) was developed as a tool to identify where the EPS forecast distribution differs substantially from that of the model climate. It is an integral measure referenced to the model climate that contains all the information regarding variability of weather parameters, in location and time. Thus users can recognise the abnormality of a weather situation without having to define specific space- and time-dependent thresholds.

ECMWF's monthly and seasonal forecasts provide early predictions of events such as heat waves, cold spells and droughts, as well as their impacts on sectors such as agriculture, energy and health. Since ECMWF runs a wave model, there are also predictions of coastal waves and storm surges in European waters which can be used to provide warnings.

== Members ==

The ECMWF is made up of 20 European countries:
*the 18 founding states of 1975: Austria, Belgium, Denmark, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Republic of Ireland, Italy, Luxembourg, Netherlands, Norway, Portugal, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Turkey, United Kingdom
*2 states joined after the 2010 convention revision: Iceland (April 2011) Iceland is the first new Member State under the amended Convention. The original Convention restricted membership to the founding Member States, but was amended in June 2010. and Slovenia (December 2012). (Membership of Serbia is expected in 2014.) 

The ECMWF has concluded co-operation agreements with other states: Bulgaria, Croatia, Czech Republic, Estonia, Hungary, Israel, Latvia, Lithuania, Macedonia, Montenegro, Morocco, Romania, Serbia and Slovakia.

== Site ==
ECMWF is based at Shinfield Park, Reading, England. It shared grounds with the UK Met. Office College until Summer 2002, before the college was relocated to Exeter ahead of the move of the Met. Office Headquarters from Bracknell in 2003. The land the Met Office College was on is now used by residential housing.

==See also==
*EUMETNET
*EUMETSAT

==References==

==Further reading==
*

==External links==
*Official Website
*ERA-15 reanalysis
*ERA-40 reanalysis
*ECMWF on TOP500.org



[[European Broadcasting Union]]

The European Broadcasting Union (EBU; ) is an alliance of public service media entities, comprising 72 Active Members in 56 countries, and 37 Associate Members from a further 22 countries. European Broadcasting Union list of Associate Members. Ebu.ch. Retrieved on 2012-01-15. It is unrelated to the European Union. It is best known for hosting the Eurovision Song Contest.

==General description==
Members of the EBU are radio and television companies, most of which are government-owned public service broadcasters or privately owned stations with public service missions. Active Members come from as far north as Iceland and as far south as Egypt, from Ireland in the west and Azerbaijan in the east, and almost every nation from geographical Europe in between. Associate Members are from countries and territories beyond Europe, such as Canada, Japan, Mexico, India and Hong Kong. Associate Members from the United States include ABC, CBS, NBC, the Corporation for Public Broadcasting, Time Warner, and the only individual station, Chicago-based classical music station WFMT.

Active Members are those paying EBU members meeting all technical criteria for full membership, whose states are either within the European Broadcasting Area (EBA) or members of the Council of Europe. Syria is an example of a country within the EBA not complying with all technical criteria for full membership, and thus it is currently only granted Associated Membership.

The EBU's highest profile production is the Eurovision Song Contest, organised by its Eurovision Network. The Eurovision Network also organises the Eurovision Dance Contest, the Junior Eurovision Song Contest, the Eurovision Young Dancers competition, and other competitions for young musicians and screenwriters, which are modelled along similar lines. The countries represented in the EBU also cooperate to create documentaries and (animated) children's programming.

Radio collaborations include Euroclassic Notturno  an overnight classical music stream, produced by BBC Radio 3 and broadcast in the United Kingdom as Through the Night  and special theme days, such as the annual Christmas music relays from around Europe. 

Most EBU broadcasters have a group deal to carry the Olympics and FIFA World Cup (particularly, the games of their country and the Final). Another annually recurring event which is broadcast across Europe through the EBU is the Vienna New Year's Concert.

The theme music played before EBU broadcasts is Marc-Antoine Charpentier's Prelude to Te Deum. It is well known to Europeans as it is played before and after the Eurovision Song Contest and other important events.

==History==
The classic opening ident that preceded all Eurovision network transmissions until the mid-1990s. The logotypes of both the sending and receiving company were shown in the middle. The pattern around the middle is based on the Flag of Europe. This sample shows the old logo of the BBC.
EBU logo used from 1994 to 2012.

It was formed on 12 February 1950 by 23 broadcasting organisations from Europe and the Mediterranean at a conference in the coastal resort of Torquay in Devon, England. In 1993, the International Radio and Television Organisation (OIRT), an equivalent organisation of broadcasters from Central and Eastern Europe, was merged with the EBU.

The first co-production was the animated series The Animals of Farthing Wood from 1993 based on the books of the same title by Colin Dann. The second animated collaboration was Noah's Island from 1997 and more recently, Pitt and Kantrop. Another important EBU programme is Jeux Sans Frontires.

==Technical activities==
The objective of the EBU's technical activities is simply to assist EBU Members (see below) in this period of unprecedented technological changes. This includes provision of technical information to Members via conferences and workshops, as well as in written form (such as the EBU Technical Review, and the EBU tech-i magazine).

The EBU also encourages active collaboration between its Members on the basis that they can freely share their knowledge and experience, thus achieving considerably more than individual Members could achieve by themselves. Much of this collaboration is achieved through Project Groups which study specific technical issues of common interest: for example, EBU Members have long been preparing for the revision of the 1961 Stockholm Plan.

The EBU places great emphasis on the use of open standards. Widespread use of open standards (such as MPEG-2, DAB, DVB, etc.) ensures interoperability between products from different vendors, as well as facilitating the exchange of programme material between EBU Members and promoting "horizontal markets" for the benefit of all consumers.

EBU Members and the EBU Technical Department have long played an important role in the development of many systems used in radio and television broadcasting, such as:

* The AES/EBU digital audio interface, formally known as AES3;
* Serial and parallel interfaces for digital video (ITU-R Recommendations 601 and 656);
* RDS  the Radio Data System used on FM broadcasting.
* The EBU Loudness Recommendation R 128 and 'EBU Mode' meters (EBU Tech 3341)

The EBU has also actively encouraged the development and implementation of:

* Digital Audio Broadcasting (DAB) through Eureka Project 147 and the WorldDAB Forum;
* Digital Video Broadcasting (DVB) through the DVB Project and DigiTAG;
* Digital radio in the bands currently used for AM broadcasting through DRM (Digital Radio Mondiale);
* Standardisation of PVR systems through the TV-Anytime Forum.
* Development of other content distribution networks on the internet through P2PTV; EBU Project Group D/P2P, from November 2007 to April 2008, with a trial of selected member channels, thanks to Octoshape's distribution platform. EBU Media portal. Ebu.ch. Retrieved on 2011-12-16. The EBU is also part of the European P2P-Next project.

===Greek state broadcaster controversy of 2013===
The Greek government shut down the state broadcaster ERT on 11 June, at short notice, citing government spending concerns related to the Euro crisis. Greek public broadcaster ERT to be shut down, reopened with fewer employees. ekathimerini.com (2013-06-11). Retrieved on 2014-04-28. In response, the European Broadcasting Union set up a makeshift studio on the same day, near the former ERT offices in Athens, in order to continue providing EBU members with news-gathering and broadcast relay services that had formerly been provided by ERT. 

The EBU put out a statement expressing its "profound dismay" at the shutdown, urged the Greek Prime Minister "to use all his powers to immediately reverse this decision" and offered the "advice, assistance and expertise necessary for ERT to be preserved". EBU - EBU urges Greek government to reverse decision on ERT. (2013-06-11). Retrieved on 2014-04-28. As of 4 May 2014, the New Hellenic Radio, Internet and Television (NERIT) broadcaster started nation wide transmissions, and overtook ERT's vacant Active Membership slot in EBU.

==Members==
Countries with Active Membership of EBU coloured by period of entrance (the six European microstates not included). Countries without active memberships have been coloured light-yellow.
The active member list as of May 2014, comprised the following 73 broadcasting companies from 56 countries. EBU Active Member list, EBU, last revised on 31 January 2014 

 Country Broadcasting organisation National script Abbr. Year 
 Albania Albanian Radio and Television Radio Televizioni Shqiptar RTSH 1999 
 Algeria Etablissement public de Tlvision Algrienne,Enterprise nationale de radiodiffusion,Tldiffusion d'Algrie   , ,  EPTV-EPRS-TDA 1970 
 Andorra Rdio i Televisi d'Andorra RTVA RTVA 2002 
 Armenia Public Radio of Armenia, andPublic Television of Armenia   ,   AMPTV 2005 
 Austria Austrian Broadcasting sterreichischer Rundfunk ORF 1953 
 Azerbaijan Public Television and Radio ctimai Televiziya v Radio Yaymlar irkti TV 2007 
 Belarus Belarusian Television and Radio Company      BTRC 1993 
 Belgium Flemish Radio- and Television Network andRadio and Television of Belgian French Vlaamse Radio- en Televisieomroep,Radio-Tlvision Belge VRT-RTBF 1950 
 Bosnia and Herzegovina Radiotelevision of Bosnia & Herzegovina Radio-televizija Bosne i Hercegovine -    BHRT 1993 
 Bulgaria Bulgarian National Radio    BNR 1993 
 Bulgarian National Television    BNT 1993 
 Croatia Croatian Radiotelevision Hrvatska radiotelevizija HRT 1993 
 Cyprus Cyprus Broadcasting Corporation    (Greek)Kbrs Radyo Yayn Kurumu (Turkish) CyBC/RIKKRYK 1969 
 Czech Republic Czech Radio esk rozhlas R 1994 
 Czech Television esk televize T 1994 
 Denmark Denmark's Radio Danmarks Radio AS DR 1950 
 TV2 TV2 AS DK/TV2 1989 
 Egypt Egyptian Radio and Television Union      ERTU 1985 
 Estonia Estonian Public Broadcasting Eesti Rahvusringhling ERR 1993 
 Finland - Finnish Broadcasting Corporation - Swedish Broadcasting of Finland Yleisradio OY (Finnish)Rundradion AB (Swedish) YLE/FST5 1950 
 Commercial Channel 3 MTV Oy FI/MTV 1993 
 France 
 Groupement des Radiodiffuseurs Franais de l'UER GRF 1950 
 Europe 1 Europe 1 E1 1978 
 Georgia Georgian Public Broadcaster    GPB 2005 
 Germany German National Broadcasting Arbeitsgemeinschaft der ffentlich-rechtlichenRundfunkanstalten der Bundesrepublik Deutschland ARD 1952 
 Second German Television Zweites Deutsches Fernsehen ZDF 1963 
 Greece New Hellenic Radio, Internet and Television   ,    NERIT 2014 
 Hungary Hungarian Media Group:- Media Support and Asset Management Fund (MTVA)- Hungarian Radio (MR)- Hungarian Television (MTV)- Duna TV Hungarian Media Group:'- Media Support and Asset Management Fund (MTVA)'- Magyar Rdi (MR)'- Magyar Televzi (MTV)'- Duna Televzi HMG 1993(merged in 2014) 
 Iceland National Broadcasting Service Rkistvarpi RV 1956 
 Ireland Raidi Teilifs ireann Raidi Teilifs ireann RT 1950 
 TG4 TG4 Teilifs na Gaeilge TG4 2007 
 Israel Israel Broadcasting Authority   IBA 1957 
 Italy Italian Radio-Television Radiotelevisione Italiana RAI 1950 
 Jordan Jordan Radio and Television Corporation   JRTV 1970 
 Latvia Latvian Television Latvijas Televzija LT 1993 
 Latvian Radio Latvijas Radio LR 1993 
 Lebanon Tl Liban   TL 1950 
 Libya Libya National Channel - LNC 2011 
 Lithuania Lithuanian National Radio and Television Lietuvos Radijas ir Televizija LRT 1993 
 Luxembourg CLT Multi Media Compagnie Luxembourgeoise de Tldiffusion CLT (RTL) 1950 
 Radio 100,7 Radio 100,7 ERSL 1996 
 Macedonia Macedonian Radio-Television    MKRTV 1993 
 Malta Public Broadcasting Services Public Broadcasting Services MT/PBS 1970 
 Moldova Teleradio-Moldova Teleradio-Moldova TRM 1993 
 Monaco - Radio Monte Carlo (France) - Radio Monte-Carlo (Italy) - TMC Monte Carlo Groupement de Radiodiffuseurs Mongasques TMC/GRMC 1950 
 Montenegro Radio Television of Montenegro Radio televizija Crne Gore     RTCG 2001 
 Morocco Socit Nationale de Radiodiffusion et de Tlvision     SNRT 1969 
 Netherlands Netherlands Public Broadcasting Nederlandse Publieke Omroep NPO 1950 
 Norway Norwegian Broadcasting Corporation Norsk Rikskringkasting AS NRK 1950 
 TV2 TV2 AS NO/TV2 1992 
 Poland Polish Radio and Television:- Polish Television (TVP)- Polish Radio (PR) Polskie Radio i Telewizja:- Telewizja Polska (TVP)- Polskie Radio (PR) PRT 1993 
 Portugal Radio and Television of Portugal Rdio e Televiso de Portugal RTP 1950 
 Romania Romanian Radio Broadcasting Company Societatea Romn de Radiodifuziune ROR 1993 
 Romanian Television Televiziunea Romn RO/TVR 1993 
 Russia Channel One Russia   C1R 1996 
 Rossijskoe Teleradio       RTR 1993 
 Radio Dom Ostankino:- Radio Mayak (MK)- Radio Orpheus (OP)- Radio Voice of Russia (VOR) Radio Dom Ostankino:'- Radio Mayak (MK)'- Radio Orpheus (OP)'- Radio Voice of Russia (VOR) RDO 1996 
 San Marino Radio-Television of San Marino Radiotelevisione della Repubblica di San Marino SMTV 1995 
 Serbia Radio Television of Serbia -  RTS 2006 
 Slovakia Radio Television of Slovakia Rozhlas a televzia Slovenska RTVS 2011 
 Slovenia Radio-Television Slovenia Radiotelevizija Slovenije RTVSLO 1993 
 Spain Spanish Radio-Television Corporacin Radiotelevisin Espaola RTVE 1955 
 Spanish Society of Radio Sociedad Espaola de Radiodifusin SER 1982 
 People's Radiowaves of Spain Cadena de Ondas Populares de Espaa COPE 1998 
 Sweden 
 Sveriges Television och Radio Grupp AB STR 1950 
 - TV4 TV4 Gruppen AB SE/TV4 2004 
 Switzerland Swiss Broadcasting Corporation - Swiss- German Radio and Television- Radio Tlvision Suisse- Italian Radio and Television of Switzerland- Swiss- Romansh Radio and Television SRG SSRRadio- und Fernsehgesellschaft (German) Socit suisse de radiodiffusion et tlvision (French)Societ svizzera di radiotelevisione (Italian)Societad svizra da radio e televisiun (Romansh) SRG SSR 1950 
 Tunisia Radiodifussion-Tlvision Tunisienne     RTTT 1950 
 Turkey Turkish Radio and Television Corporation Trkiye Radyo-Televizyon Kurumu TRT 1950 
 Ukraine National Television Company of Ukraine, andNational Radio Company of Ukraine   ,'   NTU/NRU 1993 
 United Kingdom British Broadcasting Corporation - BBC 1950 
 United Kingdom Independent Broadcasting - Independent Television - Channel 4 - Sianel 4 Cymru Darlledu Annibynnol y Deyrnas Gyfunol (Welsh) UKIB 1960 
 Vatican City Vatican Radio Radio Vaticana RV 1950 

===Associate members===
Any group or organisation member of the International Telecommunication Union (ITU), which provide a radio and/or television service outside of the European Broadcasting Area, are permitted to submit applications to the EBU for Associate Membership. Countries which have this status also pay an annual fee to maintain this status, if a fee is not paid, then their Associate Membership is revoked. It was also noted by the EBU that any country that is granted Associate Member status does not include any access into the Eurovision system. 

The list of Associate Members of EBU, comprised the following 37 broadcasting companies from 22 countries as of January 2014. 

 Country Broadcasting organisation Abbr. 
 Australia Australian Broadcasting Corporation ABC 
 FreeTV Australia Free 
 SBS Australia SBSC 
 Bangladesh National Broadcasting Authority of Bangladesh NBAB 
 Brazil TV Cultura (Fundao Padre Anchieta) FPA 
 Canada Canadian Broadcasting Corporation (Societ Radio Canada) CBC/SRC 
 Chile Canal 13 (Chile) UCCTV 
 China China Central Television CCTV 
 Cuba Cuban Institute of Radio and Television ICRT 
 Georgia Teleimedi TEME 
 Rustavi 2 RB 
 Hong Kong Radio Television Hong Kong RTHK 
 India All India Radio AIR 
 Iran Islamic Republic of Iran Broadcasting IRIB 
 Japan Fuji Television FTN 
 The Japan Commercial Broadcasters Association JBA 
 Nippon Hoso Kyokai NHK 
 Tokyo Broadcasting System TBS 
 Tokyo FM TFM 
 Korea (Republic of) Korean Broadcasting System KBS 
 Malaysia Radio Television Malaysia RTM 
 Mauritania TV de Mauritanie MR/TVM 
 Mauritius Mauritius Broadcasting Corporation MBC 
 New Zealand Radio New Zealand RNZ 
 Television New Zealand Ltd TVNZ 
 Oman Public Authority for Radio and TV PART 
 Philippines GMA Network DZBB 
 South Africa South African Broadcasting Corporation SABC 
 Syria Organisme de la Radio-Tlvision Arabe Syrienne ORTAS 
 United States American Broadcasting Company ABC 
 American Public Media APM 
 CBS Broadcasting Inc., CBS 
 National Public Radio NPR 
 National Broadcasting Company NBC 
 WFMT 98.7 FM, Chicago, Illinois WFMT 
 WGBH-TV and WGBH-FM, Boston, Massachusetts WGBH 
 New York Public Radio WNYCWQXRNJPR 

===Approved participant members===
Any groups or organisations from a country with International Telecommunication Union (ITU) membership, which don't qualify for either of the EBU's Active or Associate memberships, but still provide a broadcasting activity for the EBU are granted a unique Approved Participants membership, which lasts approximately 5 years. An application for this status may be submitted to the EBU at any given time, providing an annual fee is paid.

The following 7 EBU broadcast members had status as Approved Participants in January 2014. 

 Country Broadcasting organisation Abbr. 
 Belgium Canada France Switzerland TV5 Europe FRI/TV5 
 European Union Euronews Euronews 
 Franco-German ARTE GEIE ARTE 
 Macedonia JP RMD (Macedonian Broadcasting) JPRMD 
 Spain Abertis Telecom S.A. JP MRD 
 Catalunya Msica CAT 
 Russia Russian TV and Radio Broadcasting Network RTRN 

===Past active members===

 Country Broadcasting organisation Abbr. Years 
 Czechoslovakia eskoslovensk televize CST 19911992 
 Greece Hellenic Broadcasting Corporation ERT 19502013 
 Italy Telemontecarlo TMC 19812001 
 Libyan Arab Jamahiriya Libyan Jamahiriya Broadcasting Corporation ( ) LJBC 19742011 
 Serbia and Montenegro Alliance of Public Radio and Television UJRT 20012006 
 Slovakia Slovensk rozhlas SRo 19932011 
 Slovensk televzia STV 19932011 
 Spain Antena 3 de Radio, S.A. A3R 19861993 
 Vatican City Vatican Television Center CTV 1950-2012 http://www.europeanjazzcompetition.nl/fileadmin/content/pdf/EBU-Active-Members-List_EN-FR.pdf 
 Yugoslavia Yugoslav Radio Television JRT 19501992 

===Pending EBU membership applications===

 Country Broadcasting organisation Abbr. Notes 
 Kazakhstan Kazakhstan Radio and Television Corporation KRTC State Television Company awaits of satisfaction of request for Pending or Approved EBU membership since 2008. 
 Kosovo Radio Television of Kosovo RTK RTK has shown interest into obtaining active EBU membership. However, they have yet to fulfil all the criteria set by the EBU for admission. 
 Liechtenstein 1 Frstentum Liechtenstein Television 1FLTV Liechtenstein's only television broadcaster which began broadcasting on 15 August 2008. In July 2009, Peter Klbel, broadcaster's managing director officially announced its intent to apply to join the EBU by the end of July 2009. 
 Morocco La deuxime Tlvision 2M TV The second commercial channel of Morocco has asked for membership to the EBU. 
 Qatar Qatar Radio QR Recently shown interest at Eurovision 2009, by sending delegates in the hope of applying for active membership. 
 Russia NTV NTV They never became members of The EBU. It was launched in 1993. 

==EBU competitions==
The EBU holds competitions in which its Members can participate, if they wish to do so.

===Eurovision Song Contest===

The Eurovision Song Contest () is an annual international song competition, that was first held in Lugano, Switzerland, on 24 May 1956. Seven countries participated  each submitting two songs, for a total of 14. This was the only contest in which more than one song per country was performed: since 1957 all contests have allowed one entry per country. The 1956 contest was won by the host nation, Switzerland. In this competition, only countries that are members of the EBU can participate. The first winner was Switzerland, and the most recent is Austria.

===Junior Eurovision Song Contest===

Junior Eurovision Song Contest (), is an annual international song competition, that was first held in Copenhagen, Denmark, on 15 November 2003. Sixteen countries participated  each submitting one song, for a total of 16 entries. The 2003 Contest was won by Croatia and the current winner is Malta.

===Eurovision Young Musicians===

Eurovision Young Musicians is a competition for Europeans younger than 19 years old. It is organised by the European Broadcasting Union (EBU) and is a member of EMCY.

The televised competition is held every two years, with some countries holding national heats. Since its foundation in 1982 the Eurovision Young Musicians competition has become one of the most important music competitions on an international level.

The first competition was held in Manchester, United Kingdom on 11 May 1982.

===Eurovision Dance Contest===

The Eurovision Dance Contest (not to be confused with the Eurovision Young Dancers Competition) was an international dancing competition that was held for the first time in London, United Kingdom on 1 September 2007. The competition was repeated in 2008, but has not been held since.

===Eurovision Young Dancers===

The Eurovision Young Dancers is a biennial dance showcase broadcast on television throughout Europe.

The first competition was held in Reggio Emilia, Italy on 16 June 1985.

It uses a format similar to the Eurovision Song Contest, every country that is a member of the EBU has had the opportunity to send a dance act to compete for the title of "Eurovision Young Dancer". The act can be either a solo act or a dance couple, and all contestants must be between the ages of 15 and 21 years and not professionally engaged. The winner is chosen by television viewers across the EBU through a real-time, electronic and onscreen voting mechanism.

===Let the Peoples Sing===

Let the Peoples Sing is a biennial choir competition, the participants of which are chosen from radio recordings entered by EBU radio members. The final, encompassing three categories and around ten choirs, is offered as a live broadcast to all EBU members. The overall winner is awarded the Silver Rose Bowl.

==See also==

* Asia-Pacific Broadcasting Union
* BBC World News
* Caribbean Broadcasting Union
* Commonwealth Broadcasting Association
* Commonwealth Press Union
* Europe by Satellite
* North American Broadcasters Association
* Organizacin de Televisin Iberoamericana (Iberoamerican Television Organization)
* TV5MONDE
* WRN Broadcast

==Notes and references==
Notes:

 a. 

References:

==External links==
* EBU Website

 


[[Electrothermal-chemical technology]]

Electrothermal-chemical (ETC) technology is an attempt to increase accuracy and muzzle energy of future tank, artillery, and close-in weapon system guns by improving the predictability and rate of expansion of propellants inside the barrel. 

An electrothermal-chemical gun uses a plasma cartridge to ignite and control the ammunition's propellant, using electrical energy to trigger the process. ETC increases the performance of conventional solid propellants, reduces the effect of temperature on propellant expansion and allows for more advanced, higher density propellants to be used. 

The technology has been under development since the mid-1980s and at present is actively being researched in the United States by the Army Research Laboratory and private organizations. It is possible that electrothermal-chemical gun propulsion will be an integral part of US Army's future combat system and those of other countries such as Germany and the United Kingdom. 
Electrothermal-chemical technology is part of a broad research and development program that encompasses all electric gun technology, such as railguns and coil guns.

== Background ==
The XM360.

The constant battle between armour and armor-piercing round has caused a near constant development of the main battle tank design. The evolution of American anti-tank weapons can be traced back to requirements to combat Soviet tanks. In the late eighties, it was thought that the protection level of the Future Soviet Tank (FST) could exceed 700 mm of rolled homogeneous armour equivalence at its maximum thickness, which was effectively immune against the contemporary M-829 armour piercing fin stabilized discarding sabot. Ropelewski, Soviet Gains in Armor/Antiarmor Shape US Army Master Plan, p.69 Today it is estimated that a tank gun will have to achieve muzzle energies on the level of 18 MJ&mdash;which is double the muzzle energy of current tank gun systems  to be able to successfully penetrate such armour plating. In the eighties the most immediate method available to NATO to counter Soviet advances in armour technology was the adoption of a 140 mm main gun. This, however, required a redesigned turret that could incorporate the inherently larger breech and ammunition, and it also required some sort of automatic loader. Schemmer, Army, SecDef's Office at Loggerheads over Antiarmor, p.53 Although the 140 mm gun was considered a real interim solution it was decided after the fall of the Soviet Union that the increase in muzzle energy it provided was not worth the increase in weight. Resources were therefore spent on research into other programs that could provide the needed muzzle energy. One of the most successful alternative technologies remains electrothermal-chemical ignition. 

Most proposed advances in gun technology are based on the assumption that the solid propellant as a stand alone propulsion system is no longer capable of delivering the required muzzle energy. This requirement has been underscored by the appearance of the Russian T-90 main battle tank. Even the elongation of current gun tubes, such as the new German 120 mm L/55, The length of the cannon can be found by multiplying the diameter of the barrel and the caliber length. For example, the M256, which is a 120 mm L/44, has a total length of 5.28 m, while the 120 mm L/55 has a total length of 6.6 m. which was introduced by Rheinmetall is considered only an interim solution as it doesn't offer the required increase in muzzle velocity. Sharoni, The Future Combat System, p. 29 Even advanced kinetic energy ammunition such as the United States' M-829A3 is considered only an interim solution against future threats. Pengelley, The new era in tank main armament, p.1522 To that extent the solid propellant is considered to have reached the end of its usefulness, although it will remain the principal propulsion method for at least the next decade until newer technologies mature. Sharoni, The Future Combat System, p.30 To improve on the capabilities of a solid propellant weapon the electrothermal-chemical gun may see production as early as 2016. Kruse, Studies on Germany's Future 140 mm Tank Gun System, p. 1 

ETC technology offers a medium-risk upgrade and is developed to the point that further improvements are so minor that it can be considered mature. The lightweight American 120 mm XM-291 came close to achieving 17 MJ of muzzle energy, which is the lower-end muzzle energy spectrum for a 140 mm gun. Diamond, Electro Thermal Chemical Gun Technology Study, p.5 However, the success of the XM-291 doesn't imply the success of ETC technology as there are key parts of the propulsion system that are not yet understood or fully developed, such as the plasma ignition process. Nevertheless, there is substantial existing evidence that ETC technology is viable and something worth the money to continue development. Furthermore, it can be integrated into current gun systems. Sauerwein, Rheinmetall's NPzK 

== How it works ==
A diagram of a working electrothermal-chemical gun.

An electrothermal-chemical gun uses a plasma cartridge to ignite and control the ammunition's propellant, using electrical energy as a catalyst to begin the process. Originally researched by Dr. Jon Parmentola for the U.S. Army, it has grown into a very plausible successor to a standard solid propellant tank gun. Since the beginning of research the United States has funded the XM-291 gun project with USD 4,000,000, basic research with USD 300,000, and applied research with USD 600,000. Since then it has been proven to work, although efficiency to the level required has not yet been accomplished. ETC increases the performance of conventional solid propellants, reduces the effect of temperature on propellant expansion and allows for more advanced, higher density propellants to be used. It will also reduce pressure placed on the barrel in comparison to alternative technologies that offer the same muzzle energy given the fact that it helps spread the propellant's gas much more smoothly during ignition. Hilmes, Aspects of future MBT conception Currently, there are two principal methods of plasma initiation: the flashboard large area emitter (FLARE) and the triple coaxial plasma igniter (TCPI).

=== Flashboard large area emitter ===
Flashboards run in several parallel strings to provide a large area of plasma or ultraviolet radiation and uses the breakdown and vaporization of gaps of diamonds to produce the required plasma. These parallel strings are mounted in tubes and oriented to have their gaps azimuthal to the tube's axis. It discharges by using high pressure air to move air out of the way. Diamond, Electro Thermal Chemical Gun Technology Study, p.11-12 FLARE initiators can ignite propellants through the release of plasma, or even through the use of ultraviolet heat radiation. Diamond, Electro Thermal Chemical Gun Technology Study, p.13-15 The absorption length of a solid propellant is sufficient enough to be ignited by radiation from a plasma source. However, FLARE has most likely not reached optimal design requirements and further understanding of FLARE and how it works is completely necessary to ensure the evolution of the technology. If FLARE provided the XM-291 gun project with the sufficient radiative heat to ignite the propellant to achieve a muzzle energy of 17 MJ one could only imagine the possibilities with a fully developed FLARE plasma igniter. Current areas of study include how plasma will affect the propellant through radiation, the deliverance of mechanical energy and heat directly and by driving gas flow. Despite these daunting tasks FLARE has been seen as the most plausible igniter for future application on ETC guns. For further technical information on FLARE see: P. Diamond 

=== Triple coaxial plasma igniter ===
A coaxial igniter consists of a fully insulated conductor, covered by four strips of aluminum foil. All of this is further insulated in a tube about 1.6 cm in diameter that is perforated with small holes. The idea is to use an electrical flow through the conductor and then exploding the flow into vapor and then breaking it down into plasma. Consequently, the plasma escapes through the constant perforations throughout the insulating tube and initiates the surrounding propellant. A TCPI igniter is fitted in individual propellant cases for each piece of ammunition. However, TCPI is no longer considered a viable method of propellant ignition because it may damage the fins and does not deliver energy as efficiently as a FLARE igniter. TCPI is also covered in Electro Thermal Chemical Gun Technology Study by P. Diamond 

== Feasibility ==
The 60 mm ETC gun developed by the US Navy at FMC as an ETC CIWS proof of principle demonstrator.

The XM-291 is the best existing example of a working electrothermal-chemical gun. It was an alternate technology to the heavier caliber 140 mm gun by using the dual-caliber approach. It uses a breech that is large enough to accept 140 mm ammunition and be mounted with both a 120 mm barrel and a 135 mm or 140 mm barrel. The XM-291 also mounts a larger gun tube and a larger ignition chamber than the existing M256 L/44 main gun. Pengelley, A new era in tank main armament, p. 1522 Through the application of electrothermal-chemical technology the XM-291 has been able to achieve muzzle energy outputs that equate that to a low-level 140 mm gun, while achieving muzzle velocities greater than those of the larger 140 mm gun. Sharoni, The Future Combat System, p.31 Although the XM-291 does not mean that ETC technology is viable it does offer an example that it is possible. 

ETC is also a more viable option than other alternatives by definition. ETC requires much less energy input from outside sources, like a battery, than a railgun or a coilgun would. Tests have shown that energy output by the propellant is higher than energy input from outside sources on ETC guns. P. Diamond, Electro Thermal Chemical Gun Technology Study In comparison, a railgun currently cannot achieve a higher muzzle velocity than the amount of energy input. Even at 50% efficiency a rail gun launching a projectile with a kinetic energy of 20 MJ would require an energy input into the rails of 40 MJ, and 50% efficiency has not yet been achieved. Horst, Recent Advances in Anti-Armor Technology, p.6 To put this into perspective, a rail gun launching at 9 MJ of energy would need roughly 32 MJ worth of energy from capacitors. Current advances in energy storage allow for energy densities as high as 2.5 MJ/m, which means that a battery delivering 32 MJ of energy would require a volume of 12.8 m; this is not a viable volume for use in a modern main battle tank, especially one designed to be lighter than existing models. Zahn, The Future Combat System: Minimizing Risk While Maximizing Capability, p.20 There has even been discussion about eliminating the necessity for an outside electrical source in ETC ignition by initiating the plasma cartridge through a small explosive force. Yangmeng, A Novel Concept of Electrothermal Chemical Gun without Power Supply, p.1 

Furthermore, ETC technology is not only applicable to solid propellants. To increase muzzle velocity even further electrothermal-chemical ignition can work with liquid propellants, although this would require further research into plasma ignition. ETC technology is also compatible with existing projects to reduce the amount of recoil delivered to the vehicle while firing. Understandably, recoil of a gun firing a projectile at 17 MJ or more will increase directly with the increase in muzzle energy in accordance to Newton's third law of motion and successful implementation of recoil reduction mechanisms will be vital to the installation of an ETC powered gun in an existing vehicle design. For example, OTO Melara's new lightweight 120 mm L/45 gun has achieved a recoil force of 25 t by using a longer recoil mechanism (550 mm) and a pepperpot muzzle brake. Hilmes, Arming Future MBTs, p.79 Reduction in recoil can also be achieved through mass attenuation of the thermal sleeve. The ability of ETC technology to be applied to existing gun designs means that for future gun upgrades there's no longer the necessity to redesign the turret to include a larger breech or caliber gun barrel.

Several countries have already determined that ETC technology is viable for the future and have funded indigenous projects considerably. These include the United States, Germany Hilmes, Modern German Tank Development, p.20-21. and the United Kingdom, amongst others. The United States' XM360, which is planned to equip the Future Combat Systems Mounted Combat System light tank and may be the M1 Abrams' next gun upgrade, is reportedly based on the XM291 and may include ETC technology, or portions of ETC technology. Tests of this gun have been performed using "precision ignition" technology, which may refer to ETC ignition.

== Notes ==

== Bibliography ==

* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 

== External links ==
* Electromagnetic Launch Symposium
* http://www.powerlabs.org/electrothermal.htm



[[Boeing E-3 Sentry]]

The Boeing E-3 Sentry, commonly known as AWACS, is an airborne early warning and control (AEW&C) aircraft developed by Boeing as the prime contractor. Derived from the Boeing 707, it provides all-weather surveillance, command, control and communications, and is used by the United States Air Force (USAF), NATO, British Royal Air Force (RAF), French Air Force and Royal Saudi Air Force. The E-3 is distinguished by the distinctive rotating radar dome above the fuselage. Production ended in 1992 after 68 aircraft had been built.

In the mid-1960s, the USAF was seeking an aircraft to replace its piston-engined Lockheed EC-121 Warning Star, which had seen service for over a decade. After issuing preliminary development contracts to three companies, the USAF picked Boeing to construct two airframes to test Westinghouse Electric's and Hughes's competing radars. Both radars used Pulse-Doppler technology, with Westinghouse's design emerging as the contract winner. Col. Emmett Virgil Conkling who was an early participant in radar development in England prior to the official U.S. entry into WWII, retired from his position with the Air Force in the pentagon and took the position of head of development in Seattle. Testing on the first production E-3 began in October 1975.

The first USAF E-3 was delivered in March 1977, and during the next seven years, a total of 34 aircraft were manufactured. NATO, as a single identity, also had eighteen aircraft manufactured, basing them in Germany. The E-3 was also sold to the United Kingdom (seven) and France (four) and Saudi Arabia (five, plus eight E-3 derived tanker aircraft). In 1991, by which time the last aircraft had been delivered, E-3s participated in Operation Desert Storm, playing a crucial role of directing Coalition aircraft against the enemy. Throughout the aircraft's service life, numerous upgrades were performed to enhance its capabilities. In 1996, Westinghouse Electric was acquired by Northrop before being renamed Northrop Grumman Electronic Systems, which currently supports the E-3's radar.

==Development==

===Background===
In 1963, the USAF asked for proposals for an Airborne Warning and Control System (AWACS) to replace its EC-121 Warning Stars, which had served in the airborne early warning role for over a decade. Wilson 1998, p. 72. The new aircraft would take advantage of improvements in radar technology which allowed airborne radars to "look down" and detect low-flying aircraft, even over land, which was previously impractical due to ground clutter. Eden et al 2004, p. 92. Contracts were issued to Boeing, Douglas and Lockheed, the latter being eliminated in July 1966. In 1967, a parallel program was put into place to develop the radar, with Westinghouse Electric and the Hughes Aircraft being asked to compete in producing the radar system. In 1968 it was referred to as Overland Radar Technology (ORT) during development tests on the modified EC-121Q. Davies 2005, p. 2. The Westinghouse's radar antenna was going to be used by whichever company won the radar competition, since Westinghouse had pioneered in the design of high-power RF phase-shifters.

alt=Black-and-white photograph of piston-engined aircraft with a large hump on mid-fuselage.

Boeing initially proposed a purpose-built aircraft, but tests indicated that it would not outperform the already-operational 707, so the latter was chosen instead. To increase endurance, this design was to be powered by eight General Electric TF34s, or carrying its radar in a rotating dome mounted at the top of a forward-swept tail, above the fuselage. Boeing was selected ahead of McDonnell Douglas's DC-8-based proposal in July 1970. Initial orders were placed for two aircraft, designated EC-137D as test beds to evaluate the two competing radars. As the test-beds did not need the same 14-hour endurance demanded of the production aircraft, the EC-137s retained the Pratt & Whitney JT3D commercial engines, and a later reduction in endurance requirement led to retaining the normal engines in production. 

The first EC-137 made its maiden flight on 9 February 1972, with the fly-off between the two radars taking place during MarchJuly that year. Favorable test results saw the selection of Westinghouse's radar for the production aircraft. Davies 2005, pp. 56. Hughes's radar was initially thought to be a certain winner, simply because much of its design was also going into the new F-15 Eagle's radar program. The Westinghouse radar used a pipelined Fast Fourier Transform (FFT) to digitally resolve 128 Doppler frequencies, while Hughes's radars used analog filters based on the design for the F-15 fighter. Westinghouse's engineering team won this competition by using a programmable 18-bit computer whose software could be modified before each mission. This computer was the AN/AYK-8 design from the B-57G program, and designated AYK-8-EP1 for its much expanded memory. This radar also multiplexed a Beyond The Horizon (BTH) pulse mode that could complement the pulse-Doppler radar mode. This proved to be beneficial especially when the BTH mode is used to detect ships at sea when the radar beam is directed below the horizon. 

===Full-scale development===
Approval was given on 26 January 1973 for full-scale development of the AWACS system. To allow further development of the aircraft's systems, orders were placed for three pre-production aircraft, the first of which performed its maiden flight in February 1975. To save costs, the endurance requirements were relaxed allowing the new aircraft to retain the four JT3D (US Military designation TF33) engines. Taylor et al 1976, p. 246. IBM and Hazeltine were selected to develop the mission computer and display system. The IBM computer receiving the designation 4PI, and the software is written in JOVIAL. A Semi-Automatic Ground Environment (SAGE) or BUIC operator would immediately be at home with the track displays and tabular displays, but differences in symbology would create compatibility problems in tactical ground radar systems in Iceland, Europe and Korea over Link-11 (TADIL-A).
alt=Black-and-white photograph with angled front view of four-engine jet aircraft on ramp with front fuselage door opened. A contingent of people are there to welcome the jet, which has a disc-shaped radar perching on top of struts on the dorsal fuselage.

Modifications to the Boeing 707 for the E-3 Sentry included a rotating radar dome, single-point ground refueling, air refueling, and a bail-out chute. The original design called for two bail-out chutes (one forward, and one aft) but the aft bail-out chute was deleted as a way to cut mounting costs. Engineering, test and evaluation began on the first E-3 Sentry in October 1975. During 19771992, a total of 68 E-3s were built. 

===Future status===
Because the Boeing 707 is no longer in production, the E-3 mission package has been fitted into the Boeing E-767 for the Japan Air Self Defense Forces. The E-10 MC2A was intended to replace USAF E-3salong with the RC-135 and the E-8but the E-10 program was canceled by the Department of Defense. The USAF is now performing a series of incremental improvements, mainly to avionics, to bring the E-3 up to current standards of performance. Boeing is flight testing its Block 40/45 E-3s. This modified E-3 contains upgrades of the mission crew and air battle management sections, as well as significantly upgraded electronic equipment. 

Another program that the Air Force is considering is the "Avionics Modernization Program" (AMP). AMP would equip the E-3s with glass cockpits. The Air Force also wants modified E-3s with jet engines that are more reliable than the original ones, and also with at least 19% higher fuel efficiencies. New turbofan engines would give these E-3s longer ranges, longer time-on-station, and a shorter critical runway length. If the modification is carried out, the E-3s could take off with full fuel loads using runways only 10000 ft long, and also at higher ambient temperatures and lower barometric pressures, such as from bases in mountainous areas. Now that the E-8 Joint STARS are being fitted with the new Pratt & Whitney JT8D-219 turbofans, which are stated as having one-half the cost of the competing engine, the CFM56, the Air Force is again studying the possibility of replacing the E-3's original turbofan engines with more-efficient ones. 

Upgrading NATO's E-3 fleet is complicated by the heterogeneity of the fleet's equipment. Each NATO member's E-3 aircraft are configured differently, and NATO has not finalized upgrade or replacement plans. The airplanes themselves can be flown to 2050 with appropriate maintenance, but as the world-wide fleet of 707 aircraft dwindles, supporting the E-3 becomes more difficult. Batey, Angus, Early warning, Aviation Week and Space Technology, April 21, 2014, p.54 

==Design==

===Overview===

The E-3 Sentry's airframe is a modified Boeing 707-320B Advanced model. USAF and NATO E-3s have an unrefueled range of some 4000 mi or eight hours of flying. The newer E-3 versions bought by France, Saudi Arabia and the UK are equipped with newer CFM56-2 turbofan engines, and these can fly for about 11 hours or about 5000 mi. The Sentry's range and on-station time can be increased through air-to-air refueling and the crews can work in shifts by the use of an on-board crew rest and meals area. 

When deployed, the E-3 monitors an assigned area of the battlefield and provides information for commanders of air operations to gain and maintain control of the battle; whilst as an air defense asset, E-3s can detect, identify and track airborne enemy forces far from the boundaries of the U.S. or NATO countries and can direct fighter-interceptor aircraft to these targets. In support of air-to-ground operations, the E-3 can provide direct information needed for interdiction, reconnaissance, airlift and close-air support for friendly ground forces. 

===Avionics===
The unpressurized dome is 30 feet (9.1 m) in diameter, six feet (1.8 m) thick at the center, and is held 11 feet (3.4 m) above the fuselage by two struts. It is tilted down 6 at the front to reduce its air drag during take-offs, and while flying endurance speed (which is corrected electronically by both the radar and SSR antenna phase shifters). The dome uses both bleed-air and cooling doors to remove the heat generated by electronic and mechanical equipment. The hydraulically rotated antenna system permits the Westinghouse Corporation's AN/APY-1 and AN/APY-2 passive electronically scanned array radar system to provide surveillance from the Earth's surface up into the stratosphere, over land or water.

alt=Close-up view of black disc-shaped radar with wide diagonal white band. The radar rests on two convergent struts above aircraft fuselage.

Other major subsystems in the E-3 Sentry are navigation, communications, and computers. Consoles display computer-processed data in graphic and tabular format on video screens. Console operators perform surveillance, identification, weapons control, battle management and communications functions. The radar and computer subsystems on the E-3 can gather and present broad and detailed battlefield information. This includes position and tracking information on enemy aircraft and ships, and location and status of friendly aircraft and naval vessels. The information can be sent to major command and control centers in rear areas or aboard ships. In times of crisis, data can be forwarded to the National Command Authority in the U.S. via RC-135 or naval aircraft carrier task forces. 

Electrical generators mounted on each of the E-3's four engines provide one megawatt of electrical power that is required by the E-3's radars and other electronics. Its pulse-Doppler radar has a range of more than 250 mi (400 km) for low-flying targets at its operating altitude, and the pulse "beyond the horizon" radar has a range of approximately 400 mi (650 km) for aircraft flying at medium to high altitudes. The radar combined with a secondary surveillance radar to provide a look down to detect, identify and track enemy and friendly low-flying aircraft while eliminating ground clutter returns. 

===Upgrades===
alt=Inside military aircraft. Two personnel wearing green clothes and blue gloves manning communications consoles with wide displays.

Starting in 1987, USAF E-3s were upgraded under the "Block 30/35 Modification Program" to enhance the E-3's capabilities. On 30 October 2001, final airframe to be upgraded under this program was rolled out. Several major enhancements were made, firstly the installation of electronic support measures (ESM) and an electronic surveillance capability, for both active and passive means of detection. The Joint Tactical Information Distribution System (JTIDS) provides rapid and secure communication for transmitting information, including target positions and identification data, to other friendly platforms. Global Positioning System (GPS) capability was also added. Onboard computers were also overhauled to accommodate JTIDS, Link-16, the new ESM systems and to provide for future enhancements. 

The Radar System Improvement Program (RSIP) was a joint US/NATO development program. RSIP enhances the operational capability of the E-3 radars' electronic countermeasures, and dramatically improve the system's reliability, maintainability, and availability. Essentially, this program replaced the older transistor-transistor logic (TTL) and emitter-coupled logic (MECL) electronic components, long-since out of production, with off-the-shelf digital computers that utilised a High-level programming language instead of assembly language. Significant improvement came from replacing the old 8-bit FFT with 24-bit FFTs, and the 12-bit A/D (Sign + 12-bits) with a 15-bit A/D (Sign + 15-bits). These hardware and software modifications improve the E-3 radars' performance, providing enhanced detection with an emphasis towards low radar cross-section (RCS) targets. 

The RAF had also joined the USAF in adding RSIP to upgrade the E-3's radars. The retrofitting of the E-3 squadrons were completed in December 2000. Along with the RSIP upgrade was installation of the Global Positioning System/Inertial Navigation Systems which dramatically improve positioning accuracy. In 2002, Boeing was awarded a contract to add RSIP to the small French AWACS squadron. Installation was completed in 2006. 

==Operational history==
In March 1977 the 552nd Airborne Warning and Control Wing (now the 552d Air Control Wing) at Tinker AFB, Oklahoma received the first E-3 aircraft. The 34th and last USAF Sentry was delivered in June 1984. In March 1996, the USAF activated the 513th Air Control Group (513 ACG), an ACC-gained Air Force Reserve Command (AFRC) AWACS unit under the Reserve Associate Program. Collocated with the 552 ACW at Tinker AFB, the 513 ACG which performs similar duties on active duty E-3 aircraft shared with the 552 ACW. 

alt=Four-engined jet aircraft with disc-shaped radar on fuselage in-flight flanked by two jet fighters.

The USAF have a total of thirty-one E-3s in active service. Twenty-seven are stationed at Tinker AFB and belong to the Air Combat Command (ACC). Four are assigned to the Pacific Air Forces (PACAF) and stationed at Kadena AB, Okinawa and Elmendorf AFB, Alaska. One aircraft (TS-3) was assigned to Boeing for testing and development (retired/scrapped June 2012). 

In 1977 Iran placed an order for ten E-3's, however this order was cancelled following the 1979 revolution.

NATO acquired 18 E-3As and support equipment for a NATO air defense force. Since all aircraft must be registered with a certain country, the decision was made to register the 18 NATO Sentries with Luxembourg, a NATO member that previously did not have any air force. The first NATO E-3 was delivered in January 1982. Wilson 1998, p 75. The eighteen E-3s were operated by Number 1, 2 and 3 Squadrons of NATO's E-3 Component, based at NATO Air Base Geilenkirchen. Presently 17 NATO E-3As are in the inventory, since one E-3 was lost in a crash. 

The United Kingdom and France are not part of the NATO E-3A Component, instead procuring E-3 aircraft through a joint project. The UK and France operate their E-3 aircraft independently of each other and of NATO. The UK operates six aircraft (with a seventh now retired) and France operates four aircraft, all fitted with the newer CFM56-2 engines. The British requirement came about following the cancellation of the British Aerospace Nimrod AEW3 project to replace the Avro Shackleton AEW2 during the 1980s. The UK E-3 order was placed in February 1987, with deliveries starting in 1990. Lake 2009, p. 44. The other operator of the type is Saudi Arabia which operates five aircraft, all fitted with CFM56-2 engines. 

E-3 Sentry aircraft were among the first to deploy during Operation Desert Shield, where they immediately established as an around-the-clock radar screen to defend against Iraqi forces. During Operation Desert Storm, E-3s flew 379 missions and logged 5,052 hours of on-station time. Veronico and Dunn 2004, p. 83. The data collection capability of the E-3 radar and computer subsystems allowed an entire air war to be recorded for the first time in history. In addition to providing senior leadership with time-critical information on the actions of enemy forces, E-3 controllers assisted in 38 of the 41 air-to-air kills recorded during the conflict. NATO and RAF E-3s participated in the international military operation in Libya. 

==Variants==
;EC-137D
:Two prototype AWACS aircraft with JT3D engines, one fitted with a Westinghouse Electric radar and the other with a Hughes Aircraft Company radar. Both converted to E-3A standard with TF33 engines.
;E-3A
:Production aircraft with TF33 engines and AN/APY-1 radar, 24 built for USAF later converted to E-3B standard, total of 34 ordered but the last 9 completed as E-3C. Pither 1998, pp. 4042 One additional aircraft retained by Boeing for testing, 18 built for NATO with TF33 engines and five for Saudi Arabia with CFM56 engines. 
;KE-3A
:These are not AWACS aircraft but CFM56 powered tankers based on the E-3 design. Eight were sold to Saudi Arabia. 
;E-3B
:E-3As with improvements, 24 conversions. 
;E-3C
:Production aircraft with AN/APY-2 radar, additional electronic consoles and system improvements, ten built. 
;JE-3C
:One E-3A aircraft used by Boeing for trials later redesignated E-3C. 
;E-3D
:Production aircraft for the Royal Air Force to E-3C standard with CFM56 engines and British modifications designated Sentry AEW.1, seven built. 
;E-3F
:Production aircraft for the French Air Force to E-3C standard with CFM56 engines and French modifications, four built. 
;E-3G
:USAF Block 40/45 modification. 

==Operators==
alt=Four-engined jet aircraft in-flight with landing gear partially extended. A large disc-shaped radar perches on two convergent struts on the aft fuselage.

;France: The French Air Force purchased four E-3F aircraft similar to the British E-3D aircraft.
:All planes are assigned to the Escadron de Dtection et de Commandement Aroport (ECDA, Air detection and command squadron) and are based at Avord Air Base. Wilson 1998, p 76. 

;NATO
: Based in Geilenkirchen, Germany, 18 E-3 AWACS were purchased  one lost in Greece. All of these aircraft are officially registered as aircraft of Luxembourg, a NATO member with no other air force. Responsible for monitoring airspace for NATO operations around the world.
* Squadron 1
* Squadron 2
* Squadron 3
* Training wing

;Saudi Arabia: The Royal Saudi Air Force purchased five E-3A aircraft and eight KE-3A tanker aircraft in 1983. Wilson 1998, pp. 7576. 
* No. 18 Squadron

;United Kingdom: The Royal Air Force purchased seven E-3Ds by October 1987. Six are operational and one is used for training. The aircraft are designated Sentry AEW.1. 
* No. 8 Squadron
* No. 23 Squadron  (disbanded in 2009)
* No. 54 Squadron

;United States of America: The United States Air Force currently has 32 E-3s.

:Tactical Air Command 1976-92
:Air Combat Command 1992-present
*552d Air Control Wing - Tinker AFB, Oklahoma
::960th Airborne Air Control Squadron 2001-present (NAS Keflavik, Iceland 1979-92)
::963d Airborne Air Control Squadron 1976-present 
::964th Airborne Air Control Squadron 1977-present
::965th Airborne Air Control Squadron 1978-79, 1984-present 
::966th Airborne Air Control Squadron 1976-present
*380th Air Expeditionary Wing - Al Dhafra AB, United Arab Emirates
::960th Expeditionary Airborne Air Control Squadron 2002-present
:Air Force Reserve Command
*513th Air Control Group (Associate) - Tinker AFB, Oklahoma
::970th Airborne Air Control Squadron 1996-present
:Pacific Air Forces
*3d Wing - Elmendorf AFB, Alaska
::962d Airborne Air Control Squadron 1986-present
*18th Wing - Kadena AB, Japan
::961st Airborne Air Control Squadron 1979-present

==Incidents and accidents==
Yukla 27, serial number 77-0354 crash site
alt=Jet aircraft resting on ramp with an nose-down attitude. The nose is black, sustained during a fire. On top of it is a circular radar.

The E-3 has been involved in three hull-loss accidents.

* On 22 September 1995, a U.S. Air Force E-3 Sentry (callsign Yukla 27, serial number 77-0354), crashed shortly after take off from Elmendorf AFB, Alaska. The plane lost power to both port side engines after these engines ingested several Canada Geese during takeoff. The aircraft went down about two miles (3 km) northeast of the runway, killing all 24 crew members on board. 

* On 14 July 1996, a NATO E-3A, LX-N90457, c/n 22852, ex-79-0457, overran the runway and dipped into the sea on takeoff from Preveza AB, Preveza, Greece. The fuselage broke into two, destroying the aircraft, but there were no casualties among the 16 crew members on board. Hurturk 1998, p. 358. It allegedly suffered a birdstrike during take off, but no evidence of a birdstrike was found. 

* On 28 August 2009, a USAF E-3C, 83-0008, was severely damaged while landing at Nellis Air Force Base, after experiencing a nose-wheel failure. The failure resulted in a fire that caused a reported US$100 million in damage. "E-3 damaged while landing at Nellis". US Air Force, 31 August 2009. (copy on Wikisource) The accident was determined to be pilot error. 

==Specifications (USAF/NATO)==

==See also==

==References==
;Notes

;Citations

;Bibliography

* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 

==External links==

* Royal Air Force E-3 Sentry information
* NATO AWACS-Spotter Geilenkirchen website
* Airborne Early Warning Association website

E-03 Sentry



[[Northrop Grumman E-8 Joint STARS]]

The Northrop Grumman E-8 Joint Surveillance Target Attack Radar System (Joint STARS) is a United States Air Force battle management and command and control aircraft. It tracks ground vehicles and some aircraft, collects imagery, and relays tactical pictures to ground and air theater commanders. The aircraft is operated by both active duty Air Force and Air National Guard units and also carries specially trained U.S. Army personnel as additional flight crew. 

==Development==
Joint STARS evolved from separate United States Army and Air Force programs to develop, detect, locate and attack enemy armor at ranges beyond the forward area of troops. In 1982, the programs were merged and the U.S. Air Force became the lead agent. The concept and sensor technology for the E-8 was developed and tested on the Tacit Blue experimental aircraft. The prime contract was awarded to Grumman Aerospace Corporation in September 1985 for two E-8A development systems.

===Upgrades===
In late 2005, Northrop Grumman was awarded a contract for upgrading engines and other systems. "Re-engining the E-8 JSTARS". Defense Industry Daily, Mar. 23, 2010. Retrieved: Pratt & Whitney, in a joint venture with Seven Q Seven (SQS), will produce and deliver JT8D-219 engines for the E-8s. Their greater efficiency will allow the Joint STARS to spend more time on station, take off from a wider range of runways, climb faster, fly higher all with a much reduced cost per flying hour. 

In December 2008, an E-8C test aircraft took its first flight with the new engines. In 2009, the company began engine replacement and additional upgrade efforts. USA Spending $532M to Upgrade its E-8 J-STARS Eyes in the Sky. Defense Industry Daily, Nov. 23, 2005. Retrieved: However, the re-engining funding was temporarily halted in 2009 as the Air Force began to consider other options for performing the JSTARS mission. Boeing 767-400ER E-10A. Spyflight, June, 2008. 

===Future===
The Air Force began an analysis of alternatives (AOA) in March 2010 for its next generation ground moving target indication (GMTI) radar aircraft fleet. The study was completed in March 2012 and recommended buying a new business jet-based ISR aircraft, such as an Air Force version of the Navy P-8 Poseidon, and the RQ-4B Global Hawk Block 40. However, at a Senate Armed Services Committee meeting on 20 March 2012, the Air Force said it can not afford a new ISR platform. The E-8 is considered viable in the near and medium terms. As of October 2012, a test plane has had a Hewlett-Packard central computer installed, with work to begin on the rest in 2013. Before the AOA started, Northrop Grumman received funds for two batches of new engines. One set of engines has flown on a JSTARS test plane, and the other set is in storage. The Air Force does not plan to replace the engines of the 16-plane fleet due to the fiscal environment. The company wants to replace the aircraft's data link, but the Air Force will not, due to cost and because they can still receive data through satellite links. Northrop also wants to upgrade its communications with Force XXI Battle Command Brigade and Below because of the Army's shift towards the system. The Air Force says JSTARS is in a phase of the capability improvements and is expected to remain in operation through 2030. USAF can't afford JSTARS replacement - Flightglobal.com, 20 March 2012. With No Replacement in Sight, Joint STARS Feel Strain - Defensenews.com, 9 October 2012. 

On 23 January 2014, the USAF revealed a plan for the acquisition of a new business jet-class replacement for the E-8C JSTARS. The program is called JSTARS Recap and plans for the aircraft to reach initial operating capability (IOC) by 2022. The airframe must be more efficient, and separate contracts will be awarded for developing the aircraft, airborne sensor, battle management command and control (BMC2) system, and communications subsystem. JSTARS Recap is currently unfunded and the Air Force FY 2014 budget did not include requests. The program may be launched in FY 2015. USAF reveals plan to replace JSTARS with business jets by 2022 - Flightglobal.com, 27 January 2014 

On 8 April 2014, the Air Force held an industry day for companies interested in competing for JSTARS Recap; attendees included Boeing, Bombardier Aerospace, and Gulfstream Aerospace. Air Force procurement documents call for a replacement for the Boeing 707-based E-8C as a "business jet class" airframe that is "significantly smaller and more efficient." Boeing, Bombardier and Gulfstream attend JSTARS industry day - Flightglobal.com, 21 April 2014 Current pre-decisional requirements are for an aircraft with a 10-13 person crew with a 3.96 - radar array. Though smaller than the crew and radar size of the E-8C, it could be challenging to meet those demands in a typical business jet and could require a relatively large platform. The staffing and sensor requirements are comparable to the cancelled Northrop Grumman E-10 MC2A, which was originally planned as the E-8's replacement. The Air Force plans to award a contract at the end of FY 2016, a relatively quick pace partly to avoid budget redistributions to other programs. Replacing the E-8C avoids nearly $11 billion in operations and sustainment costs needed to keep the fleet relevant and airworthy. USAF reveals notional specifications for JSTARS replacement - Flightglobal.com, 16 May 2014 On 22 May 2014 the Senate Armed Services Committee announced that they would allow the Air Force to retire all E-8C Joint STARS aircraft. Senate Committee: $320M from Personnel Cuts Could Keep A-10 Flying - Defense News, 22 May 2014 

Gulfstream confirmed in late May 2014 that they would offer their Gulfstream G650 for the Air Force's JSTARS replacement. Their bidding strategy is to team with a defense contractor to serve as the integrator. Boeing is expected to offer a ground surveillance version of the Boeing 737, which is already in military service with the U.S. Navy as the P-8 Poseidon for maritime surveillance. Gulfstream to pitch G650 for JSTARS replacement - Flightglobal.com, 22 May 2014 

==Design==
The E-8C is an aircraft modified from the Boeing 707-300 series commercial airliner. The E-8 carries specialized radar, communications, operations and control subsystems. The most prominent external feature is the 40 ft (12 m) canoe-shaped radome under the forward fuselage that houses the 24 ft (7.3 m) side-looking APY-7 passive electronically scanned array antenna.

The E-8C can respond quickly and effectively to support worldwide military contingency operations. It is a jam-resistant system capable of operating while experiencing heavy electronic countermeasures. The E-8C can fly a mission profile for 9 hours without refueling. Its range and on-station time can be substantially increased through in-flight refueling.

===Radar and systems===
alt= 

The AN/APY-7 radar can operate in wide area surveillance, ground moving target indicator (GMTI), fixed target indicator (FTI) target classification, and synthetic aperture radar (SAR) modes.

To pick up moving targets, the radar looks at the Doppler frequency shift of the returned signal. It can look from a long range, which the military refers to as a high standoff capability. The antenna can be tilted to either side of the aircraft for a 120-degree field of view covering nearly 50,000 km (19,305 mile) and can simultaneously track 600 targets at more than 250 km (152 miles). The GMTI modes cannot pick up objects that are too small, insufficiently dense, or stationary. Data processing allows the APY-7 to differentiate between armored vehicles (tracked tanks) and trucks, allowing targeting personnel to better select the appropriate ordnance for various targets.

The system's SAR modes can produce images of stationary objects. Objects with many angles (for example, the interior of a pick-up bed) will give a much better radar signature, or specular return. In addition to being able to detect, locate and track large numbers of ground vehicles, the radar has a limited capability to detect helicopters, rotating antennas and low, slow-moving fixed-wing aircraft.
alt= 

The radar and computer subsystems on the E-8C can gather and display broad and detailed battlefield information. Data is collected as events occur. This includes position and tracking information on enemy and friendly ground forces. The information is relayed in near-real time to the US Army's common ground stations via the secure jam-resistant surveillance and control data link (SCDL) and to other ground C4I nodes beyond line-of-sight via ultra high frequency satellite communications.

Other major E-8C prime mission equipment are the communications/datalink (COMM/DLX) and operations and control (O&C)subsystems. Eighteen operator workstations display computer-processed data in graphic and tabular format on video screens. Operators and technicians perform battle management, surveillance, weapons, intelligence, communications and maintenance functions.

Northrop Grumman has tested the installation of a MS-177 camera on an E-8C to provide real time visual target confirmation. Matthews, William Joint STARS Aircraft Tests U-2 Camera in Tandem With Radar Def News, 1 November 2010 

===Battle management ===
In missions from peacekeeping operations to major theater war, the E-8C can provide targeting data and intelligence for attack aviation, naval surface fire, field artillery and friendly maneuver forces. The information helps air and land commanders to control the battlespace. Coskuner, Nevin, Multimission Aircraft Design Study - Operational Scenarios. Air Force Institute of Technology 

The E-8's ground-moving radar can tell approximate number of vehicles, location, speed, and direction of travel. It cannot identify exactly what type of vehicle a target is, tell what equipment it has, or discern whether it is friendly, hostile, or a bystander, so commanders often crosscheck the JSTARS data against other sources. In the Army, JSTARS data is analyzed in and disseminated from a Ground Station Module (GSM).

==Operational history==
alt= 

The two E-8A development aircraft were deployed in 1991 to participate in Operation Desert Storm under the direction of Albert J. Verderosa, even though they were still in development. The joint program accurately tracked mobile Iraqi forces, including tanks and Scud missiles. Crews flew developmental aircraft on 49 combat sorties, accumulating more than 500 combat hours and a 100% mission effectiveness rate.

These Joint STARS developmental aircraft also participated in Operation Joint Endeavor, a NATO peacekeeping mission, in December 1995. While flying in friendly air space, the test-bed E-8A and pre-production E-8C aircraft monitored ground movements to confirm compliance with the Dayton Peace Accords agreements. Crews flew 95 consecutive operational sorties and more than 1,000 flight hours with a 98% mission effectiveness rate.

The 93d Air Control Wing, which activated 29 January 1996, accepted its first aircraft, 11 June 1996, and deployed in support of Operation Joint Endeavor in October. The provisional 93d Air Expeditionary Group monitored treaty compliance while NATO rotated troops through Bosnia and Herzegovina. The first production E-8C and a pre-production E-8C flew 36 operational sorties and more than 470 flight hours with a 100% effectiveness rate. The wing declared initial operational capability 18 December 1997 after receiving the second production aircraft. Operation Allied Force saw Joint STARS in action again from February to June 1999 accumulating more than 1,000 flight hours and a 94.5% mission-effectiveness rate in support of the U.S. lead Kosovo War.

On 1 October 2002, the 93d Air Control Wing (93 ACW) was "blended" with the 116th Bomb Wing in a ceremony at Robins Air Force Base, Georgia. The 116 BW was an Air National Guard wing equipped with the B-1B Lancer bomber at Robins AFB. As a result of a USAF reorganization of the B-1B force, all B-1Bs were assigned to active duty wings, resulting in the 116 BW lacking a current mission. Extensive efforts by the Georgia's governor and congressional delegation led to the resulting "blending", with the newly created wing designated as the 116th Air Control Wing (116 ACW). The 93 ACW was inactivated the same day. The 116 ACW constituted the first fully blended wing of active duty and Air National Guard airmen.

The 116 ACW has been heavily involved in both Operation Enduring Freedom and Operation Iraqi Freedom, earning high marks for operational effectiveness and recently completing 10,000 combat hours. The wing took delivery of the 17th and final E-8C on 23 March 2005. The E-8C Joint STARS routinely supports various taskings of the Combined Force Command Korea during the North Korean winter exercise cycle and for the United Nations enforcing resolutions on Iraq. The twelfth production aircraft, outfitted with an upgraded operations and control subsystem, was delivered to the USAF on 5 November 2001.

On 13 March 2009, a Joint STARS aircraft was damaged beyond economical repair when a test plug was left on a fuel tank vent, subsequently causing the fuel tank to rupture during in-flight refueling. There were no casualties but the aircraft sustained $25 million in damage. http://defensetech.org/2012/01/27/a-basic-mistake-that-trashed-a-jstars/ A Basic Mistake that Trashed a JSTARS http://usaf.aib.law.af.mil/E-8C_AOR_13Mar09.pdf Accident Report 

On 3 September 2009, Loren B. Thompson of the Lexington Institute raised the question of why most of the JSTARS fleet was sitting idle instead of being used to track insurgents in Afghanistan. Thompson states that the JSTARS' radar has an inherent capacity to find what the Army calls 'dismounted' targetsinsurgents walking around or placing roadside bombs. Failure To Use Radar Planes Against Taliban Is Foolish Thompson's neutrality has been questioned by some since Lexington Institute is heavily funded by defense contractors, including Northrop. Analyst's switch stirs tanker talk al.com 

Recent trials of JSTARS in Afghanistan are destined to develop tactics, techniques and procedures in tracking dismounted, moving groups of Taliban. DefenceNews, Issue November 23, 2009. 

On 28 November 2010, amidst escalating danger of war breaking out between North and South Korea, the South Korean government requested the U.S. to implement JSTARS in order to monitor and track North Korean military movements near the DMZ. 

On 17 January 2011, Northrop Grumman's E-8C Joint Surveillance Target Attack Radar System (Joint STARS) test bed aircraft recently completed the second of two deployments to Naval Air Station Point Mugu, California, in support of the U.S. Navy Joint Surface Warfare Joint Capability Technology Demonstration to test its Network-Enabled Weapon architecture.

The Joint STARS aircraft executed three Operational Utility Assessment flights and demonstrated its ability to guide anti-ship weapons against surface combatants at a variety of standoff distances in the NEW architecture. The Joint STARS aircraft served as the network command-and-control node, as well as a node for transmitting in-flight target message updates to an AGM-154 C-1 Joint Standoff Weapon carried by U.S. Navy F/A-18 Hornets using its advanced long range tracking and targeting capability.

From 2001 to January 2011 the Joint STARS fleet has flown over 63,000 hours in 5,200 combat missions in support of Operations Iraqi Freedom, Enduring Freedom and New Dawn. Photo Release - Northrop Grumman's Joint STARS is Key Enabler in Success of U.S. Navy/Air Force Joint Surface Warfare Network-Enabled Weapon Joint Capability Technology Demons... tradershuddle.com 

On 1 October 2011, the "blended" wing construct of the 116th Air Control Wing (116 ACW), combining Air National Guard and Regular Air Force personnel in a single unit was discontinued. On this date, the 461st Air Control Wing (461 ACW) was established at Robins AFB as the Air Force's sole active duty E-8 JSTARS wing while the 116 ACW reverted to a traditional Air National Guard wing within the Georgia Air National Guard. Both units share the same E-8 aircraft and will often fly with mixed crews, but now function as separate units.

==Variants==
alt= 

;E-8A
: Original platform configuration. DoD 4120.15L, Model Designation of Military Aerospace Vehicles 
;TE-8A
: Single aircraft with mission equipment removed, used for flight crew training. 
;YE-8B
: Single aircraft, was to be a U.S. Navy E-6 but transferred to the U.S. Air Force as a development aircraft before it was decided to convert second-hand Boeing 707s (1 from a Boeing CC-137) for the JSTARS role.
;E-8C
: Production Joint Stars platform configuration converted from second-hand Boeing 707s (1 from a CC-137).

==Operators==
;
United States Air Force
:Air Combat Command
*93d Air Control Wing - Robins AFB, Georgia (1996-2002)
*461st Air Control Wing - Robins AFB (2011-present)
::12th Airborne Command and Control Squadron
::16th Airborne Command and Control Squadron
::330th Combat Training Squadron
:Air National Guard
*116th Air Control Wing (Associate) - Robins AFB (Joint ACC/ANG unit 2002-11)
::128th Airborne Command and Control Squadron

==Specifications (E-8C)==

==See also==

==References==
;Citations

;Bibliography
* 

==External links==

* Northrop Grumman Joint STARS System Information
* Northrop Grumman Joint STARS Radar Information
* Boeing Integrated Defense Systems
* Northrop Grumman ISR overview
* Joint STARS Re-engine Program Info

E-08 Joint STARS



[[Eric Cheney]]

Eric Cheney (5 January 1924  30 December 2001) was an independent British motorcycle designer and constructor. He was known as one of the best motorcycle frame designers of his era. 

==Early life==
Cheney attended the Lancasterian School in Winchester before joining the Royal Navy at the age of 18, where he served on wartime Arctic convoys and in motor torpedo boats and gained experience of engineering and working on high performance engines. Cheney also worked on the development of remote controlled submarines for the Royal Navy. 

==Career==
After World War II, Cheney joined the motorcycle dealers Archers of Aldershot as a mechanic. Cheney began racing motocross and became one Britain's best riders, along with his travelling companion Les Archer, who went on to become European champion. He had ten successful years on the Continental circuit but a prolonged illness due to an infection contracted while racing in Algeria ended his riding career. He moved into bike preparation and designs for motorcycle chassis and suspension systems. 

Cheney had no formal training as a motorcycle designer yet was able to create original and high performance motorcycle chassis designs working in a simple workshop that was essentially a domestic garage. His approach has been described as "like a medieval engineer" as in an age of computer aided design and significant resources for research and development teams, he worked entirely by intuition. Eric relied on his long personal experience of international off road competition riding and would prepare his initial designs for a new motorcycle frame in chalk on the wall of his workshop. Experimenting with different lines until he was satisfied, Eric would then form the steel tubing using his chalk drawings as a guide. Only when he had built a working prototype motorcycle would he start work on a final jig for mass production. He was once quoted as saying "I know when it's right and it screams at me when it's wrong." 

In the late 1960s, the British motorcycle industry was unable to support a national team to compete in the International Six Days Trial so, Cheney hand built a limited number of ISDT Cheney-Triumphs using his own design of twin down-tube frame with a specially tuned Triumph 5TA engine. Fitted with tapered conical hubs, special motocross forks and large alloy fuel tanks, a Cheney Triumph was first used in the 1968 British Trophy Team. In 1970 and 1971 three 504cc Cheney Triumphs were used by the British team in the ISDT, in which Cheney won a manufacturer's prize. Replicas were built, but production was short-lived due to a shortage of engines.

Cheney's most noted successes were in the Grand Prix road racing championships, with Phil Read using his chassis in tandem with a Yamaha engine to win the 1971 250cc world championship. His designs were the last British ones to win a Grand Prix. He never worked for any of the major manufacturers but maintained a productive relationship with BSA in its heyday. After the demise of BSA in 1972, Cheney joined with former BSA factory rider John Banks to develop and campaign a highly successful BSA powered motocross bike.

Some of Cheney's motorcycle designs are now famous in their own right, such as the competition BSA Gold Stars of Jerry Scott and Keith Hickman and the John Banks replica which used a BSA B50 engine specially tuned by Cheney. He also built some racing frames for Suzuki Grand Prix motorcycles in 1968 and, it has been suggested that Suzuki engineers incorporated features of Cheney's designs, such as magnesium hubs and lower fork legs into production road going motorcycles. Cheney's company was originally known as Eric Cheney Designs, then changed to Inter-Moto, now known as Cheney Racing.

==Steve McQueen==
American actor Steve McQueen, an experienced off road rider who represented the United States in the ISDT bought a number of Cheney's motorcycles at full price because he considered them better than other makes. 

==References==

==External links==
* Cheney Racing web site



[[Econometrics]]

Econometrics is the application of mathematics, statistical methods, and, more recently, computer science, to economic data and is described as the branch of economics that aims to give empirical content to economic relations. M. Hashem Pesaran (1987). "Econometrics," , v. 2, p. 8 8-22. Reprinted in J. Eatwell et al., eds. (1990). Econometrics: The New Palgrave, p. 1 1-34. Abstract (2008 revision by J. Geweke, J. Horowitz, and H. P. Pesaran). More precisely, it is "the quantitative analysis of actual economic phenomena based on the concurrent development of theory and observation, related by appropriate methods of inference." P. A. Samuelson, T. C. Koopmans, and J. R. N. Stone (1954). "Report of the Evaluative Committee for Econometrica," Econometrica 22(2), p. 142. p. 141-146, as described and cited in Pesaran (1987) above. An introductory economics textbook describes econometrics as allowing economists "to sift through mountains of data to extract simple relationships." Paul A. Samuelson and William D. Nordhaus, 2004. Economics. 18th ed., McGraw-Hill, p. 5. The first known use of the term "econometrics" (in cognate form) was by Polish economist Pawe Ciompa in 1910. http://www.dziejekrakowa.pl/biogramy/index.php?id=516 Ragnar Frisch is credited with coining the term in the sense that it is used today.  H. P. Pesaran (1990), "Econometrics," Econometrics: The New Palgrave, p. 2, citing Ragnar Frisch (1936), "A Note on the Term 'Econometrics'," Econometrica, 4(1), p. 95.  Aris Spanos (2008), "statistics and economics," The New Palgrave Dictionary of Economics, 2nd Edition. Abstract. 

Econometrics is the intersection of economics, mathematics, and statistics. Econometrics adds empirical content to economic theory allowing theories to be tested and used for forecasting and policy evaluation.

==Basic econometric models: linear regression==
The basic tool for econometrics is the linear regression model. In modern econometrics, other statistical tools are frequently used, but linear regression is still the most frequently used starting point for an analysis. Greene (2012), 12. Estimating a linear regression on two variables can be visualized as fitting a line through data points representing paired values of the independent and dependent variables.

Okun's law representing the relationship between GDP growth and the unemployment rate. The fitted line is found using regression analysis.

For example, consider Okun's law, which relates GDP growth to the unemployment rate. This relationship is represented in a linear regression where the change in unemployment rate () is a function of an intercept (), a given value of GDP growth multiplied by a slope coefficient and an error term, :

:

The unknown parameters and can be estimated. Here is estimated to be 1.77 and is estimated to be 0.83. This means that if GDP growth increased by one percentage point, the unemployment rate would be predicted to drop by .94 points (1.77*1+0.83). The model could then be tested for statistical significance as to whether an increase in growth is associated with a decrease in the unemployment, as hypothesized. If the estimate of were not significantly different from 0, the test would fail to find evidence that changes in the growth rate and unemployment rate were related.

==Theory==

Econometric theory uses statistical theory to evaluate and develop econometric methods. Econometricians try to find estimators that have desirable statistical properties including unbiasedness, efficiency, and consistency. An estimator is unbiased if its expected value is the true value of the parameter; It is consistent if it converges to the true value as sample size gets larger, and it is efficient if the estimator has lower standard error than other unbiased estimators for a given sample size. Ordinary least squares (OLS) is often used for estimation since it provides the BLUE or "best linear unbiased estimator" (where "best" means most efficient, unbiased estimator) given the Gauss-Markov assumptions. When these assumptions are violated or other statistical properties are desired, other estimation techniques such as maximum likelihood estimation, generalized method of moments, or generalized least squares are used. Estimators that incorporate prior beliefs are advocated by those who favor Bayesian statistics over traditional, classical or "frequentist" approaches.

===GaussMarkov theorem===
The GaussMarkov theorem shows that the OLS estimator is the best (minimum variance), unbiased estimator assuming the model is linear, the expected value of the error term is zero, errors are homoskedastic and not autocorrelated, and there is no perfect multicollinearity.

====Linearity====
The dependent variable is assumed to be a linear function of the variables specified in the model. The specification must be linear in its parameters. This does not mean that there must be a linear relationship between the independent and dependent variables. The independent variables can take non-linear forms as long as the parameters are linear. The equation qualifies as linear while can be transformed to be linear by replacing (beta)^2 by another parameter, say gamma. An equation with a parameter dependent on an independent variable does not qualify as linear, for example y = alpha + beta(x) * x, where beta(x) is a function of x.

Data transformations are often used to convert an equation into a linear form (see, however, Santos Silva and Tenreyro, 2006). For example, the CobbDouglas functionoften used in economicsis nonlinear:
:

But it can be expressed in linear form by taking the natural logarithm of both sides:

This assumption also covers specification issues: assuming that the proper functional form has been selected and there are no omitted variables.

====Expected error is zero====
:
The expected value of the error term is assumed to be zero. This assumption can be violated if the measurement of the dependent variable is consistently positive or negative. The mis-measurement will bias the estimation of the intercept parameter, but the slope parameters will remain unbiased.

The intercept may also be biased if there is a logarithmic transformation. See the Cobb-Douglas equation above. The multiplicative error term will not have a mean of 0, so this assumption will be violated.

This assumption can also be violated in limited dependent variable models. In such cases, both the intercept and slope parameters may be biased.

====Spherical errors====
:
Error terms are assumed to be spherical otherwise the OLS estimator is inefficient. The OLS estimator remains unbiased, however. Spherical errors occur when errors have both uniform variance (homoscedasticity) and are uncorrelated with each other. The term "spherical errors" will describe the multivariate normal distribution: if in the multivariate normal density, then the equation f(x)=c is the formula for a ball centered at  with radius  in n-dimensional space.

Heteroskedacity occurs when the amount of error is correlated with an independent variable. For example, in a regression on food expenditure and income, the error is correlated with income. Low income people generally spend a similar amount on food, while high income people may spend a very large amount or as little as low income people spend. Heteroskedacity can also be caused by changes in measurement practices. For example, as statistical offices improve their data, measurement error decreases, so the error term declines over time.

This assumption is violated when there is autocorrelation. Autocorrelation can be visualized on a data plot when a given observation is more likely to lie above a fitted line if adjacent observations also lie above the fitted regression line. Autocorrelation is common in time series data where a data series may experience "inertia." If a dependent variable takes a while to fully absorb a shock. Spatial autocorrelation can also occur geographic areas are likely to have similar errors. Autocorrelation may be the result of misspecification such as choosing the wrong functional form. In these cases, correcting the specification is one possible way to deal with autocorrelation.

In the presence of non-spherical errors, the generalized least squares estimator can be shown to be BLUE.

====Exogeneity of independent variables====
:
This assumption is violated if the variables are endogenous. Endogeneity can be the result of simultaneity, where causality flows back and forth between both the dependent and independent variable. Instrumental variable techniques are commonly used to address this problem.

====Full rank====
The sample data matrix must have full rank or OLS cannot be estimated. There must be at least one observation for every parameter being estimated and the data cannot have perfect multicollinearity. Perfect multicollinearity will occur in a "dummy variable trap" when a base dummy variable is not omitted resulting in perfect correlation between the dummy variables and the constant term.

Multicollinearity (as long as it is not "perfect") can be present resulting in a less efficient, but still unbiased estimate.

==Methods==

Applied econometrics uses theoretical econometrics and real-world data for assessing economic theories, developing econometric models, analyzing economic history, and forecasting. Clive Granger (2008). "forecasting,"
The New Palgrave Dictionary of Economics, 2nd Edition. Abstract. 

Econometrics may use standard statistical models to study economic questions, but most often they are with observational data, rather than in controlled experiments. In this, the design of observational studies in econometrics is similar to the design of studies in other observational disciplines, such as astronomy, epidemiology, sociology and political science. Analysis of data from an observational study is guided by the study protocol, although exploratory data analysis may by useful for generating new hypotheses. Herman O. Wold (1969). "Econometrics as Pioneering in Nonexperimental Model Building," Econometrica, 37(3), pp. 369-381. Economics often analyzes systems of equations and inequalities, such as supply and demand hypothesized to be in equilibrium. Consequently, the field of econometrics has developed methods for identification and estimation of simultaneous-equation models. These methods are analogous to methods used in other areas of science, such as the field of system identification in systems analysis and control theory. Such methods may allow researchers to estimate models and investigate their empirical consequences, without directly manipulating the system.

One of the fundamental statistical methods used by econometricians is regression analysis. For an overview of a linear implementation of this framework, see linear regression. Regression methods are important in econometrics because economists typically cannot use controlled experiments. Econometricians often seek illuminating natural experiments in the absence of evidence from controlled experiments. Observational data may be subject to omitted-variable bias and a list of other problems that must be addressed using causal analysis of simultaneous-equation models. Edward E. Leamer (2008). "specification problems in econometrics," The New Palgrave Dictionary of Economics. Abstract. 

===Experimental economics===
In recent decades, econometricians have increasingly turned to use of experiments to evaluate the often-contradictory conclusions of observational studies. Here, controlled and randomized experiments provide statistical inferences that may yield better empirical performance than do purely observational studies.  H. Wold 1954. "Causality and Econometrics," Econometrica, 22(2), p p. 162-177.  Kevin D. Hoover (2008). "causality in economics and econometrics," The New Palgrave Dictionary of Economics, 2nd Edition. Abstract and galley proof. 

===Data===
Data sets to which econometric analyses are applied can be classified as time-series data, cross-sectional data, panel data, and multidimensional panel data. Time-series data sets contain observations over time; for example, inflation over the course of several years. Cross-sectional data sets contain observations at a single point in time; for example, many individuals' incomes in a given year. Panel data sets contain both time-series and cross-sectional observations. Multi-dimensional panel data sets contain observations across time, cross-sectionally, and across some third dimension. For example, the Survey of Professional Forecasters contains forecasts for many forecasters (cross-sectional observations), at many points in time (time series observations), and at multiple forecast horizons (a third dimension).

===Instrumental variables===
In many econometric contexts, the commonly-used ordinary least squares method may not recover the theoretical relation desired or may produce estimates with poor statistical properties, because the assumptions for valid use of the method are violated. One widely used remedy is the method of instrumental variables (IV). For an economic model described by more than one equation, simultaneous-equation methods may be used to remedy similar problems, including two IV variants, Two-Stage Least Squares (2SLS), and Three-Stage Least Squares (3SLS). Peter Kennedy (economist) (2003). A Guide to Econometrics, 5th ed. Description, preview, and TOC, ch. 9, 10, 13, and 18. 

===Computational methods===
Computational concerns are important for evaluating econometric methods and for use in decision making.  Keisuke Hirano (2008). "decision theory in econometrics," The New Palgrave Dictionary of Economics, 2nd Edition. Abstract.  James O. Berger (2008). "statistical decision theory," The New Palgrave Dictionary of Economics, 2nd Edition. Abstract. Such concerns include mathematical well-posedness: the existence, uniqueness, and stability of any solutions to econometric equations. Another concern is the numerical efficiency and accuracy of software. B. D. McCullough and H. D. Vinod (1999). "The Numerical Reliability of Econometric Software," Journal of Economic Literature, 37(2), pp. 633-665. A third concern is also the usability of econometric software.  Vassilis A. Hajivassiliou (2008). "computational methods in econometrics," The New Palgrave Dictionary of Economics, 2nd Edition. Abstract.  Richard E. Quandt (1983). "Computational Problems and Methods," ch. 12, in Handbook of Econometrics, v. 1, pp. 699-764.  Ray C. Fair (1996). "Computational Methods for Macroeconometric Models," Handbook of Computational Economics, v. 1, pp. -169. 

===Structural econometrics===
Structural econometrics extends the ability of researchers to analyze data by using economic models as the lens through which to view the data. The benefit of this approach is that any policy recommendations are not subject to the Lucas critique since counter-factual analyses take an agent's re-optimization into account. Structural econometric analyses begin with an economic model that captures the salient features of the agents under investigation. The researcher then searches for parameters of the model that match the outputs of the model to the data. There are two ways of doing this. The first requires the researcher to completely solve the model and then use maximum likelihood. However, there have been many advances that can bypass the full solution of the model and that estimate models in two stages. Importantly, these methods allow the researcher to consider more complicated models with strategic interactions and multiple equilibria. 

A good example of structural econometrics is in the estimation of first price sealed bid auctions with independent private values. The key difficulty with bidding data from these auctions is that bids only partially reveal information on the underlying valuations, bids shade the underlying valuations. One would like to estimate these valuations in order to understand the magnitude of profits each bidder makes. More importantly, it is necessary to have the valuation distribution in hand to engage in mechanism design. In a first price sealed bid auction the expected payoff of a bidder is given by:
:
where v is the bidder valuation, b is the bid. The optimal bid solves a first order condition:
:
which can be re-arranged to yield the following equation for 
:
Notice that the probability that a bid wins an auction can be estimated from a data set of completed auctions, where all bids are observed. This can be done using simple non-parametric estimators. If all bids are observed, it is then possible to use the above relation and the estimated probability function and its derivative to point wise estimate the underlying valuation. This will then allow the investigator to estimate the valuation distribution.

==Example==
A simple example of a relationship in econometrics from the field of labor economics is:

:

This example assumes that the natural logarithm of a person's wage is a linear function of the number of years of education that person has acquired. The parameter measures the increase in the natural log of the wage attributable to one more year of education. The term is a random variable representing all other factors that may have direct influence on wage. The econometric goal is to estimate the parameters, under specific assumptions about the random variable . For example, if is uncorrelated with years of education, then the equation can be estimated with ordinary least squares.

If the researcher could randomly assign people to different levels of education, the data set thus generated would allow estimation of the effect of changes in years of education on wages. In reality, those experiments cannot be conducted. Instead, the econometrician observes the years of education of and the wages paid to people who differ along many dimensions. Given this kind of data, the estimated coefficient on Years of Education in the equation above reflects both the effect of education on wages and the effect of other variables on wages, if those other variables were correlated with education. For example, people born in certain places may have higher wages and higher levels of education. Unless the econometrician controls for place of birth in the above equation, the effect of birthplace on wages may be falsely attributed to the effect of education on wages.

The most obvious way to control for birthplace is to include a measure of the effect of birthplace in the equation above. Exclusion of birthplace, together with the assumption that is uncorrelated with education produces a misspecified model. Another technique is to include in the equation additional set of measured covariates which are not instrumental variables, yet render identifiable. An overview of econometric methods used to study this problem were provided by Card (1999). 

==Journals==
The main journals which publish work in econometrics are Econometrica, the Journal of Econometrics, the Review of Economics and Statistics, Econometric Theory, the Journal of Applied Econometrics, Econometric Reviews, the Econometrics Journal, Applied Econometrics and International Development, the Journal of Business & Economic Statistics, and the Journal of Economic and Social Measurement.

==Limitations and criticisms==

Like other forms of statistical analysis, badly specified econometric models may show a spurious correlation where two variables are correlated but causally unrelated. In a study of the use of econometrics in major economics journals, McCloskey concluded that economists report p values (following the Fisherian tradition of tests of significance of point null-hypotheses), neglecting concerns of type II errors; economists fail to report estimates of the size of effects (apart from statistical significance) and to discuss their economic importance. Economists also fail to use economic reasoning for model selection, especially for deciding which variables to include in a regression. Stephen T. Ziliak and Deirdre N. McCloskey (2004). "Size Matters: The Standard Error of Regressions in the American Economic Review," Journal of Socio-economics, 33(5), pp. 527-46 (press +). 

In some cases, economic variables cannot be experimentally manipulated as treatments randomly assigned to subjects. In such cases, economists rely on observational studies, often using data sets with many strongly associated covariates, resulting in enormous numbers of models with similar explanatory ability but different covariates and regression estimates. Regarding the plurality of models compatible with observational data-sets, Edward Leamer urged that "professionals ... properly withhold belief until an inference can be shown to be adequately insensitive to the choice of assumptions". 

Economists from the Austrian School argue that aggregate economic models are not well suited to describe economic reality because they waste a large part of specific knowledge. Friedrich Hayek in his The Use of Knowledge in Society argued that "knowledge of the particular circumstances of time and place" is not easily aggregated and is often ignored by professional economists. Robert F. Garnett. What Do Economists Know? New Economics of Knowledge. Routledge, 1999. ISBN 978-0-415-15260-0. p. 170 G. M. P. Swann. Putting Econometrics in Its Place: A New Direction in Applied Economics. Edward Elgar Publishing, 2008. ISBN 978-1-84720-776-0. p. 62-64 

==Notable econometricians==

*Joshua Angrist
*Sir James Ball
*Edwin 'Sedge' Coppock
*James Durbin
*Robert F. Engle
*Ragnar Frisch
*Wayne Fuller
*Clive Granger
*William Greene
*Trygve Haavelmo
*James D. Hamilton
*Lars Peter Hansen
*Jerry Hausman
*Fumio Hayashi
*David Forbes Hendry
*James Heckman
*Guido Imbens
*Lawrence Klein
*CEV Leser
*Peter C. B. Phillips
*Denis Sargan
*Halbert White
*Jeffrey Wooldridge

==See also==

* Augmented DickeyFuller test
* Choice modelling
* Cowles Foundation
* Econometric software
* Financial modeling
* Granger causality
* Important publications in econometrics
* Macroeconomic model
* Methodological individualism
* Predetermined variables
* Single equation methods (econometrics)
* Spatial econometrics
* Unit root

==Notes==

==References==
* Handbook of Econometrics Elsevier. Links to volume chapter-preview links: Zvi Griliches and Michael D. Intriligator, ed. (1983). v. 1; (1984),v. 2; (1986), description, v. 3; (1994), description, v. 4 Robert F. Engle and Daniel L. McFadden, ed. (2001).Description, v. 5 James J. Heckman and Edward E. Leamer, ed. (2007). Description, v. 6A & v. 6B
* Handbook of Statistics, v. 11, Econometrics (1993), Elsevier. Links to first-page chapter previews.
* International Encyclopedia of the Social & Behavioral Sciences (2001), Statistics, "Econometrics and Time Series," links to first-page previews of 21 articles.
* Angrist, Joshua & Pischke, JrnSteffen (2010). "The Credibility Revolution in Empirical Economics: How Better Research Design Is Taking the Con out of Econometrics], 24(2), , pp. 330. Abstract.
* Eatwell, John, et al., eds. (1990). Econometrics: The New Palgrave. Article-preview links (from , 1987).
* 
* Greene, William H. (1999, 4th ed.) Econometric Analysis, Prentice Hall.
* Hayashi, Fumio. (2000) Econometrics, Princeton University Press. ISBN 0-691-01018-8 Description and contents links.
* Hamilton, James D. (1994) Time Series Analysis, Princeton University Press. Description and preview.
* Hughes Hallett, Andrew J. "Econometrics and the Theory of Economic Policy: The Tinbergen-Theil Contributions 40 Years On," Oxford Economic Papers (1989) 41#1 pp 189214
* Kelejian, Harry H., and Wallace E. Oates (1989, 3rd ed.) Introduction to Econometrics.
* 
* Russell Davidson and James G. MacKinnon (2004). Econometric Theory and Methods. New York: Oxford University Press. Description.
* Mills, Terence C., and Kerry Patterson, ed. Palgrave Handbook of Econometrics:
:(2007) v. 1: Econometric Theoryv. 1. Links to description and contents.
:(2009) v. 2, Applied Econometrics. Palgrave Macmillan. ISBN 978-1-4039-1799-7 Links to description and contents.
* Pearl, Judea (2009, 2nd ed.). Causality: Models, Reasoning and Inference, Cambridge University Press, Description, TOC, and preview, ch. 1-10 and ch. 11. 5 economics-journal reviews, including Kevin D. Hoover, Economics Journal.
* Pindyck, Robert S., and Daniel L. Rubinfeld (1998, 4th ed.). Econometric Methods and Economic Forecasts, McGraw-Hill.
*Santos Silva, J.M.C. and Tenreyro, Silvana (2006), The Log of Gravity, The Review of Economics and Statistics, 88(4), pp. 641658. 
* Studenmund, A.H. (2011, 6th ed.). Using Econometrics: A Practical Guide. Contents (chapter-preview) links.
* Wooldridge, Jeffrey (2003). Introductory Econometrics: A Modern Approach. Mason: Thomson South-Western. ISBN 0-324-11364-1 Chapter-preview links in brief and detail.

==Further reading==
* Econometric Theory book on Wikibooks
* Giovanini, Enrico Understanding Economic Statistics, OECD Publishing, 2008, ISBN 978-92-64-03312-2

==External links==

* Journal of Financial Econometrics
* Econometric Society
* The Econometrics Journal
* Econometric Links
* Teaching Econometrics (Index by the Economics Network (UK))
* Applied Econometric Association
* The Society for Financial Econometrics
* The interview with Clive Granger - Nobel winner in 2003, about econometrics

 



[[Ellen van Langen]]

Ellen Gezina Maria van Langen (born February 9, 1966 in Oldenzaal, Overijssel) is a former Dutch middle distance runner. Van Langen has a degree in economics at the University of Amsterdam. Before she started running, she played football.

At the 1992 Summer Olympics in Barcelona, Van Langen won the Olympic title in the 800 m in a time of 1:55.54, a time which remained her personal best. After her major achievement, she was plagued by various injuries. Her best result after 1992 was a 6th place at the 1995 World Championships. She retired from the sport in 1998.

After her gold medal win in 1992 the Amsterdam unemployment benefits office terminated her dole on grounds that she might earn money from her victory in the future. 

==References==

==External links==
* 

 
 



[[Emacs Lisp]]

Emacs Lisp is a dialect of the Lisp programming language used by the GNU Emacs and XEmacs text editors (which this article will refer to collectively as "Emacs"). It is used for implementing most of the editing functionality built into Emacs, the remainder being written in C (as is the Lisp interpreter itself). Emacs Lisp is also referred to as Elisp, although there is also an older, unrelated Lisp dialect with that name.

Users of Emacs commonly write Emacs Lisp code to customize and extend Emacs. Other options include the "Customize" feature that's in GNU Emacs since version 20. This provides a set of preference pages and when the user saves their preferences, Customize writes the necessary Emacs Lisp code to the user's config file.

Emacs Lisp can also function as a scripting language, much like the Unix Bourne shell or Python, by calling Emacs in "batch mode". In this way it may be called from the command line or via an executable file, and its editing functions, such as buffers and movement commands are available just as in the normal mode.

==Compared to other Lisp dialects==
In terms of features, it is closely related to the Maclisp dialect, with some later influence from Common Lisp. "GNU Emacs Lisp is largely inspired by Maclisp, and a little by Common Lisp. If you know Common Lisp, you will notice many similarities. However, many features of Common Lisp have been omitted or simplified in order to reduce the memory requirements of GNU Emacs. Sometimes the simplifications are so drastic that a Common Lisp user might be very confused. We will occasionally point out how GNU Emacs Lisp differs from Common Lisp."  from the "History" section of the "Introduction" to the Emacs Lisp Manual, as of Emacs 21 It supports imperative and functional programming methods. Richard Stallman chose Lisp as the extension language for his rewrite of Emacs (the original used TECO as its extension language) because of its powerful features, including the ability to treat functions as data. Unlike Common Lisp, Scheme existed at the time Stallman was rewriting Gosling Emacs into GNU Emacs, but he chose not to use it because of its comparatively poor performance on workstations, and he wanted to develop a dialect which he thought would be more easily optimized. "So the development of that operating system, the GNU operating system, is what led me to write the GNU Emacs. In doing this, I aimed to make the absolute minimal possible Lisp implementation. The size of the programs was a tremendous concern. There were people in those days, in 1985, who had one-megabyte machines without virtual memory. They wanted to be able to use GNU Emacs. This meant I had to keep the program as small as possible."  from "My Lisp Experiences and the Development of GNU Emacs" 

The Lisp dialect used in Emacs differs substantially from the more modern Common Lisp and Scheme dialects commonly used for applications programming. For example: Emacs Lisp uses dynamic rather than lexical scope by default (see below). That is, a function can reference local variables in the scope it's called from, but not in the scope where it was defined.

==Example==

To understand the logic behind Emacs Lisp, it's important to remember that there is an emphasis on providing data structures and features specific to making a versatile text editor.

Here follows a simple example of an Emacs extension written in Emacs Lisp. In Emacs, the editing area can be split into separate areas called windows, each displaying a different buffer. A buffer is a region of text loaded into Emacs' memory (possibly from a file) which can be saved into a text document.

Users issue the "C-x 2" command to open a new window. This runs the Emacs Lisp function split-window-vertically. Normally, when the new window appears, it displays the same buffer as the previous one. Suppose we wish to make it display the next available buffer. In order to do this, the user writes the following Emacs Lisp code, in either an existing Emacs Lisp source file or an empty Emacs buffer:

(defun my-split-window-func ()
 (interactive)
 (split-window-vertically)
 (set-window-buffer (next-window) (other-buffer)))
 
(global-set-key "\C-x2" 'my-split-window-func )

The first statement, (defun ...), defines a new function, my-split-window-func, which calls split-window-vertically (the old window-splitting function), then tells the new window to display another (new) buffer. The second statement, (global-set-key ...) re-binds the key sequence "C-x 2" to the new function.

This can also be written using the feature called advice, which allows the user to create wrappers around existing functions instead of defining their own. This has the advantage of being simpler to write but the disadvantage of making debugging more complicated. For this reason, advice is not allowed in the source code of GNU Emacs itself, but if a user wishes, the advice feature can be used in their own code to reimplement the above code as follows:

(defadvice split-window-vertically
 (after my-window-splitting-advice first () activate)
 (set-window-buffer (next-window) (other-buffer)))

This instructs split-window-vertically to execute the user-supplied code whenever it is called, before executing the rest of the function.

These changes take effect at code evaluation time, using (for instance) the command "M-x eval-buffer" flag. It is not necessary to recompile or even restart Emacs. If the code is saved into the Emacs "init file" (usually a file named ".emacs" in the user's home directory), then Emacs will load the extension the next time it starts. Otherwise, the changes will be lost when the user exits Emacs.

==Source code==
In file-systems, Emacs Lisp code exists as plain text files, by convention with the filename suffix ".el". The user's init file is an exception, often appearing as ".emacs" despite being evaluated as any Emacs Lisp code. When the files are loaded, an interpreter component of the Emacs program reads and parses the functions and variables, storing them in memory. They are then available to other editing functions, and to user commands. Functions and variables can be freely modified and re-loaded.

In order to save time and memory space, much of the functionality of Emacs loads only when required. Each set of optional features is implemented by a collection of Emacs code called a "library". For example, there is a library for highlighting keywords in program source code, and a library for playing the game of Tetris. Each library is implemented using one or more Emacs Lisp source files.

Emacs developers write certain functions in C. These are "primitives", also known as "built-in functions" or "subrs". Although primitives can be called from Lisp code, they can only be modified by editing the C source files and recompiling. In GNU Emacs, primitives are not available as external libraries; they are part of the Emacs executable. In XEmacs, runtime loading of such primitives is possible, using the operating system's support for dynamic linking. Functions may be written as primitives because they need access to external data and libraries not otherwise available from Emacs Lisp, or because they are called often enough that the comparative speed of C versus Emacs Lisp makes a worthwhile difference.

However, because errors in C code can easily lead to segmentation violations or to more subtle bugs, which crash the editor, and because writing C code that interacts correctly with the Emacs Lisp garbage collector is error-prone, relatively few functions are implemented as primitives.

===Byte code===
"Byte-compilation" can make Emacs Lisp code faster. Emacs contains a compiler which can translate Emacs Lisp source files into a special representation known as bytecode. Emacs Lisp bytecode files have the filename suffix ".elc". Compared to source files, bytecode files load faster, occupy less space on the disk, use less memory when loaded, and run faster.

Bytecode still runs more slowly than primitives, but functions loaded as bytecode can be easily modified and re-loaded. In addition, bytecode files are platform-independent. The standard Emacs Lisp code distributed with Emacs is loaded as bytecode, although the matching source files are usually provided for the user's reference as well. User-supplied extensions are typically not byte-compiled, as they are neither as large nor as computationally intensive.

==Language features==

Notably, the "cl" package implements a fairly large subset of Common Lisp.

Emacs Lisp (unlike some other Lisp implementations) does not do tail-call optimization. Without this, tail recursions can eventually lead to stack overflow.

The apel library aids in writing portable Emacs Lisp code, with the help of the polysylabi platform bridge.

===From dynamic to lexical scoping===
Emacs Lisp uses dynamic scope, offering static (or lexical) as an option starting from version 24. It can be activated by setting the file local variable lexical-binding. 

In dynamic scoping, if a programmer declares a variable within the scope of a function, it is available to subroutines called from within that function. Originally, this was intended as an optimization; lexical scoping was still uncommon and of uncertain performance. "I asked RMS when he was implementing emacs lisp why it was dynamically scoped and his exact reply was that lexical scope was too inefficient." Dynamic scoping was also meant to provide greater flexibility for user customizations. However, dynamic scoping has several disadvantages. Firstly, it can easily lead to bugs in large programs, due to unintended interactions between variables in different functions. Secondly, accessing variables under dynamic scoping is generally slower than under lexical scoping.

Also, the lexical-let macro in the "cl" package does provide effective lexical scope to Emacs Lisp programmers, but while `cl' is widely used, lexical-let is rarely used.

===Discouraged features===
After decades of evolution, some features have become deprecated or replaced, and other features are now supported for Emacs users but their use is not allowed in the Emacs source code itself. defadvice and letf are two examples of the latter, of which Richard Stallman says "it makes for confusion in debugging. (...) Users can use these features -- the only people they might confuse are themselves, (....) However, in our code, we should handle these situations in other ways." Adding new hooks can sometimes provide what's necessary to replace advice. 

==References==

==External links==

* The Emacs page at the GNU Project

Lisp


[[Edward Bulwer-Lytton]]

Edward George Earle Lytton Bulwer-Lytton, 1st Baron Lytton PC (25 May 1803  18 January 1873), was an English novelist, poet, playwright, and politician. He was immensely popular with the reading public and wrote a stream of bestselling novels which earned him a considerable fortune. He coined the phrases "the great unwashed", #Quotations "pursuit of the almighty dollar", "the pen is mightier than the sword", "dweller on the threshold", as well as the infamous opening line "It was a dark and stormy night". first seven words of his novel Paul Clifford (1830) 

==Life==
Bulwer-Lytton was born on 25 May 1803 to General William Earle Bulwer of Heydon Hall and Wood Dalling, Norfolk and Elizabeth Barbara Lytton, daughter of Richard Warburton Lytton of Knebworth, Hertfordshire. He had two elder brothers, William Earle Lytton Bulwer (17991877) and Henry (18011872), later Lord Dalling and Bulwer.

When Edward was four his father died and his mother moved to London. He was a delicate, neurotic child and was discontented at a number of boarding schools. But he was precocious and Mr Wallington at Baling encouraged him to publish, at the age of fifteen, an immature work, Ishmael and Other Poems.

In 1822 he entered Trinity College, Cambridge, where he met John Auldjo, but shortly afterwards moved to Trinity Hall. In 1825 he won the Chancellor's Gold Medal for English verse. In the following year he took his B.A. degree and printed, for private circulation, a small volume of poems, Weeds and Wild Flowers.

He purchased a commission in the army, but sold it without serving.

In August 1827, against his mother's wishes, he married Rosina Doyle Wheeler (18021882), a famous Irish beauty. When they married his mother withdrew his allowance and he was forced to work for a living. World Wide Words  Unputdownable They had two children, Lady Emily Elizabeth Bulwer-Lytton (18281848), and (Edward) Robert Lytton Bulwer-Lytton, 1st Earl of Lytton (18311891) who became Governor-General and Viceroy of British India (18761880).

His writing and political work strained their marriage while his infidelity embittered Rosina; in 1833 they separated acrimoniously and in 1836 the separation became legal. Three years later, Rosina published Cheveley, or the Man of Honour (1839), a near-libellous fiction bitterly satirising her husband's hypocrisy. 

In June 1858, when her husband was standing as parliamentary candidate for Hertfordshire, she indignantly denounced him at the hustings. He retaliated by threatening her publishers, withholding her allowance, and denying access to the children. Finally he had her committed to a mental asylum. But, after a public outcry she was released a few weeks later. This incident was chronicled in her memoir, A Blighted Life (1880). (Online text at wikisource.org) Full text at Internet Archive (archive.org) For years she continued her attacks upon her husbands character. Bulwer-Lytton in later life

The death of Bulwer-Lytton's mother in 1843 greatly saddened him. His own "exhauston of toil and study had been completed by great anxiety and grief", and by "about the January of 1844, I was thoroughly shattered". Full text at Internet Archive (archive.org) In his mother's room, Bulwer-Lytton "had inscribed above the mantelpiece a request that future generations preserve the room as his beloved mother had used it"; it remains essentially unchanged to this day. 

On 20 February 1844, in accordance with his mother's will, he changed his surname from 'Bulwer' to 'Bulwer-Lytton' and assumed the arms of Lytton by royal licence. His widowed mother had done the same in 1811. But, his brothers remained plain 'Bulwer'.

By chance he encountered a copy of "Captain Claridge's work on the 'Water Cure,' as practised by Priessnitz, at Graefenberg", and "making allowances for certain exaggerations therein", pondered the option of travelling to Graefenberg, but preferred to find something closer to home, with access to his own doctors in case of failure: "I who scarcely lived through a day without leech or potion!". 

After reading a pamphlet by Doctor James Wilson, who operated a hydropathic establishment with James Manby Gully at Malvern, he stayed there for "some nine or ten weeks", after which he "continued the system some seven weeks longer under Doctor Weiss, at Petersham", then again at "Doctor Schmidt's magnificent hydropathic establishment at Boppart" (at the former Marienberg Convent at Boppard), after developing a cold and fever upon his return home. 

When King Otto of Greece abdicated in 1862, he was offered the crown of Greece, which he declined. The Alexander Romance in Persia and the East 

In 1866 Bulwer-Lytton was raised to the peerage as Baron Lytton.

The English Rosicrucian society, founded in 1867 by Robert Wentworth Little, claimed Bulwer-Lytton as their 'Grand Patron', but he wrote to the society complaining that he was 'extremely surprised' by their use of the title, as he had 'never sanctioned such'. R. A. Gilbert, 'The Supposed Rosy Crucian Society', in Caron et al. (eds.), sotrisme, Gnoses et Imaginaire Symbolique, Leuven: Peeters, 2001, pp. 399. Nevertheless, a number of esoteric groups have continued to claim Bulwer-Lytton as their own, chiefly because some of his writingssuch as the 1842 book Zanonihave included Rosicrucian and other esoteric notions. According to the Fulham Football Club, he once resided in the original Craven Cottage, today the site of their stadium.

Bulwer-Lytton had long suffered with a disease of the ear and for the last two or three years of his life he lived in Torquay nursing his health. Following an operation to cure deafness, an abscess formed in his ear and burst; he endured intense pain for a week and died at 2am on 18 January 1873 just short of his 70th birthday. The cause of death was not clear but it was thought that the infection had affected his brain and caused a fit. Rosina outlived him by nine years. Against his wishes, Bulwer-Lytton was honoured with a burial in Westminster Abbey. Westminster Abbey monuments and gravestones 

His unfinished history Athens: Its Rise and Fall was published posthumously.

==Career==
Bulwer-Lytton began his career as a follower of Jeremy Bentham. In 1831 he was elected member for St Ives in Cornwall, after which he was returned for Lincoln in 1832, and sat in Parliament for that city for nine years. He spoke in favour of the Reform Bill, and took the leading part in securing the reduction, after vainly essaying the repeal, of the newspaper stamp duties. His influence was perhaps most keenly felt when, on the Whigs dismissal from office in 1834, he issued a pamphlet entitled A Letter to a Late Cabinet Minister on the Crisis. Full text at Internet Archive (archive.org) Lord Melbourne, then Prime Minister, offered him a lordship of the admiralty, which he declined as likely to interfere with his activity as an author.

In 1841, he left Parliament and didn't return to politics until 1852; this time, having differed from the policy of Lord John Russell over the Corn Laws, he stood for Hertfordshire as a Conservative. Lord Lytton held that seat until 1866, when he was raised to the peerage as Baron Lytton of Knebworth in the County of Hertford. In 1858 he entered Lord Derby's government as Secretary of State for the Colonies, thus serving alongside his old friend Disraeli. In the House of Lords he was comparatively inactive. He took a proprietary interest in the development of the Crown Colony of British Columbia and wrote with great passion to the Royal Engineers upon assigning them their duties there. The former HBC Fort Dallas at Camchin, the confluence of the Thompson and Fraser Rivers, was renamed in his honour by Governor Sir James Douglas in 1858 as Lytton, British Columbia. 

==Literary works==
Bulwer-Lytton's literary career began in 1820with the publication of a book of poemsand spanned much of the nineteenth century. He wrote in a variety of genres, including historical fiction, mystery, romance, the occult, and science fiction. He financed his extravagant life with a varied and prolific literary output, sometimes publishing anonymously. 1849 printing of Pelham with Hablot K. Browne (Phiz) frontispiece: Pelham's electioneering visit to the Revd. Combermere St Quintin, who is surprised at dinner with his family.

In 1828 Pelham brought him public acclaim and established his reputation as a wit and dandy. Its intricate plot and humorous, intimate portrayal of pre-Victorian dandyism kept gossips busy trying to associate public figures with characters in the book. Pelham resembled Benjamin Disraeli's recent first novel Vivian Grey (1827). 

Bulwer-Lytton admired Benjamins father, Isaac D'Israeli, himself a noted author. They began corresponding in the late 1820s and met for the first time in March 1830, when Isaac D'Israeli dined at Bulwer-Lyttons house (also present that evening were Charles Pelham Villiers and Alexander Cockburn. The young Villiers was to have a long parliamentary career, while Cockburn became Lord Chief Justice of England in 1859). 

Bulwer-Lytton reached the height of his popularity with the publication of Godolphin (1833). This was followed by The Pilgrims of the Rhine (1834), The Last Days of Pompeii (1834), Rienzi, Last of the Roman Tribunes (1835), and Harold, the Last of the Saxons (1848). The Last Days of Pompeii was inspired by Karl Briullov's painting, The Last Day of Pompeii, which Bulwer-Lytton saw in Milan. 

He also wrote the horror story "The Haunted and the Haunters" or "The House and the Brain" (1859). This story is included in Isaac Asimov's anthology, Tales of the Occult. It also appears in The Wordsworth Book of Horror Stories. Another novel dealing with a supernatural theme was A Strange Story (1862), which was an influence on Bram Stoker's Dracula. The coming race / Edward Bulwer-Lytton ; edited with an introduction by David Seed 

Bulwer-Lyton penned many other works, including The Coming Race or Vril: The Power of the Coming Race (1871), which drew heavily on his interest in the occult and contributed to the birth of the science fiction genre. May Day, 1871: The Day Science Fiction Was Invented Its story of a subterranean race waiting to reclaim the surface of the Earth is an early science fiction theme. The book popularised the Hollow Earth theory and may have inspired Nazi mysticism. His term "vril" lent its name to Bovril meat extract. Adopted by theosophists and occultists since the 1870s, "vril" would develop into a major esoteric topic, and eventually become closely associated with the ideas of an esoteric neo-Nazism after 1945. Julian Strube. Vril. Eine okkulte Urkraft in Theosophie und esoterischem Neonazismus. Mnchen/Paderborn: Wilhelm Fink 2013. 

His play, Money (1840), was first produced at the Theatre Royal, Haymarket, London, on 8 December 1840. The first American production was at the Old Park Theater in New York on 1 February 1841. Subsequent productions include the Prince of Wales's Theatre's in 1872 and it was also the inaugural play at the new California Theatre in San Francisco in 1869. Don B. Wilmeth 2007) The Cambridge Guide to American Theatre 

Among Bulwer-Lytton's lesser-known contributions to literature is that he convinced Charles Dickens to revise the ending of Great Expectations to make it more palatable to the reading public, as in the original version of the novel, Pip and Estella do not get together. John Forster's biography of Dickens 

==Legacy==

===Quotations===
Bulwer-Lytton's most famous quotation, "the pen is mightier than the sword", is from his play Richelieu where it appears in the line beneath the rule of men entirely great, the pen is mightier than the sword

In addition, he gave the world the memorable phrase "pursuit of the almighty dollar" from his novel The Coming Race. Edward Bulwer Lytton Baron Lytton, The Coming Race (London, England: William Blackwood and Sons, 1871), 
page 2. 

He is also credited with "the great unwashed". He used this rather disparaging term in his 1830 novel Paul Clifford: He is certainly a man who bathes and lives cleanly, (two especial charges preferred against him by Messrs. the Great Unwashed). 

The Last Days of Pompeii has been cited as the first source, but inspection of the original text shows this to be wrong. However, the term "the Unwashed" with the same meaning, appears in The Parisians: "He says that Paris has grown so dirty since the 4 September, that it is only fit for the feet of the Unwashed." The Parisians, though, was not published until 1872, while William Makepeace Thackeray's novel Pendennis (1850) uses the phrase ironically, implying it was already established. The Oxford English Dictionary refers to "Messrs. the Great Unwashed" in Lytton's Paul Clifford (1830), as the earliest instance.

Bulwer-Lytton is also credited with the appellation for the Germans "Das Volk der Dichter und Denker", that is, the people of poets and thinkers.

===Theosophy===
Also the writers of theosophy were influenced by his work. Annie Besant and especially Helena Blavatsky incorporated his thoughts and ideas from particularly The Last Days of Pompeii, Vril, the Power of the Coming Race and Zanoni in her own books. The Coming Race - Introduction by David Seed The A to Z of Fantasy Literature 

===Contest===

Bulwer-Lytton's name lives on in the annual Bulwer-Lytton Fiction Contest, in which contestants think-up terrible openings for imaginary novels, inspired by the first line of his novel Paul Clifford: Edward Bulwer Lytton, Paul Clifford (Paris, France: Baudry's European Library, 1838), page 1. It was a dark and stormy night; the rain fell in torrentsexcept at occasional intervals, when it was checked by a violent gust of wind which swept up the streets (for it is in London that our scene lies), rattling along the housetops, and fiercely agitating the scanty flame of the lamps that struggled against the darkness. Entrants in the contest seek to capture the rapid changes in point of view, the florid language, and the atmosphere of the full sentence. The opening was popularized by the Peanuts comic strip, in which Snoopy's sessions on the typewriter usually began with It was a dark and stormy night. The same words also form the first sentence of Madeleine L'Engles Newbery Medal-winning novel A Wrinkle in Time. Similar wording appears in Edgar Allan Poe's 1831 short story, The Bargain Lost, although not at the very beginning. It reads:It was a dark and stormy night. The rain fell in cataracts.

===Operas===
Several of Bulwer-Lytton's novels were made into operas, one of which, Rienzi, der Letzte der Tribunen (1842) by Richard Wagner, eventually became more famous than the novel. Leonora (1846) by William Henry Fry, the first European-styled "grand" opera composed in the United States of America, is based on Bulwer-Lytton's play The Lady of Lyons, as is Frederic Cowen's first opera Pauline (1876). Verdi rival Errico Petrella's most successful opera, Jone (1858), was based upon Bulwer-Lytton's The Last Days of Pompeii, and was performed all over the world until the First World War.

===Magazines===
In 1831 Bulwer-Lytton became the editor of the New Monthly but he resigned the following year. In 1841, he started the Monthly Chronicle, a semi-scientific magazine. During his career he wrote poetry, prose, and stage plays; his last novel was Kenelm Chillingly, which was in course of publication in Blackwoods Magazine at the time of his death in 1873.

===Translations===
Bulwer-Lytton's works of fiction and non-fiction were translated in his day and since then into many languages, including Serbian (by Laza Kostic), German, Russian, Norwegian, Swedish, French, Finnish, and Spanish. In 1879, his Ernest Maltravers was the first complete novel from the West to be translated into Japanese. 

===Place names===
The township of Lytton, Quebec (today part of Montcerf-Lytton) was named after him. 
Lytton, British Columbia, is also named after him.

===Portrayal on television===
Bulwer-Lytton was portrayed by the actor Brett Usher in the 1978 television serial Disraeli.

== Works by Edward Bulwer-Lytton ==

=== Novels ===
* 
* Calderon, the Courtier
* The Pilgrims of the Rhine
* Falkland (1827) 
* Pelham: or The Adventures of a Gentleman (1828) 
* The Disowned (1829)
* Devereux (1829)
* Paul Clifford (1830)
* Eugene Aram (1832)
* Godolphin (1833)
* Falkland (1834)
* The Last Days of Pompeii (1834)
* Rienzi, the last of the Roman tribunes (1835) 
* The Student (1835)
* Ernest Maltravers (1837)
* Alice (1838)
* Night and Morning (1841)
* Zanoni (1842)
* The Last of the Barons (1843)
* Lucretia (1846)
* Harold, the Last of the Saxons (1848) 
* Caxtons|The Caxtons: A Family Picture] (1849) 
* My Novel, or Varieties in English Life (1853) 
* The Haunted and the Haunters or The House and the Brain (novellette, 1859)
* What Will He Do With It? (1858) 
* A Strange Story (1862)
* The Coming Race (1871), republished as Vril: The Power of the Coming Race
* Kenelm Chillingly (1873)
* The Parisiens (1873 unfinished) 

===Verse===
* Ismael (1820) 
* The New Timon (1846), an attack on Tennyson published anonymously 
* King Arthur (18489) 

=== Plays ===
* The Lady of Lyons (1838)
* Richelieu (1839), adapted for the 1935 film Cardinal Richelieu
* Money (1840)
* Not So Bad As We Seem, or Many Sides to a Character (1851)

==See also==
* Hollow earth theory
* Lytton, Queensland

==References==

==Further reading==
* 
* 
* 
* (Distributed in the U.S. and Canada by Palgrave Macmillan)

* Whittington-Egan, Molly (2013) Arthur O'Shaughnessy: Music Maker (publisher Bluecoat Press)

==External links==

 Bulwer-Lytton ebooks
* 
* Works by Edward Bulwer-Lytton at Internet Archive
Other links
* 
* Edward George Earl Bulwer-Lytton (180373)
* John S. Moore's essay on Bulwer-Lytton
* Edward Bulwer-Lytton biography and works

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

|-



[[History of Esperanto]]

The constructed international auxiliary language Esperanto was developed in the 1870s and 80s by L. L. Zamenhof, and first published in 1887. The number of speakers has grown gradually over time, although it has not had much support from governments and international bodies, and has sometimes been outlawed or otherwise suppressed.

==Standardized Yiddish and relexified Esperanto==
Around 1880, while in Moscow and approximately simultaneously with working on Esperanto, Zamenhof made an aborted attempt to standardize Yiddish, based on his native Bialystok (Northeastern) dialect, as a unifying language for the Jews of the Russian Empire. He even used a Latin alphabet, with the letters , h, ,  (the same as in early drafts of Esperanto, later , , , ) and  for schwa. However, he concluded there was no future for such a project, and abandoned it, dedicating himself to Esperanto as a unifying language for all humankind. Christer Kiselman, "Esperanto: Its origins and early history", in Andrzej Pelczar, ed., 2008, Prace Komisji Spraw Europejskich PAU, vol. II, pp. 3956, Krakaw. It has been suggested that Esperanto was not an arbitrary pastiche of major European languages but a Latinate relexification of Yiddish, and thus both genealogically a Slavic language, and a close parallel to Modern Hebrew, a Hebraic relexification of Yiddish. 
 

== Development of the language before publication ==

Zamenhof would later say that he had dreamed of a world language since he was a child. At first he considered a revival of Latin, but after learning it in school he decided it was too complicated to be a common means of international communication. When he learned English, he realised that verb conjugations were unnecessary, and that grammatical systems could be much simpler than he had expected. He still had the problem of memorising a large vocabulary, until he noticed two Russian signs labelled  (vejtsarskaja, a porter's lodge  from  vejtsar, a porter) and  (konditerskaja, a confectioner's shop  from  konditer, a confectioner). He then realised that a judicious use of affixes could greatly decrease the number of root words needed for communication. He chose to take his vocabulary from Romance and Germanic, the languages that were most widely taught in schools around the world and would therefore be recognisable to the largest number of people.

Zamenhof taught an early version of the language to his high-school classmates. Then, for several years, he worked on translations and poetry to refine his creation. In 1895 he wrote, "I worked for six years perfecting and testing the language, even though it had seemed to me in 1878 that it was already completely ready." When he was ready to publish, the Czarist censors would not allow it. Stymied, he spent his time in translating works such as the Bible and Shakespeare. This enforced delay led to continued improvement. In July 1887 he published his Unua Libro (First Book), a basic introduction to the language. This was essentially the language spoken today.

== Esperanto history from publication until the first world congress ==

At first the movement grew most in the Russian empire and eastern Europe, but soon spread to western Europe and beyond: to Argentina in 1889; to Canada in 1901; to Algeria, Chile, Japan, Mexico, and Peru in 1903; to Tunisia in 1904; and to Australia, the United States, Guinea, Indochina, New Zealand, Tonkin, and Uruguay in 1905.

In its first years Esperanto was used mainly in publications by Zamenhof and early adopters like Antoni Grabowski, in extensive correspondence (mostly now lost), in the magazine La Esperantisto, published from 1889 to 1895 and only occasionally in personal encounters.

In 1894 under pressure from Wilhelm Trompeter, the publisher of the magazine La Esperantisto, and some other leading users, Zamenhof reluctantly put forward a radical reform to be voted on by readers. He proposed the reduction of the alphabet to 22 letters (by eliminating the accented letters and most of their sounds), the change of the plural to -i, the use of a positional accusative instead of the ending -n, the removal of the distinction between adjectives and adverbs, the reduction of the number of participles from six to two, and the replacement of the table of correlatives with more Latinate words or phrases. These reforms were overwhelmingly rejected, but some were picked up in subsequent reforms (such as Ido) and criticisms of the language. In the following decade Esperanto spread into western Europe, especially France. By 1905 there were already 27 magazines being published (Auld 1988).

A small international conference was held in 1904, leading to the first world congress in August 1905 in Boulogne-sur-Mer, France. There were 688 Esperanto speakers present from 20 nationalities. At this congress, Zamenhof officially resigned his leadership of the Esperanto movement, as he did not want personal prejudice against himself (or anti-Semitism) to hinder the progress of the language. He proposed a declaration on founding principles of the Esperanto movement, which the attendees of the congress endorsed.

== Esperanto history since the first congress ==

World congresses have been held every year since 1905, except during the two World Wars.

The autonomous territory of Neutral Moresnet, between Belgium and Germany, had a sizable proportion of Esperanto-speakers among its small and multiethnic population. There was a proposal to make Esperanto its official language.

In the early 1920s, there was a proposal for the League of Nations to accept Esperanto as their working language. Ten delegates accepted the proposal with only one voice against, the French delegate, Gabriel Hanotaux. Hanotaux did not like how the French language was losing its position as the international language and saw Esperanto as a threat. However, two years later the League recommended that its member states include Esperanto in their educational curricula. Many people see the 1920s as the heyday of the Esperanto movement.

Starting in the 1930s, Adolf Hitler and Joseph Stalin murdered many Esperanto speakers because of their anti-nationalistic tendencies.

Hitler wrote in Mein Kampf that it was created as a universal language to unite the Jewish diaspora.
The creation of a Jew-free National German Esperanto League was not enough to placate the Nazis.
The teaching of Esperanto was not allowed in German prisoner-of-war camps during World War II. Esperantists sometimes were able to get around the ban by convincing guards that they were teaching Italian, the language of Germany's closest ally.

An Soviet calendar page for 22 October 1935 including the Esperanto oktobro among other translations.
In the early years of the Soviet Union, Esperanto was given a measure of government support, and an officially recognized Soviet Esperanto Association came into being. Donald J. Harlow, The Esperanto Book, chapter 7 However, in 1937, Stalin reversed this policy. He denounced Esperanto as "the language of spies" and had Esperantists exiled or executed. The use of Esperanto was effectively banned until 1956. 
While Esperanto itself was not enough cause for execution, its use was extended among Jews or trade unionists and encouraged contacts with foreigners.

Fascist Italy, on the other hand, made some efforts of promoting tourism in Italy through Esperanto leaflets and appreciated the similarities of Italian and Esperanto.

Salazarist Portugal persecuted the language from 1936 until the Carnation Revolution of 1975.
After the Spanish Civil War, Francoist Spain persecuted the Anarchists and Catalan nationalists among which Esperanto was extended but in the 1950s, the Esperanto movement was tolerated again La utilizacin del esperanto durante la Guerra Civil Espaola, Too del Barrio and Ulrich Lins. Paper for the International Congress on the Spanish Civil War, (Madrid, 2729 November 2006). with Francisco Franco accepting the honorary patronage of the Madrid World Esperanto Congress.

The Cold War, especially in the 1950s and 1960s, put a damper on the Esperanto movement as well, as there were fears on both sides that Esperanto could be used for enemy propaganda. However, the language experienced something of a renaissance in the 1970s and spread to new parts of the world, such as its veritable explosion in popularity in Iran in 1975. By 1991 there were enough African Esperantists to warrant a pan-African congress. The language continues to spread, although it is not officially recognised by any country, and is part of the state educational curriculum of only a few.

== Evolution of the language ==

The Declaration of Boulogne [http://www.webcitation.org/query?url=http://www.geocities.com/Athens/Delphi/9061/bulonja.html&date=2009-10-25+05:59:00 ] of 1905 limited changes to Esperanto. That declaration stated, among other things, that the basis of the language should remain the Fundamento de Esperanto ("Foundation of Esperanto", a group of early works by Zamenhof), which is to be binding forever: nobody has the right to make changes to it. The declaration also permits new concepts to be expressed as the speaker sees fit, but it recommends doing so in accordance with the original style.

Many Esperantists believe this declaration stabilising the language is a major reason why the Esperanto speaker community grew beyond the levels attained by other constructed languages and has developed a flourishing culture. Other constructed languages have been hindered from developing a stable speaking community by continual tinkering. Also, many developers of constructed languages have been possessive of their brain-children and have worked to prevent others from contributing to the language. One such ultimately disastrous case was Schleyer's Volapk. In contrast, Zamenhof declared that "Esperanto belongs to the Esperantists", and moved to the background once the language was published, allowing others to share in the early development of the language.

The grammatical description in the earliest books was somewhat vague, so a consensus on usage (influenced by Zamenhof's answers to some questions) developed over time within boundaries set by the initial outline (Auld 1988). Even before the Declaration of Boulogne, the language was remarkably stable; only one set of lexical changes were made in the first year after publication, namely changing "when", "then", "never", "sometimes", "always" from kian, tian, nenian, ian, ian to kiam, tiam, neniam etc., to avoid confusion with the accusative forms of kia "what sort of", tia "that sort of", etc. Thus Esperanto achieved a stability of structure and grammar similar to that which natural languages enjoy by virtue of their native speakers and established bodies of literature. One could learn Esperanto without having it move from underfoot. Changes could and did occur in the language, but only by acquiring widespread popular support; there was no central authority making arbitrary changes, as happened with Volapk and some other languages.

Modern Esperanto usage may in fact depart from that originally described in the Fundamento, though the differences are largely semantic (involving changed meaning of words) rather than grammatical or phonological. The translation given for "I like this one", in the sample phrases in the main Esperanto article, offers a significant example. According to the Fundamento, Mi atas i tiun would in fact have meant "I esteem this one". The traditional usage is Tiu i plaas al mi (literally, "this one is pleasing to me"), which reflects the phrasing of most European languages (French celui-ci me plat, Spanish ste me gusta, Russian    mnye nravitsya, German Das gefllt mir, Italian mi piace). However, the original i tiu plaas al mi continues to be commonly used.

For later changes to the language, see Modern evolution of Esperanto.

== Dialects, reform projects and derived languages ==

Esperanto has not fragmented into regional dialects through natural language use. This may be because it is the language of daily communication for only a small minority of its speakers. However at least three other factors work against dialects, namely the centripetal force of the Fundamento, the unifying influence of the Plena Vortaro and its successors, which exemplified usage from the works of Zamenhof and leading writers, and the transnational ambitions of the speech community itself. Slang and jargon have developed to some extent, but such features interfere with universal communication  the whole point of Esperanto  and so have generally been avoided.

However, in the early twentieth century numerous reform projects were proposed. Almost all of these "esperantido"s were stillborn, but the very first, Ido ("Offspring"), had significant success for several years. Ido was proposed by the Delegation for the Adoption of an International Auxiliary Language in Paris in October 1907. Its main reforms were in bringing the alphabet, semantics, and some grammatical features into closer alignment with the Romance languages, as well as removal of adjectival agreement and the accusative case except when necessary. At first a number of leading Esperantists put their support behind the Ido project, but the movement stagnated and declined, first with the accidental death of one of its main proponents and later as people proposed further changes, and the number of current speakers is estimated at between 250 and 5000. However, Ido has proven to be a rich source of Esperanto vocabulary.

Some more focused reform projects, affecting only a particular feature of the language, have gained a few adherents. One of these is "riism", which modifies the language to incorporate non-sexist language and gender-neutral pronouns. However, most of these projects are specific to individual nationalities (riism from English speakers, for example), and the only changes that have gained acceptance in the Esperanto community have been the minor and gradual bottom-up reforms discussed in the last section.

Esperanto is credited with influencing or inspiring several later competing language projects, such as Occidental (1922) and Novial (1928). These always lagged far behind Esperanto in their popularity. By contrast, Interlingua (1951) has greatly surpassed Ido in terms of popularity. It shows little or no Esperanto influence, however.
:See also Esperantido

== Timeline of Esperanto ==

* 1859: Lazar Zamenhof, the creator of Esperanto, is born in Biaystok, Russia (now Poland).
* 1873: The Zamenhof family moves to Warsaw.
* 1878: Zamenhof celebrates the completion of his universal language project, Lingwe Uniwersala, with high-school friends.
* 1879: Zamenhof attends medical school in Moscow. His father burns his language project while he's away. Meanwhile Schleyer publishes a sketch of Volapk, the first constructed international auxiliary language to acquire a number of speakers. Many Volapk clubs will later switch to Esperanto.
* 1881: Zamenhof returns to Warsaw to continue medical school, and starts to recreate his project.
* 1887: Zamenhof marries, and with his wife's help publishes Unua Libro, the book introducing modern Esperanto.
* 1888: Leo Tolstoy becomes an early supporter.
* 1894: Zamenhof, reacting to pressure, puts a radical reform to a vote, but it is overwhelmingly rejected.
* 1901: Zamenhof publishes his ideas on a universal religion, based on the philosophy of Hillel the Elder.
* 1905: The first Universala Kongreso (World Congress) is held in Boulogne-sur-Mer, with 688 participants and conducted entirely in Esperanto. The Fundamento de Esperanto is published.
* 1907: Twelve members of the British parliament nominate Zamenhof for the Nobel Peace Prize. The ekbanko Esperantista (Esperantist Checking Bank) is founded in London, using the spesmilo, an auxiliary Esperanto currency based on the gold standard. A committee organised by Louis Couturat in Paris proposes the Ido reform project, which provides significant competition for Esperanto until the First World War.
* 1908: Universala Esperanto-Asocio, the World Esperanto Association, is founded by Hector Hodler, a 19-year-old Swiss Esperantist.
* 1909: The International Association of Esperantist Railway Workers is founded in Barcelona.
* 1910: 42 members of the French parliament nominate Zamenhof for the Nobel Peace Prize.
* 1917: Zamenhof dies during World War I.
* 1910s: Esperanto is taught in state schools in the Republic of China, Samos, and Macedonia. (Today it is part of the curriculum of China, Hungary, and Bulgaria.)
* 1920: The first Esperanto magazine for the blind, Aroro, begins publishing in Czechoslovakia. It's still in print today.
* 1921: The French Academy of the Sciences recommends using Esperanto for international scientific communication.
* 1922: Esperanto is banned from French schools. The French delegate to the League of Nations vetoes the use of Esperanto as its working language, leaving English and French.
* 1924: The League of Nations recommends that member states implement Esperanto as an auxiliary language.
* 1920s: Offices of the Brazilian Ministry of Education use Esperanto for their international correspondence. Lu Xun, the founder of modern Chinese literature, becomes a supporter of Esperanto. Montagu C. Butler is the first to raise Esperanto-speaking children.
* 1933/34: Reorganisation of the international (neutral) Esperanto movement, under the name UEA.
* 1934: Encyclopedia of Esperanto first published in Budapest.
* 1935: Kalocsay and Waringhien publish the influential Plena Gramatiko de Esperanto (Complete Grammar of Esperanto).
* 1936: All Esperanto organisations in Nazi Germany prohibited.
* 1937: Leaders of the Esperanto organisation in the Soviet Union arrested; Esperanto activities made impossible.
* 1938: The World Esperanto Youth Organisation TEJO is founded.
* 19391945: In World War II many countries are occupied by Germany and the Soviet Union, where Esperanto organisations often were prohibited or Esperanto activities were limited in other ways.
* 1948: The railway workers' association is refounded as IFEF, the Internacia Fervojista Esperanto-Federacio (International Railway Workers' Esperanto Federation) to foster the use of Esperanto in the administration of the railroads of the world (so far, of Eurasia).
* 1954: UNESCO establishes consultative relations with the World Esperanto Association.
* 1966: The precursor to Pasporta Servo is launched in Argentina. Pasporta Servo is a global network of Esperanto speakers who host Esperantists traveling through their countries.
* 1967: Istvn Nemere founds the Renkontio de Esperanto-Familioj, the first organisation for Esperanto-speaking families.
* 1975: The Esperanto movement spreads to Iran, with three thousand learning the language in Tehran.
* 1980: The Internacia Junulara Kongreso (International Youth Congress) in Rauma, Finland makes explicit the view of many in the Esperanto movement that Esperanto is a goal in itself.
* 1985: UNESCO encourages UN member states to add Esperanto to their school curricula.
* 1987: 6000 Esperantists attend the 72nd Universala Kongreso in Warsaw to mark Esperanto's centennial.
* 1991: The first pan-African Esperanto Conference is held in Lom, Togo.
* 1992: PEN International accepts an Esperanto section.
* 1999: The Esperanto poet William Auld is nominated for the Nobel Prize in Literature.
* 2001: The Vikipedio project (Esperanto Wikipedia) is launched, resulting in the first general encyclopedia written in a constructed language. It is now one of the most popular websites in Esperanto.
* 2004: The Europe - Democracy - Esperanto party (EDE) contests the European Parliament elections in France, on a platform of making Esperanto the second language of all EU member states, taking 0.15% of the vote.
* 2007: The State of Israel issues a stamp to commemorate 120 years of Esperanto (18872007). An image of Zamenhof is designed in a text describing his life, reproduced from the Wikipedia article on Esperanto. The corner of the tab shows the flag of the Esperanto movement.
* 2009: The Senate of Brazil passed a bill which would make Esperanto an optional part of the curriculum in its state schools. As of 2010 the bill has not yet been passed by the Chamber of Deputies. PLS 27/08 (Senate). PL-6162/2009 (Chamber of Deputies). Entidades manifestam apoio  proposta de incluir ensino de Esperanto na grade de disciplinas da rede pblica (Portuguese) Agncia Senado 

== References ==

* Auld, William. La Fenomeno Esperanto. Rotterdam: UEA, 1988.
* Lins, Ulrich. La Danera Lingvo. Gerlingen, Germany: Bleicher Eldonejo, 1988. (Also available in Polish )
*Privat, Edmond. The Life of Zamenhof. Bailieboro, Ontario: Esperanto Press, 1980.
* Zamenhof, L. L. Letero al N. Borovko. 1895.

== External links ==
* Ronald Creagh & Karine Tourraton. A Short History of Anarchist Participation in the Esperanto Movement. 

 
Esperanto

[[Esperanto grammar]]

:For Esperanto morphology, see also Esperanto vocabulary
Esperanto is a constructed auxiliary language. A highly regular grammar makes Esperanto much easier to learn than most other languages of the world, though particular features may be more or less advantageous or difficult depending on the language background of the learner. Parts of speech are immediately obvious, for example: he suffix -o indicates a noun, -a an adjective, -as a present-tense verb, and so on for other grammatical functions. An extensive system of affixes may be freely combined with roots to generate vocabulary; and the rules of word formation are straightforward, allowing speakers to communicate with a much smaller root vocabulary than in most other languages. It is possible to communicate effectively with a vocabulary built upon 400 to 500 roots, though there are numerous specialized vocabularies for sciences, professions, and other activities. 

Reference grammars of the language include the Plena Analiza Gramatiko (Complete Analytical Grammar) by Klmn Kalocsay and Gaston Waringhien, and the Plena Manlibro de Esperanta Gramatiko (Complete Handbook of Esperanto Grammar) by Bertilo Wennergren.

==Grammatical summary==
Esperanto has an agglutinative morphology, no grammatical gender, and simple verbal and nominal inflections. Verbal suffixes indicate four moods, of which the indicative has three tenses, and are derived for several aspects, but do not agree with the grammatical person or number of their subjects. Nouns and adjectives have two cases, nominative/oblique and accusative/allative, and two numbers, singular and plural; the adjectival form of personal pronouns behaves like a genitive case. Adjectives generally agree with nouns in case and number. In addition to indicating direct objects, the accusative/allative case is used with nouns, adjectives and adverbs to show the destination of a motion, or to replace certain prepositions; the nominative/oblique is used in all other situations. The case system allows for a flexible word order that reflects information flow and other pragmatic concerns, as in Russian, Greek, and Latin. 

These concepts are illustrated below.

==Script and pronunciation==

Esperanto uses the Latin alphabet. The orthography utilizes diacritics, which make digraphs such as English ch and sh unnecessary. (Alternatively, Esperanto may be written with English-like digraphs in h or, unofficially, x, rather than with diacritics, but this is seldom seen outside email.) Overall, the Esperanto alphabet resembles the Czech alphabet, but with circumflexes rather than heks on the letters , ; Western-based ,  in place of Czech d, ; and  for Czech ch. These letters are unique to Esperanto, though it also has a letter  that is shared with the Belarusian acinka alphabet and has been dropped from the Romanian alphabet. 

Zamenhof suggested Italian as a model for Esperanto pronunciation.

==The article==
Esperanto has a single definite article, la, which is invariable. It is similar to English the. 

La is used:

:For identifiable, countable objects:
::Mi trovis botelon kaj deprenis la fermilon.
:::"I found a bottle and took off the lid."
:For representative individuals:
::La gepardo estas la plej rapida de la bestoj.
:::"The cheetah is the fastest of the animals."
::La abeloj havas felon, sed ili ne tagas por karesi.
:::"Bees have fur, but they're no good for petting."
:For adjectives used as nouns, such as ethnic adjectives used as the names of languages:
::la blua
::: "the blue one"
::la angla
::: "English" (i.e. "the English language")
:For possessive pronouns, when definite:
::La mia bluas, la via ruas.
:::"Mine is blue, yours is red".

The article is also used for inalienable possession of body parts and kin terms, where English would use a possessive adjective:
:Ili tranis la manon.
::"They cut their hands." hand each

The article la, like the demonstrative adjective tiu (this, that), nearly always occurs at the beginning of the noun phrase, but this is not required by the grammar, and exceptions occur in poetry.

There is no grammatically required indefinite article: homo means either "human being" or "a human being", depending on the context, and similarly the plural homoj means "human beings" or "some human beings". The words iu and unu (or their plurals iuj and unuj) may be used somewhat like indefinite articles, but they're closer in meaning to "some" and "a certain" than to English "a". This use of unu corresponds to English "a" when the "a" indicates a specific individual. Consider, for example, Sergio Pokrovskij (2007) 'La artikolo', in Lingva Kritiko: Studoj kaj notoj pri la Internacia Lingvo 

:i volas edzinii al svedo.
::"She wants to marry a Swede" (she wants the man she marries to be Swedishno specific person in mind)
:i volas edzinii al unu svedo.
::"She wants to marry a Swede" (the man she wants to marry is Swedisha specific person)

This use of unu plays the role of "there was" in the introduction of fairy tales (There was an old woman who ...) and in introducing new participants (A man came up to me and said ...).

==Parts of speech==
The suffixes -o, -a, -e, and -i indicate that a word is a noun, adjective, adverb, and infinitive verb, respectively. Many new words can be derived simply by changing these suffixes, just as -ly derives adverbs from adjectives in English: From vidi (to see), we get vida (visual), vide (visually), and vido (sight). 

Each root word has an inherent part of speech: nominal, adjectival, verbal, or adverbial. These must be memorized explicitly and affect the use of the part-of-speech suffixes. With an adjectival or verbal root, the nominal suffix -o indicates an abstraction: parolo (an act of speech, one's word) from the verbal root paroli (to speak); belo (beauty) from the adjectival root bela (beautiful); whereas with a noun, the nominal suffix simply indicates the noun. Nominal or verbal roots may likewise be modified with the adjectival suffix -a: rea (royal), from the nominal root reo (a king); parola (spoken). The various verbal endings mean to be when added to an adjectival root: beli (to be beautiful); and with a nominal root they mean to act as the noun, to use the noun, etc., depending on the semantics of the root: rei (to reign). There are relatively few adverbial roots, so most words ending in -e are derived: bele (beautifully). Often with a nominal or verbal root, the English equivalent is a prepositional phrase: parole (by speech, orally); vide (by sight, visually); ree (like a king, royally). 

The meanings of part-of-speech affixes depend on the inherent part of speech of the root they are applied to. For example, brosi (to brush) is based on a nominal root (and therefore listed in modern dictionaries under the entry broso), whereas kombi (to comb) is based on a verbal root (and therefore listed under kombi). Change the suffix to -o, and the similar meanings of brosi and kombi diverge: broso is a brush, the name of an instrument, whereas kombo is a combing, the name of an action. That is, changing verbal kombi (to comb) to a noun simply creates the name for the action; for the name of the tool, the suffix -ilo is used, which derives words for instruments from verbal roots: kombilo (a comb). On the other hand, changing the nominal root broso (a brush) to a verb gives the action associated with that noun, brosi (to brush). For the name of the action, the suffix -ado will change a derived verb back to a noun: brosado (a brushing). Similarly, an abstraction of a nominal root (changing it to an adjective and then back to a noun) requires the suffix -eco, as in infaneco (childhood), but an abstraction of an adjectival or verbal root merely requires the nominal -o: belo (beauty). Nevertheless, redundantly affixed forms such as beleco are acceptable and widely used. 

A limited number of basic adverbs do not end with -e, but with an undefined part-of-speech ending -a. Not all words ending in -a are adverbs, and most of the adverbs that end in -a have other functions, such as hodia "today" or adverb or ankora "yet, still" or adverb. About a dozen other adverbs are bare roots, such as nun "now", tro "too, too much", not counting the adverbs among the correlatives. (See special Esperanto adverbs.)

Other parts of speech occur as bare roots, without special suffixes. These are the prepositions (al "to"), conjunctions (kaj "and"), interjections (ho "oh"), numerals (du "two"), and pronouns (mi "I"The final -i found on pronouns is not a suffix, but part of the root). There are also several grammatical "particles" which don't fit neatly into any category, and which must generally precede the words they modify, such as ne (not), anka (also), nur (only), e (even).

The part-of-speech endings may be iterated. With the -a suffix, this is nearly universal, and the -a is rarely dropped: anstata 'instead of', anstatae 'instead', anstantaa 'substitute', anstatao 'a substitute', anstatai 'to replace', etc. (Rarely anstate, anstata, anstato, anstati.) In the case of prepositions and particles, there is nothing to drop: nea 'negative', nei 'to deny'. However, occasionally other endings double up. For example, vivu! "viva!" (the volitive of vivi 'to live') has a nominal form vivuo (a cry of 'viva!') and a doubly verbal form vivui (to cry 'viva!').

==Nouns and adjectives==
A suffix -j following the noun or adjective suffixes -o or -a makes a word plural. Without this suffix, a countable noun is understood to be singular. Direct objects take an accusative case suffix -n, which goes after any plural suffix. (The resulting sequence -ojn rhymes with English coin, and -ajn rhymes with fine.)

Adjectives agree with nouns. That is, they are plural if the nouns they modify are plural, and accusative if the nouns they modify are accusative. Compare bona tago; bonaj tagoj; bonan tagon; bonajn tagojn (good day/days). This requirement allows for free word orders of adjective-noun and noun-adjective, even when two noun phrases are adjacent in subjectobjectverb or verbsubjectobject clauses:

:la knabino felian knabon kisis (the girl kissed a happy boy)
:la knabino felia knabon kisis (the happy girl kissed a boy).

Agreement clarifies the syntax in other ways as well. Adjectives take the plural suffix when they modify more than one noun, even if those nouns are all singular:
:ruaj domo kaj ato (a red house and red car)
:rua domo kaj ato (a red house and a car).

A predicative adjective does not take the accusative case suffix even when the noun it modifies does:
:mi farbis la pordon ruan (I painted the red door)
:mi farbis la pordon rua (I painted the door red).

==Pronouns==
There are three types of pronouns in Esperanto: personal (vi "you"), demonstrative (tio "that", iu "someone"), and relative/interrogative (kio "what").

===Personal pronouns===
The Esperanto personal pronoun system is similar to that of English, but with the addition of a reflexive pronoun. 

 Personal pronouns singular plural 
 first person mi (I) ni (we) 
 second person vi (you) 
 thirdperson masculine li (he) ili (they) 
 feminine i (she) 
 epicene i (it, s/he) 
 indefinite oni (one)* 
 reflexive si (self) 

:*In colloquial English, generally translated "they" or "you".

Personal pronouns take the accusative suffix -n as nouns do: min (me), lin (him), in (her). Possessive adjectives are formed with the adjectival suffix -a: mia (my), ia (its), nia (our). These agree with their noun like any other adjective: ni salutis liajn amikojn (we greeted his friends). Esperanto does not have separate forms for the possessive pronouns; this sense is generally (though not always) indicated with the definite article: la mia (mine).

The reflexive pronoun is used, in non-subject phrases only, to refer to back to the subject, usually only in the third and indefinite persons:
:li lavis sin "he washed" (himself)
:ili lavis sin "they washed" (themselves or each other)
:li lavis lin "he washed him" (someone else)
:li manis sian panon "he ate his bread" (his own bread)
:li manis lian panon "he ate his bread" (someone else's bread).

The indefinite pronoun is used when making general statements, and is often used where English would have the subject it with a passive verb, 
:oni diras, ke ... "they say that ..." or "it's said that ..."
With impersonal verbs such as verbs of weather, however, no pronoun is used:
:pluvas "it's raining".

Zamenhof created an informal second-person singular pronoun ci (thou), and capitalized the formal singular pronoun Vi, following usage in most European languages, but these forms are rarely seen today. 

i is used principally with animals and objects. Zamenhof also prescribed it to be the epicene (gender-neutral) third-person singular pronoun, for use when the gender of an individual is unknown, or to refer to an epicene noun such as persono (person). However, this use is generally only found with children:
:La infano ploras, ar i volas mani "the child is crying, because it wants to eat".
When speaking of adults or people in general, it is much more common for the demonstrative adjective and pronoun tiu (that one) to be used in such situations. However, this remedy is not always available. For example, the sentence,
:Iu us diris, ke tiu malsatas "Someone just said that tiu is hungry",
the pronoun tiu is understood to refer only to someone other than the person speaking, and so cannot be used in place of li or i.

===Other pronouns===
The demonstrative and relative pronouns form part of the correlative system, and are described in that article. The pronouns are the forms ending in -o (simple pronouns) and -u (adjectival pronouns). Their accusative case is formed in -n, but the genitive case ends in -es, which is the same for singular and plural and does not take accusative marking. Compare the nominative phases lia domo (his house) and ties domo (that one's house, those ones' house) with the plural liaj domoj (his houses) and ties domoj (that one's houses, those ones' houses), and with the accusative genitive lian domon and ties domon. An unofficial but widely recognized accusative preposition na has become popular with some Esperantists on the internet and may be used in such situations, especially when there is no following noun (ties, accusative na ties). The purposefully ambiguous preposition je may be so used as well (accusative je ties), though normally the -es words are simply not inflected for case. 

== Prepositions ==
Although Esperanto word order is fairly free, prepositions must come at the beginning of a noun phrase. Whereas in languages such as German, prepositions may require a noun to be in various cases (accusative, dative, etc.), in Esperanto all prepositions govern the nominative: por Johano (for John). The only exception is when there are two or more prepositions and one is replaced by the accusative. 

Prepositions should be used with a definite meaning. When no one preposition is clearly correct, the indefinite preposition je should be used:
:ili iros je la tria de majo (they'll go on the third of May: the "on" isn't literally true).

Alternatively, the accusative may be used without a preposition:
:ili iros la trian de majo.

Note that although la trian (the third) is in the accusative, de majo (of May) is still a prepositional phrase, and so the noun majo remains in the nominative case.

A frequent use of the accusative is in place of al (to) to indicate the direction or goal of motion (allative construction). It is especially common when there would otherwise be a double preposition:
:la kato asis la muson en la domo (the cat chased the mouse in of the house)
:la kato asis la muson en la domon (the cat chased the mouse into the house).

The accusative/allative may stand in for other prepositions as well, especially when they have vague meanings that don't add much to the clause. Adverbs, with or without the case suffix, are frequently used in place of prepositional phrases:
:li iris al sia hejmo (he went to his home)
:li iris hejmen (he went home)

Both por and pro often translate English 'for'. However, they distinguish for a goal (looking forward in time, or causing: por) and for a cause (looking back in time, or being caused by: pro): To vote por your friend means to cast a ballot with their name on it, whereas to vote pro your friend would mean to vote in their place or as they asked you to. 

The preposition most distinct from English usage is perhaps de, which corresponds to English of, from, off, and (done) by:
:libro de Johano (John's book)
:li venis de la butiko (he came from the shop)
:mordita de hundo (bitten by a dog)

However, English of corresponds to several Esperanto prepositions as well: de, el (out of, made of), and da (quantity of, unity of form and contents): 
:tablo el ligno (a table of wood)
:glaso da vino (a glass of wine)
:listo da kondioj de la kandidatoj (a list of conditions from the candidates)
The last of these, da, is semantically Slavic and is difficult for Western Europeans, to the extent that even many Esperanto dictionaries and grammars define it incorrectly. Sergio Pokrovskij, 2007. "La artikolo", in Lingva Kritiko: Studoj kaj notoj pri la Internacia Lingvo.See the entry for da at Wiktionary. 

Occasionally a new preposition is coined. Because a bare root may indicate a preposition or interjection, removing the grammatical suffix from another part of speech can be used to derive a preposition or interjection. For example, from fari (to do, to make) we get the preposition far (done by).

== Verbs ==
All verbal inflection is regular. Three tenses together form what is called the indicative mood. The other moods are the infinitive, conditional, and jussive. No aspectual distinctions are required by the grammar, but derivational expressions of Aktionsart are common. 

Verbs do not change form according to their subject. I am, we are, and he is are simply mi estas, ni estas, and li estas, respectively. Impersonal subjects are not used: pluvas (it is raining); estas muso en la domo (there's a mouse in the house).

Most verbs are inherently transitive or intransitive. As with the inherent part of speech of a root, this is not apparent from the shape of the verb and must simply be memorized. Transitivity is changed with the suffixes -igi (the transitivizer/causative) and -ii (the intransitivizer/middle voice): 
:akvo bolas je cent gradoj (water boils at 100 degrees)
:ni boligas la akvon (we boil the water).

===The verbal paradigm===
The tenses have characteristic vowels. A indicates the present tense, i the past, and o the future. 

 Indicative Active participle Passive participle Infinitive Jussive Conditional 
 Past -is -inta -ita -i -u -us 
 Present -as -anta -ata 
 Future -os -onta -ota 

The verbal forms may be illustrated with the root esper- (hope):
:esperi (to hope)
:esperas (hopes, is hoping)
:esperis (hoped, was hoping)
:esperos (shall hope, will hope)
:esperu (hope!; a command)
:esperus (were to hope, would hope)

A verb can be made emphatic with the particle ja (indeed): mi ja esperas (I do hope), mi ja esperis (I did hope).

===Tense===
As in English, Esperanto present tense may be used for generic statements such as "birds fly" (la birdoj flugas). 

The Esperanto future is a true tense, used whenever future time is meant. For example, in English "when I see you" the verb is in the present tense despite the time being in the future; in Esperanto, future tense is required: kiam mi vidos vin.

Esperanto tense is relative. This differs from English absolute tense, where the tense is past, present, or future of the moment of speaking: In Esperanto, the tense of a subordinate verb is instead anterior or posterior to the time of the main verb. For example, "John said that he would go" is in Esperanto Johano diris, ke li iros (lit., "John said that he will go"); this does not mean that he will go at some point in the future from now (as "John said that he will go" means in English), but that at the time he said this his going was still in the future.

===Mood===
The conditional mood is used for such expressions as se mi povus, mi irus (if I could, I would go) and se mi estus vi, mi irus (if I were you, I'd go). 

The jussive mood, called the volitive in Esperanto, is used for wishing and requesting, and serves as the imperative. It covers some of the uses of the subjunctive in European languages:
:Iru! (Go!)
:Mi petis, ke li venu. (I asked him to come.)
:Li parolu. (Let him speak.)
:Ni iru. (Let's go.)
:Benu i tiun domaon. (Bless this mess.)
:Mia filino belu! (May my daughter be beautiful!)

===Aspect===
Verbal aspect is not grammatically required in Esperanto. However, aspectual distinctions may be expressed via participles (see below), and the Slavic aspectual system survives in two aktionsart affixes, perfective (often inceptive) ek- and imperfective -adi. Compare,
:Tiu i interesis min (This interested me)
and,
:Tiu i ekinteresis min kaj montris al mi, ke ... (This caught my interest and showed me that ...).
Various prepositions may also be used as aktionsart prefixes, such as el (out of), used to indicate that an action is performed to completion or at least to a considerable degree, also as in Slavic languages. In,
:Germanan kaj francan lingvojn mi ellernis en infaneco (I learned French and German in childhood),
the verb el-lern-is is past tense (-is), and performed to significant completion (el-).

===The copula===
The verb esti (to be) is both the copula and the existential ("there is") verb. As a copula linking two noun phrases, it does not cause either to take the accusative case. Therefore, unlike the situation with other verbs, word order with esti can be semantically important: compare hundoj estas personoj (dogs are people) and personoj estas hundoj (people are dogs). 

It is becoming increasingly common to replace esti-plus-adjective with a verb: la ielo estas blua or la ielo bluas (the sky is blue). This is a stylistic rather than grammatical change in the language, as the more economical verbal forms were always found in poetry. However, the reverse is not true, as this does not change the inherent part of speech: Morti (to die) does not have the same meaning as esti morta (to be dead). 

==Participles==
Participles are verbal derivatives. In Esperanto, there are half a dozen forms, which retain the vowel of the related verbal tense. In addition to carrying aspect, participles are the principal means of conveying voice, with two paradigms, active (performing an action) and passive (receiving an action).

===Adjectival participles===
The basic principle of the participles may be illustrated with the verb fali (to fall). Picture Wile E. Coyote running off a cliff. Before gravity kicks in (after all, this is a cartoon), he is falonta (about to fall). As he drops, he is falanta (falling). After he impacts the desert floor, he is falinta (fallen). 

Active and passive pairs can be illustrated with the transitive verb haki (to chop). Picture a woodsman approaching a tree with an axe, intending to chop it down. He is hakonta (about to chop) and the tree is hakota (about to be chopped). While swinging the axe, he is hakanta (chopping) and the tree hakata (being chopped). After the tree has fallen, he is hakinta (having chopped) and the tree hakita (chopped).

Adjectival participles agree with nouns in number and case, just as other adjectives do:
:ili paris la arbojn hakotajn (they spared the trees that were to be chopped down).

===Compound tense===
Compound tenses are formed with the adjectival participles plus esti (to be) as the auxiliary verb. The participle reflects aspect and voice, while the verb carries tense: 

*Present progressive: mi estas kaptanta (I am catching ), mi estas kaptata (I am being caught)
*Present perfect: mi estas kaptinta (I have caught ), mi estas kaptita (I have been caught, I am caught)
*Present prospective: mi estas kaptonta (I am going to catch / about to catch), mi estas kaptota (I am going to be caught / about to be caught)

These are not used as often as their English equivalents. For "I am going to the store", you would normally use the simple present mi iras in Esperanto.

The tense and mood of esti can be changed in these compound tenses:
:mi estis kaptinta (I had caught)
:mi estus kaptonta (I would be about to catch)
:mi estos kaptanta (I will be catching).

Although such periphrastic constructions are familiar to speakers of most European languages, the option of contracting + adjective into a verb is often seen for adjectival participles: 

:mi estas kaptinta or mi kaptintas (I have caught)
:mi estis kaptinta or mi kaptintis (I had caught)

The most common of these synthetic forms are:

+Synthetic compound tenses (active voice) Simple verb Progressive Perfect Prospective 
 Present tense mi kaptas (I catch) mi kaptantas (I am catching) mi kaptintas (I have caught) mi kaptontas (I am about to catch) 
 Past tense mi kaptis (I caught) mi kaptantis (I was catching) mi kaptintis (I had caught) mi kaptontis (I was about to catch) 
 Future tense mi kaptos (I will catch) mi kaptantos (I will be catching) mi kaptintos (I will have caught) mi kaptontos (I will be about to catch) 
 Conditional mood mi kaptus (I would catch) mi kaptantus (I would be catching) mi kaptintus (I would have caught) mi kaptontus (I would be about to catch) 

Infinitive and jussive forms are also found. There is a parallel passive paradigm.

===Nominal participles===
Participles may be turned into adverbs or nouns by replacing the adjectival suffix -a with -e or -o. This means that, in Esperanto, some nouns may be inflected for tense. 

A nominal participle indicates one who participates in the action specified by the verbal root. For example, esperinto is a "hoper" (past tense), or one who had been hoping.

===Adverbial participles===
Adverbial participles are used with subjectless clauses:
:Kaptinte la pilkon, li ekkuris golen (Having caught the ball, he ran for the goal).

===Conditional and tenseless participles (unofficial)===
Occasionally, the participle paradigm will be extended to include conditional participles, with the vowel u (-unt-, -ut-). Timothy Reagan (2009) Language Matters: Reflections on Educational Linguistics, p. 167 If, for example, in our tree-chopping example, the woodsman found that the tree had been spiked and so couldn't be cut down after all, he would be hakunta and the tree hakuta (he, the one "who would chop", and the tree, the one that "would be chopped"). 

This can also be illustrated with the verb prezidi (to preside). Just after the recount of the 2000 United States presidential election:
*then-president Bill Clinton was still prezidanto (current president) of the United States,
*president-elect George W. Bush was declared prezidonto (president-to-be),
*the previous president George H. W. Bush was a prezidinto (former president), and
*the contending candidate Al Gore was prezidunto (would-be president  that is, if the recount had gone differently). This example is somewhat artificial, because the customary word for 'president' (of a country) is the tense-neutral word prezidento. Prezidanto is however typically used for the presidents of organizations other than sovereign countries, and prezidinto is used for former presidents in such contexts. 

The conditional forms are infrequent, but their regular derivation ensures that they can be readily understood, even if rarely needed. No European language has conditional participles; in English, words like prezidunto must be expressed periphrastically, as in the title of Kipling's The Man Who Would Be King.

The tense-neutral word prezidento is officially a separate root, not a derivative of the verb prezidi. The element -ento frequently occurs in words for occupations where one would not wish to specify tense, such as prezidento or studento (student). Because there is often a verb derived from the same Latin root, in these cases prezidi (to preside) and studi (to study), this -ento has occasionally been proposed as a tense-neutral active participle by analogy with the temporal participles -anto, -into, -onto. However, there is no analogous passive *-eto, because that already exists as the diminutive suffix. The nearest equivalent is the middle voice suffix -ii, which is commonly used as a generic passive. Unlike the active case, where a few new nouns like prezidento were sufficient to avoid making the language overly specific, a need for a neutral passive participle was felt early on. For example, there was heated debate for several decades as to whether "I was born in 19xx" should be mi estis naskita (I had been born) or mi estis naskata (literally 'I was being born'), with the French and Germans generally holding opposite opinions deriving from usage in their native languages. Today, people sidestep the issue with the temporally neutral mi naskiis (I was born).

== Negatives ==
A statement is made negative by using ne or one of the negative (neni-) correlatives. Ordinarily, only one negative word is allowed per clause:

: Mi ne faris ion ajn. I didn't do anything.

Two negatives within a clause cancel each other out, with the result being a positive sentence.

: Mi ne faris nenion. Mi ja faris ion. It is not the case that I did nothing. I did do something.

The word ne comes before the word it negates, with the default position being before the verb:
: Mi ne skribis tion (I didn't write that)
: Ne mi skribis tion (It wasn't me who wrote that)
: Mi skribis ne tion (It wasn't that that I wrote)

The latter will frequently be reordered as ne tion mi skribis depending on the flow of information.

== Questions ==

"Wh" questions are asked with one of the interrogative/relative (ki-) correlatives. They are commonly placed at the beginning of the sentence, but different word orders are allowed for stress:

:Li scias, kion vi faris (He knows what you did.)
:Kion vi faris? (What did you do?)
:Vi faris kion? (You did what?)

Yes/no questions are marked with the conjunction u (whether): 

:Mi ne scias, u li venos (I don't know whether he'll come)
:u li venos? (Will he come?)

Such questions can be answered jes (yes) or ne (no) in the European fashion of aligning with the polarity of the answer, or uste (correct) or maluste (incorrect) in the Japanese fashion of aligning with the polarity of the question: 

:u vi ne iris? (Did you not go?)
:&mdash; Ne, mi ne iris (No, I didn't go); &mdash; Jes, mi iris (Yes, I went)
:&mdash; uste, mi ne iris (Correct, I didn't go); &mdash; Maluste, mi iris (Incorrect, I did go)

Note that Esperanto questions may have the same word order as statements.

==Conjunctions==
Basic Esperanto conjunctions are kaj (both/and), a (either/or), nek (neither/nor), se (if), u (whether/or), sed (but), anstata (instead of), krom (besides, in addition to), kiel (like, as), ke (that). Like prepositions, they precede the phrase or clause they modify: 

:Mi vidis kaj lin kaj lian amikon (I saw both him and his friend)
:Estis nek hele nek agrable (it was neither clear nor pleasant)
:u pro kaprico, u pro natura lingvo-evoluo (whether by whim, or by natural language development)
:Li volus, ke ni iru (he would like us to go)

However, unlike prepositions, they allow the accusative case, as in the following example from Don Harlow: 

:Li traktis min kiel princon (He treated me like a prince: that is, as he would treat a prince)
:Li traktis min kiel princo (He treated me like a prince: that is, as a prince would treat me)

==Interjections==
Interjections may be derived from bare affixes or roots: ek! (get going!), from the perfective prefix; um (um, er), from the indefinite/undefined suffix; fek! (shit!), from feki (to defecate).

== Word formation ==
:Main article: Esperanto word formation
Esperanto derivational morphology uses a large number of lexical and grammatical affixes (prefixes and suffixes). These, along with compounding, decrease the memory load of the language, as they allow for the expansion of a relatively small number of basic roots into a large vocabulary. For example, the Esperanto root vid- (see) regularly corresponds to several dozen English words: see (saw, seen), sight, blind, vision, visual, visible, nonvisual, invisible, unsightly, glance, view, vista, panorama, observant etc., though there are also separate Esperanto roots for a couple of these concepts.

==Numbers==
===Numerals===
The cardinal numerals are:

:nul (zero)
:unu (one)
:du (two)
:tri (three)
:kvar (four)
:kvin (five)
:ses (six)
:sep (seven)
:ok (eight)
:na (nine)
:dek (ten)
:cent (one hundred)
:mil (one thousand)

These are grammatically numerals, not nouns, and as such do not take the accusative case suffix. However, unu (and only unu) is sometimes used adjectivally or demonstratively, meaning "a certain", and in such cases it may take the plural affix -j, just as the demonstrative pronoun tiu does:
:unuj homoj
:"certain people";
:ili kuris unuj post la aliaj
:"they ran some after others".
In such use unu is irregular in that it doesn't take the accusative affix -n in the singular, but does in the plural: 
:ian unu ideon
:"some particular idea",
but 
:unuj objektoj venis en unujn manojn, aliaj en aliajn manojn
:"some objects come into certain hands, others into other hands".
Additionally, when counting off, the final u of unu may be dropped, as if it were a part-of-speech suffix: 
:Un'! Du! Tri! Kvar!

===Higher numbers===
At numbers beyond the thousands, the international roots miliono (million) and miliardo (milliard) are used. Beyond this there are two systems: A billion in most English-speaking countries is different from a billion in most other countries (109 vs. 1012 respectively; that is, a thousand million vs. a million million). The international root biliono is likewise ambiguous in Esperanto, and is deprecated for this reason. An unambiguous system based on adding the Esperanto suffix -iliono to numerals is generally used instead, sometimes supplemented by a second suffix -iliardo: biliono at ReVo 

:106: miliono
:109: miliardo (or mil milionoj)
:1012: duiliono
:1015: duiliardo (or mil duilionoj)
:1018: triiliono
:1021: triiliardo (or mil triilionoj)
:etc.

Note that these forms are grammatically nouns, not numerals, and therefore cannot modify a noun directly: mil homojn (a thousand people ) but milionon da homoj (a million people ). An unambiguous international system is also provided by the metric prefixes, and the nonce numerals meg (miliono) and gig (miliardo) are occasionally derived from them: meg homojn (a million people). For example, Don Harlow commenting on them here. 

===Compound numerals and derivatives===
Numerals are written together as one word when their values are multiplied, and separately when their values are added (dudek 20, dek du 12, dudek du 22). Ordinals are formed with the adjectival suffix -a, quantities with the nominal suffix -o, multiples with -obl-, fractions with -on-, collectives with -op-, and repetitions with the root -foj-. 

:sescent sepdek kvin (675)
:tria (third in first, second, third)
:trie (thirdly)
:dudeko (a score )
:duobla (double)
:kvarono (one fourth, a quarter)
:duope (by twos)
:dufoje (twice)

The particle po is used to mark distributive numbers, that is, the idea of distributing a certain number of items to each member of a group. Consequently the logogram @ is not used (except in email addresses, of course): 
:mi donis al ili po tri pomojn or pomojn mi donis al ili po tri (I gave them three apples each).

Note that particle po forms a phrase with the numeral tri and is not a preposition for the noun phrase tri pomojn, so it does not prevent a grammatical object from taking the accusative case.

== Comparisons ==
Comparisons are made with the adverbial correlatives tiel ... kiel (as ... as), the adverbial roots pli (more) and plej (most), the antonym prefix mal-, and the preposition ol (than): 

:mi skribas tiel bone kiel vi (I write as well as you)
:tiu estas pli bona ol tiu (this one is better than that one)
:tio estas la plej bona (that's the best)
:la mia estas malpli multekosta ol la via (mine is less expensive than yours)

Implied comparisons are made with tre (very) and tro (too ). 

Phrases like "The more people, the smaller the portions" and "All the better!" are translated using ju and des in place of "the": 
:Ju pli da homoj, des malpli grandaj la porcioj (The more people, the smaller the portions)
:Des pli bone! (All the better!)

== Word order ==
Esperanto has a fairly flexible word order. However, word order does play a role in Esperanto grammar, even if a much lesser role than it does in English. For example, the negative particle ne generally comes before the element being negated; negating the verb has the effect of negating the entire clause (or rather, there is ambiguity between negating the verb alone and negating the clause): 
:mi ne iris 'I didn't go'
:mi ne iris, mi revenis 'I didn't go, I came back'
:ne mi iris or iris ne mi 'it wasn't me who went'
:mi iris ne al la butiko sed hejmen 'I went not to the shop but home'.
However, when the entire clause is negated, the ne may be left till last:
:mi iris ne 'I went not'.

The last order reflects a typical topiccomment (or themerheme) order: Known information, the topic under discussion, is introduced first, and what one has to say about it follows. (I went not: As for my going, there was none.) For example, yet another order, ne iris mi, would suggest that the possibility of not having gone was under discussion, and mi is given as an example of one who did not go. 

Compare: Sergio Pokrovskij (2007) 'La artikolo', in Lingva Kritiko: Studoj kaj notoj pri la Internacia Lingvo 

:Pasintjare mi feriis en Italujo
::'Last year I vacationed in Italy' (Italy was the place I went on holiday)
:En Italujo mi feriis pasintjare
::'I vacationed in Italy last year' (last year was when I went)
:En Italujo pasintjare mi feriis
::'In Italy last year I went on vacation' (a vacation is why I went)
:En Italujo pasintjare feriis mi
::(I am the one who went)

===The noun phrase===
Within a noun phrase, either the order adjectivenoun or nounadjective may occur, though the former is somewhat more common. Less flexibility occurs with numerals and demonstratives, with numeralnoun and demonstrativenoun being the norm, as in English. 
:blua ielo ~ ielo blua 'a blue sky'
:tiu ielo ~ ielo tiu 'that sky'
:tiu blua ielo ~ tiu ielo blua ~ blua ielo tiu 'that blue sky'
:sep bluaj ieloj ~ sep ieloj bluaj ~ ieloj bluaj sep 'seven blue heavens'
The last (numeral after noun) is practically unheard of outside poetry. Demonstratives such as tiu are rather uncommon after a noun as well, used there primarily for emphasis (plumo tiu 'that pen'). Even possessive pronouns strongly favor initial position, though the opposite is well known from Patro nia 'Our Father' in the Paternoster. 

Adjectivenoun order is much freer. With simple adjectives, adjectivenoun order predominates, especially if the noun is long or complex. However, a long or complex adjective typically comes after the noun, in some cases parallel to structures in English, as in the second example below: 
:homo malgrandanima kaj ege avara 'a petty and extremely greedy person'
:vizao plena de cikatroj 'a face full of scars'
:ideo fantazia sed tamen interesa 'a fantastic but still interesting idea'

Adjectives also normally occur after correlative nouns. Again, this is one of the situations where adjectives come after nouns in English:
:okazis io stranga 'something strange happened'
:ne io brilanta estas diamanto 'not everything shiny is a diamond' In English, an adjectivenoun word order requires breaking up the correlative: 'Not every shiny thing is a diamond'. 
Changing the word order here can change the meaning, at least with the correlative nenio 'nothing':
:li manis nenion etan 'he ate nothing little'
:li manis etan nenion 'he ate a little nothing'

With multiple words in a phrase, the order is typically demonstrative/pronounnumeral(adjective/noun): 
:miaj du grandaj amikoj ~ miaj du amikoj grandaj 'my two great friends'.

However, the article la comes almost exclusively at the front of the noun phrase except, rarely, in poetry: 
:la ielo blua, la blua ielo, la blua 'the blue sky'; rarely blua la ielo, ielo blua la, blua la. The only common example of the latter order is in titles such as Reo Luizo la Dekkvara 'King Louis the Fourteenth'. This is an example of an appositional phrase, Reo Luizo + la Dekkvara; see below. 

Because of adjectival agreement, an adjective may be separated from the rest of the noun phrase without confusion. For example, in 
:Mi estas certa, ke brilan vi havos sukceson 'I am certain that you will have a brilliant success',
the subject and verb, vi havos, interrupt the noun phrase brilan sukceson. However, though occasionally found in poetry, such constructions are generally foreign to the language. 

In prepositional phrases, the preposition is required to come at the front of the noun phrase (that is, even before the article la), though it is commonly replaced by turning the noun into an adverb:
:al la ielo 'to the sky' or ielen 'skywards', never *ielo al

===Constituent order===
Constituent order within a clause is generally free, apart from copular clauses. 

The default order is subjectverbobject, though any order may occur, with subject and object distinguished by case, and other constituents distinguished by prepositions:
:la hundo asis la katon 'the dog chased/hunted the cat'
:la katon asis la hundo
:asis la hundo la katon
:asis la katon la hundo
:la hundo la katon asis
:la katon la hundo asis
The expectation of a topiccomment (themerheme) order apply here, so the context will influence word order: in la katon asis la hundo, the cat is the topic of the conversation, and the dog is the news; in la hundo la katon asis, the dog is the topic of the conversation, and it is the action of chasing that is the news; and in asis la hundo la katon, the action of chasing is already the topic of discussion.

Context is required to tell whether 
:la hundo asis la katon en la ardeno
means the dog chased a cat which was in the garden, or there, in the garden, the dog chased the cat. These may be disambiguated with 
:la hundo asis la katon, kiu estis en la ardeno
::'The dog chased the cat, which was in the garden'
and 
:en la ardeno, la hundo asis la katon
::'In the garden, the dog chased the cat'.

Of course, if it chases the cat into the garden, the case of 'garden' would change: 
:la hundo asis la katon en la ardenon, en la ardenon la hundo asis la katon, etc.

Within copulative clauses, however, there are restrictions. Copulas are words such as esti 'be', ii 'become', resti 'remain', and ajni 'seem', for which neither noun phrase takes the accusative case. In such cases only two orders are generally found: noun-copula-predicate and, much less commonly, predicate-copula-noun. John Wells, 1978, Lingvistikaj aspektoj de Esperanto, p 42 ff 

(That is, the copula intervenes between the two noun phrases, unless context or punctuation/intonation disambiguate:
:Homo, mi estas. Anelo, mi estas ne. 'A man/human I am. An angel I am not.')

Generally, if a characteristic of the noun is being described, the choice between the two orders is not important: 
:sovaa estas la vento 'wild is the wind', la vento estas sovaa 'the wind is wild'
However, la vento sovaa estas is unclear, at least in writing, as it could be interpreted as 'the wild wind is', leaving the reader to ask, 'is what?'. 

With two nouns, complications can arise. Sometimes context makes clear; demonstratives and articles, for example, usually occur only in the subject:
:tiu viro estas bruto ~ bruto estas tiu viro 'that man is a brute'.
However, as noted above, there is a huge difference between saying generically 'dogs are people' and 'people are dogs'. In such cases the first noun is read as the subject, as in English. Similarly, 
:glavoj iu plugiloj 'let swords become ploughs'
is the opposite sentiment of
:plugiloj iu glavoj 'let ploughs become swords'

===Attributive phrases and clauses===
In the sentence above, la hundo asis la katon, kiu estis en la ardeno 'the dog chased the cat, which was in the garden', the relative pronoun kiu 'which' is restricted to a position after the noun 'cat'. In general, relative clauses and attributive prepositional phrases follow the noun they modify.

Attributive prepositional phrases, which are dependent on nouns, include genitives (la libro de Johano 'John's book') as well as la kato en la ardeno 'the cat in the garden' in the example above. Their order cannot be reversed: neither *la de Johano libro nor *la en la ardeno kato is possible. This behavior is more restrictive than prepositional phrases which are dependent on verbs, and which can be moved around: both asis en la ardeno and en la ardeno asis are acceptable for 'chased in the garden'. 

Relative clauses are similar, in that they are attributive and are subject to the same word-order constraint, except that rather than being linked by a preposition, the two elements are linked by a relative pronoun such as kiu 'which': 
:fuis la kato, kiun i asis 'the cat which it chased fled'
:mi vidis la hundon, kiu asis la katon 'I saw the dog which chased the cat'
Note that the noun and its adjacent relative pronoun do not agree in case. Rather, their cases depend on their relationships with their respective verbs. This is parallel to the rather archaic distinction in English between 'who' and 'whom'. Other sequences of case are possible, though with different readings: fuis la hundo, kiu asis in 'the dog which chased it fled'; mi vidis la katon, kiun la hundo asis 'I saw the cat, which the dog chased'. However, they do agree in number:
:fuis la katoj, kiujn i asis 'the cats which it chased fled'

Other word orders are possible, as long as the relative pronoun remains adjacent to the noun it depends on:
:fuis la kato, kiun asis i 'the cat which it chased fled'
:vidis mi la hundon, kiu la katon asis 'I saw the dog which chased the cat'

Because of this word-order constraint, Esperanto is restricted to an SVO order in relative clauses when the linking noun is the subject of the verb, but to an OVS order when it is the object. Compare
:Jen la kato, kiu manis la raton, kiu manis la muson, kiu manis la fromaon, kiu estis en la domo konstruita de ak
:'Here is the cat which ate the rat which ate the mouse which ate the cheese which was in the house that Jack built'
and
:Putra estis la fromao, kiun manis la rato, kiun mortigis la kato, kiun vidis Johano
(also la fromao, kiun manis la rato, kiun mortigis la kato, kiun vidis Johano, estis putra)
:'The cheese, which was eaten by the rat, which was killed by the cat, which John saw, was rotten'.
In the latter, English requires passive verb constructions, but this is not necessary in Esperanto.

===Clause order===
Coordinate clauses allow flexible word order, but tend to be iconic. For example, in
:la hundo asis la katon kaj la kato fuis 'the dog chased the cat and the cat fled',
the inference is that the cat fled after the dog started to chase it, not that the dog chased a cat which was already fleeing. For the latter reading, the clause order would be reversed:
:la kato fuis, kaj la hundo asis in 'the cat fled, and the dog chased it'
This distinction is lost in subordinate clauses such as the relative clauses in the previous section: 
:la hundo asis la katon, kiu fuis 'the dog chased the cat(,) which fled'
In written English, a comma disambiguates the two readings, but both require a comma in Esperanto. 

Non-relative subordinate clauses are similarly restricted. They follow the conjunction ke 'that', as in,
:Me estas certa, ke vi havos brilan sukceson 'I am certain that you will have a brilliant success'.

== Non-Indo-European aspects ==

There is very little about Esperanto that is not Indo-European in origin. Although it is billed as a neutral international language, its vocabulary, syntax, and semantics derive predominantly from Indo-European national languages. Roots are typically Romance or Germanic in origin. The semantics shows a significant Slavic influence. 

It is often claimed that there are elements of the grammar which are not found in these language families. Frequently mentioned is Esperanto's agglutinative morphology based on invariant morphemes, and the subsequent lack of ablaut (internal inflection of its roots), which Zamenhof himself thought would prove alien to Indo-European language speakers. Ablaut is an element of all the source languages; an English example is song sing sang sung. However, the majority of words in all Indo-European languages inflect without ablaut, as cat, cats and walk, walked do in English. (This is the so-called strongweak dichotomy.) Historically, many Indo-European languages have expanded the range of their 'weak' inflections, and Esperanto has merely taken this development closer to its logical conclusion, with the only remaining ablaut being frozen in a few sets of semantically related roots such as pli, plej, plu (more, most, further), tre, tro (very, too much), and in the verbal morphemes -as, -anta, -ata; -is, -inta, -ita; -os, -onta, -ota; and -us. 

Other features often cited as being nonstandard for an Indo-European language, such as the dedicated suffixes for different parts of speech, or the -o suffix for singular nouns, actually do occur in Indo-European languages such as Russian. For example, Russian neuter and feminine nouns end in singular -o and -a, adjectives in -oje and -aja, adverbs in -o and -e, etc.; cf. also Provenal la fenestro (the window), which is identical to Esperanto la fenestro. More pertinent is the accusative plural in -jn, which is derived through leveling of standard Indo-European grammatical structures. The Esperanto nominaladjectival paradigm as a whole is taken from Greek: Esperanto nominative singular muzo (muse) vs. Greek mousa, nominative plural muzoj vs. Greek mousai, and accusative singular muzon vs. Greek mousan. (Latin and Lithuanian had very similar setups, with in the plural and a nasal in the accusative.) However, Esperanto does not have a discrete accusative plural suffix analogous with Greek mous-s; rather, it compounds the simple accusative and plural suffixes: muz-o-j-n. This morphology does not occur as more than a marginal element in any of Esperanto's source language families, Lithuanian, which Zamenhof identified with, does have an analogous setup in one declension. Didel up "a big river", for example, is plural didels ups , accusative didel up , and plural accusative dideles upes . That is, disregarding vowel length, the accusative is marked by a change from to (historically nasal) in both singular and plural, and the plural is marked by an in both nominative and accusative. and is formally similar to European but not Indo-European Hungarian and Turkishthat is, it is similar in its mechanics, but not in use. None of these proposed "non-European" elements of the original Esperanto proposal were actually taken from non-European or non-Indo-European languages, and any similarities with those languages are accidental.

East Asian languages may have had some influence on the development of Esperanto grammar after its creation. The principally cited candidate is the replacement of predicate adjectives with verbs, such as la ielo bluas (the sky is blue) for la ielo estas blua and mia filino belu! (may my daughter be beautiful!) for the mia filino estu bela! mentioned above. This is a regularization of existing grammatical forms and was always found in poetry; if there has been an influence of an East Asian language, it has only been in the spread of such forms, not in their origin. Such usage is not entirely unknown in Europe: Latin has an analogous folium viret for folium viride est (the leaf is green) and avis rubet for avis rubra est (the bird is red).

Perhaps the best candidate for a "non-Indo-European" feature is the blurred distinction between roots and affixes. Esperanto derivational affixes may be used as independent root words and inflect for part of speech like other roots. This occurs only sporadically in other languages of the world, Indo-European or not. For example, ismo has an English equivalent in "an ism", but English has no adjectival form ("ismic"?) equivalent to Esperanto isma. For most such affixes, natural languages familiar to Europeans must use a separate root, such as English "member" for Esperanto ano, "quality" for eco, "tendency" for emo, etc.

== Sample text == 

The Pater noster, from the first Esperanto publication in 1887, illustrates many of the grammatical points presented above, and should be readable to those familiar with it without translation:

: Patro nia, kiu estas en la ieloj,
: sanktigata estu Via nomo.
: Venu Via regno,
: fariu Via volo,
: kiel en la ielo, tiel anka sur la tero.
: Nian panon iutagan donu al ni hodia.
: Kaj pardonu al ni niajn uldojn,
: kiel anka ni pardonas al niaj uldantoj.
: Kaj ne konduku nin en tenton,
: sed liberigu nin de la malbono.
: (ar Via estas la regno kaj la potenco
: kaj la gloro eterne.)
: Amen.

The morphologically complex words (see Esperanto word formation) are:
:
 sanktigata 
 sankt- -ig- -at- -a 
 holy causative passiveparticiple adjective 
 \"being made holy\" 

:
 fariu 
 far- -i- -u 
 do middlevoice jussive 
 \"be done\" 

:
 iutagan 
 iu- tag- -a -n 
 every day adjective accusative 
 \"daily\" 

:
 uldantoj 
 uld- -ant- -o -j 
 owe activeparticiple noun plural 
 \"debtors\" 

:
 liberigu nin 
 liber- -ig- -u ni -n 
 free causative jussive we accusative 
 \"free us\" 

:
 la malbono 
 la mal- bon- -o 
 genericarticle antonym good noun 
 \"evil\" 

== See also ==
*Grammar of nativized Esperanto

== Notes ==

== External links ==
A fairly good overview of Esperanto's grammar and word-building system can be gained by viewing:
*"The Sixteen Rules of Esperanto"
*"The Esperanto Correlatives"
*"Word Building With Esperanto Affixes"
*"Esperanto Grammar", by Jirka Hana
*The Esperanto Teacher by Helen Fryer (on Project Gutenberg)
*An Elementary Esperanto Primer (by Daniel M. Albro) and Grammar and Dictionary at MIT
*Plena Manlibro de Esperanta Gramatiko ("A Complete Handbook of Esperanto Grammar"), by Bertilo Wennergren
* "Esperanto - Introduction to the Language" (brief grammar of Esperanto with sounds)
* Concise Grammar of Esperanto (lernu!'s English-language grammar guide)
* Detailed Grammar of Esperanto (in Esperanto, written by Bertilo Wennergren)
*Dr. Esperanto's international language introduction and complete grammar, by L. L. Zamenhof (Alternative link)

Grammar



[[Esperanto culture]]

The language Esperanto is often used to access an international culture, including a large body of original as well as translated literature. There are over 25,000 Esperanto books (originals and translations) as well as over a hundred regularly distributed Esperanto magazines. Many Esperanto speakers use the language for free travel throughout the world using the Pasporta Servo. Others like the idea of having pen pals in many countries around the world using services like the Esperanto Pen Pal Service. Every year, Esperanto speakers meet for the World Congress of Esperanto (Universala Kongreso de Esperanto). These attract around 15003000 speakers, and the best-attended conferences are regularly those held in Central or Eastern Europe, close to the birthplace of Esperanto (see statistics at World Congress of Esperanto).

==Literature, music and film==

Every year, hundreds of new titles are published in Esperanto along with music. Also, many Esperanto newspapers and magazines exist. 

Monato is a general news magazine "like a genuinely international Time or Newsweek", but written by local correspondents. A magazine for the blind, Aroro, has been published since 1920. 

Esperanto can be heard in television and radio broadcasts and on the internet. There are currently radio broadcasts from China Radio International, Melbourne Ethnic Community Radio, Radio Habana Cuba, Radio Audizioni Italiane (Rai), Radio Polonia, Radio F.R.E.I. and Radio Vatican. Internacia Televido, an internet television channel, began broadcasting in November 2005.

Historically most of the music published in Esperanto has been in various folk traditions; in recent decades more rock and other modern genres has appeared.

In 1964, Jacques-Louis Mah produced the first full-length feature film in Esperanto, entitled Angoroj. This was followed in 1965 by the first American Esperanto-production: Incubus, starring William Shatner. Several shorter films have been produced since. , the Esperanto-language Wikipedia lists 14 films and 3 short films.
The Serbian actor Sasha Pilipovic presents his cabaret at the World Esperanto Congress, Rotterdam 2008

In 2011, Academy Award-nominated director Sam Green (The Weather Underground), released a new documentary about Esperanto titled The Universal Language (La Universala Lingvo.) This 30-minute film traces the history of Esperanto.

==Cultural community==
There are cultural commonalities between Esperanto speakers, which is a distinctive feature of a cultural community. Esperanto was created to foster universal understanding, solidarity and peace. A large proportion of the Esperanto movement continue to hold such goals, and most are at least sympathetic to them. Additionally, many Esperantists use the language as a window to the larger world, to meet people from other countries on an equal footing, and for travel. The Esperanto-community has a certain set of shared background knowledge. 

To some extent there are also shared traditions, like the Zamenhof Day, and shared behaviour patterns, like avoiding the usage of one's national language at Esperanto meetings unless there are good reasons for its use (Esperanto culture has a special word, krokodili ("to crocodile"), to describe this avoided behaviour). On the other hand, it has been said that some aspects of shared traditions normally found in cultural communities, like clothing and cooking, aren't found in the Esperanto community. Not everyone would agree. Like other people, Esperanto speakers who are interested in cookery exchange and share recipes, both their own creations and their national and regional dishes. Various collections of such recipes have been published in book form in Esperanto, e.g. Internacie kuiri (Cooking Internationally) by Maria Becker-Meisberger, published by FEL (Flemish Esperanto League), Antwerp 1989, ISBN 90-71205-34-7, Manoj el sanigaj plantoj (Healthy Vegetable Dishes) by Zlata Nani, published by BIO-ZRNO, Zagreb 2002, ISBN 953-97664-5-1. Sometimes at Esperanto gatherings, such original dishes as those devised by Zlatka Nani can be sampled. Some Esperanto periodicals, such as MONATO include cookery items from time to time. As regards clothing, at every Universala Kongreso, held every year in a different country, many of those attending can been seen wearing their national or regional costumes.

Castle of Grsilion, an Esperantist cultural center in France.

On December 15 (L. L. Zamenhof's birthday), Esperanto speakers around the world celebrate Zamenhof Day, sometimes relabelled Esperanto Book Day.

The poem La Espero is generally considered to be the Esperanto anthem. It speaks of the achievement of world peace, "sacred harmony" and "eternal blessing" on the basis of a neutral language. Nonetheless Esperanto speakers may or may not agree whether the stated benefits could in fact be achieved in this way. At the first Esperanto congress, in Boulogne-sur-Mer in 1905, a declaration was made which defined an "Esperantist" merely as one who knows and uses the language "regardless of what kind of aims he uses it for", and which also specifically declared any ideal beyond the spread of the language itself to be a private matter for the individual speaker.

==See also==
* Esperanto literature
* Esperanto music
* Esperanto flag
* Interhelpo

==External links==
*Esperanto Kaj Turismo
*Esperanto-USA's Esperanto Day page
*Jacques-Louis Mah
*Generator for Esperanto typographical filler text
*esperanto-panorama.net: Radio in Esperanto
*Melbourne Ethnic Community Radio program with Esperanto entry
*Radio F.R.E.I. from Erfurt/Germany once a month
*Propono por la tago de Esperanto-libro kaj Zamenhof-festo
*Esperanto website from Spain
*Esperanto version of Le Monde diplomatique

 

[[Emotion]]

In psychology and philosophy, emotion is a subjective, conscious experience characterized primarily by psychophysiological expressions, biological reactions, and mental states. Emotion is often associated and considered reciprocally influential with mood, temperament, personality, disposition, and motivation. It also is influenced by hormones and neurotransmitters such as dopamine, noradrenaline, serotonin, oxytocin, cortisol and GABA. Emotion is often the driving force behind motivation, positive or negative. Gaulin, Steven J. C. and Donald H. McBurney. Evolutionary Psychology. Prentice Hall. 2003. ISBN 978-0-13-111529-3, Chapter 6, p 121-142. An alternative definition of emotion is a "positive or negative experience that is associated with a particular pattern of physiological activity." 

The physiology of emotion is closely linked to arousal of the nervous system with various states and strengths of arousal relating, apparently, to particular emotions. Emotions are a complex state of feeling that results in physical and psychological changes that influence our behaviour. Those acting primarily on emotion may seem as if they are not thinking, but cognition is an important aspect of emotion, particularly the interpretation of events. For example, the experience of fear usually occurs in response to a threat. The cognition of danger and subsequent arousal of the nervous system (e.g. rapid heartbeat and breathing, sweating, muscle tension) is an integral component to the subsequent interpretation and labeling of that arousal as an emotional state. Emotion is also linked to behavioral tendency. Extroverted people are more likely to be social and express their emotions, while introverted people are more likely to be more socially withdrawn and conceal their emotions.

Research on emotion has increased significantly over the past two decades with many fields contributing including psychology, neuroscience, endocrinology, medicine, history, sociology, and even computer science. The numerous theories that attempt to explain the origin, neurobiology, experience, and function of emotions have only fostered more intense research on this topic. Current areas of research in the concept of emotion include the development of materials that stimulate and elicit emotion. In addition PET scans and fMRI scans help study the affective processes in the brain. Cacioppo, J.T & Gardner, W.L (1999). Emotion. "Annual Review of Psychology", 191. 

==Etymology, definitions, and differentiation==
The word "emotion" dates back to 1579, when it was adapted from the French word mouvoir, which means "to stir up". However, the earliest precursors of the word likely dates back to the very origins of language. 

Emotions have been described as discrete and consistent responses to internal or external events which have a particular significance for the organism. Emotions are brief in duration and consist of a coordinated set of responses, which may include verbal, physiological, behavioural, and neural mechanisms. Emotions have also been described as biologically given and a result of evolution because they provided good solutions to ancient and recurring problems that faced our ancestors. 

Emotion can be differentiated from a number of similar constructs within the field of affective neuroscience:
* Feelings are best understood as a subjective representation of emotions, private to the individual experiencing them.
* Moods are diffuse affective states that generally last for much longer durations than emotions and are also usually less intense than emotions.
* Affect is an encompassing term, used to describe the topics of emotion, feelings, and moods together, even though it is commonly used interchangeably with emotion.

In addition, relationships exist between emotions, such as having positive or negative influences, with direct opposites existing. These concepts are described in contrasting and categorization of emotions.

==Components==
In Scherer's components processing model of emotion, five crucial elements of emotion are said to exist. From the component processing perspective, emotion experience is said to require that all of these processes become coordinated and synchronized for a short period of time, driven by appraisal processes. Although the inclusion of cognitive appraisal as one of the elements is slightly controversial, since some theorists make the assumption that emotion and cognition are separate but interacting systems, the component processing model provides a sequence of events that effectively describes the coordination involved during an emotional episode.
* Cognitive appraisal: provides an evaluation of events and objects
* Bodily symptoms: the physiological component of emotional experience
* Action tendencies: a motivational component for the preparation and direction of motor responses.
* Expression: facial and vocal expression almost always accompanies an emotional state to communicate reaction and intention of actions
* Feelings: the subjective experience of emotional state once it has occurred

==Classification==

A distinction can be made between emotional episodes and emotional dispositions. Emotional dispositions are also comparable to character traits, where someone may be said to be generally disposed to experience certain emotions. For example, an irritable person is generally disposed to feel irritation more easily or quickly than others do. Finally, some theorists place emotions within a more general category of "affective states" where affective states can also include emotion-related phenomena such as pleasure and pain, motivational states (for example, hunger or curiosity), moods, dispositions and traits. Schwarz, N. H. (1990). Feelings as information: Informational and motivational functions of affective states. Handbook of motivation and cognition: Foundations of social behavior, 2, 527-561. 

The classification of emotions has mainly been researched from two fundamental viewpoints. The first viewpoint is that emotions are discrete and fundamentally different constructs while the second viewpoint asserts that emotions can be characterized on a dimensional basis in groupings.

===Basic emotions===
Examples of basic emotions
For more than 40 years, Paul Ekman has supported the view that emotions are discrete, measurable, and physiologically distinct. Ekman's most influential work revolved around the finding that certain emotions appeared to be universally recognized, even in cultures that were preliterate and could not have learned associations for facial expressions through media. Another classic study found that when participants contorted their facial muscles into distinct facial expressions (e.g. disgust), they reported subjective and physiological experiences that matched the distinct facial expressions. His research findings led him to classify six emotions as basic: anger, disgust, fear, happiness, sadness and surprise. 

Robert Plutchik agreed with Ekman's biologically driven perspective but developed the "wheel of emotions", suggesting eight primary emotions grouped on a positive or negative basis: joy versus sadness; anger versus fear; trust versus distrust; and surprise versus anticipation. Some basic emotions can be modified to form complex emotions. The complex emotions could arise from cultural conditioning or association combined with the basic emotions. Alternatively, similar to the way primary colors combine, primary emotions could blend to form the full spectrum of human emotional experience. For example, interpersonal anger and disgust could blend to form contempt. Relationships exist between basic emotions, resulting in positive or negative influences. Plutchik , R. (2002). Nature of emotions" American Scientist89, 349. 

===Multi-dimensional analysis===
Two Dimensions of Emotion
Through the use of multidimensional scaling, psychologists can map out similar emotional experiences, which allows a visual depiction of the "emotional distance" between experiences. A further step can be taken by looking at the map's dimensions of the emotional experiences. The emotional experiences are divided into two dimensions known as valences (how negative or positive the experience was) and arousal (extent of reaction to stimuli). These two dimensions can be depicted on a 2D coordinate map. 

==Theories on the experience==

===Ancient Greece and Middle Ages===
Theories about emotions stretch back to at least as far as the stoics of Ancient Greece and Ancient China. In the latter it was believed that excess emotion caused damage to qi, which in turn, damages the vital organs. The four humours theory made popular by Hippocrates contributed to the study of emotion in the same way that it did for medicine.

Western philosophy regarded emotion in varying ways. In stoic theories it was seen as a hindrance to reason and therefore a hindrance to virtue. Aristotle believed that emotions were an essential component to virtue. In the Aristotelian view all emotions (called passions) corresponded to an appetite or capacity. During the Middle Ages, the Aristotelian view was adopted and further developed by scholasticism and Thomas Aquinas in particular. There are also theories in the works of philosophers such as Ren Descartes, Niccol Machiavelli, Baruch Spinoza See for instance Antonio Damasio (2005) Looking for Spinoza. and David Hume. In the 19th century emotions were considered adaptive and were studied more frequently from an empiricist psychiatric perspective.

===Evolutionary theories===

Illustration from Charles Darwin's The Expression of the Emotions in Man and Animals.

;19th Century
Perspectives on emotions from evolutionary theory were initiated in the late 19th century with Charles Darwin's book The Expression of the Emotions in Man and Animals. Darwin, Charles (1872). The Expression of Emotions in Man and Animals. Note: This book was originally published in 1872, but has been reprinted many times thereafter by different publishers Darwin argued that emotions actually served a purpose for humans, in communication and also in aiding their survival. Darwin, therefore, argued that emotions evolved via natural selection and therefore have universal cross-cultural counterparts. Darwin also detailed the virtues of experiencing emotions and the parallel experiences that occur in animals (see emotion in animals). This led the way for animal research on emotions and the eventual determination of the neural underpinnings of emotion.

;Contemporary
More contemporary views along the evolutionary psychology spectrum posit that both basic emotions and social emotions evolved to motivate (social) behaviors that were adaptive in the ancestral environment. Current research suggests that emotion is an essential part of any human decision-making and planning, and the famous distinction made between reason and emotion is not as clear as it seems. Paul D. MacLean claims that emotion competes with even more instinctive responses, on one hand, and the more abstract reasoning, on the other hand. The increased potential in neuroimaging has also allowed investigation into evolutionarily ancient parts of the brain. Important neurological advances were derived from these perspectives in the 1990s by Joseph E. LeDoux and Antnio Damsio.

Research on social emotion also focuses on the physical displays of emotion including body language of animals and humans (see affect display). For example, spite seems to work against the individual but it can establish an individual's reputation as someone to be feared. Shame and pride can motivate behaviors that help one maintain one's standing in a community, and self-esteem is one's estimate of one's status. Wright, Robert. Moral animal. 

===Somatic theories===
Somatic theories of emotion claim that bodily responses, rather than cognitive interpretations, are essential to emotions. The first modern version of such theories came from William James in the 1880s. The theory lost favor in the 20th century, but has regained popularity more recently due largely to theorists such as John Cacioppo, Cacioppo, J. T. (1998). Somatic responses to psychological stress: The reactivity hypothesis.Advances in psychological science, Vol. 2, pp. 87-114. East Sussex, United Kingdom: Psychology Press Antnio Damsio, Aziz-Zadeh L, Damasio A. (2008) Embodied semantics for actions: findings from functional brain imaging. J Physiol Paris. Jan-May;102(1-3):35-9 Joseph E. LeDoux LeDoux J.E. (1996) The Emotional Brain. New York: Simon & Schuster. and Robert Zajonc McIntosh, D. N., Zajonc, R. B., Vig, P. S., & Emerick, S. W. (1997). Facial movement, breathing, temperature, and affect: Implications of the vascular theory of emotional efference. Cognition & Emotion, 11(2), 171-195. who are able to appeal to neurological evidence.

====JamesLange theory====

In his 1884 article James, William. 1884. "What Is an Emotion?" Mind. 9, no. 34: 188-205. William James argued that feelings and emotions were secondary to physiological phenomena. In his theory, James proposed that the perception of what he called an "exciting fact" led directly to a physiological response, known as "emotion." To account for different types of emotional experiences, James proposed that stimuli trigger activity in the autonomic nervous system, which in turn produces an emotional experience in the brain. The Danish psychologist Carl Lange also proposed a similar theory at around the same time, and therefore this theory became known as the JamesLange theory. As James wrote, "the perception of bodily changes, as they occur, is the emotion." James further claims that "we feel sad because we cry, angry because we strike, afraid because we tremble, and neither we cry, strike, nor tremble because we are sorry, angry, or fearful, as the case may be." 

An example of this theory in action would be as follows: An emotion-evoking stimulus (snake) triggers a pattern of physiological response (increased heart rate, faster breathing, etc.), which is interpreted as a particular emotion (fear). This theory is supported by experiments in which by manipulating the bodily state induces a desired emotional state. Laird, James, Feelings: the Perception of Self, Oxford University Press Some people may believe that emotions give rise to emotion-specific actions: e.g. "I'm crying because I'm sad," or "I ran away because I was scared." The issue with the JamesLange theory is that of causation (bodily states causing emotions and being a priori), not that of the bodily influences on emotional experience (which can be argued and is still quite prevalent today in biofeedback studies and embodiment theory). Reisenzein, R. (1995). James and the physical basis of emotion: A comment on ellsworth. Psychological review, 102(4), 757-761. 

Although mostly abandoned in its original form, Tim Dalgleish argues that most contemporary neuroscientists have embraced the components of the James-Lange theory of emotions. Dalgleish, T. (2004). The emotional brain. Nature: Perspectives, 5, 58289. 

====CannonBard theory====

Walter Bradford Cannon agreed that physiological responses played a crucial role in emotions, but did not believe that physiological responses alone could explain subjective emotional experiences. He argued that physiological responses were too slow and often imperceptible and this could not account for the relatively rapid and intense subjective awareness of emotion. He also believed that the richness, variety, and temporal course of emotional experiences could not stem from physiological reactions, that reflected fairly undifferentiated fight or flight responses. An example of this theory in action is as follows: An emotion-evoking event (snake) triggers simultaneously both a physiological response and a conscious experience of an emotion.

Phillip Bard contributed to the theory with his work on animals. Bard found that sensory, motor, and physiological information all had to pass through the diencephalon (particularly the thalamus), before being subjected to any further processing. Therefore, Cannon also argued that it was not anatomically possible for sensory events to trigger a physiological response prior to triggering conscious awareness and emotional stimuli had to trigger both physiological and experiential aspects of emotion simultaneously. 

====Two-factor theory====

Stanley Schachter formulated his theory on the earlier work of a Spanish physician, Gregorio Maranon, who injected patients with epinephrine and subsequently asked them how they felt. Interestingly, Maranon found that most of these patients felt something but in the absence of an actual emotion-evoking stimulus, the patients were unable to interpret their physiological arousal as an experienced emotion. Schachter did agree that physiological reactions played a big role in emotions. He suggested that physiological reactions contributed to emotional experience by facilitating a focused cognitive appraisal of a given physiologically arousing event and that this appraisal was what defined the subjective emotional experience. Emotions were thus a result of two stage process: general physiological arousal, and experience of emotion. For example, the physiological arousal, heart pounding, in a response to an evoking stimulus, the sight of a bear in the kitchen. The brain then quickly scans the area, to explain the pounding, and notices the bear. Consequently, the brain interprets the pounding heart as being the result of fearing the bear. With his student, Jerome Singer, Schachter demonstrated that subjects can have different emotional reactions despite being placed into the same physiological state with an injection of epinephrine. Subjects were observed to express either anger or amusement depending on whether another person in the situation (a confederate) displayed that emotion. Hence, the combination of the appraisal of the situation (cognitive) and the participants' reception of adrenaline or a placebo together determined the response. This experiment has been criticized in Jesse Prinz's (2004) Gut Reactions.

===Cognitive theories===
With the two-factor theory now incorporating cognition, several theories began to argue that cognitive activity in the form of judgments, evaluations, or thoughts were entirely necessary for an emotion to occur. One of the main proponents of this view was Richard Lazarus who argued that emotions must have some cognitive intentionality. The cognitive activity involved in the interpretation of an emotional context may be conscious or unconscious and may or may not take the form of conceptual processing.

Lazarus' theory is very influential; emotion is a disturbance that occurs in the following order:
# Cognitive appraisalThe individual assesses the event cognitively, which cues the emotion.
# Physiological changesThe cognitive reaction starts biological changes such as increased heart rate or pituitary adrenal response.
# ActionThe individual feels the emotion and chooses how to react.
For example: Jenny sees a snake.
# Jenny cognitively assesses the snake in her presence. Cognition allows her to understand it as a danger.
# Her brain activates Adrenaline gland which pumps Adrenaline through her blood stream resulting in increased heartbeat.
# Jenny screams and runs away.
Lazarus stressed that the quality and intensity of emotions are controlled through cognitive processes. These processes underline coping strategies that form the emotional reaction by altering the relationship between the person and the environment.

George Mandler provided an extensive theoretical and empirical discussion of emotion as influenced by cognition, consciousness, and the autonomic nervous system in two books (Mind and Emotion, 1975, and Mind and Body: Psychology of Emotion and Stress, 1984)

There are some theories on emotions arguing that cognitive activity in the form of judgements, evaluations, or thoughts are necessary in order for an emotion to occur.
A prominent philosophical exponent is Robert C. Solomon (for example, The Passions, Emotions and the Meaning of Life, 1993). Solomon claims that emotions are judgements. He has put forward a more nuanced view which responds to what he has called the standard objection to cognitivism, the idea that a judgement that something is fearsome can occur with or without emotion, so judgement cannot be identified with emotion.
The theory proposed by Nico Frijda where appraisal leads to action tendencies is another example.

It has also been suggested that emotions (affect heuristics, feelings and gut-feeling reactions) are often used as shortcuts to process information and influence behavior. see the HeuristicSystematic Model, or HSM, (Chaiken, Liberman, & Eagly, 1989) under attitude change. Also see the index entry for "Emotion" in "Beyond Rationality: The Search for Wisdom in a Troubled Time" by Kenneth R. Hammond and in "Fooled by Randomness: The Hidden Role of Chance in Life and in the Markets" by Nassim Nicholas Taleb. The affect infusion model (AIM) is a theoretical model developed by Joseph Forgas in the early 1990s that attempts to explain how emotion and mood interact with one's ability to process information.

;Perceptual theory
Theories dealing with perception either use one or multiples perceptions in order to find an emotion (Goldie, 2007).A recent hybrid of the somatic and cognitive theories of emotion is the perceptual theory. This theory is neo-Jamesian in arguing that bodily responses are central to emotions, yet it emphasizes the meaningfulness of emotions or the idea that emotions are about something, as is recognized by cognitive theories. The novel claim of this theory is that conceptually-based cognition is unnecessary for such meaning. Rather the bodily changes themselves perceive the meaningful content of the emotion because of being causally triggered by certain situations. In this respect, emotions are held to be analogous to faculties such as vision or touch, which provide information about the relation between the subject and the world in various ways. A sophisticated defense of this view is found in philosopher Jesse Prinz's book Gut Reactions, and psychologist James Laird's book Feelings.

;Affective events theory
This is a communication-based theory developed by Howard M. Weiss and Russell Cropanzano (1996), that looks at the causes, structures, and consequences of emotional experience (especially in work contexts). This theory suggests that emotions are influenced and caused by events which in turn influence attitudes and behaviors. This theoretical frame also emphasizes time in that human beings experience what they call emotion episodes a "series of emotional states extended over time and organized around an underlying theme." This theory has been utilized by numerous researchers to better understand emotion from a communicative lens, and was reviewed further by Howard M. Weiss and Daniel J. Beal in their article, "Reflections on Affective Events Theory", published in Research on Emotion in Organizations in 2005.

===Situated perspective on emotion===
A situated perspective on emotion, developed by Paul E. Griffiths and Andrea Scarantino , emphasizes the importance of external factors in the development and communication of emotion, drawing upon the situationism approach in psychology. Griffiths, Paul Edmund and Scarantino, Andrea (2005) Emotions in the wild: The situated perspective on emotion. This theory is markedly different from both cognitivist and neo-Jamesian theories of emotion, both of which see emotion as a purely internal process, with the environment only acting as a stimulus to the emotion. In contrast, a situationist perspective on emotion views emotion as the product of an organism investigating its environment, and observing the responses of other organisms. Emotion stimulates the evolution of social relationships, acting as a signal to mediate the behavior of other organisms. In some contexts, the expression of emotion (both voluntary and involuntary) could be seen as strategic moves in the transactions between different organisms. The situated perspective on emotion states that conceptual thought is not an inherent part of emotion, since emotion is an action-oriented form of skillful engagement with the world. Griffiths and Scarantino suggested that this perspective on emotion could be helpful in understanding phobias, as well as the emotions of infants and animals.

==Neurocircuitry==
Based on discoveries made through neural mapping of the limbic system, the neurobiological explanation of human emotion is that emotion is a pleasant or unpleasant mental state organized in the limbic system of the mammalian brain. If distinguished from reactive responses of reptiles, emotions would then be mammalian elaborations of general vertebrate arousal patterns, in which neurochemicals (for example, dopamine, noradrenaline, and serotonin) step-up or step-down the brain's activity level, as visible in body movements, gestures, and postures. Emotions can likely be mediated by pheromones (see fear). 

For example, the emotion of love is proposed to be the expression of paleocircuits of the mammalian brain (specifically, modules of the cingulate gyrus) which facilitate the care, feeding, and grooming of offspring. Paleocircuits are neural platforms for bodily expression configured before the advent of cortical circuits for speech. They consist of pre-configured pathways or networks of nerve cells in the forebrain, brain stem and spinal cord.

The motor centers of reptiles react to sensory cues of vision, sound, touch, chemical, gravity, and motion with pre-set body movements and programmed postures. With the arrival of night-active mammals, smell replaced vision as the dominant sense, and a different way of responding arose from the olfactory sense, which is proposed to have developed into mammalian emotion and emotional memory. The mammalian brain invested heavily in olfaction to succeed at night as reptiles sleptone explanation for why olfactory lobes in mammalian brains are proportionally larger than in the reptiles. These odor pathways gradually formed the neural blueprint for what was later to become our limbic brain. 

Emotions are thought to be related to certain activities in brain areas that direct our attention, motivate our behavior, and determine the significance of what is going on around us. Pioneering work by Broca (1878), Papez (1937), and MacLean (1952) suggested that emotion is related to a group of structures in the center of the brain called the limbic system, which includes the hypothalamus, cingulate cortex, hippocampi, and other structures. More recent research has shown that some of these limbic structures are not as directly related to emotion as others are, while some non-limbic structures have been found to be of greater emotional relevance.

In 2011, Lvheim proposed a direct relation between specific combinations of the levels of the signal substances dopamine, noradrenaline and serotonin and eight basic emotions. A model was presented where the signal substances form the axes of a coordinate system, and the eight basic emotions according to Silvan Tomkins are placed in the eight corners. Anger is, according to the model, for example produced by the combination of low serotonin, high dopamine and high noradrenaline. Lvheim H. A new three-dimensional model for emotions and monoamine neurotransmitters. Med Hypotheses (2011), Epub ahead of print. PMID 22153577 
Lvheim cube of emotion

===Prefrontal cortex===
There is ample evidence that the left prefrontal cortex is activated by stimuli that cause positive approach. Kringelbach, M.L.; O'Doherty, J.O.; Rolls, E.T.; & Andrews, C. (2003). Activation of the human orbitofrontal cortex to a liquid food stimulus is correlated with its subjective pleasantness. Cerebral Cortex, 13, 10641071. If attractive stimuli can selectively activate a region of the brain, then logically the converse should hold, that selective activation of that region of the brain should cause a stimulus to be judged more positively. This was demonstrated for moderately attractive visual stimuli Drake, R.A. (1987). Effects of gaze manipulation on aesthetic judgments: Hemisphere priming of affect. Acta Psychologica, 65, 9199. and replicated and extended to include negative stimuli. Merckelbach, H.; & van Oppen, P. (1989). Effects of gaze manipulation on subjective evaluation of neutral and phobia-relevant stimuli: A comment on Drake's (1987) 'Effects of gaze manipulation on aesthetic judgments: Hemisphere priming of affect.' Acta Psychologica, 70, 147151. 

Two neurobiological models of emotion in the prefrontal cortex made opposing predictions. The Valence Model predicted that anger, a negative emotion, would activate the right prefrontal cortex. The Direction Model predicted that anger, an approach emotion, would activate the left prefrontal cortex. The second model was supported. Harmon-Jones, E.; Vaughn-Scott, K.; Mohr, S.; Sigelman, J.; & Harmon-Jones, C. (2004). The effect of manipulated sympathy and anger on left and right frontal cortical activity. Emotion, 4, 95101. 

This still left open the question of whether the opposite of approach in the prefrontal cortex is better described as moving away (Direction Model), as unmoving but with strength and resistance (Movement Model), or as unmoving with passive yielding (Action Tendency Model). Support for the Action Tendency Model (passivity related to right prefrontal activity) comes from research on shyness Schmidt, L.A. (1999). Frontal brain electrical activity in shyness and sociability. Psychological Science, 10, 316320. and research on behavioral inhibition. Garavan, H.; Ross, T.J.; & Stein, E.A. (1999). Right hemispheric dominance of inhibitory control: An event-related functional MRI study. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 96, 83018306. Research that tested the competing hypotheses generated by all four models also supported the Action Tendency Model. Drake, R.A.; & Myers, L.R. (2006). Visual attention, emotion, and action tendency: Feeling active or passive. Cognition and Emotion, 20, 608622. Wacker, J.; Chavanon, M.-L.; Leue, A.; & Stemmler, G. (2008). Is running away right? The behavioral activationbehavioral inhibition model of anterior asymmetry. Emotion, 8, 232249. 

===Homeostatic/primordial emotion===
Another neurological approach distinguishes two classes of emotion: "classical" emotions such as love, anger and fear that are evoked by environmental stimuli, and "primordial" or "homeostatic emotions"  attention-demanding feelings evoked by body states, such as pain, hunger and fatigue, that motivate behavior (withdrawal, eating or resting in these examples) aimed at maintaining the body's internal milieu at its ideal state. 

Derek Denton defines the latter as "the subjective element of the instincts, which are the genetically programmed behaviour patterns which contrive homeostasis. They include thirst, hunger for air, hunger for food, pain and hunger for specific minerals etc. There are two constituents of a primordial emotion--the specific sensation which when severe may be imperious, and the compelling intention for gratification by a consummatory act." 

==Disciplinary approaches==
Many different disciplines have produced work on the emotions. Human sciences study the role of emotions in mental processes, disorders, and neural mechanisms. In psychiatry, emotions are examined as part of the discipline's study and treatment of mental disorders in humans. Nursing studies emotions as part of its approach to the provision of holistic health care to humans. Psychology examines emotions from a scientific perspective by treating them as mental processes and behavior and they explore the underlying physiological and neurological processes. In neuroscience sub-fields such as social neuroscience and affective neuroscience, scientists study the neural mechanisms of emotion by combining neuroscience with the psychological study of personality, emotion, and mood. In linguistics, the expression of emotion may change to the meaning of sounds. In education, the role of emotions in relation to learning is examined.

Social sciences often examine emotion for the role that it plays in human culture and social interactions. In sociology, emotions are examined for the role they play in human society, social patterns and interactions, and culture. In anthropology, the study of humanity, scholars use ethnography to undertake contextual analyses and cross-cultural comparisons of a range of human activities. Some anthropology studies examine the role of emotions in human activities. In the field of communication sciences, critical organizational scholars have examined the role of emotions in organizations, from the perspectives of managers, employees, and even customers. A focus on emotions in organizations can be credited to Arlie Russell Hochschild's concept of emotional labor. The University of Queensland hosts EmoNet, an e-mail distribution list representing a network of academics that facilitates scholarly discussion of all matters relating to the study of emotion in organizational settings. The list was established in January 1997 and has over 700 members from across the globe.

In economics, the social science that studies the production, distribution, and consumption of goods and services, emotions are analyzed in some sub-fields of microeconomics, in order to assess the role of emotions on purchase decision-making and risk perception. In criminology, a social science approach to the study of crime, scholars often draw on behavioral sciences, sociology, and psychology; emotions are examined in criminology issues such as anomie theory and studies of "toughness," aggressive behavior, and hooliganism. In law, which underpins civil obedience, politics, economics and society, evidence about people's emotions is often raised in tort law claims for compensation and in criminal law prosecutions against alleged lawbreakers (as evidence of the defendant's state of mind during trials, sentencing, and parole hearings). In political science, emotions are examined in a number of sub-fields, such as the analysis of voter decision-making.

In philosophy, emotions are studied in sub-fields such as ethics, the philosophy of art (for example, sensoryemotional values, and matters of taste and sentimentality), and the philosophy of music (see also Music and emotion). In history, scholars examine documents and other sources to interpret and analyze past activities; speculation on the emotional state of the authors of historical documents is one of the tools of interpretation. In literature and film-making, the expression of emotion is the cornerstone of genres such as drama, melodrama, and romance. In communication studies, scholars study the role that emotion plays in the dissemination of ideas and messages. Emotion is also studied in non-human animals in ethology, a branch of zoology which focuses on the scientific study of animal behavior. Ethology is a combination of laboratory and field science, with strong ties to ecology and evolution. Ethologists often study one type of behavior (for example, aggression) in a number of unrelated animals.

===History===
The history of emotions has become an increasingly popular topic recently, with some scholars arguing that it is an essential category of analysis, not unlike class, race, or gender. Historians, like other social scientists, assume that emotions, feelings and their expressions are regulated in different ways by both different cultures and different historical times, and constructivist school of history claims even that some sentiments and meta-emotions, for example Schadenfreude, are learnt and not only regulated by culture. Historians of emotion trace and analyse the changing norms and rules of feeling, while examining emotional regimes, codes, and lexicons from social, cultural or political history perspectives. Others focus on the history of medicine, science or psychology. What somebody can and may feel (and show) in a given situation, towards certain people or things, depends on social norms and rules. It is thus historically variable and open to change. Several research centers have opened in the past few years in Germany, England, Spain, Sweden and Australia.

Furtherly, research in historical trauma suggests that some traumatic emotions can be passed on from parents to offspring to second and even third generation, presented as examples of transgenerational trauma.

===Sociology===

Attempts are frequently made to regulate emotion according to the conventions of the society and the situation based on many (sometimes conflicting) demands and expectations which originate from various entities. The emotion of anger is in many cultures discouraged in girls and women, while fear is discouraged in boys and men. Expectations attached to social roles, such as "acting as man" and not as a woman, and the accompanying "feeling rules" contribute to the differences in expression of certain emotions. Some cultures encourage or discourage happiness, sadness, or jealousy, and the free expression of the emotion of disgust is considered socially unacceptable in most cultures. Some social institutions are seen as based on certain emotion, such as love in the case of contemporary institution of marriage. In advertising, such as health campaigns and political messages, emotional appeals are commonly found. Recent examples include no-smoking health campaigns and political campaign advertising emphasizing the fear of terrorism.

===Psychotherapy and regulation===
Emotion regulation refers to the cognitive and behavioral strategies people use to influence their own emotional experience. Schacter, Daniel. "Psychology". Worth Publishers. 2011. p.316 For example, a behavioral strategy in which one avoids a situation to avoid unwanted emotions (e.g., trying not to think about the situation, doing distracting activities, etc.). Schacter, Daniel. "Psychology". Worth Publishers. 2011. p.340 Depending on the particular school's general emphasis on either cognitive components of emotion, physical energy discharging, or on symbolic movement and facial expression components of emotion, Freitas-Magalhes, A., & Castro, E. (2009). Facial Expression: The effect of the smile in the Treatment of Depression. Empirical Study with Portuguese Subjects. In A. Freitas-Magalhes (Ed.), Emotional Expression: The Brain and The Face (pp. 127140). Porto: University Fernando Pessoa Press. ISBN 978-989-643-034-4 different schools of psychotherapy approach the regulation of emotion differently. Cognitively oriented schools approach them via their cognitive components, such as rational emotive behavior therapy. Yet others approach emotions via symbolic movement and facial expression components (like in contemporary Gestalt therapy). 

===Computer science===

In the 2000s, research in computer science, engineering, psychology and neuroscience has been aimed at developing devices that recognize human affect display and model emotions. Fellous, Armony & LeDoux, 2002 In computer science, affective computing is a branch of the study and development of artificial intelligence that deals with the design of systems and devices that can recognize, interpret, and process human emotions. It is an interdisciplinary field spanning computer sciences, psychology, and cognitive science. While the origins of the field may be traced as far back as to early philosophical enquiries into emotion, the more modern branch of computer science originated with Rosalind Picard's 1995 paper "Affective Computing" MIT Technical Report #321 (Abstract), 1995 on affective computing. Detecting emotional information begins with passive sensors which capture data about the user's physical state or behavior without interpreting the input. The data gathered is analogous to the cues humans use to perceive emotions in others. Another area within affective computing is the design of computational devices proposed to exhibit either innate emotional capabilities or that are capable of convincingly simulating emotions. Emotional speech processing recognizes the user's emotional state by analyzing speech patterns. The detection and processing of facial expression or body gestures is achieved through detectors and sensors.

==Notable theorists==

William James about the time he wrote on emotions
In the late 19th century, the most influential theorists were William James (18421910) and Carl Lange (18341900). James was an American psychologist and philosopher who wrote about educational psychology, psychology of religious experience/mysticism, and the philosophy of pragmatism. Lange was a Danish physician and psychologist. Working independently, they developed the JamesLange theory, a hypothesis on the origin and nature of emotions. The theory states that within human beings, as a response to experiences in the world, the autonomic nervous system creates physiological events such as muscular tension, a rise in heart rate, perspiration, and dryness of the mouth. Emotions, then, are feelings which come about as a result of these physiological changes, rather than being their cause. 

Silvan Tomkins (1911  1991) developed the Affect theory and Script theory. The Affect theory introduced the concept of basic emotions, and was based on the idea that the dominance of the emotion , which he called the affect system, was the motivating force in human life. 

Some of the most influential theorists on emotion from the 20th century have died in the last decade. They include Magda B. Arnold (19032002), an American psychologist who developed the appraisal theory of emotions; Reisenzein , R. (2006). Cognition & emotion. Psychology Press, part of the Taylor & Francis Group ,20(7), 920-951. Richard Lazarus (19222002), an American psychologist who specialized in emotion and stress, especially in relation to cognition; Herbert A. Simon (19162001), who included emotions into decision making and artificial intelligence; Robert Plutchik (19282006), an American psychologist who developed a psychoevolutionary theory of emotion; Plutchik, R. (1982). A psychoevolutionary theory of emotions.Social Science Information, 21, 529. Robert Zajonc (19232008) a PolishAmerican social psychologist who specialized in social and cognitive processes such as social facilitation. An American philosopher, Robert C. Solomon (19422007), contributed to the theories on the philosophy of emotions with books such as What Is An Emotion?: Classic and Contemporary Readings (Oxford, 2003). Peter Goldie (1946-2011) British philosopher who specializes in ethics, aesthetics, emotion, mood and character

Influential theorists who are still active include the following psychologists, neurologists, and philosophers:
* Lisa Feldman Barrett  Social philosopher and psychologist specializing in affective science and human emotion.
* John Cacioppo  from the University of Chicago, founding father with Gary Berntson of social neuroscience.
* Antnio Damsio (born 1944)  Portuguese behavioral neurologist and neuroscientist who works in the US
* Richard Davidson (born 1951)  American psychologist and neuroscientist; pioneer in affective neuroscience.
* Paul Ekman (born 1934)  Psychologist specializing in the study of emotions and their relation to facial expressions
* Barbara Fredrickson  Social psychologist who specializes in emotions and positive psychology.
* Nico Frijda (born 1927)  Dutch psychologist who specializes in human emotions, especially facial expressions
* Arlie Russell Hochschild (born 1940)  American sociologist whose central contribution was in forging a link between the subcutaneous flow of emotion in social life and the larger trends set loose by modern capitalism within organizations.
* Joseph E. LeDoux (born 1949)  American neuroscientist who studies the biological underpinnings of memory and emotion, especially the mechanisms of fear
* George Mandler (born 1924) - American psychologist who wrote influential books on cognition and emotion

* Jaak Panksepp (born 1943)  Estonian-born American psychologist, psychobiologist and neuroscientist; pioneer in affective neuroscience.
* Jesse Prinz  American philosopher who specializes in emotion, moral psychology, aesthetics and consciousness
* Klaus Scherer (born 1943)  Swiss psychologist and director of the Swiss Center for Affective Sciences in Geneva; he specializes in the psychology of emotion
* Ronald de Sousa (born 1940)  EnglishCanadian philosopher who specializes in the philosophy of emotions, philosophy of mind and philosophy of biology.

==See also==

* Affect measures
* Affective Computing
* Affective forecasting
* Affective neuroscience
* Affective science
* CyberEmotions
* Emoticons
* Emotion classification
* Emotion in animals
* Emotions and culture
* Emotion and memory
* Emotional expression
* Emotions in virtual communication
* Endocrinology
* Fear
* Feeling
* Fuzzy-trace theory
* Group emotion
* International Affective Picture System
* List of emotions
* Measuring Emotions
* Neuroendocrinology
* Sociology of emotions
* Social emotion
* Social neuroscience
* Social sharing of emotions
* Somatic markers hypothesis

==References==
Notes

Bibliography

* 
* 

==Further reading==
* Dana Sugu & Amita Chaterjee "Flashback: Reshuffling Emotions", International Journal on Humanistic Ideology, Vol. 3 No. 1, SpringSummer 2010.
* Cornelius, R. (1996). The science of emotion. New Jersey: Prentice Hall.
* Freitas-Magalhes, A. (Ed.). (2009). Emotional Expression: The Brain and The Face. Porto: University Fernando Pessoa Press. ISBN 978-989-643-034-4.
* Freitas-Magalhes, A. (2007). The Psychology of Emotions: The Allure of Human Face. Oporto: University Fernando Pessoa Press.
* Gonzlez, Ana Marta (2012). The Emotions and Cultural Analysis. Burlington, VT : Ashgate. ISBN 978-1-4094-5317-8
* Ekman, P. (1999). "Basic Emotions". In: T. Dalgleish and M. Power (Eds.). Handbook of Cognition and Emotion. John Wiley & Sons Ltd, Sussex, UK:.
* Frijda, N.H. (1986). The Emotions. Maison des Sciences de l'Homme and Cambridge University Press
* Hochschild, A.R. (1983). The managed heart: Commercialization of human feelings. Berkeley: University of California Press.
* Hogan, Patrick Colm. (2011). What Literature Teaches Us about Emotion Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
* Hordern, Joshua. (2013). Political Affections: Civic Participation and Moral Theology. Oxford: Oxford University Press. ISBN 0199646813
* LeDoux, J.E. (1986). The neurobiology of emotion. Chap. 15 in J.E. LeDoux & W. Hirst (Eds.) Mind and Brain: dialogues in cognitive neuroscience. New York: Cambridge.
* Mandler, G. (1984). Mind and Body: Psychology of emotion and stress. New York: Norton.
* Nussbaum, Martha C. (2001) Upheavals of Thought: The Intelligence of Emotions. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
* Plutchik, R. (1980). A general psychoevolutionary theory of emotion. In R. Plutchik & H. Kellerman (Eds.), Emotion: Theory, research, and experience: Vol. 1. Theories of emotion (pp. 333). New York: Academic.
* Ridley-Duff, R.J. (2010). Emotion, Seduction and Intimacy: Alternative Perspectives on Human Behaviour (Third Edition), Seattle: Libertary Editions
* Roberts, Robert. (2003). Emotions: An Essay in Aid of Moral Psychology. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
* Scherer, K. (2005). What are emotions and how can they be measured? Social Science Information Vol. 44, No. 4: 695729.
* Solomon, R. (1993). The Passions: Emotions and the Meaning of Life. Indianapolis: Hackett Publishing.
* Zeki, S. & Romaya, J.P. (2008), "Neural correlates of hate", PloS one, vol. 3, no. 10, pp. 3556.
* Wikibook Cognitive psychology and cognitive neuroscience
* Dror Green (2011). "Emotional Training, the art of creating a sense of a safe place in a changing world". Bulgaria: Books, Publishers and the Institute of Emotional Training.
* Goldie, Peter. (2007). "Emotion". Philosophy Compass, vol. 1, issue 6

==External links==

* Online Demo: Emotion recognition from speech, University of Patras, Wire Communication Lab
* Facial Emotion Expression Lab
* CNX.ORG: The Psychology of Emotions, Feelings and Thoughts (free online book)
* Queen Mary Centre for the History of the Emotions
* Humaine Emotion-Research.net: The Humaine Portal: Research on Emotions and Human-Machine Interaction
* PhilosophyofMind.net: Philosophy of Emotions portal
* Swiss Center for Affective Sciences
* The Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy: Theories of Emotion
* The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy: Emotion
* University of Arizona: Salk Institute:cCC
* Center for the History of Emotions, Max Planck Institute for Human Development, Berlin

 



[[Epictetus]]

Epictetus (; Jones, Daniel; Roach, Peter, James Hartman and Jane Setter, eds. Cambridge English Pronouncing Dictionary. 17th edition. Cambridge UP, 2006. ; AD c. 55  135) was a Greek sage and Stoic philosopher. He was born a slave at Hierapolis, Phrygia (present day Pamukkale, Turkey), and lived in Rome until his banishment, when he went to Nicopolis in northwestern Greece for the rest of his life. His teachings were written down and published by his pupil Arrian in his Discourses.

Philosophy, Epictetus taught, is a way of life and not just a theoretical discipline. To Epictetus, all external events are determined by fate, and are thus beyond our control; we should accept whatever happens calmly and dispassionately. However, individuals are responsible for their own actions, which they can examine and control through rigorous self-discipline.

== Life ==
Epictetus was born c. 55 AD, His year of birth is uncertain. He was born a slave. He must have been old enough to teach philosophy by the time Domitian banished all philosophers from Rome c. 93 AD. He also describes himself as an old man to Arrian c. 108 AD. cf. Discourses, i.9.10; i.16.20; ii.6.23; etc. presumably at Hierapolis, Phrygia. Suda. Epictetus. The name his parents gave him is unknown; the word epktetos () in Greek simply means "acquired." He spent his youth as a slave in Rome to Epaphroditos, a wealthy freedman and secretary to Nero. Epaphroditus, livius.org 

Early in life, Epictetus acquired a passion for philosophy, and with the permission of his wealthy owner, he studied Stoic philosophy under Musonius Rufus, Epictetus, Discourses, i.7.32. which allowed him to rise in respectability as he grew more educated. Epictetus, Discourses, i.9.29. He somehow became crippled, with Origen stating that his leg was deliberately broken by his master, Origen, Contra Celcus. vii. and Simplicius stating that he had been lame from childhood. Simplicius, Commentary on the Enchiridion, 13. 

Roman-era ruins at Nicopolis
Epictetus obtained his freedom sometime after Nero's death in 68 AD, Douglas J. Soccio, Archetypes of Wisdom: An Introduction to Philosophy (2012), p. 197 and began to teach philosophy in Rome. About 93 AD Emperor Domitian banished all philosophers from the city, Suetonius, Domitian, x. and Epictetus fled to Nicopolis in Epirus, Greece, where he founded a philosophical school. Aulus Gellius, Attic Nights, xv. 11. 

His most famous pupil, Arrian, studied under him when a young man (c. 108 AD) and claimed to have written the famous Discourses from his lecture notes, though some argue they should be considered an original composition by Arrian, comparable to the Socratic literature. Hendrik Selle: Dichtung oder Wahrheit  Der Autor der Epiktetischen Predigten. Philologus 145 269-290 Arrian describes Epictetus as being a powerful speaker who could "induce his listener to feel just what Epictetus wanted him to feel." Epictetus, Discourses, prologue. Many eminent figures sought conversations with him, Epictetus, Discourses, i.11; ii.14; iii.4; iii. 7; etc. and the Emperor Hadrian was friendly with him Historia Augusta, Hadrian, 16. and may have listened to him speak at his school in Nicopolis. Fox, Robin The Classical World: An Epic History from Homer to Hadrian Basic Books. 2006 pg 578 A surviving 2nd or 3rd century Altercatio Hadriani Et Epicteti gives a fictitious account of a conversation between Hadrian and Epictetus. 

He lived a life of great simplicity, with few possessions and lived alone for a long time, Simplicius, Commentary on the Enchiridion, 46. There is also a joke at Epictetus' expense in Lucian's Life of Demonax about the fact that he had no family. but in his old age he adopted a friend's child who would otherwise have been left to die, and raised him with the aid of a woman. Simplicius, Commentary on the Enchiridion, 46. He may have married her, but Simplicius' language is ambiguous. Epictetus was never married. Lucian, Demoxan, c. 55, torn, ii., ed Hemsterh., p. 393; as quoted in A Selection from the Discourses of Epictetus With the Encheiridion (2009), p. 6 He died sometime around 135 AD. He was apparently alive in the reign of Hadrian (117138). Marcus Aurelius (born 121 AD) was an admirer of him but never met him, and Aulus Gellius (ii.18.10) writing mid-century, speaks of him as if belonging to the recent past. After his death, his lamp was purchased by an admirer for 3,000 drachmae. Lucian, Remarks to an illiterate book-lover. 

== Thought ==
No writings of Epictetus himself are really known. His discourses were transcribed and compiled by his pupil Arrian (author of the Anabasis Alexandri). The main work is The Discourses, four books of which have been preserved (out of an original eight). Photius, Bibliotheca, states that there were eight books. Arrian also compiled a popular digest, entitled the Enchiridion, or Handbook. In a preface to the Discourses, addressed to Lucius Gellius, Arrian states that "whatever I heard him say I used to write down, word for word, as best I could, endeavouring to preserve it as a memorial, for my own future use, of his way of thinking and the frankness of his speech." 

Epictetus maintains that the foundation of all philosophy is self-knowledge, that is, the conviction of our ignorance and gullibility ought to be the first subject of our study. Epictetus, Discourses, ii.11.1 Logic provides valid reasoning and certainty in judgment, but it is subordinate to practical needs. Epictetus, Discourses, i.7.1-8 The first and most necessary part of philosophy concerns the application of doctrine, for example, that people should not lie; the second concerns reasons, e.g. why people should not lie; while the third, lastly, examines and establishes the reasons. Heinrich Ritter, Alexander James William Morrison, (1846), The History of Ancient Philosophy, Volume 4, page 201 This is the logical part, which finds reasons, shows what is a reason, and that a given reason is a right one. This last part is necessary, but only on account of the second, which again is rendered necessary by the first. Epictetus, Discourses, iii.2.1-6; Enchiridion, 52 

Both the Discourses and the Enchiridion begin by distinguishing between those things in our power (prohairetic things) and those things not in our power (aprohairetic things). Epictetus, Discourses, i.1; Enchiridion, 1 That alone is in our power, which is our own work; and in this class are our opinions, impulses, desires, and aversions. What, on the contrary, is not in our power, are our bodies, possessions, glory, and power. Any delusion on this point leads to the greatest errors, misfortunes, and troubles, and to the slavery of the soul. Heinrich Ritter, Alexander James William Morrison, (1846), The History of Ancient Philosophy, Volume 4, page 204 

We have no power over external things, and the good that ought to be the object of our earnest pursuit, is to be found only within ourselves. Heinrich Ritter, Alexander James William Morrison, (1846), The History of Ancient Philosophy, Volume 4, page 206 The determination between what is good and what is not good is made by the capacity for choice (prohairesis). Giovanni Reale, John R. Catan, 1990, A History of Ancient Philosophy: The schools of the Imperial Age, page 80. SUNY Press Prohairesis allows us to act, and gives us the kind of freedom that only rational animals have. Christopher Gill, 1995, The Discourses of Epictetus, page xx. Everyman It is determined by our reason, which of all our faculties sees and tests itself and everything else. Epictetus, Discourses, i.1.4; i.20 It is the right use of the impressions (phantasia) that bombard the mind that is in our power: Epictetus, Discourses, ii.19.32. 
Practise then from the start to say to every harsh impression, "You are an impression, and not at all the thing you appear to be." Then examine it and test it by these rules you have, and firstly, and chiefly, by this: whether the impression has to do with the things that are up to us, or those that are not; and if it has to do with the things that are not up to us, be ready to reply, "It is nothing to me." Epictetus, Enchiridion, 1 
We will not be troubled at any loss, but will say to ourselves on such an occasion: "I have lost nothing that belongs to me; it was not something of mine that was torn from me, but something that was not in my power has left me." Nothing beyond the use of our opinion is properly ours. Every possession rests on opinion. What is to cry and to weep? An opinion. What is misfortune, or a quarrel, or a complaint? All these things are opinions; opinions founded on the delusion that what is not subject to our own choice can be either good or evil, which it cannot. By rejecting these opinions, and seeking good and evil in the power of choice alone, we may confidently achieve peace of mind in every condition of life. Epictetus, Discourses, iii.3.14-19; Enchiridion, 6 

Reason alone is good, and the irrational is evil, and the irrational is intolerable to the rational. Epictetus, Discourses, i.2.1 The good person should labour chiefly on their own reason; to perfect this is in our power. Epictetus, Discourses, iii.8; iii.15.1-13; Enchiridion, 29 To repel evil opinions by the good is the noble contest in which humans should engage; it is not an easy task, but it promises true freedom, peace of mind (ataraxia), and a divine command over the emotions (apatheia). Epictetus, Discourses, ii.18.19-31; iii.3.14-22 We should especially be on our guard against the opinion of pleasure because of its apparent sweetness and charms. Epictetus, Enchiridion, 34. The first object of philosophy, therefore, is to purify the mind. Heinrich Ritter, Alexander James William Morrison, (1846), The History of Ancient Philosophy, Volume 4, page 207 

Epictetus teaches that the preconceptions (prolepsis) of good and evil are common to all. Heinrich Ritter, Alexander James William Morrison, (1846), The History of Ancient Philosophy, Volume 4, page 208 Good alone is profitable and to be desired, and evil is hurtful and to be avoided. Epictetus, Discourses, i.22.1; ii.11.3 Different opinions arise only from the application of these preconceptions to particular cases, and it is then that the darkness of ignorance, which blindly maintains the correctness of its own opinion, must be dispelled. People entertain different and conflicting opinions of good, and in their judgment of a particular good, people frequently contradict themselves. Epictetus, Discourses, ii.11.8-13; iii.14.11-14 Philosophy should provide a standard for good and evil. Heinrich Ritter, Alexander James William Morrison, (1846), The History of Ancient Philosophy, Volume 4, page 209 This process is greatly facilitated because the mind and the works of the mind are alone in our power, whereas all external things that aid life are beyond our control. 

The essence of God is goodness; we have all good that could be given to us. Heinrich Ritter, Alexander James William Morrison, (1846), The History of Ancient Philosophy, Volume 4, page 217 The gods too gave us the soul and reason, which is not measured by breadth or depth, but by knowledge and sentiments, and by which we attain to greatness, and may equal even with the gods. We should, therefore, cultivate the mind with special care. Heinrich Ritter, Alexander James William Morrison, (1846), The History of Ancient Philosophy, Volume 4, page 218 If we wish for nothing but what God wills, we shall be truly free, and all will come to pass with us according to our desire; and we shall be as little subject to restraint as Zeus himself. Epictetus, Discourses, ii.17.22-33 

Every individual is connected with the rest of the world, and the universe is fashioned for universal harmony. Wise people, therefore, will pursue, not merely their own will, but will also be subject to the rightful order of the world. Epictetus, Discourses, i.12.16-17 We should conduct ourselves through life fulfilling all our duties as children, siblings, parents, and citizens. Epictetus, Discourses, iii.2.4 

For our country or friends we ought to be ready to undergo or perform the greatest difficulties. Epictetus, Discourses, iii.20.4-14 The good person, if able to foresee the future, would peacefully and contentedly help to bring about their own sickness, maiming, and even death, knowing that this is the right order of the universe. Epictetus, Discourses, ii.10.4-5 We have all a certain part to play in the world, and we have done enough when we have performed what our nature allows. Epictetus, Discourses, i.2.33-37; Enchiridion, 24, 37 In the exercise of our powers, we may become aware of the destiny we are intended to fulfill. Heinrich Ritter, Alexander James William Morrison, (1846), The History of Ancient Philosophy, Volume 4, page 220 

We are like travellers at an inn, or guests at a stranger's table; whatever is offered we take with thankfulness, and sometimes, when the turn comes, we may refuse; in the former case we are a worthy guest of the gods, and in the latter we appear as a sharer in their power. Epictetus, Enchiridion, 11, 15 Anyone who finds life intolerable is free to quit it, but we should not abandon our appointed role without sufficient reason. Epictetus, Discourses, i.29.29; iii.24.97-101 The Stoic sage will never find life intolerable and will complain of no one, either God or human. Heinrich Ritter, Alexander James William Morrison, (1846), The History of Ancient Philosophy, Volume 4, page 210 Those who go wrong we should pardon and treat with compassion, since it is from ignorance that they err, being as it were blind. Epictetus, Discourses, i.18.6-8; i.28.9-10 

It is only our opinions and principles that can render us unhappy, and it is only the ignorant person that finds fault with another. Heinrich Ritter, Alexander James William Morrison, (1846), The History of Ancient Philosophy, Volume 4, page 211 Every desire degrades us, and renders us slaves of what we desire. We ought not to forget the transitory character of all external advantages, even in the midst of our enjoyment of them; but always to bear in mind that they are not our own, and that therefore they do not properly belong to us. Thus prepared, we shall never be carried away by opinions. Heinrich Ritter, Alexander James William Morrison, (1846), The History of Ancient Philosophy, Volume 4, page 212 

The final entry of the Enchiridion, or Handbook, begins: "Upon all occasions we ought to have these maxims ready at hand":

Conduct me, Zeus, and thou, O Destiny,
Wherever thy decree has fixed my lot.
I follow willingly; and, did I not,
Wicked and wretched would I follow still.
(Diogenes Laertius quoting Cleanthes; quoted also by Seneca, Epistle 107.)"

Whoe'er yields properly to Fate is deemed
Wise among men, and knows the laws of Heaven.
(From Euripides' Fragments, 965)

O Crito, if it thus pleases the gods, thus let it be.
(From Plato's Crito)

Anytus and Meletus may indeed kill me, but they cannot harm me.
(From Plato's Apology)

== Influence ==

=== Military ===
Prisoner of war James Stockdale receiving the Medal of Honor from American president Gerald Ford; Stockdale was able to retain his sanity during capture by relying on the philosophy of Epictetus
;James Stockdale
The philosophy of Epictetus is well known in the American military through the writings and example of James Stockdale, an American fighter pilot who was shot down over North Vietnam, became a prisoner of war during the Vietnam War, and later a vice presidential candidate. In Courage under Fire: Testing Epictetus's Doctrines in a Laboratory of Human Behavior (1993), Stockdale credits Epictetus with helping him endure seven and a half years in a North Vietnamese military prisonincluding tortureand four years in solitary confinement. Stockdale, James Bond. 1993. Courage Under Fire: Testing Epictetus's Doctrines in a Laboratory of Human Behavior. Stanford: Hoover Institution/Stanford University. 

In his conclusion, Stockdale quoted Epictetus as saying, "The emotions of grief, pity, and even affection are well-known disturbers of the soul. Grief is the most offensive; Epictetus considered the suffering of grief an act of evil. It is a willful act, going against the will of God to have all men share happiness" (p. 235).

=== Philosophy ===
;Marcus Aurelius
The philosophy of Epictetus was an influence on the Roman Emperor Marcus Aurelius (121 to 180 AD) whose reign was marked by wars with the resurgent Parthia in southern Asia and against the Germanic tribes in Europe. Aurelius quotes from Epictetus repeatedly in his own work, Meditations, written during his campaigns in central Europe. Marcus Aurelius, i. 7; iv. 41; vii. 19; xi. 33-37 

;Simplicius of Cilicia
In the 6th century, the Neoplatonist philosopher Simplicius, who was persecuted for his pagan beliefs during the reign of Justinian, wrote an extant commentary on the Enchiridion. At the end of the commentary Simplicius wrote: "Nor does my writing this commentary prove beneficial to others only, for I myself have already found great advantage from it, by the agreeable diversion it has given me, in a season of trouble and public calamity." George Long considered the commentary "worth reading", but then opined, "But how many will read it? Perhaps one in a million." George Long, (1890), The Discourses of Epictetus, with the Encheridion and Fragments, page 390. George Bell and Sons 

;Bernard Stiegler
When Bernard Stiegler was imprisoned for five years for armed robbery in France, he assembled an "ensemble of disciplines," which he called (in reference to Epictetus) his melete. This ensemble amounted to a practice of reading and writing that Stiegler derived from the writings of Epictetus. This led to his transformation, and upon being released from incarceration he became a professional philosopher. Stiegler tells the story of this transformation in his book, Acting Out. Bernard Stiegler, Acting Out (Stanford: Stanford University Press, 2009). 

=== Literature ===
The philosophy of Epictetus plays a key role in the 1998 novel by Tom Wolfe, A Man in Full. This was in part the outcome of discussions Wolfe had with James Stockdale (see above). The importance of Epictetus' Stoicism for Stockdale, its role in A Man in Full, and its significance in Gladiator (2000 film) is discussed by William O. Stephens William O. Stephens, Ph.D in The Rebirth of Stoicism? The Rebirth of Stoicism 

Mohun Biswas, in the novel A House for Mr Biswas (1961), by V.S. Naipaul, is pleased to think himself a follower of Epictetus and Marcus Aurelius; the irony is that he never actually behaves as a Stoic.

Everything has two handles, the one by which it may be carried, the other by which it cannot is the theme of Disturbances in the Field (1983), by Lynne Sharon Schwartz. Lydia, the central character, turns often to The Golden Sayings of Epictetus.

A line from the Enchiridion is used as a title quotation in The Life and Opinions of Tristram Shandy, Gentleman by Laurence Sterne, which translates to, "Not things, but opinions about things, trouble men." Laurence Sterne, The Life and Opinions of Tristram Shandy, Gentleman, ed. Ian Campbell Ross (Oxford Univ. Press, 1983), p. 540. The quotation alludes to a theme of the novel about how the suffering of many of its characters (above all Walter Shandy) is the result of the opinions and assumptions they make about reality.

Epictetus is mentioned in A Portrait of the Artist as a Young Man by James Joyce: in the fifth chapter of the novel the protagonist Stephen Daedalus discusses Epictetus's famous lamp with a Dean of his college. (pgs. 202-203 of the Penguin Edition). Epictetus is also mentioned briefly in Franny and Zooey by J. D. Salinger, and is referred to by Theodore Dreiser in his novel Sister Carrie. Both the longevity of Epictetus's life and his philosophy are alluded to in John Berryman's poem, "Of Suicide."

Epictetus is referred to, but not mentioned by name, in Matthew Arnold's sonnet To a Friend. Arnold provides three historical personalities as his inspiration and support in difficult times (Epictetus is preceded by Homer and succeeded by Sophocles):
Much he, whose friendship I not long since won,
That halting slave, who in Nicopolis
Taught Arrian, when Vespasian's brutal son
Cleared Rome of what most shamed him. Matthew Arnold, To A Friend 

=== Psychology ===
Psychologist Albert Ellis, the founder of Rational Emotive Behavior Therapy, credited Epictetus with providing a foundation for his system of psychotherapy. Ageless, Guiltless, by Adam Green. Obituary by Morton Schatzman in The Independent. Obituary by Oliver Burkeman in The Guardian. 

=== Religion ===
Kiyozawa Manshi, a controversial reformer within the Higashi Honganji branch of Jodo Shinshu Buddhism cited Epictetus as one of the three major influences on his spiritual development and thought.

=== Acting ===
Epictetus' philosophy is an influence on the acting method introduced by David Mamet and William H. Macy, known as Practical Aesthetics. The main book that describes the method, The Practical Handbook for the Actor, lists the Enchiridion in the bibliography.

==See also==
*Discourses of Epictetus
*Enchiridion of Epictetus
*Marcus Aurelius
*Stoicism
*List of slaves

== Notes ==

== Further reading ==

; Primary sources

* The Discourses, trans. W. A. Oldfather. 2 vols. (Loeb Classical Library edition.) Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1925 & 1928. ISBN 0-674-99145-1 andISBN 0-674-99240-7.
* Discourses and Selected Writings, Robert Dobbin (trans.), Oxford: Penguin Classics, 2008 ISBN 978-0-14-044946-4.
* Epictetus Discourses: Book 1, Robert Dobbin (trans.), (Clarendon Later Ancient Philosophers), Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1998 ISBN 0-19-823664-6.
* The Discourses (The Handbook, Fragments), Christopher Gill (trans.) Everyman Edition, 2003 ISBN 0-460-87312-1.
* The Handbook, Nicholas P. White (trans.), Indianapolis: Hackett, 1983 ISBN 0-915145-69-3.
* Enchiridion, George Long (trans.), New York: A. L. Burt, 1955 (reprint: New York: Dover, 2004) ISBN 0-87975-703-5.

; Studies

* Adolf Friedrich Bonhoffer, The Ethics of the Stoic Epictetus, William O. Stephens trans., Bern: Peter Lang, 2000 ISBN 0-8204-5139-8.
* Michel Foucault, The Hermeneutics of the Subject: Lectures at the Collge de France, 19811982, New York: Picador, 2005 ISBN 0-312-42570-8.
* Pedro P. Fuentes Gonzlez. art. "pictte", in R. Goulet (ed.), Dictionnaire des Philosophes Antiques III, Paris, CNRS, 2000, pp. 106151 ISBN 2-271-05748-5.
* Brian E. Johnson, The Role Ethics of Epictetus: Stoicism in Ordinary Life, Lanham: Lexington Books, 2014 ISBN 978-0739179673.
* A. A. Long, Epictetus: A Stoic and Socratic Guide to Life, Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2002 ISBN 0-19-924556-8.
* Theodore Scaltsas, Andrew S. Mason (ed.), The Philosophy of Epictetus. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2007 ISBN 978-0-1995-8551-9.
* Werner Sohn, EPICTETUS: Ein erzkonservativer Bildungsroman mit liberalen Eselsohren (German version) Norderstedt: BoD, 2010 ISBN 978-3-8391-5231-7.
* William O. Stephens, Stoic Ethics: Epictetus and Happiness as Freedom, London: Continuum, 2007 ISBN 0-8264-9608-3.

== External links ==

*
*
*Works by Epictetus at the Internet Classics Archive
*
*
*Dialogue between Hadrian and Epictetus - a fictitious 2nd or 3rd century composition, translated into English in The Knickerbocker magazine, August 1857
*Commentary on the Enchiridion of Epictetus by Simplicius of Cilicia (6th century)
*Stockdale on Stoicism I: The Stoic Warrior's Triad by James Stockdale
*Stockdale on Stoicism II: Master of My Fate by James Stockdale



[[Edward Lear]]

Edward Lear (12 or 13 May 1812 Metropolitan Museum of Art (New York, N.Y.), and Katharine Baetjer. 2009. British paintings in the Metropolitan Museum of Art, 1575-1875. New York: Metropolitan Museum of Art. p. 270. ISBN 1588393488 Vivian Noakes says Lear's birth certificate gives 13 May as his birthdate but says "there is some doubt about the exact date". Noakes, Vivien. 1986. Edward Lear, 1812-1888. New York: H.N. Abrams. p. 74. ISBN 0810912627  29 January 1888) was an English artist, illustrator, author and poet, and is known now mostly for his literary nonsense in poetry and prose and especially his limericks, a form he popularised. His principal areas of work as an artist were threefold: as a draughtsman employed to illustrate birds and animals; making coloured drawings during his journeys, which he reworked later, sometimes as plates for his travel books; as a (minor) illustrator of Alfred Tennyson's poems. As an author, he is known principally for his popular nonsense works, which use real and invented English words.

==Biography==
===Early years===
Lear was born into a middle-class family in the village of Holloway near London, the penultimate of twenty-one children (and youngest to survive) of Ann Clark Skerrett and Jeremiah Lear. He was raised by his eldest sister, also named Ann, 21 years his senior. Owing to the family's limited finances, Lear and his sister were required to leave the family home and live together when he was aged four. Ann doted on Edward and continued to act as a mother for him until her death, when he was almost 50 years of age. Holbrook, Jackson (ed). The Complete Nonsense of Edward Lear. Dover Publications, 1951. Page xii. 

Lear by Wilhelm Marstrand
Lear suffered from lifelong health afflictions. From the age of six he suffered frequent grand mal epileptic seizures, and bronchitis, asthma, and during later life, partial blindness. Lear experienced his first seizure at a fair near Highgate with his father. The event scared and embarrassed him. Lear felt lifelong guilt and shame for his epileptic condition. His adult diaries indicate that he always sensed the onset of a seizure in time to remove himself from public view. When Lear was about seven years old he began to show signs of depression, possibly due to the instability of his childhood. He suffered from periods of severe melancholia which he referred to as "the Morbids." 

===Artist===
Lear was already drawing "for bread and cheese" by the time he was aged 16 and soon developed into a serious "ornithological draughtsman" employed by the Zoological Society and then from 1832 to 1836 by the Earl of Derby, who kept a private menagerie at his estate Knowsley Hall. Lear's first publication, published when he was 19 years old, was Illustrations of the Family of Psittacidae, or Parrots in 1830. 
His paintings were well received and he was compared favourably with the naturalist John James Audubon.

Masada on the Dead Sea, Edward Lear, 1858
Among other travels, he visited Greece and Egypt during 184849, and toured India and Ceylon during 187375. While travelling he produced large quantities of coloured wash drawings in a distinctive style, which he converted later in his studio into oil and watercolour paintings, as well as prints for his books. Andrew Wilton & Anne Lyles, The Great Age of British Watercolours (17501880), p. 318, 1993, Prestel, ISBN 3-7913-1254-5 His landscape style often shows views with strong sunlight, with intense contrasts of colour.

Throughout his life he continued to paint seriously. He had a lifelong ambition to illustrate Tennyson's poems; near the end of his life a volume with a small number of illustrations was published.

===Relationships===
Lear's most fervent and painful friendship involved Franklin Lushington. He met the young barrister in Malta in 1849 and then toured southern Greece with him. Lear developed an undoubtedly homosexual passion for him that Lushington did not reciprocate. Although they remained friends for almost forty years, until Lear's death, the disparity of their feelings for one another constantly tormented Lear. Indeed, none of Lear's attempts at male companionship were successful; the very intensity of Lear's affections seemingly doomed the relationships. Susan Chitty, That Singular Person Called Lear, Atheneum, 1989 

The closest he came to marriage with a woman was two proposals, both to the same person 46 years his junior, which were not accepted. For companions he relied instead on friends and correspondents, and especially, during later life, on his Albanian Souliote chef, Giorgis, a faithful friend and, as Lear complained, a thoroughly unsatisfactory chef. Levi, Peter. Edward Lear, a Biography. Another trusted companion in Sanremo was his cat, Foss, who died in 1886 and was buried with some ceremony in a garden at Villa Tennyson.

===San Remo and death===
Lear travelled widely throughout his life and eventually settled in San Remo, on his beloved Mediterranean coast, in the 1870s, at a villa he named "Villa Tennyson." 

Lear was known to introduce himself with a long pseudonym: "Mr Abebika kratoponoko Prizzikalo Kattefello Ablegorabalus Ableborinto phashyph" or "Chakonoton the Cozovex Dossi Fossi Sini Tomentilla Coronilla Polentilla
Battledore & Shuttlecock Derry down Derry Dumps" which he based on Aldiborontiphoskyphorniostikos. 

After a long decline in his health, Lear died at his villa in 1888, of the heart disease from which he had suffered since at least 1870. Lear's funeral was said to be a sad, lonely affair by the wife of Dr. Hassall, Lear's physician, none of Lear's many lifelong friends being able to attend. Strachie, Lady Constance Braham. Later Letters of Edward Lear: Author of "The Book of Nonsense." 1911: Duffield and Company. P. 332 

Lear is buried in the Cemetery Foce in San Remo. On his headstone are inscribed these lines about Mount Tomohrit (in Albania) from Tennyson's poem To E.L. Lear, On His Travels in Greece:

:all things fair.
:With such a pencil, such a pen.
:You shadow forth to distant men,
:I read and felt that I was there. 

The centenary of his death was marked in Britain with a set of Royal Mail stamps in 1988 and an exhibition at the Royal Academy. Lear's birthplace area is now marked with a plaque at Bowman's Mews, Islington, in London, and his bicentenary during 2012 was celebrated with a variety of events, exhibitions and lectures in venues across the world including an International Owl and Pussycat Day on his birthday. 

==Author==
Howatke, by Edward Lear, 1867
In 1846 Lear published A Book of Nonsense, a volume of limericks that went through three editions and helped popularize the form. In 1865 The History of the Seven Families of the Lake Pipple-Popple was published, and in 1867 his most famous piece of nonsense, The Owl and the Pussycat, which he wrote for the children of his patron Edward Stanley, 13th Earl of Derby. Many other works followed.

Lear's nonsense books were quite popular during his lifetime, but a rumor developed that "Edward Lear" was merely a pseudonym, and the books' true author was the man to whom Lear had dedicated the works, his patron the Earl of Derby. Promoters of this rumor offered as evidence the facts that both men were named Edward, and that "Lear" is an anagram of "Earl." 
The falls of the Kalama, Albania 1851
Lear's nonsense works are distinguished by a facility of verbal invention and a poet's delight in the sounds of words, both real and imaginary. A stuffed rhinoceros becomes a "diaphanous doorscraper." A "blue Boss-Woss" plunges into "a perpendicular, spicular, orbicular, quadrangular, circular depth of soft mud." His heroes are Quangle-Wangles, Pobbles, and Jumblies. One of his most famous verbal inventions, the phrase "runcible spoon," occurs in the closing lines of The Owl and the Pussycat, and is now found in many English dictionaries:

:They dined on mince, and slices of quince
::Which they ate with a runcible spoon;
:And hand in hand, on the edge of the sand,
::They danced by the light of the moon,
:::The moon,
:::The moon,
:They danced by the light of the moon.

Though famous for his neologisms, Lear used a number of other devices in his works in order to defy reader expectations. For example, "Cold Are The Crabs,, conforms to the sonnet tradition until the dramatically foreshortened last line.

A Book of Nonsense (c. 1875 James Miller edition) by Edward Lear
Limericks are invariably typeset as four plus one lines presently, but Lear's limericks were published in a variety of formats. It appears that Lear wrote them in manuscript in as many lines as there was room for beneath the picture. For the first three editions most are typeset as, respectively, two, five, and three lines. The cover of one edition bears an entire limerick typeset in two lines:

:There was an Old Derry down Derry, who loved to see little folks merry;
:So he made them a book, and with laughter they shook at the fun of that Derry down Derry.

In Lear's limericks the first and last lines usually end with the same word rather than rhyming. For the most part they are truly nonsensical and devoid of any punch line or point. They are completely free of the bawdyness with which the verse form is now associated. A typical thematic element is the presence of a callous and critical "they." An example of a typical Lear limerick:

:There was an Old Man of Asta,
:Who possessed a large Cow, but he lost her;
:But they said, 'Don't you see,
:she has rushed up a tree?
:You invidious Old Man of Asta!'

Lear's self-description in verse, How Pleasant to know Mr. Lear, ends with this stanza, a reference to his own mortality:

:He reads but he cannot speak Spanish,
::He cannot abide ginger-beer;
:Ere the days of his pilgrimage vanish,
::How pleasant to know Mr. Lear!

Five of Lear's limericks from the Book of Nonsense, in the 1946 Italian translation by Carlo Izzo, were set to music for choir a cappella by Goffredo Petrassi in 1952.

==Portrayals== 
Edward Lear has been played in radio dramas by Andrew Sachs in The Need for Nonsense by Julia Blackburn (BBC Radio 4, 9 February 2009) and by Derek Jacobi in By the Coast of Coromandel by Lavinia Murray (BBC Radio 4, 21 December 2011).

==Works==
*Illustrations of the Family of the Psittacidae, or Parrots (1832)
*Mount Timohorit, Albania (1848)
*Tortoises, Terrapins, and Turtles by J.E. Gray
*Views in Rome and its Environs (1841)
*Gleanings from the Menagerie at Knowsley Hall (1846)
*Book of Nonsense (1846)
*Journal of a Landscape Painter in Greece and Albania (1851)
*The falls of the Kalama Albania 1851
*Journal of a Landscape Painter in Southern Calabria (1852)
*Journal of a Landscape Painter in Corsica (1870)
*Nonsense Songs and Stories (1870, dated 1871) 
*More Nonsense Songs, Pictures, etc. (1872) 
*Laughable Lyrics (1877)
*Nonsense Alphabets
*Argos from Mycenae (1884), now in the collection of Trinity College, Cambridge 
*Nonsense Botany (1888)
*Tennyson's Poems, illustrated by Lear (1889)
*Facsimile of a Nonsense Alphabet (1849, but not published until 1926)
*The Scroobious Pip, unfinished at his death, but completed by Ogden Nash and illustrated by Nancy Ekholm Burkert (1968)
*The Quangle-Wangle's Hat (unknown)
*Edward Lear's Parrots by Brian Reade, Duckworth (1949), including 12 coloured plates from Lear's Psittacidae
* The 1970 Saturday morning cartoon Tomfoolery, based on the works of Lear and Lewis Carroll

==Illustrations==

File:Ara macao -painting by Edward Lear.jpg|Ara macao from his first book, 1830
Image:eagleowl.jpg|Eagle Owl, Edward Lear, 1837
Image:owlpussycat.jpg|Another Edward Lear owl, in his more familiar style
Image:EdwardLearSelfPortrait.jpg|Lear self-portrait, illustrating a real incident when he encountered a stranger who claimed that "Edward Lear" was merely a pseudonym. Lear (on the right) is showing the stranger (left) the inside of his hat, with his name in the lining.
File:Edward Lear A Book of Nonsense 73.jpg|Illustration by Edward Lear for There was a Young Lady of Hull
File:Melfi - Edward Lear.jpg|Litography of Melfi, Italian city in the Basilicata region
File:Edward Lear self-caricature.jpg|Self-caricature (1870)

==See also==

*A Beach Full of Shells, the 20th album by Musician Al Stewart pays tribute in the song Mr. Lear, celebrating Foss and many events from Lear's life.
*Lear's Macaw
*List of wildlife artists
*Paperback Writer by The Beatles refers to "A novel by a man named Lear", though no such novel exists.

==References==

==External links==

*
*Edward Lear's Books of Nonsense
*Android app of Edward Lear limericks
*Scans of illustrations from the Nonsense series of books
*Full text, images, and covers of several of Lear's books available as Open Access from the Baldwin Library of Historical Children's Literature
*A reading of Lear's Nonsense Songs, Stories, Botany, and Alphabets



[[Eve Arden]]

Eve Arden (April 30, 1908 Confirmation of 1908 year of birth  November 12, 1990) was an American actress. Her almost 60-year career crossed most media frontiers with both supporting and leading roles, but she may be best-remembered for playing the sardonic but engaging title character, a high school teacher, on Our Miss Brooks, and as the Rydell High School principal in both Grease 1 and 2.

==Early life==
Eve Arden was born Eunice M. Quedens (pronounced qwi-DENZ) in Mill Valley, California, to Lucille and Charles Peter Quedens. Her parents divorced when she was a child. Arden claimed to have been an insecure child, declaring later in life that she needed therapy because her mother was so much more beautiful than she. 

Some sources indicate that Arden was Catholic based solely on the fact that she had, at one point, attended a Roman Catholic convent school. However, at age 16, she left Tamalpais High School, a public high school, and joined a stock theater company. Tamalpais High School Alumni Directory. 2002. Harris Publishing Co., p. 237. Lists "Quedens, Eunice M." in the Class of 1926 She made her film debut, under her real name, in the backstage musical Song of Love (1929). She played a wisecracking showgirl who becomes a rival to the film's star, singer Belle Baker. The film was one of Columbia Pictures' earliest successes.

Arden's Broadway debut came in 1934, when she was cast in that year's Ziegfeld Follies revue. This role was the first in which she was credited as Eve Arden. She chose that name after being told by producer Lee Shubert to drop her real name and claims she was inspired by two cosmetics bottles in her dressing room, one labeled Evening in Paris and the other by Elizabeth Arden. 

==Career==
===Film===
from Comrade X (1940)
Arden's film career began in earnest in 1937 when she appeared in the films Oh Doctor and Stage Door. Her Stage Door portrayal of a fast-talking, witty supporting character, gained Arden considerable notice and was to be a template for many of Arden's future roles. 

Her many memorable screen roles include a supporting role as Joan Crawford's wise-cracking friend in Mildred Pierce (1945) for which she received an Academy Award nomination as Best Supporting Actress, and James Stewart's wistful secretary in Otto Preminger's then-explicit murder mystery, Anatomy of a Murder (1959). (One of her co-stars in that film was husband Brooks West.) She also performed some acrobatics while trying to steal a wallet from Groucho Marx in the Marx Brothers film At the Circus (1939). In 1946 exhibitors voted her the sixth-most promising "star of tomorrow". 

===Radio and television===
Groucho Marx and Eve Arden in the trailer for At the Circus (1939)
Arden's ability with witty scripts made her a natural talent for radio; she became a regular on Danny Kaye's short-lived but memorably zany comedy-variety show in 1946, which also featured swing bandleader Harry James and gravel-voiced character actor-comedian Lionel Stander. 

Kaye's show lasted one season, but Arden's display of comic talent and timing set the stage for her to be cast in her most well-known role, Madison High School English teacher Connie Brooks in Our Miss Brooks. Arden portrayed the character on radio from 1948 to 1957, in a television version of the program from 1952 to 1956, and in a 1956 feature film. Arden's character clashed with the school's principal, Osgood Conklin (played by Gale Gordon), and nursed an unrequited crush on fellow teacher Philip Boynton (played originally by future film star Jeff Chandler and, later on radio, then on television, by Robert Rockwell). Except for Chandler, the entire radio cast of Arden, Gordon, Richard Crenna (Walter Denton), Robert Rockwell (Mr. Philip Boynton), Gloria McMillan (Harriet Conklin), and Jane Morgan (landlady Margaret Davis) played the same roles on television.

Arden's portrayal of the character was so popular that she was made an honorary member of the National Education Association, received a 1952 award from the Teachers College of Connecticut's Alumni Association "for humanizing the American teacher", and even received teaching job offers. She won a listeners' poll by Radio Mirror magazine as the top ranking comedienne of 19481949, receiving her award at the end of an Our Miss Brooks broadcast that March. "I'm certainly going to try in the coming months to merit the honor you've bestowed upon me, because I understand that if I win this (award) two years in a row, I get to keep Mr. Boynton," she joked. But she was also a hit with the critics; a winter 1949 poll of newspaper and magazine radio editors taken by Motion Picture Daily named her the year's best radio comedienne. 

with the Armed Forces Radio Service, 1940s
Arden had a very brief guest appearance in a 1955 I Love Lucy episode entitled "L.A. at Last" in which she played herself. While awaiting their food at The Brown Derby, a Hollywood restaurant, Lucy (Lucille Ball) and Ethel (Vivian Vance) argue over whether a certain portrait on a nearby wall is Shelley Winters or Judy Holliday. Lucy urges Ethel to ask a lady occupying the next booth, who turns and replies, "Neither. That's Eve Arden." Ethel suddenly realizes she was just talking to Arden herself, who soon passes Lucy and Ethel's table to leave the restaurant while the pair gawk. 

Desilu Productions, jointly owned by Desi Arnaz and Ball during their marriage, was the production company for the Our Miss Brooks television show, which filmed during the same years as I Love Lucy. Ball and Arden became acquainted when they co-starred together in the film Stage Door in 1937. It was Ball, according to numerous radio historians, who suggested Arden for Our Miss Brooks after Shirley Booth auditioned for but failed to land the role and Ball  committed at the time to My Favorite Husband  could not. 

Arden tried another series in the fall of 1957, The Eve Arden Show, but it was canceled in spring of 1958 after twenty-six episodes. More than seven years later, Arden played Nurse Kelton in the episode of "Bewitched" where Tabitha is born and the first episode with Serena in 1966. She later co-starred with Kaye Ballard as her neighbor and in-law, Eve Hubbard, in the 196769 situation comedy The Mothers-in-Law, which was produced by Desi Arnaz after the dissolution of Desilu Productions. 
Eve also played Maude's aunt on the TV Show "Maude."

==Other credits==
Arden was one of many actresses to take on the title roles in Hello, Dolly! and Auntie Mame in the 1960s; in 1967, she won the Sarah Siddons Award for her work in Chicago theatre. Arden was cast in 1983 as the leading lady in what was to be her Broadway comeback in Moose Murders. But she wisely withdrew (and was replaced with the much younger Holland Taylor) after one preview performance, citing "artistic differences", and the show went on to open and close on the same night, becoming known as one of the most legendary flops in Broadway history. 

She became familiar to a new generation of film-goers when she played Principal McGee in both 1978's Grease and 1982's Grease 2, as well as making appearances on such television shows as Bewitched,Alice, Maude and Falcon Crest. In 1985, she appeared as the wicked stepmother in the Faerie Tale Theatre production of Cinderella.

Arden published an autobiography, The Three Phases of Eve, in 1985. In addition to her Academy Award nomination, Arden has two stars on the Hollywood Walk of Fame: Radio and Television (see List of stars on the Hollywood Walk of Fame for addresses). She was inducted into the National Radio Hall of Fame in 1995. 

==Personal life==
Arden was married to Ned Bergen from 1939 to 1947, and to actor Brooks West from 1952 until his death in 1984 from a heart ailment. She and West had four children. She was also involved with Danny Kaye.

==Death==
On November 12, 1990, Arden died from colorectal cancer and heart disease at her home in Los Angeles at the age of 82. She is interred in the Westwood Village Memorial Park Cemetery, Westwood, Los Angeles, California. 

==Filmography==
===Features===

*Song of Love (1929)
*Dancing Lady (1933)
*Oh Doctor (1937)
*Stage Door (1937)
*Cocoanut Grove (1938)
*Having Wonderful Time (1938)
*Letter of Introduction (1938)
*Women in the Wind (1939)
*Big Town Czar (1939)
*The Forgotten Woman (1939)
*Eternally Yours (1939)
*At the Circus (1939)
*A Child Is Born (1940)
*Slightly Honorable (1940)
*She Couldn't Say No (1940)
*No, No, Nanette (1940)
*Comrade X (1940)
*That Uncertain Feeling (1941)
*Ziegfeld Girl (1941)
*She Knew All the Answers (1941)
*San Antonio Rose (1941)
*Whistling in the Dark (1941)
*Manpower (1941)
*Last of the Duanes (1941)
*Sing for Your Supper (1941)
*Bedtime Story (1941)
*Obliging Young Lady (1942)
*Hit Parade of 1943 (1943)
*Let's Face It! (1943)
*Cover Girl (1944)
*The Doughgirls (1944)
*Pan-Americana (1945)

*Earl Carroll Vanities (1945)
*Patrick the Great (1945)
*Mildred Pierce (1945)
*My Reputation (1946)
*The Kid from Brooklyn (1946)
*Night and Day (1946)
*Song of Scheherazade (1947)
*The Arnelo Affair (1947)
*The Unfaithful (1947)
*The Voice of the Turtle (1947)
*One Touch of Venus (1948)
*Whiplash (1948)
*My Dream Is Yours (1949)
*The Lady Takes a Sailor (1949)
*Paid in Full (1950)
*Curtain Call at Cactus Creek (1950)
*Tea for Two (1950)
*Three Husbands (1951)
*Goodbye, My Fancy (1951)
*We're Not Married! (1952)
*The Lady Wants Mink (1953)
*Our Miss Brooks (1956)
*Anatomy of a Murder (1959)
*The Dark at the Top of the Stairs (1960)
*Sergeant Deadhead (1965)
*The Strongest Man in the World (1975)
*Grease (1978)
*Under the Rainbow (1981)
*Pandemonium (1982)
*Grease 2 (1982)

===Short subjects===
*Screen Snapshots: Off the Air (1947)
*Screen Snaphots: Hollywood Life (1954)

==Stage Work==
*Low and Behold (1933)
*Private Lives (1933)
*On Approval (1933)
*Ziegfeld Follies of 1934 (1934)
*Parade (1935)
*Ziegfeld Follies of 1936 (1936)
*Very Warm for May (1939)
*Two for the Show (1940)
*Let's Face It! (1941)
*Over 21 (1950)
*Here Today (1951)
*Auntie Mame (1958)
*Goodbye Charlie (1960)
*The Marriage-Go-Round (1961)
*Beekman Place (1965)
*Hello, Dolly! (1966)
*Barefoot in the Park (1967)
*Cactus Flower (1968)
*Butterflies Are Free (1970)
*Natural Ingredients (1971)
*Silverplate (1971)
*Under Papa's Picture (1973)
*The Most Marvelous News (1977)
*Absurd Person Singular (1978)
*Little Me (1980)
*Moose Murders (1983) (replaced by Holland Taylor after previews)

==References==

==Further reading==
*
*
*

==External links==

*
*Eve Arden at Find a Grave
*AllMovie.com
*
*Literature on Eve Arden



[[Elementary function]]

In mathematics, an elementary function is a function of one variable built from a finite number of exponentials, logarithms, constants, and nth roots through composition and combinations using the four elementary operations (+   ). By allowing these functions (and constants) to be complex numbers, trigonometric functions and their inverses become included in the elementary functions (see trigonometric functions and complex exponentials).

Roots of polynomial equations are the functions implicitly defined as solving a polynomial equation with constant coefficients. For polynomials of degree four and smaller there are explicit formulae for the roots (the formulae are elementary functions), but roots of general higher-degree polynomials are not elementary functions.

Note that some elementary functions, such as roots, logarithms, or inverse trigonometric functions, are not entire functions and their definition may be ambiguous, especially for non-real numbers.

Elementary functions were introduced by Joseph Liouville in a series of papers from 1833 to 1841. An algebraic treatment of elementary functions was started by Joseph Fels Ritt in the 1930s.

==Examples==
Examples of elementary functions include:
:Addition e.g. (x+1)
:Multiplication e.g. (2x)

: 

and

: 

This last function is equal to the inverse cosine trigonometric function in the entire complex domain. Hence, is an elementary function. An example of a function that is not elementary is the error function

: 

a fact that cannot be seen directly from the definition of elementary function but can be proven using the Risch algorithm.

==Differential algebra==

The mathematical definition of an elementary function, or a function in elementary form, is considered in the context of differential algebra. A differential algebra is an algebra with the extra operation of derivation (algebraic version of differentiation). Using the derivation operation new equations can be written and their solutions used in extensions of the algebra. By starting with the field of rational functions, two special types of transcendental extensions (the logarithm and the exponential) can be added to the field building a tower containing elementary functions.

A differential field F is a field F0 (rational functions over the rationals Q for example) together with a derivation map u  u. (Here u is a new function. Sometimes the notation u&prime; is used.) The derivation captures the properties of differentiation, so that for any two elements of the base field, the derivation is linear

: 

and satisfies the Leibniz product rule

: 

An element h is a constant if h = 0. If the base field is over the rationals, care must be taken when extending the field to add the needed transcendental constants.

A function u of a differential extension F of a differential field F is an elementary function over F if the function u
* is algebraic over F, or
* is an exponential, that is, u = u a for a  F, or
* is a logarithm, that is, u = a / a for a  F.
(this is Liouville's theorem).

==See also==
*Differential Galois theory
*Algebraic function
*Transcendental function

==References==

* 
* Joseph Ritt, Differential Algebra, AMS, 1950.

==External links==
* Elementary functions at Encyclopaedia of Mathematics
* 



[[Enchiridion of Epictetus]]

The Enchiridion or Manual of Epictetus (, Enkheirdion Epikttou) is a short manual of Stoic ethical advice compiled by Arrian, a 2nd-century disciple of the Greek philosopher Epictetus.

Although the content is similar to the Discourses of Epictetus, it is not a summary of the Discourses but rather a compilation of practical precepts. Eschewing metaphysics, Arrian focused his attention on Epictetus's work applying philosophy in daily life. The primary theme is that one should accept what happens:

However, "some things are up to us and some are not up to us" and we must act accordingly, taking responsibility for planning and enacting what we can with virtue without becoming upset or disheartened by obstacles and reverses beyond our control.

For many centuries, the Enchiridion maintained its authority both with Christians and Pagans. Two Christian writers Nilus and an anonymous contemporary wrote paraphrases of it in the early 5th century and Simplicius of Cilicia wrote a commentary upon it in the 6th. The work was first published in Latin translation by Poliziano in Rome in 1493; Beroaldus published another edition in Bologna in 1496. The original Greek was first published in Venice with the Simplicius's commentary in 1528 and an English translation appeared as early as 1567. The book was a common school text in Scotland during the Scottish Enlightenment. Adam Smith had a 1670 edition in his library, acquired as a schoolboy. 

==English translations==
There have been many English translations of the Enchiridion. Translations of the Discourses (e.g. Elizabeth Carter's and George Long's) have included the Enchiridion and it has often been included with other moral writings from the ancient world, such as the Tablet of Cebes. Some notable translations of the Enchiridion include:

*James Sandford, 1567, The Manual of Epictetus, Translated out of Greek into French, and now into English.
*John Healey, 1610, Epictetus his Manual and Cebes his Table.
*John Davies, 1670, The Life and Philosophy of Epictetus, with the Emblem of Human Life by Cebes.
*Ellis Walker, 1692, Epictetus, his Enchiridion made English in a poetical paraphrase.
*George Stanhope, 1694, Epictetus his Morals, with Simplicius his Comment.
*William Bond, 1736, The Manual of Epictetus the Philosopher.
*Thomas William Rolleston, 1881, The Encheiridion of Epictetus.
*Thomas Talbot, 1881, The Encheiridion of Epictetus and The Golden Verses of Pythagoras.
*P. E. Matheson, 1916, The Discourses of Epictetus, The Manual Of Epictetus
*Nicholas P. White, 1983, Handbook of Epictetus (Hackett Publishing co. Indianapolis, Indiana)
*Robert Dobbin, 2008, Discourses and Selected Writings (Penguin Classics, City of Westminster, London)

== References ==

==External links==

* Text of translation by Elizabeth Carter, circa 1750, The Enchiridion
* Text of translation by P. E. Matheson, 1916, The Discourses of Epictetus, The Manual Of Epictetus
* Free audiobook of The Enchiridion (Elizabeth Carter translation) at Librivox.org.
* Simplicius of Cilicia, Commentary on the Enchiridion of Epictetus, translated by George Stanhope, 1722.



[[Emperor Kinmei]]

 was the 29th emperor of Japan, Imperial Household Agency (Kunaich):  (29); retrieved 2013-8-22. according to the traditional order of succession. Titsingh, Isaac. (1834). pp. 3436; Brown, Delmer. (1979). Gukansh, pp. 261262; Varley, H. Paul. (1980). pp. 123124; Ponsonby-Fane, Richard. (1959). The Imperial House of Japan, p. 45. 

His reign is said to have spanned the years from 539 through 571. Kinmei is the first for which contemporary historiography is able to assign verifiable dates. Hoye, Timothy. (1999). Japanese Politics: Fixed and Floating Worlds, p. 78; excerpt, "According to legend, the first Japanese emperor was Jimmu. Along with the next 13 emperors, Jimmu is not considered an actual, historical figure. Historically verifiable Emperors of Japan date from the early sixth century with Kimmei. 

==Traditional narrative==
Kinmei's contemporary title would not have been tenn, as most historians believe this title was not introduced until the reigns of Emperor Tenmu and Empress Jit. Rather, it was presumably Sumeramikoto or Amenoshita Shiroshimesu kimi (), meaning "the great king who rules all under heaven." Alternatively, Kinmei might have been referred to as (/) or the "Great King of Yamato."

===Events of Kinmei's life===
Because of several chronological discrepancies in the account of Emperor Kinmei in the Nihon Shoki, some believe that his was actually a rival court to that of Emperors Ankan and Senka. Nevertheless, according to the traditional account, it was not until the death of Emperor Kinmei's older brother Emperor Senka that he gained the throne.

According to this account, Emperor Senka died in 539 at the age of 73; Varley, p. 121. and succession passed to the third son of Emperor Keitai. This Imperial Prince was the next youngest brother of Emperor Senka. He would come to be known as Emperor Kinmei. He established his court at Shikishima no Kanazashi Palace () in Yamato. Brown, p. 262. 

The emperor's chief counselors were:
* omi (Great Imperial chieftain): Soga no Iname no Sukune, also known as Soga no Iname. 
* muraji (Great Deity chieftain): Monotobe Okoshi no Muraji, also known as Mononobe no Okoshi. 
* muraji (Great Deity chieftain): tomo Kanamura Maro, also known as Nakatomi no Kanamura. 

Although the imperial court was not moved to the Asuka region of Japan until 592, Emperor Kinmei's rule is considered by some to be the beginning of the Asuka period of Yamato Japan, particularly by those who associate the Asuka period primarily with the introduction of Buddhism to Japan from Korea.

According to the Nihon Shoki, Emperor Kinmei received a bronze statue of Buddha as a gift from the king of Paekche King Song Myong (, Seimei ) along with a significant envoy of artisans, monks, and other artifacts in 552. (However, according to the Jg Shtoku H Teisetsu, Buddhism was introduced in 538.) This episode is widely regarded as the official introduction of Buddhism to the country.

With the introduction of a new religion to the court, a deep rift developed between the Mononobe clan, who supported the worship of Japan's traditional deities, and the Soga clan, who supported the adoption of Buddhism.

According to the Nihon Shoki, Emperor Kinmei ruled until his death in 571 and was buried in the Hinokuma no Sakai Burial Mound (). An alternate stronger theory holds that he was actually buried in the Misemaruyama Tumulus () located in Kashihara City ().

This emperor is traditionally venerated at a memorial Shinto shrine (misasagi) at Nara. The Imperial Household Agency designates the Nara location as Kinmei's mausoleum. It is formally named Hinokuma no saki Ai no misasagi; Ponsonby-Fane, p. 419. however, the actual sites of the graves of the early emperors remain problematic, according to some historians and archaeologists.

==Genealogy==
Emperor Kinmei's father was Emperor Keitai and his mother was Emperor Ninken's daughter, . In his lifetime, he was known by the name .

Kinmei had six Empresses and 25 Imperial children (16 sons and 9 daughters). According to Nihongi, he had six wives; but Kojiki only gives five wives, identifying the third consort to the sixth one. The first three were his nieces, daughters of his half brother Senka; two others were sisters, daughters of the Omi Soga no Iname

* Princess Ishi-Hime (or Iwa-hime), daughter of Emperor Senka by his Empress Tachibana no Nakatsu; Empress 540 ; Grand Empress 572; 3 imperial children :
** Imperial Prince Yata no Tamakatsu no Oe (eldest son)
** Imperial Prince Nunakura Futotama-Shiki (Emperor Bidatsu); born 538 (second son)
** Imperial Princess Kasanui (also named Princess Satake)

* Princess Kura Wayaka-Hime, daughter of Emperor Senka by his Empress Tachibana no Nakatsu; second consort; 1 imperial Prince :
** Imperial Prince Iso no Kami, born 539/540

* Princess Hikage, daughter of Emperor Senka probably by a concubine; third consort; 1 imperial Prince:
** Imperial Prince Kura (Prince Soga no Kura)

* Soga no Kitashi Hime, daughter of Soga no Iname ; fourth consort; died before 612; 13 imperial children :

** Imperial Prince Oe or Ikebe (Emperor YOMEI); born 540 (fourth son)
** Imperial Princess Ihane-hime or Ihakumo, Ise Virgin; had to resign her charge being convicted of intrigue with her half brother Imperial Prince Mubaragi
** Imperial Prince Atori
** Imperial Princess Nukatabe (Empress SUIKO), born 553, died 626
** Imperial Prince Maroko
** Imperial Princess Ohoyake
** Imperial Prince Iso no Kami Be (Imigako)
** Imperial Prince Yamashiro
** Imperial Princess Ohotomo or Ohomata; born about 560; married to her nephew Prince Oshisako no Hikohito no Oe, son of Emperor Bidatsu
** Imperial Prince Sakurawi
** Imperial Princess Katano
** Imperial Prince Tachibana Moto no Wakugo
** Imperial Princess Toneri, born about 565; died 603; married to her nephew Prince Tame Toyora, son of Emperor Yomei

* Soga no Oane hime, daughter of Soga no Iname ; fifth consort ; 5 imperial children:
** Imperial Prince Mubaragi
** Imperial Prince Katsuraki
** Imperial Princess Hasetsukabe no Anahobe no Hashihito, born about 560; died 621; married (A) to her half brother Emperor Yomei; married (B) to her nephew and stepson Prince Tame Toyora, son of Emperor Yomei
** Imperial Prince Amatsukabe Anahobe (Prince Sume-Irodo), killed 7 VI 587
** Imperial Prince Hatsusebe (Emperor SUSHUN)

* Nukako no Iratsume, daughter of Kasuga no Hifuri no Omi ;sixth consort; 2 imperial children:
** Imperial Princess Kasuga no Yamada no Iratsume
** Imperial Prince Tachibana no Maro

==See also==
* Emperor of Japan
* List of Emperors of Japan
* Imperial cult

==Notes==

==References==
* Aston, William George. (1896). Nihongi: Chronicles of Japan from the Earliest Times to A.D. 697. London: Kegan Paul, Trench, Trubner. OCLC 448337491
* Brown, Delmer M. and Ichir Ishida, eds. (1979). Gukansh: The Future and the Past. Berkeley: University of California Press. 10-ISBN 0-520-03460-0; 13-ISBN 978-0-520-03460-0; OCLC 251325323
* Ponsonby-Fane, Richard Arthur Brabazon. (1959). The Imperial House of Japan. Kyoto: Ponsonby Memorial Society. OCLC 194887
* Titsingh, Isaac. (1834). Nihon Odai Ichiran; ou, Annales des empereurs du Japon. Paris: Royal Asiatic Society, Oriental Translation Fund of Great Britain and Ireland. OCLC 5850691
* Varley, H. Paul. (1980). Jinn Shtki: A Chronicle of Gods and Sovereigns. New York: Columbia University Press. 10-ISBN 0-231-04940-4; 13-ISBN 978-0-231-04940-5; OCLC 59145842

 
 



[[Emperor Bidatsu]]

 was the 30th emperor of Japan, Imperial Household Agency (Kunaich),  (30); retrieved 2013-1-31. according to the traditional order of succession. Brown, Delmer. (1979). Gukansh, pp. 262-263; Varley, H. Paul. (1980). Jinn Shtki. pp. 124-125; Titsingh, Isaac. (1834). Annales des empereurs du Japon, pp. 36-37; Nussbaum, Louis-Frdric. (2002). "Traditional order of Tenn" in Japan encyclopedia, pp. 962-963. 

The years of reign of Bidatsu start in 572 and end in 585; however, there are no certain dates for this emperor's life or reign. Nussbaum, "Traditional order of Tenn" at pp. 962-963; excerpt, "dates ... should be treated with caution up to Emperor Bidatsu Tenn, the thirtieth on the list." The names and sequence of the early emperors were not confirmed as "traditional" until the reign of Emperor Kammu, who was the 50th monarch of the Yamato dynasty. Aston, William George. (1896). Nihongi, p. 109 n1. 

==Traditional narrative==
Historians consider details about the life of Emperor Bidatsu to be possibly legendary, but probable. Kelly, Charles F. "Kofun Culture," Japanese Archaeology. April 27, 2009; retrieved 2013-1-31. The name Bidatsu-tenn was created for him posthumously by later generations.

In the Nihonshoki, he is called .

His palace in Yamato Province was called Osada no Miya of Iware. 

==Events of Bidatsu's life==
In the 15th year of Kimmei's reign, Bidatsu was named Crown Prince. 

In the , the old emperor died, and the succession (senso) was received by his second son. Soon after, Emperor Bidatsu is said to have acceded to the throne (sokui). Titsingh, p. 36; Varley, p. 44; n.b., the distinct act of senso is unrecognized prior to Emperor Tenji; and all sovereigns except Jit, Yzei, Go-Toba, and Fushimi have senso and sokui in the same year until the reign of Emperor Go-Murakami; compare Imperial Household Agency (Kunaich), Ceremony of Accession (Sokui-no-Rei); retrieved 2013-1-31. 

Bidatsu's contemporary title would not have been tenn, as most historians believe this title was not introduced until the reigns of Emperor Tenmu and Empress Jit. Rather, it was presumably Sumeramikoto or Amenoshita Shiroshimesu kimi (), meaning "the great king who rules all under heaven." Alternatively, Bidatsu might have been referred to as (/) or the "Great King of Yamato."

Bidatsu's reign was marked by power struggles about Buddhism. The two most important men in the court of Bidatsu were Soga no Umako and Mononobe no Moriya. Titsingh, p. 36. Soga supported the growth of Buddhism, and Moriya wanted to stop it. Brown, pp. 262-263. 

Bidatsu sought to re-establish relations with Korean Kingdoms and, according to Nihonshoki, his court successfully established relations with Baekje and Silla, two of the Three Kingdoms of Korea.

The emperor died from a disease which afflicted him with sores, apparently the first royal victim of smallpox in Japan. Hopkins, Donald R. (2002). The Greatest Killer, p. 106, citing Aston (1896). Nihongi, Vol. II. p. 104. 

The actual site of Bidatsu's grave is known. This emperor is traditionally venerated at a memorial Shinto shrine (misasagi) at Osaka.

The Imperial Household Agency designates this location as Bidatsu's mausoleum. It is formally named Kawachi no Shinaga no naka no o no misasagi. Ponsonby-Fane, Richard. (1959) The Imperial House of Japan, p. 419. 

==Genealogy==
He was the second son of Emperor Kimmei. His mother, Ishi-hime, was a daughter of Emperor Senka. Brown, p. 262. 

Although he had many children, none of them would ever become emperor. Ponsonby-Fane, p. 46. According to Gukansh, Bidatsu had four empresses and 16 Imperial children (6 sons and 10 daughters). 

Bidatsu's first empress, Hirohime, died in the fifth year of his reign. To replace her, he elevated one of his consorts, Princess Nukatabe, to the rank of empress. Nukatabe was his half-sister by their father Kimmei. Later she ascended to the throne in her own right and is today known as Empress Suiko.

He was succeeded first by one of his brothers, Emperor Ymei, then by another, Emperor Sushun, and then Empress Suiko, his sister and wife, before his grandson, Emperor Jomei, eventually took the throne.
* Princess Hiro Hime, daughter of Prince Mate no Okinaga ; Empress 572; died 575 ; 3 imperial children:
** Princess Sakanobori
** Princess Uji no Shitsukahi
** Prince Oshisako no Hikohito no Oe,born about 556, married (A) Princess Ohomata (Ohotomo), his aunt, daughter of Emperor Kimmei and Soga no Kitashi-Hime, by whom he had a son and a daughter ;(B) Princess Nukate-Hime (his half sister), by whom he had 3 sons ; (C) Princess Woharida (his half sister), by whom he had a son and a daughter :
*** Eldest son : Prince Chinu,born about 575, married to Princess Kibitsu-Hime, by whom he had a son and a daughter: Princess Takara (Empress Kgyoku), born 594,and Prince Karu (Emperor Ktoku)
*** Princesse Kuhada
*** Prince Tamura (Emperor Jomei), born 593
*** Prince Nakatsu
*** Prince Tara
*** Prince Yamashiro
*** Princesse Kasanuhi
* Ominako no Iratsume (Kusu Kimi no Iratsuko), daughter of Kasuga no Nakatsu Kimi no Omi ; second consort ; 4 imperial children :
** Prince Naniha
** Prince Kasuga
** Princess Kuwada
** Prince Ohomata
* Unako no Otoshi (Wo-Umako no Iratsume), daughter of Ohoka no Obito no Okuma ; third consort; 2 imperial children :
** Princess Futohime (Princess Sakurawi)
** Princess Nukate Hime (Princess Takara or Tamura), born about 570, married to Prince Oshisako no Hikohito no Oe, her half brother
* Princess Nukatabe, born 553, died 628; daughter of Emperor Kimmei and Soga no Kitashi hime; imperial consort ; Empress 576,(Empress Suik) ; 7 imperial children :
** Princess Uji no Shitsukahi (Uji no Kahitako), born about 570, married to Prince Shtoku, son of Emperor Ymei and Empress Anahobe
** Prince Takeda
** Princess Woharida, born about 572, married to her half brother Oshisako no Hikohito no Oe
** Princess Umori (Karu no Mori)
** Prince Wohari
** Princess Tame, married to her nephew Emperor Jomei
** Princess Sakurawi no Yumihari

==See also==
* Emperor of Japan
* List of Emperors of Japan
* Imperial cult

==Notes==

==References==
* Aston, William George. (1896). Nihongi: Chronicles of Japan from the Earliest Times to A.D. 697. London: Kegan Paul, Trench, Trubner. OCLC 448337491
* Brown, Delmer M. and Ichir Ishida, eds. (1979). Gukansh: The Future and the Past. Berkeley: University of California Press. 10-ISBN 0-520-03460-0; 13-ISBN 978-0-520-03460-0; OCLC 251325323
* Hopkins, Donald R. (2002). The Greatest Killer. Chicago: University of Chicago Press. 10-ISBN 0226351661/13-ISBN 9780226351667; 10-ISBN 0226351688/13-ISBN 9780226351681; OCLC 49305765
* Ponsonby-Fane, Richard Arthur Brabazon. (1959). The Imperial House of Japan. Kyoto: Ponsonby Memorial Society. OCLC 194887
* Titsingh, Isaac. (1834). Annales des empereurs du Japon (Nihon Odai Ichiran). Paris: Royal Asiatic Society, Oriental Translation Fund of Great Britain and Ireland. OCLC 5850691
* Varley, H. Paul. (1980). Jinn Shtki: A Chronicle of Gods and Sovereigns. New York: Columbia University Press. 10-ISBN 0-231-04940-4; 13-ISBN 978-0-231-04940-5; OCLC 59145842

 
 



[[Emperor Ymei]]

 was the 31st Emperor of Japan, Imperial Household Agency (Kunaich):  (31) according to the traditional order of succession. Ponsonby-Fane, Richard. (1959). The Imperial House of Japan, p. 46. 

Ymei's reign spanned the years from 585 until his death in 587. Brown, Delmer et al. (1979). Gukansh, p.263; Titsingh, Isaac. (1834). 

==Traditional narrative==
He was called Tachibana no Toyohi no Mikoto () in the Nihonshoki. He was also referred to as and after the palace in which he lived. He acceded to the throne after the death of his half brother, Emperor Bidatsu.

The influential courtiers from Emperor Bidatsu's reign, Mononobe no Moriya, also known as Mononobe Yuge no Moriya no Muraji or as -muraji Yuge no Moriya, and Soga no Umako no Sukune, both remained in their positions during the reign of Emperor Ymei. Umako was the son of Sogo Iname no Sukune, and therefore, he would have been one of Emperor Ymei's cousins.

* 585: In the 14th year of Bidatsu-tenn 's reign (14), he died; and the succession (senso) was received by his younger brother. Shortly thereafter, Emperor Ymei is said to have acceded to the throne (sokui). Titsingh, p. 37; Brown, pp. 263; Varley, p. 44; n.b., A distinct act of senso is unrecognized prior to Emperor Tenji; and all sovereigns except Jit, Yzei, Go-Toba, and Fushimi have senso and sokui in the same year until the reign of Emperor Go-Murakami. 

Ymei's contemporary title would not have been tenn, as most historians believe this title was not introduced until the reigns of Emperor Tenmu and Empress Jit. Rather, it was presumably Sumeramikoto or Amenoshita Shiroshimesu kimi (), meaning "the great king who rules all under heaven." Alternatively, Ymei might have been referred to as (/) or the "Great King of Yamato."

Emperor Ymei's reign lasted only two years; and he died at the age of 69. Varley, H. Paul. (1980). Jinn Shtki, p. 126. 

* 587, in the 4th month: Ymei died and his body was placed in a coffin, but not buried. 
* 587, in the 5th month: Armed conflict over the succession erupted. Shintoist, anti-Buddhist forces of Yuge no Moriya no Muraji (also known as -muraji Yuge no Moriya) battled unsuccessfully against the pro-Buddhist forces of Prince Shtoku and Soga Umako no Sukune. The opposition to Buddhism was entirely destroyed. Brown, pp. 262263. 
* 587, in the 7th month: The body of former Emperor Ymei was buried. 

Because of the brevity of his reign, Emperor Ymei was not responsible for any radical changes in policy, but his support of Buddhism created tension with supporters of Shintoism who opposed its introduction. Moriya, the most influential supporter of Shintoism, conspired with Emperor Ymei's brother, Prince Anahobe, and after Emperor Yomei's death they made an abortive attempt to seize the throne. Although Emperor Ymei is reported to have died from illness, this incident and the brevity of his reign have led some to speculate that he was actually assassinated by Moriya and Prince Anahobe.

Memorial Shinto shrine and mausoleum honoring Emperor Ymei.
The actual site of Ymei's grave is known. This emperor is traditionally venerated at a memorial Shinto shrine (misasagi) at Osaka.

The Imperial Household Agency designates this location as Ymei's mausoleum. It is formally named Kawachi no Shinaga no hara no misasagi. Ponsonby-Fane, p. 419. 

==Genealogy==
Emperor Ymei was the fourth son of Emperor Kimmei and his mother was Soga no Kitashihime, a daughter of Soga no Iname. Varley, p.125. 

*In 586, Emperor Ymei took his half-sister , whose mother was another of Iname's daughters, Soga no Oane Hime, as his consort. Princess Hashihito no Anahobe bore him four sons, including Prince Shotoku, who would later become crown prince and regent to Empress Suiko. The second was called the Imperial Prince Kume; the third was called the Imperial Prince Yeguri, the fourth was called the Imperial Prince Mamuta.

*Ishikina, daughter of Soga no Iname was appointed a Consort. She bore the Imperial Prince Tame (or Toyora).

*Hiroko, daughter of Ihamura, Ktsuraki no Atahe, bore the Imperial Prince Maroko and the Imperial Princess Nukade hime.

Yomei had three Empresses and seven Imperial sons and daughters. Brown, p. 263. 

Ymei's son, Prince Umayado, is also known as Prince Shtoku. Varley, pp.125129. 

==See also==
* Emperor of Japan
* List of Emperors of Japan
* Imperial cult

==Notes==

==References==
* Aston, William George. (1896). Nihongi: Chronicles of Japan from the Earliest Times to A.D. 697. London: Kegan Paul, Trench, Trubner. OCLC 448337491
* Brown, Delmer M. and Ichir Ishida, eds. (1979). Gukansh: The Future and the Past. Berkeley: University of California Press. 10-ISBN 0-520-03460-0; 13-ISBN 978-0-520-03460-0; OCLC 251325323
* Ponsonby-Fane, Richard Arthur Brabazon. (1959). The Imperial House of Japan. Kyoto: Ponsonby Memorial Society. OCLC 194887
* Titsingh, Isaac. (1834). Nihon Odai Ichiran; ou, Annales des empereurs du Japon. Paris: Royal Asiatic Society, Oriental Translation Fund of Great Britain and Ireland. OCLC 5850691
* Varley, H. Paul. (1980). Jinn Shtki: A Chronicle of Gods and Sovereigns. New York: Columbia University Press. 10-ISBN 0-231-04940-4; 13-ISBN 978-0-231-04940-5; OCLC 59145842

 
 



[[Emperor Sushun]]

 was the 32nd emperor of Japan, Imperial Household Agency (Kunaich):  (32) according to the traditional order of succession. Ponsonby-Fane, Richard. (1959). The Imperial House of Japan, p. 47. 

Sushun's reign spanned the years from 587 through 592. Titsingh, Isaac. (1834). Annales des empereurs du Japon, pp. 3839; Brown, Delmer et al. (1979). Gukansh, p. 263; Varley, H. Paul. (1980). Jinn Shtki, p. 126. 

==Traditional narrative==
Before his ascension to the Chrysanthemum Throne, his personal name (his imina) Brown, pp. 264; n.b., Up until the time of Emperor Jomei, the personal names of the emperors (their imina) were very long and people did not generally use them. The number of characters in each name diminished after Jomei's reign. was Hatsusebe-shinn, also known as Hatsusebe no Waka-sazaki. Aston, William. (2005). Nihongi, p. 112. 

His name at birth was . He was the twelfth son of Emperor Kimmei. His mother was , a daughter of Soga no Iname, Varley, p. 126. who was the chief, or -omi, of the Soga clan.

He succeeded his half brother, Emperor Ymei in 587, and lived in the Kurahashi Palace (Kurahashi no Miya) in Yamato. Brown, p. 263; Varley, p. 126. 

* 587: In the 2nd year of Ymei-tenn 's reign (2), the emperor died, and despite a dispute over who should follow him as sovereign, the succession (senso) was received by another son of Emperor Kimmei, one of Ymei's younger brothers. Shortly thereafter, Emperor Sushun is said to have acceded to the throne (sokui). Titsingh, p. 38; Brown, 263; Varley, p. 44; n.b., A distinct act of senso is unrecognized prior to Emperor Tenji; and all sovereigns except Jit, Yzei, Go-Toba, and Fushimi have senso and sokui in the same year until the reign of Emperor Go-Murakami. 

Sushun's contemporary title would not have been Tenn, as most historians believe this title was not introduced until the reigns of Emperor Tenmu and Empress Jit. Rather, it was presumably or , meaning "the great king who rules all under heaven." Alternatively, Sushun might have been referred to as (/) or the "Great King of Yamato."

He came to the throne with the support of the Soga clan and Empress Suiko, his half sister and the widow of Emperor Bidatsu. Initially, the Mononobe clan, a rival clan of the Sogas, allied with Prince Anahobe, another son of Kimmei, and attempted to have him installed as emperor. Soga no Umako, who succeeded his father as omi of the Soga clan, eventually killed Mononobe no Moriya at the Battle of Shigisan, the head of the Mononobe clan, which led to its decline. Umako then installed Emperor Sushun on the throne.

As time went on, Sushun eventually became resentful of Umako's power, and wanted him deposed. It is said that one day, he saw a wild boar and proclaimed, "I want to kill Soga Umako like this wild boar." This angered Soga no Umako and, perhaps out of fear of being struck first, Umako had Sushun assassinated by in 592.

Emperor Sushun's reign lasted for five years before his death at the age of 72. 

The actual site of Sushun's grave is known. This emperor is traditionally venerated at a memorial Shinto shrine (misasagi) at Nara.

The Imperial Household Agency designates this location as Ymei's mausoleum. It is formally named Kurahashi no oka no e no misasagi. Ponsonby-Fane, p. 420. 

==Genealogy==
Sushun had one Empress and two Imperial children. Brown, p. 263. 

*Empress: tomo no Koteko, Jochi Daigaku. (1989). Monumenta Nipponica, Vol. 44, p. 455  Snippet view. also known as Otehime Kawamata municipal website:  
**Imperial Prince Hachiko
**Imperial Princess Nishikite
*Consort: Kahakami no Iratsume, a daughter of Soga no Umako
*Wife: Futsuhime, Mononobe no Moriya's younger sister
*Mother Unknown
**Sadayo no Shinno

==See also==
* Emperor of Japan
* List of Emperors of Japan
* Imperial cult

==Notes==

==References==
* Aston, William George. (1896). Nihongi: Chronicles of Japan from the Earliest Times to A.D. 697. London: Kegan Paul, Trench, Trubner. OCLC 448337491
* Brown, Delmer M. and Ichir Ishida, eds. (1979). Gukansh: The Future and the Past. Berkeley: University of California Press. 10-ISBN 0-520-03460-0; 13-ISBN 978-0-520-03460-0; OCLC 251325323
* Jochi Daigaku. (1989). Monumenta Nipponica, Vol. 44. Tokyo: Sophia University Press. OCLC 1640509
* Ponsonby-Fane, Richard Arthur Brabazon. (1959). The Imperial House of Japan. Kyoto: Ponsonby Memorial Society. OCLC 194887
* Titsingh, Isaac. (1834). Nihon Odai Ichiran; ou, Annales des empereurs du Japon. Paris: Royal Asiatic Society, Oriental Translation Fund of Great Britain and Ireland. OCLC 5850691
* Varley, H. Paul. (1980). Jinn Shtki: A Chronicle of Gods and Sovereigns. New York: Columbia University Press. 10-ISBN 0-231-04940-4; 13-ISBN 978-0-231-04940-5; OCLC 59145842

 
 



[[Empress Suiko]]

 (554  15 April 628) was the 33rd monarch of Japan, Imperial Household Agency (Kunaich):  (33) according to the traditional order of succession. Ponsonby-Fane, Richard. (1959). The Imperial House of Japan, p. 48. 

Suiko's reign spanned the years from 593 until her death in 628. Brown, Delmer et al. (1979). Gukansh, pp. 263264; Varley, H. Paul. (1980). Jinn Shtki, pp. 126129; Titsingh, Isaac. (1834). 

In the history of Japan, Suiko was the first of eight women to take on the role of empress regnant. The seven women sovereigns reigning after Suiko were Kgyoku/Saimei, Jit, Gemmei, Gensh, Kken/Shtoku, Meish and Go-Sakuramachi.

==Traditional narrative==
Before her ascension to the Chrysanthemum Throne, her personal name (her imina) Brown, pp. 264; prior to Emperor Jomei, the personal names of the emperors (their iminia) were very long and people did not generally use them. The number of characters in each name diminished after Jomei's reign. was Mikekashiya-hime-no-mikoto, Varley, p. 126. also called Toyomike Kashikiya hime no Mikoto. Ashton, William. (2005). Nihongi, p. 95 n.2. 

Empress Suiko had several names including Princess Nukatabe and (possibly posthumous) Toyomike Kashikiya. She was the third daughter of Emperor Kimmei. Her mother was Soga no Iname's daughter, Soga no Kitashihime. Suiko was the younger sister of Emperor Ymei. They had the same mother.

===Events of Suiko's life===
Empress Suiko was a consort to her half-brother, Emperor Bidatsu, but after Bidatsu's first wife died she became his official consort and was given the title kisaki (official consort of the emperor). She bore seven sons.

After Bidatsu's death, Suiko's brother, Emperor Ymei, came to power for about two years before dying of illness. Upon Ymei's death, another power struggle arose between the Soga clan and the Mononobe clan, with the Sogas supporting Prince Hatsusebe and the Mononobes supporting Prince Anahobe. The Sogas prevailed once again and Prince Hatsusebe acceded to the throne as Emperor Sushun in 587. However, Sushun began to resent the power of Soga no Umako, the head of the Soga clan, and Umako, perhaps out of fear that Sushun might strike first, had him assassinated by in 592. When asked to accede to the throne to fill the power vacuum that subsequently developed, Suiko became the first of what would be several examples in Japanese history where a woman was chosen to accede to the throne to avert a power struggle.

* 593 : In the 2nd year of Sushun-tenn 's reign (2), he died; and contemporary scholars then construed that the succession (senso) Varley, p. 44; a distinct act of senso is unrecognized prior to Emperor Tenji; and all sovereigns except Jit, Yzei, Go-Toba, and Fushimi have senso and sokui in the same year until the reign of Emperor Go-Murakami. was received by the consort of former Emperor Bidatsu. Shortly thereafter, Empress Suiko is said to have acceded to the throne (sokui). Titsingh, p. 39; Brown, pp. 263264; Varley, p. 126-127. 

Suiko's contemporary title would not have been tenn, as most historians believe this title was not introduced until the reigns of Emperor Tenmu and Empress Jit. Rather, it was presumably Sumeramikoto or Amenoshita Shiroshimesu kimi (), meaning "the great Queen who rules all under heaven." Alternatively, Suiko might have been referred to as (/) or the "Great Queen of Yamato."

Prince Shtoku was appointed regent the following year. Although political power during Suiko's reign is widely viewed as having been wielded by Prince Shtoku and Soga no Umako, Suiko was far from powerless. The mere fact that she survived and her reign endured suggests she had significant political skills.

In 599, an earthquake destroyed buildings throughout Yamato province in what is now Nara Prefecture. Hammer, Joshua. (2006). Yokohama Burning: The Deadly 1923 Earthquake and Fire that Helped Forge the Path to World War II, p. 62-63. 

Suiko's refusal to grant Soga no Umako's request that he be granted the imperial territory known as Kazuraki no Agata in 624 is cited as evidence of her independence from his influence. Some of the many achievements under Empress Suiko's reign include the official recognition of Buddhism by the issuance of the Flourishing Three Treasures Edict in 594. Suiko was also one of the first Buddhist monarchs in Japan and had taken the vows of a nun shortly before becoming empress.

The reign of this empress was marked by the opening of relations with the Sui court in 600, the adoption of the Twelve Level Cap and Rank System in 603 and the adoption of the Seventeen-article constitution in 604.

The adoption of the Sexegenary cycle calendar (Jikkan Jnishi) in Japan is attributed to Empress Suiko in 604. Nussbaum, Louis-Frdric. (2005). "Jikkan Jnishi" in ; n.b., Louis-Frdric is pseudonym of Louis-Frdric Nussbaum, see Deutsche Nationalbibliothek Authority File 

At a time when imperial succession was generally determined by clan leaders, rather than the emperor, Suiko left only vague indications of succession to two candidates while on her deathbed. One, Prince Tamura, was a grandson of Emperor Bidatsu and was supported by the main line of Sogas, including Soga no Emishi. The other, Prince Yamashiro, was a son of Prince Shtoku and had the support of some lesser members of the Soga clan. After a brief struggle within the Soga clan in which one of Prince Yamashiro's main supporters was killed, Prince Tamura was chosen and he acceded to the throne as Emperor Jomei in 629.

Empress Suiko ruled for 35 years. Although there were seven other reigning empresses, their successors were most often selected from amongst the males of the paternal Imperial bloodline, which is why some conservative scholars argue that the women's reigns were temporary and that male-only succession tradition must be maintained in the 21st century. "Life in the Cloudy Imperial Fishbowl," Japan Times. 27 March 2007. Empress Gemmei, who was followed on the throne by her daughter, Empress Gensh, remains the sole exception to this conventional argument.

Memorial Shinto shrine and mausoleum honoring Empress Suiko.
The actual site of Suiko's grave is known. This empress is traditionally venerated at a memorial Shinto shrine (misasagi) at Osaka.

The Imperial Household Agency designates this location as Suiko's mausoleum. It is formally named Shinaga no Yamada no misasagi. Ponsonby-Fane, p. 420. 

==See also==
* Japanese empresses
* Emperor of Japan
* List of Emperors of Japan
* Imperial cult

==Notes==

==References==
* Aston, William George. (1896). Nihongi: Chronicles of Japan from the Earliest Times to A.D. 697. London: Kegan Paul, Trench, Trubner. OCLC 448337491
* Brown, Delmer M. and Ichir Ishida, eds. (1979). Gukansh: The Future and the Past. Berkeley: University of California Press. 10-ISBN 0-520-03460-0; 13-ISBN 978-0-520-03460-0; OCLC 251325323
* Hammer, Joshua. (2006). Yokohama Burning: The Deadly 1923 Earthquake and Fire that Helped Forge the Path to World War II. New York: Simon & Schuster. 10-ISBN 0-7432-6465-7; 13-ISBN 978-0-7432-6465-5
* Nussbaum, Louis-Frdric and Kthe Roth. (2005). Japan encyclopedia. Cambridge: Harvard University Press. 10-ISBN 0-674-01753-6; 13-ISBN 978-0-674-01753-5; OCLC 58053128
* Ponsonby-Fane, Richard Arthur Brabazon. (1959). The Imperial House of Japan. Kyoto: Ponsonby Memorial Society. OCLC 194887
* Titsingh, Isaac. (1834). Nihon Odai Ichiran; ou, Annales des empereurs du Japon. Paris: Royal Asiatic Society, Oriental Translation Fund of Great Britain and Ireland. OCLC 5850691
* Varley, H. Paul. (1980). A Chronicle of Gods and Sovereigns: Jinn Shtki of Kitabatake Chikafusa. New York: Columbia University Press. 10-ISBN 0231049404/13-ISBN 9780231049405; OCLC 6042764

 
 



[[Empress Kgyoku]]

, also known as , was the 35th Imperial Household Agency (Kunaich): () (35) and () (37) and 37th monarch of Japan, Kunaich:  (37) according to the traditional order of succession. Ponsonby-Fane, Richard. (1959). The Imperial House of Japan, pp. 49, 51. 

Kgyoku's reign spanned the years from 642645. Her reign as Saimei encompassed 655661. In other words, 
* 642: She ascended the throne as Kgyoku-tenn, and she stepped down in response to the assassination of Soga no Iruka (see: Isshi Incident).
* 645: She abdicated in favor of her brother, who would become known as Emperor Ktoku
* 654: Ktoku died; and the throne was vacant.
* 655: She re-ascended, beginning a new reign as Saimei-tenn.
* 661: Saimei ruled until her death caused the throne to be vacant again.
The two reigns of this one woman spanned the years from 642 through 661. Brown, Delmer et al. (1979). Gokansh, p. 265-267; Varley, H. Paul. (1980). Jinn Shtki. p. 130-134; Titsingh, Isaac. (1834). 

In the history of Japan, Kgyoku/Saimei was the second of eight women to take on the role of empress regnant. The sole female monarch before Kgyoku/Saimei was (a) Suiko-tenn. The six women sovereigns reigning after Kgyoku/Saimei were (b) Jit, (c) Gemmei, (d) Gensh, (e) Kken/Shtoku, (f) Meish, and (g) Go-Sakuramachi.

==Traditional narrative==
Before her ascension to the Chrysanthemum Throne, her personal name (imina) Brown, pp. 264; prior to Emperor Jomei, the personal names of the emperors (imina) were very long and people did not generally use them; however, the number of characters in each name diminished after Jomei's reign. was . Ponsonby-Fane, p. 8. As empress, her name would have been Ametoyo Takara Ikashi Hitarashi hime. Ashton, William. (2005). Nihongi, p. 171; Ponsonby-Fane, p. 8. 

Princess Takara (Takara no miko) was a great-granddaughter of Emperor Bidatsu. Brown, p. 265. She became the wife and Empress consort of her uncle Emperor Jomei. The Imperial marriage produced three children: 
* Prince Naka no e (Emperor Tenji)
* Prince ama (Emperor Temmu)
* Princess Hashihito (Empress consort of Emperor Ktoku)

===Events in Kgyoku's reign===
During her first reign the Soga clan seized power. Her son Naka no e planned a coup d'tat and slew Soga no Iruka at the court in front of her throne. The Empress, shocked by this incident, abdicated the throne.

Kgyoku's contemporary title would not have been tenn, as most historians believe this title was not introduced until the reigns of Emperor Tenmu and Empress Jit. Rather, it was presumably Sumeramikoto or Amenoshita Shiroshimesu kimi (), meaning "the great queen who rules all under heaven." Alternatively, Kgyoku might have been referred to as (/) or the "Great Queen of Yamato."

Empress Kgyoku reigned for four years. The years of Kgyoku's reign are not linked by scholars to any era or neng. Titsingh, pp. 4347. The Taika era innovation of naming time periods  neng  was yet to be initiated during her son's too-brief reign.

In this context, Brown and Ishida's translation of Gukansh offers an explanation about the years of Empress Jit's reign which muddies a sense of easy clarity in the pre-Taiho time-frame: 
:"The eras that fell in this reign were: (1) the remaining seven years of Shuch ; and (2) Taika, which was four years long . (The first year of this era was kinoto-hitsuji .) ...In the third year of the Taka era , Empress Jit yielded the throne to the Crown Prince." Brown, p. 270. 

The years of Kgyoku's reign are not more specifically identified by more than one era name or neng which was an innovation of Ktoku's brief reign. Titsingh, pp. 4354. 

===Events in Saimei's reign===
When Ktoku died, his designated heir was Naka no e. When Naka no e's mother re-ascended, he continued in the role of her heir and crown prince. In this role, he could and did remain active in the political life of Japan.

In the fifth year of Saimei's reign, Paekche in Korea was destroyed in 660. Japan assisted Paekche loyals in an attempt to aid the revival of Paekche dynasty. Early in 661, Saimei responded to the situation by leaving her capital in Yamato province. Her plan was to lead a military expedition to Korea. The empress stayed in Ishiyu Temporary Palace in Iyo province, today Dgo Onsen. In May she arrived at Asakura Palace in the north part of Tsukushi province in Kysh, today a part of Fukuoka prefecture. The allied army of Japan and Paekche was preparing for war against Silla, but the death of the empress thwarted those plans. In 661, Saimei died in the Asakura Palace before the army departed to Korea. In October her body was brought from Kysh by sea to Port Naniwa-zu (today Osaka city); and her state funeral was held in early November.

Empress Saimei ruled for seven years. The years of Saimei's reign are not linked by scholars to any era or neng. The Taika era innovation of naming time periods  neng  languished until Mommu reasserted an imperial right by proclaiming the commencement of Taih in 701.

The actual site of Kgyoku/Saimei's grave is known, having been identified as the Kengoshizuka tomb in the village of Asuka, Nara Prefecture. http://search.japantimes.co.jp/cgi-bin/nn20100910a5.html Japan Times: Nara tomb said that of seventh century empress http://www.japantoday.com/category/national/view/tomb-identified-as-that-of-7th-century-empress-saimei Japan Today: Tomb identified as that of 7th-century Empress Saimei This empress is traditionally venerated at a memorial Shinto shrine (misasagi) at Nara.

The Imperial Household Agency designates this location as Kgyoku/Seimei's mausoleum. It is formally named Ochi-no-Okanoe no misasagi. Ponsonby-Fane, p. 420. 

===Kugy===
Kugy () is a collective term for the very few most powerful men attached to the court of the Emperor of Japan in pre-Meiji eras.

In general, this elite group included only three to four men at a time. These were hereditary courtiers whose experience and background would have brought them to the pinnacle of a life's career. During Kgyoku's reign, this apex of the Daij-kan included:
* Sadaijin
* Udaijin

The kugy during Saimei's reign included:
* Sadaijin, Kose no Tokoda() (593658), 649658 Brown, p. 267. 
* Udaijin (not appointed)
* Naidaijin (), Nakatomi no Kamako() (Fujiwara no Kamatari, ) (614669), 645669 

==See also==
* Japanese empresses
* Emperor of Japan
* List of Emperors of Japan
* Imperial cult

==Notes==

==References==
* Aston, William George. (1896). Nihongi: Chronicles of Japan from the Earliest Times to A.D. 697. London: Kegan Paul, Trench, Trubner. OCLC 448337491
* Brown, Delmer M. and Ichir Ishida, eds. (1979). Gukansh: The Future and the Past. Berkeley: University of California Press. 10-ISBN 0-520-03460-0; 13-ISBN 978-0-520-03460-0; OCLC 251325323
* Ponsonby-Fane, Richard Arthur Brabazon. (1959). The Imperial House of Japan. Kyoto: Ponsonby Memorial Society. OCLC 194887
* Titsingh, Isaac. (1834). Nihon Odai Ichiran; ou, Annales des empereurs du Japon. Paris: Royal Asiatic Society, Oriental Translation Fund of Great Britain and Ireland. OCLC 5850691
* Varley, H. Paul. (1980). Jinn Shtki: A Chronicle of Gods and Sovereigns. New York: Columbia University Press. 10-ISBN 0-231-04940-4; 13-ISBN 978-0-231-04940-5; OCLC 59145842

 
 

 
 



[[Emperor Ktoku]]

 was the 36th emperor of Japan, Imperial Household Agency (Kunaich):  (33) according to the traditional order of succession. Ponsonby-Fane, Richard. (1959). The Imperial House of Japan, p. 50. 

The years of his reign lasted from 645 through 654. Brown, Delmer et al. (1979). Gukansh, pp. 266267; Varley, H. Paul. Jinn Shtki. p. 132-133; Titsinh, Isaac. (1834). 

==Traditional narrative==
Before Ktoku ascension to the Chrysanthemum Throne, his personal name (imina) Brown, pp. 264; prior to Emperor Jomei, the personal names of the emperors (their imina) were very long and people did not generally use them; however, the number of characters in each name diminished after Jomei's reign. was or . Ponsonby-Fane, p. 8. 

He enacted the Taika Reform Edicts.

He was a descendant of Emperor Bidatsu. He was a son of Chinu no kimi (Prince Chinu, ) by Kibitsuhime no kimi (Princess Kibitsuhime, ). Empress Kgyoku was his elder sister from the same parents. Chinu was a son of Prince Oshisaka hikohito no e, whose father was the Emperor Bidatsu. He had at least three consorts including his Empress, Hashihito no Himemiko (Princess Hashihito), the daughter of Emperor Jomei and his sister Empress Kgyoku.

He ruled from July 12, 645 July 12 645 corresponds to the Fourteenth Day of the Sixth Month of 645 (isshi). until his death in 654.

In 645 he ascended to the throne two days after Prince Naka no e (Emperor Tenji) assassinated Soga no Iruka in the court of Kgyoku. Kgyoku abdicated in favor of her son and crown prince, Naka no e, but Naka no e insisted Ktoku should ascend to the throne instead.

* 645: In the 3rd year of Kgyoku-tenn 's reign (3), the empress abdicated; and the succession (senso) was received by her younger brother. Shortly thereafter, Emperor Ktoku is said to have acceded to the throne (sokui). Titsingh, pp. 4748; Brown, p. 266; Varley, p. 44; a distinct act of senso is unrecognized prior to Emperor Tenji; and all sovereigns except Jit, Yzei, Go-Toba, and Fushimi have senso and sokui in the same year until the reign of Emperor Go-Murakami. 

Ktoku's contemporary title would not have been tenn, as most historians believe this title was not introduced until the reigns of Emperor Tenmu and Empress Jit. Rather, it was presumably Sumeramikoto or Amenoshita Shiroshimesu kimi (), meaning "the great king who rules all under heaven." Alternatively, Ktoku might have been referred to as (/) or the "Great King of Yamato."

According to the Nihonshoki, he was of gentle personality and was in favor of Buddhism.

In 645 he created a new city in the area called Naniwa, and moved the capital from Yamato province to this new city (see Nara). The new capital had a sea port and was good for foreign trade and diplomatic activities.

In 653 Ktoku sent an embassy to the court of the Tang Dynasty in China, but some of the ships were lost en route.

Naka no e held the rank of crown prince and was the de facto leader of the government. In 653 Naka no e proposed to move the capital again to Yamato province. Ktoku denied. Naka no e ignored the emperor's policy and moved to the former province. Many courtiers of the court including, Empress Hashihito, followed him. Ktoku was left in the palace. In the next year he died because of illness. After his death, Naka no e would not ascend to the throne. Instead, his mother and the sister of Ktoku, the former Empress Kogyoku ascended to the throne under another name, Empress Saimei.

The system of hassh kyakkan (eight ministries and a hundred offices) was first established during the reign of Emperor Ktoku. Varley, p. 133. 

Memorial Shinto shrine and mausoleum honoring Empress Ktoku.
The actual site of Ktoku's grave is known. This emperor is traditionally venerated at a memorial Shinto shrine (misasagi) at Osaka.

The Imperial Household Agency designates this location as Ktoku's mausoleum. It is formally named saka-no-shinaga no misasagi. Ponsonby-Fane, p. 420. 

===Kugy===
Kugy () is a collective term for the very few most powerful men attached to the court of the Emperor of Japan in pre-Meiji eras.

In general, this elite group included only three to four men at a time. These were hereditary courtiers whose experience and background would have brought them to the pinnacle of a life's career. During Ktoko's reign, this apex of the Daij-kan included: 
* Sadaijin, Abe no Kurahashi-maro () (?649), 645649. Brown, p. 266. 
* Sadaijin, Kose no Tokoda () (593658), 649658. 
* Udaijin, Soga no Kura-no-Yamada no Ishikawa-no-maro () (?649), 645649. 
* Udaijin, tomo no Nagatoko () (?651), 649651. 
* Naidaijin(), Nakatomi Kamako () (Fujiwara no Kamatari, ) (614669), 645669. 

==Eras of Ktoku's reign==
The years of Ktoku's reign are more specifically identified by more than one era name or neng. Titsingh, p. 47. 
* Taika (645650)
* Hakuchi (650655)

==Consorts and Children==
Empress: Princess Hashihito () (?665), daughter of Emperor Jomei

Hi: Abe no Otarashi-hime (), daughter of Abe no Kurahashi-maro
*Prince Arima () (640658)

Hi: Saga no Chi-no-iratsume (), daughter of Soga no Kura-no-Yamada no Ishikawa-no-maro

==See also==
* Emperor of Japan
* List of Emperors of Japan
* Imperial cult

==Notes==

==References==
* Aston, William George. (1896). Nihongi: Chronicles of Japan from the Earliest Times to A.D. 697. London: Kegan Paul, Trench, Trubner. OCLC 448337491
* Brown, Delmer M. and Ichir Ishida, eds. (1979). Gukansh: The Future and the Past. Berkeley: University of California Press. 10-ISBN 0-520-03460-0; 13-ISBN 978-0-520-03460-0; OCLC 251325323
* Ponsonby-Fane, Richard Arthur Brabazon. (1959). The Imperial House of Japan. Kyoto: Ponsonby Memorial Society. OCLC 194887
* Titsingh, Isaac. (1834). Nihon Odai Ichiran; ou, Annales des empereurs du Japon. Paris: Royal Asiatic Society, Oriental Translation Fund of Great Britain and Ireland. OCLC 5850691
* Varley, H. Paul. (1980). Jinn Shtki: A Chronicle of Gods and Sovereigns. New York: Columbia University Press. 10-ISBN 0-231-04940-4; 13-ISBN 978-0-231-04940-5; OCLC 59145842

 
 



[[Empress Saimei of Japan]]

#redirect Empress Kgyoku

[[Emperor Tenji]]

, also known as Emperor Tenchi, was the 38th emperor of Japan, Imperial Household Agency (Kunaich):  (38) according to the traditional order of succession. Ponsonby-Fane, Richard. (1959). The Imperial House of Japan, p. 52. 

Tenji's reign spanned the years from 661 through 671. Titsingh, Isaac. (1834). 

==Traditional narrative==
He was the son of Emperor Jomei, but was preceded as ruler by his mother Empress Saimei.

Prior to his accession, he was known as .

===Events of Tenji's life===
As prince, Naka no e played a crucial role in ending the near-total control the Soga clan had over the imperial family. In 644, seeing the Soga continue to gain power, he conspired with Nakatomi no Kamatari and Soga no Kurayamada no Ishikawa no Maro to assassinate Soga no Iruka in what has come to be known as the Isshi Incident. Although the assassination did not go exactly as planned, Iruka was killed, and his father and predecessor, Soga no Emishi, committed suicide soon after. Following the Isshi Incident, Iruka's adherents dispersed largely without a fight, and Naka no e was named heir apparent. He also married the daughter of his ally Soga no Kurayamada, thus ensuring that a significant portion of the Soga clan's power was on his side.

===Events of Tenji's reign===
Naka no e reigned as Emperor Tenji from 661 to 672.

* 661: In the , the empress designated her son as her heir; and modern scholars construe this as meaning that this son would have received the succession (senso) after her death or abdication. Shortly after, she died, Emperor Tenji could be said to have acceded to the throne (sokui). Titsingh, p. 54; Varley, H. Paul. (1980). Jinn Shtki, p. 44; a distinct act of senso is unrecognized prior to Emperor Tenji; and all sovereigns except Jit, Yzei, Go-Toba, and Fushimi have senso and sokui in the same year until the reign of Emperor Go-Murakami. 

* 662: Tenji is said to have compiled the first Japanese legal code known to modern historians. The mi Code, consisting of 22 volumes, was promulgated in the last year of Tenji's reign. This legal codification is no longer extant, but it is said to have been refined in what is known as the Asuka Kiyomihara ritsu-ry of 689; and these are understood to have been a forerunner of the Taih ritsu-ry of 701. Varley, p. 136 n. 43. 

* 668: An account in Nihon Shoki becomes the first mention of petrochemical oil in Japan. In the , flammable water (petroleum) was presented as an offering to Emperor Tenji from Echigo Province (now known as a part of Niigata Prefecture). Aston, William George. (1896). This presentation coincided with the emperor's ceremonial confirmation as emperor. He had postponed formalities during the period that the mausoleum of his mother was being constructed; and when the work was finished, he could delay no longer. Up until this time, although he had been defacto monarch, he had retained the title of Crown Prince. 

Tenji was particularly active in improving the military institutions which had been established during the Taika reforms. Asakawa, Kan'ichi. (1903). The Early Institutional Life of Japan, p. 313. 

===Death of the emperor===
Following his death in 672, there ensued a succession dispute between his fourteen children (many by different mothers). In the end, he was succeeded by his son, Prince tomo, also known as Emperor Kbun, then by Tenji's brother Prince ama, also known as Emperor Temmu. Almost one hundred years after Tenji's death, the throne passed to his grandson Emperor Knin.

:Post-Meiji chronology
:* In the 10th year of Tenji, in the 11th month (671): Emperor Tenji, in the , designated his son as his heir; and modern scholars construe this as meaning that the son would have received the succession (senso) after his father's death. Shortly thereafter, Emperor Kbun is said to have acceded to the throne (sokui). Brown, Delmer et al. (1979). Gukansh, pp. 268269. If this understanding were valid, then it would follow:
::* In the 1st year of Kbun (672): Emperor Kbun, in the 1st year of his reign (1), died; and his uncle aomi-shinn received the succession (senso) after the death of his nephew. Shortly thereafter, Emperor Temmu could be said to have acceded to the throne (sokui). Titsingh, pp. 5558. 

:Pre-Meiji chronology
:Prior to the 19th century, Otomo was understood to have been a mere interloper, a pretender, an anomaly; and therefore, if that commonly accepted understanding were to have been valid, then it would have followed:
:* In the 10th year of Tenji, in the 11th month (671): Emperor Tenji, in the , died; and despite any military confrontations which ensued, the brother of the dead sovereign would have received the succession (senso); and after a time, it would have been understood that Emperor Temmu rightfully acceded to the throne (sokui).

Memorial Shinto shrine and mausoleum honoring Emperor Tenji
The actual site of Tenji's grave is known. This emperor is traditionally venerated at a memorial Shinto shrine (misasagi) at Yamashina-ku, Kyoto.

The Imperial Household Agency designates this location as Tenji's mausoleum. It is formally named Yamashina no misasagi. Ponsonby-Fane, p. 420. 

===Poetry===
The Man'ysh includes poems attributed to emperors and empresses; and according to Donald Keene, evolving Man'ysh studies have affected the interpretation of even simple narratives like "The Three Hills." The poem was long considered to be about two male hills in a quarrel over a female hill, but scholars now consider that Kagu and Mimihashi might be female hills in love with the same male hill, Unebi. Nippon Gakujutsu Shinkokai. (1969). The Manysh, p. iv. This still-unresolved enigma in poetic form is said to have been composed by Emperor Tenji while he was still Crown Prince during the reign of Empress Saimei:

:::Mount Kagu strove with Mount Miminashi
::: For the love of Mount Unebi.
:::Such is love since the age of the gods;
:::As it was thus in the early days,
:::So people strive for spouses even now.
::::  Emperor Tenji Nippon Gakujutsu Shinkokai, p. 5. 

One of his 31-letters poems was chosen by Fujiwara no Teika as the first in the very popular anthology Hyakunin Isshu.

:::Aki no ta no
:::Kariho no io no
:::Toma o arami
:::Waga koromode wa
:::Tsuyu ni nure tsutsu
::::  Tenji Ten'n MacCauley, Clay. (1900). "Hyakunin-Isshu: Single Songs of a Hundred Poets" in Transactions of the Asia Society of Japan, p. 3. 

::Literal Translation:
:::Because of the coarseness of the rush-mat
:::Of the hut of temporary-hut
:::Of the rice of autumn
:::As far as concerns my sleeves
:::They are becoming wet with dew (or rain).
::::  Emperor Tenji 

::: 

:::
:::
:::
:::
:::

After his death, his wife, Empress Yamato wrote a song of longing about her husband. 

===Kugyo===
The top during Emperor Tenji's reign included:

* Daij-daijin: , 671672. Brown, p. 268. 
* Naishin(): Fujiwara no Kamatari () (614669), 645669. 

Prince tomo (tomo-shinn) was the favorite son of Emperor Tenji; and he was also the first to be accorded the title of Daij-daijin. Ponsonby-Fane, p. 53. 

==Non-neng period==
The years of Tenji's reign are not linked by scholars to any era or neng. The Taika era innovation of naming time periods  neng  languished until Mommu reasserted an imperial right by proclaiming the commencement of Taih in 701.
* See Japanese era name  "Non-nengo periods"
* See Tenji (period) (661).

In this context, Brown and Ishida's translation of Gukansh offers an explanation about the years of Empress Jit's reign which muddies a sense of easy clarity in the pre-Taiho time-frame:
::"The eras that fell in this reign were: (1) the remaining seven years of Shuch ; and (2) Taika, which was four years long . (The first year of this era was kinoto-hitsuji .) ...In the third year of the Taka era , Empress Jit yielded the throne to the Crown Prince." Brown, p. 270. 

==Consorts and Children==
Empress: Empress Yamato () (??), daughter of Prince Furuhito-no-e (son of Emperor Jomei).

Hin: Soga no Ochi-no-iratsume () (?651?), daughter of Soga no Kura-no-yamada no Ishikawa-no-maro
*Princess ta () (644667), married to Emperor Temmu
*Princess Uno-no-sarara () (Empress Jit) (645703)
*Prince Takeru () (651658)

Hin: Soga no Mei-no-iratsume (), daughter of Soga no Kura-no-yamada no Ishikawa-no-maro
*Princess Minabe () (658??), married to Prince Takechi
*Princess Abe (Princess Ahe) () (Empress Gemmei) (661721)

Hin: Soga no Hitachi-no-iratsume (), daughter of Soga no Akae
*Princess Yamabe () (?686), married to Prince tsu

Hin: Abe no Tachibana-no-iratsume () (?681), daughter of Abe no Kurahashi-maro
*Princess Asuka () (?700), married to Prince Osakabe
*Princess Niitabe () (?699), married to Emperor Temmu

Court lady: Oshinumi no Shikibuko-no-iratsume ()
*Prince Kawashima () (657691)

Court lady: Koshi-no-michi no Iratsume ()
*Princess e () (?699), married to Emperor Temmu
*Prince Shiki (/) (?716), Father of Emperor Knin
*Princess Izumi () (?699), Sai in Ise Shrine (701706)

Court lady: Kurikuma no Kurohime-no-iratsume ()
*Princess Minushi () (?737)

Court lady (Uneme): Yakako-no-iratsume, a lower court lady from Iga () (Iga no Uneme)
*Prince tomo () (Emperor Kbun) (648672)

==See also==
* Emperor of Japan
* List of Emperors of Japan
* Imperial cult
* Kry-ji

==Notes==
Japanese Imperial kamon  a stylized chrysanthemum blossom

==References==
* Asakawa, Kan'ichi. (1903). The Early Institutional Life of Japan. Tokyo: Shueisha. OCLC 4427686; see online, multi-formatted, full-text book at openlibrary.org
* Aston, William George. (1896). Nihongi: Chronicles of Japan from the Earliest Times to A.D. 697. London: Kegan Paul, Trench, Trubner. OCLC 448337491
* Brown, Delmer M. and Ichir Ishida, eds. (1979). Gukansh: The Future and the Past. Berkeley: University of California Press. 10-ISBN 0-520-03460-0; 13-ISBN 978-0-520-03460-0; OCLC 251325323
* MacCauley, Clay. (1900). "Hyakunin-Isshu: Single Songs of a Hundred Poets" in Transactions of the Asia Society of Japan. Tokyo: Asia Society of Japan. ...Click link for digitized, full-text copy of this book (in English)
* Nippon Gakujutsu Shinkokai (1969). The Manyoshu: The Nippon Gakujutsu Shinkokai Translation of One Thousand Poems. New York: Columbia University Press. ISBN 0-231-08620-2
* Ponsonby-Fane, Richard Arthur Brabazon. (1959). The Imperial House of Japan. Kyoto: Ponsonby Memorial Society. OCLC 194887
* 
* Titsingh, Isaac. (1834). Nihon Odai Ichiran; ou, Annales des empereurs du Japon. Paris: Royal Asiatic Society, Oriental Translation Fund of Great Britain and Ireland. OCLC 5850691
* Varley, H. Paul. (1980). Jinn Shtki: A Chronicle of Gods and Sovereigns. New York: Columbia University Press. 10-ISBN 0-231-04940-4; 13-ISBN 978-0-231-04940-5; OCLC 59145842

==External links==
* Link to address/location of Tenji's misasagi in Kyoto

 
 



[[Emperor Kbun]]

 was the 39th emperor of Japan, Imperial Household Agency (Kunaich):  (39) according to the traditional order of succession. Ponsonby-Fane, Richard. (1959). The Imperial House of Japan, p. 53. 

Kbun's reign lasted only a few months in 671672. Titsingh, Isaac. (1834). 

==Traditional narrative==
Emperor Kbun was named the 39th emperor by the Meiji government in 1870; and since the late 19th century, he is known by the posthumous name accorded to him by Meiji scholars. Brown, Delmer. (1979). Gukansh, p. 268 n.39; Varley, H. Paul. (1980). Jinn Shtki, p. 136. 

In his lifetime, he was known as Prince tomo (, tomo no ji). He was the favorite son of Emperor Tenji; and he was also the first to have been accorded the title of Daij-daijin. 

Contemporary historians now place the reign of Emperor Kbun between the reigns of Emperor Tenji and Emperor Temmu; but the Nihongi, the Gukansh, and the Jinn Shtki do not recognize this reign. Prince tomo was only given his posthumous title and name in 1870.

:Post-Meiji chronology
:* In the 10th year of Tenji, in the 11th month (671): Emperor Tenji, in the 10th year of his reign (10), designated his son as his heir; and modern scholars construe this as meaning that the son would have received the succession (senso) after his father's death. Shortly thereafter, Emperor Kbun is said to have acceded to the throne (sokui). Brown, pp. 268269; Varley, p. 44; a distinct act of senso is unrecognized prior to Emperor Tenji; and all sovereigns except Jit, Yzei, Go-Toba, and Fushimi have senso and sokui in the same year until the reign of Emperor Go-Murakami. If this understanding were valid, then it would follow:
::* In the 1st year of Kbun (672): Emperor Kbun, in the 1st year of his reign (1), died; and his uncle aomino ji received the succession (senso) after the death of his nephew. Shortly thereafter, Emperor Temmu could be said to have acceded to the throne (sokui). Titsingh, pp. 5558; Varley, p. 44. 

:Pre-Meiji chronology
:Prior to the 19th century, Otomo was understood to have been a mere interloper, a pretender, an anomaly; and therefore, if that commonly accepted understanding were to have been valid, then it would have followed:
:* In the 10th year of Tenji, in the 11th month (671): Emperor Tenji, in the 10th year of his reign (10), died; and despite any military confrontations which ensued, the brother of the dead sovereign would have received the succession (senso); and after a time, it would have been understood that Emperor Temmu rightfully acceded to the throne (sokui).
:Control of the throne was wrested by Emperor Tenchi's brother, Prince ama, during the Jinshin War, after which Emperor Kbun committed seppuku. For centuries, the hapless Prince tomo was not considered to have been a part of the traditional order of succession.

The actual site of Kbun's grave is known. This emperor is traditionally venerated at a memorial Shinto shrine (misasagi) at Shiga.

The Imperial Household Agency designates this location as Kbun's mausoleum. It is formally named Nagara no Yamasaki no misasagi. Ponsonby-Fane, p. 420. 

==Non-neng period==
The years of Kbun's reign are not linked by scholars to any era or neng. Titsingh, p. 56. The Taika era innovation of naming time periods  neng  languished until Mommu reasserted an imperial right by proclaiming the commencement of Taih in 701. 
* See Japanese era name  "Non-nengo periods"
* See Kbun (period) (672).

In this context, Brown and Ishida's translation of Gukansh offers an explanation about the years of Empress Jit's reign which muddies a sense of easy clarity in the pre-Taiho time-frame: 
::"The eras that fell in this reign were: (1) the remaining seven years of Shuch ; and (2) Taika, which was four years long . (The first year of this era was kinoto-hitsuji .) ...In the third year of the Taka era , Empress Jit yielded the throne to the Crown Prince." Brown, p. 270. 

===Kugyo===
The top during Emperor Kbun's reign included:
* Sadaijin, Soga no Akae() (??), 672 (7 months)
* Udaijin, Nakatomi no Kane() (?672), 672 (7 months)

==Consorts and Children==
Empress Consort: Princess Tchi () (648?678), a daughter of Emperor Temmu
* Prince Kadono () (669706)

Empress: Fujiwara no Mimimotoji (), a daughter of Fujiwara no Kamatari
* Princess Ichishi-hime ()

Emperor Kbun had another son named Prince Yota (), whose mother is unknown.

==See also==
* Emperor of Japan
* List of Emperors of Japan
* Imperial cult

==Notes==
Japanese Imperial kamon  a stylized chrysanthemum blossom

==References==
* Aston, William George. (1896). Nihongi: Chronicles of Japan from the Earliest Times to A.D. 697. London: Kegan Paul, Trench, Trubner. OCLC 448337491
* Brown, Delmer M. and Ichir Ishida, eds. (1979). Gukansh: The Future and the Past. Berkeley: University of California Press. 10-ISBN 0-520-03460-0; 13-ISBN 978-0-520-03460-0; OCLC 251325323
* Ponsonby-Fane, Richard Arthur Brabazon. (1959). The Imperial House of Japan. Kyoto: Ponsonby Memorial Society. OCLC 194887
* Titsingh, Isaac. (1834). Nihon Odai Ichiran; ou, Annales des empereurs du Japon. Paris: Royal Asiatic Society, Oriental Translation Fund of Great Britain and Ireland. OCLC 5850691
* Varley, H. Paul. (1980). Jinn Shtki: A Chronicle of Gods and Sovereigns. New York: Columbia University Press. 10-ISBN 0-231-04940-4; 13-ISBN 978-0-231-04940-5; OCLC 59145842

 
 



[[Emperor Tenmu]]

 was the 40th emperor of Japan, Imperial Household Agency (Kunaich):  (40); retrieved 2013-8-22. according to the traditional order of succession. Ponsonby-Fane, Richard. (1959). The Imperial House of Japan, p. 53. 

Tenmu's reign lasted from 672 until his death in 686. Titsingh, Isaac. (1834). ; Brown, Delmer M. (1979). Gukansh, pp. 268269. 

==Traditional narrative==
Tenmu was the youngest son of Emperor Jomei and Empress Saimei, and the younger brother of the Emperor Tenji. His name at birth was Prince ama (:ama no ji). He was succeeded by Empress Jit, who was both his niece and his wife.
During the reign of his elder brother, Emperor Tenji, Tenmu was forced to marry several of Tenji's daughters because Tenji thought those marriages would help to strengthen political ties between the two brothers. The nieces he married included Princess Unonosarara, today known as the Empress Jit, and Princess ta. Tenmu also had other consorts whose fathers were influential courtiers.

Tenmu had many children, including his crown prince Kusakabe by Princess Unonosarara; Princess Tchi; Prince tsu and Princess ku by Princess ta (whose father also was Tenji); and Prince Toneri, the editor of Nihonshoki and father of Emperor Junnin. Through Prince Kusakabe, Tenmu had two emperors and two empresses among his descendents. Empress Shtoku was the last of these imperial rulers from his lineage.

===Events of Tenmu's life===
Emperor Tenmu is the first monarch of Japan, to whom the title tenn was assigned contemporaneouslynot only by later generations. "Tenn" at Critannica.com; retrieved 2013-8-28. 

The only document on his life was Nihonshoki. However, it was edited by his son, Prince Toneri, and the work was written during the reigns of his wife and children, causing one to suspect its accuracy and impartiality.

Tenmu's father died while he was young, and he grew up mainly under the guidance of Empress Saimei. He was not expected to gain the throne, because his brother Tenji was the crown prince, being the older son of their mother, the reigning empress.

After Tenji ascended to the throne, Tenmu was appointed crown prince. This was because Tenji had no appropriate heir among his sons at that time, as none of their mothers was of a rank high enough to give the necessary political support. Tenji was suspicious that Tenmu might be so ambitious as to attempt to take the throne, and felt the necessity to strengthen his position through politically advantageous marriages.

Tenji was particularly active in improving the military institutions which had been established during the Taika reforms. Asakawa, Kan'ichi. (1903). The Early Institutional Life of Japan, p. 313. 

In his old age, Tenji had a son, Prince tomo, by a low-ranking consort. Since tomo had weak political support from his maternal relatives, the general wisdom of the time held that it was not a good idea for him to ascend to the throne, yet Tenji was obsessed with the idea.

In 671 Tenmu felt himself to be in danger and volunteered to resign the office of crown prince to become a monk. He moved to the mountains in Yoshino, Yamato province (now in Yoshino, Nara), officially for reasons of seclusion. He took with him his sons and one of his wives, Princess Unonosarara, a daughter of Tenji. However, he left all his other consorts at the capital, Omiky in mi Province (today in Otsu, Shiga).

A year later, (in 672) Tenji died and Prince tomo ascended to the throne as Emperor Kbun. Tenmu assembled an army and marched from Yoshino to the east, to attack the capital of Omiky in a counterclockwise movement. They marched through Yamato, Iga and Mino provinces to threaten Omiky in the adjacent province. The army of Tenmu and the army of the young Emperor Kbun fought in the northwestern part of Mino (nowadays Sekigahara, Gifu). Tenmu's army won and Kbun committed suicide (Jinshin incident).

:Post-Meiji chronology
:* In the 10th year of Tenji, in the 11th month (671): Emperor Tenji, in the 10th year of his reign (10), designated his son as his heir; and modern scholars construe this as meaning that the son would have received the succession (senso) after his father's death. Shortly thereafter, Emperor Kbun is said to have acceded to the throne (sokui). Brown, pp. 268269; Varley, H. Paul. (1980). Jinn Shtki, p. 44; a distinct act of senso is unrecognized prior to Emperor Tenji; and all sovereigns except Jit, Yzei, Go-Toba, and Fushimi have senso and sokui in the same year until the reign of Emperor Go-Murakami. If this understanding were valid, then it would it would follow:
::* In the 1st year of Kbun (672): Emperor Kbun, in the 1st year of his reign (1), died; and his uncle aomi-shinn received the succession (senso) after the death of his nephew. Shortly thereafter, Emperor Tenmu could be said to have acceded to the throne (sokui). Titsingh, pp. 5558; Varley, p. 44. 

:Pre-Meiji chronology
:Prior to the 19th century, Otomo was understood to have been a mere interloper, a pretender, an anomaly; and therefore, if that commonly accepted understanding were to have been valid, then it would have followed:
:* In the 10th year of Tenji, in the 11th month (671): Emperor Tenji, in the 10th year of his reign (10), died; and despite any military confrontations which ensued, the brother of the dead sovereign would have received the succession (senso); and after a time, it would have been understood that Emperor Tenmu rightfully acceded to the throne (sokui).

As might be expected, Emperor Tenmu was no less active than former-Emperor Tenji in improving the Taika military institutions. Tenmu's reign brought many changes, such as: (1) a centralized war department was organized; (2) the defenses of the Inner Country near the Capital were strengthened; (3) forts and castles were built near Capital and in the western parts of Honshand in Kyushu; (4) troops were reviewed; and all provincial governors were ordered to complete the collection of arms and to study tactics. Asakawa, pp. 313314. 

Memorial Shinto shrine and mausoleum honoring Emperor Tenmu
In 673 Tenmu moved the capital back to Yamato province on the Kiymihara plain, naming his new capital Asuka. The Man'ysh includes a poem written after the Jinshin conflict ended:
:::Our Sovereign, a god,
::: Has made his Imperial City Emperor Tenmu's capital was built on the plain of Kiymihara at Asuka. 
:::Out of the stretch of swamps,
:::Where chestnut horses sank
:::To their bellies.
::::::  tomo Miyuki Nippon Gakujutsu Shinkokai. (1969). The Man'ysh, p. 60. 

At Asuka, Emperor Tenmu was enthroned. He elevated Unonosarara to be his empress. Events of his reign include:

* 674 {Temmu 2): Ambassadors of Tane no kuni were received in the Japanese court. Beillevaire, Patrick. (2000). ; excerpt, "Im dritten Jahre der Regierung des Mikado Ten mu (674) kamen auch Gesandte von Tane no kuni au den japanischen Hof. Jakusima und das heutige Tanegasima waren die nrdlichsten der mehrgenannten Sdseeinseln...."; compare NengoCalc Temmu 2 () 

* 680 (Temmu 8): Yakushi-ji was founded in the Hakuh period. Hakuhou jidai , JAANUS (Japanese Architecture and Art Net Users System); retrieved January 24, 2011; see also Nussbaum, "Yakushi-ji" at ; compare NengoCalc Temmu 8 () 

Tenmu reigned from this capital until his death in 686. The actual site of his grave is known. This emperor is traditionally venerated at a memorial Shinto shrine (misasagi) at Nara. The Imperial Household Agency designates this location as Tenmu's mausoleum. It is formally named Hinokuma no uchi no misasagi. Ponsonby-Fane, p. 420. 

===Buddhism===
In 675 Emperor Tenmu banned the consumption of animal meat (horse, cattle, dogs, monkeys, birds), due to the influence of Buddhism. Hisao Nagayama.  , 1976. ISBN 4309473105 p. 66. () 

===Politics===

The Nihon Shoki entry of April 15, 683 CE (Tenmu 12th year), mandates the use of copper coins instead of silver, suggesting that Japanese currency predates his reign. Excerpt of the 11th century edition.
Early Japanese currency: Fuhonsen coins (), found in Tobishimaike (), thought to have been minted during the reign of Emperor Tenmu, end of 7th century, copper and antimony. Japan Currency Museum.
In Nihonshoki Tenmu is described as a great innovator, but the neutrality of this description is doubtful, since the work was written under the control of his descendants. It seems clear, however, that Tenmu strengthened the power of the emperor and appointed his sons to the highest offices of his government, reducing the traditional influence of powerful clans such as the tomo and Soga. He renewed the system of kabane, the hereditary titles of duty and rank, but with alterations, including the abolition of some titles. Omi and Muraji, the highest kabane in the earlier period, were reduced in value in the new hierarchy, which consisted of eight kinds of kabane. Each clan received a new kabane according to its closeness to the imperial bloodline and its loyalty to Tenmu.

Tenmu attempted to keep a balance of power among his sons. Once he traveled to Yoshino together with his sons, and there had them swear to cooperate and not to make war on each other. This turned out to be ineffective: one of his sons, Prince tsu, was later executed for treason after the death of Tenmu.

Tenmu's foreign policy favored the Korean kingdom Silla, which took over the entire Korean peninsula in 676. After the unification of Korea by Silla, Tenmu decided to break diplomatic relations with the Tang dynasty of China, evidently in order to keep on good terms with Silla.

Tenmu used religious structures to increase the authority of the imperial throne. During his reign there was increased emphasis on the tie between the imperial household and the Grand Shrine of Ise (dedicated to the ancestor goddess of the emperors, Amaterasu) by sending his daughter Princess Oku as the newly established Sai of the shrine, and several festivals were financed from the national budget. He also showed favor to Buddhism, and built several large temples and monasteries. It is said that Tenmu asked that each household was encouraged to build an altar with a dais where a Buddha-image and a sutra could be placed so that family worshiping could be held, thus inventing the butsudan. On the other hand, all Buddhist priests, monks and nuns were controlled by the state, and no one was allowed to become a monk without the state's permission. This was aimed at preventing cults and stopping farmers from turning into priests.

====Kugy====
Kugy () is a collective term for the very few most powerful men attached to the court of the Emperor of Japan in pre-Meiji eras.

In general, this elite group included only three to four men at a time. These were hereditary courtiers whose experience and background would have brought them to the pinnacle of a life's career. During Tenmu's reign, this apex of the Daij-kan included:
* Sadaijin, Soga no Akae no Omi Brown, p. 269. 
* Udaijin, Nakatomi no Kane no Muraji 
* Naidaijin

==Era of Tenmu's reign==
The years of Tenmu's reign were marked by only one era name or neng which was proclaimed in the final months of the emperor's life; and Shuch ended with Tenmu's death. Titsingh, p. 55-58. 
* Shuch (686)

===Non-neng period===
The early years of Tenmu's reign are not linked by scholars to any era or neng. The Taika era innovation of naming time periods  neng  was discontinued during these years, but it was reestablished briefly in 686. The use of neng languished yet again after Tenmu's death until Emperor Mommu reasserted an imperial right by proclaiming the commencement of Taih in 701.
* See Japanese era name  "Non-nengo periods"
* See Temmu (period) (673686).

In this context, Brown and Ishida's translation of Gukansh offers an explanation about the years of Empress Jit's reign which muddies a sense of easy clarity in the pre-Taih time-frame:
::"The eras that fell in this reign were: (1) the remaining seven years of Shuch ; and (2) Taika, which was four years long . (The first year of this era was kinoto-hitsuji .) ...In the third year of the Taika era , Empress Jit yielded the throne to the Crown Prince." Brown, p. 270. 

==Wives and Children==
Empress: Princess Uno-no-sarara ()(Empress Jit) (645703)
*Prince Kusakabe () (662689), Father of Emperor Mommu and Empress Gensh

Hi: Princess ta () (644667), daughter of Emperor Tenji
*Princess ku () (661701), Sai in Ise Shrine(673686)
*Prince tsu () (663686)

Hi: Princess e () (?699), daughter of Emperor Tenji
*Prince Naga () (?715)
*Prince Yuge () (?699)

Hi: Princess Niitabe () (?699), daughter of Emperor Tenji
*Prince Toneri () (676735), Father of Emperor Junnin

Bunin: Fujiwara no Hikami-no-iratsume () (?682), daughter of Fujiwara no Kamatari
*Princess Tajima () (?708), married to Prince Takechi

Bunin: Soga no nu-no-iratsume () (?724), daughter of Soga no Akae
*Prince Hozumi () (?715)
*Princess Ki () (??)
*Princess Takata () (?728), Sai in Ise Shrine (706707), and married to Prince Mutobe later

Bunin: Fujiwara no Ioe-no-iratsume (), daughter of Fujiwara no Kamatari
*Prince Niitabe () (?735)

Court lady: Nukata no kimi ()
*Princess Tchi () (648?678), married to Emperor Kbun

Court lady: Munakata no Amako-no-iratsume (), daughter of Munakata-no-Kimi Tokuzen
*Prince Takechi () (654696)

Court lady: Shishihito no Kajihime-no-iratsume (), daughter of Shishihito-no-Omi maro
*Prince Osakabe (/) (?705)
*Princess Hatsusebe () (?741), married to Prince Kawashima (son of Emperor Tenji) 
*Princess Taki (/) (?751), Sai in Ise Shrine (698before 701), and married to Prince Shiki (son of Emperor Tenji) later
*Prince Shiki () (??)

==See also==
* Emperor of Japan
* List of Emperors of Japan
* Imperial cult

==Notes==
Japanese Imperial kamon  a stylized chrysanthemum blossom

==References==
* Asakawa, Kan'ichi. (1903). The Early Institutional Life of Japan. Tokyo: Shueisha. OCLC 4427686; see online, multi-formatted, full-text book at openlibrary.org
* Aston, William. (1896). Nihongi: Chronicles of Japan from the Earliest Times to A.D. 697. London: Kegan Paul, Trench, Trubner. OCLC 448337491
* Brown, Delmer M. and Ichir Ishida, eds. (1979). Gukansh: The Future and the Past. Berkeley: University of California Press. 10-ISBN 0-520-03460-0; 13-ISBN 978-0-520-03460-0; OCLC 251325323
* Nippon Gakujutsu Shinkokai (1969). The Man'ysh: The Nippon Gakujutsu Shinkokai Translation of One Thousand Poems. New York: Columbia University Press. ISBN 0-231-08620-2
* Ponsonby-Fane, Richard. (1959). The Imperial House of Japan. Kyoto: Ponsonby Memorial Society. OCLC 194887
* Titsingh, Isaac. (1834). Nihon Odai Ichiran; ou, Annales des empereurs du Japon. Paris: Royal Asiatic Society, Oriental Translation Fund of Great Britain and Ireland. OCLC 5850691
* Varley, H. Paul. (1980). Jinn Shtki: A Chronicle of Gods and Sovereigns. New York: Columbia University Press. 10-ISBN 0-231-04940-4; 13-ISBN 978-0-231-04940-5; OCLC 59145842

==External links==
* Asuka Historical National Government Park: image of Mausoleum Emperor Tenmu and Empress Jit, exterior view

 
 



[[Empress Jit]]

 was the 41st monarch of Japan, Imperial Household Agency (Kunaich):  (41) according to the traditional order of succession. Ponsonby-Fane, Richard. (1959). The Imperial House of Japan, p. 54. 

Jit's reign spanned the years from 686 through 697. Titsingh, Isaac. (1834). 

In the history of Japan, Jit was the third of eight women to take on the role of empress regnant. The two female monarchs before Jit were (a) Suiko and (b) Kgyoku/Saimei. The five women sovereigns reigning after Jit were (c) Gemmei, (d) Gensh, (e) Kken/Shtoku, (f) Meish, and (g) Go-Sakuramachi.

==Traditional narrative==
Empress Jit was the daughter of Emperor Tenji. Her mother was Ochi-no-Iratsume, the daughter of Minister -omi Soga no Yamada-no Ishikawa Maro. She was the wife of Emperor Temmu, who was Tenji's half brother by another woman, and she succeeded him on the throne. Varley, H. Paul. Jinn Shtki, p. 137. 

Empress Jit's given name was , or alternately Uno. Brown, D. (1979). Gukansh, p. 270. 

===Events of Jit's reign===
Jit took responsibility for court administration after the death of her husband, Emperor Temmu, who was also her uncle. She acceded to the throne in 687 in order to ensure the eventual succession of her son, Kusakabe-shinn. Throughout this period, Empress Jit ruled from the Fujiwara Palace in Yamato. 

Prince Kusabake was named as crown prince to succeed Jit, but he died at a young age. Kusabake's son, Karu-no-o, was then named as Jit's successor. He eventually would become known as Emperor Mommu. 

Empress Jit reigned for eleven years. Although there were seven other reigning empresses, their successors were most often selected from amongst the males of the paternal Imperial bloodline, which is why some conservative scholars argue that the women's reigns were temporary and that male-only succession tradition must be maintained in the 21st century. "Life in the Cloudy Imperial Fishbowl," Japan Times. March 27, 2007. Empress Gemmei, who was followed on the throne by her daughter, Empress Gensh, remains the sole exception to this conventional argument.

In 697, Jit abdicated in Mommu's favor; and as a retired sovereign, she took the post-reign title daij-tenn. After this, her imperial successors who retired took the same title after abdication. 

Jit continued to hold power as a cloistered ruler, which became a persistent trend in Japanese politics.

Memorial Shinto shrine and mausoleum honoring Empress Jit
The actual site of Jit's grave is known. This empress is traditionally venerated at a memorial Shinto shrine (misasagi) at Nara.

The Imperial Household Agency designates this location as Jit's mausoleum. It is formally named Ochi-no-Okanoe no misasagi. Ponsonby-Fane, p. 420. 

===Kugy===
Kugy () is a collective term for the very few most powerful men attached to the court of the Emperor of Japan in pre-Meiji eras.

In general, this elite group included only three to four men at a time. These were hereditary courtiers whose experience and background would have brought them to the pinnacle of a life's career. During Jit's reign, this apex of the Daij-kan included:
* Daij-daijin, Takechi-shinn (the 3rd son of Emperor Temmu) 
* Sadaijin
* Udaijin
* Nadaijin

==Non-neng period==
Jit's reign is not linked by scholars to any era or neng. The Taika era innovation of naming time periods  neng  languished until Mommu reasserted an imperial right by proclaiming the commencement of Taih in 701.
* See Japanese era name  "Non-nengo periods"
* See Jit (period) (687697).

However, Brown and Ishida's translation of Gukansh offers an explanation which muddies a sense of easy clarity:
:"The eras that fell in this reign were: (1) the remaining seven years of Shuch ; and (2) Taika, which was four years long . (The first year of this era was kinoto-hitsuji .) ...In the third year of the Taka era , Empress Jit yielded the throne to the Crown Prince." 

==Poetry==

===Man'ysh poetry===
The Man'ysh includes a poem said to have been composed by Jit

:After the death of the Emperor Temmu Nippon Gakujutsu Shinkkai, p.18. This waka is here numbered 42; in the Kokka Taikan (1901), Book II, numbered 159. 
:Oh, the autumn foliage
:Of the hill of Kamioka! Nippon Gakujutsu Shinkkai, p. 18 n1; n.b., This would be the so-called Thunder Hill in the village of Asuka near Nara. 
:My good Lord and Sovereign
:Would see it in the evening
:And ask of it in the morning.
:On that very hill from afar
:I gaze, wondering
:If he sees it to-day,
:Or asks of it to-morrow.
:Sadness I feel at eve,
:And heart-rending grief at morn 
:The sleeves of my coarse-cloth robe
:Are never for a moment dry.

:Composed when the Empress climbed the Thunder Hill Nippon Gakujutsu Shinkkai, p. 47; n.b., This waka is here numbered 118; in the Kokka Taikan (1901), Book III, numbered 235. 
:Lo, our great Sovereign, a goddess,
:Tarries on the Thunder
:In the clouds of heaven! Nippon Gakujutsu Shinkkai, p. 47 n4; n.b., This poem is based on the idea that the Sovereigns are the offspring of Amaterasu-omikami, and that their proper sphere is heaven. There the Thunder Hill is regarded as the actual embodiment of Thunder. 

===Hyakunin Isshu poetry===
One of the poems attributed to Empress Jit was selected by Fujiwara no Teika for inclusion in the very popular anthology Hyakunin Isshu.

:Poem number 2 

:The spring has passed

:And the summer come again

:For the silk-white robes

:So they say, are spread to dry

:On Mount Kaguyama

:
:
:

:
:

==See also==
* Emperor of Japan
* Imperial cult
* Japanese empresses
* List of Emperors of Japan

==Notes==
Japanese Imperial kamon  a stylized chrysanthemum blossom

==References==
* Aston, William George. (1896). Nihongi: Chronicles of Japan from the Earliest Times to A.D. 697. London: Kegan Paul, Trench, Trubner. OCLC 448337491
* Brown, Delmer M. and Ichir Ishida, eds. (1979). Gukansh: The Future and the Past. Berkeley: University of California Press. 10-ISBN 0-520-03460-0; 13-ISBN 978-0-520-03460-0; OCLC 251325323
* MacCauley, Clay. (1900). "Hyakunin-Isshu: Single Songs of a Hundred Poets" in Transactions of the Asia Society of Japan. Tokyo: Asia Society of Japan. ...Click link for digitized, full-text copy (in English)
* __________. (1901). Kokka taikan. Tokyo: Teikoku Toshokan, Meiji 3034 . Shinten kokka taikan (), 10 vols. + 10 index vols., Kadokawa Shoten, Tokyo, 19831992. 10-ISBN 4-04-020142-6; 13-ISBN 978-4-04-020142-9
* Nippon Gakujutsu Shinkkai. (1940). Man'ysh. Tokyo: Iwanami shoten. by Columbia University Press, New York, 1965. 10-ISBN 0-231-08620-2. Rprinted by Dover Publications, New York, 2005. 10-ISBN 0-486-43959-3; 13-ISBN 978-0-486-43959-4
* Ponsonby-Fane, Richard Arthur Brabazon. (1959). The Imperial House of Japan. Kyoto: Ponsonby Memorial Society. OCLC 194887
* Titsingh, Isaac. (1834). Nihon Odai Ichiran; ou, Annales des empereurs du Japon. Paris: Royal Asiatic Society, Oriental Translation Fund of Great Britain and Ireland. OCLC 5850691
* Varley, H. Paul. (1980). Jinn Shtki: A Chronicle of Gods and Sovereigns. New York: Columbia University Press. 10-ISBN 0-231-04940-4; 13-ISBN 978-0-231-04940-5; OCLC 59145842

==External links==
* Asuka Historical National Government Park: image of Mausoleum Emperor Temmu and Empress Jit, exterior view

 
 



[[Emperor Monmu]]

 was the 42nd emperor of Japan, Imperial Household Agency (Kunaich):  (42); retrieved 2013-8-22. according to the traditional order of succession. Ponsonby-Fane, Richard. (1959). The Imperial House of Japan, p. 55. 

Monmu's reign spanned the years from 697 through 707. Titsingh, Isaac. (1834). Brown, Delmer M. (1979). Gukansh, pp. 270271; Varley, H. Paul. (1980). Jinn Shtki. pp. 137140. 

==Traditional narrative==
Before his ascension to the Chrysanthemum Throne, his personal name (imina) Brown, pp. 264; prior to Emperor Jomei, the personal names of the emperors were very long and people did not generally use them. The number of characters in each name diminished after Jomei's reign. was Karu-shinn. Brown, p. 270. 

He was a grandson of Emperor Temmu and Empress Jit. He was the second son of Prince Kusakabe. Monmu's mother was Princess Abe, a daughter of Emperor Tenji. Monmu's mother would later accede to the throne herself, and she would be known as Empress Gemmei. Varley, p. 138. 

===Events of Monmu's life===
Karu-shinn was only six years old when his father, Crown Prince Kusakabe, died.

* 697: In the 10th year of Jit-tenn 's reign (10), the empress abdicated; and the succession (senso) was received by a grandson of Emperor Temmu. Shortly thereafter, Emperor Monmu is said to have acceded to the throne (sokui). Titsingh, p. 60; Brown, p. 270; Varley, pp. 44, 137138; a distinct act of senso is unrecognized prior to Emperor Tenji; and all sovereigns except Jit, Yzei, Go-Toba, and Fishimi have senso and sokui in the same year until the reign of Emperor Go-Murakami. 

Emperor Monmu ruled until his death in 707, at which point he was succeeded by his mother, Empress Gemmei, who was also his first cousin once removed and his first cousin twice removed. He left a young son by Fujiwara no Miyako, a daughter of Fujiwara no Fuhito: Obito no miko (Prince Obito), who eventually became Emperor Shmu.

Emperor Monmu's reign lasted 10 years. He died at the age of 25. Varley, p. 140. 

The actual site of Monmu's grave is known. This emperor is traditionally venerated at a memorial Shinto shrine (misasagi) at Nara.

The Imperial Household Agency designates this location as Monmu's mausoleum. It is formally named Hinokuma no Ako no oka no e no misasagi. Ponsonby-Fane, p. 420. 

===Kugy===
 is a collective term for the very few most powerful men attached to the court of the Emperor of Japan in pre-Meiji eras.

In general, this elite group included only three to four men at a time. These were hereditary courtiers whose experience and background would have brought them to the pinnacle of a life's career. During Monmu's reign, this apex of the Daij-kan included:
* Daij Daijin, Osakabe-shinn. 
* Sadaijin
* Udaijin
* Nadaijin, Nakatomi Kamako no Muraji. Brown, p. 266. 
* Dainagon, Fujiwara Fuhito. Brown, p. 271. 

==Eras of Monmu's reign==
Conventional modern scholarship seems to have determined that the years of Monmu's reign are encompassed within more than one era name or neng. Titsingh, pp. 6063; Brown, p. 271. 
* Taih (era) (701704)
* Keiun (704708)

===Non-neng period===
The initial years of Monmu's reign are not linked by scholars to any era or neng. Titsingh, p. 60. The Taika era innovation of naming time periods  neng  languished until Monmu reasserted an imperial right by proclaiming the commencement of Taih in 701.
* See Japanese era name  "Non-nengo periods"
* See Mommu (period) (697701).

In this context, Brown and Ishida's translation of Gukansh offers an explanation about the years of Empress Jit's reign which muddies a sense of easy clarity in the pre-Taiho time-frame:
::"The eras that fell in this reign were: (1) the remaining seven years of Shuch ; and (2) Taika, which was four years long . (The first year of this era was kinoto-hitsuji .) ...In the third year of the Taka era , Empress Jit yielded the throne to the Crown Prince." 

==Consorts and Children==
Bunin: Fujiwara no Miyako () (?754), daughter of Fujiwara no Fuhito
*Prince Obito () (Emperor Shmu) (701756)

Hin: Ki no Kamado-no-iratsume ()

Hin: Ishikawa no Tone-no-iratsume ()
*Prince Hironari ()
*Prince Hiroyo ()

==See also==
* Emperor of Japan
* List of Emperors of Japan
* Imperial cult

==Notes==
Japanese Imperial kamon  a stylized chrysanthemum blossom

==References==
* Brown, Delmer M. and Ichir Ishida, eds. (1979). Gukansh: The Future and the Past. Berkeley: University of California Press. ISBN 978-0-520-03460-0; OCLC 251325323
* Ponsonby-Fane, Richard Arthur Brabazon. (1959). The Imperial House of Japan. Kyoto: Ponsonby Memorial Society. OCLC 194887
* Titsingh, Isaac. (1834). Nihon Odai Ichiran; ou, Annales des empereurs du Japon. Paris: Royal Asiatic Society, Oriental Translation Fund of Great Britain and Ireland. OCLC 5850691
* Varley, H. Paul. (1980). Jinn Shtki: A Chronicle of Gods and Sovereigns. New York: Columbia University Press. ISBN 978-0-231-04940-5; OCLC 59145842

 
 



[[Empress Gensh]]

 was the 44th monarch of Japan, Imperial Household Agency (Kunaich):  (44) according to the traditional order of succession. Ponsonby-Fane, Richard. (1959). The Imperial House of Japan, p. 56. 

Gensh's reign spanned the years 715 through 724. Brown, Delmer et al. (1979). Gukansh, pp. 271272; Varley, H. Paul. (1980). Jinn Shtki. pp. 140141; Titsingh, Isaac. (1834). 

In the history of Japan, Gensh was the fifth of eight women to take on the role of empress regnant. The four female monarchs before Gensh were: (a) Suiko, (b) Kgyoku, (c) Jit and (d) Gemmei. The three women sovereigns reigning after Gensh were (e) Kken, (f) Meish, and (g) Go-Sakuramachi.

Gensh was the only Japanese empress regnant to inherit her title from another empress regnant, rather than a male predecessor.

==Traditional narrative==
Before her ascension to the Chrysanthemum Throne, her personal name (imina) Brown, pp. 264; prior to Emperor Jomei, the personal names of the emperors were very long and people did not generally use them. The number of characters in each name diminished after Jomei's reign. was Hidaka-hime. Brown, p. 271. 

Gensh was an elder sister of Emperor Mommu and daughter of Prince Kusakabe and his wife who later became Empress Gemmei. Therefore she was a granddaughter of Emperor Temmu and Empress Jit by her father and a granddaughter of Emperor Tenji through her mother. Brown, pp. 271272. 

===Events of Gensh's life===
Empress Gensho's succession to the throne was intended as a regency until Prince Obito, the son of her deceased younger brother Mommu, was mature enough to ascend the throne. Obito would later become the Emperor Shmu.

Obito was appointed Crown Prince in 714 by Empress Gemmei. In the next year, 715, Empress Gemmei, then in her fifties, abdicated in favor of her daughter Gensho. Obito was then 14 years old.

* 715 (Reiki 1, 9th month): In the 7th year of Gemmei-tenn 's reign (7), the empress abdicated; and the succession (senso) was received by her daughter, who held the throne in trust for her younger brother. Shortly thereafter, Empress Gensh acceded to the throne (sokui) as Empress Regnant. Brown, pp. 271272; Varley, pp. 44, 141; a distinct act of senso is unrecognized prior to Emperor Tenji; and all sovereigns except Jit, Yzei, Go-Toba, and Fushimi have senso and sokui in the same year until the reign of Emperor Go-Murakami. 

Obito remained the crown prince, heir to the new empress. Fujiwara no Fuhito, the most powerful courtier in Gemmei's court, remained at his post until his death in 720. After his death, Prince Nagaya, a grandson of Temmu and the Empress Gensho's cousin, seized power. This power shift was a background for later conflicts between Nagaya and Fuhito's four sons during the reign of Emperor Shmu (formerly Prince Obito).

Under Gensho's reign, the Nihonshoki was finished in 720. This was the first Japanese history book. Organization of the law system known as the ritsuryo was continued under the initiatives of Fuhito until his death. These laws and codes were edited and enacted by Fujiwara no Nakamaro, a grandson of Fuhito, and published as Yoro ritsuryo under the name of Fuhito. The taxation system which had been introduced by Empress Jit in the late 7th century began to malfunction. To compensate for the decreased tax revenue, the "Act of possession in three generations", an initiative of Prince Nagaya, was enacted in 723. Under this act, people were allowed to possess a newly cultivated field once every three generations. In the fourth generation, the right of possession would revert to the national government. This act was intended to motivate new cultivation, but it only remained in effect for about 20 years.

Empress Gensh reigned for nine years. Although there were seven other reigning empresses, their successors were most often selected from amongst the males of the paternal Imperial bloodline, which is why some conservative scholars argue that the women's reigns were temporary and that male-only succession tradition must be maintained in the 21st century. "Life in the Cloudy Imperial Fishbowl," Japan Times. March 27, 2007. Empress Gemmei, who was succeeded by her daughter, remains the sole exception to this conventional argument.

In 724, Gensho abdicated in favor of her nephew, who would be known as Emperor Shmu. Gensh lived for 25 years after she stepped down from the throne. She never married and had no children. She died at age 65. Varley, H. Paul. Jinn Shtki, p. 141. 

Empress Gensh's grave is located in Nara. This empress is traditionally venerated at a memorial Shinto shrine (misasagi), also in Nara. The Imperial Household Agency has designated this location as Mommu's mausoleum, and has been formally named Nahoyama no nishi no misasagi. Ponsonby-Fane, p. 420. The Imperial tomb can be visited today in Narazaka-cho, Nara City. Gensh's misasagi  image Gensh's misasagi  map 

===Kugy===
 is a collective term for the very few most powerful men attached to the court of the Emperor of Japan in pre-Meiji eras.

In general, this elite group included only three to four men at a time. These were hereditary courtiers whose experience and background would have brought them to the pinnacle of a life's career. During Gensh's reign, this apex of the Daij-kan included:
* Daij-daijin (Chi-daij-kanji ), Toneri-shinn (Prince Toneri) (). (9th son of Emperor Temmu) Brown, p. 272. 720735
* Sadaijin, Isonokami no Maro (). 708717
* Udaijin, Fujiwara no Fuhito (). 708720
* Udaijin, Prince Nagaya (). 721724
* Dainagon, Abe no Sukunamaro (). 718720
* Dainagon, Prince Nagaya (). 718721
* Dainagon, Tajihi no Ikemori (). 721730

==Eras of Gensh's reign==
The years of Gensh's reign are more specifically identified by more than one era name or neng. Titsingh, p. 65. 
* Reiki (715717)
* Yr (717724)
* Jinki (724729)

==See also==
* Japanese empresses
* Emperor of Japan
* List of Emperors of Japan
* Imperial cult

==Notes==
Japanese Imperial kamon  a stylized chrysanthemum blossom

==References==
* Brown, Delmer M. and Ichir Ishida, eds. (1979). Gukansh: The Future and the Past. Berkeley: University of California Press. 10-ISBN 0-520-03460-0; 13-ISBN 978-0-520-03460-0; OCLC 251325323
* Ponsonby-Fane, Richard Arthur Brabazon. (1959). The Imperial House of Japan. Kyoto: Ponsonby Memorial Society. OCLC 194887
* Titsingh, Isaac. (1834). Nihon Odai Ichiran; ou, Annales des empereurs du Japon. Paris: Royal Asiatic Society, Oriental Translation Fund of Great Britain and Ireland. OCLC 5850691
* Varley, H. Paul. (1980). Jinn Shtki: A Chronicle of Gods and Sovereigns. New York: Columbia University Press. 10-ISBN 0-231-04940-4; 13-ISBN 978-0-231-04940-5; OCLC 59145842

 
 



[[Empress Kken]]

, also known as , was the 46th and the 48th monarch of Japan respectively, Emperor Knin, Takano Imperial Mausoleum, Imperial Household Agency according to the traditional order of succession. Ponsonby-Fane, Richard. (1959). The Imperial House of Japan, pp. 58, 59. Empress Kken first reigned from 749 to 758, then she reascended the throne as Empress Shtoku from 765 until her death in 770.

In the history of Japan, Kken/Shtoku was the sixth of eight women to take on the role of empress regnant. The five female monarchs before Kken/Shtoku were (a) Suiko, (b) Kgyoku/Saimei, (c) Jit, (d) Gemmei, and (e) Gensh; and the two women sovereigns reigning after Kken/Shtoku were (f) Meish, and (g) Go-Sakuramachi.

==Traditional narrative==
Empress Kken's personal name (imina) was . Brown and Ishida, p. 274; Varley p. 149. Her father was Emperor Shmu, and her mother was Empress Kmy. Brown and Ishida, p. 274 

Kken is traditionally venerated at her tomb; the Imperial Household Agency designates , in Nara, Nara, as the location of Kken's mausoleum. The site is publicly accessible. Shtoku's misasagi  image Shtoku's misasagi  map (top left) 

===Events of Kken's life===
* August 19, 749 Julian dates derived from NengoCalc (): In the 25th year of Shmu-tenn 's reign (25), the emperor died; and the succession (senso) was received by his daughter. Shortly thereafter, Kken is said to have acceded to the throne. Brown and Ishida, pp. 274; Varley, p. 44; a distinct act of senso is unrecognized prior to Emperor Tenji; and all sovereigns except Jit, Yzei, Go-Toba, and Fushimi have senso and sokui in the same year until the reign of Emperor Go-Murakami. 

* 757: Conspiracy to overthrow Empress Kken was not successful. Bender, Ross. (2009). "The Suppresion of the Tachibana Naramaro Conspiracy," Japanese Journal of Religious Studies 37/2:223245; compare mirrored full-text; retrieved 2012-10-23. 

* 758: Koken abdicated in favor of a cousin who would become known as Emperor Junnin. The Empress had reigned as for ten years.

* 764: In the sixth year of Junnin-tenn 's reign, the emperor was deposed by his adoptive mother, and the succession was received by former-Empress Kken.

* January 26, 765 (): Kken formally reascended the throne (sokui) as Empress Shtoku. Brown and Ishida, pp. 276; Varley, p. 44, 145. 

* August 28, 770 (: Empress Shtoku died of smallpox at age 57, Brown and Ishida, p. 276. leaving the throne vacant. Bender, Ross. "The Hachiman Cult and the Dky Incident," Monumenta Nipponica, Vol. 34, No. 2 (1979). pp. 125153. She was succeeded by her first cousin twice removed, Emperor Knin. Empress Shtoku had reigned for five years. 

===Eras of her reigns===
The years of Kken's reign are more specifically identified by more than one era name. Titsingh, p. 73. 
* Tenpy-kanp (749)
* Tenpy-shh (749757)
* Tenpy-hji (757765)

The years of Shtoku's reign are more specifically identified by more than one era name. Titsingh, p. 78. 
* Tenpy-hji (757765)
* Tenpy-jingo (765767)
* Jingo-keiun (767770)

==Legacy==
Koken's reign was turbulent, and she survived coup attempts by both Tachibana Naramaro and Fujiwara no Nakamaro. Bender, Ross. (2009). "The Suppresion of the Tachibana Naramaro Conspiracy," Japanese Journal of Religious Studies 37/2:223245; compare mirrored full-text; retrieved 2012-10-22. Today, she is remembered chiefly for her alleged affair with a Buddhist monk named Dky (), a man she honored with titles and power. An oracle from Usa Shrine, the shrine of the kami in Usa, is said to have proclaimed that the monk should be made emperor; but when the empress sent to verify the pronouncement, Hachiman decreed that only one of imperial blood should ascend to the throne. Titsingh, pp. 7881. 

As with the seven other reigning empresses whose successors were most often selected from amongst the males of the paternal imperial bloodline, she was followed on the throne by a male cousin, which is why some conservative scholars argue that the women's reigns were temporary and that male-only succession tradition must be maintained in the 21st century. "Life in the Cloudy Imperial Fishbowl," Japan Times. March 27, 2007. Empress Gemmei, who was followed on the throne by her daughter, Empress Gensh, remains the sole exception to this conventional argument.

She is also known for sponsoring the Hyakumant Darani, one of the largest productions of printed works in early Japan.

==Kugy==
 is a collective term for the very few most powerful men attached to the court of the Emperor of Japan in pre-Meiji eras.

In general, this elite group included only three to four men at a time. These were hereditary courtiers whose experience and background would have brought them to the pinnacle of a life's career. During Kken's reign, this apex of the Daij-kan included:
* Taih, Emi no Oshikatsu (formerly Fujiwara no Nakamaro). 
* Daij-daijin
* Sadaijin, Tachibana no Moroe (formerly Katsuragi-, Prince Katsuragi) (half brother of Empress Kmy). 
* Udaijin, Fujiwara no Toyonari (first son of Fujiwara no Muchimaro). 
* Udaijin, Fujiwara no Nakamaro (second son of Fujiwara no Muchimaro). 
* Nadaijin
* Dainagon

The kugy during Shtoku's reign included:
* Daij-daiji, Dky. 
* Sadaijin
* Udaijin, Kibi Makibi. 
* Nadaijin
* Dainagon, Fujiwara Matate. 

==Notes==
Japanese Imperial kamon  a stylized chrysanthemum blossom

==References==
* 
* 
* Ponsonby-Fane, Richard Arthur Brabazon. (1959). The Imperial House of Japan. Kyoto: Ponsonby Memorial Society. OCLC 194887
* Titsingh, Isaac. (1834). Nihon Odai Ichiran; ou, Annales des empereurs du Japon. Paris: Royal Asiatic Society, Oriental Translation Fund of Great Britain and Ireland. OCLC 5850691
* Varley, H. Paul. (1980). Jinn Shtki: A Chronicle of Gods and Sovereigns. New York: Columbia University Press. 10-ISBN 0-231-04940-4; 13-ISBN 978-0-231-04940-5; OCLC 59145842

==See also==
* Emperor of Japan
* Japanese empresses
* Hyakumant Darani

 
 

 
 



[[Emperor Junnin]]

 was the 47th emperor of Japan, Imperial Household Agency (Kunaich):  (47) according to the traditional order of succession. Ponsonby-Fane, Richard. (1959). The Imperial House of Japan, p. 59. The seventh son of Prince Toneri and a grandson of Emperor Temmu, his reign spanned the years 758 to 764. Brown, Delmer et al. (1979). Gukansh, p. 275; Varley, H. Paul. (1980). Jinn Shtki. p. 143-144; Titsingh, Isaac. (1834). 

==Traditional narrative==
Before his ascension to the throne, his name (imina) Brown, pp. 264; prior to Emperor Jomei, the personal names of the emperors were very long ,and people did not generally use them. The number of characters in each name decreased after Jomei's reign. was i-shinn (i-no-). Brown, p. 275, Varley, p. 143. He was the seventh son of Prince Toneri, a son of Emperor Temmu. Brown, p. 275. And although his father died when he was three, he was not given any rank or office at the court. In the older Japanese documents, he is usually referred to as Haitei (), the unthroned emperor. The posthumous name of Emperor Junnin was given by Emperor Meiji a thousand years later.

===Ascension and reign===
In 757 the Empress Kken, his third cousin appointed him to be her crown prince instead of Prince Funado, who had been appointed to this position in the will of the Emperor Shmu. In the tenth year of Kken-tenn 's reign (10), on December 7, 758 (Tenpy-shh 2, 1st day of the 8th month), the empress abdicated and the succession (senso) passed to her adopted son. Shortly afterwards, Emperor Jimmu is said to have ascended to the throne (sokui). Titsingh, p. 75; Brown, p. 275; Varley, p. 44, 144; a distinct act of senso is unrecognized prior to Emperor Tenji; and all sovereigns except Jit, Yzei, Go-Toba, and Fushimi have achieved senso and sokui in the same year, until the reign of Emperor Go-Murakami. In 760 (Tenpy-hji 4), additional coins were put into circulationcopper coins bearing the words Mannen Ten-h, silver coins bearing the words Teihei Genh, and gold coins bearing the words Kaiki Shh. Appert, Georges et al. (1888). Ancien japon, pp. 2930. 

The years of Junnin's reign, 758765, are more specifically encompassed within a single era name or neng. Titsingh, p. 75. Tenpy-hji Junnin seemingly had very little power and was a mere figurehead. In 764, six years after Empress Kken had stepped down, the former empress reclaimed the throne, forcing Junnin to abdicate.

===Death and mausoleum===
On November 10, 765 (Tenpy-jingo 1, 23rd day of the 10th month) the former emperor died while in exile. The site of Junnin's actual grave is unknown, and he is traditionally venerated at a memorial Shinto shrine (misasagi) at Awaji. The Imperial Household Agency designates this location as Junnin's mausoleum: It is formally named Awaji no misasagi. Ponsonby-Fane, p. 420. 

Though Junnin had, technically, been emperor, he was not featured on the official List of Japanese Emperors until the late nineteenth century. In 1870, Emperor Meiji conferred the posthumous name and title by which Emperor Junnin is now known. His place in the traditional order of succession was confirmed at the same time as announcements about Emperor Kbun and Emperor Chukyo were made public.

==Kugy==
 is a collective term for the few most powerful men attached to the court of the Emperor of Japan in pre-Meiji eras. In general, this elite group included only three or four men at a time, and they were hereditary courtiers whose experience and background would have brought them to the pinnacle of their careers. During Junnin's reign, this group of Daij-kan included:
* Taishi, Fujiwara Oshikatsu, also known as Emi no Oshikatsu () (formerly Fujiwara no Nakamaro) (). 
* Taih, Fujiwara Oshikatsu. 
* Daij-daijin, Fujiwara Oshikatsu. 
* Sadaijin, Fujiwara no Toyonari (). 
* Udaijin, Fujiwara no Toyonari (). 
* Naidaijin (not appointed)
* Dainagon

==Consorts and children==
* Awata no Morone (), widow of Fujiwara no Mayori, the first son of Fujiwara no Nakamaro

* Unknown woman

* Princess Yamao (), Sai in Ise Shrine 758765

==Notes==
Japanese Imperial kamon  a stylized chrysanthemum blossom

==References==
* Appert, Georges and Hiroji Kinoshita. (1888). Ancien japon. Tokyo: Kokubunsha. OCLC 4429674
* Brown, Delmer M. and Ichir Ishida, eds. (1979). Gukansh: The Future and the Past. Berkeley: University of California Press. 10-ISBN 0-520-03460-0; 13-ISBN 978-0-520-03460-0; OCLC 251325323
* Ponsonby-Fane, Richard Arthur Brabazon. (1959). The Imperial House of Japan. Kyoto: Ponsonby Memorial Society. OCLC 194887
* Titsingh, Isaac. (1834). Nihon Odai Ichiran; ou, Annales des empereurs du Japon. Paris: Royal Asiatic Society, Oriental Translation Fund of Great Britain and Ireland. OCLC 5850691
* Varley, H. Paul. (1980). Jinn Shtki: A Chronicle of Gods and Sovereigns. New York: Columbia University Press. 10-ISBN 0-231-04940-4; 13-ISBN 978-0-231-04940-5; OCLC 59145842

==See also==
* Emperor of Japan
* List of Emperors of Japan
* Imperial cult
* Japanese empresses

 
 



[[Emperor Heizei]]

, also known as Heij-tenn. was the 51st emperor of Japan, Emperor Heizei, Yamamomo Imperial Mausoleum, Imperial Household Agency according to the traditional order of succession. Ponsonby-Fane, Richard. (1959). The Imperial House of Japan, pp. 6263. Heizei's reign lasted from 806 to 809. Titsingh, Isaac. (1834). Annales des empereurs du Japon, pp. 9697; Brown, Delmer et al. (1979). Gukansh, pp. 279280; Varley, H. Paul. Jinn Shtki, p. 151. 

==Traditional narrative==
He was the eldest son of the Emperor Kammu and empress Fujiwara no Otomuro. Varley, p. 151; Brown, p. 279. Heizei had three Empresses and seven sons and daughters. Brown, p. 279. 

Heizei is traditionally venerated at his tomb; the Imperial Household Agency designates , in Nara, as the location of Heizei's mausoleum. The site is publicly accessible. Nara City Sightseeing Information Center (Narashikanko): Heizei's misasagi, map Although one of the largest kofun monuments in Japan, archaeological investigations in 19621963 indicate that it was constructed in the early 5th century, and that portions of it were destroyed during the construction of Heijo-ky, calling into question the designation by the Imperial Household Agency.

===Events of Heizei's life===
Before he ascended to the throne, his liaison with Fujiwara no Kusuko, the mother of his one consort, caused a scandal. Because of this scandal his father considered depriving him of the rank of crown prince.

* 785: (): Heizei was appointed Crown Prince at the age of 12. Brown and Ishida, p. 279 

* April 9, 806 Julian dates derived from NengoCalc (): In the 25th year of Emperor Kammu's reign, he died; and despite an ensuring dispute over who should follow him as sovereign, contemporary scholars then construed that the succession (senso) was received by his son. Shortly thereafter, Emperor Heizei is said to have acceded to the throne (sokui). Titsingh, p. 95; Brown and Ishida, p. 279; Varley, p. 44; a distinct act of senso is unrecognized prior to Emperor Tenji; and all sovereigns except Jit, Yzei, Go-Toba, and Fushimi have senso and sokui in the same year until the reign of Emperor Go-Murakami. 

His title Heizei was derived from the official name of the capital in Nara, Heizei Ky.

During Heizei's reign, the bodyguards were reorganized; the existing Imperial Bodyguards became the Left Imperial Bodyguards, while the Middle Bodyguards became the Right Imperial Bodyguards. Brown and Ishida, p. 280 Both sides were given a new Senior Commander; at this time Heizei appointed Sakanoue no Tamuramaro (758811) as Senior Commander of the Imperial Bodyguards of the Right. Under Emperor Kammu, Tamuramaro had been appointed as shogun of a military expedition against the Emishi. Brown and Ishida, p. 279; Varley, p. 272; Titsingh, p. 99. 

* 809 (): After a reign of four years, Heizei fell ill; and fearing that he would not survive, Heizei abdicated in favor of his younger brother, who would later come to be known as Emperor Saga. After abdicating, Heizei moved to Nara and was henceforth known as Nara no Mikado, the "Emperor of Nara". 

* May 18, 809 (): Emperor Saga was enthroned at age 24. 

* 810 (Knin 1): In Heizei's name, the former emperor's ambitious third wife, , and her brother Nakanari organized an attempted rebellion, but their forces were defeated. Kusuko died in poison and her brother was executed. Heizei took the tonsure and became a Buddhist monk. Ponsonby-Fane, p. 318. Brown and Ishida, pp. 281 

* August 5, 824 (): Heizei died at age 51, 14 years after he had abdicated due to illness. Brown and Ishida, p. 280; Varley, p. 151. 

===Era of Heizei's reign===
The years of Heizei's reign are encompassed within one era name (neng). Titsingh, p. 96. 
* Daid (806810)

==Kugy==
 is a collective term for the very few most powerful men attached to the court of the Emperor of Japan in pre-Meiji eras. Furugosho: Kugy of Heizi-tenn 

In general, this elite group included only three to four men at a time. These were hereditary courtiers whose experience and background would have brought them to the pinnacle of a life's career. During Heizei's reign, this apex of the Daij-kan included:
* Sadaijin (not appointed)
* Udaijin, Miwa-no-Oh or Miwa-no-Ohkimi(),798806. 
* Udaijin, Fujiwara no Uchimaro(),806812. 
* Naidaijin
* Dainagon, Fujiwara no Otomo (), 806807

When the daughter of a chnagon became the favored consort of the Crown Prince Ate (later known as Heizei-tenn), her father's power and position in court was affected. Kammu disapproved of , former wife of Fujiwara no Tadanushi; and Kammu had her removed from his son's household. After Kammu died, Heizei restored this one-time favorite as part of his household; and this distinction had consequences. Ponsonby-Fane, p. 318. 

* Chnagon, Fujiwara no Tadanushi 

==Consorts and children==

Empress (posthumously elevated Kg): Fujiwara no Tarashiko () (?794), also known as Taishi, daughter of Fujiwara no Momokawa Ponsonby-Fane, P. 318; in 806, 12 years after death, this is first time this posthumously elevated rank was bestowed 

Hi: Imperial Princess Asahara () (779817), daughter of Emperor Kammu

Hi: Imperial Princess yake () (?849), daughter of Emperor Kammu

Shshi Court lady (Naishi-no-kami): , former wife of Chnagon Fujiwara no Tadanushi 

Court lady: Fujii no Fujiko/Tshi (), daughter of Fujii no Michiyori
*Imperial Prince Abo () (792842)

Court lady: Ise no Tsugiko () (772812), daughter of Ise no na
*Imperial Prince Takaoka () (799881), the Crown Prince in 809(deposed in 810)
*Imperial Prince Kose () (?882)
*Imperial Princess Kamitsukeno () (?842)
*Imperial Princess Isonokami () (?846)
*Imperial Princess hara () (?863), 14th Sai in Ise Shrine(806809)

Court lady: Ki no Iokazu (), daughter of Ki no Kotsuo
*Imperial Princess Enu () (?835)

==See also==

* Emperor of Japan
* List of Emperors of Japan
* Imperial cult

==Notes==
Japanese Imperial kamon  a stylized chrysanthemum blossom

==References==
* 
* 
* Ponsonby-Fane, Richard Arthur Brabazon. (1959). The Imperial House of Japan. Kyoto: Ponsonby Memorial Society. OCLC 194887
* Titsingh, Isaac. (1834). Nihon Odai Ichiran; ou, Annales des empereurs du Japon. Paris: Royal Asiatic Society, Oriental Translation Fund of Great Britain and Ireland. OCLC 5850691
* Varley, H. Paul. (1980). Jinn Shtki: A Chronicle of Gods and Sovereigns. New York: Columbia University Press. 10-ISBN 0-231-04940-4; 13-ISBN 978-0-231-04940-5; OCLC 59145842

 
 



[[Emperor Saga]]

Cry for noble Saich (), which was written by Emperor Saga for Saich's death. Saga was a scholar of the Chinese classics. He was also renowned as a skillful calligrapher. Chinese calligraphic influence had been weakened after the Heian period; this text was an example of the different way it was evolving in Japan.
 was the 52nd emperor of Japan, Emperor Saga, Saganoyamanoe Imperial Mausoleum, Imperial Household Agency according to the traditional order of succession. Ponsonby-Fane, Richard. (1959). The Imperial House of Japan, pp. 6364. Saga's reign spanned the years from 809 through 823. Brown and Ishida, pp. 280282; Varley, H. Paul. (1980). Jinn Shtki, p. 151-163; Titsingh, Isaac. (1834). 

==Traditional narrative==
Saga was the second son of Emperor Kanmu and Fujiwara no Otomuro. Varley, p. 151. Brown and Ishida, p. 280. His personal name was . Titsingh, p. 96; Brown and Ishida, p. 280. Saga was an "accomplished calligrapher" able to compose in Chinese who held the first imperial poetry competitions (naien). Brown and Ishida, p. 281 According to legend, he was the first Japanese emperor to drink tea.

Saga is traditionally venerated at his tomb; the Imperial Household Agency designates , in Uky-ku, Kyoto, as the location of Saga's mausoleum. 

===Events of Saga's life===
* 806 Saga became the crown prince at age 21.
* June 17, 809 Julian dates derived from NengoCalc (): In the 4th year of Emperor Heizei's reign, he fell ill and abdicated; and the succession (senso) was received by Kammu's second son Saga, the eldest son having become a Buddhist priest. Shortly thereafter, Emperor Saga is said to have acceded to the throne (sokui). Titsingh, p. 96; Brown and Ishida, p. 280; Varley, p. 44; a distinct act of senso is unrecognized prior to Emperor Tenji; and all sovereigns except Jit, Yzei, Go-Toba, and Fushimi have senso and sokui in the same year until the reign of Emperor Go-Murakami. 

Soon after his enthronement, Saga himself took ill. Saga's untimely health problems provided former-Emperor Heizei with a unique opportunity to foment a rebellion; however, forces loyal to Emperor Saga, led by taishgun Sakanoue no Tamuramaro, quickly defeated the Heizei rebels which thus limited the adverse consequences which would have followed any broader conflict. Titsingh, p. 98; Varley, p. 151. This same Tamuramaro is remembered in Aomori's annual nebuta or neputa matsuri which feature a number of gigantic, specially-constructed, illuminated paper floats. These great lantern-structures are colorfully painted with mythical figures; and teams of men carry them through the streets as crowds shout encouragement. This early ninth century military leader is commemorated in this way because he is said to have ordered huge illuminated lanterns to be placed at the top of hills; and when the curious Emishi approached these bright lights to investigate, they were captured and subdued by Tamuramaro's men. Boroff, Nicholas. National Geographic Traveler Japan, p. 156. 
* August 24, 842 (): Saga died at the age of 57. Brown and Ishida, p. 282; Varley, p. 163. 

===Eras of Saga's reign===
The years of Saga's reign are more specifically identified by more than one era name (neng). Titsingh, p. 97. 
* Daid (806810)
* Knin (810824)

==Legacy==
In ancient Japan, there were four noble clans, the Gempeitkitsu (). One of these clans, the Minamoto clan are also known as Genji (), and of these, the Saga Genji () are descended from 52nd emperor Saga. Saga's grandson, Minamoto no Tru, is thought to be an inspiration for the protagonist of the novel The Tale of Genji.

In the 9th century, Emperor Saga made a decree prohibiting meat consumption except fish and birds. This remained the dietary habit of Japanese until the introduction of European dietary customs in the 19th century. 

Emperor Saga played an important role as a stalwart supporter of the Buddhist monk Kkai. The emperor helped Kkai to establish the Shingon School of Buddhism by granting him the Toji temple in the capital Heian-ky (present day Kyoto).

==Kugy==
 is a collective term for the very few most powerful men attached to the court of the Emperor of Japan in pre-Meiji eras. Furugosho: kugy of Saga-tenn 

In general, this elite group included only three to four men at a time. These were hereditary courtiers whose experience and background would have brought them to the pinnacle of a life's career. During Saga's reign (809823), this kugy included:
* Sadaijin
* Udaijin, Fujiwara no Uchimaro(), 806812. 
* Udaijin, Fujiwara no Sonohito(),812818. 
* Udaijin, Fujiwara no Fuyutsugu(),821825. 
* Udaijin, Tachibana no Ujikimi. Ponsonby-Fane, p. 319. 
* Naidaijin
* Dainagon

==Consorts and children==

Saga had 49 children by at least 30 different women. Many of the children received the surname Minamoto, thereby removing them from royal succession.

Empress: Tachibana no Kachiko () (786850), also known as , daughter of Tachibana no Kiyotomo (). Ponsonby-Fane, Richard. (1959). The Imperial House of Japan, pp. 318319. 
* Imperial Prince Masara () (810850), Emperor Ninmyo
* Imperial Princess Masako () (810879), married to Emperor Junna
* Imperial Princess Hideko () (?850)
* Imperial Prince Hidera () (817895)
* Imperial Princess Toshiko () (?826)
* Imperial Princess Yoshiko () (?839)
* Imperial Princess Shigeko () (?851)

Hi(deposed): Princess Takatsu () (?841), daughter of Emperor Kammu
* Imperial Prince Nariyoshi () (?868)
* Imperial Princess Nariko () (?815)

Hi: Tajihi no Takako () (787825), daughter of Tajihi no Ujimori ()

Bunin: Fujiwara no Onatsu () (?855), daughter of Fujiwara no Uchimaro ()

Nygo: hara no Kiyoko () (?841), daughter of hara no Yakatsugu ()
* Imperial Princess Ninshi () (?889), 15th Sai in Ise Shrine 809823

Nygo: Princess Katano (), daughter of Prince Yamaguchi ()
* Imperial Princess Uchiko () (807847), 1st Saiin in Kamo Shrine 810831

Nygo: Kudara no Kimy () (?851), daughter of Kudara no Shuntetsu ()
* Imperial Prince Motora () (?831)
* Imperial Prince Tadara () (819876)
* Imperial Princess Motoko () (?831)

Koui: Iidaka no Yakatoji ()
* Minamoto no Tokiwa () (812854)
* Minamoto no Akira () (814852/853)

Koui: Akishino no Koko (/), daughter of Akishino no Yasuhito ()
* Minamoto no Kiyoshi ()

Koui: Yamada no Chikako ()
* Minamoto no Hiraku(?) () (829869)
* Minamoto no Mituhime ()

Court lady (Naishi-no-kami): Kudara no Kyomy () (?849), daughter of Kudara no Kyshun ()
* Minamoto no Yoshihime ((814?)
* Minamoto no Sadamu () (815863)
* Minamoto no Wakahime ()
* Minamoto no Shizumu(?) () (824881)

Court lady: Takashina no Kawako (), daughter of Takashina no Kiyoshina ()
* Imperial Princess Sshi () (?854)

Court lady: Fun'ya no Fumiko (), daughter of Fun'ya no Kugamaro ()
* Imperial Princess Junshi () (?863)
* Imperial Princess Seishi () (?853), married to Prince Fujii(son of Emperor Kammu)
* Prince Atsushi ()

Court lady: A daughter of Hiroi no Otona ()
* Minamoto no Makoto () (810869)

Court lady: Fuse no Musashiko ()
* Minamoto no Sadahime () (810880)
* Minamoto no Hashihime ()

Court lady: A daughter of Kamitsukeno clan ()
* Minamoto no Hiromu () (812863)

Court lady(Nyoju): A daughter of Taima no Osadamaro ()
* Minamoto no Kiyohime () (810856), married to Fujiwara no Yoshifusa ()
* Minamoto no Matahime () (812882), Naishi-no-kami ()

Court lady: A daughter of Abe no Yanatsu ()
* Minamoto no Yutaka(?) () (813876)

Court lady: Kasa no Tsugiko (), daughter of Kasa no Nakamori ()
* Minamoto no Ikeru () (821872)

Court lady: A daughter of Tanaka clan ()
* Minamoto no Sumu(?) ()

Court lady: A daughter of Awata clan ()
* Minamoto no Yasushi () (822853)

Court lady: hara no Matako (), daughter of hara no Mamuro ()
* Minamoto no Tru () (822895), Sadaijin
* Minamoto no Tsutomu () (824881)
* Minamoto no Mitsuhime ()

Court lady: A daughter of Koreyoshi no Sadamichi ()
* Minamoto no Masaru ()

Court lady: A daughter of Nagaoka no Okanari ()
* Minamoto no Sakashi(?) ()

Court lady: A daughter of Ki clan ()
* Minamoto no Sarahime ()

Court lady: Kura no Kageko ()
* Minamoto no Kamihime ()
* Minamoto no Katahime(?) ()
* Minamoto no Agahime ()

Court lady: Kannabi no Iseko ()
* Minamoto no Koehime ()

Court lady: Tachibana no Haruko ()

Court lady: nakatomi no Mineko ()

(from unknown women)
* Minamoto no Tsugu (?) ()
* Minamoto no Yoshihime ()
* Minamoto no Toshihime ()

==See also==
* Emperor Go-Saga
* Emperor of Japan
* Imperial cult
* List of Emperors of Japan

==Notes==
Japanese Imperial kamon  a stylized chrysanthemum blossom

==References==
* 

* 
* 
* 
* 
* 

== External links ==
* Another photo of Emperor Saga's mausoleum

 
 



[[Emperor Junna]]

 was the 53rd emperor of Japan, Emperor Junna, harano no Nishi no Minenoe Imperial Mausoleum, Imperial Household Agency according to the traditional order of succession. Ponsonby-Fane, Richard. (1959). The Imperial House of Japan, p. 64. Junna reigned from 823 to 833. Brown and Ishida, pp.282283; Varley, H. Paul. (1980). Jinn Shtki, p. 164; Titsingh, Isaac. (1834). 

==Traditional narrative==
Junna had six Empresses and Imperial consorts and 13 Imperial sons and daughters. Brown and Ishida, p. 282. His personal name (imina) was . Titsingh, p. 103; Brown and Ishida, p. 282. 

Junna is traditionally venerated at his tomb; the Imperial Household Agency designates , in Nishiky-ku, Kyoto, as the location of Junna's mausoleum. 

===Events of Junna's life===
* 810: After the rebellion of Emperor Heizei, he became the crown prince of Emperor Saga at 25 years of age. 

* 30 May 823 Julian dates derived from NengoCalc (): In the 14th year of Emperor Saga's reign, he abdicated; the succession (senso) was received by Junna, Saga's younger brother and Emperor Kammu's third son. Brown and Ishida, pp. 282283. 

* 22 March 833 (): In the 10th year of Emperor Junna's reign, the emperor abdicated; and the succession (senso) was received by a his adopted son. Shortly thereafter, Emperor Ninmyo is said to have acceded to the throne. After Junna stepped down from the throne, two former Emperors were alive. In this period, Saga was called the Senior Retired Emperor and Junna was known as the Junior Retired Emperor. 

* 11 June 840 (: Former-Emperor Junna died at the age of 55. Brown and Ishida, p. 283; Varely, p. 164. Following his death, Fujiwara Yoshifusa maneuvered to have Montoku, rather than the crown prince Tsunesada, put on the throne; Junna's death set the stage for the Fujiwara clan's ascendancy. Mason and Caiger, p. 69 

===Eras of Junna's reign===
The years of Junna's reign are more specifically identified by more than one era name (neng). Titsingh, p. 102. 
* Knin (810824)
* Tench (824834)

==Kugy==
 is a collective term for the very few most powerful men attached to the court of the Emperor of Japan in pre-Meiji eras. Furugosho: Kugy of Junna-tenn 

In general, this elite group included only three to four men at a time. These were hereditary courtiers whose experience and background would have brought them to the pinnacle of a life's career. During Junna's reign, this apex of the Daij-kan included:
* Sadaijin, Fujiwara no Fuyutsugu(), 825826. 
* Sadaijin, Fujiwara no Otsugu(),832843. 
* Udaijin, Fujiwara no Otsugu(),825832.
* Udaijin, Kiyohara no Natsuno(),832837. 
* Naidaijin (not appointed)
* Dainagon, Fujiwara no Otsugu(),821825.
* Dainagon, Yoshimine no Yasuyo () (half brother of Emperor Junna), 828830.
* Dainagon, Kiyohara no Natsuno(),828832
* Dainagon, Fujiwara no Mimori (), 829838

==Consorts and children==

Empress: Imperial Princess Shshi/Masako () (810879), daughter of Emperor Saga
*Imperial Prince Tsunesada () (825884), the Crown Prince (deposed in 842)
*Imperial Prince Tsunefusa () (830842)
*Imperial Prince Motosada () (?869)

Hi(Empress as posthumous honors): Imperial Princess Koshi () (789809), daughter of Emperor Kammu
*Imperial Prince Tsuneyo () (806826)
*Imperial Princess Ujiko () (?885), 16th Sai in Ise Shrine(823827)
*Imperial Princess Yushi () (?862)
*Imperial Princess Sadako () (?834)

Nyog: Nagahara no Motohime ()

Nyog: Tachibana no Ujiko (), daughter of Tachibana no Nagana

Koui: Fujiwara no Kiyoko (), daughter of Fujiwara no Nagaoka

Court lady: Princess Otsugu () (787847)

Court lady: nakatomi no Yasuko (), daughter of nakatomi no Fuchiio
*Imperial Prince Yoshisada () (?848)

Court lady: no no Takako (), daughter of no no Masao
*Imperial Princess Hiroko () (?869)

Court lady: Tachibana no Funeko (), daughter of Tachibana no Kiyono
*Imperial Princess Takaiko () (?848)

Court lady: Tajihi no Ikeko (), daughter of Tajihi no Kadonari
*Imperial Princess Tomoko () (?860)

Court lady: Kiyohara no Haruko (), daughter of Kiyohara no Natsuno
*Imperial Princess Meishi () (?854)

Unknown lady
*Mune no Chushi () (?863), removed from the Imperial Family by receiving the family name from Emperor (Shisei Kka, ) in 862.

==Notes==
Japanese Imperial kamon  a stylized chrysanthemum blossom

==References==
* 
* 
* 
* Kasai, Masaki. (1991). Tokyo: Yamakawa Shuppan-sha. ISBN 4-634-60270-9; 13-ISBN 978-4-634-60270-0; OCLC 166930357
* Ponsonby-Fane, Richard Arthur Brabazon. (1959). The Imperial House of Japan. Kyoto: Ponsonby Memorial Society. OCLC 194887
* Titsingh, Isaac. (1834). Nihon Odai Ichiran; ou, Annales des empereurs du Japon. Paris: Royal Asiatic Society, Oriental Translation Fund of Great Britain and Ireland. OCLC 5850691
* Varley, H. Paul. (1980). Jinn Shtki: A Chronicle of Gods and Sovereigns. New York: Columbia University Press. 10-ISBN 0-231-04940-4; 13-ISBN 978-0-231-04940-5; OCLC 59145842

==See also==
* Emperor of Japan
* List of Emperors of Japan
* Imperial cult

 
 



[[Kmy]]

Komyo can refer to:
#Emperor Kmy, the second Northern Emperor of Japan, or pretender.
#Empress Consort Kmy, the consort of Emperor Shmu.
# Kmy () is a phrase used in Japanese Jodo Shinshu Buddhism to refer to the Infinite Light of Amitabha Buddha.



[[Emperor Suk]]

) (May 25, 1334  January 31, 1398) was the third of Ashikaga Pretenders during the Period of the Northern and Southern Courts in Japan. According to pre-Meiji scholars, his reign spanned the years from 1348 through 1351. Titsingh, Isaac. (1834). Annales des empereurs du japon, pp. 296301. 

==Genealogy==
His personal name was originally Masuhito (;), but was later changed to Okihito ().

His father was the Northern Pretender Emperor Kgon. His predecessor, Emperor Kmy was his uncle, the younger brother of Emperor Kgon.
*Lady-in-waiting: Niwata (Minamoto) ?? ()
**First son: Imperial Prince Fushimi-no-miya Yoshihito () (First Fushimi-no-miya)
**Second son: Prince Okinobu () (Buddhist Priest)
*Court Lady: Lady Yasukuku-dono ()
*Consort: Sanj ?? ()
**First daughter: ?? ()
**Third son: Prince Ksuke ?? () (Buddhist Priest)

==Events of Suk's life==
In his own lifetime, Suk and those around him believed that he occupied the Chrysanthemum Throne from November 18, 1348 until November 26, 1351.

In 1348, he became Crown Prince. In the same year, he became Northern Emperor upon the abdication of Emperor Kmy. Although Emperor Kgon ruled as cloistered Emperor, the rivalry between Ashikaga Takauji and Ashikaga Tadayoshi began, and in 1351, Takauji returned to the allegiance of the Southern Court, forcing Emperor Suk to abdicate. This was intended to reunify the Imperial Line. However, the peace soon fell apart, and in 1352, the Southern Dynasty evacuated Kyoto, abducting with them Retired (Northern) Emperors Emperor Kgon and Emperor Kmy as well as Suk and the Crown Prince, Imperial Prince Naohito, the son of Emperor Kgon. Because of this, Takauji made Emperor Kgon's second son Imperial Prince Iyahito emperor (First Fushimi-no-miya).

Returning to Kyoto in 1357, Emperor Suk's son Imperial Prince Yoshihito began to work with the Bakufu to be named Crown Prince, but the Bakufu instead decided to make Emperor Go-Kgon's son (the future Emperor Go-En'y) Crown Prince instead.

In 1398, Emperor Suk died. But, 30 years after his death, in 1428, his great-grandson Hikohito (), as the adopted son of Emperor Shk, became Emperor Go-Hanazono, fulfilling Suk's dearest wish. Suk is enshrined at the Daikmyji no misasagi () in Fushimi-ku, Kyoto.

==Eras during his reign==
:Nanboku-ch Southern court
*Eras as reckoned by legitimate Court (as determined by Meiji rescript)
** Shhei

:Nanboku-ch Northern court
*Eras as reckoned by pretender Court (as determined by Meiji rescript)
** Jwa
** Kan'

==Southern Court rivals==
*Emperor Go-Murakami

==See also==
* Emperor of Japan
* List of Emperors of Japan
* Imperial cult

==Notes==
Japanese Imperial kamon  a stylized chrysanthemum blossom

==References==

* Ponsonby-Fane, Richard Arthur Brabazon. (1959). The Imperial House of Japan. Kyoto: Ponsonby Memorial Society. OCLC 194887
* Titsingh, Isaac, ed. (1834). Rin-siyo/Hayashi Gah, 1652, Nipon o da itsi ran; ou, Annales des empereurs du Japon. Paris: Oriental Translation Fund of Great Britain and Ireland.

 
 

Suko of Japan
Suko of Japan


[[Emperor Go-Kgon]]

Emperor Go-Kgon ( Go-Kgon-tenn) (23 March 1338  12 March 1374) was the 4th of the Ashikaga Pretenders during the Period of the Northern and Southern Courts. According to pre-Meiji scholars, his reign spanned the years from 1352 through 1371. Titsingh, Isaac. (1834). Annales des empereurs du japon, pp. 302309. 

This Nanboku-ch "sovereign" was named after his father Emperor Kgon and go- (), translates literally as "later;" and thus, he may be called the "Later Emperor Kgon". The Japanese word "go" has also been translated to mean the "second one;" and in some older sources, this would-be emperor may be identified as "Kgon, the second", or as "Kgon II."

==Genealogy==
His personal name was Iyahito ().

He was the second son of the Northern Pretender Emperor Kgon, and brother of his predecessor, Emperor Suk. His mother was Hideko (), daughter of Sanj Kinhide ()
*Lady-in-waiting: Nakako (), daughter of Hirohashi (Fujiwara) Kanetsuna ()
**Second son: Imperial Prince Ohito () (Emperor Go-En'y)
**Fifth son: Prince Eijo () (Buddhist Lay Priest)
**Twelfth son: Prince Gynin () (Buddhist Priest)
*Consort: Uemon-no-Suke no Tsubone ()
**First son: Imperial Prince Rynin () (Buddhist Lay Priest)
**Seventh son: Prince Kakuz () (Buddhist Priest)
*Consort: Daughter of Hin Chkai ()
**First daughter: Imperial Princess Haruko ()
**Fourth son: Prince Kakuei () (Buddhist Priest)
**Eighth son: Prince Den () (Buddhist Priest)
**Eleventh son: Prince Shjo () (Buddhist Priest)
*Consort: Daughter of Tachibana no Mochishige ()
**Tenth son: Prince Mysh () (Buddhist Priest)
*(from unknown women)
**Third son: Prince Gyj () (Buddhist Lay Priest)
**Fifth son: Prince Kanshu () (Buddhist Priest)
**Thirteenth son: Prince Kanky () (Buddhist Lay Priest)
**Second daughter: Imperial Princess Kenshi ()
**Daughter: Shnin () (Buddhist Priestess)

==Events of Go-Kgon's life==
In his own lifetime, Go-Kgon and those around him believed that he occupied the Chrysanthemum Throne from 25 September 1352 to 9 April 1371.
 
In 1351, Ashikaga Takauji briefly returned to the allegiance of the Southern Dynasty, causing the Southern Court to briefly consolidate control of the Imperial Line. However, this peace fell apart in 1352. On this occasion, the Southern Court abducted Retired (Northern) Emperors Emperor Kgon and Emperor Kmy as well as Emperor Suk and the Crown Prince, Imperial Prince Naohito, the son of Emperor Kgon, from Kyoto to Yoshino, producing a state of affairs in which there was no Emperor in Kyoto.

Because of this, Imperial Prince Iyahito became emperor in 1352 with the support of Ashikaga Yoshiakira.

During this period, the Era of the Northern and Southern Courts, because of the antagonism between the two competing dynasties, public order in Kyoto was disturbed. The Southern Court repeatedly recaptured Kyoto. Emperor Go-Kgon was forced to repeatedly flee from Kyoto to mi Province and other places. Around the time that Ashikaga Yoshimitsu was named Shgun (1368), the Southern Courts power weakened, and order was restored to Kyoto. Also around this time, the Emperor's authority began to show its weakness.

On 9 April 1371, he abdicated in favor of his son, who became the Northern Pretender Emperor Go-En'y. He continued to rule as Cloistered Emperor until he died of illness on 12 March 1374. He is enshrined with other emperors at the imperial tomb called Fukakusa no kita no misasagi () in Fushimi-ku, Kyoto.

==Eras of Go-Kgon's reign==
The years of Go-Kgon's reign are more specifically identified by more than one era name or neng.

:Nanboku-ch Southern court
*Eras as reckoned by legitimate Court (as determined by Meiji rescript)
* Shhei (13461370)
* Kentoku (13701372)

:Nanboku-ch Northern court
*Eras as reckoned by pretender Court (as determined by Meiji rescript)
* Kann (13501352)
* Bunna (13521356)
* Embun (13561361)
* Kan (13611362)
* Jji (13621368)
* an (13681375)

==Southern Court rivals==
*Emperor Go-Murakami
*Emperor Chkei

==Notes==
Japanese Imperial kamon  a stylized chrysanthemum blossom

==References==

* Ponsonby-Fane, Richard Arthur Brabazon. (1959). The Imperial House of Japan. Kyoto: Ponsonby Memorial Society. OCLC 194887
* Titsingh, Isaac, ed. (1834). Rin-siyo/Hayashi Gah, 1652, Nipon o da itsi ran; ou, Annales des empereurs du Japon. Paris: Oriental Translation Fund of Great Britain and Ireland.

==See also==
* Emperor of Japan
* List of Emperors of Japan
* Imperial cult

 
 

Go-Kogon of Japan
Go-Kogon of Japan


[[Emperor Go-En'y]]

 (11 January 1359  6 June 1393) was the "5th" of the Ashikaga Pretenders during the period of two courts. According to pre-Meiji scholars, his reign spanned the years from 1371 through 1382. Titsingh, Isaac. (1834). Annales des empereurs du japon, pp. 310316. 

This Nanboku-ch "sovereign" was named after the 10th century Emperor En'y and go- (), translates literally as "later;" and thus, he may be called the "Later Emperor En'y". The Japanese word "go" has also been translated to mean the "second one;" and in some older sources, this would-be emperor may be identified as "En'y, the second", or as "En'y II."

==Genealogy==
His personal name was Ohito ().

He was the second son of the fourth Northern Pretender Emperor Go-Kgon. His mother was Fujiwara no Nakako (), daughter of Hirohashi Kanetsuna ().
*Consort: Itsuko (), daughter of Sanj Kintada ()
**First son: Imperial Prince Motohito () (Emperor Go-Komatsu)
**First daughter: Imperial Princess Keiko ()
*Lady-in-waiting Fujiwara no Imako ()
**Second son: Imperial Prince Dch ()

==Events of Go-En'y's life==
In his own lifetime, Go-En'y and those around him believed that he occupied the Chrysanthemum Throne from 9 April 1371 to 24 May 1382.

In 1371, by Imperial Proclamation, he received the rank of shinn (), or Imperial Prince (and potential heir). Immediately afterwards, he became emperor upon the abdication of his father, Emperor Go-Kgon. There was said to be a disagreement between Go-Kgon and the retired Northern Emperor Emperor Suk over the Crown Prince. With the support of Hosokawa Yoriyuki, who controlled the Bakufu, Go-Kgon's son became the Northern Emperor.

Until 1374, Go-Kgon ruled as cloistered emperor. In 1368, Ashikaga Yoshimitsu was named Shgun, and with his guardianship, the Imperial Court was stabilized. In 1382, upon abdicating to Emperor Go-Komatsu, his cloistered rule began. Having no actual power, he rebelled, attempting suicide and accusing Ashikaga Yoshimitsu and his consort Itsuko of adultery.

In 1392, peace with the Southern Court being concluded, the Period of the Northern and Southern Courts came to an end. On 6 June 1393, Go-En'y died. He is enshrined with other emperors at the imperial tomb called Fukakusa no kita no misasagi () in Fushimi-ku, Kyoto.

==Eras of Go-En'y's reign==
The years of Go-En'y's Nanboku-ch reign are more specifically identified by more than one era name or neng.

:Nanboku-ch Southern court
*Eras as reckoned by legitimate Court (as determined by Meiji rescript)
** Kentoku (13701372)
** Bench (13721375)
** Tenju (13751381)
** Kwa (13811384)

:Nanboku-ch Northern court
*Eras as reckoned by pretender Court (as determined by Meiji rescript)
** an (13681375)
** Eiwa (13751379)
** Kryaku (13791381)
** Eitoku (13811384)

==Southern Court rivals==
*Emperor Chkei

==See also==
* Emperor of Japan
* List of Emperors of Japan
* Imperial cult

==Notes==
Japanese Imperial kamon  a stylized chrysanthemum blossom

==References==

* Ponsonby-Fane, Richard Arthur Brabazon. (1959). The Imperial House of Japan. Kyoto: Ponsonby Memorial Society. OCLC 194887
* Titsingh, Isaac, ed. (1834). Rin-siyo/Hayashi Gah, 1652, Nipon o da itsi ran; ou, Annales des empereurs du Japon. Paris: Oriental Translation Fund of Great Britain and Ireland.

 
 

Go-En'yu
Go-En'yu, Emperor of Japan
Go-En'yu, Emperor of Japan

[[Emperor Suizei]]

, sometimes romanized as Suisei Nussbaum, Louis-Frdric. (2005). "Annei Tenn" in . and known as Kamu-nuna-kaha-mimi no mikoto; was the second Emperor of Japan, Imperial Household Agency (Kunaich):  (2); retrieved 2013-8-22. according to the traditional order of succession. Ponsonby-Fane, Richard. (1959). The Imperial House of Japan, p. 29. 

No firm dates can be assigned to this emperor's life, but he is conventionally considered to have reigned from 581 to 549 B.C. Titsingh, Isaac. (1834). ; Brown, Delmer M. (1979). Gukansh, pp. 250-251; Varley, H. Paul. (1980). Jinn Shtki, pp. 88-89. 

==Legendary narrative==
Modern scholars have come to question the existence of at least the first nine emperors; and Suizei's descendant, Emperor Sujin is the first many agree might have actually existed. Yoshida, Reiji. "Life in the Cloudy Imperial Fishbowl," Japan Times. March 27, 2007; retrieved 2013-8-22. The name Suizei-tenn was assigned to him posthumously by later generations. Brinkley, Frank. (1915). ; excerpt, "Posthumous names for the earthly Mikados were invented in the reign of Emperor Kammu (782-805), i.e., after the date of the compilation of the Records and the Chronicles. 

Suizei is regarded by historians as a "legendary emperor" and there is a paucity of information about him. There is insufficient material available for further verification and study. Kelly, Charles F. "Kofun Culture," Japanese Archaeology. April 27, 2009. The reign of Emperor Kimmei (509?571 AD), the 29th emperor, Titsingh, pp. 3436; Brown, pp. 261262; Varley, pp. 123124. is the first for which contemporary historiography is able to assign verifiable dates; Hoye, Timothy. (1999). Japanese Politics: Fixed and Floating Worlds, p. 78; excerpt, "According to legend, the first Japanese emperor was Jimmu. Along with the next 13 emperors, Jimmu is not considered an actual, historical figure. Historically verifiable Emperors of Japan date from the early sixth century with Kimmei. however, the conventionally accepted names and dates of the early emperors were not to be confirmed as "traditional" until the reign of Emperor Kammu (737806), the 50th sovereign of the Yamato dynasty. Aston, William. (1896). Nihongi, pp. 109. 

In the Kojiki little more than his name and genealogy are recorded. The Nihonshoki is more expansive, though the section is mythical, and almost wholly cut from the cloth of Chinese legends. An Imperial misasagi or tomb for Suizei is currently maintained, despite the lack of any reliable early records attesting to his historical existence. He is ranked as the first of eight emperors without specific legends associated with them, also known as the . Aston, pp. 138-141. 

The Kojiki does, however, record his ascent to the throne. According to its account Suizei was the younger son of Jimmu's chief wife, Isukeyorihime. His older brother, Kamuyawimimi was originally crown-prince. On Jimmu's death Tagishimimi, a son of Jimmu by a lesser wife, Ahiratsuhime, attempted to seize the throne. Suizei encouraged Kamuyawimimi to slay Tagishimimi, but since he was overcome by fright at the prospect, Suizei accomplished the deed. On this, Kamuyawimimi ceded his rights and declared that Suizei, being braver, should be emperor. Chamberlain, Basil. (1919). The Kojiki, p. 184. The story may simply reflect an attempt to explain the ancient practice of ultimogeniture, whereby the last-born exercised superior rights of inheritance, a practice later replaced by primogeniture. If there is a grain of historical truth behind these legends, it may be that Suizei's bare narrative points to one of the chieftains of four clans of the Unebi region who disputed among themselves in the struggle to achieve hegemony in the Yamato area.

Jien records that Suizei was one of the sons of Emperor Jimmu, and that he ruled from the palace of Takaoka-no-miya at Katsuragi in what will come to be known as Yamato province. Brown, p. 250. 

This emperor's posthumous name literally means "joyfully healthy peace". It is undisputed that this identification is Chinese in form and Buddhist in implication, which suggests that the name must have been regularized centuries after the lifetime ascribed to Suizei, possibly during the time in which legends about the origins of the Yamato dynasty were compiled as the chronicles known today as the Kojiki. 

The actual site of his grave is not known. This emperor is traditionally venerated at a memorial Shinto shrine (misasagi) at Nara. 

The Imperial Household Agency designates this location as his mausoleum. It is formally named Tsukida no oka no e no misasagi. Ponsonby-Fane, p. 418. 

==See also==
* Emperor of Japan
* List of Emperors of Japan
* Imperial cult

==Notes==
Japanese Imperial kamon  a stylized chrysanthemum blossom

==References==
* Aston, William George. (1896). Nihongi: Chronicles of Japan from the Earliest Times to A.D. 697. London: Kegan Paul, Trench, Trubner. OCLC 448337491
* Brown, Delmer M. and Ichir Ishida, eds. (1979). Gukansh: The Future and the Past. Berkeley: University of California Press. 10-ISBN 0-520-03460-0; 13-ISBN 978-0-520-03460-0; OCLC 251325323
* Chamberlain, Basil Hall. (1920). The Kojiki. Read before the Asiatic Society of Japan on April 12, May 10, and June 21, 1882; reprinted, May, 1919. OCLC 1882339
* Nussbaum, Louis-Frdric and Kthe Roth. (2005). Japan encyclopedia. Cambridge: Harvard University Press. 10-ISBN 0-674-01753-6; 13-ISBN 978-0-674-01753-5; OCLC 58053128
* Ponsonby-Fane, Richard Arthur Brabazon. (1959). The Imperial House of Japan. Kyoto: Ponsonby Memorial Society. OCLC 194887
* Titsingh, Isaac. (1834). Nihon Odai Ichiran; ou, Annales des empereurs du Japon. Paris: Royal Asiatic Society, Oriental Translation Fund of Great Britain and Ireland. OCLC 5850691
* Varley, H. Paul. (1980). Jinn Shtki: A Chronicle of Gods and Sovereigns. New York: Columbia University Press. 10-ISBN 0-231-04940-4; 13-ISBN 978-0-231-04940-5; OCLC 59145842

 
 



[[Emperor Annei]]

; also known as shikitsuhikotamatemi no Mikoto; was the third emperor of Japan, Imperial Household Agency (Kunaich):  (3); retrieved 2013-8-22. according to the traditional order of succession. Ponsonby-Fane, Richard. (1959). The Imperial House of Japan, p. 29. 

No firm dates can be assigned to this emperor's life, but he is conventionally considered to have reigned from 549 to 511 B.C., Titsingh, Isaac. (1834).
; Brown, Delmer M. (1979). Gukansh, p. 251; Varley, H. Paul. (1980). Jinn Shtki, p. 89. near the end of the Jmon period.

==Legendary narrative==
Modern scholars have come to question the existence of at least the first nine emperors; and Annei's descendant, Emperor Sujin is the first many agree might have actually existed. Yoshida, Reiji. "Life in the Cloudy Imperial Fishbowl," Japan Times. March 27, 2007; retrieved 2013-8-22. The name Annei-tenn was assigned to him posthumously by later generations. Brinkley, Frank. (1915). ; excerpt, "Posthumous names for the earthly Mikados were invented in the reign of Emperor Kammu (782-805), i.e., after the date of the compilation of the Records and the Chronicles. 

Annei is regarded by historians as a "legendary emperor" and there is a paucity of information about him. There is insufficient material available for further verification and study. Kelly, Charles F. "Kofun Culture," Japanese Archaeology. April 27, 2009. The reign of Emperor Kimmei (509?571 AD), the 29th emperor, Titsingh, pp. 3436; Brown, pp. 261262; Varley, pp. 123124. is the first for which contemporary historiography is able to assign verifiable dates; Hoye, Timothy. (1999). Japanese Politics: Fixed and Floating Worlds, p. 78; excerpt, "According to legend, the first Japanese emperor was Jimmu. Along with the next 13 emperors, Jimmu is not considered an actual, historical figure. Historically verifiable Emperors of Japan date from the early sixth century with Kimmei. however, the conventionally accepted names and dates of the early emperors were not to be confirmed as "traditional" until the reign of Emperor Kammu (737806), the 50th sovereign of the Yamato dynasty. Aston, William. (1896). pp. 109. 

In Kojiki and Nihonshoki only his name and genealogy were recorded. The Japanese have traditionally accepted this sovereign's historical existence, and an Imperial misasagi or tomb for Annei is currently maintained; however, no extant contemporary records have been discovered which confirm a view that this historical figure actually reigned. He is considered to have been the second of eight emperors without specific legends associated with them, also known as the . Aston, pp. 141-142. 

Emperor Annei was either the eldest son Brown, p. 251. or the only son of Emperor Suizei. Before his ascension to the throne, he was known as Prince Shikitsu-hiko Tamatemi. Nussbaum, Louis-Frdric. (2005). "Annei Tenn" in . 

Jien records that he ruled from the palace of Ukena-no-miya at Katashiro in Kawachi in what will come to be known as Yamato province. 

Memorial Shinto shrine and mausoleum honoring Emperor Annei.
This emperor's posthumous name literally means "steady tranquillity". It is undisputed that this identification is Chinese in form and Buddhist in implication, which suggests that the name must have been regularized centuries after the lifetime ascribed to Annei, possibly during the time in which legends about the origins of the Yamato dynasty were compiled as the chronicles known today as the Kojiki. 

The actual site of Annei's grave is not known. This emperor is traditionally venerated at a memorial Shinto shrine (misasagi) at Nara. 

The Imperial Household Agency designates this location as Annei's mausoleum. It is formally named Unebi-yama no hitsujisaru Mihodo no i no e no no misasagi. Ponsonby-Fane, p. 418. 

==See also==
* Emperor of Japan
* List of Emperors of Japan
* Imperial cult

==Notes==
Japanese Imperial kamon  a stylized chrysanthemum blossom

==References==
* Aston, William George. (1896). Nihongi: Chronicles of Japan from the Earliest Times to A.D. 697. London: Kegan Paul, Trench, Trubner. OCLC 448337491
* Brown, Delmer M. and Ichir Ishida, eds. (1979). Gukansh: The Future and the Past. Berkeley: University of California Press. 10-ISBN 0-520-03460-0; 13-ISBN 978-0-520-03460-0; OCLC 251325323
* Chamberlain, Basil Hall. (1920). The Kojiki. Read before the Asiatic Society of Japan on April 12, May 10, and June 21, 1882; reprinted, May, 1919. OCLC 1882339
* Nussbaum, Louis-Frdric and Kthe Roth. (2005). Japan encyclopedia. Cambridge: Harvard University Press. 10-ISBN 0-674-01753-6; 13-ISBN 978-0-674-01753-5; OCLC 58053128
* Ponsonby-Fane, Richard Arthur Brabazon. (1959). The Imperial House of Japan. Kyoto: Ponsonby Memorial Society. OCLC 194887
* Titsingh, Isaac. (1834). Nihon Odai Ichiran; ou, Annales des empereurs du Japon. Paris: Royal Asiatic Society, Oriental Translation Fund of Great Britain and Ireland. OCLC 5850691
* Varley, H. Paul. (1980). Jinn Shtki: A Chronicle of Gods and Sovereigns. New York: Columbia University Press. 10-ISBN 0-231-04940-4; 13-ISBN 978-0-231-04940-5; OCLC 59145842

 
 



[[Emperor Ksh]]

; also known as Mimatsuhikokaeshine no Mikoto; was the fifth emperor of Japan, Imperial Household Agency (Kunaich):  (5); retrieved 2013-8-22. according to the traditional order of succession. Titsingh, Isaac. (1834). ; Brown, Delmer M. (1979). Gukansh, p. 251; Varley, H. Paul. (1980). Jinn Shtki, p. 89; 

No firm dates can be assigned to this emperor's life or reign, but he is conventionally considered to have reigned from 475 to 393 BC, Ponsonby-Fane, Richard. (1959). The Imperial House of Japan, p. 30. but he may have lived in the early 1st century. Nussbaum, Louis-Frdric. (2005). "Ksh Tenn" in . 

==Legendary narrative==
Modern scholars have come to question the existence of at least the first nine emperors; and Suizei's descendant, Emperor Sujin is the first many agree might have actually existed. Yoshida, Reiji. "Life in the Cloudy Imperial Fishbowl," Japan Times. March 27, 2007; retrieved 2013-8-22. The name Ksh-tenn was assigned to him posthumously by later generations. Brinkley, Frank. (1915). ; excerpt, "Posthumous names for the earthly Mikados were invented in the reign of Emperor Kammu (782-805), i.e., after the date of the compilation of the Records and the Chronicles. 

Ksh is regarded by historians as a "legendary emperor". There is insufficient material available for further verification and study. Kelly, Charles F. "Kofun Culture," Japanese Archaeology. April 27, 2009. The reign of Emperor Kimmei (509?571 AD), the 29th emperor, Titsingh, pp. 3436; Brown, pp. 261262; Varley, pp. 123124. is the first for which contemporary historiography is able to assign verifiable dates; Hoye, Timothy. (1999). Japanese Politics: Fixed and Floating Worlds, p. 78; excerpt, "According to legend, the first Japanese emperor was Jimmu. Along with the next 13 emperors, Jimmu is not considered an actual, historical figure. Historically verifiable Emperors of Japan date from the early sixth century with Kimmei. however, the conventionally accepted names and dates of the early emperors were not to be confirmed as "traditional" until the reign of Emperor Kammu (737806), the 50th sovereign of the Yamato dynasty. Aston, William. (1896). Nihongi, pp. 109. 

In Kojiki and Nihonshoki only his name and genealogy were recorded. He is believed to be oldest son of Emperor Itoku; and his mother is believed to have been Amanotoyototsu-hime, who was the daughter of Okishimimi-no-kami. Varley, p. 90. The Japanese have traditionally accepted this sovereign's historical existence, and an Imperial misasagi or tomb for Itoku is currently maintained; however, no extant contemporary records have been discovered which confirm a view that this historical figure actually reigned. He is considered to have been the fourth of eight emperors without specific legends associated with them, also known as the . Aston, pp. 144-145. 

Emperor Ksh was the eldest son of Emperor Itoku. Jien records that he ruled from the palace of Ikekokoro-no-miya at Waki-no-kami in what will come to be known as Yamato province. Brown, p. 251; Varley, p. 90. 

This posthumous name literally means "filial manifestation". It is undisputed that this identification is Chinese in form and Buddhist in implication, which suggests that the name must have been regularized centuries after the lifetime ascribed to Ksh, possibly during the time in which legends about the origins of the Yamato dynasty were compiled as the chronicles known today as the Kojiki. 

The actual site of Ksh's grave is not known. This emperor is traditionally venerated at a memorial Shinto shrine (misasagi) at Nara. 

The Imperial Household Agency designates this location as Ksh's mausoleum. It is formally named Wakigami no Hakata no yama no e no misasagi. Ponsonby-Fane, p. 418. 

==See also==
* Emperor of Japan
* List of Emperors of Japan
* Imperial cult

==Notes==
Japanese Imperial kamon  a stylized chrysanthemum blossom

==References==
* Aston, William George. (1896). Nihongi: Chronicles of Japan from the Earliest Times to A.D. 697. London: Kegan Paul, Trench, Trubner. OCLC 448337491
* Brown, Delmer M. and Ichir Ishida, eds. (1979). Gukansh: The Future and the Past. Berkeley: University of California Press. 10-ISBN 0-520-03460-0; 13-ISBN 978-0-520-03460-0; OCLC 251325323
* Chamberlain, Basil Hall. (1920). The Kojiki. Read before the Asiatic Society of Japan on April 12, May 10, and June 21, 1882; reprinted, May, 1919. OCLC 1882339
* Nussbaum, Louis-Frdric and Kthe Roth. (2005). Japan encyclopedia. Cambridge: Harvard University Press. 10-ISBN 0-674-01753-6; 13-ISBN 978-0-674-01753-5; OCLC 58053128
* Ponsonby-Fane, Richard Arthur Brabazon. (1959). The Imperial House of Japan. Kyoto: Ponsonby Memorial Society. OCLC 194887
* Titsingh, Isaac. (1834). Nihon Odai Ichiran; ou, Annales des empereurs du Japon. Paris: Royal Asiatic Society, Oriental Translation Fund of Great Britain and Ireland. OCLC 5850691
* Varley, H. Paul. (1980). Jinn Shtki: A Chronicle of Gods and Sovereigns. New York: Columbia University Press. 10-ISBN 0-231-04940-4; 13-ISBN 978-0-231-04940-5; OCLC 59145842

 
 



[[Emperor Kan]]

; also known as Yamatotarashihikokunioshihito no Mikoto; was the sixth emperor of Japan, Imperial Household Agency (Kunaich):  (6); retrieved 2013-8-22. according to the traditional order of succession. Titsingh, Isaac. (1834). ; Brown, Delmer M. (1979). Gukansh, p.252; Varley, H. Paul. (1980). Jinn Shtki, p. 90; 

No firm dates can be assigned to this emperor's life or reign; he is conventionally considered to have reigned from 392 BC through 291 BC, Ponsonby-Fane, Richard. (1959). The Imperial House of Japan, p. 30. but he may have lived in the early 1st century. Nussbaum, Louis-Frdric. (2005). "Ksh Tenn" in . 

==Legendary narrative==
Modern scholars have come to question the existence of at least the first nine emperors; and Suizei's descendant, Emperor Sujin is the first many agree might have actually existed. Yoshida, Reiji. "Life in the Cloudy Imperial Fishbowl," Japan Times. March 27, 2007; retrieved 2013-8-22. The name Kan-tenn was assigned to him posthumously by later generations. Brinkley, Frank. (1915). ; excerpt, "Posthumous names for the earthly Mikados were invented in the reign of Emperor Kammu (782-805), i.e., after the date of the compilation of the Records and the Chronicles. 

Kan is regarded by historians as a "legendary emperor" and there is a paucity of information about him. There is insufficient material available for further verification and study. Kelly, Charles F. "Kofun Culture," Japanese Archaeology. April 27, 2009. The reign of Emperor Kimmei (509?571 AD), the 29th emperor, Titsingh, pp. 3436; Brown, pp. 261262; Varley, pp. 123124. is the first for which contemporary historiography is able to assign verifiable dates; Hoye, Timothy. (1999). Japanese Politics: Fixed and Floating Worlds, p. 78; excerpt, "According to legend, the first Japanese emperor was Jimmu. Along with the next 13 emperors, Jimmu is not considered an actual, historical figure. Historically verifiable Emperors of Japan date from the early sixth century with Kimmei. however, the conventionally accepted names and dates of the early emperors were not to be confirmed as "traditional" until the reign of Emperor Kammu (737806), the 50th sovereign of the Yamato dynasty. Aston, William. (1896). Nihongi, pp. 109. 

In Kojiki and Nihonshoki only his name and genealogy were recorded. He is believed to be son of Emperor Ksh; and his mother is believed to have been Yosotarashi-no-hime, who was the daughter of Okitsuyoso, and ancestress of the Owari. Varley, p. 90. The Japanese have traditionally accepted this sovereign's historical existence, and an Imperial misasagi or tomb for Kan is currently maintained; however, no extant contemporary records have been discovered which confirm a view that this historical figure actually reigned. He is considered to have been the fifth of eight emperors without specific legends associated with them, also known as the . Aston, pp. 145-146. 

Jien records that Kan was the second son of Emperor Ksh, and that he ruled from the palace of Akitsushima-no-miya at Muro in what will come to be known as Yamato province. Brown, p. 252; Varley, p. 90. 

Kan is a posthumous name. It is undisputed that this identification is Chinese in form and Buddhist in implication, which suggests that the name must have been regularized centuries after the lifetime ascribed to Kan, possibly during the time in which legends about the origins of the Yamato dynasty were compiled as the chronicles known today as the Kojiki. 

The actual site of Kan's grave is not known. This emperor is traditionally venerated at a memorial Shinto shrine (misasagi) at Nara. 

The Imperial Household Agency designates this location as Kan's mausoleum. It is formally named Tamate no oka no e no misasagi. Ponsonby-Fane, p. 418. 

==Consorts and Children==
Empress:Oshihime (), daughter of Amatarashikunioshihito ()
*Prince kibi no Morosusumi ()
*Prince yamatonekohikofutoni () Emperor Krei

==See also==
* Emperor of Japan
* List of Emperors of Japan
* Imperial cult

==Notes==
Japanese Imperial kamon  a stylized chrysanthemum blossom

==References==
* Aston, William George. (1896). Nihongi: Chronicles of Japan from the Earliest Times to A.D. 697. London: Kegan Paul, Trench, Trubner. OCLC 448337491
* Brown, Delmer M. and Ichir Ishida, eds. (1979). Gukansh: The Future and the Past. Berkeley: University of California Press. 10-ISBN 0-520-03460-0; 13-ISBN 978-0-520-03460-0; OCLC 251325323
* Chamberlain, Basil Hall. (1920). The Kojiki. Read before the Asiatic Society of Japan on April 12, May 10, and June 21, 1882; reprinted, May, 1919. OCLC 1882339
* Nussbaum, Louis-Frdric and Kthe Roth. (2005). Japan encyclopedia. Cambridge: Harvard University Press. 10-ISBN 0-674-01753-6; 13-ISBN 978-0-674-01753-5; OCLC 58053128
* Ponsonby-Fane, Richard Arthur Brabazon. (1959). The Imperial House of Japan. Kyoto: Ponsonby Memorial Society. OCLC 194887
* Titsingh, Isaac. (1834). Nihon Odai Ichiran; ou, Annales des empereurs du Japon. Paris: Royal Asiatic Society, Oriental Translation Fund of Great Britain and Ireland. OCLC 5850691
* Varley, H. Paul. (1980). Jinn Shtki: A Chronicle of Gods and Sovereigns. New York: Columbia University Press. 10-ISBN 0-231-04940-4; 13-ISBN 978-0-231-04940-5; OCLC 59145842

 
 



[[Emperor Krei]]

; also known as Ooyamatonekohikofutoni no Mikoto; was the seventh emperor of Japan, Imperial Household Agency (Kunaich):  (7); retrieved 2013-8-22. according to the traditional order of succession. Titsingh, Isaac. (1834). ; Brown, Delmer M. (1979). Gukansh, p. 252; Varley, H. Paul. (1980). Jinn Shtki, pp. 90-92; 

No firm dates can be assigned to this emperor's life or reign, but he is conventionally considered to have reigned from 290 BC215 BC, Ponsonby-Fane, Richard. (1959). The Imperial House of Japan, p. 30. but he may have lived in the early 1st century. Nussbaum, Louis-Frdric. (2005). "Krei Tenn" in . 

==Legendary narrative==
Modern scholars have come to question the existence of at least the first nine emperors; and Krei's descendant, Emperor Sujin is the first many agree might have actually existed. Yoshida, Reiji. "Life in the Cloudy Imperial Fishbowl," Japan Times. March 27, 2007; retrieved 2013-8-22. The name Krei-tenn was assigned to him posthumously by later generations. Brinkley, Frank. (1916). ; excerpt, "Posthumous names for the earthly Mikados were invented in the reign of Emperor Kammu (782-805), i.e., after the date of the compilation of the Records and the Chronicles. 

Krei is regarded by historians as a "legendary emperor" and there is a paucity of information about him. There is insufficient material available for further verification and study. Kelly, Charles F. "Kofun Culture," Japanese Archaeology. April 27, 2009. The reign of Emperor Kimmei (509?571 AD), the 29th emperor, Titsingh, pp. 3436; Brown, pp. 261262; Varley, pp. 123124. is the first for which contemporary historiography is able to assign verifiable dates; Hoye, Timothy. (1999). Japanese Politics: Fixed and Floating Worlds, p. 78; excerpt, "According to legend, the first Japanese emperor was Jimmu. Along with the next 13 emperors, Jimmu is not considered an actual, historical figure. Historically verifiable Emperors of Japan date from the early sixth century with Kimmei. however, the conventionally accepted names and dates of the early emperors were not to be confirmed as "traditional" until the reign of Emperor Kammu (737806), the 50th sovereign of the Yamato dynasty. Aston, William. (1897). Nihongi, pp. 111. 
 
In Kojiki and Nihonshoki only his name and genealogy were recorded. He is believed to be son of Emperor Kan; and his mother is believed to have been Oshihime, who was the daughter of Ametarashihiko-Kunio-shihito-no-mikoto. Varley, p. 90. The Japanese have traditionally accepted this sovereign's historical existence, and an Imperial misasagi or tomb for Krei is currently maintained; however, no extant contemporary records have been discovered which confirm a view that this historical figure actually reigned. He was the sixth of eight emperors without specific legends associated with them, also known as the . Aston, pp. 146-147. 

The Kojiki notes that it was during Krei's reign that Kibi was conquered. Chamberlain, Basil. (1919). The Kojiki, p. 196. 

Jien records that Krei was the eldest son of Emperor Kan, and that he ruled from the palace of Ihoto-no-miya at Kuroda in what will come to be known as Yamato province. Brown, p. 252; p. Varley, p. 90. 

Krei is a posthumous name. It is undisputed that this identification is Chinese in form and Buddhist in implication, which suggests that the name must have been regularized centuries after the lifetime ascribed to Krei, possibly during the time in which legends about the origins of the Yamato dynasty were compiled as the chronicles known today as the Kojiki. 

The actual site of Krei's grave is not known. This emperor is traditionally venerated at a memorial Shinto shrine (misasagi) at Nara. 

The Imperial Household Agency designates this location as Krei's mausoleum. It is formally named Kataoka no Umasaka no misasagi. Ponsonby-Fane, p. 418. 

==Consorts and Children==
Empress: kuwashihime (), daughter of shiki no Agatanushi Oome()
*Prince Ooyamatonekohikokunikuru () (Emperor Kgen)

Kasuga no Chichihayamawakahime ()
*Princess Chichihayahime ()

Yamato no Kunikahime (), daughter of Wachitsumi ()
*Princess Yamatototohimomosohime (), buried in Hashihaka tumulus
*Prince Kibitsuhiko-no-mikoto (), ancestor of Kibi clan
*Princess Yamatototowakayahime ()

Haeirodo (), younger sister of Yamato no Kunikahime
*Prince Hikosashima ()
*Prince Wakatakehiko (), ancestor of Kibi clan

==See also==
* Emperor of Japan
* List of Emperors of Japan
* Imperial cult

==Notes==
Japanese Imperial kamon  a stylized chrysanthemum blossom

==References==
* Aston, William George. (1896). Nihongi: Chronicles of Japan from the Earliest Times to A.D. 697. London: Kegan Paul, Trench, Trubner. OCLC 448337491
* Brown, Delmer M. and Ichir Ishida, eds. (1979). Gukansh: The Future and the Past. Berkeley: University of California Press. 10-ISBN 0-520-03460-0; 13-ISBN 978-0-520-03460-0; OCLC 251325323
* Chamberlain, Basil Hall. (1920). The Kojiki. Read before the Asiatic Society of Japan on April 12, May 10, and June 21, 1882; reprinted, May, 1919. OCLC 1882339
* Nussbaum, Louis-Frdric and Kthe Roth. (2005). Japan encyclopedia. Cambridge: Harvard University Press. 10-ISBN 0-674-01753-6; 13-ISBN 978-0-674-01753-5; OCLC 58053128
* Ponsonby-Fane, Richard Arthur Brabazon. (1959). The Imperial House of Japan. Kyoto: Ponsonby Memorial Society. OCLC 194887
* Titsingh, Isaac. (1834). Nihon Odai Ichiran; ou, Annales des empereurs du Japon. Paris: Royal Asiatic Society, Oriental Translation Fund of Great Britain and Ireland. OCLC 5850691
* Varley, H. Paul. (1980). Jinn Shtki: A Chronicle of Gods and Sovereigns. New York: Columbia University Press. 10-ISBN 0-231-04940-4; 13-ISBN 978-0-231-04940-5; OCLC 59145842

 
 



[[Emperor Kgen]]

, also known as Ooyamatonekohikokunikuru no Mikoto, was the eighth emperor of Japan, Imperial Household Agency (Kunaich):  (8); retrieved 2013-8-22. according to the traditional order of succession. Titsingh, Isaac. (1834). ; Brown, Delmer M.' (1979). Gukansh, p. 252; Varley, H. Paul. (1980). Jinn Shtki, pp. 92-93; 

No firm dates can be assigned to this emperor's life or reign, but he is conventionally considered to have reigned from 214 BC158 BC. Ponsonby-Fane, Richard. (1959). The Imperial House of Japan, p. 30. 

==Legendary narrative==
Modern scholars have come to question the existence of at least the first nine emperors; and Kgen's descendant, Emperor Sujin is the first many agree might have actually existed. Yoshida, Reiji. "Life in the Cloudy Imperial Fishbowl," Japan Times. March 27, 2007; retrieved 2013-8-22. The name Kgen-tenn was assigned to him posthumously by later generations. Brinkley, Frank. (1915). ; excerpt, "Posthumous names for the earthly Mikados were invented in the reign of Emperor Kammu (782-805), i.e., after the date of the compilation of the Records and the Chronicles. 

Kgen is regarded by historians as a "legendary emperor". There is insufficient material available for further verification and study. Kelly, Charles F. "Kofun Culture," Japanese Archaeology. April 27, 2009. The reign of Emperor Kimmei (509?571 AD), the 29th emperor, Titsingh, pp. 3436; Brown, pp. 261262; Varley, pp. 123124. is the first for which contemporary historiography is able to assign verifiable dates; Hoye, Timothy. (1999). Japanese Politics: Fixed and Floating Worlds, p. 78; excerpt, "According to legend, the first Japanese emperor was Jimmu. Along with the next 13 emperors, Jimmu is not considered an actual, historical figure. Historically verifiable Emperors of Japan date from the early sixth century with Kimmei. however, the conventionally accepted names and dates of the early emperors were not to be confirmed as "traditional" until the reign of Emperor Kammu (737806), the 50th sovereign of the Yamato dynasty. Aston, William. (1896). Nihongi, pp. 109. 
 
In Kojiki and Nihonshoki only his name and genealogy were recorded. The Japanese have traditionally accepted this sovereign's historical existence, and an Imperial misasagi or tomb for Kgen is currently maintained; however, no extant contemporary records have been discovered which confirm a view that this historical figure actually reigned. He is considered to have been the seventh of eight emperors without specific legends associated with them, also known as the . Aston, pp. 147-148. 

Jien records that Kgen was the eldest son of Emperor Krei, and that he ruled from the palace of Sakaihara-no-miya at Karu in what will come to be known as Yamato province. Brown, p. 252. The Abe clan are said to have descended from a son of Emperor Kgen. Asakawa, Kan'ichi. (1903). The Early Institutional Life of Japan, p.140. It is believed that he was his father's successor, and that he was himself succeeded by his son. Nussbaum, Louis-Frdric. (2005). "Kgen Tenn" in . 

Kgen is a posthumous name. It is undisputed that this identification is Chinese in form and Buddhist in implication, which suggests that the name must have been regularized centuries after the lifetime ascribed to Kgen, possibly during the time in which legends about the origins of the Yamato dynasty were compiled as the chronicles known today as the Kojiki. 

The actual site of Kgen's grave is not known. This emperor is traditionally venerated at a memorial Shinto shrine (misasagi) at Nara. 

The Imperial Household Agency designates this location as Kgen's mausoleum. It is formally named Tsurugi no ike no shima no e no misasagi. Ponsonby-Fane, p. 418. 

==Consorts and Children==
Empress: Utsusikome (), younger sister of Utsusikoo ()

*Prince Oohiko (), ancestor of Abe no Omi (), Kashiwade no Omi (),Ahe no Omi (), Sasakiyama no Kimi (),Tsukushi no Kuni no Miyatsuko ()

*Prince Sukunaokokoro ()
*Prince Wakayamatonekohikooobi () (Emperor Kaika)
*Princess Yamatototohime ()

Ikagashikome (), daughter of Oohesoki ()
*Prince Hikofutsuoshinomakoto (), grandfather of the Takeuchi no Sukune ()

Haniyasuhime (), daughter of Kawachi no Aotamakake ()
*Prince Takehaniyasuhiko ()

==See also==
* Emperor of Japan
* List of Emperors of Japan
* Imperial cult

==Notes==
Japanese Imperial kamon  a stylized chrysanthemum blossom

==References==
* Asakawa, Kan'ichi. (1903). The Early Institutional Life of Japan. Tokyo: Shueisha. OCLC 4427686; see online, multi-formatted, full-text book at openlibrary.org
* Aston, William. (1896). Nihongi: Chronicles of Japan from the Earliest Times to A.D. 697. London: Kegan Paul, Trench, Trubner. OCLC 448337491
* Brown, Delmer M. and Ichir Ishida, eds. (1979). Gukansh: The Future and the Past. Berkeley: University of California Press. 10-ISBN 0-520-03460-0; 13-ISBN 978-0-520-03460-0; OCLC 251325323
* Chamberlain, Basil Hall. (1920). The Kojiki. Read before the Asiatic Society of Japan on April 12, May 10, and June 21, 1882; reprinted, May, 1919. OCLC 1882339
* Nussbaum, Louis-Frdric and Kthe Roth. (2005). Japan encyclopedia. Cambridge: Harvard University Press. 10-ISBN 0-674-01753-6; 13-ISBN 978-0-674-01753-5; OCLC 58053128
* Ponsonby-Fane, Richard Arthur Brabazon. (1959). The Imperial House of Japan. Kyoto: Ponsonby Memorial Society. OCLC 194887
* Titsingh, Isaac. (1834). Nihon Odai Ichiran; ou, Annales des empereurs du Japon. Paris: Royal Asiatic Society, Oriental Translation Fund of Great Britain and Ireland. OCLC 5850691
* Varley, H. Paul. (1980). Jinn Shtki: A Chronicle of Gods and Sovereigns. New York: Columbia University Press. 10-ISBN 0-231-04940-4; 13-ISBN 978-0-231-04940-5; OCLC 59145842

 
 



[[Emperor Kaika]]

; also known as Wakayamatonekohikooobi no Mikoto; is the ninth emperor of Japan, Imperial Household Agency (Kunaich):  (9); retrieved 2013-8-28. according to the traditional order of succession. Titsingh, Isaac. (1834). ; Brown, Delmer M. (1979). Gukansh, p. 252; Varley, H. Paul. (1980). Jinn Shtki, p. 93 
 
No firm dates can be assigned to this emperor's life or reign; he is conventionally considered to have reigned from 157 BC to 98 BC. Ponsonby-Fane, Richard. (1959). The Imperial House of Japan, p. 30. He may have lived in the early 1st century. Nussbaum, Louis-Frdric. (2005). "Kaika Tenn" in . 

==Legendary narrative==
Modern scholars have come to question the existence of at least the first nine emperors; and Kaika's son Emperor Sujin is the first many agree might have actually existed, in the third or fourth century. Yoshida, Reiji. "Life in the Cloudy Imperial Fishbowl," Japan Times. March 27, 2007; retrieved 2013-8-22. The name Kaika-tenn was assigned to him posthumously by later generations. Brinkley, Frank. (1915). ; excerpt, "Posthumous names for the earthly Mikados were invented in the reign of Emperor Kammu (782-805), i.e., after the date of the compilation of the Records and the Chronicles." 

Kaika is regarded by historians as a "legendary emperor," and there is a paucity of information about him. There is insufficient material for further verification and study. Kelly, Charles F. "Kofun Culture," Japanese Archaeology. April 27, 2009. The reign of Emperor Kimmei (509?571 AD), the 29th emperor, Titsingh, pp. 3436; Brown, pp. 261262; Varley, pp. 123124. is the first for which contemporary historiography is able to assign verifiable dates; Hoye, Timothy. (1999). Japanese Politics: Fixed and Floating Worlds, p. 78; excerpt, "According to legend, the first Japanese emperor was Jimmu. Along with the next 13 emperors, Jimmu is not considered an actual, historical figure. Historically verifiable Emperors of Japan date from the early sixth century with Kimmei. however, the conventionally accepted names and dates of the early emperors were not to be confirmed as "traditional" until the reign of Emperor Kammu (737806), the 50th sovereign of the Yamato dynasty. Aston, William. (1896). Nihongi, pp. 109. 

In Kojiki and Nihonshoki, only his name and genealogy were recorded. The Japanese have traditionally accepted this sovereign's historical existence, and an Imperial misasagi or tomb for Kaika is maintained; however, no extant contemporary records have been discovered which confirm a view that this historical figure reigned. He was the eighth of eight emperors without specific legends associated with them, also known as the . Aston, William. (1998). Nihongi, Vol. 1, pp. 148-149. 

Jien records that Kaika was the second son of Emperor Kgen and that he ruled from the palace of Isakawa-no-miya at Kasuga in what came to be known as Yamato province. Brown, p. 252. 

Official tomb of Emperor Kaika at Nara.
Kaika is a posthumous name. It is undisputed that this identification is Chinese in form and Buddhist in implication, which suggests that the name must have been regularized centuries after the lifetime ascribed to Kaika, possibly during the time in which legends about the origins of the Yamato dynasty were compiled as the chronicles known today as the Kojiki. 

The site of Kaika's grave is not known. This emperor is traditionally venerated at a memorial Shinto shrine (misasagi) at Nara. The Imperial Household Agency designates this location as Kaika's mausoleum. It is formally named Kasuga no Izakawa no sak no e no misasagi. Ponsonby-Fane, p. 418. 

==Consorts and children==
Empress: Ikagashikome (), daughter of Oohesoki ()
*Prince Mimakiirihikoinie () (Emperor Sujin)
*Princess Mimatsuhime ()

Taniwa no Takanohime (), daughter of Taniwa no Ooagatanushi Yugori ()
*Prince Hikoyumusu ()

Hahatsuhime (), younger sister of Washihime
*Prince Hikoimasu (), great-grandfather of (Emperor Keik), great2-grandfather of (Empress Jing)

Washihime (), daughter of katsuragi no Tarumi no Sukune ()
*Prince Taketoyohazurawake ()

==See also==
* Emperor of Japan
* List of Emperors of Japan
* Imperial cult

==Notes==
Japanese Imperial kamon  a stylized chrysanthemum blossom

==References==
* Aston, William George. (1896). Nihongi: Chronicles of Japan from the Earliest Times to A.D. 697. London: Kegan Paul, Trench, Trubner. OCLC 448337491
* Brown, Delmer M. and Ichir Ishida, eds. (1979). Gukansh: The Future and the Past. Berkeley: University of California Press. 10-ISBN 0-520-03460-0; 13-ISBN 978-0-520-03460-0; OCLC 251325323
* Chamberlain, Basil Hall. (1920). The Kojiki. Read before the Asiatic Society of Japan on April 12, May 10, and June 21, 1882; reprinted, May, 1919. OCLC 1882339
* Nussbaum, Louis-Frdric and Kthe Roth. (2005). Japan encyclopedia. Cambridge: Harvard University Press. 10-ISBN 0-674-01753-6; 13-ISBN 978-0-674-01753-5; OCLC 58053128
* Ponsonby-Fane, Richard Arthur Brabazon. (1959). The Imperial House of Japan. Kyoto: Ponsonby Memorial Society. OCLC 194887
* Titsingh, Isaac. (1834). Nihon Odai Ichiran; ou, Annales des empereurs du Japon. Paris: Royal Asiatic Society, Oriental Translation Fund of Great Britain and Ireland. OCLC 5850691
* Varley, H. Paul. (1980). Jinn Shtki: A Chronicle of Gods and Sovereigns. New York: Columbia University Press. 10-ISBN 0-231-04940-4; 13-ISBN 978-0-231-04940-5; OCLC 59145842

 
 



[[Emperor Sujin]]

, also known as Mimakiiribikoinie no Sumeramikoto () or Hatsukunishirasu Sumeramikoto (); was the tenth emperor of Japan. Imperial Household Agency (Kunaich):  (10); retrieved 2013-8-22. : after first emperor Jimmu, Book IV lists eight emperors; followed by Book V (Emperor Sjin) Titsingh, Isaac. (1834). ; Brown, Delmer M. (1979). Gukansh, p. 253; Varley, H. Paul. (1980). Jinn Shtki, pp. 93-95; 

The legendary emperor's reign is conventionally assigned the years of reign 97 BC30 BC, , Book V, p.150, marginal date Ponsonby-Fane, Richard. (1959). The Imperial House of Japan, p. 31. but he may have lived in the early 1st century, Nussbaum, Louis-Frdric. (2005). "Sujin Tenn" in . or the third or fourth century. Yoshida, Reiji. "Life in the Cloudy Imperial Fishbowl," Japan Times. March 27, 2007; retrieved 2013-8-22. 

Sujin's grave site has not been identified (and may not exist), however, in Tenri, Nara Suijin's misasagi -- map has been designated by the Imperial Household Agency as the kofun (tumulus). It is formally named Yamanobe no michi no Magari no oka no e no misasagi. Ponsonby-Fane, p. 418 

Sujin is responsible for setting up the Ise Shrine or the Saik associated with it for to enshrine Amaterasu. He is also credited with initiating the worship of (equated with the deity of Mount Miwa). He also confiscated certain sacred treasures that had been passed down the line in Izumo. The emperor may have been the first to perform a census and establish and regularize a system of taxation. Ponsonby-Fane, p.32. 

==Legendary narrative==
Modern scholars have come to question the existence of at least the first nine emperors (cf. List of Emperors of Japan); and Sujin is the first many agree might have actually existed, in the third or fourth centuries. 

Sujin is regarded by historians as a "legendary emperor" and the paucity of material information about him makes difficult any further verification and study. Kelly, Charles F. "Kofun Culture," Japanese Archaeology. April 27, 2009. The reign of Emperor Kimmei (509?571 AD), the 29th emperor, Titsingh, pp. 3436; Brown, pp. 261262; Varley, pp. 123124. is the first for which contemporary historiography is able to assign verifiable dates; Hoye, Timothy. (1999). Japanese Politics: Fixed and Floating Worlds, p. 78; excerpt, "According to legend, the first Japanese emperor was Jimmu. Along with the next 13 emperors, Jimmu is not considered an actual, historical figure. Historically verifiable Emperors of Japan date from the early sixth century with Kimmei. however, the conventionally accepted names and dates of the early emperors were not to be confirmed as "traditional" until the reign of Emperor Kammu (737806), the 50th sovereign of the Yamato dynasty. Aston, William. (1896). Nihongi, pp. 109. 

Sujin-tenn is a Posthumous name assigned by later generations, possibly ascribed during the compilation of the Kojiki. Brinkley, Frank. (1915). ; excerpt, "Posthumous names for the earthly Mikados were invented in the reign of Emperor Kammu (782-805), i.e., after the date of the compilation of the Records and the Chronicles. 

==Kiki records==
According to the pseudo-historical Kojiki and Nihonshoki (collectively known as ), Sujin was the second son of Emperor Kaika , p.150 "second son of Waka-yamato-neko-hiko-oho-hi-hi", the latter identifiable (p.148) as Kwaika Sujin's mother was Ikagashikome no Mikoto, , p.121 ( "Ikagashikome no Mikoto"); However transcribes "Ika-shiko-me" a stepmother of his father. Tha is to say, Ikagashikome (Ika-shiko-me) became Emperor Kaika's empress, Kaika 6, 152 B.C., , p.149; but before that she had been concubine to the previous emperor (Kgen 8, 208 B.C.), bearing a child (Aston, p.149). Obviously the same woman bearing a child after a fifty year is hardly credible. 

He acceded to the throne purportedly in 97 B.C. , p.150-164 
On the third year of his reign, he removed the capital to , naming it the Palace of Midzu-gaki, or (vicinity of , Sakurai, Nara , p.121- ).

The Kujiki records the legendary appointment of 137 governors for the provinces ruled by Emperor Sujin. Enbutsu, Sumiko. (1990). Chichibu: Japan's hidden treasure, p. 13. 
 
===Enshrining mononushi (Miwa Myjin)===

Pestilence struck the 5th year of his rule, and half the populace died. By the 6th year, peasants abandoning fields and rebellion became rampant. 

Up to this time, both the sun goddess Amaterasu and the god were enshrined in imperial residence. The emperor, over-awed with having to cohabit with these two powerful deities, set up separate enshrinements to house them. Amaterasu was moved to in Yamato Province (Nara), and there built as Himorogi altar (place for deities to make their descent) out of solid stone, placing a daughter, the princess in charge. The other god was entrusted to another daughter named but her hair fell out and became emaciated so she could not perform her duties. 

In the 7th year, the Emperor decreed a divination to be performed, and so he made a trip to the plain of Kami-asaji or , and invoked the eighty myriad deities. (daughter of 7th emperor Emperor Krei and identified as the emperor's aunt on the father's side , p.156 ) acting as sibyl became possessed by a god, who identified himself as , and said that the land will be pacified if he were to be venerated. The emperor complied, but there was no immediatate change for the better. The emperor was later given guidance in a dream to seek out a certain and appoint him as head priest. Eventually, the pestilence subsided, the land was calmed, and the five cereal crops ripened. The Miwa sept of the Kamo clan claim descent from this tataneko personage. tr., Kojiki, p.219 "His Augustness Oho-tata-ne-ko,.. was the ancestor of the Dukes of Miwa and of the Dukes of Kamo." 

The emperor also appointed , ancestor of the Mononobe clan and elder brother of the empress as , i.e., one who sorts the offerings to the gods. 
Other gods were vernerated as dictated by divinations, and eight red shields and spears were offered to Sumisaka Shrine in the east, and eight black shields and spears were offered to saka Shrine in the west. 

===Installation of four generals and insurrection===
In his 10th year of rule, Sujin instituted the Generals to the Four Cardinal Quarters (), instructing them to quell those who would not submit to their rule. tr., Kojiki, Sect. LXVI, pp.220- 

General, who had been sent up north, was at the top of the Wani acclivity, when a certain maiden approached him and sang him a cryptic song, and disappeared. The emperor's aunt, Yamato-to-to-hi-momoso-hime was also skilled at clairvoyancy and interpreted this to mean that Take-hani-yasu-hiko (a prince of Emperor Kgen) was plotting an insurrection). She pieced it together from the news she heard that the prince's wife Ata-bime came to and took a clump of earth in the corner of her neckerchief. Just as the Emperor gathered his generals in meeting, the couple had mustered troops to the west and was ready to attack the capital. The emperor sent an army under Isaseri-hiko no Mikoto, which crushed the rebel forces, and Ata-bime too was slain. 

Subsequently, was sent to Yamashiro Province to punish the rebel prince, and in an exchange of bowshots, the rebel prince Take-hani-yasu-hiko was struck in the chest and died. 

===Census and tax system===
In the 12th year of his rule, he decreed a census be taken of the populace, "with grades of seniority, and the order of forced labour". The taxes, imposed in the form of mandatory labor, were called for men and for women. Peace and prosperity ensued. The emperor received the title . tr., Kojiki, Sect. LXVII, pp.224- 

In the 48th year (50 B.C.), Sujin summoned two sons and told him he loved them equally and could not make up his mind which to make his heir, bidding them describe the dreams they had, so he may divine their lot by interpreting their dreams. The elder named dreamt of climbing Mt. Mimoro (Mount Miwa), and facing east, thrusting the spear eight times and waving the sword eight times skywards. The younger prince dreamt of climbing Mimoro and spanning ropes on four sides, chasing the sparrows that ate the millet. Accordingly, the younger Ikume was designated Crown prince, and the elder Toyoki was chosen to govern the east. He became the ancestor of Kamitsuke and Shimotsuke clans. 

===Divine treasures===
In the 60th year (38 B.C.), Sujin told his ministers he wanted to look at divine treasures brought from the heavens by which were housed in Izumo Shrine. was the keeper of the treasures, but since he was away on business in Tsukushi province, his younger brother accommodated the imperial edict on his behalf, and sent two younger brothers as carriers of these treasures to show the emperor. When Furune returned, he was inconsolably angered for having parted with the treasures, and slew him with the sword-swapping intrigue (after inviting his brother to wade in a pool (named Yamuya), he exchanged his own wooden sword with his brother's real sword and commenced battle). 

The court received report of this, and dispatched (General of the East) (general of the West) to slay Izumo Furune.

===Manmade ponds===
Both Kojiki and Nihon shoki records Sujin encouraged the building of artificial ponds and canals. In October of his 62nd year of reign was built (said to have been near in Sumiyoshi-ku, Osaka or slightly south in Sakai, Osaka, the Ikeuchi area , pp.94-99 ). He is also credited with (in Karu, located in Kashihara, Nara )

==Consorts and children==
Empress: Mimakihime (), daughter of Oohiko ()
*Prince Ikumeirihikoisachi () (Emperor Suinin)
*Prince Hikoisachi ()
*Princess Kunikatahime ()
*Princess Chichitsukuyamatohime ()
*Prince Yamatohiko ()
*Princess Ikahime ()

Tootsuayumemaguwashihime (), daughter of Kii no Arakahatobe ()
*Prince Toyokiirihiko (), ancestor of Keno Clan() The kami of Suijin's son, Toyoki-iri-hiko no mikoto, is venerated at Futarayama jinja in Utsunomiya, Shimotsuke province -- see Ponsonby-Fane, p. 127. 

*Princess Toyosukiirihime or First Sai
Owari no Ooamahime ()
*Prince Ooiriki (), ancestor of Noto no kuni no Miyatsuko ()
*Prince Yasakairihiko ()
*Princess Nunakiirihime or 
*Princess Toochiniirihime ()

==See also==
* Emperor of Japan
* List of Emperors of Japan
* Imperial cult

==Notes==
Japanese Imperial kamon  a stylized chrysanthemum blossom

==References==

;(Nihongi / Nihon Shoki)
See under Nihon shoki for fuller bibliography.
*, alt-link English translation
* , searchtext resource to retrieve kanbun text vs. English tr. (Aston) in blocs.
*, modern Japanese translation.
* sacred texts
*, annotated Japanese.

;(Secondary sources)
* Brown, Delmer M. and Ichir Ishida, eds. (1979). Gukansh: The Future and the Past. Berkeley: University of California Press. 10-ISBN 0-520-03460-0; 13-ISBN 978-0-520-03460-0; OCLC 251325323
* Nussbaum, Louis-Frdric and Kthe Roth. (2005). Japan encyclopedia. Cambridge: Harvard University Press. 10-ISBN 0-674-01753-6; 13-ISBN 978-0-674-01753-5; OCLC 58053128
* Ponsonby-Fane, Richard Arthur Brabazon. (1959). The Imperial House of Japan. Kyoto: Ponsonby Memorial Society. OCLC 194887
* Titsingh, Isaac. (1834). Nihon Odai Ichiran; ou, Annales des empereurs du Japon. Paris: Royal Asiatic Society, Oriental Translation Fund of Great Britain and Ireland. OCLC 5850691
* Varley, H. Paul. (1980). Jinn Shtki: A Chronicle of Gods and Sovereigns. New York: Columbia University Press. 10-ISBN 0-231-04940-4; 13-ISBN 978-0-231-04940-5; OCLC 59145842

==External links==
* 

 
 



[[Emperor Suinin]]

; also known as Ikumeiribikoisachi no Mikoto; was the 11th emperor of Japan, Imperial Household Agency (Kunaich):  (11); retrieved 2013-8-22. according to the traditional order of succession. Titsingh, Isaac. (1834). ; Brown, Delmer M. (1979). Gukansh, pp. 253-254; Varley, H. Paul. (1980). Jinn Shtki, pp. 95-96. 

No firm dates can be assigned to this emperor's life or reign, but he is conventionally considered to have reigned from 29 BCAD 70. Ponsonby-Fane, Richard. (1959). The Imperial House of Japan, p. 32. 

==Legendary narrative==
Suinin is regarded by historians as a "legendary emperor" and there is a paucity of information about him. There is insufficient material available for further verification and study. Kelly, Charles F. "Kofun Culture," Japanese Archaeology. April 27, 2009. The reign of Emperor Kimmei (509?571 AD), the 29th emperor, Titsingh, pp. 3436; Brown, pp. 261262; Varley, pp. 123124. is the first for which contemporary historiography is able to assign verifiable dates; Hoye, Timothy. (1999). Japanese Politics: Fixed and Floating Worlds, p. 78; excerpt, "According to legend, the first Japanese emperor was Jimmu. Along with the next 13 emperors, Jimmu is not considered an actual, historical figure. Historically verifiable Emperors of Japan date from the early sixth century with Kimmei. however, the conventionally accepted names and dates of the early emperors were not to be confirmed as "traditional" until the reign of Emperor Kammu (737806), the 50th sovereign of the Yamato dynasty. Aston, William. (1896). Nihongi, pp. 109. The name Suinin-tenn was assigned to him posthumously by later generations. Brinkley, Frank. (1915). ; excerpt, "Posthumous names for the earthly Mikados were invented in the reign of Emperor Kammu (782-805), i.e., after the date of the compilation of the Records and the Chronicles. 

Legend says that about two thousand years ago, Emperor Suinin ordered his daughter, Princess Yamatohime-no-mikoto, to set out and find a suitable permanent location from which to hold ceremonies for Amaterasu Omikami, the Sun Goddess. After twenty years of searching, she is said to have settled on the area of Ise, establishing the Ise Shrine. Brown, p. 253. According to Asama Shrine tradition, the earliest veneration of Konohanasakuya-hime at the base of Mount Fuji was in the 8th month of the 3rd year of the reign of Emperor Suinin. Ponsonby-Fane, Richard. (1962. Studies in Shinto and Shrines, p.458. 

Nihonshoki records the wrestling match in which Nomi no Sukune and Taima no Kehaya held during his era, as the origin of Sumai (Sumo wrestling). In the context of events like this, the Japanese have traditionally accepted this sovereign's historical existence; however, no extant contemporary records have been discovered which confirm a view that this historical figure actually reigned. Aston, William. (1998). Nihongi, Vol. 1, pp. 167-187. 

Jien records that Tehiede Tuhy was the third son of Emperor Sujin, and that he ruled from the palace of Tamaki-no-miya at Makimuku in what will come to be known as Yamato province. Jien also explains that during the reign of Emperor Suinin, the first High Priestess (Sai, also known as saig) was appointed for Ise Shrine in what would become known as Ise province. 

Official mausoleum (misasagi) of Emperor Suinin, Nara Prefecture
Suinin is a posthumous name. It is undisputed that this identification is Chinese in form and Buddhist in implication, which suggests that the name must have been regularized centuries after the lifetime ascribed to Suinin, possibly during the time in which legends about the origins of the Yamato dynasty were compiled as the chronicles known today as the Kojiki. 

The actual site of Suinin's grave is not known. This emperor is traditionally venerated at a memorial Shinto shrine (misasagi) at Nara. 

The Imperial Household Agency designates this location as Suinin's mausoleum. It is formally named Sugawara no Fushimi no higashi no misasagi. Ponsonby-Fane, Studies in Shinto, p. 418. 

Suinin's tomb can be visited in Nishi-machi, Amagatsuji, Nara City. Suinin's misasagi -- image Suinin's misasagi -- map (mis-labelled as "Enperor Nonin s Tomb") This kofun-type Imperial tomb is characterized by a keyhole-shaped island located within a wide, water-filled moat. Suinin-type kofun -- see illustration #3, bottom of web page Suinin's misasagi -- aerial photo (also known as Hraisan kofun) 

==Consorts and Children==
Empress(first): Sahohime (), daughter of Hikoimasu ()
*Prince Homutsuwake ()

Empress(second): Hibasuhime (), daughter of Tanba no Michinoushi ()
*Prince Inishikiirihiko ()
*Prince Ootarashihikoosirowake () Emperor Keik
*Princess Oonakatsuhime ()
*Princess Yamatohime () Sai
*Prince Wakakiniirihiko ()

Nubataniirihime (), younger sister of Hibasuhime
*Prince Nuteshiwake (), ancestor of Wake clan (Wake no Kiyomaro)
*Princess Ikatarashimime ()

Matonohime (),younger sister of Hibasuhime

Azaminiirihime (),younger sister of Hibasuhime
*Prince Ikohayawake ()
*Princess Wakaasatsuhime ()

Kaguyahime (),daughter of Ootsutsukitarine ()
*Prince Onabe ()

Kanihatatobe (),daughter of Yamashiro no Ookuni no Fuchi ()
*Prince Iwatsukuwake (), ancestor of Mio clan ()
*Princess Futajiirihime (), wife of Yamatotakeru, mother of Emperor Chai

Karihatatobe (),older sister of Kanihatatobe
*Prince Oochiwake ()
*Prince Ikatarashihiko ()
*Prince Itakeruwake ()

unknown
*Prince Tuburame ()

==See also==
* Emperor of Japan
* List of Emperors of Japan
* Imperial cult

==Notes==
Japanese Imperial kamon  a stylized chrysanthemum blossom

==References==
* Aston, William George. (1896). Nihongi: Chronicles of Japan from the Earliest Times to A.D. 697. London: Kegan Paul, Trench, Trubner. OCLC 448337491
* Brown, Delmer M. and Ichir Ishida, eds. (1979). Gukansh: The Future and the Past. Berkeley: University of California Press. 10-ISBN 0-520-03460-0; 13-ISBN 978-0-520-03460-0; OCLC 251325323
* Chamberlain, Basil Hall. (1920). The Kojiki. Read before the Asiatic Society of Japan on April 12, May 10, and June 21, 1882; reprinted, May, 1919. OCLC 1882339
* Ponsonby-Fane, Richard Arthur Brabazon. (1959). The Imperial House of Japan. Kyoto: Ponsonby Memorial Society. OCLC 194887
* ____________. (1962). Studies in Shinto and Shrines. Kyoto: Ponsonby Memorial Society. OCLC 3994492
* Titsingh, Isaac. (1834). Nihon Odai Ichiran; ou, Annales des empereurs du Japon. Paris: Royal Asiatic Society, Oriental Translation Fund of Great Britain and Ireland. OCLC 5850691
* Varley, H. Paul. (1980). Jinn Shtki: A Chronicle of Gods and Sovereigns. New York: Columbia University Press. 10-ISBN 0-231-04940-4; 13-ISBN 978-0-231-04940-5; OCLC 59145842

==External links==
*Ise Shrine - Naiku, official website

 
 



[[Emperor Keik]]

; also known as Ootarashihikooshirowake no Sumeramikoto, was the 12th emperor of Japan, Imperial Household Agency (Kunaich):  (12); retrieved 2013-8-23. according to the traditional order of succession. Titsingh, Isaac. (1834). ; Brown, Delmer M. (1979). Gukansh, p. 254; Varley, H. Paul. (1980). Jinn Shtki, pp. 96-99. 

No firm dates can be assigned to this emperor's life or reign, but he is conventionally considered to have reigned from 71130. Ponsonby-Fane, Richard. (1959). The Imperial House of Japan, p. 33. 

==Legendary narrative==
Keik is regarded by historians as a "legendary emperor" who might be real and there is a paucity of information about him. There is insufficient material available for further verification and study. Kelly, Charles F. "Kofun Culture," Japanese Archaeology. April 27, 2009. The reign of Emperor Kimmei (509?571 AD), the 29th emperor, Titsingh, pp. 3436; Brown, pp. 261262; Varley, pp. 123124. is the first for which contemporary historiography is able to assign verifiable dates; Hoye, Timothy. (1999). Japanese Politics: Fixed and Floating Worlds, p. 78; excerpt, "According to legend, the first Japanese emperor was Jimmu. Along with the next 13 emperors, Jimmu is not considered an actual, historical figure. Historically verifiable Emperors of Japan date from the early sixth century with Kimmei. however, the conventionally accepted names and dates of the early emperors were not to be confirmed as "traditional" until the reign of Emperor Kammu (737806), the 50th sovereign of the Yamato dynasty. Aston, William George. (1896). Nihongi, pp. 109. The name Keik-tenn was assigned to him posthumously by later generations. Brinkley, Frank. (1915). ; excerpt, "Posthumous names for the earthly Mikados were invented in the reign of Emperor Kammu (782-805), i.e., after the date of the compilation of the Records and the Chronicles. 

His legend was recorded in Kojiki and Nihonshoki, but the accounts of him are different in these two sources. In Kojiki he sent his son Yamatotakeru to Kysh to conquer local tribes. In Nihonshoki Keik himself went there and won battles against local tribes. According to both sources, he sent Yamatotakeru to Izumo province and eastern provinces to conquer the area and spread his territory. Aston, William. (1998). Nihongi, Vol. 1, pp. 188-214. 

According to traditional sources, Yamato Takeru died in the 43rd year of Emperor Keiko's reign (43). Ponsonby-Fane, Richard. (1953) Studies in Shinto and Shrines, p. 433. The possessions of the dead prince were gathered together along with the sword Kusanagi; and his widow venerated his memory in a shrine at her home. Sometime later, these relics and the sacred sword were moved to the current location of the Atsuta Shrine. Ponsonby-Fane, Studies in Shinto, p. 434. Nihonshoki explains that this move occurred in the 51st year of Keiko's reign, but shrine tradition also dates this event in the 1st year of Emperor Chai's reign. Ponsonby-Fane, Studies in Shinto, p. 435. 

The actual site of Keik's grave is not known. This emperor is traditionally venerated at a memorial Shinto shrine (misasagi) at Nara. 

The Imperial Household Agency designates this location as Keik's mausoleum. It is formally named Yamanobe no michi no e no misasagi. Ponsonby-Fane, Studies in Shinto, p. 419. 

==Consorts and children==
Empress(first): Harima no Inabi no Ooiratsume (), daughter of Wakatakehiko ()
*Prince Kushitsunowake ()
*Prince Oousu (), ancestor of Mugetsu no kimi ()

*Prince Ousu (), father of Emperor Chai

Empress(second): Yasakairihime (), daughter of Yasakairihiko ()
*Prince Wakatarashihiko () Emperor Seimu
*Prince Iokiirihiko ()
*Prince Oshinowake ()
*Prince Wakayamatoneko ()
*Prince Oosuwake ()
*Princess Nunoshinohime ()
*Princess Iokiirihime ()
*Princess Kagoyorihime ()
*Prince Isakiirihiko (), ancestor of Mitsukai no Muraji ()
*Prince Kibinoehiko ()
*Princess Takagiirihime ()
*Princess Otohime ()

Mizuhanoiratume (), daughter of iwatsukuwake (), younger sister of Iwakiwake ()
*Princess Ionono () Sai

Ikawahime ()
*Prince Kamukushi (), ancestor of Sanuki no Kimi (), Sakabe no Kimi ()
*Prince Inaseirihiko (), ancestor of Saeki no Atai (), Harima no Atai ()

Abe no Takadahime (), daughter of Abe no Kogoto ()
*Prince Takekunikoriwake ()

Himuka no Kaminagaootane ()
*Prince Himuka no Sotsuhiko ()

Sonotakehime ()
*Prince Kunichiwake ()
*Prince Kunisewake ()
*Prince Toyotowake ()

Himuka no Mihakashihime ()
*Prince Toyokuniwake (), ancestor of Himuka no Kuni no miyatsuko ()

Inabinowakairatsume (), daughter of Wakatakehiko, younger sister of Harima no Inabi no Ooiratsume
*Prince Mawaka ()
*Prince Hikohitoooe ()

Igotohime (),daughter of Mononobe no Igui ()
*Prince Igotohiko ()

==See also==
* List of Emperors of Japan
* Imperial cult
* Takahashi Ujibumi

==Notes==
Japanese Imperial kamon  a stylized chrysanthemum blossom

==References==
* Aston, William George. (1896). Nihongi: Chronicles of Japan from the Earliest Times to A.D. 697. London: Kegan Paul, Trench, Trubner. OCLC 448337491
* Brown, Delmer M. and Ichir Ishida, eds. (1979). Gukansh: The Future and the Past. Berkeley: University of California Press. 10-ISBN 0-520-03460-0; 13-ISBN 978-0-520-03460-0; OCLC 251325323
* Chamberlain, Basil Hall. (1920). The Kojiki. Read before the Asiatic Society of Japan on April 12, May 10, and June 21, 1882; reprinted, May, 1919. OCLC 1882339
* Ponsonby-Fane, Richard Arthur Brabazon. (1959). The Imperial House of Japan. Kyoto: Ponsonby Memorial Society. OCLC 194887
* __________. (1953). Studies in Shinto and Shrines. Kyoto: Ponsonby Memorial Society. OCLC 470294859
* Titsingh, Isaac. (1834). Nihon Odai Ichiran; ou, Annales des empereurs du Japon. Paris: Royal Asiatic Society, Oriental Translation Fund of Great Britain and Ireland. OCLC 5850691
* Varley, H. Paul. (1980). Jinn Shtki: A Chronicle of Gods and Sovereigns. New York: Columbia University Press. 10-ISBN 0-231-04940-4; 13-ISBN 978-0-231-04940-5; OCLC 59145842

 
 



[[Emperor Seimu]]

; also known as Wakatarashihiko no Sumeramikoto; was the 13th emperor of Japan, Imperial Household Agency (Kunaich):  (13); retrieved 2013-8-28. according to the traditional order of succession. Titsingh, Isaac. (1834). ; Brown, Delmer M. (1979). Gukansh, p. 254; Varley, H. Paul. (1980). Jinn Shtki, pp. 99100. 

No firm dates can be assigned to this emperor's life or reign, but he is conventionally considered to have reigned from 131191. Ponsonby-Fane, Richard. (1959). The Imperial House of Japan, p. 34. 

==Legendary narrative==
Seimu is regarded by historians as a "legendary emperor" who might be real; and there is a paucity of information about him. There is insufficient material available for further verification and study. Kelly, Charles F. "Kofun Culture," Japanese Archaeology. 27 April 2009. The reign of Emperor Kimmei (509?571 AD), the 29th emperor, Titsingh, pp. 3436; Brown, pp. 261262; Varley, pp. 123124. is the first for which contemporary historiography is able to assign verifiable dates; Hoye, Timothy. (1999). Japanese Politics: Fixed and Floating Worlds, p. 78; excerpt, "According to legend, the first Japanese emperor was Jimmu. Along with the next 13 emperors, Jimmu is not considered an actual, historical figure. Historically verifiable Emperors of Japan date from the early sixth century with Kimmei. however, the conventionally accepted names and dates of the early emperors were not to be confirmed as "traditional" until the reign of Emperor Kammu (737806), the 50th sovereign of the Yamato dynasty. Aston, William. (1896). Nihongi, pp. 109. 

The name Seimu Tenn was assigned to him posthumously by later generations. Brinkley, Frank. (1915). ; excerpt, "Posthumous names for the earthly Mikados were invented in the reign of Emperor Kammu (782805), i.e., after the date of the compilation of the Records and the Chronicles. 

If Seimu did exist, there is no evidence to suggest that the title tenn was used during the time period to which his reign has been assigned. It is much more likely that he was a chieftain, or local clan leader, and the polity he ruled would have only encompassed a small portion of modern day Japan. Aston, William George. (1998). Nihongi, Vol. 1, pp. 214216. 

His father was Emperor Keik and his mother was Yasaka no Iri Bime no Mikoto, a granddaughter of Emperor Sujin and a first cousin of his father.

Memorial Shinto shrine and mausoleum honoring Emperor Seimu.
The actual site of Seimu's grave is not known. This emperor is traditionally venerated at a memorial Shinto shrine (misasagi) at Nara. 

The Imperial Household Agency designates this location as Seimu's mausoleum. It is formally named Saki no Tatanami no misasagi. Ponsonby-Fane, Richard. (1953). Studies in Shinto and Shrines, p. 419. 

Seimu's tomb can be visited today at Misasagi-cho, Nara City. Seimu's misasagi  map (lower right) 

==See also==
* Emperor of Japan
* List of Emperors of Japan
* Imperial cult

==Notes==
Japanese Imperial kamon  a stylized chrysanthemum blossom

==References==
* Aston, William George. (1896). Nihongi: Chronicles of Japan from the Earliest Times to A.D. 697. London: Kegan Paul, Trench, Trubner. OCLC 448337491
* Brown, Delmer M. and Ichir Ishida, eds. (1979). Gukansh: The Future and the Past. Berkeley: University of California Press. 10-ISBN 0-520-03460-0; 13-ISBN 978-0-520-03460-0; OCLC 251325323
* Chamberlain, Basil Hall. (1920). The Kojiki. Read before the Asiatic Society of Japan on 12 April, 10 May, and 21 June 1882; reprinted May 1919. OCLC 1882339
* Ponsonby-Fane, Richard Arthur Brabazon. (1959). The Imperial House of Japan. Kyoto: Ponsonby Memorial Society. OCLC 194887
* Titsingh, Isaac. (1834). Nihon Odai Ichiran; ou, Annales des empereurs du Japon. Paris: Royal Asiatic Society, Oriental Translation Fund of Great Britain and Ireland. OCLC 5850691
* Varley, H. Paul. (1980). Jinn Shtki: A Chronicle of Gods and Sovereigns. New York: Columbia University Press. 10-ISBN 0-231-04940-4; 13-ISBN 978-0-231-04940-5; OCLC 59145842

 
 



[[Emperor Chai]]

; also known as Tarashinakatsuhiko no Sumeramikoto; was the 14th emperor of Japan, Imperial Household Agency (Kunaich):  (14); retrieved 2013-8-25. according to the traditional order of succession. Titsingh, Isaac. (1834). ; Brown, Delmer M. (1979). Gukansh, pp. 254-255; Varley, Paul. (1980). Jinn Shtki, pp. 100-101; 

No firm dates can be assigned to this emperor's life or reign, but he is conventionally considered to have reigned from 192200. Ponsonby-Fane, Richard. (1959). The Imperial House of Japan, p. 34. 

==Legendary narrative==
Chai is regarded by historians as a "legendary emperor" who might be real; and there is a paucity of information about him. There is insufficient material available for further verification and study. Kelly, Charles F. "Kofun Culture," Japanese Archaeology. 27 April 2009. The reign of Emperor Kimmei (509?571 AD), the 29th emperor, Titsingh, pp. 3436; Brown, pp. 261262; Varley, pp. 123124. is the first for which contemporary historiography is able to assign verifiable dates; Hoye, Timothy. (1999). Japanese Politics: Fixed and Floating Worlds, p. 78; excerpt, "According to legend, the first Japanese emperor was Jimmu. Along with the next 13 emperors, Jimmu is not considered an actual, historical figure. Historically verifiable Emperors of Japan date from the early sixth century with Kimmei. however, the conventionally accepted names and dates of the early emperors were not to be confirmed as "traditional" until the reign of Emperor Kammu (737806), the 50th sovereign of the Yamato dynasty. Aston, William. (1896). Nihongi, pp. 109. 

If Chai did exist, there is no evidence to suggest that the title tenn was used during the time to which his reign has been assigned. It is much more likely that he was a chieftain or local clan leader, and the polity he ruled would have only encompassed a small portion of modern day Japan. The name Chai Tenn was assigned to him posthumously. Brinkley, Frank. (1915). ; excerpt, "Posthumous names for the earthly Mikados were invented in the reign of Emperor Kammu (782-805), i.e., after the date of the compilation of the Records and the Chronicles. 

According to the Kojiki and Nihonshoki, he was the father of Emperor jin. jin is generally believed to have existed, based on archaeological evidence; but details of his life are scant.

Chai's father was Yamato Takeru, a son of the Yamato monarch Emperor Keik, but Yamato Takeru's story is problematic. Chai's mother was Futaji no Iri Hime no Mikoto, a daughter of Emperor Kaika and an aunt of Chai's father. Chai's wife was Jing.

According to these same legends, his wife was suddenly possessed by some unknown gods. The gods promised Emperor Chai rich lands overseas. Chai then looked to the sea, but he could see nothing and denounced his belief in the promises of the gods. The gods were enraged by this and declared that he would die and never receive the promised land. Instead they would go to his conceived, unborn son. The legend then states that Chai died soon after and his widow, Jing, conquered the promised land, which is conjectured to be part of modern-day Korea. According to one version of the legend, Chai's son was born three years after the death of Chai, which lends further support to the notion that the stories surrounding him are based on myth rather than actual events. This legend also has many other flaws (it claims that Jing was flown into the middle of the promised land and then conquered into Japan) which have largely discredited the story among historians. Aston, William George. (1998). Nihongi, Vol. 1, pp. 217-223. 

The site of Chai's grave is not known. This emperor is traditionally venerated at a memorial Shinto shrine (misasagi) at Nara. The Imperial Household Agency designates this location as Chai's mausoleum. It is formally named Ega no Naganu no nishi no misasagi. Ponsonby-Fane, p. 419. 

==Consorts and Children==
EmpressOkinagatarashihime ()Empress Jing, daughter of Okinaga no sukune no Miko ()
*Prince Homutawake () Emperor jin

nakatsuhime (), daughter of Hikohitoe no Mikoto ()
*Prince Kagosaka ()
*Prince Oshikuma ()

Otohime (), daughter of sakanushi()
*Prince Homuyawake ()

==See also==
* Emperor of Japan
* List of Emperors of Japan
* Imperial cult

==Notes==
Japanese Imperial kamon  a stylized chrysanthemum blossom

==References==
* Aston, William George. (1896). Nihongi: Chronicles of Japan from the Earliest Times to A.D. 697. London: Kegan Paul, Trench, Trubner. OCLC 448337491
* Brown, Delmer M. and Ichir Ishida, eds. (1979). Gukansh: The Future and the Past. Berkeley: University of California Press. 10-ISBN 0-520-03460-0; 13-ISBN 978-0-520-03460-0; OCLC 251325323
* Chamberlain, Basil Hall. (1920). The Kojiki. Read before the Asiatic Society of Japan on April 12, May 10, and June 21, 1882; reprinted, May, 1919. OCLC 1882339
* Ponsonby-Fane, Richard Arthur Brabazon. (1959). The Imperial House of Japan. Kyoto: Ponsonby Memorial Society. OCLC 194887
* Titsingh, Isaac. (1834). Nihon Odai Ichiran; ou, Annales des empereurs du Japon. Paris: Royal Asiatic Society, Oriental Translation Fund of Great Britain and Ireland. OCLC 5850691
* Varley, H. Paul. (1980). Jinn Shtki: A Chronicle of Gods and Sovereigns. New York: Columbia University Press. 10-ISBN 0-231-04940-4; 13-ISBN 978-0-231-04940-5; OCLC 59145842

 
 



[[Emperor jin]]

, also known as Homutawake or , was the 15th emperor of Japan, Imperial Household Agency (Kunaich):  (15); retrieved 2013-8-26. according to the traditional order of succession. Titsingh, Isaac. (1834). Annales des empereurs du japon, pp. 1922; Brown, Delmer M. (1979). Gukansh, p. 255-56; Varley, Paul. (1980). Jinn Shtki, pp. 10310. 

No firm dates can be assigned to this emperor's life or reign, but he is conventionally considered to have reigned from 270 to 310. Ponsonby-Fane, Richard. (1959). The Imperial House of Japan, p. 36. 

==Legendary narrative==
jin is regarded by historians as a "legendary emperor" of the 5th century. Kelly, Charles F. "Kofun Culture," Japanese Archaeology. 27 April 2009. The reign of Emperor Kimmei (509?571 AD), the 29th emperor, Titsingh, pp. 3436; Brown, pp. 261262; Varley, pp. 123124. is the first for which contemporary historiography is able to assign verifiable dates; Hoye, Timothy. (1999). Japanese Politics: Fixed and Floating Worlds, p. 78; excerpt, "According to legend, the first Japanese emperor was Jimmu. Along with the next 13 emperors, Jimmu is not considered an actual, historical figure. Historically verifiable Emperors of Japan date from the early sixth century with Kimmei. however, the conventionally accepted names and dates of the early emperors were not to be confirmed as "traditional" until the reign of Emperor Kammu (737806), the 50th sovereign of the Yamato dynasty. Aston, William. (1896). Nihongi, pp. 109. 

The name jin Tenn was assigned to him posthumously by later generations. jin is also identified by some as the earliest "historical" emperor. Wakabayashi, Tadashi. (1995) 

According to the Kojiki and the Nihonshoki, jin was the son of the Emperor Chai and his consort Jing. As Chai died before jin's birth, his mother Jing became the de facto ruler. The history book written to the 8th century, alleged that the boy jin was conceived but unborn when Chai died. His widow, Jing, then spent three years in conquest of a promised land, which is conjectured to be Korea, but the story is largely dismissed by scholars for lack of evidence. Then, after her return to Japanese islands, the boy was born, three years after the death of the father.

Either a period of less than nine months contained three "years" (some seasons), e.g. three harvests, or the paternity is just mythical and symbolic, rather than real. jin was born (in 200 according to the traditional, but untrustworthy TC date, timetable; realistically sometime in the late 4th century) in Tsukushi on the return of his mother from the invasion of the promised land and named him Prince Hondawake. He became the crown prince at the age of four. He was crowned (in 270) at the age of 70 and reigned for 40 years until his death in 310, although none of the TC dates around his reign have any historical basis. He supposedly lived in two palaces both of which are in present day Osaka.

jin was traditionally identified as the father of Emperor Nintoku, who acceded after jin's death. Aston, William George. (1998). Nihongi, p. 254-271. jin has been deified as Hachiman Daimyjin, regarded as the guardian of warriors. The Hata Clan considered him their guardian Kami.

Memorial Shinto shrine and mausoleum honoring Emperor jin.
The actual site of jin's grave is not known. This emperor is traditionally venerated at a memorial Shinto shrine (misasagi) at Osaka.

The Imperial Household Agency designates this location as jin's mausoleum. It is formally named Eega no Mofushi no oka no misasagi. Ponsonby-Fane, p. 419. 

==Consorts and children==
Empress: Nakatsuhime (), daughter of Homudamawaka ()
*Princess Arata ()
*Prince osazaki () Emperor Nintoku
*Prince Netori (), ancestor of ta no Kimi ()

Takakiirihime (), older sister of Nakatsuhime
*Prince Nukata no nakatsuhiko ()
*Prince yamamori (), ancestor of Hijikata no Kimi () and Haibara no Kimi()

*Prince Izanomawaka (), ancestor of Fukakawawake ()
*Princess hara ()
*Princess Komukuta ()

Otohime (), younger sister of Nakatsuhime
*Princess Ahe ()
*Princess Awaji no Mihara (), wife of Netori
*Princess ki no Uno ()
*Princess Shigehara ()
*Princess Mino no Iratsume ()

Miyanushiyakahime (), daughter of Wani no Hifure no Omi ()
*Prince Uji no Wakiiratsuko (), Crown Prince
*Princess Yata (), wife of Emperor Nintoku
*Princess Metori ()

Onabehime (), younger sister of Miyanushiyakahime
*Princess Uji no Wakiiratsuhime (), wife of Emperor Nintoku

Okinaga mawakanakatsuhime (), daughter of Kawamatanakatsuhiko ()
*Prince Wakanuke no futamata (), ancestor of Okinaga clan (). great-grandfather of Emperor Keitai

Itohime (), daughter of Sakuraitabe no Muraji Shimatarine()
*Prince Hayabusawake ()

Himuka no Izumi no nagahime ()
*Prince hae ()
*Prince ohae ()
*Princess Hatabi no Wakairatsume (), wife ofEmperor Rich

Kagurohime (), daughter of Sumeiro nakahiko()
*Princess Kawarata no iratsume ()
*Princess Tama no iratsume ()
*Prince Kataji ()

Katsuragi no Irome (), daughter of Takenouchi no sukune ?
*Prince Izanomawaka ? ()

Ehime (), younger sister of Kibi no Mimotowake()

==See also==

* Emperor of Japan
* List of Emperors of Japan
* Imperial cult

==Notes==
Japanese Imperial kamon  a stylized chrysanthemum blossom

==References==
* Aston, William George. (1896). Nihongi: Chronicles of Japan from the Earliest Times to A.D. 697. London: Kegan Paul, Trench, Trubner. OCLC 448337491
* Brown, Delmer M. and Ichir Ishida, eds. (1979). Gukansh: The Future and the Past. Berkeley: University of California Press. 10-ISBN 0-520-03460-0; 13-ISBN 978-0-520-03460-0; OCLC 251325323
* Chamberlain, Basil Hall. (1920). The Kojiki. Read before the Asiatic Society of Japan on April 12, May 10, and June 21, 1882; reprinted, May 1919. OCLC 1882339
* Ponsonby-Fane, Richard Arthur Brabazon. (1959). The Imperial House of Japan. Kyoto: Ponsonby Memorial Society. OCLC 194887
* Titsingh, Isaac. (1834). Nihon Odai Ichiran; ou, Annales des empereurs du Japon. Paris: Royal Asiatic Society, Oriental Translation Fund of Great Britain and Ireland. OCLC 5850691
* Varley, H. Paul. (1980). Jinn Shtki: A Chronicle of Gods and Sovereigns. New York: Columbia University Press. 10-ISBN 0-231-04940-4; 13-ISBN 978-0-231-04940-5; OCLC 59145842
* Wakabayashi, Tadashi. (1995). Japanese loyalism reconstrued: Yamagata Daini's Ryshi shinron of 1759. Honolulu: University of Hawaii Press. 10-ISBN 0824816676/13-ISBN 9780824816674; OCLC 31078696

 
 



[[Emperor Nintoku]]

 was the 16th emperor of Japan, Imperial Household Agency (Kunaich):  (16); retrieved 2013-8-28. according to the traditional order of succession. Titsingh, Isaac. (1834). Annales des empereurs du japon, pp. 22-24;Brown, Delmer M. (1979). Gukansh, pp. 256-257; Varley, H. Paul. (1980). Jinn Shtki, pp. 110-111. 

No firm dates can be assigned to this emperor's life or reign, but he is conventionally considered to have reigned from 313399. Ponsonby-Fane, Richard. (1959). The Imperial House of Japan, p. 36. 

==Legendary narrative==
Nintoku is regarded by historians as a "legendary emperor" of the 5th century. Kelly, Charles F. "Kofun Culture," Japanese Archaeology. 27 April 2009. The reign of Emperor Kimmei (509?571 AD), the 29th emperor, Titsingh, pp. 3436; Brown, pp. 261262; Varley, pp. 123124. is the first for which contemporary historiography is able to assign verifiable dates; Hoye, Timothy. (1999). Japanese Politics: Fixed and Floating Worlds, p. 78; excerpt, "According to legend, the first Japanese emperor was Jimmu. Along with the next 13 emperors, Jimmu is not considered an actual, historical figure. Historically verifiable Emperors of Japan date from the early sixth century with Kimmei. however, the conventionally accepted names and dates of the early emperors were not to be confirmed as "traditional" until the reign of Emperor Kammu (737806), the 50th sovereign of the Yamato dynasty. Aston, William. (1896). Nihongi, pp. 109. 

 
According to Nihon Shoki, he was the fourth son of Emperor jin and his mother was Nakatsuhime no Mikoto, a great-granddaughter of Emperor Keik. He was also the father of Emperors Rich, Hanzei, and Ingy.

Nintoku's contemporary title would not have been tenn, as most historians believe this title was not introduced until the reigns of Emperor Tenmu and Empress Jit. Rather, it was presumably Sumeramikoto or Amenoshita Shiroshimesu kimi (), meaning "the great king who rules all under heaven." Alternatively, Nintoku might have been referred to as (/) or the "Great King of Yamato."

== Events of Nintoku's life ==
Although the Nihon Shoki states that Nintoku ruled from 313399, modern research suggests those dates are likely inaccurate. Parry, Richard Lloyd. "Japan guards the emperors' secrets; Ban on digs in ancient imperial tombs frustrates archaeologists," The Independent (London). 12 November 1995. 

The achievements of Nintoku's reign which are noted in Nihon Shoki include:
* constructed a thorn field bank called Namba no Horie to prevent a flood in Kawachi plains and for development. It is assumed that this was Japan's first large-scale engineering works undertaking.
* established a thorn field estate under the direct control of the Imperial Court ()
* constructed a Yokono bank (horizontal parcel, Ikuno-ku, Osaka-shi). Aston, William. (1998). Nihongi, Vol. 1, pp. 254-271. 

==Consorts and Children==
Empress (first): Princess Iwa (), poet and daughter of Katsuragi no Sotsuhiko ()
*Prince Ooe no Izahowake () Emperor Rich
*Prince Suminoe no Nakatsu ()
*Prince Mizuhawake () Emperor Hanzei
*Prince Oasatsuma wakugo no Sukune () Emperor Ingy

Empress (second): Yatanohimemiko (), daughter of Emperor jin

Himuka no Kaminagahime (), daughter of Morokata no Kimi Ushimoroi ()
*Prince Ookusaka ()
*Princess Kusaka no hatabihime no Himemiko ()
Uji no Wakiiratsume (), daughter of Emperor jin

Kurohime (), daughter of Kibi no Amabe no Atai ()

== Nintoku's tomb ==
Daisen-Kofun, the tomb of Emperor Nintoku, Osaka
Daisen-Kofun (the biggest tomb in Japan) in Sakai, Osaka is considered to be his final resting place. The actual site of Nintoku's grave is not known. 

The Imperial tomb of Nintoku's consort, Iwa-no hime no Mikoto, is said to be located in Saki-cho, Nara City. Iwa-no hime no Mikoto's misasagi -- map (upper right) Both kofun-type Imperial tombs are characterized by a keyhole-shaped island located within a wide, water-filled moat.
Imperial tombs and mausolea are cultural properties; but they are guarded and administered by the Imperial Household Agency (IHA), which is the government department responsible for all matters relating to the emperor and his family. According to the IHA, the tombs are more than a mere repository for historical artifacts; they are sacred religious sites. IHA construes each of the Imperial grave sites as sanctuaries for the spirits of the ancestors of the Imperial House. 

Nintoku is traditionally venerated at a memorial Shinto shrine (misasagi) at Osaka. The Imperial Household Agency designates this location as his mausoleum. It is formally named Mozu no Mimihara no naka no misasagi. Ponsonby-Fane, p. 419. 

== See also ==
* Emperor of Japan
* List of Emperors of Japan
* Imperial cult
* Five kings of Wa

== Notes ==
Japanese Imperial kamon  a stylized chrysanthemum blossom

==References==
* Aston, William George. (1896). Nihongi: Chronicles of Japan from the Earliest Times to A.D. 697. London: Kegan Paul, Trench, Trubner. OCLC 448337491
* Brown, Delmer M. and Ichir Ishida. (1979). Gukansh: The Future and the Past. Berkeley: University of California Press. 10-ISBN 0-520-03460-0; 13-ISBN 978-0-520-03460-0; OCLC 251325323
* Ponsonby-Fane, Richard Arthur Brabazon. (1959). The Imperial House of Japan. Kyoto: Ponsonby Memorial Society. OCLC 194887
* Titsingh, Isaac. (1834). Nihon Odai Ichiran; ou, Annales des empereurs du Japon. Paris: Royal Asiatic Society, Oriental Translation Fund of Great Britain and Ireland. OCLC 5850691
* Varley, H. Paul. (1980). Jinn Shtki: A Chronicle of Gods and Sovereigns. New York: Columbia University Press. 10-ISBN 0-231-04940-4; 13-ISBN 978-0-231-04940-5; OCLC 59145842

== External links ==
* Encyclopedia of Daisen Kofun (in Japanese)

 
 



[[Emperor Rich]]

 was the 17th emperor of Japan, Imperial Household Agency (Kunaich):  (17); retrieved 2013-8-28. according to the traditional order of succession. Titsingh, Isaac. (1834). Annales des empereurs du japon, pp. 24-25;Brown, Delmer M. (1979). Gukansh, p. 257; Varley, H. Paul. (1980). Jinn Shtki, p. 111. 

No firm dates can be assigned to this emperor's life or reign, but he is conventionally considered to have reigned from 400 to 405. Ponsonby-Fane, Richard. (1959). The Imperial House of Japan, p. 38. 

==Legendary narrative ==
Rich is regarded by historians as a "legendary emperor" of the 5th century. Kelly, Charles F. "Kofun Culture," Japanese Archaeology. 27 April 2009. The reign of Emperor Kimmei (509?571 AD), the 29th emperor, Titsingh, pp. 3436; Brown, pp. 261262; Varley, pp. 123124. is the first for which contemporary historiography is able to assign verifiable dates; Hoye, Timothy. (1999). Japanese Politics: Fixed and Floating Worlds, p. 78; excerpt, "According to legend, the first Japanese emperor was Jimmu. Along with the next 13 emperors, Jimmu is not considered an actual, historical figure. Historically verifiable Emperors of Japan date from the early sixth century with Kimmei. however, the conventionally accepted names and dates of the early emperors were not to be confirmed as "traditional" until the reign of Emperor Kammu (737806), the 50th sovereign of the Yamato dynasty. Aston, William. (1896). Nihongi, pp. 109. 

According to Nihonshoki and Kojiki, Rich was the eldest son of Emperor Nintoku and Iwanohime. 

Rich's contemporary title would not have been tenn, as most historians believe this title was not introduced until the reigns of Emperor Tenmu and Empress Jit. Rather, it was presumably Sumeramikoto or Amenoshita Shiroshimesu kimi (), meaning "the great king who rules all under heaven." Alternatively, Rich might have been referred to as (/) or the "Great King of Yamato."

Some scholars identify him with King San in the Book of Song. King San sent messengers to the Song Dynasty at least twice in 421 and 425. Aston, William. (1998). Nihongi, Vol. 1, pp. 301-311. 

Emperor Rich is traditionally associated with this kamiishizu misanzi in Sakai. 
Rich succumbed to disease in his sixth year of reign. His tomb is in Kawachi province, in the middle of present-day Osaka prefecture. He was succeeded by his younger brother Emperor Hanzei. None of his sons succeeded to the throne, although two grandsons would eventually ascend as Emperor Kenz and as Emperor Ninken. 

The site of Rich's grave is not known. This emperor is traditionally venerated at a memorial Shinto shrine (misasagi) in Sakai, Osaka. The Imperial Household Agency designates this location as Rich's mausoleum. It is formally named Mozu no mimihara no minami no misasagi. Ponsonby-Fane, p. 419. It is also identified as the Kami Ishizu Misanzai kofun ().

==Consorts and children==
Empress (first): Kurohime (), daughter of Katsuragi no Ashita no Sukune ()

*Prince Iwasaka no itinohe no Oshiha (), father of Emperor Kenz and Emperor Ninken

*Prince Mima ()
*Princess Aomi no Himemiko ()

Empress( second): Kusaka no Hatabi no Himemiko (), daughter of Emperor jin
*Princess Nakashi no Himemiko (), wife of Ookusaka

Futohime no Iratsume (), daughter of Funashiwake ()

Takatsuru no Iratsume (), sisters of Futohime

==See also==
* Emperor of Japan
* List of Emperors of Japan
* Imperial cult
* Five kings of Wa

==Notes==
Japanese Imperial kamon  a stylized chrysanthemum blossom

==References==
* Aston, William George. (1896). Nihongi: Chronicles of Japan from the Earliest Times to A.D. 697. London: Kegan Paul, Trench, Trubner. OCLC 448337491
* Brown, Delmer M. and Ichir Ishida, eds. (1979). Gukansh: The Future and the Past. Berkeley: University of California Press. 10-ISBN 0-520-03460-0; 13-ISBN 978-0-520-03460-0; OCLC 251325323
* Ponsonby-Fane, Richard Arthur Brabazon. (1959). The Imperial House of Japan. Kyoto: Ponsonby Memorial Society. OCLC 194887
* Titsingh, Isaac. (1834). Nihon Odai Ichiran; ou, Annales des empereurs du Japon. Paris: Royal Asiatic Society, Oriental Translation Fund of Great Britain and Ireland. OCLC 5850691
* Varley, H. Paul. (1980). Jinn Shtki: A Chronicle of Gods and Sovereigns. New York: Columbia University Press. 10-ISBN 0-231-04940-4; 13-ISBN 978-0-231-04940-5; OCLC 59145842

==External links==
*Imperial Household Agency webpage on mausoleum
*Digital Burial Mound Encyclopedia entry

 
 



[[Emperor Hanzei]]

, also known as Emperor Hansh, was the 18th emperor of Japan, Imperial Household Agency (Kunaich):  (18); retrieved 2013-8-28. according to the traditional order of succession. Ponsonby-Fane, Richard. (1959). The Imperial House of Japan, p. 38. 

No firm dates can be assigned to this emperor's life or reign, but he is conventionally considered to have reigned from 406 CE to 410 CE. Titsingh, Isaac. (1834). Annales des empereurs du japon, p. 25;Brown, Delmer M. (1979). Gukansh, p. 257; Varley, H. Paul. (1980). Jinn Shtki, p. 112. 

==Legendary narrative==
Hanzei is regarded by historians as a "legendary emperor" of the 5th century. Kelly, Charles F. "Kofun Culture," Japanese Archaeology. 27 April 2009. The reign of Emperor Kimmei (509?571 AD), the 29th emperor, Titsingh, pp. 3436; Brown, pp. 261262; Varley, pp. 123124. is the first for which contemporary historiography is able to assign verifiable dates; Hoye, Timothy. (1999). Japanese Politics: Fixed and Floating Worlds, p. 78; excerpt, "According to legend, the first Japanese emperor was Jimmu. Along with the next 13 emperors, Jimmu is not considered an actual, historical figure. Historically verifiable Emperors of Japan date from the early sixth century with Kimmei. however, the conventionally accepted names and dates of the early emperors were not to be confirmed as "traditional" until the reign of Emperor Kammu (737806), the 50th sovereign of the Yamato dynasty. Aston, William. (1896). Nihongi, pp. 109. 

Hanzei was the son of Emperor Nintoku and Iwanohime. He was the brother of Emperor Rich; and this succession effectively by-passed Rich's two sons. No other details have survived. 

Hanzei's contemporary title would not have been tenn, as most historians believe this title was not introduced until the reigns of Emperor Tenmu and Empress Jit. Rather, it was presumably Sumeramikoto or Amenoshita Shiroshimesu kimi (), meaning "the great king who rules all under heaven." Alternatively, Hanzei might have been referred to as (/) or the "Great King of Yamato."

The Nihongi records that the country enjoyed peace during this emperor's reign. Aston, William. (1998). Nihongi, Vol. 1, pp. 310-311. 
 
The description of Hanzei in the Kojiki is daunting as he is described as standing over nine feet tall and have enormous teeth all the same size. He is said to have ruled from the palace of Shibagaki at Tajihi in Kawachi (present day Matsubara, Osaka); and he is said to have died peacefully in his palace. 

Memorial Shinto shrine and mausoleum honoring Emperor Hanzei.
The actual site of Hanzei's grave is not known. This emperor is traditionally venerated at a memorial Shinto shrine (misasagi) at in Sakai, Osaka. 

The Imperial Household Agency designates the in Sakai as Hanzei's official mausoleum. It is formally named . Ponsonby-Fane, p. 419. 

==Consorts and Children==
Empress: Tsunohime (), daughter of Ooyake no omi Kogoto ()

*Princess Kaihime ()
*Princess Tuburahime ()

Otohime (), younger sister of Tsunohime
*Princess Takarahime ()
*Prince Takabe ()

==See also==
* Emperor of Japan
* List of Emperors of Japan
* Imperial cult
* Five kings of Wa

==Notes==
Japanese Imperial kamon  a stylized chrysanthemum blossom

==References==
* Aston, William George. (1896). Nihongi: Chronicles of Japan from the Earliest Times to A.D. 697. London: Kegan Paul, Trench, Trubner. OCLC 448337491
* Brown, Delmer M. and Ichir Ishida, eds. (1979). Gukansh: The Future and the Past. Berkeley: University of California Press. 10-ISBN 0-520-03460-0; 13-ISBN 978-0-520-03460-0; OCLC 251325323
* Ponsonby-Fane, Richard Arthur Brabazon. (1959). The Imperial House of Japan. Kyoto: Ponsonby Memorial Society. OCLC 194887
* Titsingh, Isaac. (1834). Nihon Odai Ichiran; ou, Annales des empereurs du Japon. Paris: Royal Asiatic Society, Oriental Translation Fund of Great Britain and Ireland. OCLC 5850691
* Varley, H. Paul. (1980). Jinn Shtki: A Chronicle of Gods and Sovereigns. New York: Columbia University Press. 10-ISBN 0-231-04940-4; 13-ISBN 978-0-231-04940-5; OCLC 59145842

 
 



[[Emperor Ingy]]

 was the 19th emperor of Japan, Imperial Household Agency (Kunaich):  (19); retrieved 2013-8-28. according to the traditional order of succession. Titsingh, Isaac. (1834). Annales des empereurs du japon, p. 26;Brown, Delmer M. (1979). Gukansh, pp. 257-268; Varley, H. Paul. (1980). Jinn Shtki, p. 112. 

No firm dates can be assigned to this emperor's life or reign, but he is conventionally considered to have reigned from 410453. Ponsonby-Fane, Richard. (1959). The Imperial House of Japan, p. 39. 

==Legendary narrative==
Ingy is regarded by historians as a "legendary emperor" of the 5th century. Kelly, Charles F. "Kofun Culture," Japanese Archaeology. 27 April 2009. The reign of Emperor Kimmei (509?571 AD), the 29th emperor, Titsingh, pp. 3436; Brown, pp. 261262; Varley, pp. 123124. is the first for which contemporary historiography is able to assign verifiable dates; Hoye, Timothy. (1999). Japanese Politics: Fixed and Floating Worlds, p. 78; excerpt, "According to legend, the first Japanese emperor was Jimmu. Along with the next 13 emperors, Jimmu is not considered an actual, historical figure. Historically verifiable Emperors of Japan date from the early sixth century with Kimmei. however, the conventionally accepted names and dates of the early emperors were not to be confirmed as "traditional" until the reign of Emperor Kammu (737806), the 50th sovereign of the Yamato dynasty. Aston, William. (1896). Nihongi, pp. 109. 

According to Kojiki and Nihon Shoki, he was the fourth son of Emperor Nintoku and his consort Iwanohime, and therefore a younger brother of his predecessor Emperor Hanzei. He sat on the throne after Hanzei died and ruled for 41 years. 

Ingy's contemporary title would not have been tenn, as most historians believe this title was not introduced until the reigns of Emperor Tenmu and Empress Jit. Rather, it was presumably Sumeramikoto or Amenoshita Shiroshimesu kimi (), meaning "the great king who rules all under heaven." Alternatively, Ingy might have been referred to as (/) or the "Great King of Yamato."

His consort was Oshisaka no nakatsu no Hime. They had five sons and four daughters, including Emperor Ank and Emperor Yryaku. He reformed the system of family and clan names, because many named themselves false names using higher ranked clan or family names.

==Events of Ingy's reign==
The earliest documented earthquake in Japan occurred in 416 when the Imperial Palace at Kyoto was leveled by the severity of the Earth's tremors. Hammer, Joshua. (2006). 

Some scholars identify him with King Sai in the Book of Song. This would have been a king of Japan (referred to as Wa by contemporary Chinese scholars) who is said to have sent messengers to the Song Dynasty at least twice, in 443 and 451.

According to Nihon Shoki, the king of the Korean Silla Kingdom grieved very much when Ingy died. To comfort the soul of Ingyo, he presented Japan 80 musicians. Nihonshoki, Vol. 13, Story of Ingy 

The actual site of Ingy's grave is not known. This emperor is traditionally venerated at a memorial Shinto shrine near Osaka. 

The Imperial Household Agency designates this location as Ingy's mausoleum. Ponsonby-Fane, p. 419. It is formally known as , in Fujiidera city near Osaka. Gowland, William. "The Burial Mounds and Dolmens of the Early Emperors of Japan," The Journal of the Royal Anthropological Institute of Great Britain and Ireland, Vol. 37, Jan.-Jun., 1907, pp. 10-46. 

==Consorts and children==
Empress of Ingy was Oshisaka no nakatsuhime (), daughter of Wakanuke-Futamata no Miko ().

His children were:
*Prince Kinashi no Karu 
*Princess Nagata no iratsume ()
*Prince Sakai no Kurohiko () (?456)
*Prince Anaho () (Emperor Ank) (401?456)
*Princess Karu no iratsume ()
*Prince Yatsuri no Shirahiko () (?456)
*Prince hatuse no Wakatakeru () (Emperor Yryaku) (418479)
*Princess Tajima no Tachibana no iratsume ()
*Princess Sakami ()

Princess of Ingy was Sotoshi no Iratsume, younger sister of Oshisaka no nakatsuhime.

==See also==
* Imperial cult
* Five kings of Wa

==Notes==
Japanese Imperial kamon  a stylized chrysanthemum blossom

==References==
* Aston, William George. (1896). Nihongi: Chronicles of Japan from the Earliest Times to A.D. 697. London: Kegan Paul, Trench, Trubner. OCLC 448337491
* Brown, Delmer M. and Ichir Ishida, eds. (1979). Gukansh: The Future and the Past. Berkeley: University of California Press. 10-ISBN 0-520-03460-0; 13-ISBN 978-0-520-03460-0; OCLC 251325323
* Hammer, Joshua. (2006). Yokohama Burning: The Deadly 1923 Earthquake and Fire that Helped Forge the Path to World War II. New York: Simon & Schuster. 10-ISBN 0-7432-6465-7; 13-ISBN 978-0-7432-6465-5 (cloth)
* Ponsonby-Fane, Richard Arthur Brabazon. (1959). The Imperial House of Japan. Kyoto: Ponsonby Memorial Society. OCLC 194887
* Titsingh, Isaac. (1834). Nihon Odai Ichiran; ou, Annales des empereurs du Japon. Paris: Royal Asiatic Society, Oriental Translation Fund of Great Britain and Ireland. OCLC 5850691
* Varley, H. Paul. (1980). Jinn Shtki: A Chronicle of Gods and Sovereigns. New York: Columbia University Press. 10-ISBN 0-231-04940-4; 13-ISBN 978-0-231-04940-5; OCLC 59145842

 
 



[[Emperor Ank]]

 was the 20th emperor of Japan, Imperial Household Agency (Kunaich):  (20); retrieved 2013-8-28. according to the traditional order of succession. Titsingh, Isaac. (1834). Annales des empereurs du japon, pp. 26-27;Brown, Delmer M. (1979). Gukansh, p. 258; Varley, H. Paul. (1980). Jinn Shtki, p. 113. 

No firm dates can be assigned to this emperor's life or reign, but he is conventionally considered to have reigned from 453456. Ponsonby-Fane, Richard. (1959). The Imperial House of Japan, p. 40. 

==Legendary narrative==
Ank was a 5th-century monarch. Kelly, Charles F. "Kofun Culture," Japanese Archaeology. 27 April 2009. The reign of Emperor Kimmei (509?571 AD), the 29th emperor, Titsingh, pp. 3436; Brown, pp. 261262; Varley, pp. 123124. is the first for which contemporary historiography is able to assign verifiable dates; Hoye, Timothy. (1999). Japanese Politics: Fixed and Floating Worlds, p. 78; excerpt, "According to legend, the first Japanese emperor was Jimmu. Along with the next 13 emperors, Jimmu is not considered an actual, historical figure. Historically verifiable Emperors of Japan date from the early sixth century with Kimmei. however, the conventionally accepted names and dates of the early emperors were not to be confirmed as "traditional" until the reign of Emperor Kammu (737806), the 50th sovereign of the Yamato dynasty. Aston, William. (1896). Nihongi, pp. 109. 

According to Kojiki and Nihon Shoki, Ank was the second son of Emperor Ingy. His elder brother Prince Kinashi no Karu was the crown prince, but due to an incestuous relationship with his sister, Karu no iratsume, Kinashikaru lost favour with the court. After an aborted attempt to rally troops against Ank, Kinashi no Karu (and his sister-lover) were exiled and committed suicide.

Ank's contemporary title would not have been tenn, as most historians believe this title was not introduced until the reign of Emperor Tenmu. Rather, it was presumably Sumeramikoto or Amenoshita Shiroshimesu kimi (), meaning "the great king who rules all under heaven." Alternatively, Ank might have been referred to as the "Great King of Yamato."

Ank was assassinated in his third year of reign by Mayowa no kimi (Prince Mayowa), in retaliation for the execution of Mayowa's father. Aston, William. (1998). Nihongi, Vol. 1, pp. 328-333. 

The actual site of Ank's grave is not known. This emperor is traditionally venerated at a memorial Shinto shrine at Nara Prefecture. 

The Imperial Household Agency designates this location as Ank's mausoleum. It is formally named Sugawara no Fushimi no nishi misasagi. Ponsonby-Fane, p. 419. 

==Gallery==

File:Mausoleum of Emperor Anko.jpg|Memorial Shinto shrine and mausoleum honoring Emperor Ank

==See also==
* Five kings of Wa

==Notes==
Japanese Imperial kamon  a stylized chrysanthemum blossom

==References==
* Aston, William George. (1896). Nihongi: Chronicles of Japan from the Earliest Times to A.D. 697. London: Kegan Paul, Trench, Trubner. OCLC 448337491
* Brown, Delmer M. and Ichir Ishida, eds. (1979). Gukansh: The Future and the Past. Berkeley: University of California Press. 10-ISBN 0-520-03460-0; 13-ISBN 978-0-520-03460-0; OCLC 251325323
* Ponsonby-Fane, Richard Arthur Brabazon. (1959). The Imperial House of Japan. Kyoto: Ponsonby Memorial Society. OCLC 194887
* Titsingh, Isaac. (1834). Nihon Odai Ichiran; ou, Annales des empereurs du Japon. Paris: Royal Asiatic Society, Oriental Translation Fund of Great Britain and Ireland. OCLC 5850691
* Varley, H. Paul. (1980). Jinn Shtki: A Chronicle of Gods and Sovereigns. New York: Columbia University Press. 10-ISBN 0-231-04940-4; 13-ISBN 978-0-231-04940-5; OCLC 59145842

 
 



[[Emperor Yryaku]]

 was the 21st emperor of Japan, Imperial Household Agency (Kunaich):  (21); retrieved 2013-8-28. according to the traditional order of succession. Titsingh, Isaac. (1834). Annales des empereurs du japon, pp. 27-28; Brown, Delmer M. (1979). Gukansh, p. 258; Varley, H. Paul. (1980). Jinn Shtki, pp. 113-115. 

Yryaku is remembered as a patron of sericulture. Nippon Gakujutsu Shinkokai (1969). The Manysh, p. 317. 

No firm dates can be assigned to this emperor's life or reign, but he is conventionally considered to have reigned from 456479. Ponsonby-Fane, Richard. (1959). The Imperial House of Japan, p. 40. 

==Legendary narrative==
Yryaku was a 5th-century monarch. Kelly, Charles F. "Kofun Culture," Japanese Archaeology. 27 April 2009. The reign of Emperor Kimmei (509?571 AD), the 29th emperor, Titsingh, pp. 3436; Brown, pp. 261262; Varley, pp. 123124. is the first for which contemporary historiography is able to assign verifiable dates; Hoye, Timothy. (1999). Japanese Politics: Fixed and Floating Worlds, p. 78; excerpt, "According to legend, the first Japanese emperor was Jimmu. Along with the next 13 emperors, Jimmu is not considered an actual, historical figure. Historically verifiable Emperors of Japan date from the early sixth century with Kimmei. however, the conventionally accepted names and dates of the early emperors were not to be confirmed as "traditional" until the reign of Emperor Kammu (737806), the 50th sovereign of the Yamato dynasty. Aston, William. (1896). Nihongi, pp. 109. 

Inariyama Sword

According to the Kojiki, this emperor is said to have ruled from the Thirteenth Day of the Eleventh Month of 456 (Heishin) until his death on the Seventh Day of the Eight Month of 479 (Kibi).

According to Kojiki and Nihonshoki, Yryaku was named Prince Ohatsuse Wakatake ( ) at birth. Swords unearthed from some kofuns indicate his name was Waka Takeru (kimi). Yuryaku is a name posthumously assigned to him by a much later era. He was the fifth and youngest son of Emperor Ingy. After his elder brother Emperor Ank was murdered, he won the struggle against his other brothers and became the new emperor. His title at his own lifetime was certainly not tenn, but presumably kimi and/or Sumeramikoto ( - amenoshita shiroshimesu kimi, or sumera no mikoto, Great King who rules all under heaven) and/or king of Yamato (/ - yamato kimi, Great King of Yamato). He had three wives (including his consort Kusahahatahi). His successor, Prince Shiraka (Emperor Seinei), was his son by his wife Kazuraki no Karahime.

The actual site of Yryaku's grave is not known. This emperor is traditionally venerated at a memorial Shinto shrine (misasagi) at Osaka.

The Imperial Household Agency designates this location as Yryaku's mausoleum. It is formally named Tajii no Takawashi-hara no misasagi. Ponsonby-Fane, p. 419. 

==Consorts and Children==
Empress: Kusaka no hatabihime no Himemiko (), daughter of Emperor Nintoku Or Emperor Rich

Lady: Katsuragi no Karahime (), daughter of Katsuragi no Tsubura no omi ()
*Prince Shiraka () (Emperor Seinei) (444?484)
*Princess Takuhatahime () (?459) (Saik)

Lady: Kibi no Wakahime () (?479), daughter of Kibi no Kamitsumichi no omi ()
*Prince Iwaki ()
*Prince Hoshikawa no Wakamiya () (?479)

Lady: Wani no warawakimi (), daughter of Kasuga no Wani no omi Fukame ()
*Princess Kasuga no iratsume (), married to Emperor Ninken

==King Bu==
King Bu, supposed to be Yryaku Minabo Tarriko, sent an envoy to the emperor of Liu Song, a minor Chinese dynasty, in 478. The ambassador explained that their ancestors were the conquerors of 115 barbarian countries. This claim was followed by the request of military support against Goguryeo of the Three Kingdoms of Korea. Batten, Bruce Loyd. (2006). 

Yryaku is believed to be referred to as Bu in contemporary Chinese records (; read as Take or Takeru in Japanese). These records state that Bu began his rule before 477, was recognized as the ruler of Japan by the Liu Song, Southern Qi, and Liang dynasties, and continued his rule through to 502. Bu sent messengers to the Song dynasty in 477 and 478 to ask for military support for protecting Baekje against the threat of Goguryeo. Aston, William. (1998). Nihongi, Vol. 1, pp. 333-372. South Korean scholar So Jin Cheol claims that Bu is not Yryaku but Sima, who became King Muryeong of Baekje. So Jin Cheol. (2008).    (The World of King Muryeong), p. 124. 

==Poetry==
This Japanese sovereign's interest in poetry is amongst the more well-documented aspects of his character and reign. Poems attributed to this 5th-century monarch are included in the Man'ysh, and a number of his verses are preserved in the Kojiki and the Nihonshoki. 

==See also==
* Emperor of Japan
* List of Emperors of Japan
* Eta Funayama Sword
* Five kings of Wa
* Imperial cult
* Inariyama Sword

==Notes==
Japanese Imperial kamon  a stylized chrysanthemum blossom

==References==
* Aston, William George. (1896). Nihongi: Chronicles of Japan from the Earliest Times to A.D. 697. London: Kegan Paul, Trench, Trubner. OCLC 448337491
* Batten, Bruce Loyd. (2006). Gateway to Japan: Hakata in war and peace, 500-1300. Honolulu:University of Hawaii Press. 10-ISBN 0-8248-2971-9/13-ISBN 978-0-8248-2971-1; 10-ISBN 0-8248-3029-6/13-ISBN 978-0-8248-3029-8; OCLC 254764602
* Brown, Delmer M. and Ichir Ishida, eds. (1979). Gukansh: The Future and the Past. Berkeley: University of California Press. 10-ISBN 0-520-03460-0; 13-ISBN 978-0-520-03460-0; OCLC 251325323
* Nippon Gakujutsu Shinkokai (1969). The Manysh: The Nippon Gakujutsu Shinkokai Translation of One Thousand Poems. New York: Columbia University Press. ISBN 0-231-08620-2
* Ponsonby-Fane, Richard Arthur Brabazon. (1959). The Imperial House of Japan. Kyoto: Ponsonby Memorial Society. OCLC 194887
* Titsingh, Isaac. (1834). Nihon Odai Ichiran; ou, Annales des empereurs du Japon. Paris: Royal Asiatic Society, Oriental Translation Fund of Great Britain and Ireland. OCLC 5850691
* Varley, H. Paul. (1980). Jinn Shtki: A Chronicle of Gods and Sovereigns. New York: Columbia University Press. 10-ISBN 0-231-04940-4; 13-ISBN 978-0-231-04940-5; OCLC 59145842

* . (2008). :  (Paekche Muryng Wang i segye: wang i sesang n haeyang taeguk tae Paekche). Seoul: . 10-ISBN 89-6246-010-6/13-ISBN 978-89-6246-010-0; OCLC 310625141

==External links==
*Nihon Shoki Online English Translations.Scroll 14 - Emperor Yuryaku

 
 



[[Emperor Seinei]]

 was the 22nd emperor of Japan, Imperial Household Agency (Kunaich):  (22); retrieved 2013-8-28. according to the traditional order of succession. Titsingh, Isaac. (1834). Annales des empereurs du japon, pp. 28-29; Brown, Delmer M. (1979). Gukansh, pp. 258-259; Varley, H. Paul. (1980). Jinn Shtki, pp. 115-116. 

No firm dates can be assigned to this emperor's life or reign, but he is conventionally considered to have reigned from 480484. Ponsonby-Fane, Richard. (1959). The Imperial House of Japan, p. 41. 

==Legendary narrative==
Seinei was a 5th-century monarch. Kelly, Charles F. "Kofun Culture," Japanese Archaeology. 27 April 2009. The reign of Emperor Kimmei (509?571 AD), the 29th emperor, Titsingh, pp. 3436; Brown, pp. 261262; Varley, pp. 123124. is the first for which contemporary historiography is able to assign verifiable dates; Hoye, Timothy. (1999). Japanese Politics: Fixed and Floating Worlds, p. 78; excerpt, "According to legend, the first Japanese emperor was Jimmu. Along with the next 13 emperors, Jimmu is not considered an actual, historical figure. Historically verifiable Emperors of Japan date from the early sixth century with Kimmei. however, the conventionally accepted names and dates of the early emperors were not to be confirmed as "traditional" until the reign of Emperor Kammu (737806), the 50th sovereign of the Yamato dynasty. Aston, William. (1896). Nihongi, pp. 109. 

According to Kojiki and Nihonshoki, he was a son of Emperor Yryaku and his consort Katsuragi no Karahime. Seinei's full sister was Princess Takuhatahime. His name in birth was Shiraka. It is said that the color of his hair was white since birth. Titsingh, p. 29; n.b., there is speculation that this unusual hair color suggests albinism. After the death of his father, Seinei won the fight against Prince Hoshikawa, his brother, for the throne and so succeeded his father.

Seinei's contemporary title would not have been tenn, as most historians believe this title was not introduced until the reigns of Emperor Tenmu and Empress Jit. Rather, it was presumably Sumeramikoto or Amenoshita Shiroshimesu kimi (), meaning "the great king who rules all under heaven." Alternatively, Seinei might have been referred to as (/) or the "Great King of Yamato."

Seinei fathered no children; however, two grandsons of the 17th emperor, Emperor Rich, were foundlater to ascend as Prince Oke and Prince Woke. Seinei adopted them as his heirs. Aston, William. (1998). Nihongi, Vol. 1, pp. 373377. 

The actual site of Seinei's grave is not known. This emperor is traditionally venerated at a memorial Shinto shrine (misasagi) at Osaka.

The Imperial Household Agency designates this location as Seinei's mausoleum. It is formally named Kawachi no Sakado no hara no misasagi . Ponsonby-Fane, p. 419. 

==See also==
* Emperor of Japan
* List of Emperors of Japan
* Imperial cult

==Notes==
Japanese Imperial kamon  a stylized chrysanthemum blossom

==References==
* Aston, William George. (1896). Nihongi: Chronicles of Japan from the Earliest Times to A.D. 697. London: Kegan Paul, Trench, Trubner. OCLC 448337491
* Brown, Delmer M. and Ichir Ishida, eds. (1979). Gukansh: The Future and the Past. Berkeley: University of California Press. 10-ISBN 0-520-03460-0; 13-ISBN 978-0-520-03460-0; OCLC 251325323
* Nippon Gakujutsu Shinkokai (1969). The Manysh: The Nippon Gakujutsu Shinkokai Translation of One Thousand Poems. New York: Columbia University Press. ISBN 0-231-08620-2
* Ponsonby-Fane, Richard Arthur Brabazon. (1959). The Imperial House of Japan. Kyoto: Ponsonby Memorial Society. OCLC 194887
* Titsingh, Isaac. (1834). Nihon Odai Ichiran; ou, Annales des empereurs du Japon. Paris: Royal Asiatic Society, Oriental Translation Fund of Great Britain and Ireland. OCLC 5850691
* Varley, H. Paul. (1980). Jinn Shtki: A Chronicle of Gods and Sovereigns. New York: Columbia University Press. 10-ISBN 0-231-04940-4; 13-ISBN 978-0-231-04940-5; OCLC 59145842

==External links==
*Nihon Shoki Online English Translations.Scroll 15  Emperors Seinei, Kenzo, and Ninken 

 
 



[[Emperor Kenz]]

, also spelled Ghen-so-tenn, was the 23rd emperor of Japan, Imperial Household Agency (Kunaich):  (23); retrieved 2013-8-29. according to the traditional order of succession. Titsingh, Isaac. (1834). Annales des empereurs du japon, pp. 29-30;Brown, Delmer M. (1979). Gukansh, p. 259; Varley, H. Paul. (1980). Jinn Shtki, p. 116. 

No firm dates can be assigned to this emperor's life or reign, but he is conventionally considered to have reigned from 485487. Ponsonby-Fane, Richard. (1959). The Imperial House of Japan, p. 42. 

==Legendary narrative==
Prince Oka, later to become Emperor Kenz, is said to have been the grandson of Emperor Rich, and the son of Ichinobe-no Oshiwa. Murray, David. (1906). He would have been quite young when Emperor Yryaku shot the arrow which killed his father during a hunting expedition; and this caused both Prince Oke and his older brother, Prince ka, to flee for their lives. They found refuge at Akashi in Harima province where they hid by living in obscurity. Histories from that period explained that the two brothers sought to blend into this rural community by posing as common herdsmen. Titsingh, p. 29. 

It is said that the Prince of Harima came by chance to Akashi; and at that time, Prince ka revealed his true identity. This intermediary re-introduced the lost cousins to Emperor Seinei, who had by this time ascended to the throne after the death of his father, the former Emperor Yryaku. Seinei invited both brothers to return the court; and he adopted both of them as sons and heirs. 

At Seinei's death, he had no other heirs than Prince ka and Prince Oka, whose father had been killed by Yraku. At this point, Oka wanted his elder brother to become emperor; but ke refused. The two could not reach an agreement. The great men of the court insisted that one or the other of the brothers must accept the throne; but in the end, ka proved to be more adamant. Prince Oka agreed to accept the throne; and Kenz was ultimately proclaimed as the new emperorwhich created a sense of relief for all the people who had endured this period of uncertainty. Titsingh, pp. 29-30. 

This sample page from Nihon dai Ichiran (1834) represents the first published account of Emperor Kenz's reign to become available in the West.

Kenz is considered to have ruled the country during the late-5th century, but there is a paucity of information about him. There is insufficient material available for further verification and study.

Kenz's contemporary title would not have been tenn, as most historians believe this title was not introduced until the reigns of Emperor Tenmu and Empress Jit. Rather, it was presumably Sumeramikoto or Amenoshita Shiroshimesu kimi (), meaning "the great king who rules all under heaven." Alternatively, Kenz might have been referred to as (/) or the "Great King of Yamato."

==Kenz's reign==
It is recorded that his capital was at in Yamato province. Titsingh, p. 30. The location of the palace is thought to have been in present day Osaka prefecture or Nara prefecture. Aston, William. (1998). Nihongi, Vol. 1, pp. 377-393. 

Murray reports that the only event of major consequence during Kenz's reign had to do with the filial respect he showed for his murdered father. Kenz arranged to have his father's remains retrieved and reinterred in a mausoleum appropriate for the son of an one Emperor and the father of another. Murray, 

Kenz died at age 38, reigning only three years. He too had no other heirs; so his emperor's brother would follow him on the throne.

The actual site of Kenz's grave is not known. This emperor is traditionally venerated at a memorial Shinto shrine (misasagi) at Osaka.

The Imperial Household Agency designates this location as Kenz's mausoleum. It is formally named Kataoka no Iwatsuki no oka no kita no misasagi. Ponsonby-Fane, p. 419. 

==See also==
* Emperor of Japan
* List of Emperors of Japan
* Imperial cult

==Notes==
Japanese Imperial kamon  a stylized chrysanthemum blossom

==References==
* Aston, William George. (1896). Nihongi: Chronicles of Japan from the Earliest Times to A.D. 697. London: Kegan Paul, Trench, Trubner. OCLC 448337491
* Brown, Delmer M. and Ichir Ishida, eds. (1979). Gukansh: The Future and the Past. Berkeley: University of California Press. 10-ISBN 0-520-03460-0; 13-ISBN 978-0-520-03460-0; OCLC 251325323
* Murray, David. (1906). Japan. New York: G.P. Putnam & Sons. OCLC 52763776
* Ponsonby-Fane, Richard. (1959). The Imperial House of Japan. Kyoto: Ponsonby Memorial Society. OCLC 194887
* Titsingh, Isaac. (1834). Annales des empereurs du Japon (Nihon Odai Ichiran). Paris: Royal Asiatic Society, Oriental Translation Fund of Great Britain and Ireland. OCLC 5850691 
* Varley, H. Paul. (1980). Jinn Shtki: A Chronicle of Gods and Sovereigns. New York: Columbia University Press. 10-ISBN 0-231-04940-4; 13-ISBN 978-0-231-04940-5; OCLC 59145842

 
 



[[Emperor Ninken]]

, also known as Ninken-okimi, was the 24th emperor of Japan, Imperial Household Agency (Kunaich):  (24); retrieved 2013-8-30. according to the traditional order of succession. Titsingh, Isaac. (1834). Annales des empereurs du japon, p. 30;Brown, Delmer M. (1979). Gukansh, p. 259-260; Varley, H. Paul. (1980). Jinn Shtki, p. 117. No firm dates can be assigned to this emperor's life or reign, but he is conventionally considered to have reigned from 488498. Ponsonby-Fane, Richard. (1959). The Imperial House of Japan, p. 42. 

==Legendary narrative==
Ninken is considered to have ruled the country during the late-5th century, but there is a paucity of information about him. There is insufficient material available for further verification and study.

In his youth, he was known as Prince Oyoke. Along with his younger brother, Prince Woke, Oyoke was raised to greater prominence when Emperor Seinei died without an heir. The two young princes were said to be grandsons of Emperor Rich. Each of these brothers would ascend the throne as adopted heirs of Seinei, although it is unclear whether they had been "found" in Seinei's lifetime or only after that. Titsingh, p. 29. 

Okyoke's younger brother, who would become posthumously known as Emperor Kenzo, ascended before his elder brother. This unconventional sequence was in accordance with an agreement made by the two brothers. Titsingh, pp. 29-30. 

==Ninken's reign==
When Emperor Kenzo died without heirs, Prince Oyoke succeeded him as Emperor Ninken.

Ninken's contemporary title would not have been tenn, as most historians believe this title was not introduced until the reigns of Emperor Tenmu and Empress Jit. Rather, it was presumably Sumeramikoto or Amenoshita Shiroshimesu kimi (), meaning "the great king who rules all under heaven." Alternatively, Ninken might have been referred to as (/) or the "Great King of Yamato."

Ninken married to Emperor Yryaku's daughter Kasuga no iratsume no Himemiko, a second cousin of him. Their daughter Tashiraka was later married to Keitai, successor or possibly usurper after her brother, and became mother of Kimmei, a future monarch and lineal ancestor of all future monarchs of Japan. There apparently was also another daughter, princess Tachibana, who in turn is recorded to have become a wife of Senka and mother of princess Iwahime, who herself became a consort of Kimmei and bore Bidatsu, a future monarch and lineal ancestor of current monarchs of Japan.

Ninken was succeeded by his son, who would accede as Emperor Buretsu. Aston, William George. (1998). Nihongi, Vol. 1, pp. 393-398. 

The actual site of Ninken's grave is not known. This emperor is traditionally venerated at a memorial Shinto shrine (misasagi) at Osaka.

The Imperial Household Agency designates this location as Ninken's mausoleum. It is formally named Hany no Sakamoto no misasagi. Ponsonby-Fane, p. 419. 

==See also==
* Emperor of Japan
* List of Emperors of Japan
* Imperial cult

==Notes==
Japanese Imperial kamon  a stylized chrysanthemum blossom

==References==
* Aston, William George. (1896). Nihongi: Chronicles of Japan from the Earliest Times to A.D. 697. London: Kegan Paul, Trench, Trubner. OCLC 448337491
* Brown, Delmer M. and Ichir Ishida, eds. (1979). Gukansh: The Future and the Past. Berkeley: University of California Press. 10-ISBN 0-520-03460-0; 13-ISBN 978-0-520-03460-0; OCLC 251325323
* Ponsonby-Fane, Richard Arthur Brabazon. (1959). The Imperial House of Japan. Kyoto: Ponsonby Memorial Society. OCLC 194887
* Titsingh, Isaac. (1834). Nihon Odai Ichiran; ou, Annales des empereurs du Japon. Paris: Royal Asiatic Society, Oriental Translation Fund of Great Britain and Ireland. OCLC 5850691
* Varley, H. Paul. (1980). Jinn Shtki: A Chronicle of Gods and Sovereigns. New York: Columbia University Press. 10-ISBN 0-231-04940-4; 13-ISBN 978-0-231-04940-5; OCLC 59145842

 
 



[[Emperor Buretsu]]

 was the 25th emperor of Japan, Imperial Household Agency (Kunaich):  (25) according to the traditional order of succession. Varley, Paul. (1980). Jinn Shtki, pp. 117-118; Titsingh, Isaac. (1834). 

No firm dates can be assigned to this emperor's life or reign, but he is conventionally considered to have reigned from 498506. Ponsonby-Fane, Richard. (1959). The Imperial House of Japan, p. 43. 

==Legendary narrative==
Buretsu is considered to have ruled the country during the late-fifth century and early-sixth century, but there is a paucity of information about him. There is insufficient material available for further verification and study.

Buretsu was a son of Emperor Ninken and his mother is Kasuga no iratsume no Kg (). His name was Ohatsuse no Wakasazaki no Mikoto ().

==Buretsu's reign==
If Emperor Keitai began a new dynasty as some historians believe, then Buretsu is the last emperor of the first recorded dynasty of Japan. Aston, William. (1998). Nihongi, Vol. 1, pp. 393-407. 

Buretsu's contemporary title would not have been tenn, as most historians believe this title was not introduced until the reigns of Emperor Tenmu and Empress Jit. Rather, it was presumably Sumeramikoto or Amenoshita Shiroshimesu kimi (), meaning "the great king who rules all under heaven." Alternatively, Buretsu might have been referred to as (/) or the "Great King of Yamato."

Buretsu is described as an essentially wicked historical figure. Nihonshoki likened him to Di Xin of the Shang Dynasty, but the record in Kojiki has no such indication. There are several theories on this difference. Some believe that this was to justify and praise his successor Emperor Keitai who took over under questionable circumstances. In history textbooks available before and during World War II, part of Buretsu's record was intentionally omitted.

The actual site of Buretsu's grave is not known. This emperor is traditionally venerated at a memorial Shinto shrine (misasagi) at Nara.

The Imperial Household Agency designates this location as Buretsu's mausoleum. It is formally named Kataoka no Iwatsuki no oka no kita no misasagi. Ponsonby-Fane, p. 419. 

==See also==
* Emperor of Japan
* List of Emperors of Japan
* Imperial cult

==Notes==

==References==
* Aston, William George. (1896). Nihongi: Chronicles of Japan from the Earliest Times to A.D. 697. London: Kegan Paul, Trench, Trubner. OCLC 448337491
* Brown, Delmer M. and Ichir Ishida, eds. (1979). Gukansh: The Future and the Past. Berkeley: University of California Press. 10-ISBN 0-520-03460-0; 13-ISBN 978-0-520-03460-0; OCLC 251325323
* Ponsonby-Fane, Richard Arthur Brabazon. (1959). The Imperial House of Japan. Kyoto: Ponsonby Memorial Society. OCLC 194887
* Titsingh, Isaac. (1834). Nihon Odai Ichiran; ou, Annales des empereurs du Japon. Paris: Royal Asiatic Society, Oriental Translation Fund of Great Britain and Ireland. OCLC 5850691
* Varley, H. Paul. (1980). Jinn Shtki: A Chronicle of Gods and Sovereigns. New York: Columbia University Press. 10-ISBN 0-231-04940-4; 13-ISBN 978-0-231-04940-5; OCLC 59145842

 
 



[[Emperor Keitai]]

:"Keitai" is also the Japanese term for mobile/cell phones but is written with different kanji.

, also known as Keitai-okimi, was the 26th emperor of Japan, Imperial Household Agency (Kunaich):  (26) according to the traditional order of succession. Varley, Paul. (1980). Jinn Shtki, pp. 119-120; Titsingh, Isaac. (1834). 

No firm dates can be assigned to this emperor's life or reign, but he is conventionally considered to have reigned from 507531. Ponsonby-Fane, Richard. (1959). The Imperial House of Japan, p. 43. 

==Legendary narrative==
Keitai is considered to have ruled the country during the early-6th century, but there is a paucity of information about him. There is insufficient material available for further verification and study. Significant differences exist in the records of the Kojiki and the Nihon Shoki. 

Kojiki puts this emperor's birth year at 485; and his date of death is said to have been April 9, 527. Japanese dates correspond to the traditional lunisolar calendar used in Japan until 1873. In the extant account, he is called do no Mikoto (). 

Nihon Shoki gives his birth year at 450; and he is said to have died on February 7, 531 or 534. In this historical record, he is said to have been called do no Kimi () and Hikofuto no Mikoto (). Also, records identify him as Wo Ofu Ato-no-Hiko Fudo no Mikoto.

In other historical records, he is said to have originally been King of Koshi, a smaller tribal entity, apparently in northern parts of central Japan, perhaps as far as the coast of Sea of Japan. Some modern reference works of history call Keitai simply King Ohoto of Koshi. Aston, William. (1998). Nihongi, Vol. 2, pp. 1-25. 

Keitai's contemporary title would not have been tenn, as most historians believe this title was not introduced until the reigns of Emperor Tenmu and Empress Jit. Rather, it was presumably Sumeramikoto or Amenoshita Shiroshimesu kimi (), meaning "the great king who rules all under heaven." Alternatively, Keitai might have been referred to as (/) or the "Great King of Yamato."

===Genealogy===
If Emperor Keitai began a new dynasty as some historians believe, then Emperor Buretsu would have been the last monarch of the first recorded dynasty of Japan. Aston, William. (1998). Nihongi, Vol. 1, pp. 393-407. 

Keitai was not the son of the immediate previous monarch. According to the Kojiki (712) and Nihon Shoki (720), Buretsu died without a successor, at which time a fifth generation grandson of Emperor jin, Keitai, came and ascended the throne. 

The genealogical trees of the Nihon Shoki have been lost, and the accuracy of its account of events remains unknown. This uncertainty raises arguable doubts about this emperor's genealogy. 

Genealogy information is supplemented in Shaku Nihongi which quotes from the now lost text Jgki (7th century). It says he was a son of Ushi no Kimi, a grandson of Ohi no Kimi, a great-grandson of Ohohoto no Kimi (brother to Emperor Ingy's consort), a great-great-grandson of Wakanuke Futamata no Kimi, and a great-great-great-grandson of Emperor jin.

According to Kojiki and Nihon Shoki, his father was Hikoushi no Kimi and his mother was Furihime. When Buretsu died, Kanamura recommended Keitai at his age of 58 as a possible heir to the Yamato throne.

Although genealogy information described in Shaku Nihongi leaves room for discussion, many scholars acknowledge the blood relationship with the Okinaga clan, a powerful local ruling family or the collateral line of the Imperial family-governed Oumi region (a part of present-day Shiga Prefecture). This family produced many empresses and consorts throughout history. According to Nihon Shoki, Ohohoto no Kimi, the great-grandfather of Emperor Keitai, married into the Okinaga clan. Keitai's mother, Furihime, was from a local ruling family in Koshi (Echizen province), so his mother brought him to her home after his father's death. Interestingly, abundant traditions relating to the Imperial family have been passed down by shrines and old-established families in both regions.

Korean scholar Kim Yong Woon claims that Japan was a tributary of ancient Korea, and Emperor Keitai was the younger brother of a Korean King. Kim Yong Woon,     Chosun Ilbo (Seoul). July 21, 2009; So Jin Cheol ( ).      (May 22, 1997). Wonkwang University Museum. ; Searchina: 
 Kim has theorized that Emperor Keitai may have been a brother of Muryeong of Baekje, and they may be sons of Konchi of Baekje (, ). If so, then this legendary figure would also be the descended from Munju of Baekje.   ,    (Emperor Keitai is a brother of King Muryeong of Baekje). Pressian (Seoul). December 5, 2008 

Regardless of speculation about Keitai's genealogy, it is well settled that there was an extended period of disputes over the succession which developed after Keitai's death. A confrontation arose between adherents of two branches of the Yamato, pitting the supporters of sons who would become known as Emperor Ankan and Emperor Senka against those who were backers of the son who would become known as Emperor Kimmei. Hall, John Whitney. (1993). 

==Keitai's reign==
Keitai declared his ascension in Kusuba, in the northern part of Kawachi Province (present day Shijonawate, Osaka), and married a younger sister of Buretsu, Princess Tashiraga. It is supposed that his succession was not welcomed by everyone, and it took about 20 years for Keitai to enter Yamato province, near Kawachi and the political center of Japan at the time.

In Keitai's later years, 527 or 528, the Iwai Rebellion broke out in Tsukushi province, Kysh. Keitai assigned Mononobe no Arakahi as Shogun and sent him to Kysh to put down the rebellion.

Among his sons, Emperor Ankan, Emperor Senka and Emperor Kimmei ascended to the throne. 

The actual site of Keitai's grave is not known. This emperor is traditionally venerated at a memorial Shinto shrine (misasagi) at the Ooda Chausuyama kofun in Ibaraki, Osaka. 

The Imperial Household Agency designates this location as Keitai's mausoleum. It is formally named Mishima no Aikinu no misasagi. Ponsonby-Fane, p. 419. 

==Consorts and Children==
Empress: Tashiraka no Himemiko (), daughter of Emperor Ninken
*Prince Amekunioshiharakihironiwa () Emperor Kinmei

Menokohime (), daughter of Owari no Muraji Kusaka ()
*Prince Magari no e () Emperor Ankan
*Prince Hinokuma no Takata () Emperor Senka

Wakakohime (), younger sister ofMio no Tsunoori no Kimi ()
*Prince iratsuko ()
*Princess Izumo ()

Hirohime (), daughter ofSakata no mata ()
*Princess Kamusaki ()
*Princess Manta ()
*Princess Umaguta ()

Ominoiratsume (), daughter ofOkinaga no mate ()
*Princess Sasage () sai

Sekihime (), daughter ofManda no Muraji Omochi ()
*Princess Manda no iratsume ()
*Princess Shirasaka no Ikuhihime ()
*Princess Ono no Wakairatsume ()

Yamatohime (), daughter ofMio no Kimi Katahi ()
*Princess iratsume ()
*Prince Maroko ()
*Prince Mimi ()
*Princess Akahime ()

Haehime (), daughter ofWani no Omi Kawachi ()
*Princess Wakayahime ()
*Princess Tubira no Iratsuko ()
*Prince Atsu ()

Hirohime (), daughter ofNe ()
*Prince Usagi ()
*Prince Nakatsu ()

==See also==
* Emperor of Japan
* List of Emperors of Japan
* Imperial cult

==Notes==

==References==
* Aston, William George. (1896). Nihongi: Chronicles of Japan from the Earliest Times to A.D. 697. London: Kegan Paul, Trench, Trubner. OCLC 448337491
* Brown, Delmer M. and Ichir Ishida, eds. (1979). Gukansh: The Future and the Past. Berkeley: University of California Press. 10-ISBN 0-520-03460-0; 13-ISBN 978-0-520-03460-0; OCLC 251325323
* Hall, John Whitney. (1993). The Cambridge history of Japan: Ancient Japan, Vol. I. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 10-ISBN 0-521-22352-0; 13-ISBN 978-0-521-22352-2
* Kim Yong Woon (2009). History and the Future are One (  ). Seoul.
* Ponsonby-Fane, Richard Arthur Brabazon. (1959). The Imperial House of Japan. Kyoto: Ponsonby Memorial Society. OCLC 194887
* Seeley, Christopher. (1991). A History of Writing in Japan. Leiden: Brill Publishers. 10-ISBN 90-04-09081-9; 13-ISBN 978-9-004-09081-1reprinted by University of Hawaii Press (2000). 10-ISBN 0-8248-2217-X; 13-ISBN 978-0-8248-2217-0
* Titsingh, Isaac. (1834). Nihon Odai Ichiran; ou, Annales des empereurs du Japon. Paris: Royal Asiatic Society, Oriental Translation Fund of Great Britain and Ireland. OCLC 5850691
* Varley, H. Paul. (1980). Jinn Shtki: A Chronicle of Gods and Sovereigns. New York: Columbia University Press. 10-ISBN 0-231-04940-4; 13-ISBN 978-0-231-04940-5; OCLC 59145842

 
 



[[Emperor Ankan]]

 was the 27th emperor of Japan, Imperial Household Agency (Kunaich):  (27) according to the traditional order of succession. Varley, Paul. (1980). Jinn Shtki, p. 120; Titsingh, Isaac. (1834). 

No firm dates can be assigned to this emperor's life or reign, but he is conventionally considered to have reigned from 531536. Ponsonby-Fane, Richard. (1959). The Imperial House of Japan, p. 44. 

==Legendary narrative==

According to the Kojiki Ankan was the elder son of Emperor Keitai, who is considered to have ruled the country during the early-6th century, though there is a paucity of information about him. Kelly, Charles F. "Kofun Culture," Japanese Archaeology. April 27, 2009. When Ankan was 66 years old, Keitai abdicated in favor of him. 

Ankan's contemporary title would not have been tenn, as most historians believe this title was not introduced until the reigns of Emperor Tenmu and Empress Jit. Rather, it was presumably Sumeramikoto or Amenoshita Shiroshimesu kimi (), meaning "the great king who rules all under heaven." Alternatively, Ankan might have been referred to as (/) or the "Great King of Yamato."

The most noteworthy event recorded during his reign was the construction of state granaries in large numbers throughout Japan, indicating the broad reach of imperial power at the time. Mason, Joseph. (2002). 

Memorial Shinto shrine and mausoleum honoring Emperor Ankan.
Ankan's grave is traditionally associated with the Takayatsukiyama kofun in Habikino, Osaka.

==Genealogy==
Empress: Kasuga no Yamada no Himemiko (), daughter of Emperor Ninken

Satehime (), daughter of Kose no Ohito no omi ()

Kakarihime (), younger sister ofSatehime

Yakahime (), daughter of Mononobe no Itabi no omuraji ()

==See also==
* Emperor of Japan
* List of Emperors of Japan
* Imperial cult

==Notes==

==References==
* Aston, William George. (1896). Nihongi: Chronicles of Japan from the Earliest Times to A.D. 697. London: Kegan Paul, Trench, Trubner. OCLC 448337491
* Brown, Delmer M. and Ichir Ishida, eds. (1979). Gukansh: The Future and the Past. Berkeley: University of California Press. 10-ISBN 0-520-03460-0; 13-ISBN 978-0-520-03460-0; OCLC 251325323
* Mason, Joseph Warren Teets. (1935) The Meaning of Shinto: The Primaeval Foundation of Creative Spirit in Modern Japan. New York: E. P. Dutton. by Trafford Publishing, Victoria, British Columbia, 2002. 10-ISBN 1553691393/13-ISBN 9781553691396; OCLC 49602125
* Ponsonby-Fane, Richard Arthur Brabazon. (1959). [http://books.google.com/books?id=SLAeAAAAMAAJ&q=The+Imperial+House+of+Japan&dq=The+Imperial+House+of+Japan&client=firefox-a&pgis=1 The Imperial House of Japan. Kyoto: Ponsonby Memorial Society. OCLC 194887
* Titsingh, Isaac. (1834). Nihon Odai Ichiran; ou, Annales des empereurs du Japon. Paris: Royal Asiatic Society, Oriental Translation Fund of Great Britain and Ireland. OCLC 5850691
* Varley, H. Paul. (1980). Jinn Shtki: A Chronicle of Gods and Sovereigns. New York: Columbia University Press. 10-ISBN 0-231-04940-4; 13-ISBN 978-0-231-04940-5; OCLC 59145842

 
 



[[Emperor Senka]]

, also known as Senkwa, was the 28th emperor of Japan, Imperial Household Agency (Kunaich):  (28) according to the traditional order of succession. Varley, Paul. (1980). Jinn Shtki, p. 121; Titsingh, Isaac. (1834). 

No firm dates can be assigned to this emperor's life or reign, but he is conventionally considered to have reigned from 536539. Ponsonby-Fane, Richard. (1959). The Imperial House of Japan, p. 45. 

==Legendary narrative==
Keitai is considered to have ruled the country during the early-6th century, but there is a paucity of information about him. There is insufficient material available for further verification and study.

When Emperor Ankan died, he had no offspring; and succession passed to his youngest brother who will come to be known as Emperor Senka. Emperor Senka was elderly at the time of his enthronement; and his reign is said to have endured for only three years.

Senka's contemporary title would not have been tenn, as most historians believe this title was not introduced until the reigns of Emperor Tenmu and Empress Jit. Rather, it was presumably Sumeramikoto or Amenoshita Shiroshimesu kimi (), meaning "the great king who rules all under heaven." Alternatively, Senka might have been referred to as (/) or the "Great King of Yamato."

During this reign, Soga no Iname Titsingh, p. 33. is believed to have been the first verifiable "Great Minister" or Omi (also identified as -omi).

This emperor is traditionally venerated at a memorial Shinto shrine (misasagi) at Nara. The Imperial Household Agency designates this location as Senka's mausoleum. It is formally named Musa no Tsukisaka no e no misasagi; Ponsonby-Fane, p. 419. however, the actual sites of the graves of the early emperors remain problematic, according to some historians and archaeologists.

==See also==
* Emperor of Japan
* List of Emperors of Japan
* Imperial cult

==Notes==

==References==
* Aston, William George. (1896). Nihongi: Chronicles of Japan from the Earliest Times to A.D. 697. London: Kegan Paul, Trench, Trubner. OCLC 448337491
* Brown, Delmer M. and Ichir Ishida, eds. (1979). Gukansh: The Future and the Past. Berkeley: University of California Press. 10-ISBN 0-520-03460-0; 13-ISBN 978-0-520-03460-0; OCLC 251325323
* Ponsonby-Fane, Richard Arthur Brabazon. (1959). The Imperial House of Japan. Kyoto: Ponsonby Memorial Society. OCLC 194887
* Titsingh, Isaac. (1834). Nihon Odai Ichiran; ou, Annales des empereurs du Japon. Paris: Royal Asiatic Society, Oriental Translation Fund of Great Britain and Ireland. OCLC 5850691
* Varley, H. Paul. (1980). Jinn Shtki: A Chronicle of Gods and Sovereigns. New York: Columbia University Press. 10-ISBN 0-231-04940-4; 13-ISBN 978-0-231-04940-5; OCLC 59145842

 
 



[[Eastmoreland, Portland, Oregon]]

Eastmoreland is an early-twentieth century, tree-filled neighborhood in inner southeast Portland, Oregon, United States. The neighborhood is bounded on the north by SE Woodstock Boulevard. The western boundary is a combination of SE 28th Avenue, SE Bybee Boulevard, and SE 27th Avenue. SE Crystal Springs Boulevard serves as the neighborhood's southern boundary, and gradually curves north to Eastmoreland's eastern boundary, SE 39th Avenue, recently renamed SE Csar E. Chvez Boulevard. The Reed College campus is located on the opposite side of SE Woodstock, bordering northern Eastmoreland.

Eastmoreland is filled with trees and lush landscaping. Public parks in Eastmoreland include Crystal Springs Rhododendron Garden (1923), Eastmoreland Golf Course (1916), and Berkeley Park (1941). There is also a median on Reed College Place which is owned by Portland Department of Transportation and maintained by Portland Parks & Recreation.

==References==

==External links==
* Portland Maps map of Eastmoreland



[[Elyssa Davalos]]

Elyssa Davalos (born May 30, 1959) is a former American television and movie actress. Her father is actor Richard Davalos. She is the mother of actress Alexa Davalos, from her marriage to photographer Jeff Dunas.

==Television==
* How the West Was Won (19761979)
* The Hardy Boys/Nancy Drew Mysteries (1978) episode "The Mystery of King Tut's Tomb"
* MacGyver (19871988) as Nicole Anne "Nikki" Carpenter/she also played Lisa Kohler/Kosov in the double episode "Lost Love"
* The Paper Chase (1978) as Nancy Burch in the episode "Nancy"
* Knight Rider episode "Blind Spot", guest role as blind Julie Robinson (1983)
* Scarecrow and Mrs. King (19851986)
* Beauty and the Beast (1988) as Lisa Campbell in the episode "Arabesque"
* Riptide (1984) as Jody, the dolphin trainer in the episode "Something Fishy"

==Movies==
* Nancy Drew (2007 film) as Palms Resort Manager
* Urban Chaos Theory (2000)
* A House in the Hills (1993)
* Jericho Fever (1993)
* Riviera (1987)
* Herbie Goes Bananas (1980)
* The Apple Dumpling Gang Rides Again (1979)
* Wild and Wooly (1978)

==External links==
* 



[[Emil Theodor Kocher]]

Emil Theodor Kocher (25 August 1841  27 July 1917) was a Swiss physician and medical researcher who received the 1909 Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine for his work in the physiology, pathology and surgery of the thyroid. Among his many accomplishments are the introduction and promotion of aseptic surgery and scientific methods in surgery, specifically reducing the mortality of thyroidectomies below 1% in his operations.

He was the first Swiss citizen and the first surgeon to ever receive a Nobel prize. He was considered a pioneer and leader in the field of surgery in his time. 

== Early Life and Personal life ==

=== Childhood ===
Kocher's father was Jakob Alexander Kocher (1814-1893), the sixth of seven children to Samuel Kocher (1771-1842), a carpenter, and Barbara Sutter (1772-1849). Jakob Alexander Kocher was a railway engineer and he moved in 1845 to Burgdorf, Switzerland (near Bern) because of his job as regional engineer of Emmental (Bezirksingenieur). He was named chief engineer for street and water in the canton of Bern at an age of only 34 years and he moved with his family to the capital, the city of Bern. In 1858 he left the states service and managed several engineering projects around Bern. 

Theodor Kocher's mother was Maria Kocher (ne Wermuth) living from 1820 to 1900. She was a very religious woman and part of the Moravian Church; together with Jakob Alexander, she raised a family of five sons and one daughter (Theodor Kocher was the second son).

Theodor Kocher was born on 25 August 1841 in Bern and baptized in the local Bern Minster on 16 September 1841. Together with the family, he moved to Burgdorf in 1845 where he started school. Later his family moved back to Bern where he went to middle and high school (Realschule and Literaturgymnasium) where he was the first of his class. During high school, Theodor was interested in many subjects and was specifically drawn to art and classical philology but finally decided to become a doctor. 

=== Studies ===
He started his studies after obtaining the Swiss Matura in 1858 at the University of Bern where Anton Biermer and Hermann Askan Demme were teaching, two professors that impressed him most. He was a studious and dedicated student but still became a member of the Schweizerischer Zofingerverein, a Swiss fraternity.
He obtained his doctorate in Bern in 1865 (March 1865) or 1866 While the dissertation was published in 1866 and the HLS refers to 1866 as date of promotion and 1865 as date of completing his studies, all other sources point to 1865 as the date where Kocher obtained his doctorate with his dissertation about Behandlung der croupsen Pneumonie mit Veratrum-Prparaten under professor Biermer with the predicate summa cum laude unamimiter. 

In spring 1865, Kocher followed his teacher Biermer to Zurich where Theodor Billroth was director of the hospital influenced Kocher significantly. Kocher then proceeded to start a journey through Europe to meet several of the most famous surgeons of the time. It is not clear how Kocher financed his trip but according to Bonjour (1981) he received money from an unknown female Suisse romande philanthropist who also supported his friend Marc Dufour and was probably a member of the Moravian Church. In October 1865, he traveled to Berlin, passing through Leipzig and visiting an old friend from high school, Hans Blum. In Berlin, he studied under Bernhard von Langenbeck and applied for an assistant position with Langenbeck and Rudolf Virchow. Since there was no position available, in April 1867 Kocher moved on to London where he first met Jonathan Hutchinson and then worked for Henry Thompson and John Erichsen. Furthermore, he was interested in the work of Isaac Baker Brown and Thomas Spencer Wells, who also invited Kocher to go to the opera with his family. In July 1867, he traveled on to Paris to meet Auguste Nlaton, Auguste Verneuil and Louis Pasteur. During his travels, he did not only learn novel techniques but also got to know leading surgeons in person and learned to speak English fluently which allowed him later on to follow the scientific progress in the English speaking world with ease. 

Once returned to Bern, Kocher prepared for his habilitation and on 12 October 1867, he wrote a petition to the ministry of education to award him the venia docendi which was granted to him. He became assistant to Georg Lcke who left Bern in 1872 to become professor in Strasbourg. Choong (2009) claims that Kocher became assistant in Bern already in 1866 but according to Bonjour, Kocher was then still in Berlin Kocher was hoping to get his position, but at the time it was customary to appoint German professors to positions at Swiss universities. Accordingly, the faculty suggested Franz Knig before Kocher to follow Lcke. However, the students and assistants as well as many doctors preferred Kocher and started a petition to the Bernese government to choose Kocher. Also the press was in favor of Kocher and several famous foreign surgeons, such as Langenbeck from Berlin and Billroth from Vienna, wrote letters in support of Kocher. Under this public pressure, the Bernese government (Regierungsrat) chose Kocher as the successor of Lcke as Ordinary Professor of Surgery and Director of the University Surgical Clinic at the Inselspital on 16 March 1872, despite a different proposal by the faculty. 

=== Personal life ===
In 1869, he married Marie Witschi-Courant Several alternative spellings to Marie Witschi-Courant exist, for example
 Maria Witschi (ref hls),
 Witchi (ref choong2009),
 Witchi-Cournant (ref tan2008),
 Maria Witschi but in letters "Marie" (ref http://katalog.burgerbib.ch/deskriptordetail.aspx?ID=137721
 (1841 - 1921) or (1850 - 1925). The Bernese Burgerbibliothek give 1850-1925 as her living years and also Bonjour 1981 writes (pg 86) that she was nineteen in 1869 but does not give a date of death She was the daughter of Johannes Witschi who was a merchant and she had three sons together with Kocher. The Kochers first lived at the Marktgasse in Bern and moved in 1875 to a bigger house in the Villette. The house became a place for friends, colleagues and guests to gather and many patients from Kocher's clinic were invited to dine at the Villette. 

Like his mother, Kocher was a deeply religious man and also part of the Moravian Church. This was an uncommon trait that not many colleagues and co-workers shared and until his death, Kocher attributed all his successes and failures to God. He thought that the rise of materialism (especially in science) was a great evil, and he attributed the outbreak of the First World War. 

Kocher was involved in the education of his three sons and played tennis with them and went horseback riding with them. The eldest son Albert (1872-1941) would follow him to the surgical clinic in Bern and become Assistant Professor of Surgery. 

On the evening of 23 July 1917, he was called into the Inselspital for an emergency. Kocher executed the surgery but afterwards felt unwell and went to bed, working on scientific notes. He then fell unconscious and died on 27 July 1917. 

== Career ==

The call for an ordinary professorship at the University of Bern at the age of 30 was the first big career step for Theodor Kocher. In the 45 years he served as professor at the university, he oversaw the re-building of the famous Bernese Inselspital, published 249 scholarly articles and books, trained numerous medical doctors and treated thousands of patients. He made major contributions to the fields of applied surgery, neurosurgery and, especially, thyroid surgery and endocrinology. For his work he received, among other honors, the 1909 Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine. According to Asher, the field of surgery has transformed radically during the time of Theodore Kocher and later generations will build on the foundations created by Kocher  if a future historian wanted to describe the state of surgery at the beginning of the 20th century, he only need mention Kocher's Text-Book of Operative Surgery. 

Three main factors contributed to Kocher's success as a surgeon, according to Bonjour (1981). The first factor was his consequent implementation of antiseptic wound treatment which prevented infection and later death of the patients. The second factor, according to Erich Hintzsche, was his monitoring of the anesthesia where he used special masks and later used local anesthesia for goitre surgery which decreased or removed the dangers of anesthesia. As a third factor, Hintzsche mentions the minimal blood loss which Kocher achieved. Even the smallest source of blood during surgery was precisely controlled and inhibited by Kocher, initially because he thought that decomposing blood would constitute an infection risk for the patient. 

=== Early career ===
Kocher first attained international recognition with his method to reset a dislocated shoulder published in 1870. The new procedure was much less painful and safer than the traditionally used procedure and could be performed by a single physician. Kocher developed the procedure through his knowledge of anatomy. In the same period, Kocher also studied the phenomena of bullet wounds and how they can cause bone fractures. From these studies resulted one public lecture in 1874 Die Verbesserung der Geschosse vom Standpunkt der Humanitaet and an 1875 manuscript Ueber die Sprengwirkung der modernen Kriegsgewehrgeschosse. He showed that small caliber bullets were less harmful and recommended to use bullets with slower speed. 

=== Relocation of Inselspital and call to Prague ===
As soon as Kocher became professor, he wanted to modernize the practices at the Bernese Inselspital. He noticed that the old building did not suffice the modern standards and was too small  half of the patients seeking medical attention had to be turned away. In spring 1878, he visited several institutions around Europe to evaluate novel innovations for hospitals and implement them if possible in Bern. He wrote down his observations in a lengthy report for the Bernese government, giving instructions even for architectonic details. In a speech on 15 November 1878, he informed the general public about the pressing needs of a new hospital building. Finally, he used his call to Prague to pressure the government: He would only stay in Bern if he was either granted 75 beds in the new building or would get money to increase his facilities in the old building. Finally, in the winter of 1884/1885 the new building was finished and the Inselspital could be moved. 

At the time, Prague had the third largest university clinic in the German speaking world and it was a great honor for Kocher when he received a call as a professor to Prague in spring 1880. Many colleagues, especially international ones, urged Kocher to accept while Bernese doctors and colleagues begged him to stay. Kocher used this call, to demand certain improvements for the university clinic from the Bernese government. They accepted all his demands, the government promised him to begin building the new Inselspital building the next year, increased his credit for surgical equipment and books to 1000 franks and increased the number of beds for Kocher in the new Inselspital. Thus, Kocher decided to stay and many Bernese and Swiss students and professionals thanked him for it. He cited the affection of his students as one of his main reasons for staying. The university students organized a torchlight procession on 8 June 1880 in his honor. 

=== Aseptic Surgery ===
It is unclear whether Kocher directly knew Joseph Lister, who pioneered the antiseptic (using chemical means to kill bacteria) method, but Kocher was in correspondence with him. Kocher had recognized the importance of aseptic techniques early on, introducing them to his peers at a time when this was considered revolutionary. In a hospital report from 1868, he attributed the lower mortality directly to the "antiseptic Lister's wound bandaging method" and he could later as director of the clinic order strict adherence to the antiseptic method. Bonjour (1981) describes how his assistants were worried about wound infection for fear of having to explain their failure to Kocher himself. Kocher made it a matter of principle to investigate the cause of every wound infection and remove every potential source of infection, he also banned visitors from his surgeries for this reason. 

He published multiple works on aseptic treatment and surgery. 

=== Contributions to Neurosurgery ===

Kocher also contributed significantly to the field of neurology and neurosurgery. In this area, his research was pioneering and covered the areas of concussion, neurosurgery and intracranial pressure (ICP). Furthermore, he investigated the surgical treatment of epilepsy and spinal and cranial trauma. He found that in some cases, the epilepsy patients had a brain tumor which could be surgically removed. He hypothesized that epilepsy was caused by an increase in ICP and believed that drainage of cerebrospinal fluid could cure epilepsy. 

The Japanese surgeon Hayazo Ito came to Bern in 1896 in order to perform experimental research on epilepsy. Kocher was especially interested in the ICP during experimentally induced epilepsy and after Ito returned to Japan, he performed over 100 surgeries in epilepsy patients. 

The American surgeon Harvey Cushing spent several month in the lab of Kocher in 1900, performing cerebral surgery and first encountering the Cushing reflex which describes the relationship between blood pressure and intracranial pressure. Kocher later also found that decompressive craniectomy was an effective method to lower ICP. 

In his surgery textbook Chirurgische Operationslehre, Kocher dedicated 141 pages of 1060 pages to surgery of the nervous system. It included methods of exploration and decompression of the brain. 

=== Contributions to Thyroid surgery ===

Thyroid surgery, which was mostly performed as treatment of goitre with a complete thyroidectomy when possible, was considered a risky procedure when Kocher started his work. Some estimates put the mortality of thyroidectomy as high as 75% in 1872. Indeed, the operation was believed to be one of the most dangerous operations and in France it was prohibited by the Academy of Medicine at the time. Through application of modern surgical methods, such as antiseptic wound treatment and minimizing blood loss, and the famous slow and precise style of Kocher, he managed to reduce the mortality of this operation from an already low 13% (compared to contemporary standards) to less than 0.5% by 1912. By then, Kocher had performed over 5000 thyroid excisions. The success of Kocher's methods, especially when compared to operations performed by Theodor Billroth who was also performing thyroidectomies at that time, was described by William Stewart Halsted as follows:

Kocher and others later discovered that the complete removal of the thyroid could lead to cretinism (termed cachexia strumipriva by Kocher) caused by a deficiency of thyroid hormones. The phenomena was reported to Kocher first in 1874 by the general practitioner August Fetscherin and later in 1882 by Jacques-Louis Reverdin together with his assistant Auguste Reverdin (1848-1908). Reverdin met Kocher on 7 September in Geneva at the international hygienic congress (internationaler Hygienekongress) and expressed his concerns about complete removal of the thyroid to Kocher. Kocher then tried to contact 77 of his 102 former patients and found signs of a physical and mental decay in those cases where he had removed the thyroid gland completely. Ironically, it was his precise surgery that allowed Kocher to remove the thyroid gland almost completely and led to the severe side effects of cretinism.

Kocher came to the conclusion that a complete removal of the thyroid (as it was common to perform at the time because the function of the thyroid was not yet clear) was not advisable, a finding that he made public on 4 April 1883 in a lecture to the German Society of Surgery and also published in 1883 under the title Ueber Kropfexstirpation und ihre Folgen. Reverdin had already made his findings public on 13 September 1882 and published further articles on this topic in 1883; yet still Kocher never acknowledged Reverdin's priority in this discovery. At the time, the reactions to Kocher's lecture were mixed, some people asserted that goitre and cretinism were different stages of same disease and that cretinism would have occurred independently of the removal of the thyroid in the cases which Kocher described. In the long run however, these observations contributed to a more complete understanding of thyroid function and were one of the early hints of a connection between the thyroid and congenital cretinism. These findings finally enabled thyroid hormone replacement therapies for a variety of thyroid related diseases. 

=== Further contributions to science ===

Kocher published works on a number of subjects other than the thyroid gland, including hemostasis, antiseptic treatments, surgical infectious diseases, on gunshot wounds, acute osteomyelitis, the theory of strangulated hernia, and abdominal surgery. The prize money, from the Nobel prize he received, helped him to establish the Kocher Institute in Bern. 

A number of instruments (for example the craniometer ) and surgical techniques (for example, the Kocher manoeuvre, and kocher incision) are named after him, as well as the Kocher-Debre-Semelaigne syndrome. The Kocher manoeuvre is still a standard practice in orthopaedics. Kocher is also credited for the invention of the Kocher's Surgical Clamp in 1882, which he used to prevent blood loss during surgery. 

One of his main works, Chirurgische Operationslehre (Text-Book of Operative Surgery Text-Book of Operative Surgery ), was published through six editions and translated into many languages. 

During his life, Kocher published 249 articles and books and supervised more than 130 doctoral candidates. He was rector of the university in 1878 and 1903. He was president of the Bernese and the Swiss physicians association and co-founded the Swiss society for surgery in 1913 and became its first president. 

In 1904 / 1905 he built a private clinic called "Ulmenhof" which had space for 25 patients. Here Kocher catered to the wealthier patients, which in many cases were international. He also treated the wife of Lenin, Nadezhda Krupskaya and operated on her in Bern (in 1913 ). 

== Legacy ==
Bust of Theodor Kocher (created by Karl Hnny)

Kocher was also a famous and loved teacher. During nearly 100 semesters he taught his knowledge to about 10 000 students of the University of Bern. He was able to inspire students and taught them to think clearly and logically. Specifically, Kocher also taught a generation of Jewish-Russian students who could not study in Russia. This association with Russia has also led the Russian geographic society to name a volcano after him (in the area of Ujun-Choldongi). Among his many local and international students were
Carl Arend (Bern),
Oscar Bernhard (St. Moritz), 
Andrea Crotti (Ohio),
Gustave Dardel (Bern),
Carl Garr (Bonn),
Gottlieb and Max Feurer (St. Gallen),
Anton Fonio (Langnau), 
Walter Grbly (Arbon),
Carl Kaufmann (Zurich),
Albert Kocher (Bern),
Joseph Kopp (Luzern),
Ernst Kummer (Geneva),
Otto Lanz (Amsterdam), 
Edmond Lardy (Geneva) 
Jakob Lauper (Interlaken),
Albert Lthi (Thun),
Hermann Matti (Bern),
Charles Pettavel (Neuenburg),
Paul Pfhler (Olten),
Fritz de Quervain (La Chaux de Fonds / Basel / Bern),
August Rickli (Langenthal),
Ernst Rieben (Interlaken),
August Rollier (Leysin), 
Csar Roux (Lausanne),
Karl Schuler (Rorschach), 
Fritz Steinmann (Bern),
Albert Vogel (Luzern),
Hans Wildbolz (Bern) as well as 
the American neurosurgeon Harvey Cushing. Other notable students of his include Hayazo Ito (1865 - 1929) and S. Berezowsky which also spread his techniques in their respective home-countries (Japan and Russia). 

Kocher's name is living on with the Theodor Kocher Institute, the Kochergasse and the Kocher Park in Bern. In the Inselspital, there is a bust of Kocher, created by Karl Hnny in 1927. In the Kocher Park there is another bust, created by Max Fueter. In the Manchuria, a volcano is named after Kocher. 

In 1950, the Swiss historian Edgar Bonjour (1989-1991) who was married to Dora Kocher Bonjour, Edgar in the HLS wrote a 136-page monograph on Kocher's life that was extended again in 1981. 

=== Eponyms ===
* Kocher's forceps - a surgical instrument with serrated blades and interlocking teeth at the tips used to control bleeding http://www.merriam-webster.com/medical/kocher%27s%20forceps 
* Kocher's point - a common entry point for an intraventricular 
* Kocher manoeuvre - a surgical manoeuvre to expose structures in the retroperitoneum
* KocherDebreSemelaigne syndrome - hypothyroidism in infancy or childhood characterised by lower extremity or generalized muscular hypertrophy, myxoedema, short stature and creationism
* Kocher criteria - used to differentiate septic arthritis from transient synovitis of the hip in children

== Honors ==

* Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine (1909)
* Hon FRCS (Fellow of the Royal College of Surgeons, 25 July 1900) 
* President of the Bernese and Swiss physician societies 
* President of the Swiss society for surgery 
* President of the German society for surgery (1902) 
* Honorary member of the German society for surgery (1902) 
* Chairman of the first international surgery conference in Brussels 1905 
* several honorary memberships and honorary doctorates 

== Works ==
During his life, Kocher published 249 articles and books and supervised more than 130 doctoral candidates. The following is an incomplete list of his most important works:
* Die antiseptische Wundbehandlung (Antiseptic wound treatment; 1881)
* Vorlesungen ber chirurgische Infektionskrankheiten (Lectures on surgical infections; 1895)
* Chiruigische Operationslehre (1894; Eng. trans. as Textbook of Operative Surgery, 2 vols., 1911)

== Notes ==
 

== References ==

== Further reading ==
* 
* Nobel Lectures, Physiology or Medicine 1901-1921, Elsevier, Amsterdam, 1967
* 
* 
* 
* 

== External links ==
*Theodor Kocher Institute of the University of Bern

* 
* 



[[Eight queens puzzle]]

The eight queens puzzle is the problem of placing eight chess queens on an 88 chessboard so that no two queens threaten each other. Thus, a solution requires that no two queens share the same row, column, or diagonal. The eight queens puzzle is an example of the more general n-queens problem of placing n queens on an nn chessboard, where solutions exist for all natural numbers n with the exception of n=2 or n=3. Hoffman, et al. "Construction for the Solutions of the m Queens Problem". Mathematics Magazine, Vol. XX (1969), p. 6672. 

==History==
Chess composer Max Bezzel published the eight queens puzzle in 1848. Franz Nauck published the first solutions in 1850. W. W. Rouse Ball (1960) The Eight Queens Problem, in Mathematical Recreations and Essays, Macmillan, New York, pp 165-171. Nauck also extended the puzzle to the n-queens problem, with n queens on a chessboard of n  n squares.

Since then, many mathematicians, including Carl Friedrich Gauss, have worked on both the eight queens puzzle and its generalized n-queens version. In 1874, S. Gunther proposed a method using determinants to find solutions. J.W.L. Glaisher refined Gunther's approach.

In 1972 Edsger Dijkstra used this problem to illustrate the power of what he called structured programming. He published a highly detailed description of a depth-first backtracking algorithm.2

==Solution construction==
The problem can be quite computationally expensive as there are 4,426,165,368 (i.e., 64C8) possible arrangements of eight queens on an 88 board, but only 92 solutions. It is possible to use shortcuts that reduce computational requirements or rules of thumb that avoids brute-force computational techniques. For example, just by applying a simple rule that constrains each queen to a single column (or row), though still considered brute force, it is possible to reduce the number of possibilities to just 16,777,216 (that is, 88) possible combinations. Generating permutations further reduces the possibilities to just 40,320 (that is, 8!), which are then checked for diagonal attacks.

These brute-force algorithms are computationally manageable for n = 8, but would be intractable for problems of n  20, as 20! = 2.433 * 1018. Advancements for this and other toy problems are the development and application of heuristics (rules of thumb) that yield solutions to the n queens puzzle at a small fraction of the computational requirements.

This heuristic solves N queens for any N  4. It forms the list of numbers for vertical positions (rows) of queens with horizontal position (column) simply increasing. N is 8 for eight queens puzzle.

# If the remainder from dividing N by 6 is not 2 or 3 then the list is simply all even numbers followed by all odd numbers  N
# Otherwise, write separate lists of even and odd numbers (i.e. 2,4,6,8 - 1,3,5,7)
# If the remainder is 2, swap 1 and 3 in odd list and move 5 to the end (i.e. 3,1,7,5)
# If the remainder is 3, move 2 to the end of even list and 1,3 to the end of odd list (i.e. 4,6,8,2 - 5,7,1,3)
# Append odd list to the even list and place queens in the rows given by these numbers, from left to right (i.e. a2, b4, c6, d8, e3, f1, g7, h5)

For N = 8 this results in the solution shown above. A few more examples follow.

* 14 queens (remainder 2): 2, 4, 6, 8, 10, 12, 14, 3, 1, 7, 9, 11, 13, 5.
* 15 queens (remainder 3): 4, 6, 8, 10, 12, 14, 2, 5, 7, 9, 11, 13, 15, 1, 3.
* 20 queens (remainder 2): 2, 4, 6, 8, 10, 12, 14, 16, 18, 20, 3, 1, 7, 9, 11, 13, 15, 17, 19, 5.

Martin Richards published a program to count solutions to the n-queens problem using bitwise operations. Martin Richards. Backtracking Algorithms in MCPL using Bit Patterns and Recursion. University of Cambridge Computer Laboratory. http://www.cl.cam.ac.uk/~mr10/backtrk.pdf 

=== Solutions ===
The eight queens puzzle has 92 distinct solutions. If solutions that differ only by symmetry operations (rotations and reflections) of the board are counted as one, the puzzle has 12 fundamental solutions.

A fundamental solution usually has eight variants (including its original form) obtained by rotating 90, 180, or 270 degrees and then reflecting each of the four rotational variants in a mirror in a fixed position. However, should a solution be equivalent to its own 90 degree rotation (as happens to one solution with five queens on a 5x5 board) that fundamental solution will have only two variants (itself and its reflection). Should a solution be equivalent to its own 180 degree rotation (but not to its 90 degree rotation) it will have four variants (itself, its reflection, its 90 degree rotation and the reflection of that). It is not possible for a solution to be equivalent to its own reflection (except at n=1) because that would require two queens to be facing each other. Of the 12 fundamental solutions to the problem with eight queens on an 8x8 board, exactly one is equal to its own 180 degree rotation, and none are equal to their 90 degree rotation, thus the number of distinct solutions is 11*8 + 1*4 = 92 (where the 8 is derived from four 90-degree rotational positions and their reflections, and the 4 is derived from two 180-degree rotational positions and their reflections).

The different fundamental solutions are presented below:

Solution 10 has the additional property that no three queens are in a straight line.

==Explicit solutions==
Explicit solutions exist for placing n queens on an n  n board for all n  4, requiring no combinatorial search whatsoever. Explicit Solutions to the N-Queens Problem for all N, Bo Bernhardsson (1991), Department of Automatic Control, Lund Institute of Technology, Sweden. 
The explicit solutions exhibit stair-stepped patterns, as in the following examples for n = 8, 9 and 10:

The examples above can be obtained with the following formulas. Let (i, j) be the square in column i and row j on the n  n chessboard, k an integer.

# If n is even and n  6k + 2, then place queens at (i, 2i) and (n/2 + i, 2i - 1) for i = 1,2,...,n/2.
# If n is even and n  6k, then place queens at (i, 1 + (2i + n/2 - 3 (mod n))) and (n + 1 - i, n - (2i + n/2 - 3 (mod n))) for i = 1,2,...,n/2.
# If n is odd, then use one of the patterns above for (n - 1) and add a queen at (n, n).

==Counting solutions==
The following table gives the number of solutions for placing n queens on an n  n board, both fundamental and all , for n=114, 2426.

n: 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 .. 24 25 26 
 fundamental: 1 0 0 1 2 1 6 12 46 92 341 1,787 9,233 45,752 .. 28,439,272,956,934 275,986,683,743,434 2,789,712,466,510,289 
 all: 1 0 0 2 10 4 40 92 352 724 2,680 14,200 73,712 365,596 .. 227,514,171,973,736 2,207,893,435,808,352 22,317,699,616,364,044 

Note that the six queens puzzle has fewer solutions than the five queens puzzle.

There is currently no known formula for the exact number of solutions.

==Related problems==
*Higher dimensions
:Find the number of non-attacking queens that can be placed in a d-dimensional chess space of size n. More than n queens can be placed in some higher dimensions (the smallest example is four non-attacking queens in a 3  3  3 chess space), and it is in fact known that for any k, there are higher dimensions where n'k queens do not suffice to attack all spaces. J. Barr and S. Rao (2006), The n-Queens Problem in Higher Dimensions, Elemente der Mathematik, vol 61 (4), pp. 133137. 
*Using pieces other than queens
:On an 88 board one can place 32 knights, or 14 bishops, 16 kings or eight rooks, so that no two pieces attack each other. Fairy chess pieces have also been substituted for queens. In the case of knights, an easy solution is to place one on each square of a given color, since they move only to the opposite color. The solution is also easy for rooks and kings. Eight rooks can be placed along a long diagonal (amongst thousands of other solutions), and 16 kings are placed on the board by dividing it into 2 by 2 squares and placing the kings at equivalent points on each square.
*Permutation matrix
:In mathematics, a permutation matrix can be regarded geometrically as a set of n points lying on the squares of a nxn chessboard, such that each row or column contains only one point. Thus, an order-n permutation matrix is a solution to an n-rooks puzzle.
*Nonstandard boards
:Plya studied the n queens problem on a toroidal ("donut-shaped") board and showed that there is a solution on an nn board if and only if n is not divisible by 2 or 3. G. Plya, Uber die "doppelt-periodischen" Losungen des n-Damen-Problems, George Plya:
 Collected papers Vol. IV, G-C. Rota, ed., MIT Press, Cambridge, London, 1984, pp. 237247
 In 2009 Pearson and Pearson algorithmically populated three-dimensional boards (nnn) with n2 queens, and proposed that multiples of these can yield solutions for a four-dimensional version of the puzzle.
*Domination
:Given an nn board, the domination number is the minimum number of queens (or other pieces) needed to attack or occupy every square. For n=8 the queen's domination number is 5.
*Nine queens problem
:Place nine queens and one pawn on an 88 board in such a way that queens don't attack each other. Further generalization of the problem (complete solution is currently unknown): given an nn chess board and m > n queens, find the minimum number of pawns, so that the m queens and the pawns can be set up on the board in such a way that no two queens attack each other.
*Queens and knights problem
:Place m queens and m knights on an nn board so that no piece attacks another.
*Magic squares
: In 1992, Demirrs, Rafraf, and Tanik published a method for converting some magic squares into n queens solutions, and vice versa. O. Demirrs, N. Rafraf, and M.M. Tanik. Obtaining n-queens solutions
from magic squares and constructing magic squares from n-queens solutions. Journal of Recreational Mathematics, 24:272280, 1992 
*Latin squares
: In an nn matrix, place each digit 1 through n in n locations in the matrix so that no two instances of the same digit are in the same row or column.
*Exact cover
: Consider a matrix with one primary column for each of the n ranks of the board, one primary column for each of the n files, and one secondary column for each of the 4n-6 nontrivial diagonals of the board. The matrix has n2 rows: one for each possible queen placement, and each row has a 1 in the columns corresponding to that square's rank, file, and diagonals and a 0 in all the other columns. Then the n queens problem is equivalent to choosing a subset of the rows of this matrix such that every primary column has a 1 in precisely one of the chosen rows and every secondary column has a 1 in at most one of the chosen rows; this is an example of a generalized exact cover problem, of which sudoku is another example.

==Exercise in algorithm design==
Finding all solutions to the eight queens puzzle is a good example of a simple but nontrivial problem. For this reason, it is often used as an example problem for various programming techniques, including nontraditional approaches such as constraint programming, logic programming or genetic algorithms. Most often, it is used as an example of a problem that can be solved with a recursive algorithm, by phrasing the n queens problem inductively in terms of adding a single queen to any solution to the problem of placing n&minus;1 queens on an n-by-n chessboard. The induction bottoms out with the solution to the 'problem' of placing 0 queens on the chessboard, which is the empty chessboard.

This technique is much more efficient than the nave brute-force search algorithm, which considers all 648 = 248 = 281,474,976,710,656 possible blind placements of eight queens, and then filters these to remove all placements that place two queens either on the same square (leaving only 64!/56! = 178,462,987,637,760 possible placements) or in mutually attacking positions. This very poor algorithm will, among other things, produce the same results over and over again in all the different permutations of the assignments of the eight queens, as well as repeating the same computations over and over again for the different sub-sets of each solution. A better brute-force algorithm places a single queen on each row, leading to only 88 = 224 = 16,777,216 blind placements.

It is possible to do much better than this.
One algorithm solves the eight rooks puzzle by generating the permutations of the numbers 1 through 8 (of which there are 8! = 40,320), and uses the elements of each permutation as indices to place a queen on each row.
Then it rejects those boards with diagonal attacking positions.
The backtracking depth-first search program, a slight improvement on the permutation method, constructs the search tree by considering one row of the board at a time, eliminating most nonsolution board positions at a very early stage in their construction.
Because it rejects rook and diagonal attacks even on incomplete boards, it examines only 15,720 possible queen placements.
A further improvement, which examines only 5,508 possible queen
placements, is to combine the permutation based method with the early
pruning method: the permutations are generated depth-first, and
the search space is pruned if the partial permutation produces a
diagonal attack.
Constraint programming can also be very effective on this problem.

An alternative to exhaustive search is an 'iterative repair' algorithm, which typically starts with all queens on the board, for example with one queen per column. A Polynomial Time Algorithm for the N-Queen Problem by Rok Sosic and Jun Gu, 1990. Describes run time for upto 500,000 Queens which was the max they could run due to memory constraints. It then counts the number of conflicts (attacks), and uses a heuristic to determine how to improve the placement of the queens. The 'minimum-conflicts' heuristic &mdash; moving the piece with the largest number of conflicts to the square in the same column where the number of conflicts is smallest &mdash; is particularly effective: it finds a solution to the 1,000,000 queen problem in less than 50 steps on average. This assumes that the initial configuration is 'reasonably good' &mdash; if a million queens all start in the same row, it will obviously take at least 999,999 steps to fix it. A 'reasonably good' starting point can for instance be found by putting each queen in its own row and column so that it conflicts with the smallest number of queens already on the board.

Note that 'iterative repair', unlike the 'backtracking' search outlined above, does not guarantee a solution: like all hillclimbing (i.e., greedy) procedures, it may get stuck on a local optimum (in which case the algorithm may be restarted with a different initial configuration). On the other hand, it can solve problem sizes that are several orders of magnitude beyond the scope of a depth-first search.

This animation uses backtracking to solve the problem. A queen is placed in a column that is known not to cause conflict. If a column is not found the program returns to the last good state and then tries a different column.

==Sample program==
The following is a Pascal program by Niklaus Wirth. Wirth, 1976, p. 145 It finds one solution to the eight queens problem.

program eightqueen1(output);
 
var i : integer; q : boolean;
 a : array[ 1 .. 8] of boolean;
 b : array[ 2 .. 16] of boolean;
 c : array[ -7 .. 7] of boolean;
 x : array[ 1 .. 8] of integer;
 
procedure try( i : integer; var q : boolean);
 var j : integer;
 begin 
 j := 0;
 repeat 
 j := j + 1; 
 q := false;
 if a[ j] and b[ i + j] and c[ i - j] then
 begin 
 x[ i ] := j;
 a[ j ] := false; 
 b[ i + j] := false; 
 c[ i - j] := false;
 if i < 8 then
 begin
 try( i + 1, q);
 if not q then
 begin 
 a[ j] := true; 
 b[ i + j] := true; 
 c[ i - j] := true;
 end
 end 
 else 
 q := true
 end
 until q or (j = 8);
 end;
 
begin
for i := 1 to 8 do a[ i] := true;
for i := 2 to 16 do b[ i] := true;
for i := -7 to 7 do c[ i] := true;
try( 1, q);
if q then
 for i := 1 to 8 do write( x[ i]:4);
writeln
end.

==See also==
* Mathematical game
* Mathematical puzzle
* No-three-in-line problem
* Rook polynomial

==References==

==Further reading==
* Bell, Jordan and Stevens, Brett, A survey of known results and research areas for n-queens, Discrete Mathematics, Vol. 309, Issue 1, 6 January 2009, 1-31.
* Watkins, John J. (2004). Across the Board: The Mathematics of Chess Problems. Princeton: Princeton University Press. ISBN 0-691-11503-6.
* O.-J. Dahl, E. W. Dijkstra, C. A. R. Hoare Structured Programming, Academic Press, London, 1972 ISBN 0-12-200550-3 see pp 7282 for Dijkstra's solution of the 8 Queens problem.
* Three Dimensional NxN-Queens Problems, L. Allison, C.N. Yee, & M. McGaughey (1988), Department of Computer Science, Monash University, Australia.
* S. Nudelman, The Modular N-Queens Problem in Higher Dimensions, Discrete Mathematics, vol 146, iss. 1-3, 15 November 1995, pp. 159167.
* M. Engelhardt, Der Stammbaum der Lsungen des Damenproblems (in German, means The pedigree chart of solutions to the 8-queens problem), Spektrum der Wissenschaft, August 2010, pp. 68-71DOI.
* On The Modular N-Queen Problem in Higher Dimensions, Ricardo Gomez, Juan Jose Montellano and Ricardo Strausz (2004), Instituto de Matematicas, Area de la Investigacion Cientifica, Circuito Exterior, Ciudad Universitaria, Mexico.
* 

==External links==

* MathWorld article
* Solutions in various languages on Rosetta Code



[[Enrico Bombieri]]

Enrico Bombieri (born 26 November 1940 in Milan, Italy) is a mathematician, known for his work in analytic number theory, algebraic geometry, univalent functions, theory of several complex variables, partial differential equations of minimal surfaces, and the theory of finite groups. He won a Fields Medal in 1974. Proceedings of the International Congress of Mathematicians, 1974 

==Career==
Bombieri published his first mathematical paper in 1957 when he was 16 years old. In 1963 at age 22 he earned his first degree (Laurea) in mathematics from the Universit degli Studi di Milano under the supervision of Giovanni Ricci and then studied at Trinity College, Cambridge with Harold Davenport.

Bombieri was an assistant professor (19631965) and then a full professor (19651966) at the Universit di Cagliari, at the Universit di Pisa in 19661974, and then at the Scuola Normale Superiore di Pisa in 19741977. From Pisa he emigrated in 1977 to the USA, where he became a professor at the School of Mathematics at the Institute for Advanced Study in Princeton, New Jersey. In 2011 he became professor emeritus.

Bombieri's research in number theory, algebraic geometry, and mathematical analysis have earned him many international prizes  a Fields Medal in 1974 and the Balzan Prize in 1980. In 2010 he received the King Faisal International Prize (jointly with Terence Tao). King Faisal Foundation, - retrieved 2010-01-11. He is a member, or foreign member, of several learned academies, including the French Academy of Sciences (elected 1984), the United States National Academy of Sciences (elected 1996), and the Accademia Nazionale dei Lincei (elected 1976). Scheda socio, from the website of Accademia dei Lincei (elected 1976) 
In 2002 he was made Cavaliere di Gran Croce al Merito della Repubblica Italiana. 

The BombieriVinogradov theorem is one of the major applications of the large sieve method. It improves Dirichlet's theorem on prime numbers in arithmetic progressions, by showing that by averaging over the modulus over a range, the mean error is much less than can be proved in a given case. This result can sometimes substitute for the still-unproved generalized Riemann hypothesis.

In 1969 Bombieri, De Giorgi, and Giusti solved Bernstein's problem. 

In 1976, Bombieri developed the technique known as the "asymptotic sieve". E. Bombieri, "The asymptotic sieve", Mem. Acad. Naz. dei XL, 1/2 (1976) 243269. In 1980 he supplied the completion of the proof of the uniqueness of finite groups of Ree type in characteristic 3; at the time of its publication it was one of the missing steps in the classification of finite simple groups. (This paper completed a line of research initiated by the Walter theorem.) 

Bombieri is also known for his pro bono service on behalf of the mathematics profession, e.g. for serving on external review boards and for peer-reviewing extraordinarily complicated manuscripts (like the paper of Per Enflo on the invariant subspace problem).

Bombieri, accomplished also in the arts, explored for wild orchids and other plants as a hobby in the Alps when a young man.

==See also==
*Bombieri norm
*Bombieri-Lang conjecture
*BombieriVinogradov theorem

==Notes==

==References==
*
*
* E. Bombieri, Le Grand Crible dans la Thorie Analytique des Nombres (Seconde dition). Astrisque 18, Paris 1987.
* B. Beauzamy, E. Bombieri, P. Enflo and H. L. Montgomery. "Product of polynomials in many variables", Journal of Number Theory, pages 219245, 1990.
*

==External links==
*
*
*Enrico Bombieri, Institute for Advanced Study
*Lista delle pubblicazioni di Enrico Bombieri, University of Pisa



[[Eos]]

In Greek mythology, s (; , or , s, "dawn", or ; also , As in Aeolic) is a Titaness and the goddess Lycophron calls her by an archaic name, Tito (the Titaness). Kerenyi observes that Tito shares a linguistic origin with Eos's lover Tithonus, which belonged to an older, pre-Greek language. (Kerenyi 1951:199 note 637) of the dawn, who rose each morning from her home at the edge of the Oceanus.

==Etymology==
Eos is cognate to Vedic Sanskrit 'Ushas' and Latin Aurora, both goddesses of dawn, and all three considered derivatives of a PIE stem *Hewss ( *Auss), "dawn", a stem that also gave rise to Proto-Germanic *Austr, Old Germanic stara and Old English ostre/astre. Also see Dawn goddess. Eos had a brother and a sister. Helios, god of the sun, and Selene, goddess of the moon.

==Greek literature ==

The dawn goddess Eos was almost always described with rosy fingers (, rhododktylos) or rosy forearms (, rhodpkhys) as she opened the gates of heaven for the Sun to rise. Nonnus: "Eos had just shaken off the wing of carefree sleep (Hypnos) and opened the gates of sunrise, leaving the lightbringing couch of Kephalos." (Dionysiaca 27. 1f, in A.L. Rouse's translation). In Homer, Iliad viii.1; xxiv.695 her saffron-coloured robe is embroidered or woven with flowers; Odyssey vi:48 etc rosy-fingered and with golden arms, she is pictured on Attic vases as a beautiful woman, crowned with a tiara or diadem and with the large white-feathered wings of a bird.

From The Iliad:

Quintus Smyrnaeus pictured her exulting in her heart over the radiant horses (Lampus and Phaton) that drew her chariot, amidst the bright-haired Horae, the feminine Hours, climbing the arc of heaven and scattering sparks of fire. Posthomerica i.48 

She is most often associated with her Homeric epithet "rosy-fingered" (rhododactylos), but Homer also calls her Eos Erigeneia:

Hesiod wrote:

Thus Eos, preceded by the Morning Star, is seen as the genetrix of all the stars and planets; her tears are considered to have created the morning dew, personified as Ersa or Herse.
Eos is the daughter of Hyperion, a bringer of light, the One Above, Who Travels High Above the Earth and of Theia, The Divine. Her brother was the Sun god Helios, and her sister was Selene, the Moon goddess. Her team of horses pull her chariot across the sky and are named in the Odyssey as Firebright and Daybright.

She was the Mother of several notable offspring, including the Winds, Zephyrus, Boreas, and Notus, and the Morning Star, Eosphoros, all of whom she bore to the Titan Astraeus ("of the Stars"), and Memnon, her son by Tithonus. 

This rosy-fingered, saffron-robed and golden-throned goddess, who goes up to Olympus to announce the light to the immortals, fell in love several times, and some say it was Aphrodite who cursed her to be perpetually in love, because once had Eos lain with Aphrodite's sweetheart Ares, god of war.

==Genealogy==
Eos is the daughter of Hyperion and Theia and sister of Helios the sun and Selene the moon, "who shine upon all that are on earth and upon the deathless gods who live in the wide heaven." Hesiod told in Theogony (371-374). The generation of Titans preceded all the familiar deities of Olympus, who largely supplanted them.

==Lovers and children==
Eos in her chariot flying over the sea, red-figure krater from South Italy, 430420 BC, Staatliche Antikensammlungen
According to Pseudo-Apollodorus, Eos consorted with the war god Ares and was thereupon cursed with unsatisfiable sexual desire by the jealous Aphrodite. Pseudo-Apollodorus, Bibliotheca, 1. 4. 4 This caused her to abduct a number of handsome young men, most notably Cephalus, Tithonus, Orion and Cleitus. The good-looking Cleitus was made immortal by her. Homer, Odyssey, 15. 249 ff She also asked for Tithonus to be made immortal, but forgot to ask for eternal youth, which resulted in him living forever as a helpless old man. Homeric Hymn to Aphrodite, 318 ff 

According to Hesiod Theogony 984ff by Tithonus Eos had two sons, Memnon and Emathion. Memnon fought among the Trojans in the Trojan War and was slain. Her image with the dead Memnon across her knees, like Thetis with the dead Achilles are icons that inspired the Christian Piet.
Eos and the slain Memnon on an Attic red-figure cup, ca. 490480 BCE, the so-called "Memnon Piet" found at Capua (Louvre).

The abduction of Cephalus had special appeal for an Athenian audience because Cephalus was a local boy, Mary R. Lefkowitz, "'Predatory' Goddesses" Hesperia 71.4 (October 2002, pp. 325-344) p. 326. and so this myth element appeared frequently in Attic vase-paintings and was exported with them. In the literary myths Hesiod Theogony 984; pseudo-Apollodorus Bibliotheke iii. 14.3; Pausanias i. 3.1; Ovid Metamorphoses vii. 703ff; Hyginus Fabula 189. Eos kidnapped Cephalus when he was hunting and took him to Syria. The second-century CE traveller Pausanias was informed that the abductor of Cephalus was Hemera, goddess of Day. Pausanias remarking on the subjects shown in the Royal Stoa, Athens (i.3.1) and on the throne of Apollo at Amyklai (iii.18.10ff). Although Cephalus was already married to Procris, Eos bore him three sons, including Phaeton and Hesperus, but he then began pining for Procris, causing a disgruntled Eos to return him to her  and put a curse on them. In Hyginus' report, Hyginus, Fabula 189. Cephalus accidentally killed Procris some time later after he mistook her for an animal while hunting; in Ovid's Metamorphoses vii, Procris, a jealous wife, was spying on him and heard him singing to the wind, but thought he was serenading his ex-lover Eos.

==Etruscan interpretations==
Among the Etruscans, the generative dawn-goddess was Thesan. Depictions of the dawn-goddess with a young lover became popular in Etruria in the fifth century, probably inspired by imported Greek vase-painting. Marilyn Y. Goldberg, "The 'Eos and Kephalos' from Cre: Its Subject and Date" American Journal of Archology 91.4 (October 1987, pp. 605-614) p 607. Though Etruscans preferred to show the goddess as a nurturer (Kourotrophos) rather than an abductor of young men, the late Archaic sculptural acroterion from Etruscan Cre, now in Berlin, showing the goddess in archaic running pose adapted from the Greeks, and bearing a boy in her arms, has commonly been identified as Eos and Cephalus. Goldberg 1987:605-614 casts doubt on the boy's identification, in the context of Etruscan and Greek abduction motifs. On an Etruscan mirror Thesan is shown carrying off a young man, whose name is inscribed as Tinthu. Noted by Goldberg 1987: in I. Mayer-Prokop, Die gravierten etruskischen Griffspiegel archaischen Stils (Heidelberg) 1966, fig. 61. 

==Roman interpretations==
The Roman equivalent of Eos is Aurora, also a cognate showing the characteristic Latin rhotacism. The Dawn became associated in Roman cult with Matuta, later known as Mater Matuta. She was also associated with the sea harbors and ports, and had a temple on the Forum Boarium. On June 11, the Matralia was celebrated at that temple in honor of Mater Matuta; this festival was only for women during their first marriage.

==See also==

* Tithonus
* Memnon (mythology)
* Aurora (mythology)
* Mater Matuta
* Zorya

* Dawn goddess

==Notes==

==References==
* Grimal, Pierre, The Dictionary of Classical Mythology, Wiley-Blackwell, 1996, ISBN 978-0-631-20102-1. "Eos" p. 146
* Kerenyi, Karl. The Gods of the Greeks. Thames and Hudson, 1951.
* Smith, William; Dictionary of Greek and Roman Biography and Mythology, London (1873). "Eos" 

==External links==
* Theoi Project - Eos



[[Eduardo Blasco Ferrer]]

Eduardo Blasco Ferrer (born 1956) is a Spanish-Italian linguist, currently a professor at the University of Cagliari, Sardinia. He is best known as the author of several studies about the Sardinian language. 

==Books==
*Grammatica storica del catalano e dei suoi dialetti con speciale riguardo all'algherese. Tbingen: G. Narr, c1984.
*La lingua sarda contemporanea : grammatica del logudorese e del campidanese : norma e variet dell'uso : sintesi storica. Cagliari : Della Torre, c1986.
*Storia linguistica della Sardegna. Tbingen : Niemeyer, 1984.
*Le parlate dell'alta Ogliastra : analisi dialettologica : saggio di storia linguistica e culturale. Cagliari : Edizioni Della Torre, 1988.
*Ello, ellus : grammatica sarda. Nuoro : Poliedro, c1994.
*La lingua nel tempo : variazione e cambiamento in latino, italiano e sardo. Cagliari : CUEC, 1995.
*Breve corso di linguistica italiana : con facsimili, edizione e commento d'un testo quattrocentesco ad uso di seminari ed esercitazioni. Cagliari : CUEC, 1996.
*Pro domo : grammatica essenziale della lingua sarda. Cagliari : Condaghes, 1998.
*Italiano e tedesco : un confronto linguistico. Torino : Paravia scriptorium, c1999.
*Italiano, sardo e lingue moderne a scuola. Milano : F. Angeli, 2003.
*Storia della lingua sarda. Cagliari : CUEC, 2009.
*Paleosardo. Le radici linguistiche della Sardegna neolitica. Berlin : De Gruyter, 2010. ISBN 978-3-11-023560-9

==References==



[[Elba]]

Elba (, ; ; Ancient Greek: , Aithalia) is a Mediterranean island in Tuscany, Italy, 20 km from the coastal town of Piombino. The largest island of the Tuscan Archipelago, Elba is also part of the Arcipelago Toscano National Park, and the third largest island in Italy, after Sicily and Sardinia. It is located in the Tyrrhenian Sea, about 50 km east of the French island of Corsica.

The island is part of the province of Livorno and is divided into eight municipalities, with a total population of about 30,000 inhabitants, which increases considerably during the summer. The municipalities are Portoferraio, which is also the island's principal town, along with Campo nell'Elba, Capoliveri, Marciana, Marciana Marina, Porto Azzurro, Rio Marina, and Rio nell'Elba. 

==Geology==
The island of Elba is the largest remaining stretch of land from the ancient tract that once connected the Italian peninsula to Corsica. The northern coast faces the Ligurian Sea; the eastern coast the Piombino Channel; the southern coast the Tyrrhenian Sea; while the Corsica channel divides the western tip of the Island from neighbouring Corsica.

The terrain is quite varied, and is thus divided into several areas based on geomorphology. The mountainous and most recent part of the island can be found to the west, the centre of which is dominated by Mount Capanne (1018 m), also called the "roof of the Tuscan Archipelago". The mountain is home to many animal species including the mouflon and wild boar, two species that flourish despite the continuous influx of tourists. The central part of the island is a mostly flat section with the width being reduced to just four kilometres (4 km). It is where the major centres can be found: Portoferraio, Campo nell'Elba. To the east is the oldest part of the island, formed over 4,000 years ago. In the hilly area, dominated by Monte Calamita, are the deposits of iron that made Elba famous.

===Hydrography===
Rivers rarely exceed 3 km in length, and it is common for the shorter ones to dry up during the summer.
The largest rivers, sorted by length, are:
* Fosso San Francesco 6.5 km;
* Fosso Barion, 5.1 km;
* Fosso Redinoce, 2 km;

Between Poggio and Marciana, at the foot of Mount Capanne, is a spring called Fonte Napoleone, known for its quality.

===Climate===
The climate of the island is predominantly Mediterranean, except for Mount Capanne, where winters tend to be moderately cold. Precipitation is concentrated in autumn and comprises a normal rainfall. The table below shows the average temperatures for the islands by month.

==History==
The map of Elba in "The Rise and Fall of Napoleon", 1814 cartoon by Johann Michael Voltz.

Originally inhabited by Ligures Ilvati who gave the ancient name Ilva, the island was well known from very ancient times for its iron resources and its valued mines. The Greeks called it Aethalia (, "fume") after the fumes of the furnaces for the production of metal. Apollonius of Rhodes mentioned it briefly in his epic poem Argonautica: the Argonauts rested here during their travels and signs of their visit were still visible in the poet's day, including skin-coloured pebbles that they dried their hands on, and large stones they used at discus. The text however may be unsound and Strabo (5.2.6) presented a slightly different account: "because the scrapings, which the Argonauts formed when they used their strigils, became congealed, the pebbles on the shore remain variegated still to this day." W. H. Race, Apollonius Rhodius: Argonautica, Loeb Classical Library (2008), II.654-58, pages 381-3; see note 95 page 383 for Strabo quote. 

The island was invaded by the Etruscans and later (after 480 BC) by the Romans. In the early 11th century it became a possession of the Republic of Pisa. When the latter was sold to the Visconti of Milan in 1398, the island was acquired by the Appiani, Lords of Piombino, who retained it for two centuries.

In 1544 the Barbary pirates from North Africa devastated Elba and the coasts of Tuscany. "Christian Slaves, Muslim Masters: White Slavery in the Mediterranean, the Barbary Coast and Italy, 15001800". Robert Davis (2004). ISBN 1-4039-4551-9. In 1546 part of the island was handed over to Cosimo I de' Medici, who fortified Portoferraio and renamed it "Cosmopoli", while in 1577 the rest of the island was returned to the Appiani. In 1596 Philip II of Spain captured Porto Azzurro and had two fortresses built there. In 1802 the island became a French possession, and its economy flourished.

Napoleon Bonaparte leaving Elba on 26 February 1815

Following the Treaty of Fontainebleau, French emperor Napoleon I was exiled to Elba after his forced abdication in 1814 and arrived at Portoferraio on May 30, 1814 to begin his exile there. He was allowed to keep a personal guard of six hundred men. Although he was nominally sovereign of Elba, the island was patrolled by the British Royal Navy.

During the months Napoleon stayed on the island, he carried out a series of economic and social reforms to improve the quality of life, partly to pass the time and partly out of a genuine concern for the well-being of the islanders. Napoleon stayed on Elba for 300 days. He returned to France on February 26, 1815 for the Hundred Days. After his defeat at Waterloo he was subsequently exiled again, this time to the barren and isolated South Atlantic island of Saint Helena.

In the Congress of Vienna the island was given to the Grand Duchy of Tuscany. In 1860 it became part of the new unified Kingdom of Italy.

Elba was liberated from the Germans by the French 1er Corps d'Arme on June 17, 1944 in Opration Brassard. Faulty intelligence and strong defences made the battle more difficult than expected. 

More recently, the island has become famed for its wine, and it is today a noted tourist resort. 

==Transportation==
thumb
The island is connected to the mainland via the three ferry companies, Toremar, Moby Lines and Blunavy, all offering routes between Piombino and Portoferraio, the capital located in the north, Cavo, Rio Marina and Porto Azzurro, on the east coast of the island. 
 
 
 
 

There is an airport on the island, Marina di Campo Airport. It is served by Intersky, with flights to Friedrichshafen, Munich and Zrich, and ElbaFly by internal flights.

==Tourism==
The island is a popular holiday resort, particularly for German tourists. Many street signs and notices are bilingual in Italian and German.
===Cycling===
The island has a network of trails for road racers looking for more technical routes for their training, trails and dirt roads for bikers to have fun on, and accessible routes for families with children who need safe and relaxing routes. On the road from Rio nell'Elba going to Porto Azzurro is the Fonte di Coppi. Towards the end of his career the campionissimo came here to train on the roads of Elba to regain his best shape. He was no longer the best Fausto Coppi but he was already a monument to cycling, set to become a hero and legend with his death that would arrive within a few years. The plaque on the fountain reads: "1960 - 2010, here the champion quenched his thirst, since fifty years on the run".

==Notes==

==References==
*

==Gallery==

File:Aerial view of Elba 2.jpg
File:Elba Westkste.jpg|West coast of Elba
File:Bandiera_isola_elba.JPG| Flag of Elba
File:Marciana Marina - Hafen und Monte Capanne.jpg|Marciana Marina
File:Capoliveri 01.jpg|Capoliveri
File:Capoliveri Elbe Elba.JPG|Capoliveri
File:Fetovaia01.jpg|Fetovaia beach

==External links==

*

 



[[Etna]]

Mount Etna is an active volcano on the east coast of Sicily.

Etna or ETNA may also refer to:

==Places== 
===United States===
*Etna, California, a city
*Etna, Georgia, a village
*Etna, Illinois, an unincorporated community
*Etna, Indiana, an unincorporated town
*Etna, Kentucky, an unincorporated community
*Etna, Maine, a town
*Etna, Minnesota, an unincorporated community
*Etna, Missouri, an unincorporated community
*Etna, Nebraska, an unincorporated community
*Etna, Nevada, a village
*Etna (site), Nevada, a former townsite
*Etna, New Hampshire, a village
*Emerson, New Jersey, a borough originally named the Borough of Etna
*Etna, New York, an unincorporated community
*Etna, Lawrence County, Ohio, an unincorporated community
*Etna Township, Licking County, Ohio
*Etna, Licking County, Ohio, an unincorporated community
*Etna, Oklahoma, an unincorporated community
*Etna, Pennsylvania, a borough
*Whiteside, Tennessee, an unincorporated community formerly named Etna
*Etna, Texas, a ghost town
*Etna, Utah, an unincorporated community
*Etna, Washington, an unincorporated community
*Etna, Wisconsin, an unincorporated community
*Etna, Wyoming, a census-designated place

===Elsewhere===
*Mount Etna, an active volcano in Italy
*Etna (river), in the traditional district of Valdres, Norway
*Etna Island, off the northeastern tip of the Antarctic Peninsula
*11249 Etna, an asteroid

==Ships==
*HMS Aetna, a list of ships including those named Etna
*Etna-class corvette, six sailing ships of the French Navy
*Etna-class protected cruiser, four ships built for the Royal Italian Navy in the late 1880s
*Etna-class cruiser, two ships ordered in Italy for the Royal Thai Navy in 1938, but never completed
*Italian ship Etna (A5326), an Italian Navy auxiliary ship
*USS Whitley (AKA-91), an attack cargo ship transferred to the Italian navy in 1962 and renamed Etna (A5328)

==ETNA==
*Electronic Transactions on Numerical Analysis, a mathematical journal
*cole des technologies numriques appliques, a French private university in computer science

==Other uses==
*Etna (wine), an Italian wine
*Etna, a main character in the Disgaea series of console role playing games
* Etna Iron Works, a New York marine engine manufacturer active during the American Civil War
*Lotus Etna, a one-off concept car
*Etna, a steam locomotive of the Carmarthen and Cardigan Railway in Wales
*LG KS360, LG Etna, also known as LG KS360, a mobile phone model

==See also==
*Aetna (disambiguation)
*Mount Aetna (disambiguation)



[[Enki]]

Enki (; Sumerian: ) is a god in Sumerian mythology, later known as Ea in Akkadian and Babylonian mythology. He was originally patron god of the city of Eridu, but later the influence of his cult spread throughout Mesopotamia and to the Canaanites, Hittites and Hurrians. He was the deity of crafts (gaam); mischief; water, seawater, lakewater (a, aba, ab), intelligence (gest, literally "ear") and creation (Nudimmud: nu, likeness, dim mud, make beer). He was associated with the southern band of constellations called stars of Ea, but also with the constellation A-IKU, the Field (Square of Pegasus). Origins of the ancient constellations: I. The Mesopotamian traditions by J.H. Rogers Beginning around the second millennium BCE, he was sometimes referred to in writing by the numeric ideogram for "40," occasionally referred to as his "sacred number." Jeremy A. Black, Jeremy Black, Anthony Green, Tessa Rickards, Gods, demons, and symbols of ancient Mesopotamia (1992), University of Texas Press, p. 145. Benjamin R. Foster, Chpt. 4 "Mesopotamia" from A Handbook of Ancient Religions edited by John R. Hinnells (2007), Cambridge University Press, p. 174. W. Rllig, "Gtterzahlen", Reallexikon der Assyriologie, III (1957-1971), p. 500. The planet Mercury, associated with Babylonian Nabu (the son of Marduk) was in Sumerian times, identified with Enki.

A large number of myths about Enki have been collected from many sites, stretching from Southern Iraq to the Levantine coast. He figures in the earliest extant cuneiform inscriptions throughout the region and was prominent from the third millennium down to Hellenistic times.

The exact meaning of his name is uncertain: the common translation is "Lord of the Earth": the Sumerian en is translated as a title equivalent to "lord"; it was originally a title given to the High Priest; ki means "earth"; but there are theories that ki in this name has another origin, possibly kig of unknown meaning, or kur meaning "mound".
The name Ea is allegedly Hurrian in origin while others Huffmon, Herbert B. (1965), "Amorite Personal Names in the Mari Texts: A Structural and Lexical Study". (Baltimore, Maryland: The Johns Hopkins Press) Noah Kramer, Samuel and John Maier, (1989), "Myths of Enki, the Crafty God" (New York and Oxford. Oxford University Press) claim that his name 'Ea' is possibly of Semitic origin and may be a derivation from the West-Semitic root *hyy meaning "life" in this case used for "spring", "running water." In Sumerian E-A means "the house of water", and it has been suggested that this was originally the name for the shrine to the god at Eridu.

==Attributes==
The main temple to Enki is called E-abzu, meaning "abzu temple" (also E-en-gur-a, meaning "house of the subterranean waters"), a ziggurat temple surrounded by Euphratean marshlands near the ancient Persian Gulf coastline at Eridu. He was the keeper of the divine powers called Me, the gifts of civilization. His image is a double-helix snake, or the Caduceus, very similar to the Rod of Asclepius used to symbolize medicine. He is often shown with the horned crown of divinity dressed in the skin of a carp.

Considered the master shaper of the world, god of wisdom and of all magic, Enki was characterized as the lord of the Abzu (Apsu in Akkadian), the freshwater sea or groundwater located within the earth. In the later Babylonian epic Enma Eli, Abzu, the "begetter of the gods", is inert and sleepy but finds his peace disturbed by the younger gods, so sets out to destroy them. His grandson Enki, chosen to represent the younger gods, puts a spell on Abzu "casting him into a deep sleep", thereby confining him deep underground. Enki subsequently sets up his home "in the depths of the Abzu." Enki thus takes on all of the functions of the Abzu, including his fertilising powers as lord of the waters and lord of semen. Leick, Gwendolyn (2001), "Mesopotamia: the invention of the city" (Penguin) p.20 

Early royal inscriptions from the third millennium BCE mention "the reeds of Enki". Reeds were an important local building material, used for baskets and containers, and collected outside the city walls, where the dead or sick were often carried. This links Enki to the Kur or underworld of Sumerian mythology. In another even older tradition, Nammu, the goddess of the primeval creative matter and the mother-goddess portrayed as having "given birth to the great gods," was the mother of Enki, and as the watery creative force, was said to preexist Ea-Enki. Dalley, S (1989), "Myths of Mesopotamia" (Oxford, NY), p.50 Benito states "With Enki it is an interesting change of gender symbolism, the fertilising agent is also water, Sumerian "a" or "Ab" which also means "semen". In one evocative passage in a Sumerian hymn, Enki stands at the empty riverbeds and fills them with his 'water'". Benito, C.A. (1969) "Enki and Ninmah" and "Enki and the World Order" (dissertation, Uni of Philadelphia) This may be a reference to Enki's hieros gamos or sacred marriage with Ki/Ninhursag (the Earth) (see below).

His symbols included a goat and a fish, which later combined into a single beast, the goat Capricorn, recognised as the Zodiacal constellation Capricornus. He was accompanied by an attendant Isimud. He was also associated with the planet Mercury in the Sumerian astrological system.

==Myths of Enki==

===Enki and Ninhursag and the Creation of Life and Sickness===
The cosmogenic myth common in Sumer was that of the hieros gamos, a sacred marriage where divine principles in the form of dualistic opposites came together as male and female to give birth to the cosmos. In the epic Enki and Ninhursag, Enki, as lord of Ab or fresh water (also the Sumerian word for semen), is living with his wife in the paradise of Dilmun where

::"The land of Dilmun is a pure place, the land of Dilmun is a clean place,
::The land of Dilmun is a clean place, the land of Dilmun is a bright place;
::He who is alone laid himself down in Dilmun,
::The place, after Enki is clean, that place is bright"

Despite being a place where "the raven uttered no cries" and "the lion killed not, the wolf snatched not the lamb, unknown was the kid-killing dog, unknown was the grain devouring boar", Dilmun had no water and Enki heard the cries of its Goddess, Ninsikil, and orders the sun-God Utu to bring fresh water from the Earth for Dilmun. As a result

::"Her City Drinks the Water of Abundance,
::Dilmun Drinks the Water of Abundance,
::Her wells of bitter water, behold they are become wells of good water,
::Her fields and farms produced crops and grain,
::Her city, behold it has become the house of the banks and quays of the land."

Dilmun was identified with Bahrein, whose name in Arabic means "two seas", where the fresh waters of the Arabian aquifer mingle with the salt waters of the Persian Gulf. This mingling of waters was known in Sumerian as Nammu, and was identified as the mother of Enki.

The subsequent tale, with similarities to the Biblical story of the forbidden fruit, repeats the story of how fresh water brings life to a barren land. Enki, the Water-Lord then "caused to flow the 'water of the heart" and having fertilised his consort Ninhursag, also known as Ki or Earth, after "Nine days being her nine months, the months of 'womanhood'... like good butter, Nintu, the mother of the land, ...like good butter, gave birth to Ninsar, (Lady Greenery)". When Ninhursag left him, as Water-Lord he came upon Ninsar (Lady Greenery). Not knowing her to be his daughter, and because she reminds him of his absent consort, Enki then seduces and has intercourse with her. Ninsar then gave birth to Ninkurra (Lady Fruitfulness or Lady Pasture), and leaves Enki alone again. A second time, Enki, in his loneliness finds and seduces Ninkurra, and from the union Ninkurra gave birth to Uttu (weaver or spider, the weaver of the web of life).

A third time Enki succumbs to temptation, and attempts seduction of Uttu. Upset about Enki's reputation, Uttu consults Ninhursag, who, upset at the promiscuous wayward nature of her spouse, advises Uttu to avoid the riverbanks, the places likely to be affected by flooding, the home of Enki. In another version of this myth Ninhursag takes Enki's semen from Uttu's womb and plants it in the earth where eight plants rapidly germinate. With his two-faced servant and steward Isimud, "Enki, in the swampland, in the swampland lies stretched out, 'What is this (plant), what is this (plant). His messenger Isimud, answers him; 'My king, this is the tree-plant', he says to him. He cuts it off for him and he (Enki) eats it". And so, despite warnings, Enki consumes the other seven fruit. Consuming his own semen, he falls pregnant (ill with swellings) in his jaw, his teeth, his mouth, his hip, his throat, his limbs, his side and his rib. The gods are at a loss to know what to do, chagrinned they "sit in the dust". As Enki lacks a womb with which to give birth, he seems to be dying with swellings. The fox then asks Enlil King of the Gods, "If i bring Ninhursag before thee, what shall be my reward?" Ninhursag's sacred fox then fetches the goddess.

Ninhursag relents and takes Enki's Ab (water, or semen) into her body, and gives birth to gods of healing of each part of the body. Abu for the Jaw, Nintul for the Hip, Ninsutu for the tooth, Ninkasi for the mouth, Dazimua for the side, Enshagag for the Limbs. The last one, Ninti (Lady Rib), is also a pun on Lady Life, a title of Ninhursag herself. The story thus symbolically reflects the way in which life is brought forth through the addition of water to the land, and once it grows, water is required to bring plants to fruit. It also counsels balance and responsibility, nothing to excess.

Ninti, the title of Ninhursag, also means "the mother of all living", and was a title given to the later Hurrian goddess Kheba. This is also the title given in the Bible to Eve, the Hebrew and Aramaic awwah (), who was made from the rib of Adam, in a strange reflection of the Sumerian myth, in which Adam  not Enki  walks in the Garden of Paradise. 

===Enki and the Making of Man===
After six generations of Gods, in the Babylonian "Enuma Elish", in the seventh generation, (Akkadian "shapattu" or sabath), the younger Igigi Gods, the sons and daughters of Enlil and Ninlil, go on strike and refuse their duties of keeping the creation working. Abzu God of fresh water, co-creator of the cosmos, threatens to destroy the world with his waters, and the Gods gather in terror. Enki promises to help and puts Abzu to sleep, confining him in irrigation canals and places him in the Kur, beneath his city of Eridu. But then, with the universe still threatened, Tiamat, with the imprisonment of her husband and consort Abzu and at the prompting of her son and vizier Kingu, decides to take back the creation herself. The Gods gather again in terror and turn to Enki for help, but Enki who harnessed Abzu, Tiamat's consort, for irrigation refuses to get involved. The gods then seek help elsewhere, and the patriarchal Enlil, their father, God of Nippur, promises to solve the problem if they make him King of the Gods. In the Babylonian tale, Enlil's role is taken by Marduk, Enki's son, and in the Assyrian version it is Asshur. After dispatching Tiamat with the "arrows of his winds" down her throat (similar in some respects to how Elohim moves his breath (ruach) over the "face of the deep" or "Tehom", in ) and reconstructing the heavens with the arch of her ribs (i.e. her "life"), Enlil places her tail in the sky as the Milky Way, and her crying eyes become the source of the Tigris and Euphrates. But there is still the problem of "who will keep the cosmos working". Enki, who might have otherwise come to their aid, is lying in a deep sleep and fails to hear their cries. His mother Nammu (creatrix also of Abzu and Tiamat) "brings the tears of the gods" before Enki and says

::Oh my son, arise from thy bed, from thy (slumber), work what is wise,
::Fashion servants for the Gods, may they produce their (bread?).

Enki then advises that they create a servant of the Gods, humankind, out of clay and blood. Kramer 1963 pp. 149-151; Kramer 1961 pp. 69-72 Christopher B. Siren (1999) based on John C. Gibson's Canaanite Mythology and S. H. Hooke's Middle Eastern Mythology Against Enki's wish the Gods decide to slay Kingu, and Enki finally consents to use Kingu's blood to make the first human, with whom Enki always later has a close relationship, the first of the seven sages, seven wise men or "Abgallu" (Ab = water, Gal = great, Lu = Man), also known as Adapa. Enki assembles a team of divinities to help him, creating a host of "good and princely fashioners". He tells his mother

::Oh my mother, the creature whose name thou has uttered, it exists,
::Bind upon it the (will?) of the Gods;
::Mix the heart of clay that is over the Abyss,
::The good and princely fashioners will thicken the clay
::Thou, do thou bring the limbs into existence;
::Ninmah (the Earth-mother goddess (Ninhursag, his wife and consort) will work above thee
::(Nintu?) (goddess of birth) will stand by thy fashioning;
::Oh my mother, decree thou its (the new born's) fate.

Adapa, the first man fashioned, later goes and acts as the advisor to the King of Eridu, when in the Sumerian Kinglist, the "Me" of "kingship descends on Eridu".

Samuel Noah Kramer, believes that behind this myth of Enki's confinement of Abzu lies an older one of the struggle between Enki and the Dragon Kur (the underworld) 

The Atrahasis-Epos has it that Enlil requested from Nammu the creation of humans. And Nammu told him that with the help of Enki (her son) she can create humans in the image of gods.

===Confuser of languages===
In the Sumerian epic entitled Enmerkar and the Lord of Aratta, in a speech of Enmerkar, an incantation is pronounced that has a mythical introduction. Kramer's translation is as follows: Another translation describes 'Hamazi, the many-tongued' and instead calls on Enki to change the languages of mankind into one. 

===Enki and the Deluge===

According to Sumerian mythology, Enki also assisted humanity to survive the Deluge designed to kill them. In the later Legend of Atrahasis, Enlil, the king of the gods, sets out to eliminate humanity, whose noise is disturbing his rest. He successively sends drought, famine and plague to eliminate humanity, but Enki thwarts his half-brother's plans by teaching Atrahasis how to counter these threats. Each time, Atrahasis asks the population to abandon worship of all gods, except the one responsible for the calamity, and this seems to shame them into relenting. Humans, however, proliferate a fourth time. Enraged, Enlil convenes a Council of Deities and gets them to promise not to tell humankind that he plans their total annihilation. Enki does not tell Atrahasis directly, but speaks to him in secret via a reed wall. He instructs Atrahasis to build a boat in order to rescue his family and other living creatures from the coming deluge. After the seven-day Deluge, the flood hero frees a swallow, a raven and a dove in an effort to find if the flood waters have receded. Upon landing, a sacrifice is made to the gods. Enlil is angry his will has been thwarted yet again, and Enki is named as the culprit. Enki explains that Enlil is unfair to punish the guiltless, and the gods institute measures to ensure that humanity does not become too populous in the future. This is one of the oldest of the surviving Middle Eastern Deluge myths.

===Enki and Inanna===
In his connections with Inanna, Enki shows other aspects of his non-Patriarchal nature. The myth Enki and Inanna "Inanna: Lady of Love and War, Queen of Heaven and Earth, Morning and Evening Star", consulted 25 August 2007 Wolkstein, Diana and Noah Kramer, Samuel "Inanna: Queen of Heaven and Earth" tells the story of the young goddess of the -anna temple of Uruk, who visits the senior god of Eridu, and is entertained by him in a feast. The seductive god plies her with beer, and the young goddess maintains her virtue, whilst Enki proceeds to get drunk. In generosity he gives her all the gifts of his Me, the gifts of civilized life. Next morning, with a hangover, he asks his servant Isimud for his Me, only to be informed that he has given them to Inanna. Upset at his actions, he sends Galla demons to recover them. Inanna escapes her pursuers and arrives safely back at the quay at Uruk. Enki realises that he has been tricked in his hubris and accepts a peace treaty forever with Uruk.

Politically, this myth would seem to indicate events of an early period when political authority passed from Enki's city of Eridu to Inanna's city of Uruk.

In the myth of Inanna's descent, Inanna, in order to console her grieving sister Ereshkigal, who is mourning the death of her husband Gugalana (gu, bull, gal, big, ana, sky/heaven), slain by Gilgamesh and Enkidu, sets out to visit her sister. She tells her servant Ninshubur (Lady Evening), a reference to Inanna's role as the evening star, that if she does not return in three days, to get help from her father Anu, Enlil, king of the gods, or Enki. When she does not return, Ninshubur approaches Anu only to be told that he understands that his daughter is strong and can take care of herself. Enlil tells Ninshubur he is much too busy running the cosmos. Enki immediately expresses concern and dispatches his Galla demons, Galaturra or Kurgarra, sexless beings created from the dirt from beneath the god's finger-nails, to recover the young goddess. These beings may be the origin of the Greco-Roman Galli, androgynous beings of the third sex, similar to the American Indian berdache, who played an important part in early religious ritual. De Shong Meador, Betty, (2006)"Inanna: Lady of the Largest Heart: Poems of the Sumerian High Priestess Enheduanna" (Texas Press) 

In the story Inanna and Shukaletuda, Lishtar "The Avenging Maiden and the Predator Gardener: a study of Inanna and Shukaletuda" Shukaletuda, the gardener, set by Enki to care for the date palm he had created, finds Inanna sleeping under the palm tree and rapes the goddess in her sleep. Awaking, she discovers that she has been violated and seeks to punish the miscreant. Shukaletuda seeks protection from Enki, whom Bottero Bottro, Jean (1992) "Mesopotamia: Writing, Reasoning and the Gods" (University of Chicago Press) believes to be his father. In classic Enkian fashion, the father advises Shukaletuda to hide in the city where Inanna will not be able to find him. Enki, as the protector of whoever comes to seek his help, and as the empowerer of Inanna, here challenges the young impetuous goddess to control her anger so as to be better able to function as a great judge.

Eventually, after cooling her anger, she too seeks the help of Enki, as spokesperson of the "assembly of the gods", the Igigi and the Anunnaki. After she presents her case, Enki sees that justice needs to be done and promises help, delivering knowledge of where the miscreant is hiding.

==Portrayal==
Enki
Enki was considered a god of life and replenishment, and was often depicted with two streams of water emanating from his shoulders, one the Tigris, the other the Euphrates. Alongside him were trees symbolising the female and male aspects of nature, each holding the female and male aspects of the 'Life Essence', which he, as apparent alchemist of the gods, would masterfully mix to create several beings that would live upon the face of the earth.

==Influence==
Enki and later Ea were apparently depicted, sometimes, as a man covered with the skin of a fish, and this representation, as likewise the name of his temple E-apsu, "house of the watery deep", points decidedly to his original character as a god of the waters (see Oannes). Around the excavation of the 18 shrines found on the spot, thousands of carp bones were found, consumed possibly in feasts to the god. Of his cult at Eridu, which goes back to the oldest period of Mesopotamian history, nothing definite is known except that his temple was also associated with Ninhursag's temple which was called Esaggila, "the lofty head house" (E, house, sag, head, ila, high; or Akkadian goddess = Ila), a name shared with Marduk's temple in Babylon, pointing to a staged tower or ziggurat (as with the temple of Enlil at Nippur, which was known as E-kur (kur, hill)), and that incantations, involving ceremonial rites in which water as a sacred element played a prominent part, formed a feature of his worship. This seems also implicated in the epic of the hieros gamos or sacred marriage of Enki and Ninhursag (above), which seems an etiological myth of the fertilisation of the dry ground by the coming of irrigation water (from Sumerian a, ab, water or semen). The early inscriptions of Urukagina in fact go so far as to suggest that the divine pair, Enki and Ninki, were the progenitors of seven pairs of gods, including Enki as god of Eridu, Enlil of Nippur, and Su'en (or Sin) of Ur, and were themselves the children of An (sky, heaven) and Ki (earth). http://www.utlib.ee/ekollekt/diss/mag/2006/b18272897/espakpeeter.pdf The pool of the Abzu at the front of his temple was adopted also at the temple to Nanna (Akkadian Sin) the Moon, at Ur, and spread from there throughout the Middle East. It is believed to remain today as the sacred pool at Mosques, or as the holy water font in Catholic or Eastern Orthodox churches. Bottero, Jean (1995), "Mesopotamia: Writing, Reasoning, and the Gods" (University Of Chicago Press) 

Whether Eridu at one time also played an important political role in Sumerian affairs is not certain, though not improbable. At all events the prominence of "Ea" led, as in the case of Nippur, to the survival of Eridu as a sacred city, long after it had ceased to have any significance as a political center. Myths in which Ea figures prominently have been found in Assurbanipal's library, and in the Hattusas archive in Hittite Anatolia. As Ea, Enki had a wide influence outside of Sumer, being equated with El (at Ugarit) and possibly Yah (at Ebla) in the Canaanite 'ilhm pantheon, he is also found in Hurrian and Hittite mythology, as a god of contracts, and is particularly favourable to humankind. Among the western semites, it is thought that Ea was equated to the term *hyy (life), referring to Enki's waters as life giving. Enki/Ea is essentially a god of civilization, wisdom, and culture. He was also the creator and protector of man, and of the world in general. Traces of this version of Ea appear in the Marduk epic celebrating the achievements of this god and the close connection between the Ea cult at Eridu and that of Marduk. The correlation between the two rises from two other important connections: (1) that the name of Marduk's sanctuary at Babylon bears the same name, Esaggila, as that of a temple in Eridu, and (2) that Marduk is generally termed the son of Ea, who derives his powers from the voluntary abdication of the father in favour of his son. Accordingly, the incantations originally composed for the Ea cult were re-edited by the priests of Babylon and adapted to the worship of Marduk, and, similarly, the hymns to Marduk betray traces of the transfer to Marduk of attributes which originally belonged to Ea.

It is, however, as the third figure in the triad (the two other members of which were Anu and Enlil) that Ea acquires his permanent place in the pantheon. To him was assigned the control of the watery element, and in this capacity he becomes the shar apsi; i.e. king of the Apsu or "the deep". The Apsu was figured as the abyss of water beneath the earth, and since the gathering place of the dead, known as Aralu, was situated near the confines of the Apsu, he was also designated as En-Ki; i.e. "lord of that which is below", in contrast to Anu, who was the lord of the "above" or the heavens. The cult of Ea extended throughout Babylonia and Assyria. We find temples and shrines erected in his honour, e.g. at Nippur, Girsu, Ur, Babylon, Sippar, and Nineveh, and the numerous epithets given to him, as well as the various forms under which the god appears, alike bear witness to the popularity which he enjoyed from the earliest to the latest period of Babylonian-Assyrian history. The consort of Ea, known as Ninhursag, Ki, Uriash Damkina, "lady of that which is below", or Damgalnunna, "big lady of the waters", originally was fully equal with Ea, but in more patriarchal Assyrian and Neo-Babylonian times plays a part merely in association with her lord. Generally, however, Enki seems to be a reflection of pre-patriarchal times, in which relations between the sexes were characterised by a situation of greater gender equality. In his character, he prefers persuasion to conflict, which he seeks to avoid if possible.

==Ea and West Semitic deities==
In 1964, a team of Italian archaeologists under the direction of Paolo Matthiae of the University of Rome La Sapienza performed a series of excavations of material from the third-millennium BCE city of Ebla. Much of the written material found in these digs was later translated by Giovanni Pettinato.

Among other conclusions, he found a tendency among the inhabitants of Ebla to replace the name of El, king of the gods of the Canaanite pantheon (found in names such as Mikael), with Ia.

Jean Bottero (1952) Bottero, Jean. "Religion in Ancient Mesopotamia" (University of Chicago Press, 2004) ISBN 0-226-06718-1 and others Boboula, Ida. "The Great Stag: A Sumerian Deity and Its Affiliations", Fifty-Third General Meeting of the Archaeological Institute of America (1951) in American Journal of Archaeology, Vol. 56, No. 3 (Jul. 1952) 171178, All pertinent information is available online. suggested that Ia in this case is a West Semitic (Canaanite) way of saying Ea, Enki's Akkadian name, associating the Canaanite theonym Yahu, and ultimately Hebrew YHWH. This hypothesis is dismissed by some scholars as erroneous, based on a mistaken cuneiform reading, "Yahweh" in K. van der Toorn, Bob Becking, Pieter Willem van der Horst, Dictionary of Deities and Demons in the Bible (1999), ISBN 978-90-04-11119-6, p. 911: "his cult at Ebla is a chimera." but academic debate continues.
Ia has also been compared by William Hallo William W. Hallo "Enki and the Theology of Eridu" (Journal of the American Oriental Society 1996) with the Ugaritic Yamm (sea), (also called Judge Nahar, or Judge River) whose earlier name in at least one ancient source was Yaw, or Ya'a.

==See also==
*Ancient Near East
*Barbar Temple, a Dilmun-era temple in Bahrain devoted to the worship of Enki
*Capricornus
*Me (mythology)
*Mesopotamia
*Mesopotamian mythology
*Prometheus
*Khnum
*Matsya

==Notes==

==References==
*Jacobsen, Thorkild (1976), Treasures of Darkness; A History of Mesopotamian Religion (Yale University Press, London, New Heaven) ISBN 0-300-02291-3.
*Bottero, Jean (2004), Religion in Ancient Mesopotamia (University of Chicago Press) ISBN 0-226-06718-1.
*Kramer, Samuel Noah (1998), Sumerian Mythology: A Study of Spiritual and Literary Achievement in the Third Millennium B.C.(University of Pennsylvania Press; Revised edition) ISBN 0-8122-1047-6.
*Kramer, S.N. and Maier, J.R. (1989), Myths of Enki, the Crafty God (Oxford).
*Galter, H.D. (1981), Der Gott Ea/Enki in der akkadischen berlieferung (Graz).
*Espak, Peeter (2010) The God Enki in Sumerian Royal Ideology and Mythology. Dissertationes Theologiae Universitatis Tartuensis 19. (Tartu: Tartu University Press). ISBN 9789949195220 
*

==External links==

*Ancient Mesopotamian Gods and Goddesses: Enki/Ea (god)
*Enki and Ninhursag
*Creation of Man
*Enki and Inanna



[[Eli Wallach]]

Eli Herschel Wallach (born December 7, 1915) is an American film, television and stage actor whose career has spanned more than six decades, beginning in the late 1940s. For his performance as Silva Vacarro in Baby Doll, he won a BAFTA Award for Best Newcomer and a Golden Globe nomination. Among his most famous roles are Calvera in The Magnificent Seven (1960), Guido in The Misfits (1961), and Tuco in The Good, the Bad and the Ugly (1966). Other notable portrayals include Don Altobello in The Godfather Part III, Cotton Weinberger in The Two Jakes (both 1990), and Arthur Abbott in The Holiday (2006). One of America's most prolific screen actors, Wallach has remained active well into his nineties, with roles as recently as 2010 in and The Ghost Writer.

Wallach has received BAFTA Awards, Tony Awards and Emmy Awards for his work, and received an Honorary Academy Award at the 2nd Annual Governors Awards, presented on November 13, 2010.

==Early life==
Wallach was born in Red Hook, Brooklyn at 156 Union St., the son of Polish Jewish immigrants Bertha (ne Schorr) and Abraham Wallach. They were the only Jewish family in an otherwise predominantly Italian American neighborhood. http://www.bfi.org.uk/sightandsound/feature/49253/ "Eli Wallach Knows His Lines" - Forward.com His parents owned Bertha's, a candy store. Wallach graduated in 1936 from the University of Texas at Austin with a degree in history "Alumni in the News: Eli Wallach to receive lifetime achievement award", Alumni and Friends, Department of History, University of Texas, Austin and in 1938 received a masters degree in education from the City College of New York. "Marian Seldes, Eli Wallach to Receive CCNY Alumni Finley Award", Newswire, City College of New York, October 19, 2010 "Biography: Eli Wallach", The New York Times He gained his first Method experience at the Neighborhood Playhouse School of Theatre in New York City. While attending the University of Texas, Wallach performed in a play with fellow students Ann Sheridan and Walter Cronkite. - imdb.com 

Wallach served as a United States Army staff sergeant in a military hospital in Hawaii during World War II. He was soon sent to Officer Candidate School (OCS) in Abilene, Texas to train as a medical administrative officer. He graduated as a Second Lieutenant and was sent to Madison Barracks in upstate New York. He was promptly shipped to Casablanca and, later in the war, to France. It was there that a superior discovered his acting history and asked him to form a show for the patients. He and other members from his unit wrote a play called Is This the Army?, which was inspired by Irving Berlin's This Is the Army. In the comedic play, Wallach and the other men clowned around as various dictators, with Wallach portraying Adolf Hitler, the leader of Nazi Germany.

==Career==
Wallach took classes in acting at the Dramatic Workshop of the New School in New York with the influential German director Erwin Piscator. Later, he attended the Actors Studio from its inception; there, he studied acting with founding member Robert Lewis, alongside Marlon Brando, Montgomery Clift, Herbert Berghof, and Sidney Lumet, and his soon-to-be wife, Anne Jackson. Wallach made his Broadway debut in 1945 and won a Tony Award in 1951 for his performance in the Tennessee Williams play The Rose Tattoo. Additional theater credits include Mister Roberts, The Teahouse of the August Moon, Camino Real, Major Barbara, Luv, and Staircase, co-starring Milo O'Shea, which was a serious depiction of an aging homosexual couple. He also played a role in a tour of Antony and Cleopatra, produced by the actress Katharine Cornell in 1946. Mosel, "Leading Lady: The World and Theatre of Katharine Cornell He last starred on stage as the title character in Visiting Mr. Green.

Wallach's film debut was in Elia Kazan's controversial 1956 Baby Doll, and he went on to a prolific career in films, although rarely in a starring role. Other early films include The Lineup, The Misfits with Clark Gable and Marilyn Monroe, The Magnificent Seven with Yul Brynner and Steve McQueen, Lord Jim with Peter O'Toole, a comic role in How to Steal a Million with Audrey Hepburn, and perhaps most famously, as Tuco (the 'Ugly') in Sergio Leone's The Good, the Bad and the Ugly with Clint Eastwood. After the latter's success, Wallach appeared in several other spaghetti westerns, including Ace High.

with Karl Malden (r) in Baby Doll (1956) 
Wallach is central to one of the most infamous show business legends. In 1953 he was cast as Angelo Maggio in the film From Here to Eternity, but was abruptly replaced by Frank Sinatra before filming began. Sinatra went on to win an Oscar for the performance, which revived his career. Sinatra purportedly used pressure from his underworld connections to get the part, an incident that inspired the Johnny Fontane character in the classic 1972 film The Godfather. To spare Sinatra embarrassment, Wallach says he turned down the role to appear in a Tennessee Williams play, claiming: "...henever Sinatra saw me, hed say, 'Hello, you crazy actor!'" 

In 2006, Wallach made a guest appearance on the NBC show Studio 60 on the Sunset Strip, playing a former writer who was blacklisted in the 1950s. His character was a writer on The Philco Comedy Hour, a show that aired on a fictional NBS network. This is a reference to The Philco Television Playhouse, in several episodes of which Wallach actually appeared in 1955. Wallach earned a 2007 Emmy nomination for his work on the show.

Before accepting a role as a villain in Leone's Once Upon a Time in the West, Henry Fonda called Wallach and asked "What the hell does he know about the West?" Wallach assured Fonda he would be pleasantly surprised if he accepted the role. After the film's success, Fonda called Wallach back to thank him.

Wallach and Leone had built a good relationship during shooting The Good, the Bad and the Ugly, but had a falling-out later on. Leone had asked Wallach to play a role in his upcoming film, A Fistful of Dynamite, but the actor explained he had a scheduling conflict. After much pleading, Wallach finally relented and turned down the other offer and waited for Leone to raise enough Hollywood money for the picture. However, the studio Leone went to had an actor, Rod Steiger, with one more picture in his studio contract and the studio announced that Leone would have to use him if they were to put up any financing. Leone then called to apologize to Wallach, who remained dumbstruck on the other end of the line. After even refusing to give Wallach a token payment for losing out on two jobs, the actor said, "I'll sue you"to which Leone replied, "Get in line", and slammed down the phone. In his autobiography, Wallach relates the incident as regrettably being the final time the two spoke to one another. 

Wallach played Mr. Freeze in the 1960s Batman television series. He wrote in his autobiography that he received more fan mail about his role as Mr. Freeze than about all of his other roles combined.

On November 13, 2010, at the age of 94, Wallach received an Honorary Academy Award for his contribution to the film industry at the 2010 Governor's Awards ceremony of the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences. Wallach, Eli. Acceptance speech, Honorary Academy Award, Governors' Award ceremony, 13 Nov 2010. http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=N37u6BuN0MA 

==Personal life==
Wallach and Jackson in 2010
Eli Wallach has been married to stage actress Anne Jackson (born 1926) since March 5, 1948, and they have three children:
Peter (born 1951), Roberta (born 1955,) Katherine (born 1958). Roberta had an acting experience as a mentally disturbed teenager in Paul Zindel's The Effect of Gamma Rays on Man-in-the-Moon Marigolds.

In 2005, Wallach released his autobiography The Good, the Bad and Me: In My Anecdotage. In it, Wallach wrote about his famous role as Tuco in The Good, the Bad and the Ugly, commenting that he did not realize he was going to be "blessed" with the title "Ugly" until he saw the film. He remarked that it was an honor to work with Clint Eastwood, whom he praised for his professionalism. Wallach also mentioned that director Sergio Leone was notoriously careless regarding the safety of his actors during dangerous scenes. It was during filming that Wallach accidentally drank from a bottle of acid that a film technician had carelessly placed next to his soda bottle. He spat it out immediately, but was furious because his vocal cords could have been damaged if he had swallowed any of it. Leone gave him some milk to wash out his mouth and apologized for the incident, but also commented that accidents do happen. Wallach, Eli. (2006): The Good, the Bad and Me: In My Anecdotage (Harvest Books, Fort Washington, PA) ISBN 978-0-15-603169-1, p. 255 

Wallach lost sight in his left eye as the result of a stroke. According to his autobiography, the incident occurred "some years ago".

His niece is historian Joan Wallach Scott (the daughter of his brother, Sam Wallach). A. O. Scott, a film critic for the New York Times, is his great-nephew. 

==Filmography==

===Film===

* Baby Doll (1956)
* The Lineup (1958)
* Seven Thieves (1960)
* The Magnificent Seven (1960)
* The Misfits (1961)
* Hemingway's Adventures of a Young Man (1962)
* How the West Was Won (1962)
* The Victors (1963)
* Act One (1963)
* The Moon-Spinners (1964)
* Kisses for My President (1964)
* Lord Jim (1965)
* Genghis Khan (1965)
* The Poppy Is Also a Flower (1966)
* How to Steal a Million (1966)
* The Good, the Bad and the Ugly (1966)
* The Tiger Makes Out (1967) (also producer)
* Ace High (1968)
* How to Save a Marriage and Ruin Your Life (1968)
* A Lovely Way to Die (1968)
* The Brain (1969)
* Mackenna's Gold (1969)
* The Adventures of Gerard (1970)
* The Angel Levine (1970)
* The People Next Door (1970)
* Zigzag (1970)
* Romance of a Horsethief (1971)
* Long Live Your Death (1971)
* A Cold Night's Death (1972)(TV)
* Stateline Motel (1972)
* Cinderella Liberty (1973)
* Crazy Joe (1974)
* The Dream Factory (1975)
* Shoot First... Ask Questions Later (1975)
* (1975)
* Eye of the Cat (1976)
* Plot of Fear (1976)
* Independence (1976)
* The Domino Principle (1976)
* The Sentinel (1977)
* The Deep (1977)
* Winter Kills (1977) (Released in 1979)
* Nasty Habits (1977)
* Movie Movie (1977)
* Girlfriends (1978)
* Little Italy (1978)

* Circle of Iron (1978)
* Firepower (1979)
* The Hunter (1980)
* The Salamander (1981)
* Sam's Son (1984)
* (1985)
* Tough Guys (1986)
* The Impossible Spy (1987) (TV)
* Hollywood Uncensored (1987)
* Nuts (1987)
* Funny (1989)
* The Two Jakes (1990)
* The Godfather Part III Don Altobello (1990)
* Article 99 (1992)
* Mistress (1992) (Made in 1987)
* Night and the City (1992)
* Honey Sweet Love (1994)
* (1995) (narrator)
* Two Much (1996)
* The Associate (1996)
* Larry's Visit (1996)
* The Devil's Twilight (1998)
* Uninvited (1999)
* Keeping the Faith (2000)
* Cinerama Adventure (2002)
* Advice and Dissent (2002)
* The Root (2003)
* (2003)
* Mystic River (2003)
* King of the Corner (2004)
* A Taste of Jupiter (2005)
* (2005) (voice)
* The Easter Egg Adventure (2005) (narrator)
* The Holiday (2006)
* (2006) (as himself)
* The Hoax (2007)
* Constantine's Sword (2007)
* The War (2007)
* Mama's Boy (2007)
* Liszt For President (2008)
* The Toe Tactic (2008)
* Tickling Leo (2009)
* New York, I Love You (2009)
* The Ghost Writer (2010)
* (2010)

===Television===

* The Philco Television Playhouse - The Beautiful Bequest (1949)
* Lights Out - Rappaccini's Daughter (1951)
* Studio One - Stan The Killer (1952)
* Armstrong Circle Theater - The Portrait (1952)
* The Web - Deadlock (1952)
* The Philco Television Playhouse - The Baby (1953)
* Goodyear Television Playhouse - The Brownstone (1953)
* Kraft Television Theater - Delicate Story (1954)
* The Philco Television Playhouse - Shadow of the Champ (1955)
* The Philco Television Playhouse - The Outsiders (1955)
* The Kaiser Aluminum Hour - A Fragile Affair (1956)
* Studio One - The Man Who Wasn't Himself (1957)
* Hallmark Hall of Fame - The Lark (1957)
* The Seven Lively Arts - The World of Nick Adams (1957)
* Climax - Albert Anastasia, His Life & Death (1958)
* Suspicion - The Death of Paul Dane (1958)
* Westinghouse Desilu Playhouse - My Father The Fool (1958)
* Shirley Temple's Storybook Theater - The Emperor's New Clothes (1958)
* Hallmark Hall of Fame - The Gift of the Magi (1958)
* Where Is Thy Brother (1958)
* Playhouse 90 - The Plot To Kill Stalin (1958)
* The Dupont Show of the Month - I Don Quixote (1959)
* Playhouse 90 - The Blue Men (1959)
* Playhouse 90 - For Whom The Bell Tolls (Parts 1 & 2) (1959)
* Play of the Week - Lullaby (1960)
* Naked City - A Death of Princes (1960)
* Naked City - A Run For The Money (1962)
* The Dick Powell Show - Tomorrow, The Man (1962)
* CBS Playhouse - Dear Friends (1967)
* Batman - Ice-Spy (1967)
* Batman - The Duo Defy (1967)
* The Typists (1971)
* The Young Lawyers - Legal Maneuvre (1971)
* A Cold Night's Death (1972) (TVM)
* Indict and Convict (1973) (TVM)
* Paradise Lost (1974)
* Great Mysteries - Compliments of the Season (1974)
* Kojak - A Question of Answers (1975)
* 20 Shades of Pink (1976)
* Seventh Avenue (1977)
* The Pirate (1978)
* Fugitive Family (1980)
* The Pride of Jesse Hallam (1980)(TVM)

* Skokie (1981)(TVM)
* Tales of the Unexpected - Shatterproof (1981)
* The Wall (1982)
* The Executioner's Song (1982)
* Anatomy of an Illness (1983) (TVM)
* Christopher Columbus (1985)
* Our Family Honor (1985) (TVM)
* Our Family Honor (198586) (Series)
* Embassy (1985) (TVM)
* (1985) (TVM)
* Rocket to the Moon (1986) (TVM)
* Something In Common (1986) (TVM)
* Highway to Heaven - To Bind The Wounds (1986)
* The Impossible Spy (1987) (TVM)
* Highway To Heaven - A Father's Faith (1987)
* World's Beyond - The Black Tomb (1987)
* Murder She Wrote - A Very Good Year For Murder (1988)
* Alfred Hitchcock Presents - Kandinsky's Vault (1988)
* CBS Schoolbreak Special - A Matter of Conscience (1989)
* Vendetta : Secrets of a Mafia Bride (1991) (TVM)
* L.A. Law - There Goes The Judge (1991)
* Legacy of Lies (1992) (TVM)
* Nonsense and Lullabyes: Nursery Rhymes (1992)
* Nonsense and Lullabyes: Poems (1992)
* Law & Order - The Working Stiff (1992)
* Teamster Boss: The Jackie Presser Story (1992) (TVM)
* Vendetta 2 - The New Mafia (1993) (TVM)
* Tribeca - Stepping Back (1993)
* Naked City - Justice With A Bullet (1998) (TVM)
* The Bookfair Murders (2000)(TVM)
* 100 Center Street - Kids : Part 1 (2001)
* The Education of Max Bickford - I Never Schlunged My Father (2002)
* The Education of Max Bickford - Genesis (2002)
* The Education of Max Bickford - One More Time (2002)
* Monday Night Mayhem (2002) (TVM)
* Veritas: The Quest - The Name of God (2003)
* Whoopi - American Woman (2003)
* E.R - A Boy Falling Out of the Sky (2003)
* Stroker and Hoop - I Saw Stroker Killing Santa (2005)
* Studio 60 on the Sunset Strip - The Wrap Party (2006)
* (2009) (PBS) (Voice)
* Nurse Jackie (2009)

==References==

==External links==

* 
* 
* 
* The Bookwrap video interviews
* 

 
 



[[Electric Light Orchestra]]

Electric Light Orchestra (ELO) were a British rock group from Birmingham, England, who released eleven studio albums between 1971 and 1986 and another album in 2001. ELO were formed to accommodate Roy Wood and Jeff Lynne's desire to create modern rock and pop songs with classical overtones. After Wood's departure following the band's debut record, Lynne wrote and arranged all of the group's original compositions and produced every album.

Despite early singles success in the United Kingdom, the band were initially more successful in the United States, billed as "The English guys with the big fiddles". They gained a cult following despite lukewarm reviews back in their native United Kingdom. By the mid-1970s, they had become one of the biggest-selling acts in music. From 1972 to 1986, ELO accumulated 27 Top-40 hit singles in both the UK and the US, with 20 Top 20 UK singles and 15 Top-20 US singles (as charted by Billboard magazine). The band also holds the record for having the most Billboard Hot 100 Top 40 hits, 20, of any group in US chart history without ever having a number one single. Casey Kasem's American Top 40 from 15 March 1986 

ELO collected 19 CRIA, 21 RIAA and 38 BPI awards, and sold over 50 million records worldwide during the group's original 13 year period of active recording and touring. 

==History==

===19701973: Birth of the band and early albums===
In the late 1960s, Roy Wood  guitarist, vocalist and songwriter of The Move  had an idea to form a new band that would use violins, cellos, string basses, horns and woodwinds to give their music a classical sound, taking rock music in the direction "that The Beatles had left off". Jeff Lynne, frontman of fellow Birmingham group The Idle Race, was excited by the concept. In January 1970, when Carl Wayne left The Move, Lynne accepted Wood's second invitation to join the band on the condition that they focus their energy on the new project. On 12 July 1970, when Wood added multiple cellos to a Lynne-penned song intended to be a Move B-side, the new concept became a reality and "10538 Overture" became the first Electric Light Orchestra song. To help finance the fledgling band, two more Move albums were released during the lengthy ELO recordings. The resulting debut album The Electric Light Orchestra was released in 1971. (It was released in the United States in 1972 as No Answer, the name being chosen because a record company secretary had tried to ring the UK company and get the name of the album  since they were unable to contact them they left a note saying "No Answer". Electric Light Orchestra's No Answer. snopes.com. Retrieved 31 January 2011. ) "10538 Overture" became a UK top-ten hit. Lynne, Wood and Bev Bevan were the founding members of Electric Light Orchestra. They were joined by Bill Hunt (horns, keyboards) and Steve Woolam (violin) on the debut album.

ELO's debut concert took place on 16 April 1972 at The Greyhound Pub in Croydon, UK, with a line-up of Wood, Lynne, Bevan, Hunt, Wilfred Gibson (violin), Hugh McDowell (cello), Mike Edwards (cello), Andy Craig (cello) and Richard Tandy (bass). However, tensions soon surfaced between Wood and Lynne due to problems with management. A Recent interview with Roy Wood in Mojo magazine During the recordings for the band's second LP, Wood left the band taking cellist McDowell and horn/keyboard player Hunt with him to form Wizzard. Despite predictions from the music press that the band would fold without Wood, who had been the driving force behind the creation of ELO, Lynne stepped up to lead the band, with Bev Bevan remaining on drums, joined by Gibson on violin, Richard Tandy now playing the Moog synthesiser, piano and other keyboards in place of Hunt, Mike de Albuquerque on bass and vocals, and Mike Edwards and Colin Walker on cellos.

The new line-up performed at the 1972 Reading Festival. Barcus Berry instrument pick-ups, now sported by the band's string trio, allowed them to have proper amplification on stage for their instruments, which had previously been all but drowned out by all the sound of the other electrified instruments. The band released their second album, ELO 2 in 1973, which produced their first US chart single, a hugely elaborate version of the Chuck Berry classic "Roll Over Beethoven". ELO also made their first appearance on American Bandstand show. During the recording of the third album, Gibson was let go after a dispute over money, Mik Kaminski joined as violinist, and Walker left since touring was keeping him away from his family too much, while remaining cellist Edwards finished the cello parts. The resulting album, On the Third Day, was released in late 1973, with the American version featuring the popular single "Showdown". Hugh McDowell who had left the band the previous year returned for the subsequent American Tour in support of the album.

===19741982: Global success and concept albums===
For the band's fourth album, Eldorado, A Symphony, a concept album about a daydreamer, Lynne stopped overdubbing strings and hired an orchestra and choir instead. Louis Clark joined the band as string arranger. Eaton Music  Louis Clark. Web.archive.org (5 June 2008). Retrieved 31 January 2011. The first single of the album, "Can't Get It Out of My Head", became their first US Billboard charts Top 10 hit, and Eldorado, A Symphony became ELO's first gold album. After the release of Eldorado, bassist and vocalist Kelly Groucutt and cellist Melvyn Gale joined, replacing de Albuquerque (who, like Walker before him, quit since the ELO tours were keeping him away from his family too long) and Edwards respectively. The line-up stabilised as the band took to a decidedly more accessible sound. ELO had become successful in the United States at this point and the group was a star attraction on the stadium and arena circuit, as well as regularly appearing on The Midnight Special (1973, 1975, 1976 & 1977) more than any other band in that show's history with four appearances. Face the Music was released in 1975, producing the hit singles "Evil Woman" and "Strange Magic". The opening instrumental "Fire on High", with its mix of strings and blazing acoustic guitars, saw heavy exposure as background music on CBS Sports Spectacular montages. The group toured extensively from 3 February till 13 April 1976 promoting the album in the US, playing 68 shows in 76 days. It was on the American tour that ELO debuted their use of coloured lasers.

Despite the recognition and success they enjoyed in the States, they were still largely ignored in the United Kingdom until their sixth album, the platinum selling A New World Record, hit the top ten there in 1976. It contained the hit singles "Livin' Thing", "Telephone Line", "Rockaria!" and "Do Ya", a re-recording of The Move song. The band toured in support in the US only from October 1976 to April 1977 with a break in December, then an American Music Award show appearance on 31 January 1977, ELO Livin Thing American Music Awards 31 Jan 1977 Full. YouTube (25 February 2011) plus a one-off gig in San Diego in August 1977. Casey Kasem said that The Electric Light Orchestra is the "World's first touring rock 'n' roll chamber group" before he played "Livin' Thing" at #28. Casey Kasem's American Top 40 from 29 January 1977 A New World Record was followed by a multi-platinum selling album, the double-LP Out of the Blue, in 1977. Out of the Blue featured the singles "Turn to Stone", "Sweet Talkin' Woman", "Mr. Blue Sky", and "Wild West Hero", each becoming a hit in the United Kingdom. The band then set out on a nine-month, 92-date world tour, with an enormous set and a hugely expensive space ship stage with fog machines and a laser display. In the United States the concerts were billed as The Big Night and were their largest to date, with 80,000 people seeing them at Cleveland Stadium. The Big Night went on to become the highest-grossing live concert tour in music history up to that point (1978). The band also played at the Wembley Arena for eight straight sold-out nights during the tour as well, another record at that time. The first of these shows was recorded and televised, and later released as a CD and of the Blue: Live at Wembley (remastered)|DVD].

In 1979, the multi-platinum album Discovery was released. Although the biggest hit on the album (and ELO's biggest hit overall) was the rock song "Don't Bring Me Down", the album was noted for its heavy disco influence. Discovery also produced the hits "Shine a Little Love", "Last Train to London", "Confusion" and "The Diary of Horace Wimp". Another song, "Midnight Blue", was released as a single in Southeast Asia, and was a hit particularly in the Philippines. The band recorded videos for all the songs on the album.

ELO performing live in Oslo, Norway in 1978.

The Electric Light Orchestra finished 1979 as the biggest selling act in the United Kingdom. ELO had reached the peak of their stardom, selling millions of albums and singles, and even inspiring a parody/tribute song on the Randy Newman album Born Again, titled "The Story of a Rock and Roll Band". During 1979 Jeff Lynne also turned down an invitation for ELO to headline the August 1979 Knebworth Festival concerts. That allowed Led Zeppelin the chance to headline instead. In 1980 Jeff Lynne was asked to write for the soundtrack of the musical film Xanadu, with the other half written by John Farrar and performed by the film's star Olivia Newton-John. The movie performed poorly at the box office, but the soundtrack did exceptionally well, eventually going double platinum. The album spawned hit singles from both Newton-John ("Magic", No. 1 in the United States, and "Suddenly" with Cliff Richard) and ELO ("I'm Alive", which went gold, "All Over the World" and "Don't Walk Away"). The title track, performed by both Newton-John and ELO, is ELO's only song to top the singles chart in the United Kingdom. Guinness World Records: "British Hit Singles 14th Edition", page 195. 0-85112-156-X More than a quarter of a century later, Xanadu, a Broadway Musical, based on the film, opened on 10 July 2007 at the Helen Hayes Theatre to uniformly good reviews. It received 4 Tony Award nominations.

The Electric Light Orchestra Story, Bev Bevan's memoirs from his early days and throughout his career with The Move and ELO, was published in 1980. In 1981, ELO's sound changed again with the science fiction concept album Time, a throwback to earlier, more progressive rock albums like Eldorado. With the string section laid off, synthesisers took a dominating role, as was the trend in the larger music scene of the time, although studio strings were present on some of the tracks conducted by Rainer Pietsch, the overall soundscape had a more electronic feel in keeping with the futuristic nature of the album. Time topped the UK charts for two weeks and was the last ELO studio album to be certified platinum in the United Kingdom. Singles from the album included "Hold on Tight", "Twilight", "The Way Life's Meant to Be", "Here Is the News" and "Ticket to the Moon". The band embarked on their last world tour to promote the LP. It was the first ELO tour without cellists, although Mik Kaminski returned to play his "blue violin". The live line-up was completed with Louis Clark and Dave Morgan (guitar, synthesisers, vocals) playing the string parts on synthesisers, and "Fred the Robot" voicing the "Prologue" and "Epilogue".

===19831986, 1989: Secret Messages, disbanding and ELO Part II===
Jeff Lynne wanted to follow Time with a double album. CBS blocked his plan claiming a double vinyl album would be too expensive. The new album was edited down from double album to a single disc and released as Secret Messages in 1983. (Many of the out-takes were later released on Afterglow or as b-sides of singles.) The album was a hit in the UK reaching the top 5. The album's release was followed by news that there would be no tour to promote the LP, that drummer Bevan was now playing drums for Black Sabbath and that bassist Kelly Groucutt had left the band. Rumours of the group disbanding were publicly denied by Bevan. Although Secret Messages debuted at number four in the United Kingdom, it fell off the charts, failing to catch fire with a lack of hit singles in the U.K. (though "Rock 'n' Roll Is King" was a sizeable hit in UK, the US and Australia) and a lukewarm media response. By 1983 Bevan was expressing a desire to join Black Sabbath permanently and Lynne and Tandy were recording tracks for the Electric Dreams soundtrack under Jeff Lynne's name. However, Lynne was contractually obligated to make one more ELO album. Lynne, Bevan and Tandy returned to the studio in 1985 as a three-piece (with Christian Schneider playing saxophone on some tracks) to record Balance of Power, released early in 1986. Though the single "Calling America" placed in the Top 30 in the United Kingdom (number 28) and Top 20 in the States, subsequent singles failed to chart. The album lacked actual strings, replaced once again by synthesisers, played by Tandy. The album also shed the customary ELO logo that had appeared on every album since 1976.

Lynne, with the 7-piece line-up that supported Time (with the exception of bassist Groucutt being replaced by Martin Smith), played a small number of live ELO performances in 1986, including shows in England and Germany along with US appearances on American Bandstand, American Bandstand from June 28th, 1986 Solid Gold, then at Disneyland that summer. Disney's Summer Vacation Party TV Show, 1986 The Birmingham Heart Beat Charity Concert 1986 was a charity concert organised by Bevan in ELO's hometown of Birmingham on 15 March 1986. Electric Light Orchestra (ELO) Concert at Birmingham NEC 1986 - Heartbeat '86 A hint of Lynne's future was seen when George Harrison appeared onstage during the encore at Heartbeat, joining in the all-star jam of "Johnny B. Goode". ELO's last performance for several years occurred on 13 July 1986 in Stuttgart, Germany playing as support band to Rod Stewart. ELO effectively disbanded after that final show in Stuttgart in 1986, but there was no announcement made of it for the next two years, during which George Harrison's Lynne-produced album Cloud Nine and the pair's follow-up (with Roy Orbison, Bob Dylan and Tom Petty as Traveling Wilburys) Traveling Wilburys Vol. 1 were released. Bevan approached Lynne to make another ELO album in 1988, but Lynne was not interested and went on to announce that ELO was no more.

ELO Part II in concert

Bevan (under an agreement with Lynne who co-owned the ELO name with him) continued on in 1989 as ELO Part II, initially with no other former ELO members except Clark. ELO Part II released their debut album Electric Light Orchestra Part Two in 1990. Mik Kaminski, Kelly Groucutt and Hugh McDowell joined the band for the first tour in 1991. McDowell left after that tour. Bevan, Groucutt, Kaminski and Clark recorded a second album, Moment of Truth, in 1994 and toured extensively until 1999. Bevan retired from the line-up in 1999 and sold his share of the ELO name to Jeff Lynne in 2000. The remaining members continue to tour and record, renamed as The Orchestra.

===2000: Reformation===
Lynne's comeback with ELO began in 2000 with the release of a retrospective box set, Flashback, containing three CDs of remastered tracks and a handful of out-takes and unfinished works, most notably a new version of ELO's only UK number one hit "Xanadu". In 2001 Zoom, ELO's first album since 1986, was released. Though billed and marketed as an ELO album, the only returning member other than Lynne was Tandy, who performed on one track. Guest musicians included former Beatles Ringo Starr and George Harrison. Upon completion of the album, Lynne reformed the band with completely new members, including his then-girlfriend Rosie Vela (who had released her own album, Zazu, in 1986) and announced that ELO would tour again. Former ELO member Tandy rejoined the band a short time afterwards for two television live performances: VH1 Storytellers and a PBS concert shot at CBS Television City, later titled Zoom Tour Live, that was released on DVD. The planned tour was cancelled "The off-switch has been flipped on the Electric Light Orchestra. Or at least its tour, which was wired to illuminate the First Union Center on 15 Sept." and was not rescheduled. Harvest and Epic/Legacy released ELO's back catalogue from 200107. Included amongst the remastered album tracks were unreleased songs and out-takes, including two new singles. The first was "Surrender" which registered on the lower end of the UK Singles Chart at number 81, some 30 years after it was written in 1976. The other single was another unreleased recording, "Latitude 88 North", released as the third bonus track on the 2007 remastered version of their 1977 album Out of the Blue. The song was written in 1977, but existed only as a demo recording of the chorus. Lynne returned to the song and finished it in preparation for the remastered version of Out of the Blue.

===201012: Non-performing work and miniature reunions===
On 9 August 2010, Eagle Rock Entertainment released Live  The Early Years in the UK as a DVD compilation that included Fusion  Live in London (1976) along with never before released live performances at Brunel University (1973) and on a German TV show Rockpalast (1974). Electric Light Orchestra "Live  The Early Years" for the first time on DVD | Altsounds.com News. Hangout.altsounds.com. Retrieved 31 January 2011. The US had a slightly edited release on 24 August 2010. Live  The Early Years  Product Details. Eagle Rock. Retrieved 31 January 2011. The Essential Electric Light Orchestra artwork was re-jigged to feature two different covers. The US and Australian releases shared one design, while the rest of the world featured the other for a new double album release in October 2011. Here Is the News by Face the Music  Official ELO and related artists information site. This was the third ELO compilation to present a chronological run-through of ELO's singles/songs following US compilations Ol ELO in 1976 and in 1995. was released on 8 October 2012. It is an album of new recordings of ELO's greatest hits by Lynne; along with a new song "Point of No Return" to coincide with Lynne's second solo album release Long Wave. These new 2012 albums contained advertisement cards, announcing the re-release of expanded and remastered versions of both the 2001 album Zoom, in addition to his solo album Armchair Theatre, which originally debuted in 1990. Both albums were re-released, in April 2013 with various bonus tracks. Also released was the live album, Electric Light Orchestra Live, showcasing songs from the Zoom tour. 

In 2012, Lynne and Tandy teamed up at Lynne's Bungalow Palace home studios to record a live set of ELO's songs. This was broadcast on TV as part of the Mr. Blue Sky documentary.

Lynne and Tandy reunited again on 12 November 2013 to perform, under the name Jeff Lynne and Friends, "Livin' Thing" and "Mr Blue Sky" at the Children in Needs Rocks concert at Hammersmith Eventim Apollo, London.

==Band name and logo==
1976 logo
Earlier logo
The group's name is an intended pun based not only on electric light (as in a light bulb as seen on early album covers) but also using "electric" rock instruments combined with a "light orchestra" (orchestras with only a few cellos and violins that were popular in Britain during the 1960s). The official band logo, designed in 1976 by artist Kosh, was first seen on their 1976 album A New World Record and is based on a 1946 Wurlitzer jukebox model 4008 speaker. The 4008 speaker was itself based upon the upper cabinet of the Wurlitzer model 1015 jukebox. The band's previous logo, designed by John Kehe at United Artists Records, took its cues from the General Electric logo. The new logo appeared on most of the band's subsequent album covers in various forms. For instance, on 1977's Out of the Blue, the logo was turned into a huge flying saucer space station, an enduring image now synonymous with the band. On the follow-up album Discovery, the logo became a small glowing artifact on top of a treasure chest. Bev Bevan usually displayed the logo on his drum kit.

==Personnel==

*Jeff Lynne  lead vocals, guitars, bass guitar, keyboards, drums, cello, producer, songwriter, composer, arranger (19701986, 20002001, 2012)
*Bev Bevan  drums, percussion, vocals (19701986)
*Roy Wood  lead vocals, guitar, bass guitar, cello, clarinet, bassoon, oboe, drums, recorder, producer, songwriter, arranger (197072)
*Bill Hunt  keyboards, French horn, hunting horn (19701972)
*Steve Woolam  violin (19701971)
*Richard Tandy  keyboards, synthesisers, bass guitar, guitar, backing vocals, arranger (19721986, 20002001, 2012)
*Mike Edwards  cello (19721974)
*Wilfred Gibson  violin (19721973)
*Hugh McDowell  cello (1972, 19731979)
*Andy Craig  cello (1972)
*Colin Walker  cello (19721973)
*Mike de Albuquerque  bass guitar, backing vocals (19721974)

*Mik Kaminski  violin (19731986)
*Louis Clark  orchestra arranger, conductor, synthesisers, keyboards (19741986)
*Kelly Groucutt  bass guitar, backing vocals (19741983)
*Melvyn Gale  cello, piano (19751979)
*Dave Morgan  backing vocals, synthesisers, acoustic guitar (19811986)
*Martin Smith  bass guitar, backing vocals (1986)
*Marc Mann  guitars, keyboards, backing vocals (20002001, 2012)
*Rosie Vela  backing vocals (2000-2001)
*Matt Bissonette  bass guitar, backing vocals (2001)
*Gregg Bissonette  drums, backing vocals (2001)
*Peggy Baldwin  cello (2001)
*Sarah O'Brien  cello (2001)

==Discography==

;Studio albums
* The Electric Light Orchestra (1971)
* ELO 2 (1973)
* On the Third Day (1973)
* Eldorado (1974)
* Face the Music (1975)
* A New World Record (1976)
* Out of the Blue (1977)
* Discovery (1979)
* Xanadu (1980)
* Time (1981)
* Secret Messages (1983)
* Balance of Power (1986)
* Zoom (2001)

==References==

==External links==
 

*Electric Light Orchestra Home  The official Electric Light Orchestra site.
*Face the Music  ELO and related artists information site.
*Electric Light Orchestra Legacy Recordings site  ELO's page at their record label.
*Jeff Lynne Song Database

 



[[Elo]]

Elo or ELO may refer to:

== Music ==
* Electric Light Orchestra, a British rock music group
** The Electric Light Orchestra (album), the group's debut album
** ELO 2, the group's second album
* ELO Part II, an offshoot band of Electric Light Orchestra

== Sports and games ==
* Elo rating system, a system for measuring the relative strength of players in chess and other two-player games
* World Football Elo Ratings, a ranking system for men's national teams in football, based on Elo rating system

== People ==
* Arpad Elo (19031992), Hungarian-American creator of the Elo rating system
* Colmn Elo (555611), Irish saint
* Michael Elo, Danish musician
* Unto Elo (born 1944), Finnish sprint canoer

== Places ==
;United States
* Elo, Wisconsin, an unincorporated community

== Other ==
* EuroLOT, an airline which has ICAO airline designator ELO
* Eleorchis, an orchid genus abbreviated "Elo" in trade journals
* Electronic Literature Organization, a nonprofit organisation promoting electronic literary works
* Elo (dog), a dog breed
* Elo, a Samoan god who presides over Pulotu (the underworld)
* Very-long-chain 3-oxoacyl-CoA synthase, an enzyme



[[Evil Dead II]]

Evil Dead II (referred to in publicity materials as Evil Dead 2: Dead by Dawn ) is a 1987 American comedy horror film directed by Sam Raimi and a parody sequel to the 1981 film The Evil Dead. The film was written by Raimi and Scott Spiegel (they wrote the screenplay during the production of another collaboration Crimewave), produced by Robert Tapert, and stars Bruce Campbell as Ash Williams.

Filming took place in Michigan and North Carolina in 1986 and the film was released in the United States on March 13, 1987. It was a minor box office success, achieving just under $6 million. , the total U.S. box office gross is $10.9 million. It also received critical acclaim with critics notably praising Raimi's direction and Campbell's role as the protagonist.

Like the original, Evil Dead II has accumulated a cult following, and is widely considered one of the greatest horror films of all time. The film was eventually followed by a third installment in the Evil Dead series, Army of Darkness (1992).

==Plot==
The film begins with a revised recap of the events of the first film. Ash Williams and his girlfriend Linda take a romantic vacation to a seemingly abandoned cabin in the woods. While in the cabin, Ash plays a tape of an archaeology professor (the cabin's previous inhabitant), reciting passages from the Necronomicon Ex-Mortis (or Book of the Dead), which he has discovered during an archaeological dig. The recorded incantation unleashes an evil force which kills and later possesses Linda. Ash is then forced to decapitate his girlfriend for his own safety.

After he buries Linda, a spirit is seen hunting for Ash. The film then picks up with Ash becoming briefly possessed by the demon, but when day breaks the spirit is gone, and Ash is back to normal. Ash finds little chance of safety, however, as the bridge leading to the cabin is destroyed. To make things worse, Linda was revived and attacks Ash by biting his hand with her head. Ash brings Linda's severed head to the shed where her headless body attacks him with a chainsaw but Ash gains the upper hand and slashes the relentless zombified Linda to death, killing her once and for all. Later on, Ash is forced to sever his bitten right hand, which has become possessed.

While Ash is dealing with this force, the professor's daughter, Annie, and her research partner, Ed Getley, return from the dig with more pages of the Necronomicon in tow, only to find the destroyed bridge. They enlist the help of Jake and Bobby Joe to guide them along an alternate trail to the cabin. The four of them find an embattled Ash, who is, seemingly, slowly being driven insane due to his encounter with the demon, such as hallucinating that the room comes to life and begins laughing hysterically at him.

At first, he is mistaken for a murderer by the four people because he shoots at them through the door (mistaking them as the Evil Force), but they find out the truth after listening to a recording of Annie's father, Professor Knowby, that talked about how his wife Henrietta was possessed and buried in the cabin's cellar rather than dismembered. Ed is possessed and is soon dismembered by an axe wielding Ash. Bobby Joe tries to escape, but is attacked by the demon trees and dragged to her death. Annie translates two of the pages before Jake turns on them and throws the pages into the cellar, holding them at gunpoint to force them to go look for Bobby Joe. Ash is possessed once again and turns on his remaining companions, incapacitating Jake. Annie retreats to the cabin and accidentally stabs Jake (mistaking him for the demon) and drags him to the cellar door, where he is killed by Henrietta in a bloodbath. Ash tries to kill Annie, but returns to normal when he sees Linda's necklace, reminding him of her. 

Ash, with Annie's help, modifies the chainsaw and attaches it to where his right hand had been. Ash eventually finds the missing pages of the Necronomicon and kills Henrietta, turned into a long-necked monster. Annie chants an incantation that sends the evil force back to where it came from. The incantation opens up a whirling temporal portal which not only draws in the evil force, but nearby trees, the Oldsmobile, and Ash himself. Ash's possessed hand stabs and kills Annie with the Kandarian dagger.

Ash and his Oldsmobile land in what appears to be the Crusader-held Middle East in the year 1300 AD. He is then confronted by a group of knights who initially mistake him for a deadite, but they are quickly distracted when a real one actually shows up. Ash blasts the harpy-like deadite with his shotgun and is hailed as a hero who has come to save the realm, at which point he breaks down and screams "No!"

==Cast==
* Bruce Campbell as Ash Williams, a common guy who travels to the cabin in the woods to spend the weekend with his girlfriend Linda. As the story follows, he must defeat the evil powers around him that keep growing. After enough attacks, he decides to take the evil head-on equipped with a shotgun and a chainsaw and sets out to face the enemy.
* Sarah Berry as Annie Knowby, Professor Knowby's daughter who travels to the cabin looking forward to share her discoveries of the Book of the Dead with her father. She thinks Ash murdered her parents at first, but when the evil spirits unleash against them, she realizes the truth and finds out her only way to survive is to help Ash defeat the spirits.
* Dan Hicks as Jake, a white-trash guy who freaks out before the evil spirits. When things turn bad, he thinks they have to escape before they all get killed. He is accidentally stabbed in the chest by Annie when trying to escape a possessed Ash. Badly wounded but still alive, Annie tries dragging him to safety in the living room near the trapdoor to the fruit cellar, where he is attacked and eaten alive by Henrietta.
* Kassie DePaiva as Bobby Joe, Jake's foul-mouthed, self-centered girlfriend. She tries to escape the cabin, only to be killed by the woods themselves (in a similar fashion to how Cheryl was raped in the first film).
* Ted Raimi as Possessed Henrietta, Annie's possessed mother who uses her memories to lure her in order to kill her and everybody else, but is killed when Ash stabs her through the chest with his chainsaw.
* Denise Bixler as Linda, Ash's girlfriend. She gets possessed, then tries to kill Ash. In a desperate effort, he beheads her with a shovel before burying her. Later on, her corpse raises from the grave and resumes her intentions to kill Ash with both her severed head and her body acting separately. He finally gets rid of her by chopping her up with a chainsaw.
* Richard Domeier as Professor Ed Getley, Professor Knowby's associate and Annie's boyfriend. After being attacked by the possessed Henrietta, he gets possessed by another spirit. He meets his doom when Ash dismembers him with an ax.
* John Peaks as Professor Knowby, the archaeologist who found the Book of the Dead. When he took it to his cabin to translate it, he accidentally unleashed its evil spirits. His fate remains unknown, since he only appears as a floating head from another plane of existence.
* Lou Hancock as Henrietta Knowby, Professor Knowby's wife. She gets possessed when her husband accidentally unleashes the evil spirits of the Book of the Dead. According to the Professor's recordings he was forced to kill Henrietta when she became demonically possessed and attacked him. He then buried her body in the fruit cellar where she reanimates and remains a recurring villain (portrayed by Ted Raimi) through the second half of the film.
* The Possessed Hand, which once belonged to Ash though he was forced to amputate it from the wrist when the hand became possessed and tried to kill him in a rather comedic slapstick scene. Once amputated the hand proceeds to act independently and becomes a recurring villain causing chaos in the cabin despite Ash's initial attempts to kill it with a shotgun.

==Production==

The concept of a sequel to The Evil Dead was discussed during location shooting on the first film. Raimi wanted to toss his hero, Ash, through a time portal, back into the Middle Ages. That notion eventually led to the third installment, Army of Darkness. 

After the release of The Evil Dead, Raimi moved on to Crimewave, a cross between a crime film and a comedy produced by Raimi and Joel and Ethan Coen. Irvin Shapiro, a publicist who was primarily responsible for the mainstream release of The Evil Dead, suggested that they next work on an Evil Dead sequel. Raimi scoffed at the idea, expecting Crimewave to be a hit, but Shapiro put out ads announcing the sequel regardless.

After Crimewave was released to little audience or critical acclaim, Raimi and Tapert, knowing that another flop would further stall their already lagging careers, took Shapiro up on his offer. Around the same time, they met Italian film producer Dino De Laurentiis, the owner of production and distribution company DEG. He had asked Raimi if he would direct a theatrical adaptation of the Stephen King (written under his Richard Bachman pseudonym) novel Thinner. Raimi turned down the offer, but De Laurentiis continued to be interested in the young filmmaker.

The Thinner adaptation was part of a deal between De Laurentiis and King to produce several adaptations of King's successful horror fiction. At the time, King was directing the first such adaptation, Maximum Overdrive, based on his short story "Trucks". He had dinner with a crew member who had been interviewed about the Evil Dead sequel, and told King that the film was having trouble attracting funding. Upon hearing this, King, who had written a glowing review of the first film that helped it become an audience favorite at Cannes, called De Laurentiis and asked him to fund the film. 

Though initially skeptical, De Laurentiis agreed after being presented with the extremely high Italian grosses for the first film. Although Raimi and Tapert had desired $4 million for the production, they were allotted only $3.6 million. As such, the planned medieval storyline had to be scrapped.

===Script===
Though they had only recently received the funding necessary to produce the film, the script had been written for some time, having been composed largely during the production of Crimewave. Raimi contacted his old friend Scott Spiegel, who had collaborated with Campbell and others on the Super 8 mm films they had produced during their childhood in Michigan. Most of these films had been comedies, and Spiegel felt that Evil Dead II should be less straight horror than the first. Initially, the opening sequence included all five of the original film's characters, but, in an effort to save time and money, all but Ash and Linda were cut from the final draft. 

Spiegel and Raimi wrote most of the film in their house in Silver Lake, Los Angeles, California, where they were living with the aforementioned Coen brothers, as well as actors Frances McDormand, Kathy Bates, and Holly Hunter (Hunter was the primary inspiration for the Bobby Jo character). Due both to the distractions of their house guests and the films they were involved with, Crimewave and Josh Becker's Thou Shalt Not Kill... Except, the script took an inordinately long time to finish.

Among the film's many inspirations include The Three Stooges and other slapstick comedy films; Ash's fights with his disembodied hand come from a film made by Spiegel as a teenager, entitled Attack of the Helping Hand, which was itself inspired by television commercials advertising Hamburger Helper. The "laughing room" scene, where all the objects in the room seemingly come to life and begin to cackle maniacally along with Ash, came about after Spiegel jokingly used a gooseneck lamp to visually demonstrate a Popeye-esque laugh. Spiegel's humorous influence can be seen throughout the film, perhaps most prominently in certain visual jokes; for instance, when Ash traps his rogue hand under a pile of books, on top is A Farewell to Arms.

===Filming===
With the script completed, and a production company secured, filming could begin. The production commenced in Wadesboro, North Carolina, not far from De Laurentiis' offices in Wilmington. De Laurentiis had wanted them to film in his elaborate Wilmington studio, but the production team felt uneasy being so close to the producer, so they moved to Wadesboro, approximately three hours away. Steven Spielberg had previously filmed The Color Purple in Wadesboro, and the large white farmhouse used as an exterior location in that film became the production office for Evil Dead II. Most of the film was shot in the woods near that farmhouse, or J.R. Faison Junior High School, which is where the interior cabin set was located.

The film's production was not nearly as chaotic or strange as the original film's production, largely because of Raimi, Tapert and Campbell's additional film making experience. However, there are nevertheless numerous stories about the strange happenings on the set. For instance, the rat seen in the cellar was nicknamed "Seor Cojones" by the crew ("cojones" is Spanish slang for "testicles"). 

Even so, there were hardships, mostly involving Ted Raimi's costume. Ted, director Sam's younger brother, had been briefly involved in the first film, acting as a fake Shemp, but in Evil Dead II he gets the larger role of the historian's demonically-possessed wife, Henrietta. Raimi was forced to wear a full-body, latex costume, crouch in a small hole in the floor acting as a "cellar", or on one day, both. Raimi became extremely overheated, to the point that his costume was literally filled with liters of sweat; special effects artist Gregory Nicotero describes pouring the fluid into several Dixie cups so as to get it out of the costume. The sweat is also visible on-screen, dripping out of the costume's ear, in the scene where Henrietta spins around over Annie's head.

The crew also snuck various in-jokes into the film itself, such as the clawed glove of Freddy Krueger, the primary antagonist of the A Nightmare on Elm Street series of slasher films, which hangs in the cabin's basement and tool shed. This was, at least partially, a reference to a scene in the original A Nightmare on Elm Street where the character Nancy Thompson (portrayed by Heather Langenkamp), watches the original Evil Dead on a television set in her room. In turn, that scene was a reference to the torn The Hills Have Eyes poster seen in the original Evil Dead film, which was itself a reference to a torn Jaws poster in The Hills Have Eyes.

At the film's wrap party, the crew held a talent contest, where Raimi and Campbell sang The Byrds' "Eight Miles High", with Nicotero on guitar. Mentioned in Evil Dead II audio commentary 

==Reception==

===Box office===
Evil Dead II opened on March 13, 1987 to a weekend gross of $807,260. At this time, it was only in 310 theatres, resulting in its smaller gross. However, after spending a little over a month in theatres, the film ultimately grossed $5,923,044 domestically. Since its initial release, the film has reached an estimated total of $10,900,000 in box office revenues.

===Critical response===
Like its predecessor, Evil Dead II has received universal acclaim, and holds the 98% approval rating on the review aggregator Rotten Tomatoes based on 46 reviews with an average rating of 8/10, the same score as its predecessor. On a similar website Metacritic, it holds a score of 69/100 (generally favorable). Empire magazine praised the film saying "the gaudily gory, virtuoso, hyper-kinetic horror sequel uses every trick in the cinematic book" and confirms that "Bruce Campbell and Raimi are gods" and Caryn James of The New York Times called it "genuine, if bizarre, proof of Sam Raimi's talent and developing skill." Leonard Maltin originally rated the film with two stars, Maltin, 2001, p. 426. but later increased the rating to three stars. Maltin, 2009, 424. 

Roger Ebert of the Chicago Sun-Times gave the film a three star rating (out of four) describing it as "a fairly sophisticated satire, that makes you want to get up and shuffle." He praised the film's sense of surrealism, comedic timing, and "grubby, low-budget intensity." Ebert states that "if you know it's all special effects, and if you've seen a lot of other movies and have a sense of humor, you might have a great time at Evil Dead 2." Richard Harrington of the Washington Post wrapped up his review stating that "the acting is straight out of '50s B movies. The exposition is clumsy, the sound track corny, the denouement silly. Then again, who said bad taste was easy?" Conversely, Pat Graham of Chicago Reader disliked the mix of horror and comedy, writing in his review that "The pop-up humor and smirkiness suggest Raimi's aspiring to the fashionable company of the brothers Coen, though on the basis of this strained effort I'd say he's overshot the mark." 

Entertainment Weekly ranked the film #19 on their list of "The Top 50 Cult Films". 

Sight and Sound ranked it #34 on their 50 Funniest Films of All Time list. In 2008, Empire magazine included Evil Dead II on their list of The 500 Greatest Movies of All Time, ranked #49. 

J.C. Maek III of PopMatters wrote, "Equal parts remake and sequel, the second film brought back Bruce Campbell as Ash and was every bit as gory and horrific as the first film with more tree rape and dismemberment and blood splatters than ever. On the other hand, Evil Dead II is also an absolutely hilarious and uproarious intentional comedy." 

===Accolades===

 Award Subject Nominee Result 
 Saturn Awards Best Horror Film Sam Raimi 
 Best Special Effects Vern Hyde, Doug Beswick and Tom Sullivan 
 Best Make-up Mark Shostrom 
 Catalonian International Film Festival Best Film Sam Raimi 
 Fantasporto Awards 
 

==References==

;Bibliography
* Warren, Bill. The Evil Dead Companion. ISBN 0-312-27501-3.
* Raimi, Sam. Spiegel, Scott. Nicotero, Greg. Campbell, Bruce. Evil Dead II DVD, audio commentary.
* Campbell, Bruce. . ISBN 0-312-29145-0

==External links==
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* Evil Dead 2: Dead by Dawn at Deadites Online.
* Evil Dead II at Book Of The Dead



[[Edwin Hubble]]

Edwin Powell Hubble (November 20, 1889  September 28, 1953) was an American astronomer who played a crucial role in establishing the field of extragalactic astronomy and is generally regarded as one of the most important observational cosmologists of the 20th century. Hubble is known for showing that the recessional velocity of a galaxy increases with its distance from the earth, implying the universe is expanding. Known as "Hubble's law", this relation had been discovered previously by Georges Lematre, a Belgian priest/astronomer who published his work in a less visible journal. There is still much controversy surrounding the issue and some argue that it should be referred to as "Lematre's law" although this change has not taken hold in the astronomy community.

Hubble is also known for providing substantial evidence that many formerly known "nebulae" were actually galaxies beyond the Milky Way. American astronomer Vesto Slipher provided the first evidence to this argument almost a decade before. 

Hubble supported the Doppler shift interpretation of the observed redshift that had been proposed earlier by Slipher, and that led to the theory of the metric expansion of space. Effects of Red Shifts on the Distribution of Nebulae, Hubble, Edwin, Astrophysical Journal, vol. 84, p.517, The SAO/NASA Astrophysics Data System Red-shifts and the distribution of nebul&aelig, Hubble, Edwin, Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society, Vol. 97, p.513, The SAO/NASA Astrophysics Data System He tended to believe the frequency of light could, by some so far unknown means, decrease the longer light travels through space. Engelbert Broda: 

==Biography==
Edwin Hubble was born to Virginia Lee James (1864-1934) and John Powell Hubble, an insurance executive, in Marshfield, Missouri, and moved to Wheaton, Illinois, in 1900. In his younger days, he was noted more for his athletic prowess than his intellectual abilities, although he did earn good grades in every subject except for spelling. Edwin was a gifted athlete playing baseball, football, basketball, and he ran track in both high school and college. He played a variety of positions on the basketball court from center to shooting guard. In fact Hubble even led the University of Chicago s basketball team to their first conference title in 1907. He won seven first places and a third place in a single high school track and field meet in 1906. That year he also set the state high school record for the high jump in Illinois. Another of his personal interests was dry-fly fishing, and he practiced amateur boxing as well. World of Physics and The Cloudy Night Book 

His studies at the University of Chicago were concentrated on mathematics and astronomy, which led to a bachelor of science degree in 1910. Hubble also became a member of the Kappa Sigma Fraternity (and in 1948 was named the Kappa Sigma "Man of the Year"). He spent the three years at The Queen's College, Oxford after earning his bachelors as one of the university's first Rhodes Scholars, initially studying jurisprudence instead of science (as a promise to his dying father), and later added literature and Spanish, and earning his master's degree. 

In 1909, Hubble's father moved his family from Chicago to Shelbyville, Kentucky, so that the family could live in a small town, ultimately settling in nearby Louisville. His father died in the winter of 1913, while Edwin was still in England, and in the summer of 1913, Edwin returned to care for his mother, two sisters, and younger brother, as did his brother William. The family moved once more to Everett Avenue, in Louisville's Highlands neighborhood, to accommodate Edwin and William. 

Hubble was also a dutiful son, who despite his intense interest in astronomy since boyhood, surrendered to his fathers request to study law, first at the University of Chicago and later at Oxford, though he managed to take a few math and science courses. After the death of his father in 1913, Edwin returned to the Midwest from Oxford, but did not have the motivation to practice law. So he taught Spanish, physics, and mathematics at the New Albany High School in New Albany, Indiana for a year before he resolved to start over, at the age of 25, to become a professional astronomer. He also coached the boys' basketball team there. After a year of high-school teaching, he entered graduate school with the help of his former professor from the University of Chicago to study astronomy at the Yerkes Observatory of the University, where he received his PhD in 1917. His dissertation was titled Photographic Investigations of Faint Nebulae.

When Congress declared war on Germany in 1917, Hubble rushed his dissertation for his PhD, volunteering for the United States Army and was assigned to the newly created 86th Division. He rose to the rank of Major and was found fit for overseas duty on July 9, 1918. The 86th Division never saw combat, and after the end of World War One Hubble spent a year in Cambridge, where he renewed his studies of Astronomy. In 1919, Hubble was offered a staff position in California by George Ellery Hale, the founder and director of the Carnegie Institution's Mount Wilson Observatory, near Pasadena, California, where he remained on the staff until his death. Hubble also served in the U.S. Army at the Aberdeen Proving Ground during World War II. For his work there, he received the Legion of Merit award. Shortly before his death, Mount Palomar's giant 200 in reflector Hale Telescope was completed, and Hubble was the first astronomer to use it. Hubble continued his research at the Mount Wilson and Mount Palomar Observatories, where he remained active until his death.

Although Hubble was raised as a Christian, he later became an agnostic. 

Hubble experienced a heart attack in July 1949 while on vacation in Colorado. He was taken care of by his wife, Grace Hubble, and continued on a modified diet and work schedule. He died of cerebral thrombosis (a spontaneous blood clot in his brain) on September 28, 1953, in San Marino, California. No funeral was held for him, and his wife never revealed his burial site. 

==Discoveries==

===The universe goes beyond the Milky Way galaxy===
Edwin Hubble's arrival at Mount Wilson, California in 1919 coincided roughly with the completion of the 100 in Hooker Telescope, then the world's largest telescope. At that time, the prevailing view of the cosmos was that the universe consisted entirely of the Milky Way Galaxy. Using the Hooker Telescope at Mt. Wilson, Hubble identified Cepheid variables (a kind of star; see also standard candle) in several spiral nebulae, including the Andromeda Nebula and Triangulum. His observations, made in 19221923, proved conclusively that these nebulae were much too distant to be part of the Milky Way and were, in fact, entire galaxies outside our own. This idea had been opposed by many in the astronomy establishment of the time, in particular by the Harvard University-based Harlow Shapley. Despite the opposition, Hubble, then a thirty-five-year-old scientist, had his findings first published in The New York Times on November 23, 1924, and then more formally presented in the form of a paper at the January 1, 1925 meeting of the American Astronomical Society. Hubble's findings fundamentally changed the scientific view of the universe. Supporters of Hubbles expanding universe theory state that Hubbles discovery of nebulas outside of our galaxy helped pave the way for future astronomers. Although some of his more renowned colleagues simply scoffed at Hubble's idea of an expanding universe, Hubble ended up publishing his findings on nebulas. This published work earned him an award titled the American Association Prize and five hundred dollars from Burton E. Livingston of the Committee on Awards. 

Hubble also devised the most commonly used system for classifying galaxies, grouping them according to their appearance in photographic images. He arranged the different groups of galaxies in what became known as the Hubble sequence. 

===Redshift increases with distance===
The 100 in Hooker telescope at Mount Wilson Observatory that Hubble used to measure galaxy distances and a value for the rate of expansion of the universe.

Combining his own measurements of galaxy distances based on Henrietta Swan Leavitt's period-luminosity relationship for Cepheids with Vesto Slipher and Milton L. Humason's measurements of the redshifts associated with the galaxies, he discovered a rough proportionality of the objects' distances with their red shifts. Though there was considerable scatter (now known to be due to peculiar velocities), he was able to plot a trend line from the 46 galaxies and obtained a value for the Hubble Constant of 500 km/s/Mpc, which is much higher than the currently accepted value due to errors in their distance calibrations. In 1929 Hubble formulated the Redshift Distance Law, nowadays termed simply Hubble's law, which, if the redshift is understood to be a measure of recession velocity, is consistent with the solutions of Einsteins equations of general relativity for a homogeneous, isotropic expanding space. Although concepts underlying an expanding universe were well understood earlier, this statement by Hubble and Humason led to wider-scale acceptance for this view. The law states that the greater the distance between any two galaxies, the greater their relative speed of separation. But two years before, in 1927, Georges Lematre, a Belgian Catholic priest and physicist, published a paper in an obscure Belgian journal, Annales de la Socit Scientifique de Bruxelles. In that paper, he showed that the data collected by Hubble and two other astronomers up to that time was enough to derive a linear velocity-distance relation between the galaxies, and that this supported a model of an expanding universe based on Einsteins equations for General Relativity.

This discovery was the first observational support for the Big Bang theory which had been proposed by Georges Lematre in 1927. The observed velocities of distant galaxies, taken together with the cosmological principle, appeared to show that the universe was expanding in a manner consistent with the Friedmann-Lematre model of general relativity. In 1931 Hubble wrote a letter to the Dutch cosmologist Willem de Sitter expressing his opinion on the theoretical interpretation of the redshift-distance relation: 

Today, the "apparent velocities" in question are understood as an increase in proper distance that occurs due to the expansion of space. Light traveling through stretching space will experience a Hubble-type redshift, a mechanism different from the Doppler effect (although the two mechanisms become equivalent descriptions related by a coordinate transformation for nearby galaxies).

In the 1930s, Hubble was involved in determining the distribution of galaxies and spatial curvature. These data seemed to indicate that the universe was flat and homogeneous, but there was a deviation from flatness at large redshifts. According to Allan Sandage,

There were methodological problems with Hubble's survey technique that showed a deviation from flatness at large redshifts. In particular, the technique did not account for changes in luminosity of galaxies due to galaxy evolution.
Earlier, in 1917, Albert Einstein had found that his newly developed theory of general relativity indicated that the universe must be either expanding or contracting. Unable to believe what his own equations were telling him, Einstein introduced a cosmological constant (a "fudge factor") to the equations to avoid this "problem". When Einstein learned of Hubble's redshifts, he immediately realized that the expansion predicted by General Relativity must be real, and in later life he said that changing his equations was "the biggest blunder of life." In fact, Einstein apparently once visited Hubble and tried to convince him that the universe was expanding. 

===Other discoveries===
Hubble discovered the asteroid 1373 Cincinnati on August 30, 1935. He also wrote The Observational Approach to Cosmology and The Realm of the Nebulae approximately during this time. 

==No Nobel Prize==
Hubble spent much of the later part of his career attempting to have astronomy considered an area of physics, instead of being its own science. He did this largely so that astronomersincluding himselfcould be recognized by the Nobel Prize Committee for their valuable contributions to astrophysics. This campaign was unsuccessful in Hubble's lifetime, but shortly after his death, the Nobel Prize Committee decided that astronomical work would be eligible for the physics prize. However, the prize is not one that can be awarded posthumously.

==Stamp==
On March 6, 2008, the United States Postal Service released a 41-cent stamp honoring Hubble on a sheet titled "American Scientists" designed by artist Victor Stabin. His citation reads: The other scientists on the "American Scientists" sheet include Gerty Cori, biochemist; Linus Pauling, chemist, and John Bardeen, physicist.

==Honors==
Awards
*Bruce Medal in 1938;
*Franklin Medal in 1939;
*Gold Medal of the Royal Astronomical Society in 1940;
*Legion of Merit for outstanding contribution to ballistics research in 1946.
Named after him
* Asteroid 2069 Hubble;
* The crater Hubble on the Moon;
* Orbiting Hubble Space Telescope;
* Edwin P. Hubble Planetarium, located in the Edward R. Murrow High School, Brooklyn, NY.;
* Edwin Hubble Highway, the stretch of Interstate 44 passing through his birthplace of Marshfield, Missouri;
* Hall of Famous Missourians 2003;
* 2008 "American Scientists" US stamp series, $0.41.

* The Edwin P. Hubble Medal of Initiative is awarded annually by the city of Marshfield, Missouri  Hubble's birthplace.
* Hubble Middle School in Wheaton, Illinois, was renamed for Edwin Hubble when Wheaton Central High School was converted to a middle school in the fall of 1992.

==In Popular Culture==
The play "Creation's Birthday", written by Cornell physicist Hasan Padamsee, tells Hubble's life story. Symmetry Magazine, "On Stage: Hubble's Contentious Life and Science" 

==See also==
* Astronomy
** Distance measures
** Cosmic distance ladder
* Galaxies
** Hubble sequence
** Galaxy morphological classification
** Gerard de Vaucouleurs
** William Wilson Morgan
* Expansion of the universe
** Big bang
** General relativity
** Hubble's law
** Hubble constant
** Albert Einstein
* Hubble Space Telescope
* Edwin Hubble House, residence and National Historic Landmark in San Marino, California
* The Great Debate of April 26, 1920

==References and notes==

==Further reading==
*Bartusiak, Marcia. The Day We Found the Universe. New York: Pantheon, 2009.
*Christianson, Gale; Edwin Hubble: Mariner of the Nebulae Farrar Straus & Giroux (T) (New York, August 1995.)
*Hubble E.P., The Observational Approach to Cosmology (Oxford, 1937.)
*Hubble E.P., The Realm of the Nebulae (New Haven, 1936.)
*
*Mayall, N.U., Edwin Powell Hubble Biographical Memoirs NAS 41
* 
*Harry Nussbaumer and Lydia Bieri, Discovering the expanding universe. Cambridge University Press, 2009.

==External links==

*http://edwinhubble.com/
*Time Profile
*Astronomy at the University of Louisville  Photographs of Edwin Hubble at New Albany High School.
*Edwin Hubble bio  Written by Allan Sandage
* 
*American Physical Society's Hubble Bio
*Edwin Powell Hubble  The man who discovered the cosmos
*Astroprof's article on Hubble
* Hubble: The Man and His Telescope  slideshow by Life magazine
* The problem with the expanding Universe, 1942 Edwin Hubble

 



[[Emperor Ninmy]]

 Spelling note: A modified Hepburn romanization system for Japanese words is used throughout Western publications in a range of languages including English. Unlike the standard system, the "n" is maintained even when followed by "homorganic consonants" (e.g., shinbun, not shimbun). In the same way that Wikipedia has not yet adopted a consensus policy to address spelling variations in English (e.g., humour, not humor), variant spellings based on place of articulation are unresolved, perhaps unresolvable  as in Emperor Ninmy vs. Emperor Nimmy, which are each construed as technically correct. was the 54th emperor of Japan, Emperor Ninmy, Fukakusa Imperial Mausoleum, Imperial Household Agency according to the traditional order of succession. Ponsonby-Fane, Richard. (1959). The Imperial House of Japan, pp. 6465. Ninmy's reign lasted from 833 to 850. Brown and Ishida, pp.283284; Varley, H. Paul. (1980). Jinn Shtki, p. 164-165; Titsingh, Isaac. (1834). 

==Traditional narrative==
Ninmy was the second son of Emperor Saga and the Empress Tachibana no Kachiko. His personal name (imina) was . Brown and Ishida, p. 282; Varley, p. 164. After his death, he was given the title .

Ninmy had nine Empresses, Imperial consorts, and concubines (ki); and the emperor had 24 Imperial sons and daughters. Brown and Ishida, p. 283. 

Emperor Ninmy is traditionally venerated at his tomb; the Imperial Household Agency designates , in Fushimi-ku, Kyoto, as the location of Ninmy's mausoleum. 

===Events of Ninmy's life===
Ninmy ascended to the throne following the abdication of his uncle, Emperor Junna.

* 6 January 823 Julian dates derived from NengoCalc (): Received the title of Crown Prince at the age of 14.

* 22 March 833 (): In the 10th year of Emperor Junna's reign, the emperor abdicated; and the succession (senso) was received by his adopted son. Masara-shinn was the natural son of Emperor Saga, and therefore would have been Junna's nephew. Shortly thereafter, Emperor Ninmyo is said to have acceded to the throne (sokui). Titsingh, p. 106; Brown and Ishida, pp. 283; Varley, p. 44; a distinct act of senso is unrecognized prior to Emperor Tenji; and all sovereigns except Jit, Yzei, Go-Toba, and Fushimi have senso and sokui in the same year until the reign of Emperor Go-Murakami. 

Shortly after Ninmyo was enthroned, he designated an heir. He named as Prince Tsunesada, a son of former Emperor Junna, as the crown prince. Brown and Ishida, pp. 284. 

* 835 (): Kkai (known posthumously as Kb-Daishi) died. This monk, scholar, poet, and artist had been the founder of the Shingon or "True Word" school of Buddhism. 

* 838-839 (Jwa 5-6): Diplomatic mission to Tang China headed by Fujiwara no Tsunetsugu. Sansom, George Bailey. (1958). A History of Japan to 1334, pp. 134-135; Nussbaum, Louis-Frdric. (2005). "Fujiwara no Tsunetsugu" in Japan Encyclopedia, p. 211. 

*842: Following a coup d'tat called the Jwa Incident, Tsunesada the crown prince was replaced with Ninmy's first son, Prince Michiyasu (later Emperor Montoku) whose mother was the Empress Fujiwara no Junshi, a daughter of sadaijin Fujiwara no Fuyutsugu. It is supposed that this was the result of political intrigue planned by Ninmy and Fujiwara no Yoshifusa. Mason and Caiger, p. 69 The first of what would become a powerful line of Fujiwara regents, Mason and Caiger, p. 71 Yoshifusa had numerous family ties to the imperial court; he was Ninmy's brother in law (by virtue of his sister who became Ninmy's consort), the second son of sadaijin Fuyutsugu, and uncle to the new crown prince. 

In his lifetime, Ninmy could not have anticipated that his third son, Prince Tokiyasu, would eventually ascend the throne in 884 as Emperor Kk. Titsingh, p. 124; Brown and Ishida, p. 289; Varley, pp. 171175. 

* 6 May 850 (): Emperor Ninmy died at the age of 41. Brown and Ishida, p. 284 Adolphson, Mikael et al. (2007). Heian Japan, centers and peripheries, p. 23. He was sometimes posthumously referred to as "the Emperor of Fukakusa," because that was the name given to his tomb. Brown and Ishida, p. 284; Varley, p. 165. 

===Eras of Ninmy's reign===
The years of Ninmy's reign are more specifically identified by more than one era name (neng). Titsingh, p. 106. 
* Tench (824834)
* Jwa (834848)
* Kash (848851)

==Kugy==
 is a collective term for the very few most powerful men attached to the court of the Emperor of Japan in pre-Meiji eras. Heian period Imperial courts:  kugy of Ninmy-tenn (in French) 

In general, this elite group included only three to four men at a time. These were hereditary courtiers whose experience and background would have brought them to the pinnacle of a life's career. During Ninmy's reign, this apex of the Daij-kan included:
* Sadaijin, Fujiwara no Otsugu(),773843. Nussbaum, Louis-Frdric. (2005). "Fujiwara no Otsugu" in . 
* Sadaijin, Minamoto no Tokiwa(),812854. 
* Udaijin, Kiyohara no Natsuno(),782837. 
* Udaijin, Fujiwara no Mimori(),d. 840. 
* Udaijin, Minamoto no Tokiwa()
* Udaijin, Tachibana no Ujikimi(),783847. 
* Udaijin, Fujiwara no Yoshifusa(),804872. 
* Udaijin, Fujiwara no Otsugu, 825832 
* Naidaijin (not appointed)
* Dainagon, Fujiwara no Otsugu, ?825. Titsingh, 

==Consorts and children==

Nygo (Tai-Ktaig): Fujiwara no Junshi () (809871), daughter of Fujiwara no Fuyutsugu ()
*Imperial Prince Michiyasu () (Emperor Montoku) (827858)

Nygo: Fujiwara no Takushi or Sawako () (?839), daughter of Fujiwara no Fusatsugu ()
*Imperial Prince Muneyasu () (828868)
*Imperial Prince Tokiyasu () (Emperor Kk) (830887)
*Imperial Prince Saneyasu () (831872)
*Imperial Princess Shinshi () (?897)

Nygo: Fujiwara no Teishi/Sadako () (?864), daughter of Fujiwara no Mimori ()
*Imperial Prince Nariyasu () (836853)
*Imperial Princess Shinshi () (?851)
*Imperial Princess Heishi () (?877)

Nygo: Tachibana no Kageko () (?864), daughter of Tachibana no Ujikimi ()

Koui: Ki no Taneko () (?869), daughter of Ki no Natora ()
*Imperial Prince Tsuneyasu () (?869)
*Imperial Princess Shinshi/Saneko () (?870)

Koui(deposed in 845): A daughter of Mikuni clan, Mikuni-machi ()
*Sada no Noboru (), given the family name 'Sada' from Emperor (Shisei Kka, ) in 866

Court lady: Shigeno no Tsunako (), daughter of Shigeno no Sadanushi ()
*Imperial Prince Motoyasu () (?902)
*Imperial Princess Tokiko () (?847), 2nd Saiin in Kamo Shrine 831833
*Imperial Princess Jshi () (?869)

Court lady: Fujiwara no Katoko (), daughter of Fujiwara no Fukutomaro ()
*Imperial Prince Kuniyasu () (?898)

Court lady: Fujiwara no Warawako (), daughter of Fujiwara no Michit ()
*Imperial Princess Shigeko () (?865)

Court lady: Princess Takamune (), daughter of Prince Okaya ()
*Imperial Princess Hisako () (?876), 18th Sai in Ise Shrine 833850. Saik Historical Museum, Meiwa, Mie: wall-display information table. 

Court lady (Nyoju): Kudara no Yky (), daughter of Kudara no Kyfuku ()
*Imperial Princess Takaiko () (?866), 3rd Saiin in Kamo Shrine 833850

Court lady: A daughter of Yamaguchi clan ()
*Minamoto no Satoru () (849879)

(from unknown women)
*Minamoto no Masaru () (831888), Udaijin 882888
*Minamoto no Suzushi () (835890), Sangi 882890
*Minamoto no Hikaru () (846913), Udaijin 901913
*Minamoto no Itaru ()

==See also==
* Emperor of Japan
* List of Emperors of Japan
* Imperial cult
* Emperor Go-Fukakusa, a later emperor named in honor of Emperor Ninmy
* Shoku Nihon Kki, a Japanese national history covering Emperor Ninmy's reign.

==Notes==
Japanese Imperial kamon  a stylized chrysanthemum blossom

==References==
* Adolphson, Mikael S., Edward Kamens and Stacie Matsumoto. (2007). Heian Japan, centers and peripheries. Honolulu: University of Hawaii Press. 10-ISBN 0-8248-3013-X; 13-ISBN 978-0-8248-3013-7
* 
* 
* 
* Nussbaum, Louis-Frdric and Kthe Roth. (2005). Japan encyclopedia. Cambridge: Harvard University Press. 10-ISBN 0-674-01753-6; 13-ISBN 978-0-674-01753-5; OCLC 58053128
* Ponsonby-Fane, Richard Arthur Brabazon. (1959). The Imperial House of Japan. Kyoto: Ponsonby Memorial Society. OCLC 194887
* Titsingh, Isaac. (1834). Nihon Odai Ichiran; ou, Annales des empereurs du Japon. Paris: Royal Asiatic Society, Oriental Translation Fund of Great Britain and Ireland. OCLC 5850691
* Varley, H. Paul. (1980). Jinn Shtki: A Chronicle of Gods and Sovereigns. New York: Columbia University Press. 10-ISBN 0-231-04940-4; 13-ISBN 978-0-231-04940-5; OCLC 59145842

==External links==
* Hokusai: Poem #12, image of ceremonial event in Ninmy's court

 
 



[[Emperor Montoku]]

 (22 January 826 7 October 858) was the 55th emperor of Japan, Imperial Household Agency (Kunaich):  (55) according to the traditional order of succession. Ponsonby-Fane, Richard. (1959). The Imperial House of Japan, pp. 6465. 

The years of Montoku's spanned the years from 850 through 858. Brown, Delmer et al. (1979). Gukansh, pp. 264265; Varley, H. Paul. (1980). Jinn Shtki, p. 165; Titsingh, Isaac. (1834). 

==Traditional narrative==
Before Montoku's ascension to the Chrysanthemum Throne, his personal name (imina) Brown, pp. 264; prior to Emperor Jomei, the personal names of the emperors were very long and people did not generally use them; however, the number of characters in each name diminished after Jomei's reign. was . Titsingh, p. 112; Brown p. 285. He was also known as Tamura-no-mikado Varley, p. 165. or Tamura-tei. Ponsonby-Fane, p. 8. 

He was the eldest son of Emperor Ninmy. His mother was Empress Dowager Fujiwara no Junshi (also called the Goj empress ), daughter of the minister of the left, Fujiwara no Fuyutsugu. 

Montoku had six Imperial consorts and 29 Imperial sons. Brown, p. 285. 

===Events of Montoku's life===
* 6 May 850 (Kash 3, 21st day of the 3rd month): In the 17th year of Ninmy-tenn 's reign (17), the emperor died; and his eldest son received the succession (senso). Titsingh, p. 112; Brown, p. 284; Varley, p. 44; a distinct act of senso is unrecognized prior to Emperor Tenji; and all sovereigns except Jit, Yzei, Go-Toba, and Fushimi have senso and sokui in the same year until the reign of Emperor Go-Murakami. 
* 850 (Kash 3, 4th month): Emperor Montoku formally acceded to the throne (sokui). Titsingh, p. 112; Varley, p. 44 
* 850 (Kash 3, 5th month): The widow of Emperor Saga, who was also the mother of Emperor Ninmy and the grandmother of Emperor Montoku, died. This very devout Buddhist had founded a temple called on the site of present-day  more formally known as , located in what is now Susukinobaba-ch, Uky Ward in Kyoto, Before her death, the former empress had been known by the honorific title, ; and she had been honored as if she were a saint. Titsingh, p. 112. 
* 850 (Kash 3, 11th month): The emperor named Korehito-shinn, the 4th son of Emperor Montoku as his heir. Brown, p. 286. This 9-month-old baby was also the grandson of udaijin Fujiwara no Yoshifusa. Titsingh, p. 113. 

* 853 (Ninju 3, 2nd month): The emperor visited the home of udaijin Yoshifusa, the grandfather of his designated heir. 

* 11 July 854 (Saik 1, 13th day of the 6th month): The saidaijin Minamoto no Tokiwa, also known as Minamoto no Tsune, died at age 43. Brown, p. 285; Titsingh, p. 113. 
* 855 (Saik 2, in the 1st month): The Emishi organized a rebellion; and in response, a force of 1,000 men and provisions were sent to the north. Titsingh, p. 114. 

* 855 (Saik 2, 5th month): The head of the great statute of Buddha in the Tdai-ji fell off; and in consequence, the emperor ordered the then dainagon Fujiwara no Yoshisuke, the brother of sadaijin Yoshifusa, to be in charge of gathering the gifts of the pious from throughout the empire to make another head for the Daibutsu. 

Events during his reign included the repression of insurrections among the Ebisu people in Mutsu province in 855, and among the people of the island of Tsushima two years later.

* 7 October 858 (Ten'an 2, 27th day of the 8th month): Montoku's died at the age of 32. Brown, p. 285-286; Varley, p. 165. 

The actual site of Montoku's grave is known. This emperor is traditionally venerated at a memorial Shinto shrine (misasagi) at Kyoto.

The Imperial Household Agency designates this location as Montoku's mausoleum. It is formally named Tamura no misasagi. Ponsonby-Fane, p. 420. 

===Kugy===
 is a collective term for the very few most powerful men attached to the court of the Emperor of Japan in pre-Meiji eras. kugy of Montoku-tenn (in French)

In general, this elite group included only three to four men at a time. These were hereditary courtiers whose experience and background would have brought them to the pinnacle of a life's career. During Montoku's reign), this apex of the Daij-kan included:
* Daij-daijin, Fujiwara no Yoshifusa(), 804872. 
* Sadaijin, Minamoto no Tokiwa(), 812854. 
* Sadaijin, Minamoto no Makoto(), 810868. 
* Udaijin, Fujiwara no Yoshifusa(), 804872. 
* Udaijin, Fujiwara no Yoshimi(), 813867. 
* Naidaijin (not appointed)
* Dainagon

==Eras of Montoku's reign==
The years of Montoku's reign are more specifically identified by more than one era name or neng. 
* Kash (848851)
* Ninju (851854)
* Saik (854857)
* Ten'an (857859)

==Consorts and Children==
Kgo(Tai-Kotaig): Fujiwara no Akirakeiko () (829899), also known as Somedono-no-Kisaki, daughter of Fujiwara no Yoshifusa (). Ponsonby-Fane, pp. 319320. 
*Imperial Prince Korehito () (850881) (Emperor Seiwa)
*Imperial Princess Gishi () (?879), 6th Saiin in Kamo Shrine 859876

Nygo: Fujiwara no Koshi/Furuko (), daughter of Fujiwara no Fuyutsugu ()

Nygo: Fujiwara no Takakiko () (?858), daughter of Fujiwara no Yoshimi ()

Nygo: Fujiwara no Nenshi/Toshiko ())

Nygo: Princess Azumako () (?865)

Nygo: Fujiwara no Koreko ()

Nygo: Tachibana no Fusako (), daughter of Tachibana no Ujikimi ()

Nygo: Tachibana no Chushi (), daughter of Tachibana no Ujikimi ()

Koui: Ki no Shizuko () (?866), daughter of Ki no Natora ()
*Imperial Prince Koretaka () (844897)
*Imperial Prince Koreeda () (848868)
*Imperial Princess Tenshi () (?913), 20th Sai in Ise Shrine 859876
*Imperial Princess Jutsushi () (?897), 5th Saiin in Kamo Shrine 857858
*Imperial Princess Chinshi () (?877)

Court lady: Fujiwara no Retsushi (), daughter of Fujiwara no Koreo ()
*Imperial Princess Anshi () (?900), 19th Sai in Ise Shrine 850858
*Imperial Princess Akirakeiko () (?881), 4th Saiin in Kamo Shrine 850857

Court lady: Shigeno no Okuko (), daughter of Shigeno no Sadanushi ()
*Imperial Prince Korehiko () (850883)
*Imperial Princess Nshi () (?903)
*Imperial Princess Shshi () (?871)

Court lady: Fujiwara no Konshi/Imako (), daughter of Fujiwara no Sadamori ()
*Imperial Prince Koretsune () (?904)
*Imperial Princess Reishi () (?899)
*Imperial Princess Keishi () (?914), 22nd Sai in Ise Shrine 882884

Court lady: Shigeno no Mineko (), daughter of Shigeno no Sadao ()
*Minamoto no Motoari ()
*Minamoto no Fuchiko/Shigeko (/) (?911)

Court lady: A daughter of Tomo clan ()
*Minamoto no Yoshiari () (845897), Udaijin 896897

Court lady: A daughter of Fuse clan ()
*Minamoto no Yukiari () (854887)
*Minamoto no Tomiari () (?887)

Court lady: A daughter of Tajihi clan ()
*Minamoto no Tsuneari ()

Court lady: A daughter of Kiyohara clan ()
*Minamoto no Tokiari ()
*Minamoto no Noriari ()

Court lady: A daughter of Sugano clan ()

Court lady: A daughter of Sugawara clan ()
*Minamoto no Sadaari ()
*Minamoto no Tomiko ()

(from unknown women)
*Minamoto no Hyshi ()
*Minamoto no Kenshi ()
*Minamoto no Okuko ()
*Minamoto no Retsushi ()
*Minamoto no Seishi (), married to Emperor Seiwa

==See also==
* Emperor of Japan
* List of Emperors of Japan
* Imperial cult
* Nihon Montoku Tenn Jitsuroku, one of the Six National Histories

==Notes==
Japanese Imperial kamon  a stylized chrysanthemum blossom

==References==
* Brown, Delmer M. and Ichir Ishida, eds. (1979). Gukansh: The Future and the Past. Berkeley: University of California Press. 10-ISBN 0-520-03460-0; 13-ISBN 978-0-520-03460-0; OCLC 251325323
* Ponsonby-Fane, Richard Arthur Brabazon. (1959). The Imperial House of Japan. Kyoto: Ponsonby Memorial Society. OCLC 194887
* Titsingh, Isaac. (1834). Nihon Odai Ichiran; ou, Annales des empereurs du Japon. Paris: Royal Asiatic Society, Oriental Translation Fund of Great Britain and Ireland. OCLC 5850691
* Varley, H. Paul. (1980). Jinn Shtki: A Chronicle of Gods and Sovereigns. New York: Columbia University Press. 10-ISBN 0-231-04940-4; 13-ISBN 978-0-231-04940-5; OCLC 59145842

 
 



[[Emperor Seiwa]]

 was the 56th emperor of Japan, Imperial Household Agency (Kunaich):  (56) according to the traditional order of succession. Ponsonby-Fane, Richard. (1959). The Imperial House of Japan, p. 66. 

Seiwa's reign spanned the years from 858 through 876. Titsingh, Isaac. (1834). ; Brown, Delmer et al. (1979). Gukansh, pp. 286288; Varley, H. Paul. Jinn Shtki, pp. 16617. 

==Traditional narrative==
Seiwa was the fourth son of Emperor Montoku. His mother was Empress Dowager Fujiwara no Akirakeiko (), also called the Somedono empress ). Seiwa's mother was the daughter of Fujiwara no Yoshifusa (), who was regent and great minister of the council of state. 
He was the younger half-brother of Imperial Prince Koretaka () (lived 844897)

===Imina===
Before his ascension to the Chrysanthemum Throne, his personal name (his imina) Brown, pp. 264; prior to Emperor Jomei, the personal names of the emperors (their imina) were very long and people did not generally use them. The number of characters in each name diminished after Jomei's reign. was , Titsingh, the first member of the Imperial house to be personally named "-hito" . One meaning of the character  is the Confucian concept of ren. Later it has been a tradition to name all male members of the Imperial family personally this way.

He was also known as emperor as Mizunoo-no-mikado Varley, p. 166. or Minoo-tei. Ponsonby-Fane, p. 8. 

===Events of Seiwa's life===
Originally under the guardianship of his maternal grandfather Fujiwara no Yoshifusa, he displaced Imperial Prince Koretaka () as Crown Prince. Upon the death of his father in 858, Emperor Montoku, he became Emperor at the age of 8, but the real power was held by his grandfather, Yoshifusa.

* 10 July 858 (Ten'an 2, 27th day of the 8th month): In the 8th year of Montoku-tenn 's reign (8), the emperor abdicated; and the succession (senso) was received by his son. Shortly thereafter, Emperor Seiwa is said to have acceded to the throne (sokui). Brown, pp. 286; Varley, p. 44; a distinct act of senso is unrecognized prior to Emperor Tenji; and all sovereigns except Jit, Yzei, Go-Toba, and Fushimi have senso and sokui in the same year until the reign of Emperor Go-Murakami. 
* 15 December 858 (Ten'an 2, 7th day of the 11th month): The emperor's official announcement of his enthronement at age 9 was accompanied by the appointment of his grandfather as regent (sessh). This is the first time that this high honor has been accorded to a member of the Fujiwara family, and it is also the first example in Japan of the accession of an heir who is too young to be emperor. The proclamation of the beginning of Seiwa's reign was made at the Kotaijingu at Ise Province and at all the tombs of the imperial family. Titsingh, ; Brown, p. 286. 

* 859 (Jgan 1, 1st month): All New Year's festivities were suspended because of the period of national mourning for the death of Emperor Montoku. Titsingh, 
* 859 (Jgan 1): Construction began on the Iwashimizu Shrine near Heian-ky. This shrine honors Hachiman, the Shinto war god. Brown, p. 288. 
* 869 (Jgan 10): Yzei was born, and he was named Seiwa's heir in the following year. Titsingh, 
* 876 (Jgan 17, 11th month): In the 18th year of Seiwa-tenn 's reign (18), the emperor ceded his throne to his five-year-old son, which meant that the young child received the succession (senso). Shortly thereafter, Emperor Yzei formally acceded to the throne (sokui). Titsingh, ; Varley, p. 44. 

* 878 (Gangy 2): Seiwa became a Buddhist priest. His new priestly name was Soshin. 
* 31 December 878 (Gangy 2, 4th day of the 12th month ): Former-Emperor Seiwa died at age 28. Brown, p. 289; Varley, p. 170. 

==Mausoleum==

The actual site of Seiwa's grave is known. The emperor is traditionally venerated at the misasagi memorial shrine in the Uky-ku ward of Kyoto. The Imperial Household Agency designates this location as Seiwa's mausoleum. It is formally named the or Seiwa Tenn Ry. Ponsonby-Fane, p. 421. From the site of his tomb the Emperor Seiwa is sometimes referred to as the . The kami of Emperor Seiwa is venerated at the Seiwatenn-sha in close proximity to the mausoleum. Ponsonby-Fane, p. 128. 

==Kugy==
 is a collective term for the very few most powerful men attached to the court of the Emperor of Japan in pre-Meiji eras. Furugosho: Kugy of Seiwa-tenn 

In general, this elite group included only three to four men at a time. These were hereditary courtiers whose experience and background would have brought them to the pinnacle of a life's career. During Seiwa's reign, this apex of the Daij-kan included:
* Sessh, Fujiwara no Yoshifusa,804872. 
* Daij-daijin, Fujiwara no Yoshifusa. 
* Sadaijin, Minamoto no Makoto().
* Sadaijin, Minamoto no Tooru(). Titsingh, 
* Udaijin, Fujiwara no Yoshimi(),817867. Brown, p. 287. 
* Udaijin, Fujiwara no Ujimune().
* Udaijin, Fujiwara no Mototsune,836891. Brown, p. 287; Nussbaum, Louis-Frdric. (2005). "Fujiwara no Mototsune" in . 
* Naidaijin
* Dainagon, Fujiwara no Mototsune. 

==Eras of Seiwa's reign==
The years of Seiwa's reign are more specifically identified by more than one era name or neng. 
* Ten'an (857859)
* Jgan (859877)

==Consorts and Children==
Nygo(Ktaig): Fujiwara no Takaiko () (842910), daughter of Fujiwara no Nagara ()
*Imperial Prince Sadaakira () (868949) (Emperor Yzei)
*Imperial Prince Sadayasu () (870924)
*Imperial Princess Atsuko () (?930), 7th Saiin in Kamo Shrine 877880

Nygo: Fujiwara no Tamiko () (?886), daughter of Fujiwara no Yoshimi ()

Nygo: Taira no Kanshi ()

Nygo: Princess Kashi (), daughter of Prince Munesada ()
*Imperial Prince Sadasumi () (873916)  father of Minamoto no Tsunemoto (), founder of the Seiwa Genji, from whom the Kamakura shogunate and the Ashikaga shogunate were both descended, as well as from whom the Tokugawa shogunate claimed descent

Nygo: Minamoto no Seishi (), daughter of Emperor Montoku

Nygo: Minamoto no Sadako () (?873)

Nygo: Minamoto no Kenshi/Atsuko ()

Nygo: Princess Chshi/Tadako (), daughter of Imperial Prince Tokiyasu(Emperor Kk later)

Nygo: Fujiwara no Yoriko () (?936), daughter of Fujiwara no Mototsune ()

Nygo: Fujiwara no Kazuko (), daughter of Fujiwara no Mototsune ()
*Imperial Prince Sadatoki () (874929)

Nygo: Minamoto no Takeko/Izuko () (?878), daughter of Minamoto no Yoshiari ()

Nygo: Minamoto no Gishi/Yoshiko (), daughter of Minamoto no Okimoto ()

Nygo: Princess Kenshi ()

Nygo: Princess Ryshi ()

Koui: A daughter of Tachibana no Yasukage ()
*Imperial Prince Sadakata () (?930)

Koui: A daughter of Fujiwara no Nakamune ()
*Imperial Prince Sadamoto () (?909)

Koui: A daughter of Fujiwara no Yoshichika ()
*Imperial Prince Sadahira () (?913)
*Imperial Princess Shikiko () (874906), 21st Sai (Imperial Princess serving at Ise Shrine) 877880

Koui: Ariwara no Fumiko (), daughter of Ariwara no Yukihira ()
*Imperial Prince Sadakazu () (875916)
*Imperial Princess Kaneko () (?889)

Koui: A daughter of Fujiwara no Morofuji ()
*Imperial Prince Sadazane () (876932)
*Imperial Princess Mshi () (?901)

Koui: A daughter of Fujiwara no Naomune ()
*Imperial Prince Sadayori () (876922)

Koui: A daughter of Saeki no Sanefusa ()
*Minamoto no Nagami ()
*Minamoto no Nagayori ()

Court lady : A daughter of Kamo no Mineo ()
*Minamoto no Naganori () (?918)
*Minamoto no Saishi/Noriko ()

Court lady : A daughter of no no Takatori ()
*Minamoto no Nagafuchi ()

==Notes==
Japanese Imperial kamon  a stylized chrysanthemum blossom

==References==
* Brown, Delmer M. and Ichir Ishida, eds. (1979). Gukansh: The Future and the Past. Berkeley: University of California Press. 10-ISBN 0-520-03460-0; 13-ISBN 978-0-520-03460-0; OCLC 251325323
* Ponsonby-Fane, Richard Arthur Brabazon. (1959). The Imperial House of Japan. Kyoto: Ponsonby Memorial Society. OCLC 194887
* Titsingh, Isaac. (1834). Nihon Odai Ichiran; ou, Annales des empereurs du Japon. Paris: Royal Asiatic Society, Oriental Translation Fund of Great Britain and Ireland. OCLC 5850691
* Varley, H. Paul. (1980). Jinn Shtki: A Chronicle of Gods and Sovereigns. New York: Columbia University Press. 10-ISBN 0-231-04940-4; 13-ISBN 978-0-231-04940-5; OCLC 59145842

==See also==
* Emperor of Japan
* List of Emperors of Japan
* Nihon Sandai JitsurokuCorresponding to three reign of Emperor Seiwa, Yzei, and Kk. 
* Gion MatsuriSaid to have originated during the reign of Emperor Seiwa (r. 858-876).
* Imperial cult
* Emperor Go-Mizunoo

 
 



[[Emperor Yzei]]

 was the 57th emperor of Japan, Imperial Household Agency (Kunaich):  (57) according to the traditional order of succession. Ponsonby-Fane, Richard. (1959). The Imperial House of Japan, pp. 6667. 

Yzei's reign spanned the years from 876 through 884. Titsigh, Isaac. (1834). Annales des empereurs du Japon, pp. 121124; Brown, Delmer et al. (1979). Gukansh, pp. 288289; Varley, H. Paul, ed. (1980). Jin Shtki, pp. 170171. 

==Traditional narrative==
Before his ascension to the Chrysanthemum Throne, his personal name (his imina) Brown, pp. 264; prior to Emperor Jomei, the personal names of the emperors (their imina) were very long and people did not generally use them. The number of characters in each name diminished after Jomei's reign. was Sadaakira Shinn (). Titsingh, p. 121; Varley, p. 170. 

Yzei was the oldest son of Emperor Seiwa. His mother was the Empress Fujiwara no Takaiko, who was also known after Seiwa's abdication as the Nij empress. Varley, p. 170. Yzei's mother was the sister of Fujiwara no Mototsune, who would figure prominently in the young emperor's life. Titsigh, p. 121. 

In ancient Japan, there were four noble clans, the Gempeitkitsu (). One of these clans, the Minamoto clan () are also known as Genji, and of these, the Yzei Genji () are descended from the 57th emperor Yzei.

Yzei had nine Imperial sons, born after he had abdicated. Brown, p. 288. 

==Events of Yzei's life==
Yzei was made emperor when he was an immature, unformed young boy.

* 869 (Jgan 10): Yzei was born, and he is named Seiwa's heir in the following year. Titsingh, p. 122. 
* 18 December 876 (Jgan 18, 29th day of the 11th month): In the 18th year of Emperor Seiwa's reign (18), he ceded his throne to his son, which meant that the young child received the succession (senso). Shortly thereafter, Emperor Yzei formally acceded to the throne (sokui). Titsingh, p. 122; Brown, p. 288; Varley, p. 44; a distinct act of senso is unrecognized prior to Emperor Tenji; and all sovereigns except Jit, Yzei, Go-Toba, and Fushimi have senso and sokui in the same year until the reign of Emperor Go-Murakami. 

* 20 January 877 (Gangy 1, 3rd day of the 1st month): Yzei was formally enthroned at age 8; and the beginning of a new neng was proclaimed. However, the new residence being constructed for the emperor had not been completed; and initially, he must live elsewhere in the palace compound. 
* 877 (Gangy 1, 2nd month): Ambassadors from Baekje arrived in the province of Izumo; but they were turned back. 
* 877 (Gangy 1, 6th month): There was a great drought; and sacrifices were made at the temples of Hachiman, Kamo and other temples in Ise province. Eventually, it rained. 
* 883 (Gangy 7, 1st month): In his early teens, Yzei often spent time alone; and sometimes he would feed live frogs to snakes so that he could watch the reptile swallowing; or sometimes, he would find pleasure in setting dogs and monkeys to fight. In time, these amusements became more dangerous. He himself executed criminals. When he became angry, he sometimes chased after those who dared speak up; and he sometimes tried to use his sword. Fujiwara no Mototsune, the Kanpaku, used every possible opportunity to turn Yzei towards more seemly conduct, but the emperor closed his ears to all remonstrances. Titsingh, pp. 123124. 
* 884 (Gangy 8, 1st month): The extravagant and dangerous habits of the emperor continued unabated. At one point, Mototsune came to the court and discovered that Yzei had arranged a bizarre scenario for his diversion: He ordered some men to climb high into trees, and then he ordered others to use sharp lances to poke at these men in trees until they fell to their deaths. This extraordinary event convinced Motosune that the emperor was too "undignified" to reign. Mototsune reluctantly realized that someone needed to devise a strategy for deposing the emperor. Shortly thereafter, Mototsune approached Yzei and remarked that it must be boring to be so often alone, and then Mototsune suggested that the emperor might be amused by a horse race. Yzei was attracted to this proposition, and he eagerly encouraged Mototsune to set a time and place for the event. It was decided that this special amusement for the emperor would take place on the 4th day of the 2nd month of Gangy 8. Titsingh, p. 124. 
* 4 March 884 (Gangy 8, 4th day of the 2nd month): The pretext of a special horse race enticed the emperor to leave his palace. Yzei traveled in a carriage which was quickly surrounded by a heavy guard. The carriage was redirected to "Yo se in" palace ("Yang tchhing yuan") at "Ni zio", a town situated a short distance to the south-west of Miyako. Mototsune confronted the emperor, explaining that his demented behavior made him incapable of reigning, and that he was being dethroned. At this news, Yzei cried sincerely, which did attract feelings of compassion from those who witnessed his contrition. 

According to very scanty information from the Imperial archives, including sources such as Rikkokushi, and Nihon Sandai Jitsuroku, Emperor Yzei murdered one of his retainers, an action that caused massive scandal in the Heian court. Japanese society during the Heian era was very sensitive to issues of "pollution," both spiritual and personal. Deaths (especially killing animals or people) were the worst acts of pollution possible, and warranted days of seclusion in order to purify oneself. Since the Emperor was seen as a divine figure and linked to the deities, pollution of such extreme degree committed by the highest source was seen as extremely ruinous. Many of the high court officials construed Emperor Yzei's actions as exceeding the bounds of acceptable behavior, and as justifiable cause for the emperor to be forcibly deposed.

In Kitabatake Chikafusa's 14th-century account of Emperor Yzei's reign, the emperor is described as possessing a "violent disposition" and unfit to be a ruler. In the end, when Fujiwara no Mototsune, who was Sessh (regent for the child-emperor, 876880), Kampaku (chief advisor or first secretary for the emperor, 880890), and Daij Daijin (Great Minister of the Council of State), decided that Yzei should be removed from the throne, he discovered that there was general agreement amongst the kuge that this was a correct and necessary decision. Varley, p.171. 

Yzei was succeeded by his father's uncle, Emperor Kk; and in the reign of Kk's son, Emperor Uda, the madness re-visited the tormented former emperor:

* 889 (Kanpy 1, 10th month): The former emperor Yzei was newly attacked by the mental illness. Yzei would enter the palace and address courtiers he would meet with the greatest rudeness. He became increasingly furious. He garroted women with the strings of musical instruments and then threw the bodies into a lake. While riding on horseback, he directed his mount to run over people. Sometimes he simply disappeared into the mountains where he chased wild boars and Sika Deer, Titsingh, p. 127. which in Shinto cosmology, were considered to be messengers of the kami.

Yzei lived in retirement until the age of 81. 

Memorial Shinto shrine and mausoleum honoring Emperor Yzei, Kyoto
The actual site of Yzei's grave is known. This emperor is traditionally venerated at a memorial Shinto shrine (misasagi) at Kyoto.

The Imperial Household Agency designates this location as Yzei's mausoleum. It is formally named Kaguragaoka no Higashi no misasagi. Ponsonby-Fane, p. 420. 

===Kugy===
 is a collective term for the very few most powerful men attached to the court of the Emperor of Japan in pre-Meiji eras. Furugosho: Kugy of Yozei-tenn. 

In general, this elite group included only three to four men at a time. These were hereditary courtiers whose experience and background would have brought them to the pinnacle of a life's career. During Yozei's reign, this apex of the Daij-kan included:
* Sessh, Fujiwara no Mototsune(), 836891. 
* Kampaku, Fujiwara no Mototsune().
* Daij-daijin, Fujiwara no Mototsune. 
* Sadaijin, Minamoto no Tru().
* Udaijin, Fujiwara no Mototsune. 
* Udaijin, Minamoto no Masaru().
* Naidaijin (not appointed)
* Dainagon, Minamoto no Masaru().
* Dainagon, Minafuchi no Toshina (), 807877

==Eras of Yzei's reign==
The years of Yzei's reign are more specifically identified by more than one era name or neng. During this time, the tradition of naming eras because of good omens changed. Instead, the name of an era might be chosen to limit the effects of something bad. Bialock, David T. (2007). 'Eccentric Spaces, Hidden Histories: Narrative, Ritual, and Royal , p. 138. 
* Jgan (859877)
* Gangy (877885)

==Consorts and Children==
Kky: Imperial Princess Kanshi () (?914), daughter of Emperor Kk

Kky: Imperial Princess Yasuko () (?925), daughter of Emperor Kk

Kky: Princess Aneko ()
*Imperial Prince Motonaga () (901976)
*Imperial Prince Mototoshi () (?964)
*Imperial Princess Chshi () (?922)
*Imperial Princess Genshi () (?930)

Court lady: A daughter of Fujiwara no Tnaga ()
*Imperial Prince Motoyoshi () (890943)
*Imperial Prince Motohira () (?958)

Court lady: A daughter of Ki clan ()
*Minamoto no Kiyokage () (884950), Dainagon 948950

Court lady: A daughter of Saeki clan ()
*Minamoto no Kiyot () (?912)

Court lady: A daughter of Tomo clan ()
*Minamoto no Kiyomi () (?936)

==Notes==
Japanese Imperial kamon  a stylized chrysanthemum blossom

==References==
* Brown, Delmer M. and Ichir Ishida, eds. (1979). Gukansh: The Future and the Past. Berkeley: University of California Press. 10-ISBN 0-520-03460-0; 13-ISBN 978-0-520-03460-0; OCLC 251325323
* Ponsonby-Fane, Richard Arthur Brabazon. (1959). The Imperial House of Japan. Kyoto: Ponsonby Memorial Society. OCLC 194887
* Titsingh, Isaac. (1834). Nihon Odai Ichiran; ou, Annales des empereurs du Japon. Paris: Royal Asiatic Society, Oriental Translation Fund of Great Britain and Ireland. OCLC 5850691
* Varley, H. Paul. (1980). Jinn Shtki: A Chronicle of Gods and Sovereigns. New York: Columbia University Press. 10-ISBN 0-231-04940-4; 13-ISBN 978-0-231-04940-5; OCLC 59145842

==See also==
* Emperor of Japan
* List of Emperors of Japan
* Imperial cult
* Deer (mythology)
* Emperor Go-Yzei

 
 



[[Emperor Kk]]

 was the 58th emperor of Japan, Imperial Household Agency (Kunaich):  (58) according to the traditional order of succession. Ponsonby-Fane, Richard. (1959). The Imperial House of Japan, p. 67. 

Kk reigned from 884 to 887. Titsingh, Isaac. (1834). Annales des empereurs du japon, p. 124-125; Brown, Delmer et al. (1979). Gukansh, pp. 289; Varley, H. Paul, ed. (1980). Jin Shtki, pp. 171175. 

== Traditional narrative ==
Before his ascension to the Chrysanthemum Throne, his personal name (imina) Brown, pp. 264; prior to Emperor Jomei, the personal names of the emperors (their imina) were very long and people did not generally use them. The number of characters in each name diminished after Jomei's reign. was Titsingh, p. 124; Varley, p. 171. or Komatsu-tei. Ponsonby-Fane, p. 8. He would later be identified sometimes as "the Emperor of Komatsu." This resulted in the later Emperor Go-Komatsu adopting this name (go- meaning "later", so "Later Emperor Komatsu" or "Emperor Komatsu II").

Tokiyatsu Shinn was the third son of Emperor Nimmy. His mother was Fujiwara no Sawako. Brown, p. 289; Varley, p. 171. 

Kk had four Imperial consorts and 41 Imperial sons and daughters. Brown, p. 289. 

== Events of Kk's life ==
The first kampaku Fujiwara no Mototsune was influential in the process by Kk became emperor. At the time Emperor Yzei was deposed, Prince Tokiaytsu was already Governor of Hitachi and Chief Minister of Ceremonies (Jibu-ky, ) Varley, p. 172; Titsingh, p. 429. 

According to Kitabatake Chikafusa's 14th-century account, Mototsune resolved the problem of succession by simply going to visit Tokiyatsu-shinn, where the kampaku addressed the prince as a sovereign and assigned imperial guards. The prince signaled his acceptance by going into the imperial palaquin, which then conducted him to the emperor's residence within the palace. Curiously, he was still wearing the robes of a prince when he decided to take this ride into an entirely unanticipated future. Varley, p. 172. 

* February 4, 884 (Gangy 8, 4th day of the 1st month): In the 8th year of Emperor Yzei's reign (8), the emperor was deposed; and scholars then construed that the succession (senso) was received by the third son of former Emperor Ninmy, who was then age 55. Brown, p. 289; Varley, p. 44; a distinct act of senso is unrecognized prior to Emperor Tenji; and all sovereigns except Jit, Yzei, Go-Toba, and Fushimi have senso and sokui in the same year until the reign of Emperor Go-Murakami. 
* March 23, 884 (Gangy 8, 23rd day of the 2nd month'): Emperor Kk is said to have acceded to the throne (sokui). Titsingh, p. 124; Varley, p. 44. 
* 885 (Gangy 9): The era name was changed accordingly in 885. 

During his reign, Kk revived many ancient court rituals and ceremonies, and one example is the imperial hawking excursion to Serikawa, which had been initiated in 796 by Emperor Kammu. This ritual event was revived by Kk after a lapse of 50 years. 

* January 11, 886 (Ninna 2, 14th day of the 12th month): Kk traveled to Seri-gawa to hunt with falcons. He very much enjoyed this kind of hunting, and he often took time for this kind of activity. Titsingh, p. 125. 
* September 17, 887 (Ninna 3, 26th day of the 8th month )  : Kk died at the age of 57. Brown, p. 289; Varley, p.173. 

The actual site of Kk's grave is known. This emperor is traditionally venerated at a memorial Shinto shrine (misasagi) at Kyoto.

The Imperial Household Agency designates this location as Kk's mausoleum. It is formally named Kaguragaoka no Higashi no misasagi. Ponsonby-Fane, p. 420. 

===Kugy===
 is a collective term for the very few most powerful men attached to the court of the Emperor of Japan in pre-Meiji eras. Furugosho:Kugy of Kk-tenn 

In general, this elite group included only three to four men at a time. These were hereditary courtiers whose experience and background would have brought them to the pinnacle of a life's career. During Kk's reign, this apex of the Daij-kan included:
* Kampaku, Fujiwara no Mototsune() (Shsen-k, ), 836891. 
* Daij-daijin, Fujiwara no Mototsune. 
* Sadaijin, Minamoto no Tru().
* Udaijin, Minamoto no Masaru().
* Naidaijin (not appointed)
* Dainagon, Fujiwara no Yoshiyo ()
* Dainagon, Fujiwara no Fuyuo ()

== Eras of Kk's reign ==
The years of Kk's reign are more specifically identified by more than one era name or neng. Titsingh, p. 124. 
* Gangy (877885)
* Ninna (885889)

== Consorts and children ==
Ktaig: Princess Hanshi () (833900), daughter of Imperial Prince Nakano (son of Emperor Kammu)
* Imperial Prince Koretada () (857922)
* Imperial Prince Koresada () (?903)
* Minamoto no Motonaga () (?883), dead before Emperor Kk's succession
* Imperial Prince Sadami () (867931) (Emperor Uda)
* Imperial Princess Tadako () (854904), married to Emperor Seiwa
* Imperial Princess Kanshi () (?914), married to Emperor Yzei
* Imperial Princess Yasuko () (?925), married to Emperor Yzei
* Imperial Princess Ishi () (?899), married to Emperor Daigo

Nygo: Fujiwara no Kamiko () (?898), daughter of Fujiwara no Mototsune ()

Nygo: Taira no Motoko/Tshi (), daughter of Taira no Yoshikaze ()

Nygo: Fujiwara no Motoyoshi (), daughter of Fujiwara no Yamakage ()

Koui: Shigeno no Naoiko ()
* Imperial Princess Shigeko () (?916), 23rd Saio in Ise Shrine 884887

Koui: A daughter of Sanuki no Naganao ()
* Minamoto no Motomi () (?908)

Koui: A daughter of Fujiwara no Kadomune ()
* Minamoto no Koreshige () (886941)

Court lady: Princess Keishin (), daughter of Prince Masami ()
* Imperial Princess Bokushi () (?903), 8th Saiin in Kamo Shrine 882887

Court lady: Sugawara no Ruishi (), daughter of Sugawara no Koreyoshi ()
* Minamoto no Junshi () (875925), married to Fujiwara no Tadahira ()

Court lady: A daughter of Tajihi clan ()
* Minamoto no Kanshi/Ayako (/)(?908)

Court lady: A daughter of Fuse clan ()
* Shigemizu no Kiyozane (), given the family name 'Shigemizu' by the Emperor (Shisei Kka, ) in 886

(from unknown women)
* Minamoto no Washi () (?947), married to Emperor Daigo
* Minamoto no Reishi () (??)
* Minamoto no Onshi/Kusuko (/) (?919)
* Minamoto no Takaiko () (??)
* Minamoto no Renshi/Tsurako () (?905)
* Minamoto no Reishi () (?909)
* Minamoto no Saishi () (?886)
* Minamoto no Kaishi () (??)
* Minamoto no Mokushi () (?902)
* Minamoto no Heishi () (?906)
* Minamoto no Kenshi () (?924)
* Minamoto no Shinshi () (?917)
* Minamoto no Shshi () (?912)
* Minamoto no Mitsuko () (??)
* Minamoto no Kaishi () (?910)
* Minamoto no Zenshi () (??)

== Poetry ==
Emperor Kk is well-remembered for his poetry, and one of his waka appeared in the Ogura Hyakunin Isshu (no. 15):

  kimi ga tame 
  haru no no ni idete 
  wakana tsumu 
  waga koromode ni 
  yuki wa furitsutsu 

== Notes ==
Japanese Imperial kamon  a stylized chrysanthemum blossom

== References ==
* Brown, Delmer M. and Ichir Ishida, eds. (1979). Gukansh: The Future and the Past. Berkeley: University of California Press. 10-ISBN 0-520-03460-0; 13-ISBN 978-0-520-03460-0; OCLC 251325323
* Ponsonby-Fane, Richard Arthur Brabazon. (1959). The Imperial House of Japan. Kyoto: Ponsonby Memorial Society. OCLC 194887
* Titsingh, Isaac. (1834). Nihon Odai Ichiran; ou, Annales des empereurs du Japon. Paris: Royal Asiatic Society, Oriental Translation Fund of Great Britain and Ireland. OCLC 5850691
* Varley, H. Paul. (1980). Jinn Shtki: A Chronicle of Gods and Sovereigns. New York: Columbia University Press. 10-ISBN 0-231-04940-4; 13-ISBN 978-0-231-04940-5; OCLC 59145842

== See also ==
* Emperor of Japan
* List of Emperors of Japan
* Imperial cult
* Emperor Go-Komatsu

 
 



[[Emperor Uda]]

 was the 59th emperor of Japan, Imperial Household Agency (Kunaich):  (59) according to the traditional order of succession. Ponsonby-Fane, Richard. (1959). The Imperial House of Japan, pp. 6768. 

Uda's reign spanned the years from 887 through 897. Brown, Delmer et al. (1979). Gukansh, pp. 289290; Varley, H. Paul. (1980). Jinn Shtki, pp. 175179; Titsingh, Isaac. (1834). 

==Traditional narrative==

===Name and legacy===
Before his ascension to the Chrysanthemum Throne, his personal name (imina) Brown, pp. 264; prior to Emperor Jomei, the personal names of the emperors were very long and people did not generally use them. The number of characters in each name diminished after Jomei's reign. was Titsingh, p. 125; Brown, p. 289; Varley, 175. or Chjiin-tei. Ponsonby-Fane, p. 8. 

Emperor Uda was the third son of Emperor Kk. His mother was Empress Dowager Hanshi, a daughter of Prince Nakano (who was himself a son of Emperor Kammu). Varley, p. 175. Uda had five Imperial consorts and 20 Imperial children. Brown, p. 289. Particularly important sons include:

* Prince Atsuhito (884930).
* Prince Atsumi () (893-967). Kitagawa, Hiroshi et al. (1975). The Tale of the Heike, p. 503. 

===Historical background===

In ancient Japan, there were four noble clans, the Gempeitkitsu (). One of these clans, the Minamoto clan (), is also known as Genji. Some of Uda's grandchildren were granted the surname Minamoto (Minamoto is the most used surname for former Japanese royalty.). In order to distinguish Uda's descendants from other Minamoto clan families () or Genji, they became known as the Uda Genji (). Some of the Uda Genji moved to mi province and known as Sasaki clan () or mi Genji ().

Among the Uda Genji, Minamoto no Masazane (), a son of Prince Atsumi () succeeded in the court. Masazane became sadaijin (Minister of the Left). One of Masazane's daughters, Minamoto no Rinshi () married Fujiwara no Michinaga and from this marriage three empresses dowagers and two regents (sessh) were born.

From Masanobu, several kuge families originated including the Niwata, Ayanokji, Itsutsuji, hara and Jikji. From his fourth son Sukeyosi, the Sasaki clan originated, and thus Kygoku clan originated. These descendants are known as mi Genji today. From this line, Sasaki Takauji made a success at the Muromachi shogunate and the Amago clan originated from his brother.

===Events of Uda's life===
Uda's father, Emperor Kk, demoted his sons from the rank of imperial royals to that of subjects in order to reduce the state expenses, as well as their political influence. Sadami was given the clan name of Minamoto and named Minamoto no Sadami. Later, in 887, when Kk needed to appoint his successor, Sadami was once again promoted to the Imperial Prince rank with support of kampaku Fujiwara no Mototsune, since Sadami was adopted by a half-sister of Mototsune. After the death of his father in November of that year, Sadami-shinn ascended to the throne.

* September 17, 887 (Ninna 3, 26th day of the 8th month): Emperor Kk died; and his third son received the succession (senso). Shortly thereafter, Emperor Uda formally acceded to the throne (sokui). Brown, p. 289; Varley, p. 44; a distinct act of senso is unrecognized prior to Emperor Tenji; and all sovereigns except Jit, Yzei, Go-Toba, and Fushimi have senso and sokui in the same year until the reign of Emperor Go-Murakami. 
* January 4, 888 (Ninna 3, 17th day of the 11th month): Mototsune asked Uda for permission to retire from his duties; but the emperor is said to have responded, "My youth limits my ability to govern; and if you stop offering me your good counsel, I will be obliged to abdicate and to retire to a monastery." Therefore, Mototsune continued to serve as the new emperor's kampaku. Titsingh, p. 126. 
A garden at Ninnaji
* 888 (Ninna 4, 8th month): Construction of the newly created Buddhist temple of was completed; and a former disciple of Kb-daishi was installed as the new abbot. 

* 889 (Kanpy 1, 10th month): The former emperor Yzei became deranged, and afflicted by mental illness. Yzei would enter the palace and address courtiers he would meet with the greatest rudeness. He became increasingly furious. He garroted women with the strings of musical instruments and then threw the bodies into a lake. While riding on horseback, he directed his mount to run over people. Sometimes he simply disappeared into the mountains where he chased wild boars and red deer. Titsingh, p. 127. 

In the beginning of Uda's reign, Mototsune held the office of kampaku (or chancellor). Emperor Uda's reign is marked by a prolonged struggle to reassert power by the Imperial Family away from the increasing influence of the Fujiwara, beginning with the death of Mototsune in 891. Records show that shortly thereafter, Emperor Uda assigned scholars Sukeyo and Kiyoyuki, supporters of Mototsune, to provincial posts in the remote provinces of Mutsu and Higo respectively. Meanwhile, non-Fujiwara officials mainly from the Minamoto family were promoted to prominent ranks, while his trusted counselor, Sugawara no Michizane rapidly rose in rank within five years to reach the third rank in the court, and supervision of the Crown Prince's household. Meanwhile, Mototsune's son and heir, Fujiwara no Tokihira, rose in rank, but only just enough to prevent an open power struggle.

Meanwhile, Emperor Uda attempted to return Court politics to the original spirit envisioned in the Ritsuryo Codes, while reviving intellectual interest in Confucian doctrine and culture. In the seventh month of 896, Emperor Uda dispatched Sugawara no Michizane to review prisoners in the capitol and provide a general amnesty for the wrongfully accused, in keeping with Chinese practices. Emperor Uda also issued edicts reinforcing peasant land rights from encroachment by powerful families in the capital or monastic institutions, while auditing tax collections made in the provinces. 

Emperor Uda stopped the practice of sending ambassadors to China ("ken-toh-shi" ). The emperor's decision was informed by what he understood as persuasive counsel from Sugawara Michizane. Kitagawa, H. (1975). The Tale of the Heike, p. 222. 

The Special Festival of the Kamo Shrine was first held during Uda's reign. Brown, p. 290. 

In 897, Uda abdicated in favor of his eldest son, Prince Atsuhito, who would later come to be known as Emperor Daigo. Uda left behind an hortatory will or testament which offered general admonitions or precepts Compare Precepts of Tokugawa Ieyasu for his son's guidance (see excerpt at right). The document praises Fujiwara no Tokihira as an advisor but cautions against his womanizing; and Sugawara no Michizane is praised as Uda's mentor. Both were assigned by Emperor Uda to look after his son until the latter reach maturity.

Three years later, he entered the Buddhist priesthood at age 34 in 900. Having founded the temple at Ninna-ji, Uda made it his new home after his abdication.

Decorative emblems (kiri) of the Hosokawa clan are found at Ryoan-ji. Uda is amongst six other emperors entombed near what had been the residence of Hosokawa Katsumoto before the nin War. His Buddhist name was Kong Kaku. He was sometimes called "the Cloistered Emperor of Teiji()," because the name of the Buddhist hall where he resided after becoming a priest was called Teijiin. 

Uda died in 931 (Shhei 1, 19th day of the 7th month) at the age of 65. Brown, p. 295; Varley, p. 179. 

The actual site of Uda's grave is known. This emperor is traditionally venerated at a memorial Shinto shrine (misasagi) at Kyoto.

The Imperial Household Agency designates this location as Uda's mausoleum. It is formally named Kaguragaoka no Higashi no misasagi. Ponsonby-Fane, p. 420. 

The former emperor is buried amongst the "Seven Imperial Tombs" at Ryoan-ji Temple in Kyoto. The "Seven Imperial Tombs" at Ryoan-ji are the burial places of Uda, Kazan, Ichij, Go-Suzaku, Go-Reizei, Go-Sanj, and Horikawa. The mound which commemorates the Hosokawa Emperor Uda is today named O-uchiyama. The emperor's burial place would have been quite humble in the period after Uda died. These tombs reached their present state as a result of the 19th century restoration of imperial sepulchers which were ordered by Emperor Meiji. Moscher, Gouverneur. (1978). Kyoto: A Contemplative Guide, pp. 277278. 

===Kugy===
 is a collective term for the very few most powerful men attached to the court of the Emperor of Japan in pre-Meiji eras. Furugosho: Kugy of Uda-tenn. 

In general, this elite group included only three to four men at a time. These were hereditary courtiers whose experience and background would have brought them to the pinnacle of a life's career.

During Uda's reign, this apex of the Daij-kan included:

* Kampaku, Fujiwara no Mototsune (), 836891. 
* Daij-daijin, Fujiwara no Mototsune. 
* Sadaijin, Minamoto no Tru ().
* Sadaijin, Fujiwara no Yoshiyo ().
* Udaijin, Minamoto no Masaru ().
* Udaijin, Fujiwara no Yoshiyo ().
* Udaijin, Minamoto no Yoshiari ().
* Naidaijin (not appointed)
* Dainagon

==Eras of Uda's reign==
The years of Uda's reign are more specifically identified by more than one era name or neng. Titsingh, p. 125. 
* Ninna (885889)
* Kanpy (889898)

==Consorts and Children==
Nygo: Fujiwara no Inshi () (?896), daughter of Fujiwara no Takafuji
*Imperial Prince Atsugimi () (885930) (Emperor Daigo)
*Imperial Prince Atsuyoshi () (887930)
*Imperial Prince Atsukata () (?927)
*Imperial Prince Atsumi () (893967)
*Imperial Princess Jshi () (?959), 25th Sai in Ise Shrine (897930)

Nygo: Fujiwara no Onshi () (872907), daughter of Fujiwara no Mototsune
*Imperial Princess Kinshi (]) (890910), married to Imperial Prince Atsuyoshi

Nygo: Tachibana no Yoshiko/Gishi (), daughter of Tachibana no Hiromi
*Imperial Prince Tokinaka () (885891)
*Imperial Prince Tokiyo () (886927)
*Imperial Prince Tokikuni ()
*Imperial Princess Kunshi (]) (?902), 10th Saiin in Kamo Shrine (893902)

Nygo: Tachibana no Fusako () (?893)

Nygo: Sugawara no Hiroko/Enshi (), daughter of Sugawara no Michizane

Koui: Minamoto no Sadako (), daughter of Minamoto no Noboru
*Imperial Princess Ishi () (895936)

Koui: Princess Norihime (), daughter of Prince Tyo
*Imperial Princess Fushi () (?958)

Koui: Fujiwara no Yasuko (), daughter of Fujiwara no Arizane
*Imperial Princess Kaishi () (ca. 894953), married to Imperial Prince Motoyoshi (son of Emperor Yzei)
*Imperial Princess Kishi () (?979)

Koui: Minamoto no Hisako ()

Koui: Fujiwara no Shizuko ()

Court lady: A daughter of Fujiwara no Tsugukage, Ise () (875/7ca. 939)
*prince (died young)

Court lady: Fujiwara no Hshi (), daughter of Fujiwara no Tokihira
*Imperial Prince Masaakira () (920929)
*Imperial Prince Noriakira ()
*Imperial Prince Yukiakira () (926948)

(from unknown women)
*Imperial Prince Yukinaka ()
*Imperial Princess Seishi () (?978)
*Minamoto no Shinshi ()

==Notes==
Japanese Imperial kamon  a stylized chrysanthemum blossom

==References==
* Brown, Delmer M. and Ichir Ishida, eds. (1979). Gukansh: The Future and the Past. Berkeley: University of California Press. 10-ISBN 0-520-03460-0; 13-ISBN 978-0-520-03460-0; OCLC 251325323
* Kitagawa, Hiroshi and Bruce T. Tsuchida. (1975). The Tale of the Heike. Tokyo: University of Tokyo Press. OCLC 262297615
* Moscher, Gouverneur. (1978). Kyoto: A Contemplative Guide. 10-ISBN 0804812942/13-ISBN 9780804812948; OCLC 4589403
* Ponsonby-Fane, Richard Arthur Brabazon. (1959). The Imperial House of Japan. Kyoto: Ponsonby Memorial Society. OCLC 194887
* Titsingh, Isaac. (1834). Nihon Odai Ichiran; ou, Annales des empereurs du Japon. Paris: Royal Asiatic Society, Oriental Translation Fund of Great Britain and Ireland. OCLC 5850691
* Varley, H. Paul. (1980). Jinn Shtki: A Chronicle of Gods and Sovereigns. New York: Columbia University Press. 10-ISBN 0-231-04940-4; 13-ISBN 978-0-231-04940-5; OCLC 59145842

==See also==
* Emperor of Japan
* List of Emperors of Japan
* Imperial cult
* Emperor Go-Uda
* Kanpy Gyoki

 
 



[[Daigo]]

Daigo may refer to:

==People==
*Emperor Daigo, Emperor of Japan between 897 and 930
*Daigo family, a branch of the Ichij family of Japanese nobility
*Daigo (name)

==Places==
*Daigo Temple, from which Emperor Daigo took his name
*Daigo, Fushimi, Kyoto, a district in the ward of Fushimi-ku, Kyoto
*Daigo Station (Kyoto), a train station
*Daigo Station (Akita), a train station
*Daigo, Ibaraki, a town in Ibaraki Prefecture

==Other uses==
*Daigo (Zen), a great enlightenment in Zen Buddhism
*Daigo (cheese), a type of cheese made in ancient Japan



[[Suzaku]]

Suzaku, Su-zaku, or Su-Zaku may refer to:
* Vermilion Bird (Zh Qu), whose Japanese name is Suzaku, the bird guardian of the South and one of the Four Symbols of Chinese constellations
* Suzaku (film), a 1997 Japanese film by Naomi Kawase
* Emperor Suzaku (922&ndash;952), emperor of Japan
* SUZAK Inc., also known as Suzaku, a video game developer
* Suzaku Avenue, one of the ancient main streets in Kyoto and Nara, Japan
* Suzaku (satellite), the name given in 2005 to an ASTRO-EII spacecraft, a joint venture of NASA and the Japanese Space Agency JAXA

Fiction:
* Suzaku (YuYu Hakusho), a character in YuYu Hakusho media
* Suzaku Kururugi, a character in the anime series Code Geass - Lelouch of the Rebellion
* Suzaku, an enemy in the PlayStation game SaGa Frontier
* Suzaku, a character in Descendants of Darkness (Yami no Matsuei) who is one of Tsuzuki's shikigami, or guardian beasts
* Suzaku, a character in the game Flying Dragon
* Suzaku Seikun, a god-character in Fushigi Ygi
* Suzaku, the bitbeast companion of Kai Hiwatari in the Beyblade franchise
* Suzaku, an antagonist of the game 2|Tenchu 2: Birth of the Stealth Assassins]
* Ryu Suzaku, the protagonist of the anime series F-Zero: Legend of the Falcon (F-Zero GP Legend), known in English as Rick Wheeler



[[Murakami]]

Murakami ( "upper village") is a Japanese surname, 35th by frequency in Japan. http://www2s.biglobe.ne.jp/~suzakihp/ju0000.html It can refer to:
__TOC__

==People==
*Emperor Murakami, 10th century emperor of Japan
*Daisuke Murakami (figure skater)
*Daisuke Murakami (snowboarder)
*Genzo Murakami (), late contemporary novelist
*Glen Murakami, animator
*Haruki Murakami (), contemporary novelist
*James J. Murakami, see Academy Award for Best Production Design
*Jimmy Murakami (1933&ndash;2014) also known as Teruaki Murakami (), animator and director whose work includes adaptations of Raymond Briggs' The Snowman and When the Wind Blows
*Kanako Murakami ( ), figure skater
*Les Murakami (born 1936), American college baseball coach
*Maki Murakami, manga artist
*Masanori Murakami, the first Japanese player to play in MLB, a pitcher for the San Francisco Giants
*Megumi Murakami, Japanese pop singer (Cute)
*Ryu Murakami (), contemporary writer and filmmaker
*Shingo Murakami (), Japanese pop singer (Kanjani Eight)
*Takashi Murakami (), contemporary artist and founder of the Superflat movement
*Yoshiaki Murakami (), corporate raider and president of M&A Consulting

==Fictional characters==
*Gennosuke Murakami, from the Usagi Yojimbo comic book series
*Kyouji Murakami, from the Tokusatsu TV series, Kamen Rider 555
*Masaki Murakami, from the manga/anime series Guyver
*Murakami Yagami, from the manga/anime series Blue Seed
*Murakami Natsumi, from the manga/anime series Negima! Magister Negi Magi
*Murakami Yuu from the manga/anime series 
*Manzanar Murakami from Karen Tei Yamashita's novel "Tropic of Orange"

==Places==
*Murakami, Niigata, a city in Niigata prefecture.
*Murakami clan, a clan within Feudal Japan.

==Music==
Murakami, a song by Russian rock singer Svetlana Surganova, widely perceived as a lesbian anthem http://www.beyondterrorbeyondgrace.com
 

==References==
 



[[Earless seal]]

The true seals or earless seals are one of the three main groups of mammals within the seal superfamily, Pinnipedia. All true seals are members of the family Phocidae . They are sometimes called crawling seals to distinguish them from the fur seals and sea lions of the family Otariidae. Seals live in the oceans of both hemispheres and, with the exception of the more tropical monk seals, are mostly confined to polar, subpolar, and temperate climates. The Baikal seal is the only seal found exclusively in fresh water.

==Anatomy==
Adult phocids vary from 1.17 m in length and 45 kg in weight, in the ringed seal, to 4.9 m and 2400 kg in the southern elephant seal. 

Phocids are more specialized for aquatic life than otariids. They lack external ears and have sleek, streamlined bodies. Retractable nipples, internal testicles and an internal penis sheath provide further streamlining. A smooth layer of blubber lies underneath the skin. Phocids are able to divert blood flow to this layer to help control their temperatures.

===Limbs===

Their fore flippers are used primarily for steering, while their hind flippers are bound to the pelvis in such a way that they cannot bring them under their body to walk on them.

They are more streamlined than fur seals and sea lions, so can swim more effectively over long distances. However, because they cannot turn their hind flippers downward, they are very clumsy on land, having to wriggle with their front flippers and abdominal muscles. 

Phocids have fewer teeth than land-based members of the Carnivora, although they retain powerful canines. Some species lack molars altogether. The dental formula is:

==Physiology==

===Respiration and circulation===
Phocid respiratory and circulatory systems are adapted to allow diving to considerable depths, and they can spend a long time underwater between breaths. Air is forced from the lungs during a dive and into the upper respiratory passages, where gases cannot easily be absorbed into the bloodstream. This helps protect the seal from the bends. The middle ear is also lined with blood sinuses that inflate during diving, helping to maintain a constant pressure. 

==Life history==

===Swimming===
While otariids are known for speed and maneuverability, phocids are known for efficient, economical movement. This allows most phocids to forage far from land to exploit prey resources, while otariids are tied to rich upwelling zones close to breeding sites. 

Phocids swim by sideways movements of their bodies, using their hind flippers to fullest effect. 

===Communication===
Unlike otariids, true seals do not communicate by "barking". Instead, they communicate by slapping the water and grunting.

===Reproduction===

alt=Photo of seven adult and juvenile seals packed closely on beach

Phocids spend most of their time at sea, although they return to land or pack ice to breed and give birth.

Pregnant females spend long periods foraging at sea, building up fat reserves, and then return to the breeding site to use their stored energy to nurse pups. However, the common seal displays a reproductive strategy similar to that used by otariids, in which the mother makes short foraging trips between nursing bouts.

Because a phocid mother's feeding grounds are often hundreds of kilometers from the breeding site, she must fast while lactating. This combination of fasting with lactation requires the mother to provide large amounts of energy to her pup at a time when she is not eating (and often, not drinking). Mothers must supply their own metabolic needs while nursing. This is a miniature version of the humpback whale's strategy, which fast during their months-long migration from arctic feeding areas to tropical breeding/nursing areas and back.

Phocids produce thick, fat-rich milk that allows them to provide their pups with large amounts of energy in a short period. This allows the mother to return to the sea in time to replenish her reserves. Lactation ranges from five to seven weeks in the monk seal to just three to five days in the hooded seal. The mother ends nursing by leaving her pup at the breeding site to search for food (pups continue to nurse if given the opportunity). "Milk stealers" that suckle from unrelated, sleeping females are not uncommon; this often results in the death of the mother's pup, since a single female can only feed one pup.

===Growth and maturation===
The pup's diet is so high in calories, it builds up a fat store. Before the pup is ready to forage, the mother abandons it, and the pup consumes its own fat for weeks or months while it matures. Seals, like all marine mammals, need time to develop the oxygen stores, swimming muscles, and neural pathways necessary for effective diving and foraging. Seal pups typically eat no food and drink no water during the period, although some polar species eat snow. The postweaning fast ranges from two weeks in the hooded seal to 912 weeks in the northern elephant seal. The physiological and behavioral adaptations that allow phocid pups to endure these remarkable fasts, which are among the longest for any mammal, remain an area of active study and research.

==Taxonomy==
In the 1980s, phylogenetic analysis of the phocids has led to a few conclusions about the interrelatedness of the various genera. The four genera Hydrurga, Leptonychotes, Lobodon, and Ommatophoca form a monophyletic group, the tribe Lobodontini. Likewise, the Phocinae subfamily (Erignathus, Cystophora, Halichoerus, and Phoca) is also monophyletic. More recently, five species have been split off from Phoca, forming three additional genera. However, the family Monachinae (the lobodonts plus Monachus and Mirounga) is probably paraphyletic. 
Fossil Pliophoca skull 
Superfamily Pinnipedia
* Family Otariidae: Fur seals and sea lions
* Family Odobenidae: Walrus
* Family Phocidae Peter Saundry. 2010. True Seals. Encyclopedia of Earth. topic ed. C.Michael Hogan, ed. in chief C.Cleveland, National Center for Science and the Environment, Washington DC 
** Subfamily Monachinae
*** Tribe Monachini
**** Monachopsis
**** Pristiphoca
**** Properiptychus
**** Messiphoca
**** Mesotaria
**** Callophoca
**** Pliophoca
**** Pontophoca
**** Hawaiian monk seal, Monachus schauinslandi
**** Mediterranean monk seal, Monachus monachus
**** Caribbean monk seal, Monachus tropicalis (probably extinct around 1950)
*** Tribe Miroungini
**** Northern elephant seal, Mirounga angustirostris
**** Southern elephant seal, Mirounga leonina
*** Tribe Lobodontini
**** Monotherium delognii
**** Monotherium wymanii
**** Piscophoca pacifica
**** Hadrokirus martini
**** Homiphoca capensis
**** Ross seal, Ommatophoca rossi
**** Crabeater seal, Lobodon carcinophagus
**** Leopard seal, Hydrurga leptonyx
**** Weddell seal, Leptonychotes weddellii
*** Acrophoca longirostris
** Subfamily Phocinae
*** Kawas benegasorum
*** Leptophoca lenis
*** Preapusa
*** Cryptophoca
*** Bearded seal, Erignathus barbatus
*** Hooded seal, Cystophora cristata
*** Tribe Phocini
**** Harbor seal or common seal, Phoca vitulina
**** Spotted seal, Phoca largha
**** Ringed seal, Pusa hispida (formerly Phoca hispida)
**** Baikal seal, Pusa sibirica (formerly Phoca sibirica)
**** Caspian seal, Pusa caspica (formerly Phoca caspica)
**** Harp seal, Pagophilus groenlandicus (formerly Phoca groenlandica)
**** Ribbon seal, Histriophoca fasciata (formerly Phoca fasciata)
**** Phocanella
**** Platyphoca
**** Gryphoca
**** Grey seal, Halichoerus grypus

==Evolution==
Piscophoca pacifica fossil
The earliest fossil phocids date from the mid-Miocene, 15 million years ago in the north Atlantic. Until recently, many researchers believed that phocids evolved separately from otariids and odobenids; and that they evolved from otter-like animals, such as Potamotherium, which inhabited European freshwater lakes. Recent evidence strongly suggests a monophyletic origin for all pinnipeds from a single ancestor, possibly Enaliarctos, most closely related to the bears.

Monk seals and elephant seals are believed to have first entered the Pacific through the open straits between North and South America, which only closed in the Pliocene. The various Antarctic species may have either used the same route, or traveled down the west coast of Africa. 

==References==

==External links==

*Elephant Seal Research Group
*Phocidae on T in Bch khoa Vit Nam
* 
* 
* 

 


[[Espionage]]

Espionage or spying involves a government or individual obtaining information considered secret or confidential without the permission of the holder of the information. Espionage is inherently clandestine, as it is taken for granted that it is unwelcome and in many cases illegal and punishable by law. It is a subset of "intelligence gathering", which otherwise may be conducted from public sources and using perfectly legal and ethical means. It is crucial to distinguish espionage from "intelligence" gathering, as the latter does not necessarily involve espionage, but often collates open-source information.

Espionage is often part of an institutional effort by a government or commercial concern. However, the term is generally associated with state spying on potential or actual enemies primarily for military purposes. Spying involving corporations is known as industrial espionage.

One of the most effective ways to gather data and information about the enemy (or potential enemy) is by infiltrating the enemy's ranks. This is the job of the spy (espionage agent). Spies can bring back all sorts of information concerning the size and strength of an enemy army. They can also find dissidents within the enemy's forces and influence them to defect. In times of crisis, spies can also be used to steal technology and to sabotage the enemy in various ways. Counterintelligence operatives can feed false information to enemy spies, protecting important domestic secrets, and preventing attempts at subversion. Nearly every country has very strict laws concerning espionage, and the penalty for being caught is often severe. However, the benefits that can be gained through espionage are generally great enough that most governments and many large corporations make use of it to varying degrees.

Further information on clandestine HUMINT (human intelligence) information collection techniques is available, including discussions of operational techniques, asset recruiting, and the tradecraft used to collect this information.

==History==
Events involving espionage are well documented throughout history. The ancient writings of Chinese and Indian military strategists such as Sun-Tzu and Chanakya contain information on deception and subversion. Chanakya's student Chandragupta Maurya, founder of the Maurya Empire in India, made use of assassinations, spies and secret agents, which are described in Chanakya's Arthasastra. The ancient Egyptians had a thoroughly developed system for the acquisition of intelligence, and the Hebrews used spies as well, as in the story of Rahab. Spies were also prevalent in the Greek and Roman empires. "Espionage in Ancient Rome". HistoryNet. During the 13th and 14th centuries, the Mongols relied heavily on espionage in their conquests in Asia and Europe. Feudal Japan often used ninja to gather intelligence. More recently, spies played a significant part in Elizabethan England (see Francis Walsingham). Many modern espionage methods were well established even then. Aztecs used Pochtecas, people in charge of commerce, as spies and diplomats, and had diplomatic immunity. Along with the pochteca, before a battle or war, secret agents, quimitchin, were sent to spy amongst enemies usually wearing the local costume and speaking the local language, techniques similar to modern secret agents. 

The Cold War involved intense espionage activity between the United States and its allies and the Soviet Union and China and their allies, particularly related to nuclear weapons secrets. Recently, espionage agencies have targeted the illegal drug trade and those considered terrorists. Since 2008 the United States has charged at least 57 defendants for attempting to spy for China. Arrillaga, Pauline. "China's spying seeks secret US info." AP, 7 May 2011. 

Different intelligence services value certain intelligence collection techniques over others. The former Soviet Union, for example, preferred human sources over research in open sources, while the United States has tended to emphasize technological methods such as SIGINT and IMINT. Both Soviet political (KGB) and military intelligence (GRU ) officers were judged by the number of agents they recruited.

==Targets of espionage==
Espionage agents are usually trained experts in a specific targeted field so they can differentiate mundane information from targets of intrinsic value to their own organisational development. Correct identification of the target at its execution is the sole purpose of the espionage operation.

Broad areas of espionage targeting expertise include:a spy

* Natural resources: strategic production identification and assessment (food, energy, materials). Agents are usually found among bureaucrats who administer these resources in their own countries
* Popular sentiment towards domestic and foreign policies (popular, middle class, elites). Agents often recruited from field journalistic crews, exchange postgraduate students and sociology researchers
* Strategic economic strengths (production, research, manufacture, infrastructure). Agents recruited from science and technology academia, commercial enterprises, and more rarely from among military technologists
* Military capability intelligence (offensive, defensive, maneuver, naval, air, space). Agents are trained by special military espionage education facilities, and posted to an area of operation with covert identities to minimize prosecution
* Counterintelligence operations specifically targeting opponents' intelligence services themselves, such as breaching confidentiality of communications, and recruiting defectors or moles

==Methods and terminology==
The news media may speak of "spy satellites" and the like, espionage is not a synonym for all It is a specific form of human source intelligence (HUMINT). Codebreaking (cryptanalysis or COMINT), aircraft or satellite photography, (IMINT) and research in open publications (OSINT) are all intelligence gathering disciplines, but none of them are espionage. Many HUMINT activities, such as prisoner interrogation, reports from military reconnaissance patrols and from diplomats, etc., are not espionage.

Unlike other forms of intelligence collection disciplines, espionage usually involves accessing the place where the desired information is stored or accessing the people who know the information and will divulge it through some kind of subterfuge. There are exceptions to physical meetings, such as the Oslo Report, or the insistence of Robert Hanssen in never meeting the people who bought his information.

The US defines espionage towards itself as "The act of obtaining, delivering, transmitting, communicating, or receiving information about the national defense with an intent, or reason to believe, that the information may be used to the injury of the United States or to the advantage of any foreign nation". Black's Law Dictionary (1990) defines espionage as: "... gathering, transmitting, or losing ... information related to the national defense". Espionage is a violation of United States law, and Article 106a of the Uniform Code of Military Justice". The United States, like most nations, conducts espionage against other nations, under the control of the National Clandestine Service. Britain's espionage activities are controlled by the Secret Intelligence Service.

==Organization==
An intelligence officer's clothing, accessories, and behavior must be as unremarkable as possible  their lives (and others') may depend on it.

A spy is a person employed to obtain such secrets. Within the United States Intelligence Community, "asset" is a more common usage. A case officer, who may have diplomatic status (i.e., official cover or non-official cover), supports and directs the human collector. Cutouts are couriers who do not know the agent or case officer but transfer messages. A safe house is a refuge for spies.

In larger networks the organization can be complex with many methods to avoid detection, including clandestine cell systems. Often the players have never met. Case officers are stationed in foreign countries to recruit and to supervise intelligence agents, who in turn spy on targets in their countries where they are assigned. A spy need not be a citizen of the target countryhence does not automatically commit treason when operating within it. While the more common practice is to recruit a person already trusted with access to sensitive information, sometimes a person with a well-prepared synthetic identity, called a Legend in tradecraft, A legend is also employed for an individual who is not an illegal agent, per se, but is an ordinary citizen who is "relocated", for example, a "protected witness". may attempt to infiltrate a target organization.

These agents can be moles (who are recruited before they get access to secrets), defectors (who are recruited after they get access to secrets and leave their country) or defectors in place (who get access but do not leave). One of the famous agent Revant is well known in all.

Spies may also be used to spread disinformation in the organization in which they are planted, such as giving false reports about their country's military movements, or about a competing company's ability to bring a product to market. Spies may be given other roles that also require infiltration, such as sabotage.

Many governments routinely spy on their allies as well as their enemies, although they typically maintain a policy of not commenting on this. Governments also employ private companies to collect information on their behalf such as SCG International Risk and others.

Many organizations, both national and non-national, conduct espionage operations. It should not be assumed that espionage is always directed at the most secret operations of a target country. National and terrorist organizations and other groups are also targets. 

Communications both are necessary to espionage and clandestine operations, and also a great vulnerability when the adversary has sophisticated SIGINT detection and interception capability. Agents must also transfer money securely. 

==Industrial espionage==

Reportedly Canada is losing $12 billion "Defectors say China running 1,000 spies in Canada". CBC News. June 15, 2005. and German companies are estimated to be losing about 50 billion ($87 billion) and 30,000 jobs "Beijing's spies cost German firms billions, says espionage expert". The Sydney Morning Herald. July 25, 2009. to industrial espionage every year.

==Agents in espionage==
In espionage jargon, an "agent" is the person who does the spying; a citizen of one country who is recruited by a second country to spy on or work against his own country or a third country. In popular usage, this term is often erroneously applied to a member of an intelligence service who recruits and handles agents; in espionage such a person is referred to as an intelligence officer, intelligence operative or case officer. There are several types of agent in use today.
*Double agent, "is a person who engages in clandestine activity for two intelligence or security services (or more in joint operations), who provides information about one or about each to the other, and who wittingly withholds significant information from one on the instructions of the other or is unwittingly manipulated by one so that significant facts are withheld from the adversary. Peddlers, fabricators, and others who work for themselves rather than a service are not double agents because they are not agents. The fact that doubles have an agent relationship with both sides distinguishes them from penetrations, who normally are placed with the target service in a staff or officer capacity." 
**Re-doubled agent, an agent who gets caught as a double agent and is forced to mislead the foreign intelligence service.
***Unwitting double agent, an agent who offers or is forced to recruit as a double or re-doubled agent and in the process is recruited by either a third party intelligence service or his own government without the knowledge of the intended target intelligence service or the agent. This can be useful in capturing important information from an agent that is attempting to seek allegiance with another country. The double agent usually has knowledge of both intelligence services and can identify operational techniques of both, thus making third party recruitment difficult or impossible. The knowledge of operational techniques can also affect the relationship between the Operations Officer (or case officer) and the agent if the case is transferred by an Operational Targeting Officer to a new Operations Officer, leaving the new officer vulnerable to attack. This type of transfer may occur when an officer has completed his term of service or when his cover is blown.
**** Triple agent, an agent that is working for three intelligence services.
*Intelligence agent: Provides access to sensitive information through the use of special privileges. If used in corporate intelligence gathering, this may include gathering information of a corporate business venture or stock portfolio. In economic intelligence, "Economic Analysts may use their specialized skills to analyze and interpret economic trends and developments, assess and track foreign financial activities, and develop new econometric and modeling methodologies." Cia.gov This may also include information of trade or tariff.
*Access agent: Provides access to other potential agents by providing profiling information that can help lead to recruitment into an intelligence service.
*Agent of influence: Someone who may provide political influence in an area of interest or may even provide publications needed to further an intelligence service agenda. The use of the media to print a story to mislead a foreign service into action, exposing their operations while under surveillance.
*Agent provocateur: This type of agent instigates trouble, or may provide information to gather as many people as possible into one location for an arrest.
*Facilities agent: A facilities agent may provide access to buildings such as garages or offices used for staging operations, resupply, etc.
*Principal agent: This agent functions as a handler for an established network of agents usually "Blue Chip".
*Confusion agent: May provide misleading information to an enemy intelligence service or attempt to discredit the operations of the target in an operation.
*Sleeper agent: A sleeper agent is a person who is recruited to an intelligence service to wake up and perform a specific set of tasks or functions while living under cover in an area of interest. This type of agent is not the same as a deep cover operative, who continually contacts a case officer to file intelligence reports. A sleeper agent is not in contact with anyone until activated.
*Illegal agent: This is a person who is living in another country under false credentials that does not report to a local station. A non official cover operative is a type of cover used by an intelligence operative and can be dubbed an "Illegal" Illegal Mi5.gov -How spies operate. when working in another country without diplomatic protection.

==Law==
Espionage is a crime under the legal code of many nations. The risks of espionage vary. A spy breaking the host country's laws may be deported, imprisoned, or even executed. A spy breaking his/her own country's laws can be imprisoned for espionage or/and treason (which in the USA and some other jurisdictions can only occur if he or she take ups arms or aids the enemy against his or her own country during wartime), or even executed, as the Rosenbergs were. For example, when Aldrich Ames handed a stack of dossiers of U.S. Central Intelligence Agency (CIA) agents in the Eastern Bloc to his KGB-officer "handler", the KGB "rolled up" several networks, and at least ten people were secretly shot. When Ames was arrested by the U.S. Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI), he faced life in prison; his contact, who had diplomatic immunity, was declared persona non grata and taken to the airport. Ames's wife was threatened with life imprisonment if her husband did not cooperate; he did, and she was given a five-year sentence. Hugh Francis Redmond, a CIA officer in China, spent nineteen years in a Chinese prison for espionageand died thereas he was operating without diplomatic cover and immunity. 

In United States law, treason, treason espionage, espionage and spying spying are separate crimes. Treason and espionage have graduated punishment levels; death is a mandatory sentence for spying.

The United States in World War I passed the Espionage Act of 1917. Over the years, many spies, such as the Soble spy ring, Robert Lee Johnson, the Rosenberg ring, Aldrich Hazen Ames, Robert Philip Hanssen, Jonathan Pollard, John Anthony Walker, James Hall III, and others have been prosecuted under this law.

==Use against non-spies==
However, espionage laws are also used to prosecute non-spies. In the United States, the Espionage Act of 1917 was used against socialist politician Eugene V. Debs (at that time the act had much stricter guidelines and amongst other things banned speech against military recruiting). The law was later used to suppress publication of periodicals, for example of Father Coughlin in World War II. In the early 21st century, the act was used to prosecute whistleblowers such as Thomas Andrews Drake, John Kiriakou, and Edward Snowden, as well as officials who communicated with journalists for innocuous reasons, such as Stephen Jin-Woo Kim. See the article on John Kiriakou 

As of 2012, India and Pakistan were holding several hundred prisoners of each other's country for minor violations like trespass or visa overstay, often with accusations of espionage attached. Some of these include cases where Pakistan and India both deny citizenship to these people, leaving them stateless. The BBC reported in 2012 on one such case, that of Mohammed Idrees, who was held under Indian police control for approximately 13 years for overstaying his 15 day visa by 23 days after seeing his ill parents in 1999. Much of the 13 years was spent in prison waiting for a hearing, and more time was spent homeless or living with generous families. The Indian People's Union for Civil Liberties and Human Rights Law Network both decried his treatment. The BBC attributed some of the problems to tensions caused by the Kashmir conflict. Your World: The Nowhere Man, Rupa Jha, October 21, 2012, BBC (retrieved 2012-10-20) (Program link:The Nowhere Man) 

==Military conflicts==
In military conflicts, espionage is considered permissible as many nations recognizes the inevitability of opposing sides seeking intelligence each about the dispositions of the other. To make the mission more easier and successful, soldiers or agents wear disguises to conceal their true identity from the enemy while penetrating enemy lines for intelligence gathering. However, if they are caught behind enemy lines in disguises, they are not entitled to prisoner-of-war status and subject to prosecution and punishmentincluding execution.

The Hague Convention of 1907 addresses the status of wartime spies, specifically within "Laws and Customs of War on Land" (Hague IV); October 18, 1907: CHAPTER II Spies". Article 29 states that a person is considered a spy who, acts clandestinely or on false pretenses, infiltrates enemy lines with the intention of acquiring intelligence about the enemy and communicate it to the belligerent during times of war. Soldiers who penetrates enemy lines in proper uniforms for the purpose of acquiring intelligence are not considered spies but are lawful combatants entitled to be treated as prisoners of war upon capture by the enemy. Article 30 states that a spy captured behind enemy lines may only be punished following a trial. However, Article 31 provides that if a spy successfully rejoined his own military and is then captured by the enemy as a lawful combatant, he cannot be punished for his previous acts of espionage and must be treated as a prisoner of war. Note that this provision does not apply to citizens who committed treason against their own country or co-belligerents of that country and may be captured and prosecuted at any place or any time regardless whether he rejoined the military to which he belongs or not or during or after the war. 

The ones that are excluded from being treated as spies while behind enemy lines are escaping prisoners of war and downed airman as international law distinguishes between a disguised spy and a disguised escaper. It is permissible for these groups to wear enemy uniforms or civilian clothes in order to facilitate their escape back to friendly lines so long as they do not attack enemy forces, collect military intelligence, or engage in similar military operations while so disguised. 2006 Operational Law Handbook Soldiers who are wearing enemy uniforms or civilian clothes simply for the sake of warmth along with other purposes rather than engaging in espionage or similar military operations while so attired is also excluded from being treated as unlawful combatants. 

Saboteurs are treated as spies as they too wear disguises behind enemy lines for the purpose of waging destruction on enemy's vital targets in addition to intelligence gathering. For example, during World War II, eight German agents entered the U.S. in June 1942 as part of Operation Pastorius, a sabotage mission against U.S. economic targets. Two weeks later, all were arrested in civilian clothes by the FBI thanks to two German agents betraying the mission to the U.S. Under the Hague Convention of 1907, these Germans were classified as spies and tried by a military tribunal in Washington D.C. On August 3, 1942, all eight were found guilty and sentenced to death. Five days later, six were executed by electric chair at the District of Columbia jail. Two who had given evidence against the others had their sentences reduced by President Franklin D. Roosevelt to prison terms. In 1948, they were released by President Harry S. Truman and deported to the American Zone of occupied Germany.

The U.S. codification of enemy spies is Article 106 of the Uniform Code of Military Justice. This provides a mandatory death sentence if a person captured in the act is proven to be "lurking as a spy or acting as a spy in or about any place, vessel, or aircraft, within the control or jurisdiction" of the U.S. Armed Forces or industrial plants and other institutions employed by the U.S. in aiding the war effort. Article 106Spies 

==List of famous spies==

Howard Burnham (1915)
FBI file photo of the leader of the Duquesne Spy Ring (1941)

* Reign of Elizabeth I of England
*: Sir Francis Walsingham
*: Christopher Marlowe

* American Revolution
*: Thomas Knowlton, The First American Spy
*: Nathan Hale
*: John Andre
*: James Armistead
*: Benjamin Tallmadge, Case agent who organized of the Culper Spy Ring in New York City

* Napoleonic Wars
*: Charles-Louis Schulmeister
*: William Wickham

* American Civil War
*: One of the innovations in the American Civil War was the use of proprietary companies for intelligence collection by the Union; see Allan Pinkerton.
*: Confederate Secret Service
*: Belle Boyd 

* Aceh War
*: Dutch professor Snouck Hurgronje world leading authority on Islam was a proponent of espionage to quell Muslim resistance in Aceh in the Dutch East Indies. In his role as Colonial Advisor on Oriental Affairs, he gathered intelligence under the name "Haji Abdul Ghaffar".He used his knowledge of Islamic and Aceh culture to devise strategies that significantly helped crush the resistance of the Aceh inhabitants and impose Dutch colonial rule, ending the 40 year Aceh War. Casualty estimates ranged between 50,000 and 100,000 inhabitants dead and about a million wounded.
*: Christiaan Snouck Hurgronje

* Second Boer War
*: Fritz Joubert Duquesne
*: Sidney Reilly

* Russo-Japanese War
*: Sidney Reilly
*: Ho Liang-Shung
*: Akashi Motojiro

===World War I===

* Fritz Joubert Duquesne
* Jules C. Silber
* Mata Hari
* Howard Burnham
* T.E. Lawrence
* Sidney Reilly

One can read about the 11 German spies executed in the Tower of London during WW1 in Leonard Sellers's book Shot in the Tower 

After an article appeared in a July 2008 New York, Wall Street Journal when a former Director General of MI5, Dame Stella Rimington listed the five best books about spies in Britain. Shot in the Tower was number 1.

*Executed :- Carl Hans Lody on 6 November 1914, in the Miniature Rifle Range.
*Executed :- Carl Frederick Muller on 23 June 1915, in Miniature Rifle Range. Prepared bullets were used by the execution party. 
*Executed :- Haicke Marinus Janssen & Willem Johannes Roos both executed on 30 July 1915, both in the Tower ditch. 
*Executed :- Ernst Waldemar Melin on 10 September 1915, Miniature Rifle Range. 
*Executed :- Augusto Alfredo Roggen on 17 September 1915, in Miniature Rifle Range. 
*Executed :- Fernando Buschman on 19 October 1915, in Miniature Rifle Range. 
*Executed :- George Traugott Breeckow, otherwise known as Reginald Rowland or George T. Parker on 26 October 1915, in Miniature Rifle Range. Worked with a lady called Lizzie Louise Wertheim who was sentenced to ten years penal servitude. Later on 17 January 1918 was certified as insane and died in Broadmoor criminal lunatic asylum on 29 July 1920. 
*Executed :- Irving Guy Ries on 27 October 1915, in Miniature Rifle Range. 
*Executed :- Albert Mayer on 2 December 1915, in Miniature Rifle Range. 
*Executed :- Ludovico Hurwitz-y-Zender on 11 April 1916 in Miniature Rifle Range.

Carl Hans Lody has his own grave and black headstone in the East London Cemetery, Plaistow. The others are buried about 150 yards away under a small memorial stone alongside a pathway.

===World War II===
Imagined German Intelligence Officer thanks British Forces for giving away details of operations, (Graham & Gillies Advertising)
Informants were common in World War II. In November 1939, the German Hans Ferdinand Mayer sent what is called the Oslo Report to inform the British of German technology and projects in an effort to undermine the Nazi regime.
The Rseau AGIR was a French network developed after the fall of France that reported the start of construction of V-weapon installations in Occupied France to the British.

Counterespionage included the use of turned Double Cross agents to misinform Nazi Germany of impact points during the Blitz and internment of Japanese in the US against "Japan's wartime spy program". Additional WWII espionage examples include Soviet spying on the US Manhattan project, the German Duquesne Spy Ring convicted in the US, and the Soviet Red Orchestra spying on Nazi Germany. The US lacked a specific agency at the start of the war, but quickly formed the Office of Strategic Services (OSS).

Spying has sometimes been considered a gentlemanly pursuit, with recruiting focused on military officers, or at least on persons of the class from whom officers are recruited. However, the demand for male soldiers, an increase in women's rights, and the tactical advantages of female spies led the British Special Operations Executive (SOE) to set aside any lingering Victorian Era prejudices and begin employing them in April 1942. Their task was to transmit information from Nazi occupied France back to Allied Forces. The main strategic reason was that men in France faced a high risk of being interrogated by Nazi troops but women were less likely to arouse suspicion. In this way they made good couriers and proved equal to, if not more effective than, their male counterparts. Their participation in Organization and Radio Operation was also vital to the success of many operations, including the main network between Paris and London.

===Post World War II===

In the United States, there are seventeen http://www.intelligence.gov/about-the-intelligence-community/ (nota bene: They say it's 17 agencies, in fact, taking military intelligence into consideration, it's 22 agencies) federal agencies that form the United States Intelligence Community. The Central Intelligence Agency operates a Clandestine Service (NCS) to collect human intelligence and perform Covert operations. The National Security Agency collects Signals Intelligence. Originally the CIA spearheaded the US-IC. Pursuant to the September 11 attacks the Office of the Director of National Intelligence (ODNI) was created to promulgate information-sharing.

*Kim Philby
*Ray Mawby

== Espionage technology and techniques ==

* Agent handling
* Concealment device
* Covert agent
* Covert listening device
* Cut-out
* Cyber spying
* Dead drop
* False flag operations
* Honeypot
* Interrogation
* Numbers messaging
* Non-official cover
* Official cover
* One-way voice link
* Safe house
* Side channel attack
* Steganography
* Surveillance
* Surveillance aircraft

== Spy fiction ==

An early example of espionage literature is Kim by the English novelist Rudyard Kipling, with a description of the training of an intelligence agent in the Great Game between the UK and Russia in 19th century Central Asia. An even earlier work was James Fenimore Cooper's classic novel, The Spy, written in 1821, about an American spy in New York during the Revolutionary War.

During the many 20th century spy scandals, much information became publicly known about national spy agencies and dozens of real-life secret agents. These sensational stories piqued public interest in a profession largely off-limits to human interest news reporting, a natural consequence of the secrecy inherent to their work. To fill in the blanks, the popular conception of the secret agent has been formed largely by 20th and 21st century literature and cinema. Attractive and sociable real-life agents such as Valerie Plame find little employment in serious fiction, however. The fictional secret agent is more often a loner, sometimes amoralan existential hero operating outside the everyday constraints of society. Loner spy personalities may have been a stereotype of convenience for authors who already knew how to write loner private investigator characters that sold well from the 1920s to the present.

Johnny Fedora achieved popularity as a fictional agent of early Cold War espionage, but James Bond is the most commercially successful of the many spy characters created by intelligence insiders during that struggle. His less fantastic rivals include Le Carre's George Smiley and Harry Palmer as played by Michael Caine. Most post-Vietnam era characters were modeled after the American, C.C. Taylor, reportedly the last sanctioned "asset" of the U.S. government. Taylor, a true "super spy", worked alone and would travel as an American or Canadian tourist or businessman throughout Europe and Asia, he was used extensively in the Middle East toward the end of his career. According to documents made available through the Freedom of Information Act, his operations were classified as "NOC" or Non-Official Cover.

Jumping on the spy bandwagon, other writers also started writing about spy fiction featuring female spies as protagonists, such as The Baroness, which has more graphic action and sex, as compared to other novels featuring male protagonists.

It also made its way into the videogame world, hence the famous creation of Hideo Kojima, the Metal Gear Solid Series.

Espionage has also made its way into comedy depictions. The 1960s TV series Get Smart portrays an inept spy, while the 1985 movie Spies Like Us depicts a pair of none-too-bright men sent to the Soviet Union to investigate a missile.

=== World War II: 19391945 ===

 Author(s) Title Publisher Date Notes 
 Babington-Smith, Constance Air Spy: The Story of Photo Intelligence in World War II  1957  
 Bryden, John Best-Kept Secret: Canadian Secret Intelligence in the Second World War Lester 1993  
 Hinsley, F. H. and Alan Stripp Codebreakers: The Inside Story of Bletchley Park  2001  
 Hinsley, F. H. British Intelligence in the Second World War  1996 Abridged version of multivolume official history. 
 Hohne, Heinz Canaris: Hitler's Master Spy  1979  
 Jones, R. V. The Wizard War: British Scientific Intelligence 19391945  1978  
 Kahn, David Hitler's Spies: German Military Intelligence in World War II'  1978  
 Kahn, David Seizing the Enigma: The Race to Break the German U-Boat Codes, 19391943  1991 FACE 
 Kitson, Simon The Hunt for Nazi Spies: Fighting Espionage in Vichy France 
 2008 
 Lewin, Ronald The American Magic: Codes, Ciphers and the Defeat of Japan  1982  
 Masterman, J. C. The Double Cross System in the War of 1935 to 1945 Yale 1972  
 Persico, Joseph Roosevelt's Secret War: FDR and World War II Espionage  2001  
 Persico, Joseph Casey: The Lives and Secrets of William J. Casey-From the OSS to the CIA  1991  
 Ronnie, Art Counterfeit Hero: Fritz Duquesne, Adventurer and Spy  1995 ISBN 1-55750-733-3 
 Sayers, Michael & Albert E. Kahn Sabotage! The Secret War Against America  1942  
 Smith, Richard Harris OSS: The Secret History of America's First Central Intelligence Agency  2005  
 Stanley, Roy M. World War II Photo Intelligence  1981  
 Wark, Wesley The Ultimate Enemy: British Intelligence and Nazi Germany, 19331939  1985  
 Wark, Wesley \"Cryptographic Innocence: The Origins of Signals Intelligence in Canada in the Second World War\" in Journal of Contemporary History 22  1987  
 West, Nigel Secret War: The Story of SOE, Britain's Wartime Sabotage Organization  1992  
 Winterbotham, F. W. The Ultra Secret Harper & Row 1974  
 Winterbotham, F. W. The Nazi Connection Harper & Row 1978  
 Cowburn, B. No Cloak No Dagger Brown, Watson, Ltd. 1960  
 Wohlstetter, Roberta. Pearl Harbor: Warning and Decision  1962  

=== Cold War era: 19451991 ===

 Author(s) Title Publisher Date Notes 
 Ambrose, Stephen E. Ike's Spies: Eisenhower and the Intelligence Establishment  1981-  
 Andrew, Christopher and Vasili Mitrokhin The Sword and the Shield: The Mitrokhin Archive and the Secret History of the KGB Basic Books 1991, 2005 ISBN 0-465-00311-7 
 Andrew, Christopher, and Oleg Gordievsky KGB: The Inside Story of Its Foreign Operations from Lenin to Gorbachev  1990  
 Aronoff, Myron J. The Spy Novels of John Le Carr: Balancing Ethics and Politics  1999  
 Bissell, Richard Reflections of a Cold Warrior: From Yalta to the Bay of Pigs'  1996  
 Bogle, Lori, ed. Cold War Espionage and Spying  2001- essays 
 Christopher Andrew and Vasili Mitrokhin The World Was Going Our Way: The KGB and the Battle for the Third World    
 Christopher Andrew and Vasili Mitrokhin The Mitrokhin Archive: The KGB in Europe and the West Gardners Books 2000 ISBN 978-0-14-028487-4 
 Colella, Jim My Life as an Italian Mafioso Spy  2000  
 Craig, R. Bruce Treasonable Doubt: The Harry Dexter Spy Case University Press of Kansas 2004 ISBN 978-0-7006-1311-3 
 Dorril, Stephen MI6: Inside the Covert World of Her Majesty's Secret Intelligence Service  2000  
 Dziak, John J. Chekisty: A History of the KGB  1988  
 Gates, Robert M. From The Shadows: The Ultimate Insider's Story Of Five Presidents And How They Won The Cold War'  1997  
 Frost, Mike and Michel Gratton Spyworld: Inside the Canadian and American Intelligence Establishments Doubleday Canada 1994  
 Haynes, John Earl, and Harvey Klehr Venona: Decoding Soviet Espionage in America  1999  
 Helms, Richard A Look over My Shoulder: A Life in the Central Intelligence Agency  2003  
 Koehler, John O. Stasi: The Untold Story of the East German Secret Police'  1999  
 Persico, Joseph Casey: The Lives and Secrets of William J. Casey-From the OSS to the CIA  1991  
 Murphy, David E., Sergei A. Kondrashev, and George Bailey Battleground Berlin: CIA vs. KGB in the Cold War  1997  
 Prados, John Presidents' Secret Wars: CIA and Pentagon Covert Operations Since World War II  1996  
 Rositzke, Harry. The CIA's Secret Operations: Espionage, Counterespionage, and Covert Action  1988  
 Srodes, James Allen Dulles: Master of Spies Regnery 2000 CIA head to 1961 
 Sontag Sherry, and Christopher Drew Blind Man's Bluff: The Untold Story of American Submarine Espinonage Harper 1998  
 Encyclopedia of Cold War Espionage, Spies and Secret Operations Greenwood Press/http://www.questia.com/PM.qst?a=o&d=106805285 2004  

* Anderson, Nicholas NOC Enigma Books 2009 - Post Cold War era
* Ishmael Jones The Human Factor: Inside the CIA's Dysfunctional Intelligence Culture Encounter Books 2008, rev. 2010
* Michael Ross The Volunteer: The Incredible True Story of an Israeli Spy on the Trail of International Terrorists McClelland & Stewart 2007, rev. 2008

== See also ==
* Animals used in espionage
* Chinese intelligence operations in the United States
* Classified information
* Covert United States foreign regime change actions
* Dumpster diving
* History of Soviet espionage
* Intelligence assessment
* Labor spies
* List of cryptographers
* List of intelligence agencies
* Ninja
* Operation Snow White
* Security clearance
* Spymaster

== References ==

== Further reading ==

* Jenkins, Peter. Surveillance Tradecraft: The Professional's Guide to Surveillance Training ISBN 978-0-9535378-2-2
* Felix, Christopher for James McCarger A Short Course in the Secret War, 4th Edition. Madison Books, November 19, 2001.
* West, Nigel. MI6: British Secret Intelligence Service Operations 19091945 1983
* Smith Jr., W. Thomas. Encyclopedia of the Central Intelligence Agency 2003
* Richelson, Jeffery T. The U.S. Intelligence Community 1999 fourth edition
* Richelson, Jeffery T. A Century of Spies: Intelligence in the Twentieth Century 1977
* Owen, David. Hidden Secrets: A Complete History of Espionage and the Technology Used to Support It
* O'Toole, George. Honorable Treachery: A History of U.S. Intelligence, Espionage, Covert Action from the American Revolution to the CIA 1991
* Lerner, Brenda Wilmoth & K. Lee Lerner, eds. Terrorism: essential primary sources Thomas Gale 2006 ISBN 978-1-4144-0621-3
* Lerner, K. Lee and Brenda Wilmoth Lerner, eds. Encyclopedia of Espionage, Intelligence and Security 2003 1100 pages.
* Knightley, Philip The Second Oldest Profession: Spies and Spying in the Twentieth Century Norton 1986
* Kahn, David. The Codebreakers: The Comprehensive History of Secret Communication from Ancient Times to the Internet 1996 Revised edition. First published in 1967.
* Johnson, Robert. Spying for Empire: The Great Game in Central and South Asia, 17571947 London: Greenhill 2006
* Friedman, George. America's Secret War: Inside the Hidden Worldwide Struggle Between the United States and Its Enemies 2005
*Doyle, David W., A Memoir of True Men and Traitors (2000)
* Tunney, Thomas Joseph and Paul Merrick Hollister Throttled!: The Detection of the German and Anarchist Bomb Plotters Boston: Small, Maynard & company 1919 | available on Wikisource: 
* Beesly, Patrick. Room 40, 1982.
* Burnham, Frederick Russell Taking Chances 1944
*May, Ernest (ed.) Knowing One's Enemies: Intelligence Assessment before the Two World Wars 1984
* Tuchman, Barbara W. The Zimmermann Telegram Ballantine Books 1966
* Words: Matt Bolton; photographs: Matt Munro. [http://www.hot.ee/aasa/LPL_1211.pdf "The Tallinn Cables: A Glimpse into Tallinn's Secret History of Espionage". Lonely Planet Magazine, December 2011

== External links ==

* Interactive Rosenberg Timeline

 

[[Exile (video game series)]]

Exile is a series of role-playing video games created by Jeff Vogel of Spiderweb Software. They were released as shareware titles for Macintosh and Windows systems. Exile III was also ported to Linux by a third party. There were four games released in the series. All of the games were later revived in the Avernum series. As of July 8th, 2013, these games are free to play on Spiderweb Software's website.

==Games==
A screenshot from the Mac edition of Exile I

===Exile I: Escape from the Pit (1995) ===
The first game of the Exile trilogy sees a party of newly created characters thrown from the world above into the subterranean world known as Exile. Once here, the party discovers a civilization formed from the outcasts of the Empire above, a culture beset by constant warfare and monsters galore. The party meets with many of those who wish to get revenge on the Empire for the wrongs it has done to the peoples of Exile.

The characters become a rallying point around which the people of Exile who desire vengeance gather to focus their energies into finding a way to strike back against the cruel Emperor of the surface. Together, the party manages to assassinate Emperor Hawthorne in his throne room, banish the demon king Grah-hoth who was becoming a significant threat to the citizens of Exile, and secure an escape route to the surface.

===Exile II: Crystal Souls (1996) ===
The second Exile game follows directly from the first. The Empire has begun to recognise the threat the Exiles pose and begin sending their army down into Exile in huge numbers. To make matters worse, unknown barriers of energy are sprouting up around the world &ndash; sometimes aiding the Exiles, sometimes helping the Empire who can afford the losses much more easily than the Exiles.

A new party of characters meets one of the creatures causing the barriers sprouting up in Exile and go to meet with the unknown race to negotiate. In the end, the party is more successful - and the Vahnatai join with the Exiles to drive out the Empire. With the support of the Vahnatai the Exiles turn the tables on the Empire and successfully repulse their invasion.

===Exile III: Ruined World (1997)===
The final release in the Exile trilogy takes place some time after Exile II. A lot of preparation has taken place and now the Exiles are ready to send a selected few back into the light of the surface. However, while the members of the expedition are at first stunned by the sheer beauty of the land around them, they begin to notice that things are not as perfect as they seem. The slimes the party encounters are only the first part of what becomes a series of monsters and terrible occurrences that are blighting the Empire and laying it to waste.

While scouting the land, as were the expedition members' orders from the nation of Exile, the members are asked by the Empire to help save the surface from its blight. They bring the Exiles and the Empire together once more as allies trying to find the cause of the destruction.

A screenshot of combat in the Mac edition of Blades of Exile

===Blades of Exile (1997)===
Blades of Exile consists of three short scenarios set after the main trilogy as well as an editor that allows players to create their own scenarios, which need not be set in the Exile game world at all. Several hundred custom-made scenarios have been designed since the release of the game in 1997. The most prominent meeting places on the web of the Blades of Exile community are the official company-hosted internet forum. These forums offer support for beginning designers and players, reviews of new scenarios and general discussions about the use of the scenario editor. In June 2007, Jeff Vogel released the source code and game content for Blades of Exile, which is currently under version 2 of the GNU General Public License. Blades of Exile Source Code 

==Game Features==
Common to all games in the Exile series are 2D graphics and basic sound. The games are designed to be non-linear and long in gameplay length.

==Reception==
The Exile trilogy was very well received. PC Gamer wrote that Exile: Escape from the Pit "offers an easygoing point-and-click interface; pleasant, if unambitious, graphics; ... literate prose; and a vast scope." Exile II: Crystal Souls won the 1995 Eddy Award Honorable Mention for Best Shareware Game of the Year, and received a 5 out of 5 star rating from ZiffNet. Exile III: Ruined World Accessed: May 27, 2010 received the Shareware Game of the Year award from Computer Gaming World and Ziff-Davis Publishing.

==Avernum==
More recently the Exile games have been remade as the Avernum series, which replaced the two-dimensional tile-based graphics system with an isometric one and made numerous changes to the RPG system and some changes to the content. Fifth and sixth titles in the series are available under the Avernum moniker and engine.

==Engine and Interface==
While the game engine itself remained relatively similar between all games in the series, the interface went through many changes. Each iteration sported a new layout and color scheme, as well the individual elements, like the inventory and character roster boxes, were also changed to display information differently. Between Exile I and Exile II the most notable difference is a background color change as well as a change to the border of the play window. Between Exile II and Exile III the interface was changed significantly in that the colors and window styles were changed again but the player roster was overhauled and an inventory window was added. The changes between Exile III and Blades of Exile were more subtle and were again of the color and style nature.

==References==

==External links==
*Spiderweb Software
*Blades of Exile Source Code
*Encyclopedia Ermariana - an extensive encyclopedia of Exile
* Exile 1 game download
* Exile 2 game download
* Exile 3 game download
* Blades of Exile game download



[[Reizei]]

Reizei can refer to:
*Emperor Reizei, emperor of Japan
* Reizei family, a branch of the Fujiwara family



[[Emperor Enyu of Japan]]

#Redirect Emperor En'y

[[Emperor Kazan]]

 was the 65th emperor of Japan, Imperial Household Agency (Kunaich):  (65) according to the traditional order of succession. Ponsonby-Fane, Richard. (1959). The Imperial House of Japan, p. 72. 

Kazan's reign spanned the years from 984 through 986. Brown, Delmer et al. (1979). Gukansh, pp. 300302; Varley, H. Paul. (1980). Jinn Shtki,p. 192; Titsingh, Isaac. (1834). 

==Traditional narrative==
Before his ascension to the Chrysanthemum Throne, his personal name (imina) was Morosada-shinn (). Titsingh, p. 148; Varley, p. 192; Brown, p. 264; prior to Emperor Jomei, the personal names of the emperors (their imina) were very long and people did not generally use them. The number of characters in each name diminished after Jomei's reign. 

Morasada was the eldest son of Emperor Reizei. The prince's mother was Fujiwara no Kaneko/Kaishi (), who was a daughter of sessh Fujiwara no Koretada. Morasada was also was the brother of Emperor Sanj. Titsingh, p. 148. 

===Events of Kazan's life===
Emperor Kazan, who was tricked into abdicating, on his way to the temple where he will become a Buddhist monk  woodblock prin by Yoshitoshi Tsukioka (18391892).
Prince Morasada was seventeen years of age at the time of the succession. Titsingh, p. 148; Brown, p. 300. 

* October 6, 984 (Eikan 1, 27th day of the 8th month): In the 15th year of Emperor En'yu's reign (15), he abdicated; and the succession (senso) was received by a nephew. Shortly thereafter, Emperor Kazan is said to have acceded to the throne (sokui). Titsingh, p. 148; Brown, pp. 300; Varley, p. 44; a distinct act of senso is unrecognized prior to Emperor Tenji; and all sovereigns except Jit, Yzei, Go-Toba, and Fushimi have senso and sokui in the same year until the reign of Emperor Go-Murakami. 

He commissioned the Shi Wakash.

* 985 (Kanna 1, 4th month): Fujiwara no Tokiakira and his brother, Yasusuke, contended with Fujiwara no Sukitaka and e-no Masahira in a swordfight in Kyoto. Masahira lost the fingers of his left hand. The two brothers fled; and after careful searching, Tokiakira was eventually located in mi Province. 

He faced a tough political struggle from the Fujiwara family; and at the age of nineteen, he was manipulated into abandoning the throne by Fujiwara no Kaneie.

* 986 (Kanna 2, 6th month): Kazan abdicated, and took up residence at Kazan-ji where he became a Buddhist monk; and his new priestly name was Nykaku. Brown, p. 302. 
* August 23, 986 (Kanna 2, 16th day of the 7th month): Iyasada-shinn was appointed as heir and crown prince at age 11. Brown, p. 307. This followed the convention that two imperial lineages took the throne in turn, although Emperor Ichij was in fact Iyasada's junior. He thus gained the nickname Sakasa-no moke-no kimi (the imperial heir in reverse). When Emperor Kanzan abandoned the world for holy orders, one grandson of Kaneie ascended to the throne as Emperor Ichij (the 66th sovereign); and in due course, another grandson would follow on the throne as Emperor Sanj (the 67th sovereign). Varley, p. 195. 

Nykaku went on various pilgrimages and 're-founded' the Kannon pilgrimage, as a monk to the name of Tokudo Shonin (Some scholars doubt that Kazan, in his unstable mental condition at the time was involved with the founding of the pilgrimage, thereby leaving all of the credit to Shonin) had supposedlly already created it. This pilgrimage involved travelling to 33 locations across the eight provinces of the Bando area.

He was told to visit these 33 sites, in order to bring release from suffering, by Kannon Bosatsu in a vision.

It is said that the first site of the pilgrimage was the Sugimoto-dera in Kamakura. This site is also the first site on the Kamakura pilgrimage.

It is suggested by many scholars that the mental health of Kazan, particularly in later life, was not stable; and therefore, living as a monk may have caused deteriorating behavior.

Decorative emblems (kiri) of the Hosokawa clan are found at Ryoan-ji. Kazan is amongst six other emperors entombed near what had been the residence of Hosokawa Katsumoto before the nin War.Daij-tenn Kazan died at the age of 41 on the 8th day of the 2nd month of the fifth year of Kank (1008). Brown, p. 306. 

The actual site of Kazan's grave is known. This emperor is traditionally venerated at a memorial Shinto shrine (misasagi) at Kyoto.

The Imperial Household Agency designates this location as Kazan's mausoleum. It is formally named Kamiya no hotori no misasagi. Ponsonby-Fane, p. 420. 

He is buried amongst the "Seven Imperial Tombs" at Ryoan-ji Temple in Kyoto. The "Seven Imperial Tombs" at Ryoan-ji are the burial places of Uda, Kazan, Ichij, Go-Suzaku, Go-Reizei, Go-Sanj, and Horikawa. The mound which commemorates the Hosokawa Emperor Kazan is today named Kinugasa-yama. The emperor's burial place would have been quite humble in the period after Kazan died. These tombs reached their present state as a result of the 19th century restoration of imperial sepulchers (misasagi) which were ordered by Emperor Meiji. Moscher, G. (1978). Kyoto: A Contemplative Guide, pp. 277278. 

===Kugy===
 is a collective term for the very few most powerful men attached to the court of the Emperor of Japan in pre-Meiji eras.

In general, this elite group included only three to four men at a time. These were hereditary courtiers whose experience and background have brought them to the pinnacle of a life's career. During Kazan's reign, this apex of the Daij-kan included: 
* Kampaku, Fujiwara no Yoritada, 924989. Brown, p. 301. 
* Daij-daijin, Fujiwara no Yoritada. 
* Sadaijin, Fujiwara no Kaneie, 929990. 
* Naidaijin (not appointed)
* Dainagon

==Eras of Kazan's reign==
The years of Kazan's reign are more specifically identified by more than one era name or neng. 
* Eikan (983985)
* Kanna (985986)

==Consorts and Children==
Nygo: Fujiwara no Shishi () (969985), daughter of Fujiwara no Tamemitsu ()

Nygo: Fujiwara no Teishi () (?1035), daughter of Fujiwara no Yoritada ()

Nygo: Fujiwara no Chshi () (971989), daughter of Fujiwara no Asateru ()

Court lady: A daughter of Taira no Sukeyuki (), Nakatsukasa ()  Nurse of Emperor Kazan
*Imperial Prince Kiyohito () (ca. 9981030)  Ancestor of Shirakawa family ()
*princess (?1008)
*princess (?1008)

Taira no Heishi (), daughter of Taira no suketada () and Nakatsukasa ()
*Imperial Prince Akinori () (9981035)
*princess (?1008)
*princess (?1025), a lady-in-waiting to Fujiwara no Shoshi (Empress consort of Emperor Ichij)

Fujiwara no Genshi () (?1016), daughter of Fujiwara no Tamemitsu (); later, concubine of Fujiwara no Michinaga ()

(from unknown women)
*Kakugen () (10001065), a Buddhist monk (Gon-no-Sj, )
*Shinkan () (10011050), a Buddhist monk (Gon-no-Daiszu, )

==Notes==
Japanese Imperial kamon  a stylized chrysanthemum blossom

==References==
* Brown, Delmer M. and Ichir Ishida, eds. (1979). Gukansh: The Future and the Past. Berkeley: University of California Press. 10-ISBN 0-520-03460-0; 13-ISBN 978-0-520-03460-0; OCLC 251325323
* Moscher, Gouverneur. (1978). Kyoto: A Contemplative Guide. 10-ISBN 0804812942/13-ISBN 9780804812948; OCLC 4589403
* Ponsonby-Fane, Richard Arthur Brabazon. (1959). The Imperial House of Japan. Kyoto: Ponsonby Memorial Society. OCLC 194887
* Titsingh, Isaac. (1834). Nihon Odai Ichiran; ou, Annales des empereurs du Japon. Paris: Royal Asiatic Society, Oriental Translation Fund of Great Britain and Ireland. OCLC 5850691
* Varley, H. Paul. (1980). Jinn Shtki: A Chronicle of Gods and Sovereigns. New York: Columbia University Press. 10-ISBN 0-231-04940-4; 13-ISBN 978-0-231-04940-5; OCLC 59145842

==See also==
* Emperor of Japan
* List of Emperors of Japan
* Imperial cult

 
 



[[Ichij]]

 literally means first street in Japanese. It can refer to:

*Emperor Ichij ( -tenn), the 66th Emperor of Japan (9801011)

==Japanese surname==
* The Ichij family ( -ke), one of the five regent houses (go-sekke) of the Fujiwara clan in Japan
* Kazuya Ichij, a Japanese voice actor

==Fictional characters==
* Hikaru Ichij of the Super Dimension Fortress Macross.
* Ichij of Pani Poni
* Eika Ichij of Sky Girls
* Sumireko Ichij and Kaoruko Ichij of Futakoi
* Takuma Ichij of Vampire Knight
* Kou Ichij of Persona 4

==Places==
* , one of numbered east-west streets in the ancient capital of Heian-ky, present-day Kyoto



[[Sanj]]

In Japanese, may refer to:

==People==
*Emperor Sanj, the 67th emperor of Japan
* , a Japanese kuge family

==Fictional characters==
*Kairi Sanj and Yukari Sanj, fictional characters from the manga series Shugo Chara!

==Places==
* Sanj, Niigata, a city in Niigata Prefecture, Japan
* , one of numbered east-west streets in the ancient capital of Heian-ky, present-day Kyoto
* , one of numbered east-west streets in the ancient capital of Heij-ky, present-day Nara
* Sanj Station (disambiguation), train stations

==See also==
*Sanyo



[[Elvis Costello]]

Elvis Costello (born Declan Patrick MacManus; 25 August 1954) is an English singer-songwriter. He began his career as part of London's pub rock scene in the early 1970s and later became associated with the first wave of the British punk & new wave movement of the mid-to-late 1970s. His critically acclaimed debut album, My Aim Is True, was recorded in 1976. Shortly after recording his first album he formed The Attractions as his backing band. His second album, This Year's Model, was released in 1978, and was ranked number 11 by Rolling Stone on its list of the best albums of the period 1967-1987. Costello and The Attractions toured and recorded together for the better part of a decade, though differences between them caused a split by 1986. Much of Costello's work since has been as a solo artist, though reunions with members of The Attractions have been credited to the group over the years.

Steeped in wordplay, the vocabulary of Costello's lyrics is broader than that of most popular songs. His music has drawn on many diverse genres; one critic described him as a "pop encyclopaedia", able to "reinvent the past in his own image". Stephen Thomas Erlewine, [ Get Happy!! [Ryko Bonus Tracks]], Allmusic. Retrieved 17 September 2007. 

Costello has won multiple awards in his career, including a Grammy Award, and has twice been nominated for the Brit Award for Best British Male. Elvis Costello BRITS Profile BRIT Awards Ltd In 2003, Costello and The Attractions were inducted into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame. Elvis Costello and the Attractions Rockhall.com. In 2004, Rolling Stone ranked Costello number 80 on their list of the 100 Greatest Artists of All Time. 100 Greatest Artists: Elvis Costello Rolling Stone. 

==Early life==
Costello was born Declan Patrick MacManus His full given name is sometimes inaccurately listed as Declan Patrick Aloysius MacManus but Aloysius was not one of his names at birth. Costello began using the name "Declan Patrick Aloysius MacManus" (or sometimes, "D.P.A. MacManus") in both the writing and production credits of his albums in 1986, although this was largely phased out by the mid-1990s. It has been suggested that Aloysius could be his confirmation name, or that the use of the name Aloysius is a reference to English comedian Tony Hancock, born Anthony John Hancock, who became famous in the UK playing a comic character who went by the name Anthony Aloysius St. John Hancock. in St Mary's Hospital, London, the son of Lilian Alda (ne Ablett, b. 1927, Liverpool) and Ross MacManus (born Birkenhead, 19272011), a musician and bandleader. He is of Irish heritage. Costello lived in Twickenham, attending Archbishop Myers R.C. School, which is now St Mark's Catholic Secondary School, in neighbouring Hounslow. With a musically inclined father (who was a jazz trumpeter and sang with The Joe Loss Orchestra), Costello's first broadcast recording was alongside his dad in a television commercial for R. White's Lemonade ("I'm a Secret Lemonade Drinker"). His father wrote and sang the song; Costello provided backing vocals. The advertisement won a silver award at the 1974 International Advertising Festival.

Costello moved with his Liverpool-born mother to Birkenhead in 1971. There, he formed his first band, a folk duo called Rusty, with Allan Mayes. After completing secondary school at St. Francis Xavier's College he moved back to London where he next formed a band called Flip City, which had a style in the pub rock vein. They were active from 1974 through to early 1976. Around this time, Costello adopted the stage name D.P. Costello. His father had performed under the name Day Costello, and Elvis has said in interviews that he took this name as a tribute to his father.

Costello worked at a number of office jobs to support himself, most famously at Elizabeth Arden  immortalised in the lyrics of "I'm Not Angry" as the "vanity factory"  where he worked as a data entry clerk. He worked for a short period as a computer operator at the Midland Bank computer centre in Bootle. He continued to write songs and began looking for a solo recording contract. He was signed to independent label Stiff Records on the basis of a demo tape. His manager at Stiff, Jake Riviera, suggested a name change, combining Elvis Presley's first name and Costello, his father's stage name. Elvis Costello, interview by Terry Gross, Fresh Air from WHYY, National Public Radio, WHYY-FM, Philadelphia, 28 February 1989 (rebroadcast 14 September 2007). Retrieved 16 September 2007. 

== Career ==

=== 1970s ===
Costello's first single for Stiff was "Less Than Zero", released on 25 March 1977. Two months later, his debut album, My Aim Is True (1977), was released to moderate commercial success (No. 14 in the UK and, later, Top 40 in the US) with Costello appearing on the cover in what became his trademark oversize glasses, bearing some resemblance to Buddy Holly. Stiff's records were initially distributed only in the UK, which meant that Costello's first album and singles were initially available in the US as imports only. In an attempt to change this, Costello was arrested for busking outside a London convention of CBS Records executives, protesting that no US record company had yet seen fit to release his records in the United States. Costello signed to CBS's Columbia Records label in the U.S. a few months later.

The backing for Costello's debut album was provided by American West Coast band Clover, a country outfit living in England whose members would later go on to join Huey Lewis and the News and The Doobie Brothers. Costello released his first major hit single, "Watching the Detectives", which was recorded with Steve Nieve and the pair of Steve Goulding (drums) and Andrew Bodnar (bass), both members of Graham Parker's backing band The Rumour. Later in 1977, Costello formed his own permanent backing band, The Attractions, consisting of Steve Nieve (piano), Bruce Thomas (bass guitar), and Pete Thomas (drums; unrelated to Bruce Thomas).

Elvis Costello, in Massey Hall, Toronto, April 1979
On 17 December 1977, Costello and The Attractions, as a replacement act for the Sex Pistols, were scheduled to play "Less Than Zero" on Saturday Night Live; however, in imitation of a rebellious act by Jimi Hendrix on a BBC show, Costello stopped the song mid-intro, and played "Radio Radio" instead - earning himself a ten-year ban from the show, and considerable attention as an angry young man. Following a tour with other Stiff artists  captured on the Live Stiffs Live album, which includes Costello's version of the Burt Bacharach/Hal David standard "I Just Don't Know What to Do With Myself"  the band recorded This Year's Model (1978). Some of the more popular tracks include the British hit "(I Don't Want to Go to) Chelsea" and "Pump It Up." His U.S. record company saw Costello as such a priority that his last name replaced the word Columbia on the label of the disc's original pressing. The Attractions' first tour of Australia in December 1978 was notable for controversial performance at Sydney's Regent Theatre when, angered by the group's failure to perform an encore after their brief 35-minute set, audience members destroyed some of the seating. 

A tour of the U.S. and Canada also saw the release of the much-bootlegged Canadian promo-only Live at the El Mocambo, recorded at a Toronto rock club, which finally saw an official release as part of the 2 Years box set in 1993.

In 1979, he released his third LP Armed Forces (originally to have been titled Emotional Fascism, a phrase that appeared on the LP's inner sleeve). American editions included a 45rpm EP recorded live at the Hollywood High School Gymnasium in Hollywood, Ca. in 1978. Both the album and the single "Oliver's Army" went to No. 2 in the UK, and the opening track "Accidents Will Happen" gained wide television exposure thanks to its innovative animated music video, directed by Annabel Jankel and Rocky Morton. Costello also found time in 1979 to produce the debut album for the 2 Tone ska revival band The Specials.

Costello's standing in the U.S. was bruised for a time when in March 1979, during a drunken argument with Stephen Stills and Bonnie Bramlett in a Columbus, Ohio Holiday Inn bar, the singer referred to James Brown as a "jive-ass nigger", then upped the ante by pronouncing Ray Charles a "blind, ignorant nigger". Costello apologised at a New York City press conference a few days later, claiming that he had been drunk and had been attempting to be obnoxious in order to bring the conversation to a swift conclusion, not anticipating that Bramlett would bring his comments to the press. According to Costello, "it became necessary for me to outrage these people with about the most obnoxious and offensive remarks that I could muster." In his liner notes for the expanded version of Get Happy!!, Costello writes that some time after the incident he had declined an offer to meet Charles out of guilt and embarrassment, though Charles himself had forgiven Costello saying "Drunken talk isn't meant to be printed in the paper." Costello worked extensively in Britain's Rock Against Racism campaign both before and after the incident. The incident inspired his Get Happy!! song "Riot Act." Barger, Al (2000). "Elvis Costello  "Riot Act" / "Don't Let Me Be Misunderstood". MoreThings.com. Retrieved 17 September 2007. 

Costello is also an avid country music fan and has cited George Jones as his favorite country singer. In 1977, he appeared in Jones' duet album My Very Special Guests, contributing "Stranger in the House", which they later performed together on an HBO special dedicated to Jones.

===1980s===
The soul-infused Get Happy!! would be the first, andalong with King of Americapossibly most successful, of Costello's many experiments with genres beyond those he is normally associated with. The single, "I Can't Stand Up for Falling Down" was an old Sam and Dave song (though Costello increased the tempo considerably). Lyrically, the songs are full of Costello's signature word play, to the point that he later felt he had become something of a self-parody and toned it down on later releases; he has mockingly described himself in interviews as "rock and roll's Scrabble champion." His only 1980 appearance in North America was at the Heatwave festival in August near Toronto.

In 1981, the band released Trust amidst growing tensions within the band, particularly between Bruce and Pete Thomas. In the U.S., the single "Watch Your Step" was released and played live on Tom Snyder's Tomorrow show, and received airplay on FM rock radio. In the U.K., the single "Clubland" scraped the lower reaches of the charts; follow-up single "From a Whisper to a Scream" (a duet with Glenn Tilbrook of Squeeze) became the first Costello single in over four years to completely miss the charts. Costello also co-produced Squeeze's popular 1981 album East Side Story (with Roger Bechirian) and also performed backing vocals on the group's hit single "Tempted".

Following Trust, Costello released Almost Blue, an album of country music cover songs written by the likes of Hank Williams ("Why Don't You Love Me (Like You Used to Do?)"), Merle Haggard ("Tonight the Bottle Let Me Down") and Gram Parsons ("How Much I Lied"). The album was a tribute to the country music he had grown up listening to, especially George Jones. It received mixed reviews. The first pressings of the record in the UK bore a sticker with the message: "WARNING: This album contains country & western music and may cause a radical reaction in narrow minded listeners." Almost Blue did spawn a surprise UK hit single in a version of George Jones' "Good Year for the Roses" (written by Jerry Chesnut), which reached No. 6.

Imperial Bedroom (1982) marked a much darker sound, due in part to the production of Geoff Emerick, famed for engineering several Beatles records. Imperial Bedroom remains one of his most critically acclaimed records, but again failed to produce any hit singles. Costello has said he disliked the marketing pitch for the album. The album also featured Costello's song Almost Blue, inspired by the music of jazz singer and trumpeter Chet Baker, who would later perform and record a version of the song (Chet Baker in Tokyo).

In 1983, he released Punch the Clock, featuring female backing vocal duo (Afrodiziak) and a four-piece horn section (The TKO Horns), alongside The Attractions. Clive Langer (who co-produced with Alan Winstanley), provided Costello with a melody which eventually became "Shipbuilding", which featured a trumpet solo by Chet Baker. Prior to the release of Costello's own version, a version of the song was a minor UK hit for former Soft Machine drummer Robert Wyatt.

Under the pseudonym The Imposter, Costello released "Pills and Soap", an attack on the changes in British society brought on by Thatcherism, released to coincide with the run-up to the 1983 U.K. general election. Punch the Clock also generated an international hit in the single "Everyday I Write the Book", aided by a music video featuring lookalikes of the Prince and Princess of Wales undergoing domestic strife in a suburban home. The song became Costello's first Top 40 hit single in the U.S. Also in the same year, Costello provided vocals on a version of the Madness song "Tomorrow's Just Another Day" released as a B-side on the single of the same name.

Tensions within the bandnotably between Costello and bassist Bruce Thomaswere beginning to tell, and Costello announced his retirement and the break-up of the group shortly before they were to record Goodbye Cruel World (1984). Costello would later say of this record that they had "got it as wrong as you can in terms of the execution". The record was poorly received upon its initial release; the liner notes to the 1995 Rykodisc re-release, penned by Costello, begin with the words "Congratulations! You've just purchased our worst album". Costello's retirement, although short-lived, was accompanied by two compilations, Elvis Costello: The Man in the UK, Europe and Australia, and The Best of Elvis Costello & The Attractions in the U.S.

In 1985, he appeared in the Live Aid benefit concert in England, singing the Beatles' "All You Need Is Love" as a solo artist. (The event was overrunning and Costello was asked to "ditch the band".) Costello introduced the song as an "old northern English folk song", and the audience was invited to sing the chorus. In the same year Costello teamed up with friend T-Bone Burnett for the single "The People's Limousine" under the moniker of The Coward Brothers. That year, Costello also produced Rum Sodomy & the Lash for the Irish punk/folk band The Pogues.

Growing antipathy between Costello and Bruce Thomas contributed to the Attractions' first split in 1986 when Costello was preparing to make a comeback. Working in the U.S. with Burnett, a band containing a number of Elvis Presley's sidemen (including James Burton and Jerry Scheff), and minor input from the Attractions, he produced King of America, an acoustic guitar-driven album with a country sound. It was billed as by "The Costello Show featuring the Attractions and Confederates" in the UK and Europe and "The Costello Show featuring Elvis Costello" in North America. Around this time he legally changed his name back to Declan MacManus, adding Aloysius as an extra middle name. Costello retooled his upcoming tour to allow for multiple nights in each city, playing one night with The Confederates, one night with The Attractions, and one night solo acoustic. In May 1986, Costello performed at Self Aid, a benefit concert held in Dublin that focused on the chronic unemployment which was widespread in Ireland at that time.

Later that year, Costello returned to the studio with the Attractions and recorded Blood and Chocolate, which was lauded for a post-punk fervour not heard since 1978's This Year's Model. It also marked the return of producer Nick Lowe, who had produced Costello's first five albums. While Blood and Chocolate failed to chart a hit single of any significance, it did produce what has since become one of Costello's signature concert songs, "I Want You." On this album, Costello adopted the alias Napoleon Dynamite, the name he later attributed to the character of the emcee that he played during the vaudeville-style tour to support Blood and Chocolate. (The pseudonym had previously been used in 1982, when the B-side single "Imperial Bedroom" was credited to Napoleon Dynamite & The Royal Guard; whether the title of the 2004 film Napoleon Dynamite was inspired by Costello is disputed).

After the tour for Blood & Chocolate, Costello split from the Attractions, due mostly to tensions between Costello and Bruce Thomas. Costello would continue to work with Attraction Pete Thomas as a session musician for future releases. 

In 1989, Costello, with a new contract with Warner Bros., released Spike, which spawned his biggest single in the U.S., the Top 20 hit "Veronica", one of several songs Costello co-wrote with Paul McCartney in that period.

=== 1990s ===
In 1991, Costello released Mighty Like a Rose, which featured the single "The Other Side of Summer." He also co-composed and co-produced, with Richard Harvey, the title and incidental music for the mini-series G.B.H. by Alan Bleasdale. This entirely instrumental, and largely orchestral, soundtrack garnered a BAFTA, for Best Music for a TV Series for the pair.

In 1993, Costello experimented with classical music with a critically acclaimed collaboration with the Brodsky Quartet 1993 Review of "The Juliet Letters" by Bradley Smith. Retrieved May 2009 on The Juliet Letters. During this period, Costello wrote a full album's worth of material for Wendy James, and these songs became the tracks on her 1993 solo album Now Ain't the Time for Your Tears. Costello returned to rock and roll the following year with a project that reunited him with The Attractions, Brutal Youth. In 1995, Costello released Kojak Variety, an album of cover songs recorded five years earlier, and followed in 1996 with an album of songs originally written for other artists, All This Useless Beauty. This was the final album of original material that he issued under his Warner Bros. contract, and also Costello's final album with The Attractions. 

In the spring of 1996, Costello played a series of intimate club dates, backed only by Steve Nieve on the piano, in support of All This Useless Beauty. An ensuing summer and fall tour with the Attractions proved to be the death knell for the band. With relations between Costello and bassist Bruce Thomas at a breaking point, Costello announced that the current tour would be the Attractions' last. The quartet performed their final U.S. show in Seattle, Washington on 1 September 1996, before wrapping up their tour in Japan. Going forward, Costello would still continue to work frequently with Attractions Steve Nieve and Pete Thomas; eventually, both would be members of Costello's new back-up band, The Imposters. 

To fulfill his contractual obligations to Warner Bros., Costello released a greatest hits album titled Extreme Honey (1997). It contained an original track titled "The Bridge I Burned", featuring Costello's son, Matt, on bass. In the intervening period, Costello had served as artistic chair for the 1995 Meltdown Festival, which gave him the opportunity to explore his increasingly eclectic musical interests. His involvement in the festival yielded a one-off live EP with jazz guitarist Bill Frisell, which featured both cover material and a few of his own songs.

In 1998, Costello signed a multi-label contract with Polygram Records, sold by its parent company the same year to become part of the Universal Music Group. Costello released his new work on what he deemed the suitable imprimatur within the family of labels. His first new release as part of this contract involved a collaboration with Burt Bacharach. Their work had commenced earlier, in 1996, on a song called "God Give Me Strength" for the movie Grace of My Heart. This led the pair to write and record the critically acclaimed album Painted From Memory, released under his new contract in 1998, on the Mercury Records label, featuring songs that were largely inspired by the dissolution of his marriage to Cait O'Riordan. Costello and Bacharach performed several concerts with a full orchestral backing, and also recorded an updated version of Bacharach's "I'll Never Fall in Love Again" for the soundtrack to , with both appearing in the film to perform the song. He also wrote "I Throw My Toys Around" for The Rugrats Movie and performed it with No Doubt. The same year, he collaborated with Paddy Moloney of The Chieftains on "The Long Journey Home" on the soundtrack of the PBS/Disney mini-series of the same name. The soundtrack won a Grammy that year.

In 1999, Costello contributed a version of "She", released in 1974 by Charles Aznavour and Herbert Kretzmer, for the soundtrack of the film Notting Hill, with Trevor Jones producing. For the 25th anniversary of Saturday Night Live, Costello was invited to the program, where he re-enacted his abrupt song-switch: This time, however, he interrupted the Beastie Boys' "Sabotage", and they acted as his backing group for "Radio Radio".

=== 2000&ndash;present ===
Elvis Costello performing at a Promotional concert, Summer 2006)
Costello performing at Glastonbury, 2005

In 2000, Costello appeared at The Town Hall, New York, in Steve Nieve's opera Welcome to the Voice, alongside Ron Sexsmith and John Flansburgh of They Might Be Giants. In 2001, Costello was artist-in-residence at UCLA and wrote the music for a new ballet. He produced and appeared on an album of pop songs for the classical singer Anne Sofie von Otter. He released the album When I Was Cruel in 2002 on Island Records, and toured with a new band, the Imposters (essentially the Attractions but with a different bass player, Davey Faragher, formerly of Cracker). He appeared as himself in the "How I Spent My Strummer Vacation" episode of The Simpsons.

On 23 February 2003, Costello, along with Bruce Springsteen, Steve Van Zandt, and Dave Grohl, performed a version of The Clash's "London Calling" at the 45th Grammy Awards ceremony, in honour of Clash frontman Joe Strummer, who had died the previous December. In March, Elvis Costello & the Attractions were inducted into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame. He announced his engagement in May to Canadian jazz singer and pianist Diana Krall, whom he had seen in concert and then met backstage at the Sydney Opera House in Australia. That September, he released North, an album of piano-based ballads concerning the breakdown of his former marriage, and his falling in love with Krall. Also that year, Costello made an appearance in the television series Frasier as a folk singer in the Cafe Nervosa, sending Frasier and Niles on a search for a new coffee bar. "Frasier:Farewell, Nervosa". IMDB. "Frasier: Farewell, Nervosa (2003)". MSN Movies. Retrieved 30 July 2011. 

On March 12, 2003, Costello filled in for David Letterman on the Late Show with David Letterman for the evening while Letterman was recovering from an eye infection. http://www.elviscostello.info/wiki/index.php/TV_2003-03-12_David_Letterman 

The song "Scarlet Tide" (co-written by Costello and T-Bone Burnett and used in the film Cold Mountain) was nominated for a 2004 Academy Award; he performed it at the awards ceremony with Alison Krauss, who sang the song on the official soundtrack. Costello co-wrote many songs on Krall's 2004 CD, The Girl in the Other Room, the first of hers to feature several original compositions. In July 2004, Costello's first full-scale orchestral work, Il Sogno, was performed in New York. The work, a ballet after Shakespeare's A Midsummer Night's Dream, was commissioned by Italian dance troupe Aterballeto, and received critical acclaim from the classical music critics. Performed by the London Symphony Orchestra, conducted by Michael Tilson Thomas, the recording was released on CD in September by Deutsche Grammophon. Costello released the album The Delivery Man, recorded in Oxford, Mississippi, and released on Lost Highway Records, in September of the same year, and it was hailed as one of his best albums.

Costello's hand prints on the European Walk of Fame, Rotterdam
A CD recording of a collaboration with Marian McPartland on her show Piano Jazz was released in 2005. It featured Costello singing six jazz standards and two of his own songs, accompanied by McPartland on piano. In November, Costello started recording a new album with Allen Toussaint and producer Joe Henry. The River in Reverse was released in the UK on the Verve label the following year in May.

A 2005 tour included a gig at Glastonbury that Costello considered to be so dreadful that he said "I don't care if I ever play England again. That gig made up my mind I wouldn't come back. I don't get along with it. We lost touch. It's 25 years since I lived there. I don't dig it, they don't dig me....British music fans don't have the same attitude to age as they do in America, where young people come to check out, say Willie Nelson. They feel some connection with him and find a role for that music in their lives." 

After Hurricane Katrina, Costello and Allen Toussaint performed in New York at a series of Hurricane Relief benefit concerts in September 2006. By weeks end, Costello had written "The River in Reverse", performed it with Toussaint and discussed plans for an album with Verve Record executives. The result was Costello's The River in Reverse which is a collaboration with New Orleanian, Allen Toussaint and recorded with The Crescent City Horns. Costello turned to older songs to reflect the national malaise at the time. 

In a studio recording of Nieve's opera Welcome to the Voice (2006, Deutsche Grammophon), Costello interpreted the character of Chief of Police, with Barbara Bonney, Robert Wyatt, Sting and Amanda Roocroft, and the album reached No. 2 in the Billboard classical charts. Costello later reprised the piece on the stage of the Thtre du Chtelet in Paris in 2008, with Sting, Joe Sumner of Fiction Plane (Sting's son) and Sylvia Schwartz. Also released in 2006 was a live recording of a concert with the Metropole Orkest at the North Sea Jazz Festival, entitled My Flame Burns Blue. The soundtrack for House, M.D. featured Costello's interpretation of "Beautiful" by Christina Aguilera, with the song appearing in the second episode of Season 2.

Costello was commissioned to write a chamber opera by the Danish Royal Opera, Copenhagen, on the subject of Hans Christian Andersen's infatuation with Swedish soprano Jenny Lind. Called The Secret Songs it was unfinished. In a performance in 2007 directed by Kasper Bech Holten at the Opera's studio theatre (Takelloftet), finished songs were interspersed with pieces from Costello's 1993 collaborative classical album The Juliet Letters, featuring Danish soprano Sine Bundgaard as Lind. The 2009 album Secret, Profane & Sugarcane includes material from Secret Songs.

On 22 April 2008, Momofuku was released on Lost Highway Records, the same imprint that released The Delivery Man, his previous studio album. The album was, at least initially, released exclusively on vinyl (with a code to download a digital copy). That summer, in support of the album, Costello toured with The Police on the final leg of their 2007/2008 Reunion Tour. Costello played a homecoming gig at the Liverpool Philharmonic Hall on 25 June 2006. and, that month, gave his first performance in Poland, appearing with The Imposters for the closing gig of the Malta theatre festival in Pozna.

In July 2008, Costello (as Declan McManus) was awarded an honorary degree of Doctor of Music from the University of Liverpool.

Between 2008 and 2010, Costello hosted Channel 4/CTV's series Spectacle in which Costello talked and performed with stars in various fields, styled similarly to Inside the Actors Studio. Between its two seasons, the show compiled 20 episodes, including one where Costello was interviewed by actress Mary-Louise Parker. 

Costello was featured on Fall Out Boy's 2008 album Folie  Deux, providing vocals on the track "What a Catch, Donnie", along with other artists who are friends with the band.

Costello appeared in Stephen Colbert's television special . In the program, he was eaten by a bear, but later saved by Santa Claus; he also sang a duet with Colbert. The special was first aired on 23 November 2008. Costello released Secret, Profane & Sugarcane, a collaboration with T-Bone Burnett, on 9 June 2009. Burnett previously worked with Costello on King of America and Spike. It was his first on the Starbucks Hear Music label and a return to country music in the manner of Good Year for the Roses.

Costello performing in tribute to music legends Chuck Berry and Leonard Cohen who were the recipients of the first annual PEN Awards for songwriting excellence, at the JFK Presidential Library, in Boston, Massachusetts on 26 February 2012
Costello appeared as himself in the finale of the third season of 30 Rock and sang in the episode's celebrity telethon, Kidney Now!. The episode references Costello's given name when Jack Donaghy accuses him of concealing his true identity: "Declan McManus, international art thief."

In May 2009, Costello made a surprise cameo appearance on-stage at the Beacon Theater in New York as part of Spinal Tap's Unwigged and Unplugged show, singing their fictional 1965 hit "Gimme Some Money" with the band backing him up.

On 15 May 2010, Costello announced he would withdraw from a concert performed in Israel in opposition to Israel's treatment of Palestinians. In a statement on his website, Costello wrote, "It has been necessary to dial out the falsehoods of propaganda, the double game and hysterical language of politics, the vanity and self-righteousness of public communiqus from cranks in order to eventually sift through my own conflicted thoughts." 

Also in 2010, Elvis Costello appeared as himself in David Simon's television series, Treme. Costello released the album National Ransom in autumn of 2010.

In 2011, Elvis Costello appeared as himself on Sesame Street to perform a song with Elmo and Cookie Monster, titled "Monster Went and Ate My Red 2", a play on (The Angels Wanna Wear My) Red Shoes.

On 26 February 2012, Costello paid tribute to music legends Chuck Berry and Leonard Cohen who were the recipients of the first annual PEN Awards for songwriting excellence, at the JFK Presidential Library, in Boston, Massachusetts on 26 February 2012. 

In September 2013 Costello released Wise Up Ghost, a collaboration with The Roots. In a BBC documentary 'Mystery Dance' covering his whole career said that this will be last album and that, as he nears sixty, he will concentrate on being a father to his sons with Diana Krall and just do occasional concerts when he needs the money. "That's it" he said.

On 25 October 2013, Costello was awarded an Honorary Doctorate of Music from New England Conservatory in Boston.

==Personal life==

===Relationships===
Costello has been married three times, the first time in 1974 to Mary Burgoyne, with whom he had a son, Matthew. Toward the end of his first marriage, Costello became embroiled in an on-again/off-again romance with Bebe Buell, then-girlfriend of Todd Rundgren (and mother of Steven Tyler's daughter Liv). Buell has said she was the inspiration behind some of Costello's most bitter love songs from the Armed Forces era, though Costello countered by claiming most of those songs had been written before he ever met Buell. 

In 1985, Costello became involved with Cait O'Riordan, then the bassist of the English/Irish group The Pogues, while he was producing The Pogues' album Rum Sodomy and the Lash. They married in 1986 and split up by the end of 2002. 

Costello became engaged to piano-vocalist Diana Krall in May 2003, and married her at the home of Elton John on 6 December that year. Krall gave birth to twin sons, Dexter Henry Lorcan and Frank Harlan James, on 6 December 2006 in New York City. 

===Vegetarianism===
A vegetarian since the early 1980s, Costello says he was moved to reject meat after seeing the documentary The Animals Film (1982), which also helped inspire his song "Pills and Soap" from 1983's Punch the Clock. 

In January 2013, Costello teamed up with Paul McCartney to create an ad campaign backing vegetarian foods produced by the Linda McCartney Foods brand. 

===Football===
Costello is a keen football fan, supporting Liverpool F.C., and has appeared on Channel 4's Football Italia as a pundit.

== Humanitarian causes ==
Costello sits on the Advisory Board of the Board of Directors of the Jazz Foundation of America. "Advisory Board". Jazz Foundation of America. Costello began working with the Jazz Foundation in 2001, and has been a featured performer in their annual benefit A Great Night in Harlem since 2006. Costello has donated his time working with the Jazz Foundation of America to save the homes and the lives of America's elderly jazz and blues musicians, including musicians who survived Hurricane Katrina.

==Collaborations==
In addition to his major recorded collaborations with Bacharach, the Brodsky Quartet, and von Otter, Costello has frequently been involved in other collaborations.

In 1984 Daryl Hall provided backing vocals for the song "The Only Flame In Town", from the album Goodbye Cruel World.

In 1985 he sang with Annie Lennox on the track 'Adrian' from the Eurythmics record 'Be Yourself Tonight'.

In 1987, Costello began a long-running songwriting collaboration with Paul McCartney. They wrote a number of songs together, including:
* "Back On My Feet", the B-side of McCartney's 1987 single "Once Upon a Long Ago", later added as a bonus track on the 1993 re-issue of McCartney's Flowers in the Dirt
* Costello's "Veronica" and "Pads, Paws and Claws" from Spike (1989)
* "So Like Candy" and "Playboy to a Man" from Mighty Like a Rose (1991)
* McCartney's "My Brave Face", "Don't Be Careless Love", "That Day Is Done" and "You Want Her Too" from Flowers in the Dirt (1989)
* "The Lovers That Never Were" and "Mistress and Maid" from Off the Ground (1993).
* "Shallow Grave" from All This Useless Beauty (1996).

In 1987, he appeared on the HBO special Roy Orbison and Friends, A Black and White Night, which featured his long-time idol Roy Orbison, and was invited back to Saturday Night Live for the first time since 1977.

In 1988, Costello co-wrote "At the Other End (of the Telescope)" with Aimee Mann; this song appears on the Til Tuesday album Everything's Different Now.

In 1994, he sang with Tony Bennett for MTV Unplugged, appearing on the album released from the broadcast.

In 2000, Costello wrote lyrics to "Green Song", a solo cello piece by Svante Henryson; this song appears on the Anne Sofie von Otter album For the Stars.

In 2005, Costello performed with Green Day frontman Billie Joe Armstrong. They played both Costello and Green Day songs together, including "Alison", "No Action", "Basket Case" and "Good Riddance (Time of Your Life)".

In Fall 2005 Costello performed with Allen Toussaint in New York City at some Hurricane Katrina Relief Concerts and produced the studio album, "The River in Reverse." Also, Costello had a collaborative history with Mr. Toussaint, beginning with a couple of scattered album tracks in the 1980s. 

In 2007, Costello collaborated with the Argentinean/Uruguayan electro-tango band Bajofondo on the song "Fairly Right" from the album Mar Dulce.

In 2008, Costello collaborated with Fall Out Boy on the track "What a Catch, Donnie" from their album Folie a Deux.

In Jenny Lewis' 2008 release, Acid Tongue, Costello provided vocals for the song "Carpetbaggers".

In November 2009, Costello appeared live with Bruce Springsteen and the E Street Band at Madison Square Garden and performed the Jackie Wilson song, Higher and Higher. 

In December 2009, it was announced that Costello would be portraying The Shape in the upcoming album Ghost Brothers of Darkland County, a collaboration between rock singer John Mellencamp and novelist Stephen King. 

In February 2010, Costello appeared in the live cinecast of Garrison Keillor's Prairie Home Companion, singing some of his own songs, and participating in many of the show's other musical and acting performances.

On 30 April 2011, played the song "Pump it Up" with The Odds before the start of a Vancouver Canucks playoff game at Rogers Arena in Vancouver BC. 

On 10 September 2013, played during the Apple September 2013 Event after the introduction of iTunes Radio, iPhone 5C and 5S at Town Hall, at the Apple campus. 

==Artistic significance==
Costello has worked with Paul McCartney, Tony Bennett, Allen Toussaint, T Bone Burnett, Lucinda Williams, Kid Rock, Lee Konitz, Brian Eno, and Rubn Blades.

Costello is also a music fan, and often champions the works of others in print. He has written several pieces for the magazine Vanity Fair, including the summary of what a perfect weekend of music would be. He has contributed to two Grateful Dead tribute albums and covered Jerry Garcia/Robert Hunter tunes such as "Ship of Fools", "Friend of the Devil", "It Must Have Been the Roses", "Ripple" and "Tennessee Jed" in concert. His collaboration with Bacharach honoured Bacharach's place in pop music history. Costello also appeared in documentaries about singers Dusty Springfield, Brian Wilson, Wanda Jackson, Ron Sexsmith and Memphis, Tennessee-based Stax Records. He has also interviewed one of his own influences, Joni Mitchell. He was instrumental in bringing Sexsmith to a wider audience in 1995 by championing his debut album in Mojo magazine, even appearing on the cover with the album. 

In 2004, Rolling Stone Magazine ranked him No. 80 on their list of the 100 Greatest Artists of All Time. 

Costello had a long collaborative history with Allen Toussaint, beginning with a couple of scattered album tracks in the 1980s and skipping ahead to the aftermath of Hurricane Katrina with the production of The River in Reverse. 

==Discography==

Studio albums by Elvis Costello (including albums released with the Attractions and the Imposters):
*My Aim Is True (1977)
*This Year's Model (1978)
*Armed Forces (1979)
*Get Happy!! (1980)
*Trust (1981)
*Almost Blue (1981)
*Imperial Bedroom (1982)
*Punch the Clock (1983)
*Goodbye Cruel World (1984)
*King of America (1986)
*Blood & Chocolate (1986)
*Spike (1989)
*Mighty Like a Rose (1991)
*The Juliet Letters (1993)
*Brutal Youth (1994)
*Kojak Variety (1995)
*All This Useless Beauty (1996)
*When I Was Cruel (2002)
*North (2003)
*Il Sogno (2004)
*The Delivery Man (2004)
*Momofuku (2008)
*Secret, Profane & Sugarcane (2009)
*National Ransom (2010)

Collaborative albums
*G.B.H. (1991, with Richard Harvey)
*Jake's Progress (1995, with Richard Harvey)
*Painted from Memory (1998, with Burt Bacharach)
* Piano Jazz (2005, with Marian McPartland)
*The River in Reverse (2006, with Allen Toussaint)
*Wise Up Ghost (2013, with The Roots)

Costello has released studio albums in collaboration with Richard Harvey, John Harle, Burt Bacharach, Anne Sofie Von Otter, Bill Frisell, Marian McPartland, Allen Toussaint, and The Roots. He has also released five live albums: Live at the El Mocambo, Deep Dead Blue, Costello & Nieve, My Flame Burns Blue, and Live at Hollywood High. There have also been numerous compilations, box sets, and reissues by labels such as Rykodisc, Demon, Rhino, and Universal Music Enterprises.

==Filmography==

===Actor===
* 1979 film debut as "The Earl of Manchester" in Americathon
* 1984 as "Henry Scully" in the UK TV series, Scully
* 1984 as "Stone Deaf A&R Man" in "The Bullshitters", a movie made by members of the comedy troupe The Comic Strip, first aired on Channel 4.
* 1985 as inept magician "Rosco de Ville" in the Alan Bleasdale film, No Surrender
* 1987 as "Hives the Butler" in the Alex Cox film, Straight to Hell, starring Joe Strummer and Courtney Love
* 1994 as himself on The Larry Sanders Show in the episode "People's Choice"
* 1997 as a barman in Spice World.
* 1999 as himself performing "I'll Never Fall In Love Again" with Burt Bacharach in 
* 1999 as a younger version of himself in 200 Cigarettes
* 2001 as himself performing "Fly Me to the Moon" on the series finale of 3rd Rock from the Sun
* 2002 as himself on the episode "How I Spent My Strummer Vacation" of The Simpsons
* 2003 as Ben on Frasier, in the season 10 episode "Farewell Nervosa".
* 2003 as himself in I Love Your Work 
* 2004 as himself in the UK TV Dead Ringers New Year Special, apparently and reportedly having serendipitously entered a filming venue 
* 2004 as himself in Two and a Half Men  Season 2, Episode 1 
* 2004 as himself in De-Lovely
* 2006 as himself in Delirious
* 2006 as himself in 
* 2008 as himself in ""
* 2009 as himself on the episode of 30 Rock, "Kidney Now!" 
* 2010 as himself on Treme

===Soundtrack===
* 2003 Academy Award nomination for best original song, "The Scarlet Tide", in Cold Mountain

==Bibliography==
* Costello, Elvis. A Singing Dictionary. London: Plangent Visions Music; New York, N.Y.: Exclusive selling agent for the United States and Canada, Warner Bros. Publications, 1980. ISBN 0-7692-1505-X. Sheet music, chords, and lyrics for works 19771980.

==References==

==Further reading==
*

==External links==

* ElvisCostello.com
* Official Elvis Costello Lost Highway Records Artist Page
* 
*
* 
* The Elvis Costello Home Page Wiki

 



[[Epilepsy]]

Epilepsy (from the Ancient Greek verb  meaning "to seize, possess, or afflict") is a group of long-term neurological disorders characterized by epileptic seizures. These seizures are episodes that can vary from brief and nearly undetectable to long periods of vigorous shaking. In epilepsy, seizures tend to recur, and have no immediate underlying cause while seizures that occur due to a specific cause are not deemed to represent epilepsy. 

In most cases the cause is unknown, although some people develop epilepsy as the result of brain injury, stroke, brain cancer, and drug and alcohol misuse, among others. Epileptic seizures are the result of excessive and abnormal cortical nerve cell activity in the brain. The diagnosis typically involves ruling out other conditions that might cause similar symptoms (such as syncope) as well as figuring out whether any immediate causes are present. Epilepsy can often be confirmed with an electroencephalogram.

Epilepsy cannot be cured, but seizures are controllable with medication in about 70% of cases. In those whose seizures do not respond to medication, surgery, neurostimulation or dietary changes may be considered. Not all cases of epilepsy are lifelong, and a substantial number of people improve to the point that medication is no longer needed.

About 1% of people worldwide (65 million) have epilepsy, and nearly 80% of cases occur in developing countries. Epilepsy becomes more common as people age. In the developed world, onset of new cases occurs most frequently in infants and the elderly; in the developing world this is in older children and young adults, due to differences in the frequency of the underlying causes. About 510% of all people will have an unprovoked seizure by the age of 80, and the chance of experiencing a second seizure is between 40 and 50%. In many areas of the world those with epilepsy either have their ability to drive restricted or disallowed, but most are able to return to driving after a period of time without seizures.

==Signs and symptoms==
A video of a seizure
Someone who has bitten the tip of their tongue while having a seizure
Epilepsy is characterized by a long-term risk of recurrent seizures. These seizures may present in several ways depending on the part of the brain involved and the person's age. 

===Seizures===
The most common type (60%) of seizures are convulsive. Of these, two-thirds begin as focal seizures (which may then become generalized) while one-third begin as generalized seizures. The remaining 40% of seizures are non-convulsive. An example of this type is the absence seizure, which presents as a decreased level of consciousness and usually lasts about 10 seconds. 

Focal seizures are often preceded by certain experiences, known as an aura. These may include: sensory (visual, hearing or smell), psychic, autonomic, or motor phenomena. Jerking activity may start in a specific muscle group and spread to surrounding muscle groups in which case it is known as a Jacksonian march. Automatisms may occur; these are non-consciously generated activities and mostly simple repetitive movements like smacking of the lips or more complex activities such as attempts to pick something up. 

There are six main types of generalized seizures: tonic-clonic, tonic, clonic, myoclonic, absence, and atonic seizures. They all involve loss of consciousness and typically happen without warning. Tonic-clonic seizures present with a contraction of the limbs followed by their extension along with arching of the back which lasts 1030 seconds (the tonic phase). A cry may be heard due to contraction of the chest muscles. This is then followed by a shaking of the limbs in unison (clonic phase). Tonic seizures produce constant contractions of the muscles. A person often turns blue as breathing is stopped. In clonic seizures there is shaking of the limbs in unison. After the shaking has stopped it may take 1030 minutes for the person to return to normal; this period is called the "postictal phase".

Loss of bowel or bladder control may occur during a seizure. The tongue may be bitten at either the tip or on the sides during a seizure. In tonic-clonic seizure, bites to the sides are more common. Tongue bites are also relatively common in psychogenic non-epileptic seizures. 

Myoclonic seizures involve spasms of muscles in either a few areas or all over. Absence seizures can be subtle with only a slight turn of the head or eye blinking. The person does not fall over and returns to normal right after it ends. Atonic seizures involve the loss of muscle activity for greater than one second. This typically occurs on both sides of the body. 

About 6% of those with epilepsy have seizures that are often triggered by specific events and are known as reflex seizures. Those with reflex epilepsy have seizures that are only triggered by specific stimuli. Common triggers include flashing lights and sudden noises. In certain types of epilepsy, seizures happen more often during sleep, and in other types they occur almost only when sleeping. 

===Postictal===
After the active portion of a seizure, there is typically a period of confusion referred to as the postictal period before a normal level of consciousness returns. This usually lasts 3 to 15 minutes but may last for hours. Other common symptoms include: feeling tired, headache, difficulty speaking, and abnormal behavior. Psychosis after a seizure is relatively common, occurring in 610% of people. Often people do not remember what happened during this time. Localized weakness, known as Todd's paralysis, may also occur after a focal seizure. When it occurs it typically lasts for seconds to minutes but may rarely last for a day or two. 

===Psychosocial===
Epilepsy can have adverse effects on social and psychological well-being. These effects may include social isolation, stigmatization, or disability. They may result in lower educational achievement and worse employment outcomes. Learning difficulties are common in those with the condition, and especially among children with epilepsy. The stigma of epilepsy can also affect the families of those with the disease. 

Certain disorders occur more often in people with epilepsy, depending partly on the epilepsy syndrome present. These include: depression, anxiety disorders, and migraines. Attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder affects three to five times more children with epilepsy than children in the general population. ADHD and epilepsy have significant consequences on a child's behavioral, learning, and social development. Epilepsy is also more common in those with autism. 

== Causes ==

Epilepsy is not a single disease but a symptom that can result from a number of different disorders. By definition the seizures occur spontaneously and without an immediate cause such as acute illness. The underlying cause of epilepsy may be identified as genetic or as due to structural or metabolic problems, but in 60% of cases the cause is unknown. Genetic, congenital, and developmental conditions are more common among younger people, while brain tumors and strokes are more likely in older people. Seizures may also occur as a consequence of other health problems; if they occur right around a specific cause, such as a stroke, head injury, toxic ingestion or metabolic problem, they are known as acute symptomatic seizures and are in the broader classification of seizure-related disorders rather than epilepsy itself. Many of the causes of acute symptomatic seizures can also lead to latter seizures in which case it is known as secondary epilepsy. 

===Genetics===
Genetics is believed to be involved in the majority of cases, either directly or indirectly. Some epilepsies are due to a single gene defect (12%); most are due to the interaction of multiple genes and environmental factors. Each of the single gene defects is rare, with more than 200 in all described. Some of the genes involved affect ion channels, enzymes, GABA, and G protein-coupled receptors. 

In identical twins, if one is affected there is a 5060% chance that the other will also be affected. In non-identical twins the risk is 15%. These risks are greater in those with generalized than focal seizures. If both twins are affected, most of the time they have the same epileptic syndrome (7090%). Other close relatives of a person with epilepsy have a risk five times that of the general population. Between 1 and 10% of those with Down syndrome and 90% of those with Angelman syndrome have epilepsy. 

===Secondary===
Epilepsy may occur as a result of a number of other conditions including: tumors, strokes, head trauma, previous infections of the central nervous system, genetic abnormalities, and as a result of brain damage around the time of birth. Of those with brain tumors, almost 30% have epilepsy, making them the cause of about 4% of cases. The risk is greatest for tumors in the temporal lobe and those that grow slowly. Other mass lesions such as cerebral cavernous malformations and artiovenous malformations have risks as high as 4060%. Of those who have had a stroke, 24% develop epilepsy. In the United Kingdom strokes account for 15% of cases and it is believed to be the cause in 30% of the elderly. Between 6 and 20% of epilepsy is believed to be due to head trauma. Mild brain injury increases the risk about two-fold while severe brain injury increases the risk seven-fold. In those who have experienced a high powered gunshot wound to the head, the risk is about 50%. 

The risk of epilepsy following meningitis is less than 10%; that disease more commonly causes seizures during the infection itself. In herpes simplex encephalitis the risk of a seizure is around 50% with a high risk of epilepsy following (up to 25%). Infection with the pork tapeworm, which can result in neurocysticercosis, is the cause of up to half of epilepsy cases in areas of the world where the parasite is common. Epilepsy may also occur after other brain infections such as cerebral malaria, toxoplasmosis, and toxocariasis. Chronic alcohol use increases the risk of epilepsy: those who drink six units of alcohol per day have a two and a half fold increase in risk. Other risks include Alzheimer's disease, multiple sclerosis, tuberous sclerosis, and autoimmune encephalitis. Getting vaccinated does not increase the risk of epilepsy. Malnutrition is a risk factor seen mostly in the developing world, although it is unclear however if it is a direct cause or an association. 

===Syndromes===

There are a number of epilepsy syndromes which are typically grouped by age of onset into: neonatal period, childhood, adulthood, and those with no strong age relationship. Additionally there are groups with specific constellations of symptoms, those due to specific metabolic or structural causes, and those of unknown cause. The ability to classify a case of epilepsy into a specific syndrome occurs more often with children. Some types include: benign rolandic epilepsy (2.8 per 100,000), childhood absence epilepsy (0.8 per 100,000) and juvenile myoclonic epilepsy (0.7 per 100,000). Febrile seizures and benign neonatal seizures are not forms of epilepsy. 

== Mechanism ==

Normally brain electrical activity is non-synchronous. In epileptic seizures, due to structural or functional problems within the brain, a group of neurons begin firing in an abnormal, excessive, and synchronized manner. This results in a wave of depolarization known as a paroxysmal depolarizing shift. 

Normally, after an excitatory neuron fires it becomes more resistant to firing for a period of time. This is due in part from the effect of inhibitory neurons, electrical changes within the excitatory neuron, and the negative effects of adenosine. In epilepsy the resistance of excitatory neurons to fire during this period is decreased. This may occur due to changes in ion channels or inhibitory neurons not functioning properly. This then results in a specific area from which seizures may develop, known as a "seizure focus". Another mechanism of epilepsy may be the up-regulation of excitatory circuits or down-regulation of inhibitory circuits following an injury to the brain. These secondary epilepsies occur through processes known as epileptogenesis. Failure of the bloodbrain barrier may also be a causal mechanism as it would allow substances in the blood to enter the brain. 

Focal seizures begin in one hemisphere of the brain while generalized seizures begin in both hemispheres. Some types of seizures may change brain structure, while others appear to have little effect. Gliosis, neuronal loss, and atrophy of specific areas of the brain are linked to epilepsy but it is unclear if epilepsy causes these changes or if these changes result in epilepsy. 

==Diagnosis==
An EEG can aid in locating the focus of the epileptic seizure.
The diagnosis of epilepsy is typically made based on the description of the seizure and surrounding events. An electroencephalogram and neuroimaging are also usually part of the workup. While figuring out a specific epileptic syndrome is often attempted, it is not always possible. Video and EEG monitoring may be useful in difficult cases. 

===Definition===
As of 2014, epilepsy is defined by the International League Against Epilepsy as a person who meets any of the following conditions: 

#At least two unprovoked (or reflex) seizures occurring greater than 24 hours apart.
#One unprovoked (or reflex) seizure and a probability of further seizures similar to the general recurrence risk (at least 60%) after two unprovoked seizures, occurring over the next 10 years.
#Diagnosis of an epilepsy syndrome

This is a refinement of their 2005 definition which was "a disorder of the brain characterized by an enduring predisposition to generate epileptic seizures and by the neurobiologic, cognitive, psychological, and social consequences of this condition. The definition of epilepsy requires the occurrence of at least one epileptic seizure." 

The 2014 definition is practical in nature and is designed for clinical use. Researchers, statistically-minded epidemiologists and other specialized groups may choose to use the older definition or a definition of their own devising. The ILAE considers doing so is perfectly allowable, so long as it is clear what definition is being used. 

Epilepsy is considered to have resolved for individuals who had an age-dependent epilepsy syndrome but are now past the applicable age or those who have remained seizure-free for the last 10 years, with no seizure medicines for the last 5 years. It is therefore possible to outgrow epilepsy or to undergo treatment that causes the epilepsy to be resolved. Resolution of epilepsy unfortunately does not guarantee that it will not return. 

In the definition, epilepsy is now called a disease, rather than a disorder. This was a decision of the executive committee of the ILAE, taken because the word "disorder," while perhaps having less stigma than does "disease," also does not express the degree of seriousness that epilepsy deserves. 

===Classification===
Those with seizures should be classified by seizure type, underlying cause, epilepsy syndrome, and events during and around the time of the seizures. Seizure types are organized by whether the source of the seizure is localized (focal seizures) or distributed (generalized seizures) within the brain. Generalized seizures are divided according to the effect on the body and include: tonic-clonic (grand mal), absence (petit mal), myoclonic, clonic, tonic, and atonic seizures. Some seizures such as epileptic spasms are of an unknown type. 

Focal seizures (previously known as partial seizures ) used to be divided into simple partial or complex partial seizure. This is no longer recommended, and instead it is preferred to describe what has occurred during a seizure. 

===Lab tests===

For adults, the testing of electrolyte, blood glucose and calcium levels is important to rule out problems with these as causes. An electrocardiogram can rule out problems with the rhythm of the heart. A lumbar puncture may be useful to diagnose a central nervous system infection but is not routinely needed. In children additional tests may be required such as urine biochemistry and blood testing looking for metabolic disorders. 

A high blood prolactin level within the first 20 minutes following a seizure may be useful to confirm an epileptic seizure as opposed to psychogenic non-epileptic seizure. Serum prolactin level is less useful for detecting partial seizures. If it is normal an epileptic seizure is still possible and a serum prolactin does not separate epileptic seizures from syncope. It is not recommended as a routine part of the diagnosis of epilepsy. 

===EEG===

An electroencephalogram (EEG) can assist in showing brain activity suggestive of an increased risk of seizures. It is only recommended for those who are likely to have had an epileptic seizure on the basis of symptoms. In the diagnosis of epilepsy, electroencephalography may help distinguish the type of seizure or syndrome present. In children it is typically only needed after a second seizure. It cannot be used to rule out the diagnosis, and may be falsely positive in those without the disease. In certain situations it may be useful to perform the EEG while the affected individual is sleeping or sleep deprived. 

===Imaging===

Diagnostic imaging by CT scan and MRI is recommended after a first non-febrile seizure to detect structural problems in and around the brain. MRI is generally a better imaging test except when bleeding is suspected, for which CT is more sensitive and more easily available. If someone attends the emergency room with a seizure but returns to normal quickly, imaging tests may be done at a later point. If a person has a previous diagnosis of epilepsy with previous imaging, repeating the imaging is usually not needed even if there are subsequent seizures. 

===Differential diagnosis===
Diagnosis of epilepsy can be difficult, and misdiagnosis is frequent (occurring in about 5 to 30% of cases). A number of other conditions may present very similar signs and symptoms to epilepsy, including: syncope, hyperventilation, migraines, narcolepsy, panic attacks and psychogenic non-epileptic seizures (PNES). Approximately one in five people seen at epilepsy clinics have PNES and of those who have PNES about 10% also have epilepsy. Separating the two based on the seizure episode alone without further testing is often difficult. 

Children may have behaviors that are easily mistaken for epileptic seizures but are not. These include: breath-holding spells, bed wetting, night terrors, tics and shudder attacks. Gastroesophageal reflux may cause arching of the back and twisting of the head to the side in infants, which may be mistaken for tonic-clonic seizures. 

==Prevention==
While many cases are not preventable, efforts to reduce head injuries, provide good care around the time of birth, and reduce environmental parasites such as the pork tapeworm may be effective. Efforts in one part of Central America to decrease rates of pork tapeworm resulted in a 50% decrease in new cases of epilepsy. 

==Management==
Epilepsy is usually treated with daily medication once a second seizure has occurred, but for those at high risk, medication may be started after the first seizure. In some cases, a special diet, the implantation of a neurostimulator, or neurosurgery may be required.

===First aid===
Rolling a person with an active tonic-clonic seizure onto their side and into the recovery position helps prevent fluids from getting into the lungs. Putting fingers, a bite block or tongue depressor in the mouth is not recommended as it might make the person vomit or result in the rescuer being bitten. Efforts should be taken to prevent further self-injury. Spinal precautions are generally not needed. 

If a seizure lasts longer than 5 minutes or if there are more than two seizures in an hour without a return to normal between them it is considered a medical emergency known as status epilepticus. This may require medical help to keep the airway open and protected; a nasopharyngeal airway may be useful for this. At home the recommended initial medication for seizure of a long duration is midazolam placed in the mouth. Diazepam may also be used rectally. In hospital, intravenous lorazepam is preferred. If two doses of benzodiazepines are not effective, other medications such as phenytoin are recommended. Convulsive status epilepticus that does not respond to initial treatment typically requires admission to the intensive care unit and treatment with stronger agents such as thiopentone or propofol. 

===Medications===
Anticonvulsants
The mainstay treatment of epilepsy is anticonvulsant medications, possibly for the person's entire life. The choice of anticonvulsant is based on seizure type, epilepsy syndrome, other medications used, other health problems, and the person's age and lifestyle. A single medication is recommended initially; if this is not effective, switching to a single other medication is recommended. Two medications at once is only recommended if a single medication does not work. In about half, the first agent is effective; a second single agent helps in about 13% and a third or two agents at the same time may help an additional 4%. About 30% of people continue to have seizures despite anticonvulsant treatment. 

There are a number of medications available. Phenytoin, carbamazepine and valproate appear to be equally effect in both focal and generalized seizures. Controlled release carbamazepine appears to work as well as immediate release carbamazepine, and may have fewer side effects. In the United Kingdom, carbamazepine or lamotrigine are recommended as first-line treatment for focal seizures, with levetiracetam and valproate as second-line due to issues of cost and side effects. Valproate is recommended first-line for generalized seizures with lamotrigine being second-line. In those with absence seizures, ethosuximide or valproate are recommended; valproate is particularly effective in myoclonic seizures and tonic or atonic seizures. If seizures are well-controlled on a particular treatment, it is not usually necessary to routinely check the medication levels in the blood. 

The least expensive anticonvulsant is phenobarbital at around $5 USD a year. The World Health Organization gives it a first-line recommendation in the developing world and it is commonly used there. Access however may be difficult as some countries label it as a controlled drug. 

Adverse effects from medications are reported in 10 to 90% of people, depending on how and from whom the data is collected. Most adverse effects are dose-related and mild. Some examples include mood changes, sleepiness, or an unsteadiness in gait. Some medications have side effects that are not related to dose such as rashes, liver toxicity, or suppression of the bone marrow. Up to a quarter of people stop treatment due to adverse effects. Some medications are associated with birth defects when used in pregnancy. Valproate is of particular concern, especially during the first trimester. Despite this, treatment is often continued once effective, because the risk of untreated epilepsy is believed to be greater than the risk of the medications. 

Slowly stopping medications may be reasonable in some people who do not have a seizure for two to four years; however, around a third of people have a recurrence, most often during the first six months. Stopping is possible in about 70% of children and 60% of adults. 

===Surgery===
Epilepsy surgery may be an option for people with focal seizures that remain a problem despite other treatments. These other treatments include at least a trial of two or three medications. The goal of surgery is total control of seizures and this may be achieved in 6070% of cases. Common procedures include: cutting out the hippocampus via an anterior temporal lobe resection, removal of tumors, and removing parts of the neocortex. Some procedures such as a corpus callosotomy are attempted in an effort to decrease the number of seizures rather than cure the condition. Following surgery, medications may be slowly withdrawn in many cases. 

Neurostimulation may be another option in those who are not candidates for surgery. Three types have been shown to be effective in those who do not respond to medications: vagus nerve stimulation, anterior thalamic stimulation, and closed-loop responsive stimulation. 

===Other===
A ketogenic diet (high-fat, low-carbohydrate, adequate-protein) appears to decrease the number of seizures by half in about 3040% of children. About 10% manage to stay on the diet for a few years, 30% had constipation, and other adverse effects were common. Less radical diets were easier to tolerate and may be effective. It is unclear why this diet works. Exercise has been proposed as possibly useful for preventing seizures with some data to support this claim. 

Avoidance therapy consists of minimizing or eliminating triggers. For example, in those who are sensitive to light, using a small television, avoiding video-games or wearing dark glasses may be useful. Some claim that seizure response dogs, a form of service dog, can predict seizures. Evidence for this, however, is poor. Operant-based biofeedback based on the EEG waves has some support in those who do not respond to medications. Psychological methods should not, however, be used to replace medications. 

===Alternative medicine===
Alternative medicine, including acupuncture, psychological interventions, routine vitamins, and yoga, have no reliable evidence to support their use in epilepsy. The use of cannabis is not supported by the evidence. Melatonin is insufficiently supported by evidence. 

==Prognosis==
Disability-adjusted life year for epilepsy per 100,000 inhabitants in 2004.

Epilepsy cannot usually be cured, but medication can control seizures effectively in about 70% of cases. Of those with generalized seizure more than 80% can be well controlled with medications while this is true in only 50% of people with focal seizures. One predictor of long-term outcome is the number of seizures that occur in the first six months. Other factors increasing the risk of a poor outcome include: little response to the initial treatment, generalized seizures, a family history of epilepsy, psychiatric problems, and waves on the EEG representing generalized epileptiform activity. In the developing world 75% of people are either untreated or not appropriately treated. In Africa 90% do not get treatment. This is partly related to appropriate medications not being available or being too expensive. 

===Mortality===
People with epilepsy are at an increased risk of death. This increase is between 1.6 and 4.1 fold greater than that of the general population and is often related to: the underlying cause of the seizures, status epilepticus, suicide, trauma, and sudden unexpected death in epilepsy (SUDEP). Death from status epilepticus is primarily due to an underlying problem rather than missing doses of medications. The risk of suicide is increased between two and six times in those with epilepsy. The cause of this is unclear. SUDEP appears to be partly related to the frequency of generalized tonic-clonic seizures and accounts for about 15% of epilepsy related deaths. It is unclear how to decrease its risk. The greatest increase in mortality from epilepsy is among the elderly. Those with epilepsy due to an unknown cause have little increased risk. In the United Kingdom it is estimated that 4060% of deaths are possibly preventable. In the developing world many deaths are due to untreated epilepsy leading to falls or status epilepticus. 

==Epidemiology==
Epilepsy is one of the most common serious neurological disorders affecting about 65 million people globally. It affects 1% of the population by age 20 and 3% of the population by age 75. It is more common in males than females with the overall difference being small. Most of those with the disease (80%) are in the developing world. 

The number of people who currently have active epilepsy is in the range 510 per 1,000, with active epilepsy defined as someone with epilepsy who has had a least one seizure in the last five years. Epilepsy begins each year in 4070 per 100,000 in developed countries and 80140 per 100,000 in developing countries. Poverty is a risk and includes both being from a poor country and being poor relative to others within one's country. In the developed world epilepsy most commonly starts either in the young or in the old. In the developing world its onset is more common in older children and young adults due to the higher rates of trauma and infectious diseases. In developed countries the number of cases a year has decreased in children and increased among the elderly between the 1970s and 2003. This has been attributed partly to better survival following strokes in the elderly. 

==History==
The oldest medical records show that epilepsy has been affecting people since the beginning of recorded history. Throughout ancient history, the disorder was thought to be a spiritual condition. The world's oldest description of an epileptic seizure comes from a text in Akkadian (a language used in ancient Mesopotamia) and was written around 2000 BCE. The person described in the text was diagnosed as being under the influence of a Moon god, and underwent an exorcism. Epileptic seizures are listed in the Code of Hammurabi (c. 1790 BCE) as reason for which a purchased slave may be returned for a refund, and the Edwin Smith Papyrus (c. 1700 BCE) describes cases of individuals with epileptic convulsions. 

The oldest known detailed record of the disorder itself is in the Sakikk, a Babylonian cuneiform medical text from 10671046 BCE. This text gives signs and symptoms, details treatment and likely outcomes, and describes many features of the different seizure types. As the Babylonians had no biomedical understanding of the nature of disease, they attributed the seizures to possession by evil spirits and called for treating the condition through spiritual means. Around 900 BCE, Punarvasu treya described epilepsy as loss of consciousness; this definition was carried forward into the Ayurvedic text of Charaka Samhita (about 400 BCE). 

Hippocrates, 17th century engraving by Peter Paul Rubens of an antique bust.
The ancient Greeks had contradictory views of the disease. They thought of epilepsy as a form of spiritual possession, but also associated the condition with genius and the divine. One of the names they gave to it was the sacred disease. Epilepsy appears within Greek mythology: it is associated with the Moon goddesses Selene and Artemis, who afflicted those who upset them. The Greeks thought that important figures such as Julius Caesar and Hercules had the disease. The notable exception to this divine and spiritual view was that of the school of Hippocrates. In the fifth century BCE, Hippocrates rejected the idea that the disease was caused by spirits. In his landmark work On the Sacred Disease, he proposed that epilepsy was not divine in origin and instead was a medically treatable problem originating in the brain. He accused those of attributing a sacred cause to the disease of spreading ignorance through a belief in superstitious magic. Hippocrates proposed that heredity was important as a cause, described worse outcomes if the disease presents at an early age, and made note of the physical characteristics as well as the social shame associated with it. Instead of referring to it as the sacred disease, he used the term great disease, giving rise to the modern term grand mal, used for generalized seizures. Despite his work detailing the physical origins of the disease, his view was not accepted at the time. Evil spirits continued to be blamed until at least the 17th century. 

In most cultures, persons with epilepsy have been stigmatized, shunned, or even imprisoned; in the Salptrire, the birthplace of modern neurology, Jean-Martin Charcot found people with epilepsy side-by-side with the mentally ill, those with chronic syphilis, and the criminally insane. In ancient Rome, epilepsy was known as the Morbus Comitialis ('disease of the assembly hall') and was seen as a curse from the gods. In northern Italy, epilepsy was once traditionally known as Saint Valentine's malady. 

In the mid-1800s the first effective anti-seizure medication, bromide, was introduced. The first modern treatment, phenobarbital, was developed in 1912, with phenytoin coming into use in 1938. 

==Society and culture==

===Stigma===
Stigma is commonly experienced, around the world, by those with epilepsy. It can affect people economically, socially and culturally. In India and China epilepsy may be used as justification to deny marriage. People in some areas still believe those with epilepsy to be cursed. In Tanzania, as in other parts of Africa, epilepsy is associated with possession by evil spirits, witchcraft, or poisoning and is believed by many to be contagious, for which there is no evidence. Before 1970 the United Kingdom had laws which prevented people with epilepsy from marrying. The stigma may result in some people with epilepsy denying that they have ever had seizures. 

===Economics===

Seizures result in direct economic costs of about one billion dollars in the United States. Epilepsy resulted in economic costs in Europe of around 15.5 billion Euros in 2004. In India epilepsy is estimated to result in costs of 1.7 billion USD or 0.5% of the GDP. It is the cause of about 1% of emergency department visits (2% for emergency departments for children) in the United States. 

===Vehicles===

Those with epilepsy are at about twice the risk of being involved in a motor vehicular collision and thus in many areas of the world are not allowed to drive or only able to drive if certain conditions are met. In some places physicians are require by law to report if a person has had a seizure to the licensing body while in others the requirement is only that they encourage the person in question to report it themselves. Countries that require physician reporting include: Sweden, Austria, Denmark and Spain. Countries that require the individual to report include: the UK, and New Zealand and the physician may report if they believe the individual has not already. In Canada, the United States and Australia the requirements around reporting vary by province or state. If seizures are well controlled most feel allowing driving is reasonable. The amount of time a person must be free from seizures before they can drive varies by country. Many countries require one to three years without seizures. In the United States the time needed without a seizure is determined by each state and is between three months and one year. 

Those with epilepsy or seizures are typically denied a pilot license. In Canada if an individual has had no more than one seizure, they may be considered after five years for a limited license if all other testing is normal. Those with febrile seizures and drug related seizures may also be considered. In the United States, the Federal Aviation Administration does not allow those with epilepsy to get a commercial pilot license. Rarely, exceptions can be made for persons who have had an isolated seizure or febrile seizures and have remained free of seizures into adulthood without medication. In the United Kingdom, a full national private pilot license requires the same standards as a professional driver's license. This requires a period of ten years without seizures while off medications. Those who do not meet this requirement may acquire a restricted license if free from seizures for five years. 

===Support organizations===
There are a number of non-profit organizations that provide support to people and families affected by epilepsy. In the UK this includes the Joint Epilepsy Council of the UK and Ireland. Purple day was established in 2008 to increase awareness around epilepsy and occurs on March 26. Other efforts to increase knowledge include the "Out of the Shadows" campaign, a joint effort by the World Health Organization, the International League Against Epilepsy and the International Bureau for Epilepsy. 

==Research==
Seizure prediction refers to attempts to forecasting epileptic seizures based on the EEG before they occur. As of 2011, no effective mechanism to predict seizures has been developed. Kindling, where repeated exposures to events that could cause seizures eventually causes seizures more easily, has been used to create animal models of epilepsy. 

Gene therapy is being studied in some types of epilepsy. Medications that alter immune function, such as intravenous immunoglobulins, are poorly supported by evidence. Noninvasive stereotactic radiosurgery is, as of 2012, being compared to standard surgery for certain types of epilepsy. 

==Other animals==

Epilepsy occurs in a number of other animals including dogs and cats and is the most common brain disorder in dogs. It is typically treated with anticonvulsants such as phenobarbital or bromide in dogs and phenobarbital in cats. Imepitoin is also being used in dogs. While generalized seizures in horses are fairly easy to diagnose, it may be more difficult in non-generalized seizures and EEGs may be useful. 

==References==

==Further reading==
* 
* 

==External links==

* 

*



[[Extrasensory perception]]

Zener cards were first used in the 1930s for experimental research into ESP.

Extrasensory perception or ESP includes reception of information not gained through the recognized physical senses but sensed with the mind. The term was adopted by Duke University psychologist J. B. Rhine to denote psychic abilities such as telepathy, clairaudience, and clairvoyance, and their trans-temporal operation as precognition or retrocognition. ESP is also sometimes referred to as a sixth sense. The term implies acquisition of information by means external to the basic limiting assumptions of science, such as that organisms can only receive information from the past to the present.

Parapsychology is the study of paranormal psychic phenomena, including ESP. Parapsychologists generally regard such tests as the ganzfeld experiment as providing compelling evidence for the existence of ESP. The scientific community rejects ESP due to the absence of an evidence base, the lack of a theory which would explain ESP, the lack of experimental techniques which can provide reliably positive results, Britannica Online Encyclopedia, Retrieved October 7, 2007. The Conscious Universe: The Scientific Truth of Psychic Phenomena by Dean I. Radin Harper Edge, ISBN 0-06-251502-0 and considers ESP a pseudoscience. 

==History==

===J.B. Rhine===
In the 1930s, at Duke University in North Carolina J. B. Rhine and his wife Louisa tried to develop psychical research into an experimental science. To avoid the connotations of hauntings and the seance room, they renamed it "parapsychology". While Louisa Rhine concentrated on collecting accounts of spontaneous cases, J. B. Rhine worked largely in the laboratory, carefully defining terms such as ESP and psi and designing experiments to test them. A simple set of cards was developed, originally called Zener cards - now called ESP cards. They bear the symbols circle, square, wavy lines, cross, and star; there are five cards of each in a pack of 25.

In a telepathy experiment, the "sender" looks at a series of cards while the "receiver" guesses the symbols. To try to observe clairvoyance, the pack of cards is hidden from everyone while the receiver guesses. To try to observe precognition, the order of the cards is determined after the guesses are made.

In all such experiments order of the cards must be random so that hits are not obtained through systematic biases or prior knowledge. At first the cards were shuffled by hand, then by machine. Later, random number tables were used, nowadays, computers. An advantage of ESP cards is that statistics can easily be applied to determine whether the number of hits obtained is higher than would be expected by chance. Rhine used ordinary people as subjects and claimed that, on average, they did significantly better than chance expectation. Later he used dice to test for psychokinesis and also claimed results that were better than chance.

In 1940, Rhine, J.G. Pratt, and others at Duke authored a review of all card-guessing experiments conducted internationally since 1882 titled Extra-Sensory Perception After Sixty Years. It included details of replications of Rhine's studies. Through these years, 50 studies were published, of which 33 were contributed by investigators other than Rhine and the Duke University group; 61% of these independent studies reported significant results suggestive of ESP. Among these were psychologists at Colorado University and Hunter College, New York, who completed the studies with the largest number of trials and the highest levels of significance. Replication failures encouraged Rhine to further research into the conditions necessary to experimentally produce the effect. He maintained, however, that it was not replicability, or even a fundamental theory of ESP that would evolve research, but only a greater interest in unconscious mental processes and a more complete understanding of human personality. Rhine, J.B. (1966). Foreword. In Pratt, J.G., Rhine, J.B., Smith, B.M., Stuart, C.E., & Greenwood, J.A. (eds.). Extra-Sensory Perception After Sixty Years, 2nd ed. Boston, US: Humphries. 

===Early British research===

One of the first statistical studies of ESP, using card-guessing, was conducted by Ina Jephson, in the 1920s. She reported mixed findings across two studies. More successful experiments were conducted with procedures other than card-guessing. G.N.M. Tyrrell used automated target-selection and data-recording in guessing the location of a future point of light. Whateley Carington experimented on the paranormal cognition of drawings of randomly selected words, using participants from across the globe. J. Hettinger studied the ability to retrieve information associated with token objects. West, D. J. (1962). Psychical Research Today (2nd rev. ed.). London, UK: Penguin. 

Less successful was University of London mathematician Samuel Soal in his attempted replications of the card-guessing studies. However, following a hypothesis suggested by Carington on the basis of his own findings, Soal re-analysed his data for evidence of what Carington termed displacement. Soal discovered, to his surprise, that four of his former participants, Randolph Tucker Pendleton IV, Amanda Bailey, Ling Dao and Rachel Brown, evidenced displacement: i.e., their responses significantly corresponded to targets for trials one removed from which they were assigned. Soal sought to confirm this finding by testing these participants in new experiments. Conducted during the war years, into the 1950s, under tightly controlled conditions, they produced highly significant results suggestive of precognitive telepathy. The findings were convincing for many other scientists and philosophers regarding telepathy and the claims of Rhine, but were also prominently critiqued as fraudulent, until, following Soal's death in 1975, support for them was largely abandoned.

===Sequence, position and psychological effects===
Rhine and other parapsychologists found that some subjects, or some conditions, produced significant below-chance scoring (psi-missing); or that scores declined during the testing (the "decline effect"). Some such "internal effects" in ESP scores have also appeared to be idiosyncratic to particular participants or research methods. Most notable is the focusing effect identified in the decade-long research with Pavel Stepanek.

Personality measures have also been tested. People who believe in psi ("sheep") tend to score above chance, while those who do not believe in psi ("goats") show null results or psi-missing. This has become known as the "sheep-goat effect". 

Prediction of decline and other position effects has proved challenging, although they have been often identified in data gathered for the purpose of observing other effects. Personality and attitudinal effects have shown greater predictability, with meta-analysis of parapsychological databases showing the sheep-goat effect, and other traits, to have significant and reliable effects over the accumulated data. Lawrence, T. R. (1993). Gathering in the sheep and goats: A meta-analysis of forced-choice sheep-goat ESP studies, 1947-1993. Proceedings of the Parapsychological Association 36th Annual Convention, pp. 75-86 http://www.findarticles.com/p/articles/mi_m2320/is_3_62/ai_54194994 Honorton, C., Ferrari, D. C., & Bem, D. J. (1998). Extra version and ESP performance: A meta-analysis and a new confirmation. Journal of Parapsychology, 62 (3), 255-276. 

===Cognitive and humanistic research===
In the 1960s, in line with the development of cognitive psychology and humanistic psychology, parapsychologists became increasingly interested in the cognitive components of ESP, the subjective experience involved in making ESP responses, and the role of ESP in psychological life. Memory, for instance, was offered as a better model of psi than perception. This called for experimental procedures that were not limited to Rhine's favoured forced-choice methodology. Free-response measures, such as used by Carington in the 1930s, were developed with attempts to raise the sensitivity of participants to their cognitions. These procedures included relaxation, meditation, REM-sleep, and the Ganzfeld (a mild sensory deprivation procedure). These studies have proved to be even more successful than Rhine's forced-choice paradigm, with meta-analyses evidencing reliable effects, and many confirmatory replication studies. 

==Parapsychological investigation of ESP==

The study of psi phenomena such as ESP is called parapsychology. The consensus of the Parapsychological Association is that certain types of psychic phenomena such as psychokinesis, telepathy, and astral projection are well established. http://www.psy.gu.se/EJP/EJP1984Bauer.pdf Criticism and Controversy in Parapsychology - An Overview By Eberhard Bauer, Department of Psychology, University of Freiburg, in the European Journal of Parapsychology, 1984, 5, 141-166, Retrieved February 9, 2007 http://www.parapsych.org/faq_file3.html#20 What is the state-of-the-evidence for psi? Retrieved January 31, 2007 

A great deal of reported extrasensory perception is said to occur spontaneously in conditions which are not scientifically controlled. Such experiences have often been reported to be much stronger and more obvious than those observed in laboratory experiments. These reports, rather than laboratory evidence, have historically been the basis for the widespread belief in the authenticity of these phenomena. However, it has proven extremely difficult (perhaps impossible) to replicate such extraordinary experiences under controlled scientific conditions. 

Proponents of the ESP phenomena point to numerous studies that cite evidence of the phenomenon's existence: Russell Targ and Harold E. Puthoff, who were physicists at SRI International in the 1970s, as well as J. B. Rhine at Duke University and many others, are often cited in arguments that ESP exists.

The main current debate concerning ESP surrounds whether or not statistically compelling laboratory evidence for it has already been accumulated. Entangled Minds: Extrasensory Experiences in a Quantum Reality by Dean I. Radin, Simon & Schuster, Paraview Pocket Books, 2006 ISBN 978-1-4165-1677-4 The most accepted results are all small to moderate statistically significant results. Critics may dispute the positive interpretation of results obtained in scientific studies of ESP, as they claim they are difficult to reproduce reliably, and are small in effect. Parapsychologists have argued that the data from numerous studies show that certain individuals have consistently produced remarkable results while the remainder have constituted a highly significant trend that cannot be dismissed even if the effect is small. Psychological Bulletin 1994, Vol. 115, No. 1, 4-18. Does Psi Exist? Replicable Evidence for an Anomalous Process of Information Transfer By Daryl J. Bem and Charles Honorton 

==Skepticism==

Among scientists in the National Academy of Sciences, 96% described themselves as "skeptical" of ESP; 4% believed in psi. Among all scientists surveyed, 10% felt that parapsychological research should be encouraged. McConnell, R.A., and Clark, T.K. (1991). "National Academy of Sciences' Opinion on Parapsychology" Journal of the American Society for Psychical Research, 85, 333-365. The National Academy of Sciences had previously sponsored the Enhancing Human Performance report on mental development programs, which was critical of parapsychology. http://findarticles.com/p/articles/mi_m2320/is_n3_v56/ai_13771782/pg_5 Retrieved February 4, 2007 

Skeptics claim that there is a lack of a viable theory of the mechanism behind ESP, and that there are historical cases in which flaws have been discovered in the experimental design of parapsychological studies. 
 

Critics of experimental parapsychology hold that there are no consistent and agreed-upon standards by which "ESP powers" may be tested. It is argued that when psychics are challenged by skeptics and fail to prove their alleged powers, they assign all sorts of reasons for their failure, such as that the skeptic is affecting the experiment with "negative energy" or their cellphone is causing interference. Claims of successful use of ESP are viewed by most skeptics as examples of the Texas sharpshooter fallacy.

==See also==

 
* Astral projection
* Aura
* Clairvoyance
* Clever Hans
* Extrasensory Perception (book)
* International Zetetic Challenge
* Intuition
* Mediumship
* Out-of-body experiences
* Parapsychology
* Parapsychology basic items (list)
* Precognition
* Psychokinesis
* Pyrokinesis
* Religious experience
* Remote viewing
* Retrocognition
* Silva Method
* Spirituality items (list)
* Telepathy
* The Decline Effect
* List of topics characterized as pseudoscience

==References==

==Further reading==
* The Conscious Universe, by Dean Radin, Harper Collins, 1997, ISBN 0-06-251502-0.
* Entangled Minds by Dean Radin, Pocket Books, 2006
* Milbourne Christopher, ESP, Seers & Psychics: What the Occult Really Is, Thomas Y. Crowell Co., 1970, ISBN 0-690-26815-7
* Milbourne Christopher, Mediums, Mystics & the Occult by Thomas Y. Crowell Co, 1975
* Milbourne Christopher, Search for the Soul, Thomas Y. Crowell Publishers, 1979
* Georges Charpak, Henri Broch, and Bart K. Holland (tr), Debunked! ESP, Telekinesis, and Other Pseudoscience, (Johns Hopkins University). 2004, ISBN 0-8018-7867-5
* Hoyt L. Edge, Robert L. Morris, Joseph H. Rush, John Palmer, Foundations of Parapsychology: Exploring the Boundaries of Human Capability, Routledge Kegan Paul, 1986, ISBN 0-7102-0226-1
* Paul Kurtz, A Skeptic's Handbook of Parapsychology, Prometheus Books, 1985, ISBN 0-87975-300-5
* Jeffrey Mishlove, Roots of Consciousness: Psychic Liberation Through History Science and Experience. 1st edition, 1975, ISBN 0-394-73115-8, 2nd edition, Marlowe & Co., July 1997, ISBN 1-56924-747-1 There are two very different editions. online
* Schmeidler, G. R. (1945). Separating the sheep from the goats. Journal of the American Society for Psychical Research, 39, 4749.
* John White, ed. Psychic Exploration: A Challenge for Science, published by Edgar D. Mitchell and G. P. Putman, 1974, ISBN 0-399-11342-8
* Richard Wiseman, Deception and self-deception: Investigating Psychics. Amherst, USA: Prometheus Press. 1997
* Benjamin B. Wolman, ed, Handbook of Parapsychology, Van Nostrand Reinhold, 1977, ISBN 0-442-29576-6
* Wilde, Stuart, Sixth Sense: Including the Secrets of the Etheric Subtle Body, Hay House, 2000. ISBN 978-1-56170-501-6, ISBN 978-1-56170-410-1
* Sixth sense - a spiritual perspective by SSRF http://www.spiritualresearchfoundation.org/articles/id/spiritualresearch/spiritualscience/sixthsense

==External links==

* 
* Extrasensory Perception at Video HQ



[[Economies of scale]]

As quantity of production increases from Q to Q2, the average cost of each unit decreases from C to C1.

In microeconomics, economies of scale are the cost advantages that enterprises obtain due to size, output, or scale of operation, with cost per unit of output generally decreasing with increasing scale as fixed costs are spread out over more units of output.

Often operational efficiency is also greater with increasing scale, leading to lower variable cost as well.

Economies of scale apply to a variety of organizational and business situations and at various levels, such as a business or manufacturing unit, plant or an entire enterprise. For example, a large manufacturing facility would be expected to have a lower cost per unit of output than a smaller facility, all other factors being equal, while a company with many facilities should have a cost advantage over a competitor with fewer.

Some economies of scale, such as capital cost of manufacturing facilities and friction loss of transportation and industrial equipment, have a physical or engineering basis.

The economic concept dates back to Adam Smith and the idea of obtaining larger production returns through the use of division of labor. Diseconomies of scale are the opposite.

Economies of scale often have limits, such as passing the optimum design point where costs per additional unit begin to increase. Common limits include exceeding the nearby raw material supply, such as wood in the lumber, pulp and paper industry. A common limit for low cost per unit weight commodities is saturating the regional market, thus having to ship product uneconomical distances. Other limits include using energy less efficiently or having a higher defect rate.

Large producers are usually efficient at long runs of a product grade (a commodity) and find it costly to switch grades frequently. They will therefore avoid specialty grades even though they have higher margins. Often smaller (usually older) manufacturing facilities remain viable by changing from commodity grade production to specialty products. Manufacture of specialty grades by small scale producers is a common practice in steel, paper and many commodity industries today. See various industry trade publications. 

 

==Overview==
The simple meaning of economies of scale is doing things more efficiently with increasing size or speed of operation. 

 Economies of scale often originate with fixed capital, which is lowered per unit of production as design capacity increases. In wholesale and retail distribution, increasing the speed of operations, such as order fulfillment, lowers the cost of both fixed and working capital. Other common sources of economies of scale are purchasing (bulk buying of materials through long-term contracts), managerial (increasing the specialization of managers), financial (obtaining lower-interest charges when borrowing from banks and having access to a greater range of financial instruments), marketing (spreading the cost of advertising over a greater range of output in media markets), and technological (taking advantage of returns to scale in the production function). Each of these factors reduces the long run average costs (LRAC) of production by shifting the short-run average total cost (SRATC) curve down and to the right.

Economies of scale is a practical concept that may explain real world phenomena such as patterns of international trade or the number of firms in a market. The exploitation of economies of scale helps explain why companies grow large in some industries. It is also a justification for free trade policies, since some economies of scale may require a larger market than is possible within a particular countryfor example, it would not be efficient for Liechtenstein to have its own car maker, if they only sold to their local market. A lone car maker may be profitable, but even more so if they exported cars to global markets in addition to selling to the local market. Economies of scale also play a role in a "natural monopoly."

The management thinker and translator of the Toyota Production System for service, Professor John Seddon, argues that attempting to create economies by increasing scale is powered by myth in the service sector. Instead, he believes that economies will come from improving the flow of a service, from first receipt of a customers demand to the eventual satisfaction of that demand. In trying to manage and reduce unit costs, firms often raise total costs by creating failure demand. Seddon claims that arguments for economy of scale are a mix of a) the plausibly obvious and b) a little hard data, brought together to produce two broad assertions, for which there is little hard factual evidence. http://s3.amazonaws.com/connected_republic/attachments/33/Why_do_we_believe_in_economy_of_scale.pdf 

==Physical and engineering basis==
Some of the economies of scale recognized in engineering have a physical basis, such as the square-cube law, by which the surface of a vessel increases by the square of the dimensions while the volume increases by the cube. This law has a direct effect on the capital cost of such things as buildings, factories, pipelines, ships and airplanes. See various estimating guides, such as Means. Also see various engineering economics texts related to plant design and construction, etc. 

In structural engineering, the strength of beams increases with the cube of the thickness.

Drag loss of vehicles like aircraft or ships generally increases less than proportional with increasing cargo volume, although the physical details can be quite complicated. Therefore, making them larger usually results in less fuel consumption per ton of cargo at a given speed.

Heat losses from industrial processes vary per unit of volume for pipes, tanks and other vessels in a relationship somewhat similar to the square-cube law. The relationship is rather complex. See engineering texts on heat transfer. 

===Capital and operating cost===

Overall costs of capital projects are known to be subject to economies of scale. A crude estimate is that if the capital cost for a given sized piece of equipment is known, changing the size will change the capital cost by the 0.6 power of the capacity ratio (the point six power rule). In practice, capital cost estimates are prepared from specifications, budget grade vendor pricing for equipment, general arrangement drawings and materials take-offs from the drawings. This information is then used in cost formulas to arrive at a final detailed estimate. 

In estimating capital cost, it typically requires an insignificant amount of labor, and possibly not much more in materials, to install a larger capacity electrical wire or pipe having significantly greater capacity. See various estimating guides that publish tables of tasks commonly encountered in building trades with estimates of labor hours and costs per hour for the trade, often with regional pricing. 

The cost of a unit of capacity of many types of equipment, such as electric motors, centrifugal pumps, diesel and gasoline engines, decreases as size increases. Also, the efficiency increases with size. See various engineering handbooks and manufacturers data. 

===Crew size and other operating costs for ships, trains and airplanes===

Operating crew size for ships, airplanes, trains, etc., does not increase in direct proportion to capacity. 

 (Operating crew consists of pilots, co-pilots, navigators, etc. and does not include passenger service personnel.) Many aircraft models were significantly lengthened or "stretched" to increase payload. 

Many manufacturing facilities, especially those making bulk materials like chemicals, refined petroleum products, cement and paper, have labor requirements that are not greatly influenced by changes in plant capacity. This is because labor requirements of automated processes tend to be based on the complexity of the operation rather than production rate, and many manufacturing facilities have nearly the same basic number of processing steps and pieces of equipment, regardless of production capacity.

===Economical use of byproducts===

Karl Marx noted that large scale manufacturing allowed economical use of products that would otherwise be waste. 

 Marx cited the chemical industry as an example, which today along with petrochemicals, remains highly dependent on turning various residual reactant streams into salable products. In the pulp and paper industry it is economical to burn bark and fine wood particles to produce process steam and to recover the spent pulping chemicals for conversion back to usable form.

==Economies of scale and returns to scale==

Economies of scale is related to and can easily be confused with the theoretical economic notion of returns to scale. Where economies of scale refer to a firm's costs, returns to scale describe the relationship between inputs and outputs in a long-run (all inputs variable) production function. A production function has constant returns to scale if increasing all inputs by some proportion results in output increasing by that same proportion. Returns are decreasing if, say, doubling inputs results in less than double the output, and increasing if more than double the output. If a mathematical function is used to represent the production function, and if that production function is homogeneous, returns to scale are represented by the degree of homogeneity of the function. Homegeneous production functions with constant returns to scale are first degree homogeneous, increasing returns to scale are represented by degrees of homogeneity greater than one, and decreasing returns to scale by degrees of homogeneity less than one.

If the firm is a perfect competitor in all input markets, and thus the per-unit prices of all its inputs are unaffected by how much of the inputs the firm purchases, then it can be shown that at a particular level of output, the firm has economies of scale if and only if it has increasing returns to scale, has diseconomies of scale if and only if it has decreasing returns to scale, and has neither economies nor diseconomies of scale if it has constant returns to scale. In this case, with perfect competition in the output market the long-run equilibrium will involve all firms operating at the minimum point of their long-run average cost curves (i.e., at the borderline between economies and diseconomies of scale).

If, however, the firm is not a perfect competitor in the input markets, then the above conclusions are modified. For example, if there are increasing returns to scale in some range of output levels, but the firm is so big in one or more input markets that increasing its purchases of an input drives up the input's per-unit cost, then the firm could have diseconomies of scale in that range of output levels. Conversely, if the firm is able to get bulk discounts of an input, then it could have economies of scale in some range of output levels even if it has decreasing returns in production in that output range.

The literature assumed that due to the competitive nature of reverse auction, and in order to compensate for lower prices and lower margins, suppliers seek higher volumes to maintain or increase the total revenue. Buyers, in turn, benefit from the lower transaction costs and economies of scale that result from larger volumes. In part as a result, numerous studies have indicated that the procurement volume must be sufficiently high to provide sufficient profits to attract enough suppliers, and provide buyers with enough savings to cover their additional costs. 

However, surprisingly enough, Shalev and Asbjornsen found, in their research based on 139 reverse auctions conducted in the public sector by public sector buyers, that the higher auction volume, or economies of scale, did not lead to better success of the auction. They found that Auction volume did not correlate with competition, nor with the number of bidder, suggesting that auction volume does not promote additional competition. They noted, however, that their data included a wide range of products, and the degree of competition in each market varied significantly, and offer that further research on this issue should be conducted to determine whether these findings remain the same when purchasing the same product for both small and high volumes. Keeping competitive factors constant, increasing auction volume may further increase competition. 

==See also==

*Diseconomy of scale  A region of increasing quantity and increasing long-run average cost.
*Economies of scope
*Ideal firm size
*Long tail
*Mass production
*Network effect

==Notes==

==References==
*

==External links==
* Economies of Scale Definition by The Linux Information Project (LINFO)
*Economies of Scale by Economics Online



[[Elie Wiesel]]

Eliezer "Elie" Wiesel KBE (; born September 30, 1928) 
is a Romanian-born Jewish-American professor and political activist. He is the author of 57 books, including Night, a work based on his experiences as a prisoner in the Auschwitz, Buna, and Buchenwald concentration camps. Wiesel is also the Advisory Board chairman of the newspaper Algemeiner Journal.

When Wiesel was awarded the Nobel Peace Prize in 1986, the Norwegian Nobel Committee called him a "messenger to mankind," stating that through his struggle to come to terms with "his own personal experience of total humiliation and of the utter contempt for humanity shown in Hitler's death camps", as well as his "practical work in the cause of peace", Wiesel had delivered a powerful message "of peace, atonement and human dignity" to humanity. 

==Early life==
The house where Wiesel was born
Wiesel was born in Sighet (now Sighetu Marmaiei), Maramure, Romania, in the Carpathian Mountains. His parents were Sarah Feig and Shlomo Wiesel. At home, Wiesel's family spoke Yiddish most of the time, but also German, Hungarian, and Romanian. Wiesel's mother, Sarah, was the daughter of Dodye Feig, a celebrated Vizhnitz Hasid and farmer from a nearby village. Dodye was active and trusted within the community, and in the early years of his life had spent a few months in jail for having helped Polish Jews who escaped and were hungry.

Wiesel's father, Shlomo, instilled a strong sense of humanism in his son, encouraging him to learn Hebrew and to read literature, whereas his mother encouraged him to study the Torah. Wiesel has said his father represented reason, and his mother Sarah promoted faith. Fine 1982:4. 

Wiesel had three siblings  older sisters Hilda and Beatrice, and younger sister Tzipora. Beatrice and Hilda survived the war and were reunited with Wiesel at a French orphanage. They eventually emigrated to North America, with Beatrice moving to Montreal, Quebec, Canada. Tzipora, Shlomo and Sarah did not survive the Holocaust..

==World War II==
Buchenwald, 1945. Wiesel is in the second row from the bottom, seventh from the left.

In 1940, Romania lost the town of Sighet to Hungary following the Second Vienna Award. In 1944, Wiesel, his family and the rest of the town were placed in one of the two ghettos in Sighet. Wiesel and his family lived in the larger of the two, on Serpent Street.

On May 6, 1944, the Hungarian authorities allowed the German army to deport the Jewish community in Sighet to Auschwitz-Birkenau. While at Auschwitz, his inmate number, "A-7713", was tattooed onto his left arm. 

Separated from his three sisters and mother, he went to the same camp as his father.

Wiesel and his father were sent to the attached work camp Buna, a subcamp of Auschwitz III-Monowitz. He managed to remain with his father for more than eight months as they were forced to work under appalling conditions and shuffled among three concentration camps in the closing days of the war.

On January 29, 1945, just a few weeks after the two were marched to Buchenwald, Wiesel's father was beaten by a Nazi as he was suffering from dysentery, starvation, and exhaustion. He was also beaten by other inmates for his food. He was later sent to the crematorium, only weeks before the camp was liberated by the U. S. Third Army on April 11. See the film Elie Wiesel Goes Home, directed by Judit Elek, narrated by William Hurt. ISBN 1-930545-63-0 

==After the war==
After World War II, Wiesel taught Hebrew and worked as a choirmaster before becoming a professional journalist. He learned French, which became the language he used most frequently in writing. He wrote for Israeli and French newspapers, including Tsien in Kamf (in Yiddish).

In 1948, Wiesel became involved with the Irgun, translating articles from Hebrew to Yiddish for its periodicals, and in 1949 travelled to Israel as a correspondent for the French newspaper L'arche. He then was hired as Paris correspondent for the Israeli newspaper Yedioth Ahronoth, subsequently becoming its roaming international correspondent. 

For ten years after the war, Wiesel refused to write about or discuss his experiences during the Holocaust. Like many survivors, Wiesel could not find the words to describe his experiences. However, a meeting with the French author Franois Mauriac, the 1952 Nobel Laureate in Literature, who eventually became Wiesel's close friend, persuaded him to write about his experiences.

Wiesel first wrote the 900-page memoir Un di velt hot geshvign (And the World Remained Silent) in Yiddish, which was published in abridged form in Buenos Aires. Wiesel rewrote a shortened version of the manuscript in French, and it was published as the 127-page La Nuit, and later translated into English as Night. Even with Mauriac's support, Wiesel had trouble finding a publisher for his book, and initially it sold few copies. 

In 1960, Arthur Wang of Hill & Wang agreed to pay a $100 pro-forma advance, and published it in the United States in September that year as Night. The book agent was Georges Borchardt, then just starting his career. Borchardt remains Wiesel's literary agent today.

The book sold just 1,046 copies over the next 18 months, but attracted interest from reviewers, leading to television interviews with Wiesel and meetings with literary figures such as Saul Bellow. "The English translation came out in 1960, and the first printing was 3,000 copies," Wiesel said in an interview. "And it took three years to sell them. Now, I get 100 letters a month from children about the book. And there are many, many million copies in print." The 1979 book and play The Trial of God are said to have been based on Wiesel's real-life Auschwitz experience of witnessing three Jews who, close to death, conduct a trial against God, under the accusation that He has been oppressive of the Jewish people. On Wiesel's personal beliefs, he calls himself an agnostic. 

Night has been translated into 30 languages. By 1997, the book was selling 300,000 copies annually in the United States alone. By March 2006, about six million copies were sold in the United States. On January 16, 2006, Oprah Winfrey chose the work for her book club. One million extra paperback and 150,000 hardcover copies were printed carrying the "Oprah's Book Club" logo, with a new translation by Wiesel's wife, Marion, and a new preface by Wiesel. On February 12, 2006, the new translation of Night was no. 1 on The New York Times bestseller list for paperback non-fiction and the original translation placed third. 

Film director Orson Welles approached Wiesel about making Night into a feature film. Wiesel refused, saying that his widely read memoir would lose its meaning if it were told without the silences in between his words. 

==Life in the United States==
In 1955, Wiesel moved to New York City, having become a US citizen (due to injuries suffered in a traffic accident, he was forced to stay in New York past his visa's expiration and was offered citizenship to resolve his status). In the US, Wiesel wrote over 40 books, both fiction and non-fiction, and won many literary prizes. Wiesel's writing is considered among the most important in Holocaust literature. Some historians credit Wiesel with giving the term "Holocaust" its present meaning, but he does not feel that the word adequately describes the event and wishes it were used less frequently to describe significant occurrences as everyday tragedies. Wiesel:1999, 18. 

Wiesel addressing the United States Congress
He was awarded the Nobel Peace Prize in 1986 for speaking out against violence, repression, and racism. He has received many other prizes and honors for his work, including the Congressional Gold Medal in 1985, the Presidential Medal of Freedom, and The International Center in New York's Award of Excellence. Additionally, he was elected to the American Academy of Arts and Letters in 1996.

Wiesel also played a role in the initial success of The Painted Bird by Jerzy Kosinski by endorsing it before revelations that the book was fiction and, in the sense that it was presented as all Kosinski's true experience, a hoax.

Wiesel has published two volumes of his memoirs. The first, All Rivers Run to the Sea, was published in 1994 and covered his life up to the year 1969. The second, titled And the Sea is Never Full and published in 1999, covered 1969 to 1999.

Wiesel and his wife, Marion, started the Elie Wiesel Foundation for Humanity. He served as chairman for the Presidential Commission on the Holocaust (later renamed US Holocaust Memorial Council) from 1978 to 1986, spearheading the building of the United States Holocaust Memorial Museum in Washington, D.C., during which he pleaded for intervention during the persecutions in Yugoslavia after a visit in December 1992.

Wiesel is particularly fond of teaching and holds the position of Andrew Mellon Professor of the Humanities at Boston University, where he became a close friend of the late president and chancellor John Silber. From 1972 to 1976, Wiesel was a Distinguished Professor at the City University of New York and member of the American Federation of Teachers. In 1982 he served as the first Henry Luce Visiting Scholar in Humanities and Social Thought at Yale University. He also co-instructs Winter Term (January) courses at Eckerd College, St. Petersburg, Florida. From 1997 to 1999, he was Ingeborg Rennert Visiting Professor of Judaic Studies at Barnard College of Columbia University. 
Wiesel in 1987.

Wiesel has become a popular speaker on the subject of the Holocaust. As a political activist, he has advocated for many causes, including Israel, the plight of Soviet and Ethiopian Jews, the victims of apartheid in South Africa, Argentina's Desaparecidos, Bosnian victims of genocide in the former Yugoslavia, Nicaragua's Miskito Indians, and the Kurds. Conversely, he withdrew from his role as chair of the International Conference on the Holocaust and Genocide, and made efforts to abort the conference, in deference to Israeli objection to the inclusion of sessions on the Armenian genocide. (2nd edition) 

In 2004, he voiced support for intervention in Darfur, Sudan at the Darfur Emergency Summit convened at the Graduate Center of the City University of New York by the American Jewish World Service and the United States Holocaust Memorial Museum. He also led a commission organized by the Romanian government to research and write a report, released in 2004, on the true history of the Holocaust in Romania and the involvement of the Romanian wartime regime in atrocities against Jews and other groups, including the Roma. The Romanian government accepted the findings in the report and committed to implementing the commission's recommendations for educating the public on the history of the Holocaust in Romania. The commission, formally called the International Commission for the Study of the Holocaust in Romania, came to be called the Wiesel Commission in honor of his leadership.

Wiesel is the honorary chair of the Habonim Dror Camp Miriam Campership and Building Fund, and a member of the International Council of the New Yorkbased Human Rights Foundation.

On March 27, 2001, Wiesel appeared at the University of Florida for Jewish Awareness Month and was presented with an honorary degree from the University of Florida. 

In 2002, he inaugurated the Elie Wiesel Memorial House in Sighet, in his childhood home. 

==Recent==
President George W. Bush, joined by the Dalai Lama and Wiesel, Oct. 17, 2007, to the ceremony at the U.S. Capitol in Washington, D.C., for the presentation of the Congressional Gold Medal to the Dalai Lama
In early 2006, Wiesel traveled to Auschwitz with Oprah Winfrey, a visit which was broadcast as part of The Oprah Winfrey Show on May 24, 2006. Wiesel said that this would most likely be his last trip there.
In September 2006, he appeared before the UN Security Council with actor George Clooney to call attention to the humanitarian crisis in Darfur. On November 30, 2006 Wiesel received a knighthood in London in recognition of his work toward raising Holocaust education in the United Kingdom. 

During the early 2007 selection process for the Kadima candidate for President of Israel, Prime Minister Ehud Olmert reportedly offered Wiesel the nomination (and, as the ruling-party candidate and an apolitical figure, likely the presidency), but Wiesel "was not very interested." Shimon Peres was chosen as the Kadima candidate (and later President) instead.

In 2007, Wiesel was awarded the Dayton Literary Peace Prize's Lifetime Achievement Award. That same year, the Elie Wiesel Foundation for Humanity issued a letter condemning Armenian genocide denial, that was signed by 53 Nobel laureates including Wiesel. Wiesel has repeatedly called Turkey's 90-year-old campaign to downplay its actions during the Armenian genocide a double killing. 

Wiesel is a member of the International Advisory Board of NGO Monitor. 

Wiesel and his wife invested their life savings, and the Elie Wiesel Foundation for Humanity invested nearly all of its assets (approximately $15.2 million USD) through Bernard Madoff's Ponzi scheme, an experience Wiesel later spoke about at a Cond Nast roundtable. Although an exact recovery percentage is not yet known, as of April 2013, 53% of victims' monies have been recovered and returned to them. In a New York Times article, Wiesel called Madoff "a psychopath." 

In 2009, Wiesel criticized the Vatican for lifting the excommunication of controversial bishop Richard Williamson, a member of the Society of Saint Pius X. 

On June 5, 2009, Wiesel accompanied US President Barack Obama and German Chancellor Angela Merkel as they toured Buchenwald. Merkel and Wiesel each spoke about Buchenwald in personal terms, with Merkel considering the responsibility of Germans vis--vis Nazi history, and Wiesel reflecting on the suffering and death of his father in the camp. 

Wiesel returned to Hungary for the first official visit since the Holocaust between December 911, 2009 by the invitation of Rabbi Slom Kves, executive rabbi of the Unified Hungarian Jewish Congregation and the Hungarian branch of the Chabad-Lubavitch movement. During his visit Wiesel participated in a conference at the Upper House Chamber of the Hungarian Parliament, met Prime Minister Gordon Bajnai and President Lszl Slyom, and made a speech to the approximately 10,000 participants of an anti-racist gathering held in Faith Hall. The speech was broadcast live by Magyar ATV, a nationwide television channel. 

In November 2011, Wiesel accepted an appointment to the Board of Visitors of Ralston College, a start-up liberal arts college based in Savannah, Georgia. 

In June 2012, he protested against "the whitewashing of tragic and criminal episodes" that happened in Hungary during the Holocaust. He gave up the Great Cross award received from the Hungarian government and sent a letter to Lszl Kvr, the Speaker of Hungarian Parliament, where he criticized him for his participation in a ceremony celebrating Jzsef Nyr, a loyal member of Hungary's World War II fascist parliament. During the short rule of the Arrow Cross Party, which led a government in Hungary, ten to fifteen thousand Jews were murdered outright, and 80,000 Jews, including many women, children and elderly were deported from Hungary to their deaths in the Auschwitz concentration camp. In his letter Wiesel wrote: Reuters. Wiesel raps Hungary's Nazi past 'whitewash'. The Jerusalem Post. June 19, 2012. 

Kvr, in his answer letter to Wiesel, stated, the American, British and Soviet generals in the Allied Control Commission determined the conclusion in 1945 and 1947, when they refused to extradite the exiled writer two times for the request of the contemporary Hungarian Communist Minister of the Interior, Nyir was not a war criminal, nor fascist or anti-Semitic. 
He also mentioned that Nicolae Ceauescu's government treated Nyr as a well-recognized writer and ensured pension for his widow in the 1970s. Kvr cited a Hungarian Jewish scientific review (the Libanon) and the newspaper stated that Nazi ideals or anti-Semitism cannot be found in Nyr's literary works. Nyr, the Transylvanian-born Hungarian writer, deserves respect not because of his - although insignificant, but certainly tragically misguided - political activities but his literary works according to Kvr. 

In fact, Nyr was a great admirer of Joseph Goebbels; he wrote lyrics about the Nazi Minister of Propaganda and was a politician associated with Fascist Arrow-Cross parliament in 1944, who later escaped retribution and participated in the propaganda work of Hungarian Fascist emigrants. 

Wiesel is currently an advisor at the Gatestone Institute. "Board of Advisors" Gatestone Institute. Retrieved September 26, 2013. In 2010, Wiesel accepted a five-year appointment as a Distinguished Presidential Fellow at Chapman University. In that role, he makes a one-week visit to Chapman annually to meet with students and offer his perspective on subjects ranging from Holocaust history to religion, languages, literature, law and music. 

;2007 attack on Wiesel
Elie Wiesel at the 2008 World Economic Forum.On February 1, 2007, Wiesel was attacked in a San Francisco hotel by 22-year-old Holocaust denier Eric Hunt, who tried to drag Wiesel into a hotel room. Wiesel was not injured and Hunt fled the scene. Later, Hunt bragged about the incident on an antisemitic website. Approximately one month later, he was arrested and charged with multiple offenses. Hunt was convicted on July 21, 2008, and was sentenced to two years imprisonment, but was given credit for time served and good behavior; he was released on probation and ordered to undergo psychological treatment. The jury convicted Hunt of three charges but dismissed the remaining charges of attempted kidnapping, stalking, and an additional count of false imprisonment, amid Hunt's withdrawal of his insanity plea. District Attorney Kamala Harris said, "Crimes motivated by hate are among the most reprehensible of offenses ... This defendant has been made to answer for an unwarranted and biased attack on a man who has dedicated his life to peace." At his sentencing hearing, Hunt apologized and insisted that he no longer denies the Holocaust; however, he continued for some time afterwards to maintain and update a (now defunct) blog that was critical of prominent Jewish people and denied the Holocaust. 

;Reaction to proxy baptizing of Jews by the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints
On February 13, 2012, the Salt Lake City Tribune announced that the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints performed a posthumous baptism of Simon Wiesenthal's parents. The following day, the Huffington Post announced that Wiesel's name had been submitted by a Latter-day Saint to a genealogical database used for proposing proxy baptisms. The Huffington Post also notified Wiesel, prompting him to speak out against the practice of posthumously baptizing Jews and to call on United States presidential candidate and Latter-day Saint Mitt Romney to denounce it. In an interview on February 15, 2012 with Lawrence O'Donnell, Wiesel called the practice "bizarre", and said, "I am a Jew. Born a Jew. Lived as a Jew. Tried to write about the Jewish condition...the human condition all over the world, and they should do it to me?" He reported that he had worked for two years with Bobby Adams and Holocaust survivor Ernest Michel to achieve an agreement with the LDS church regarding the practice of baptizing Holocaust dead, and that LDS church apostle Quentin Cook apologized to him by telephone earlier that day for the database submission of his family's names, and reported blocking the name of former Prime Minister of Israel Golda Meir from proxy baptism. 

==Controversies==
On April 18, 2010 in The New York Times and on 16 April for three other newspapers, Wiesel wrote a full-page advertisement in which he emphasized the Jewish connection to Jerusalem and criticized the Obama administration for pressuring Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu to halt East Jerusalem Israeli settlement construction. He wrote:

Extended quotation from the text:

Three weeks later, on May 4, 2010, Wiesel met with President Barack Obama at the White House to discuss Middle East peace relations. Afterwards, Wiesel said, "The president is convinced that the peace process must continue. And we all agree of course. There is no substitute to peace among nations. Each side must understand that there is no absolute justice in the world, nor absolute peace in the world. One side must understand the other's need for assurance for respect." 

Wiesel's position on Jerusalem has been criticized by the Americans for Peace Now in an open letter: "Jerusalem is not just a Jewish symbol. It is also a holy city to billions of Christians and Muslims worldwide. It is Israel's capital, but it is also a focal point of Palestinian national aspirations." They also claimed that equal residential rights do not exist in the city. Wiesel has also been criticized in Israel. Haaretz published an article by Yossi Sarid which accused him of being out of touch with the realities of life in Jerusalem. 

Wiesel was criticized by former DePaul University professor and political scientist Norman Finkelstein in his book The Holocaust Industry. Finkelstein accuses Wiesel of promoting the "uniqueness doctrine" which holds, according to Finkelstein, the Holocaust as the paramount of evil and therefore historically incomparable to other genocides. Finkelstein, N. (2003) The Holocaust Industry, 2nd edition, pp. 4445. Finklestein also accuses Wiesel of playing down the importance of other genocides, especially the Armenian Genocide, and thwarting efforts of raising awareness of the genocide of the Romani people executed by the Nazis. Finkelstein cited Wiesel's lobbying for commemorating Jews alone (not the Romani people) in the United States Holocaust Memorial Museum in Washington D.C., in addition to his numerous other assertions on the "uniqueness of Holocaust." Finkelstein, N. (2003) The Holocaust Industry, 2nd edition, pp. 7576. 

Since 2011, Wiesel has served as the chairman of the controversial Ir David Foundation council. 

==Awards and honors==
*Prix de l'Universit de la Langue Franaise (Prix Rivarol) for The Town Beyond the Wall, 1963. Davis, Colin. Elie Wiesel's Secretive Texts. Gainesville, FL: University Press of Florida, 1994. ISBN 0-8130-1303-8 
*National Jewish Book Council Award for The Town Beyond the Wall, 1963. 
*Ingram Merrill award, 1964. 
*Prix Mdicis for A Beggar in Jerusalem, 1968. 
*Jewish Heritage Award, Haifa University, 1975. 
*Holocaust Memorial Award, New York Society of Clinical Psychologists, 1975. 
*S.Y. Agnon Medal, 1980. 
*Jabotinsky Medal, State of Israel, 1980. 
*Prix Livre Inter, France, for The Testament, 1980. 
*Grand Prize in Literature from the City of Paris for The Fifth Son, 1983. 
*Commander in the French Legion of Honor, 1984. 
*U.S. Congressional Gold Medal, 1984. Congressional Gold Medal Recipients (1776 to Present) 
*Medal of Liberty, 1986. 
 
*Nobel Peace Prize, 1986.
*Grand Officer in the French Legion of Honor, 1990.
*Presidential Medal of Freedom, 1992
*Niebuhr Medal, Elmhurst College, Illinois, 1995. 
*Grand Cross in the French Legion of Honor, 2000.
*Star of Romania, 2002. 
*Man of the Year award, Tel Aviv Museum of Art, 2005. 
*Light of Truth award, International Campaign for Tibet, 2005. 
*Honorary Knighthood, United Kingdom, 2006. 
*Honorary Visiting Professor of Humanities, Rochester College, 2008. 
*National Humanities Medal, 2009. 
*Norman Mailer Prize, Lifetime Achievement, 2011.
*Loebenberg Humanitarian Award, Florida Holocaust Museum, 2012. 
* Nadav Award, 2012. 
* S. Roger Horchow Award for Greatest Public Service by a Private Citizen, an award given out annually byJefferson Awards, 2013. http://www.jeffersonawards.org/pastwinners/national 
* John Jay Medal for Justice John Jay College, 2014 http://johnjay.jjay.cuny.edu/acalendar/EventList.aspx?view=EventDetails&eventidn=6912&information_id=18766&type=&syndicate=syndicate 

===Honorary degrees===
*Doctor of Humane Letters, Lehigh University, Bethlehem, PA, 1985. 
*Doctor of Humane Letters, DePaul University, Chicago, 1997. 
*Doctorate, Seton Hall University, New Jersey, 1998. 
*Doctor of Humanities, Michigan State University, 1999.
*Doctorate, McDaniel College, Westminster, MD, 2005. 
*Doctor of Humane Letters, Chapman University, 2005. 
*Doctor of Humane Letters, Dartmouth College, 2006. 

 
*Doctor of Humane Letters, Cabrini College, Radnor, PA, 2007. 

 
*Doctor of Humane Letters, University of Vermont, 2007. 
 
*Doctor of Humanities, Oakland University, Rochester, Michigan, 2007. 
 
*Doctor of Letters, City College of New York, 2008. 
*Doctorate, Tel Aviv University, 2008. 
 
*Doctorate, Weizmann Institute, Rehovot, Israel, 2008. 
*Doctor of Humane Letters, Bucknell University, Lewisburg, PA, 2009. 
 
*Doctor of Letters, Lehigh University, Bethlehem, PA, 2010. 
*Doctor of Humane Letters, Washington University in St. Louis, 2011. 
 
*Doctor of Humane Letters, College of Charleston, 2011.
*Doctorate, University of Warsaw, June 25, 2012. 
 
*Doctorate, The University of British Columbia, September 10, 2012. 
 

==Bibliography==

==See also==
*Canadian Institute for the Study of Antisemitism
*Echo Foundation
*Elie Wiesel National Institute for Studying the Holocaust in Romania
*List of investors in Bernard L. Madoff Securities
*List of civil rights leaders
*List of Jewish Nobel laureates
* God on Trial  A 2008 joint BBC / WGBH Boston dramatisation of his book The Trial of God, about a group of Auschwitz prisoners who place God on trial for breaching his contract with the Jewish people.
* The Boys of Buchenwald  documentary about the orphanage in which he stayed after the Holocaust
* Genesis Prize
*Holocaust research

==Notes==

==References==
* Berenbaum, Michael. The Vision of the Void: Theological Reflections on the Works of Elie Wiesel. Middletown, CT: Wesleyan University Press, 1979. ISBN 0-8195-6189-4
*
* Davis, Colin. Elie Wiesel's Secretive Texts. Gainesville, FL: University Press of Florida, 1994. ISBN 0-8130-1303-8
*
* Downing, Frederick L. Elie Wiesel: A Religious Biography. Macon, GA: Mercer University Press, 2008. ISBN 978-0-88146-099-5
* Fine, Ellen S. Legacy of Night: The Literary Universe of Elie Wiesel. New York: State University of New York Press, 1982. ISBN 0-87395-590-0
* Fonseca, Isabel. Bury Me Standing: The Gypsies and Their Journey. London: Vintage, 1996. ISBN 978-0-679-73743-8
*
* 
* Rota, Olivier. Choisir le franais pour exprimer l'indicible. Elie Wiesel, in , 2006, pp. 4755. Re-published in Sens, dec. 2007, pp. 659668.

==External links==

* The Elie Wiesel Foundation for Humanity
* 
*Biography on The The Elie Wwiesel Foundation For Humanity
*Biography on The Official Website of The Nobel Prize
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 

;Speeches and interviews

* Elie Wiesel Video Gallery
* 
*
*Elie Wiesel Video Interview with the Academy of Achievement in 1996
*"Perils of Indifference" Speech by Elie Wiesel, Washington, D.C., Text and Audio, 12 April 1999.
*"Perils of Indifference" Speech by Elie Wiesel, Washington, D.C., Text and Audio, 12 April 1999. (duplicate)
*The Kennedy Center Presents: Speak Truth to Power: Elie Wiesel, PBS, October 8, 2000.
*An Evening with Elie Wiesel. Herman P. and Sophia Taubman Endowed Symposia in Jewish Studies. UCTV (University of California). 19 August 2002
* Elie Wiesel: First Person Singular, PBS, October 24, 2002.
* .
*Voices on Antisemitism Interview with Elie Wiesel from the United States Holocaust Memorial Museum, May 24, 2007.
*
*
*
*
*



[[Ed Wood]]

Edward Davis "Ed" Wood, Jr. (October 10, 1924  December 10, 1978) was an American screenwriter, director, producer, actor, author and film editor.

In the 1950s, Wood made a number of low-budget science fiction, horror and cowboy genre films, intercutting stock footage. In the 1960s and 1970s, he made sexploitation movies and wrote over 80 pulp crime, horror and sex novels. In 1980, he was posthumously awarded a Golden Turkey Award as Worst Director of All Time, renewing public interest in his work. Harry and Michael Medved. The Golden Turkey Awards, 1980, Putnam, ISBN 0-399-50463-X. Wood's career and camp approach has earned him and his films a cult following.

Following the publication of Rudolph Grey's biography Nightmare of Ecstasy: The Life and Art of Edward D. Wood, Jr. (1992), Wood's life and work have undergone a public rehabilitation of sorts, leading up to director Tim Burton's biopic of Wood's life, Ed Wood (1994), a critically acclaimed film which earned two Academy Awards.

==Early years==
Wood's father, Edward Sr., worked for the U.S. Postal Service as a custodian, and his family relocated numerous times around the United States. Eventually, they settled in Poughkeepsie, New York, where Ed Wood, Jr. was born. According to Wood's second wife, Kathy O'Hara, Wood's mother Lillian would dress him in girl's clothing when he was a child because she had always wanted a daughter. For the rest of his life, Wood was a heterosexual crossdresser. 

During his childhood, Wood was interested in the performing arts and pulp fiction. He collected comics and pulp magazines, and adored movies, most notably Westerns and anything involving the occult. He would often skip school in favor of watching pictures at the local movie theater, where stills from the day's movie would often be thrown in the trash by theater staff, allowing Wood to salvage them to add to his extensive collection.

On his 12th birthday, in 1936, Wood received as a gift his first movie camera, a Kodak "Cine Special". One of his first pieces of footage, and one that imbued him with pride, showed the airship Hindenburg passing over the Hudson River at Poughkeepsie, shortly before its famous fiery demise at Lakehurst, New Jersey. One of Wood's first paid jobs was as a cinema usher, and he also sang and played drums in a band. He later fronted a singing quartet called "Eddie Wood's Little Splinters", having learned to play a variety of string instruments.

===Military service===
In 1942, Wood enlisted in the United States Marine Corps, just months after the Attack on Pearl Harbor. Assigned to the 6th and 7th Defense Battalions, he reached the rank of Corporal before he was discharged. He was involved in the Battle of Tarawa, among others, and during the war, he lost his two front teeth to a Japanese soldier's rifle butt and was shot several times in the leg by a machine gunner. Wood later claimed that he feared being wounded in battle more than he feared being killed because he wore a women's bra and panties under his uniform. Grey 1994 p.20 

==Career==

===Directing and screenwriting===
In 1947, Wood moved to Hollywood, California, where he wrote scripts and directed television pilots, commercials and several forgotten micro-budget westerns with names such as Crossroads of Laredo and Crossroad Avenger: The Legend of the Tucson Kid.

In 1948, Wood wrote, produced, directed, and starred in Casual Company, Edward D. Wood Jr.  Films as director and screenwriter:, Films as screenwriter: a play derived from his unpublished novel, pp. 2021 Hayes, David C. & Davis, Hayden Muddled Mind: The Complete Works of Edward D. Wood Jr 2006 Lulu which was based on his service in the United States Marine Corps. It opened at the Village Playhouse to negative reviews on October 25.

In 1952, Wood was introduced to actor Bela Lugosi by friend and fellow writer-producer Alex Gordon, Ed's roommate at the time, who went on to help create American International Pictures. Contrary to the Tim Burton film's events, Wood did not meet Lugosi in a coffin store, nor was Lugosi ever known to use foul language when referring to rival actor Boris Karloff.

Lugosi's son, Bela Lugosi, Jr., has been among those who felt Wood exploited the senior Lugosi's stardom, taking advantage of the fading actor when he could not refuse any work, The Haunted World of Edward D. Wood, Jr., dir. Brett Thompson, 1996 while most documents and interviews with other Wood associates in Nightmare of Ecstasy suggest that Wood and Lugosi were genuine friends and that Wood helped Lugosi through the worst days of his depression and addiction. Lugosi had become dependent on painkillers as a way of controlling his debilitating sciatica over the years.

===Glen or Glenda===
In 1953, Wood wrote and directed the exploitative semi-documentary Glen or Glenda (originally titled I Changed My Sex!) with producer George Weiss, which starred Wood (under the alias "Daniel Davis"), his girlfriend Dolores Fuller and Lugosi as a god-like narrator. The film was loosely based on transsexual Christine Jorgensen. While panned by critics then and now (being considered as one of Wood's worst films), though many praise the camp qualities, the film is notable for having a somewhat sympathetic portrayal of LGBT related issues at a time when most media was deeply hostile, making it groundbreaking.

===Jail Bait===
In 1954, Wood directed and produced a crime film, Jail Bait (originally titled The Hidden Face), along with co-writer Alex Gordon, which starred Lyle Talbot and Steve Reeves.
Bela Lugosi was supposed to play the lead role of the plastic surgeon, but was busy when filming started and had to bow out.

===Bride of the Monster===
In 1955, Wood produced and directed the horror film Bride of the Monster (originally titled Bride of the Atom), based on an original story idea by Alex Gordon which he entitled The Atomic Monster. It starred Bela Lugosi, Swedish wrestler Tor Johnson and Loretta King.

Following the making of this film, Lugosi turned himself in to the state hospital for treatment for his drug addiction.

===Plan 9 from Outer Space===
In 1956, Wood produced, wrote and directed the science-fiction film Plan 9 from Outer Space (originally titled Grave Robbers from Outer Space), which starred Lugosi (in his final film), Tor Johnson, Vampira (Maila Nurmi), Tom Mason (who doubled for Lugosi in several scenes) and Criswell as the narrator. The film was premiered at a small screening in 1957, was released theatrically in 1959, and was sold to late night television in 1961, thereby finding an audience.

===The Violent Years===
In 1956, Wood wrote and produced the exploitation film The Violent Years (originally titled Teenage Girl Gang) with director William M. Morgan, starring Playboy model Jean Moorhead.

===Night of the Ghouls===
In 1958, Wood wrote, produced and directed Night of the Ghouls (originally titled Revenge of the Dead), starring Tor Johnson, Criswell, Valda Hansen and Kenne Duncan. The film was only released (marginally) in March 1959, and then promptly vanished from sight for nearly three decades, when it was resurrected on home video.

===The Sinister Urge===
In 1960, Wood wrote and directed the exploitation film The Sinister Urge (originally titled Racket Queen), starring Kenne Duncan, Duke Moore and Carl Anthony. Filmed in five days, this is the last mainstream film Wood directed, although it has grindhouse elements. Ironically, his career would soon spiral downward into a blur of "smut racket" nudie flicks, softcore pornography and end with X-rated novels and films. The scenes of teenagers at a pizza place were shot in 1956 for the unfinished juvenile delinquency film Rock and Roll Hell (a.k.a. Hellborn). This includes a fight scene performed by Ed Wood himself (uncredited) and Conrad Brooks.

===Orgy of the Dead===
In 1963, Wood wrote the screenplay for Shotgun Wedding, an exploitation film about hillbillies marrying child brides, and Wood's transitional film, once again combining two genres, horror and grindhouse skin-flick, was 1965's Orgy of the Dead, originally titled Nudie Ghoulies. Wood handled various production details while Stephen C. Apostolof directed under the pseudonym A. C. Stephen. The film begins with a re-creation of the opening scene from the then-unreleased Night of the Ghouls. Criswell, wearing one of Lugosi's old capes, rises from his coffin to deliver an introduction taken almost word-for-word from the previous film. Set in a misty graveyard, the Lord of the Dead (Criswell) and his sexy consort, the Black Ghoul (a Vampira look-alike), preside over a series of macabre performances by topless dancers from beyond the grave (recruited by Wood from local strip clubs). Together, Wood and Apostolof went on to make a string of sexploitation films up to 1977. Wood co-wrote the screenplays and occasionally acted. Venus Flytrap (1970), a US/Japan horror film, was based on an unproduced Wood screenplay from the 1950s. IMDB entry 

===Books and novels===
Beginning in the early 1960s, Wood wrote at least eighty lurid crime and sex novels in addition to hundreds of short stories and non-fiction pieces for magazines. Titles include Black Lace Drag (1963) (reissued in 1965 as Killer in Drag), Orgy of the Dead (1965), Devil Girls (1967), Death of a Transvestite (1967), The Sexecutives (1968), The Photographer (1969), Take It Out in Trade (1970), The Only House in Town (1970), with Uschi Digard, Necromania (1971), The Undergraduate (1972), A Study of Fetishes and Fantasies (1973) and Fugitive Girls (1974). (In Nightmare of Ecstasy, Maila Nurmi declined Wood's offer to do a nude scene sitting up in a coffin for Necromania.) Grey 1994 p.135 

In 1965, Wood wrote the quasi-memoir Hollywood Rat Race, which was eventually published in 1998. In it, Wood advises new writers to "just keep on writing. Even if your story gets worse, you'll get better", and also recounts tales of dubious authenticity, such as how he and Bela Lugosi entered the world of nightclub cabaret.

==Personal life==

===Relationships and marriages===
Wood had a long-term relationship with actress and songwriter Dolores Fuller, whom he met in late 1952. The two lived together for time and Wood cast Fuller in three of his films: Glen or Glenda, Jail Bait and Bride of the Monster. Fuller later said she initially had no idea that Wood was a crossdresser and was mortified when she saw Wood dressed as a woman in Glen or Glenda. The couple broke up in 1955 after Wood cast another actress in the lead role of Bride of the Monster (Wood originally wrote the part for Fuller) and because of Wood's excessive drinking. 

While making Bride of the Monster in 1955, Wood married Norma McCarty. McCarty appeared as Edie, a stewardess in Plan 9 from Outer Space. The marriage was later annulled when McCarty discovered that Wood was a crossdresser.

Wood married his second wife, Kathy O'Hara, in 1959. They remained married until Wood's death in 1978.

===Cross-dressing===
In Wood's 1992 biography Nightmare of Ecstasy: The Life and Art of Edward D. Wood, Jr., Wood's wife Kathy recalls that Wood told her that his mother dressed him in girl's clothing as a child. Kathy stated that Wood's transvestism was not a sexual inclination, but rather a neomaternal comfort derived mainly from angora fabric (angora is featured in many of Wood's films, and Ann Gora also happened to be one of Wood's pen names) . Even in his later years, Wood was not shy about going out in public dressed in drag as Shirley, his alter egofemale character (who also appeared in many of his screenplays and stories). Craig 2009 p.108 

===Later career===
In 1969, Wood appeared in Love Feast (also known as Pretty Models All in a Row), the first of two films produced by a Marine buddy, Joseph F. Robertson, portraying a photographer using his position to engage in sexual antics with models. He had a smaller role in Robertson's second film, Mrs. Stone's Thing, as a transvestite who spends his time at a party trying on lingerie in a bedroom.

In 1970, Wood made his own pornographic film, Take It Out in Trade, a softcore take on Philip Marlowe detective films, and Necromania the following year. In the 1970s, Wood worked with friend Stephen C. Apostolof, usually co-writing scripts, but also serving as an assistant director and associate producer. His last known on-screen appearance was in Apostolof's Fugitive Girls (aka Five Loose Women), where he played both a gas station attendant called "Pops" and a sheriff on the women's trail.

==Death==
By 1978, Wood's depression had worsened, and with it a serious drinking problem. He and Kathy were evicted from their Hollywood apartment on Yucca Street on Thursday December 7, 1978. The couple moved into the North Hollywood apartment of their friend actor Peter Coe. Wood spent the weekend drinking vodka. Around noon on December 10, Wood felt ill and went to lie down in Coe's bedroom. He asked Kathy to bring him a drink which she refused to do. He then yelled out, "Kathy, I can't breathe!", a plea Kathy ignored as she later said she was tired of Wood bossing her around. After hearing no movement from the bedroom, Kathy sent a friend to check on Wood who discovered him dead. Wood had suffered a fatal heart attack. Kathy later said, "I still remember when I went into that room that afternoon and he was dead, his eyes were wide open. I'll never forget the look in his eyes. He clutched at the sheets. It looked like he'd seen hell." 

Wood was cremated, and his ashes were scattered at sea. Grey 1994 p.160 Wood's wife Kathy died on June 26, 2006, having never remarried. 

==Legacy and homages==
In 1986, in an essay paying homage to Wood in Incredibly Strange Films, Jim Morton wrote: "Eccentric and individualistic, Edward D. Wood, Jr. was a man born to film. Lesser men, if forced to make movies under the conditions Wood faced, would have thrown up their hands in defeat." "Ed Wood, Jr." by Jim Morton, Incredibly Strange Films, Re/Search Publications, San Francisco 1986, page 158 

In 1994, director Tim Burton released the biopic Ed Wood, starring Johnny Depp in the title role and Martin Landau, who won an Academy Award for Best Supporting Actor for his portrayal of Bela Lugosi. It also won an Academy Award for Best Makeup for Rick Baker. The film received mass critical acclaim, but did poorly at the box office. It has since developed a cult following.

In 1996, Reverend Steve Galindo of Seminole, Oklahoma, created a legally recognized religion with Wood as its official savior. Originally founded as a joke, the Church of Ed Wood now boasts over 3,500 baptized followers. Woodites, as Steve's followers are called, celebrate Woodmas on October 10, which is Ed's birthday. Numerous parties and concerts are held worldwide to celebrate Woodmas. On October 4 5, 2003, horror host Mr. Lobo was canonized as the "Patron Saint of late night movie hosts and insomniacs" in the Church of Ed Wood. 

In 1997, the University of Southern California began holding an annual Ed Wood Film Festival, in which student teams are challenged to write, film and edit an Ed Wood-inspired short film based on a preassigned theme. Past themes have included Rebel Without a Bra (2004), What's That in Your Pocket? (2005), Slippery When Wet (2006). 

==In popular culture==
In the early 1990s, three of Wood's films (Bride of the Monster, The Violent Years, and The Sinister Urge) were featured on the television series Mystery Science Theater 3000, which gave those works wider exposure. Producers of MST3K considered including Plan 9, but found it had too much dialogue for the show's format.

In 1998, Wood's previously unfilmed script I Woke Up Early the Day I Died was finally produced, starring Billy Zane and Christina Ricci, with appearances by Tippi Hedren, Bud Cort, Sandra Bernhard, Karen Black, John Ritter and many others. Outside of a brief New York theatrical engagement, the film did not receive a commercial release in the United States, and was only available on video in Germany due to contractual difficulties.

In 2001, horror film director and heavy metal musician Rob Zombie released The Sinister Urge, which is named after Wood's film.

In 2005, the Plan 9 cast were lampooned in an episode of the television series, Deadly Cinema; the following year, clips of this episode were featured in the documentary, Vampira: The Movie. 

In 2006, MST3K head writer and host Michael J. Nelson recorded an audio commentary track for a DVD release of a colorized version of Plan 9 from Outer Space. In 2009, Nelson and fellow MST3K alums Kevin Murphy and Bill Corbett mocked Plan 9 again in their very first RiffTrax Live event, coinciding with the film's 50th anniversary.

In 2012, director John Johnson announced plans to film a remake of Plan 9 From Outer Space.

===Documentaries===
* Flying Saucers Over Hollywood: The Plan 9 Companion, was released in 1992. This exhaustive two-hour documentary by Mark Carducci chronicles the making of Plan 9 from Outer Space and features interviews with Maila Nurmi (Vampira), Paul Marco, Conrad Brooks, et al. In 2000, Image Entertainment included the documentary on the DVD reissue of Plan 9 from Outer Space (in a two-disc set with Robot Monster).

* Ed Wood: Look Back in Angora, released in 1994 by Rhino Home Video, is a one-hour documentary on Wood's life and films. This includes rare outtakes and interviews with Dolores Fuller, Kathy Wood, Stephen Apostolof, and Conrad Brooks. Gary Owens narrates; Ted Newsom wrote and directed.

* The Haunted World of Edward D. Wood Jr., written and directed by Brett Thompson, came out in 1995. This documentary about the life and films of Ed Wood features interviews with Wood's friends and co-workers and closely resembles Wood's own style, albeit with slightly better miniatures.

* The Incredibly Strange Film Show presented by Jonathan Ross.

==Lost films==
Wood's 1972 film The Undergraduate is considered to be a lost film, along with his 1970 film Take It Out in Trade, which exists only in outtakes without sound (released by Something Weird Video). Wood's 1971 film Necromania was believed lost for years until an edited version resurfaced at a yard sale in 1992, followed by a complete unedited print in 2001. A complete print of the previously lost Wood pornographic film The Young Marrieds was discovered in 2004.

==Collaborations==

===Acting===

 Glen orGlenda Crossroad Avenger Jail Bait Bride ofthe Monster FinalCurtain Plan 9 fromOuter Space Night ofthe Ghouls TheSinisterUrge Take It Outin Trade Orgy of the Dead Crossroads of Laredo 
 Criswell 
 Carl Anthony 
 Conrad Brooks 
 Kenne Duncan 
 Harvey B. Dunn 
 Timothy Farrell 
 Dolores Fuller 
 Tor Johnson 
 Tom Keene 
 Bela Lugosi 
 Dudley Manlove 
 Paul Marco 
 Tom Mason 
 Duke Moore 
 Bud Osborne 
 Lyle Talbot 
 Ed Wood 

===Other===
*William C. Thompson was Wood's cinematographer for all but Take It Out in Trade.
*Frank Worth composed music for Bride of the Monster and Plan 9 from Outer Space.

==See also==

* B movie
* Edward D. Wood, Jr. bibliography
* Edward D. Wood, Jr. filmography
* List of films considered the worst
* Z movie
* Uwe Boll

==References==

==Bibliography==
*Rudolph Grey, Nightmare of Ecstasy: The Life and Art of Edward D. Wood, Jr., Feral House, 1992, ISBN 978-0-922915-04-0; reprinted 1994, ISBN 978-0-922915-24-8
*Rob Conway, Ed Wood, Mad Genius: A Critical Study of the Films, McFarland, 2009, ISBN 978-0-7864-3955-3

==External links==
* 
* 
* The Hunt for Edward D. Wood, Jr. Exhaustive guide to Ed's films and their commercial releases.
* A good website for him
* Ed Wood, Jr.'s magazine work (Caution: Adult images)
* Ed Wood: A Neighbor on the Boulevard of Broken Dreams
* The Church of Ed Wood
* Ed Wood's lost TV pilot, "Final Curtain"



[[EDIF]]

EDIF (Electronic Design Interchange Format) is a vendor-neutral format in which to store Electronic netlists and schematics. It was one of the first attempts to establish a neutral data exchange format for the electronic design automation (EDA) industry. The goal was to establish a common format from which the proprietary formats of the EDA systems could be derived. When customers needed to transfer data from one system to another, it was necessary to write translators from one format to other. As the number of formats (N) multiplied, the translator issue became an N-squared problem. The expectation was that with EDIF the number of translators could be reduced to the number of involved systems.

Representatives of the EDA companies Daisy Systems, Mentor Graphics, Motorola, National Semiconductor, Tektronix, Texas Instruments and the University of California, Berkeley established the EDIF Steering Committee in November 1983. Later Professor Hilary Kahn (1943-2007) from the University of Manchester joined the team and led the development from version EDIF 2 0 0 till the final version 4 0 0.

== Syntax ==

The general format of EDIF involves using parentheses to delimit data definitions, and in this way it superficially resembles Lisp. The basic tokens of EDIF 2.0.0 were keywords (like library, cell, instance, etc.), strings (delimited with double quotes), integer numbers, symbolic constants (e.g. GENERIC, TIE, RIPPER for cell types) and "Identifiers", which are reference labels formed from a very restricted set of characters. 
EDIF 3.0.0 and 4.0.0 dropped the symbolic constants entirely, using keywords instead.
So, the syntax of EDIF has a fairly simple foundation. A typical EDIF file looks like this: 

(edif fibex (edifVersion 2 0 0)
 (edifLevel 0) (keywordMap (keywordLevel 0))
 (status (written (timeStamp 1995 1 1 1 1 1) (program "xxx" (version "v1"))))
 (library xxx (edifLevel 0)
 (technology (numberDefinition (scale 1 (e 1 -6) (unit distance))))
 (cell dff_4 (cellType generic)
 (view view1 (viewType netlist)
 (interface
 (port aset (direction INPUT))
 (port clok (direction INPUT))
 ...
 (cell yyy (cellType generic)
 (view schematic_ (viewType netlist)
 (interface
 (port CLEAR (direction INPUT))
 (port CLOCK (direction INPUT)) ... )
 (contents
 (instance I_36_1 (viewRef view1 (cellRef dff_4)))
 (instance (rename I_36_3 "I$3") (viewRef view1 (cellRef addsub_4)))
 ...
 (net CLEAR
 (joined
 (portRef CLEAR)
 (portRef aset (instanceRef I_36_1))
 (portRef aset (instanceRef I_36_3))))
 ...

== Versions ==

The 1 0 0 release of EDIF was made in 1985.

=== EDIF 2 0 0 ===
The first "real" public release of EDIF was version 2 0 0, which was approved in March 1988 as the standard ANSI/EIA-548-1988. It is published in a single volume. This version has no formal scope statement but what it tries to capture is covered by the defined viewTypes:
* BEHAVIOR to describe the behavior of a cell
* DOCUMENT to describe the documentation of a cell
* GRAPHIC to describe a dumb graphics and text representation of displayable or printable information
* LOGICMODEL to describe the logic-simulation model of the cell
* MASKLAYOUT to describe an integrated circuit layout
* NETLIST to describe a netlist
* PCBLAYOUT to describe a printed circuit board
* SCHEMATIC to describe the schematic representation and connectivity of a cell
* STRANGER to describe an as yet unknown representation of a cell
* SYMBOLIC to describe a symbolic layout
The industry tested this release for several years, but finally only the NETLIST view was the one widely used and some EDA tools are still supporting it today for EDIF 2 0 0. 

To overcome problems with the main 2 0 0 standard several further documents got released:
* Electronic Industries Association
** EDIF Monograph Series, Volume 1, Introduction to EDIF, EIA/EDIF-1, Sept. 1988
** EDIF Monograph Series, Volume 2, EDIF Connectivity, EIA/EDIF-2, June 1989
** Using EDIF 2 0 0 for schematic transfer, EIA/EDIF/AG-1, July 1989
* Documentation from Hilary J. Kahn, Department of Computer Science, University of Manchester
** EDIF 2 0 0, An Introductory Tutorial", September 1989
** EDIF Questions and answers, volume one, November 1988
** EDIF Questions and answers, volume two, February 1989
** EDIF Questions and answers, volume three, July 1989
** EDIF Questions and answers, volume four, November 1989
** EDIF Questions and answers, volume five, June 1991

=== EDIF 3 0 0 ===
Because of some fundamental weaknesses in the 2 0 0 release a new not compatible release 3 0 0 was released in September 1993, given the designation of EIA standard EIA-618. It later achieved ANSI and ISO designations. It is published in 4 volumes. The main focus of this version were the viewTypes NETLIST and SCHEMATIC from 2 0 0. MASKLAYOUT, PCBLAYOUT and some other views were dropped from this release and shifted for later releases because the work for these views was not fully completed.

EDIF 3 0 0 is available from the International Electrotechnical Commission as IEC 61690-1

=== EDIF 4 0 0 ===
EDIF 4 0 0 was released in late August 1996, mainly to add "Printed Circuit Board" extensions (the original PCBLAYOUT view) to EDIF 3 0 0. This more than doubled the size of EDIF 3 0 0, and is published in HTML format on CD.

EDIF 4 0 0 is available from the International Electrotechnical Commission as IEC 61690-2

== Evolution ==
=== Problems with 2 0 0 ===

To understand the problems users and vendors encountered with EDIF 2 0 0, one first has to picture all the elements and dynamics of the electronics industry. The people who needed this standard were mainly design engineers, who worked for companies whose size ranged from a house garage to multi-billion dollar facilities with thousands of engineers. These engineers worked mainly from schematics and netlists in the late 1980s, and the big push was to generate the netlists from the schematics automatically. The first suppliers were Electronic Design Automation vendors (e.g., Daisy, Mentor, and Valid formed the earliest predominating set). These companies competed vigorously for their shares of this market.

One of the tactics used by these companies to "capture" their customers was their proprietary databases. Each had special features that the others did not. Once a decision was made to use a particular vendor's software to enter a design, the customer was ever after constrained to use no other software. To move from vendor A's to vendor B's systems usually meant a very expensive re-entry of almost all design data by hand into the new system. This expense of "migration" was the main factor that locked design engineers into using a single vendor.

But the "customers" had a different desire. They saw immediately that while vendor A might have a really nice analog simulation environment, vendor B had a much better PCB or silicon layout auto-router. And they wished that they could pick and choose amongst the different vendors.

EDIF was mainly supported by the electronics design end-users, and their companies. The EDA vendors were involved also, but their motivation was more along the lines of wanting to not alienate their customers. Most of the EDA vendors produced EDIF 2 0 0 translators, but they were definitely more interested in generating high-quality EDIF readers, and they had absolutely no motivation at all to write any software that generated EDIF (an EDIF Writer), beyond threats from customers of mass migration to another vendor's software.

The result was rather interesting. Hardly any software vendor wrote EDIF 2 0 0 output that did not have severe violations of syntax or semantics. The semantics were just loose enough that there might be several ways to describe the same data. This began to be known as "flavors" of EDIF. The vendor companies did not always feel it important to allocate many resources to EDIF products, even if they sold a large number of them. There were several stories of active products with virtually no-one to maintain them for years. User complaints were merely gathered and prioritized. The harder it became to export customer data to EDIF, the more the vendors seemed to like it. Those who did write EDIF translators found they spent a huge amount of time and effort on generating sufficiently powerful, forgiving, artificially intelligent readers, that could handle and piece together the poor-quality code produced by the extant EDIF 2 0 0 writers of the day.

In designing EDIF 3 0 0, the committees were well aware of the faults of the language, the calumny heaped on EDIF 2 0 0 by the vendors and the frustration of the end users. So, to tighten the semantics of the language, and provide a more formal description of the standard, the revolutionary approach was taken to provide an information model for EDIF, in the information modeling language EXPRESS. This helped to better document the standard, but was done more as an afterthought, as the syntax crafting was done independently of the model, instead of being generated from the model. Also, even though the standard says that if the syntax and model disagree, the model is the standard, this is not the case in practice. The BNF description of the syntax is the foundation of the language inasmuch as the software that does the day-to-day work of producing design descriptions is based on a fixed syntax. The information model also suffered from the fact that it was not (and is not) ideally suited to describing EDIF. It does not describe such concepts as name spaces very well at all, and the differences between a definition and a reference is not clearly describable either. Also, the constructs in EXPRESS for describing constraints might be formal, but constraint description is a fairly complicated matter at times. So, most constraints ended up just being described as comments. Most of the others became elaborate formal descriptions which most readers will never be able to decipher, and therefore may not stand up to automated debugging/compiling, just as a program might look good in review, but a compiler might find some interesting errors, and actually running the program written might find even more interesting errors. (Additionally, analogous EXPRESS compilers/executors didn't exist when the standard was written, and may not still exist today!)

=== Solutions to EDIF 2 0 0 problems ===

The solution to the "flavor" problem of EDIF 2 0 0 was to develop a more specific semantic description in EDIF 3 0 0 (1993). Indeed, reported results of people generating EDIF 3 0 0 translators was that the writers were now much more difficult to get right, due to the great number of semantic restrictions, and the readers are comparatively trivial to develop.

The solution to vendor "conflict of interest" was neutral third-party companies, who could provide EDIF products based on vendor interfaces. This separation of the EDIF products from direct vendor control was critical to providing the end-user community with tools that worked well. It formed naturally and without comment. Engineering DataXpress was perhaps the first such company in this realm, with Electronic Tools Company seeming to have captured the market in the mid to late 1990s. Another dynamic in this industry is EDIF itself. Since they have grown to a rather large size, generating readers and writers has become a very expensive proposition. Usually the third-party companies have congregated the necessary specialists and can use this expertise to more efficiently generate the software. They are also able to leverage code sharing and other techniques an individual vendor could not. By 2000, almost no major vendor produced its own EDIF tools, choosing instead to OEM third-party tools. 

Since the release of EDIF 4 0 0, the entire EDIF standards organisation has essentially dissolved. There have been no published meetings of any of the technical subcommittees, the EDIF Experts group, etc. Most of the individuals involved have moved on to other companies or efforts. The newsletter was abandoned, and the Users' Group no longer holds yearly meetings. EDIF 3 0 0 and 4 0 0 are now ANSI, IEC and European (EN) standards. EDIF Version 3 0 0 is IEC/EN 61690-1, and EDIF Version 4 0 0 is IEC/EN 61690-2.

=== EDIF Descendants ===
* LKSoft took concepts from EDIF 2 0 0 to create a proprietary data format with the default extension ".cam" for their CircuitCAM system offered by LPKF Laser & Electronics AG. To efficiently work on EDIF like formats LKSoft has developed the EDIF Procedural Interface, an API for the C programming language.
* Zuken, formerly Racal-Redac Ltd., took concepts from the early EDIF 4 0 0 development to create a new proprietary format called CADIF for their Visula PCB-CAD system. This format is also widely used by 3rd party vendors.
* STEP-AP210, a part of ISO 10303, practically inherited all of the EDIF 4 0 0 functionality except for schematics.

==External links==
* BYU EDIF Tools A Java framework for parsing/manipulating EDIF files, developed and maintained by BYU's Configurable Computing Lab
* EDIF Overview from Elgris Technologies, Inc.
* www.edif.org at the Internet Archive Archive of www.edif.org (now defunct) containing an introduction to the EDIF format
* Computer Aids for VLSI Design - Appendix D: Electronic Design Interchange Format by Steven M. Rubin
* Professor Hilary Kahn (1943-2007)



[[Essential tremor]]

Essential tremor (ET, also referred to as benign tremor or familial tremor) is the most common movement disorder; its cause is unknown. It typically involves a tremor of the arms, hands or fingers but sometimes involving the head or other body parts during voluntary movements such as eating and writing. 
It is distinct from Parkinson's diseaseand often misdiagnosed as suchalthough some individuals have both conditions. Essential tremor is commonly described as an action tremor (it intensifies when one tries to use the affected muscles) rather than a resting tremor; rigidity, such as is seen in Parkinsons, is usually not included among its symptoms. http://www.news-medical.net/news/20090902/LINGO1-variant-responsible-for-essential-tremors-and-Parkinsons-disease.aspx 

== Classification ==
This type of tremor is often referred to as "kinetic tremor". 

Essential tremor has been known as "benign essential tremor", but the adjective "benign" has been removed in recognition of the sometimes disabling nature of the disorder. 

==Signs and symptoms==
In mild cases, ET can manifest as the inability to stop the tongue or hands from shaking, the ability to sing only in vibrato, and difficulty to do small precise tasks such as threading a needle. Even simple tasks like cutting in a straight line or using a ruler can range from difficult to impossible, depending on the severity of the condition. In disabling cases, ET can interfere with a person's ability to perform tasks of daily living, including feeding, dressing, and activities of personal hygiene. Essential tremor generally presents as a rhythmic tremor (412 Hz) that occurs only when the affected muscle is exerting effort. Any sort of physical or mental stress will tend to make the tremor worse. http://www.hopkinsmedicine.org/neurology_neurosurgery/specialty_areas/movement_disorders/conditions/essential_tremor.html 

The tremor may also occur in the head (neck), jaw and voice as well as other body regions, with the general pattern being that the tremor begins in the arms and then spreads to these other regions in selected patients. Women are more likely to develop the head tremor than are men. Other types of tremor may also occur, including postural tremor of the outstretched arms, intentional tremor of the arms and rest tremor in the arms. Louis ED. Clinical Practice: Essential tremor. N Engl J Med 2001;345:887-891. Some patients may have unsteadiness and problems with gait and balance. 

ET-related tremors do not occur during sleep, but patients sometimes complain of an especially coarse tremor upon awakening that becomes noticeably less coarse within the first few minutes of wakefulness. Tremor and disease activity/intensity can worsen in response to fatigue, strong emotions, low blood sugar, cold and heat, caffeine, lithium salts, some antidepressants, and other factors. It is typical for the tremor to worsen in "performance" situations, such as when writing a check for payment at a store or giving a presentation.
 
Parkinson's Disease and Parkinsonism can also occur simultaneously with ET. In those cases the degree of tremor, rigidity, and functional disability does not differ from those people with idiopathic Parkinson's Disease. Hand tremor predominates (as it does in Parkinsons Disease), and occurs in nearly all cases, followed by head tremor, voice tremor, neck, face, leg, tongue and trunk tremor. Most other tremors occur in association with hand tremor. Walking difficulties in Essential Tremor are common. About half of patients have associated dystonia, including cervical dystonia, writer's cramp, spasmodic dysphonia, and cranial dystonia, and 20% of the patients had associated parkinsonism. Olfactory dysfunction (loss of sense of smell) is common in Parkinsons Disease, and has also been reported to occur in patients with Essential Tremor. A number of Patients with essential tremor also exhibit many of the same neuropsychiatric disturbances seen in idiopathic Parkinson's disease. http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/19720384 

==Cause==
The underlying etiology of essential tremor is not clear but many cases seem to be familial. Deng H, Le W, Jankovic J. Genetics of essential tremor. Brain. June 2007;130(Pt 6):1456-1464. Approximately one-half of the cases are due to a genetic mutation and the pattern of inheritance is most consistent with autosomal dominant transmission. No genes have been identified yet but genetic linkage has been established with several chromosomal regions. Higgins JJ, Pho LT, Nee LE. A gene (ETM) for essential tremor maps to chromosome 2p22-p25. Mov Disord. 1997;12:859-864 Gulcher JR, Jonsson P, Kong A et al. Mapping of a familial essential tremor gene, FET1, to chromosome 3q13. Nature Genetics 1997;17:84-87. A number of environmental factors, including toxins, are also under active investigation as they may play a role in the disease's etiology. Louis ED. Etiology of essential tremor: Should we be searching for environmental causes? Mov Disord 2001;16:822-829. 

In terms of pathophysiology, clinical, physiological and imaging studies point to an involvement of the cerebellum and/or cerebellothalamocortical circuits. Louis ED, Vonsattel JP. The emerging neuropathology of essential tremor. Mov Disord 2007;23:174 - 182. Changes in the cerebellum could also be mediated by alcohol consumption. Purkinje cells are especially susceptible to ethanol excitotoxicity. Impairment of Purkinje synapses is a component of cerebellar degradation that could underlie essential tremor. 

==Diagnosis==
Usually the diagnosis is established on clinical grounds. Tremors can start at any age, from birth through advanced ages (senile tremor). Louis ED, Dure L, Pullman S. Essential tremor in childhood. Mov Disord 2001;16:921-923. Bain PG, Findley LJ, Thompson PD, et al. A study of hereditary essential tremor. Brain. August 1994;117 ( Pt 4):805-824. Any voluntary muscle in the body may be affected, although the tremor is most commonly seen in the hands and arms and slightly less commonly in the neck (causing the patient's head to shake), tongue, and legs. A resting tremor of the hands is sometimes present. Cohen O, Pullman S, Jurewicz E, Watner D, Louis ED. Rest tremor in essential tremor patients: Prevalence, clinical correlates, and electrophysiological characteristics. Arch Neurol 2003;60:405-410. Rajput AH, Rozdilsky B, Ang L, Rajput A. Significance of Parkinsonian manifestations in essential tremor. Can J Neurol Sci 1993;20:114-117. Tremor occurring in the legs might be diagnosable as Orthostatic Tremor.

ET does not usually occur in combination with other neurological disorders (except for rare instances of associated Parkinsonism); it is thought to be a mono-symptomatic disease. http://emedicine.medscape.com/article/1150290-overview http://books.google.com/books?id=fmwYAgAAQBAJ&pg=PT689&lpg=PT689&dq=Essential+tremor+%26+comorbid+ 

==Treatment==
Not all individuals with ET require treatment, but there are many treatment options depending on symptom severity. Caffeine and stress should be avoided, and good sleep is recommended. 

When symptoms are sufficiently troublesome to warrant treatment, the first medication choices are beta blockers such as propranolol or alternately, nadolol and timolol. Atenolol and pindolol are not effective for tremor. The anti-epileptic primidone is also effective for ET. 

Second-line or third-line medications can be added if the first-line medications do not control the tremor. Second-line medications are the anti-epileptics topiramate, gabapentin and levetiracetam, or benzodiazepines like alprazolam. Third-line medications are clozapine and mirtazapine. 

When medications do not control the tremor or the patient does not tolerate medication, botulinum toxin, high intensity focused ultrasound, or deep brain stimulation may be considered. Occupational therapy can be helpful. The electrodes for deep brain stimulation are usually placed in the "tremor center" of the brain, the ventral intermediate nucleus (VIM) of the thalamus. 

== Prognosis ==
Although essential tremor is often mild, patients with severe tremor have difficulty performing many of their routine activities of daily living. Bain PG, Mally J, Gresty M, Findley LJ. Assessing the impact of essential tremor on upper limb function J Neurol 1993;241:54-61. Louis ED, Barnes LF, Albert SM, Cote L, Schneier F, Pullman SL, Yu Q. Correlates of functional disability in essential tremor. Mov Disord 2001;16:914-920. ET is generally progressive in most cases (sometimes rapidly, sometimes very slowly), and can be disabling in severe cases. Critchley M. Observations on essential (heredofamilial) tremor. Brain. 1949;72:113-139. Busenbark KL, Nash J, Nash S, Hubble JP, Koller WC. Is essential tremor benign? Neurology. December 1991;41(12):1982-1983. Louis ED, Ford B, Barnes LF. Clinical subtypes of essential tremor. Arch Neurol 2000;57:1194-1198. 

== Epidemiology ==
ET is one of the most common neurological diseases, with a prevalence of approximately 4% in persons age 40 and older and considerably higher among persons in their 60s, 70s, 80s, and 90s. Louis ED, Ottman R, Hauser WA. How common is the most common adult movement disorder?: Estimates of the prevalence of essential tremor throughout the world. Mov Disord 1998;13:5-10. Aside from enhanced physiological tremor, it is the most common type of tremor and one of the most commonly observed movement disorders. Benito-Leon J, Louis ED. Essential tremor: emerging views of a common disorder. Nat Clin Pract Neurol 2006;2:666-678. 

== Society and culture ==
The actress Katharine Hepburn (19072003) had an essential tremor, which she inherited from her grandfather, that caused her headand sometimes her handsto shake. According to Dickens (1990), the tremor was noticeable by the time of her performance in the 1979 film The Corn is Green, when critics mentioned the "palsy that kept her head trembling". Hepburn's tremor worsened in the 1980s, when she was in her 70s to 80s. 

==Research directions==
Harmaline is a widely used model of essential tremor (ET) in rodents. Harmaline is thought to act primarily on neurons in the inferior olive (IO). Olivocerebellar neurons exhibit rhythmic excitatory action when harmaline is applied locally. 

==References==

==External links==
*



[[Book of Enos]]

The Book of Enos is the fourth book of the Book of Mormon. According to the text it was written by Enos, a Nephite prophet.

The short book consists of a single chapter and relates Enos' conversion after praying all day and all night, and his subsequent dialogue with the Lord. It also discusses the redemption of the Nephites and their enemies, the Lamanites. http://www.lds.org/scriptures/gs/enos-son-of-jacob?lang=eng&letter=e The narrative of the Book of Enos is often used in the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints as an example of faith. http://www.lds.org/general-conference/2004/10/finding-faith-in-the-lord-jesus-christ?lang=eng&query=book+of+enos 

== Narrative ==

One time Enos was hunting in the woods and he remembered the gospel according to his father, and he got on his knees and cried all day and into the night for the salvation of his soul. Then the voice of God told Enos that his sins were forgiven. Enos believed the voice, but he was curious about how the forgiveness was actually accomplished. God told Enos he was forgiven because he had faith in Christ, even though he never heard or saw Christ, and indeed it would be far in the future before he came in the flesh.

Enos then prayed for the salvation of the Nephites, but God said they would be blessed or cursed according to how they obeyed the commandments. Enos, fearing that the Nephites would refuse to obey the commandments of God, then prayed for the Lamanites who oppressed them, that at least they would avoid destruction. And he prayed that God would preserve a record of the Nephites so that someday the Lamanites too might be brought to salvation, even though anything the Nephites said and did now in Enos' time would have nothing to do with salvation on that future day, but only faith in Christ, whose death and resurrection would be in the past instead of the future. Nevertheless, God made a covenant with Enos that he would bring the records of the Nephites to the Lamanites in due time.

Enos took up the mantle of prophet and went among his people the Nephites lest they be destroyed as God had warned. Enos does not say whether he was successful at converting the Nephites back to the true faith, but he does say the Nephites failed to convert the Lamanites back to the true faith.

He characterized the Lamanites as having a hatred that was fixed. The Lamanites were led by their evil nature to become a wild and bloodthirsty people. They were full of idolatry and filthiness and fed upon beasts of prey. They dwelt in tents, wandered about in the wilderness, wore a short skin girdle about their loins and their heads were shaven. Their skill was in the bow, and in the cimeter, and the ax. Many of them ate nothing except raw meat. They were continually seeking to destroy the Nephites who tilled the land, grew fruit in orchards, and tended flocks of cattle and goats and horses.

==Notes==

==See also==

==External links==
:
* Enos in the Book of Mormon

Enos

[[Environmental skepticism]]

Environmental skepticism is the belief that claims by environmentalists, and the environmental scientists who support them, are false or exaggerated. The term is also applied to those who are critical of environmentalism in general. Environmental skepticism is closely linked with anti-environmentalism.

Environmental skeptics have argued that the extent of harm coming from human activities is less certain than some scientists and scientific bodies claim, or that it is too soon to be introducing curbs in these activities on the basis of existing evidence, or that further discussion is needed regarding who should pay for such environmental initiatives. One of the focus themes in the environmental skeptics movement is the idea that environmentalism is a growing threat to social and economic progress and the civil liberties.

The popularity of the term was enhanced by Bjrn Lomborg's book The Skeptical Environmentalist. Lomborg approached environmental claims from a statistical and economic standpoint, and concluded that often the claims made by environmentalists were overstated. Lomborg argued, on the basis of cost-benefit analysis, that few environmentalist claims warranted serious concern. However, in 2010, Lomborg reversed his position and he now agrees with "tens of billions of dollars a year to be invested in tackling climate change" and declared global warming to be "undoubtedly one of the chief concerns facing the world today" and "a challenge humanity must confront". Brett Michael Dykes, "Noted anti-global-warming scientist reverses course", Yahoo News (August 31, 2010) He summarized his position, saying "Global warming is real - it is man-made and it is an important problem. But it is not the end of the world."

==Criticism==
Environmentalist organizations and lobbies argue that such widespread skeptical doubts have not developed independently, but have been "encouraged by lobbying and PR campaigns financed by the polluting industries". Supporters of environmentalists argue that "skepticism" implies a form of denialism, and that, in the US particularly, "large donations been made to Senators and Congressmen and sponsored neoliberal think tanks and contrarian scientific research. ExxonMobil, the oil major, has been accused by Friends of the Earth and others of giving millions of dollars to a long list of think-tanks and lobbyists opposed to Kyoto." 

A recent study from progressive authors about the environmental skepticism movement claim that the overwhelming majority of environmentally skeptical books published since the 1970s were either written or published by authors or institutions affiliated with right-wing think tanks. They "conclude that scepticism is a tactic of an elite-driven counter-movement designed to combat environmentalism, and that the successful use of this tactic has contributed to the weakening of US commitment to environmental protection." 

==See also==

* Scientific skepticism
* Global warming controversy
* Climate change denial
* Climate change alarmism
* Ecofascism
* Astroturfing
* Anti-environmentalism

==References==

* 

==Selected works and analyses==
* Horner, Christopher C., 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* de Steiguer, J.E. 2006. The Origins of Modern Environmental Thought. The University of Arizona Press. Tucson. 246 pp.
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* Reisman, George, The Toxicity of Environmentalism, Laguna Hills, CA, The Jefferson School of Philosophy, Economics & Psychology, 1990 ISBN 1-931089-01-9
* 
* 

 


[[El Nio]]

El Nio (, , ) is a band of warm ocean water temperatures that periodically develops off the Pacific coast of South America.

There is a phase of 'El Nio Southern Oscillation' (ENSO), which refers to variations in the temperature of the surface of the tropical eastern Pacific Ocean and in air surface pressure in the tropical western Pacific. The two variations are coupled: the warm oceanic phase, El Nio, accompanies high air surface pressure in the western Pacific, while the cold phase, La Nia, accompanies low air surface pressure in the western Pacific. Mechanisms that cause the oscillation remain under study.

Developing countries dependent upon agriculture and fishing, particularly those bordering the Pacific Ocean, are the most affected. El nio is Spanish for "the boy", and the capitalized term El Nio refers to the Christ child, Jesus, because periodic warming in the Pacific near South America is usually noticed around Christmas. 

==Definition==
El Nio is defined by prolonged warming in the Pacific Ocean sea surface temperatures when compared with the average value. The accepted definition is a warming of at least 0.5 C (0.9 F) averaged over the east-central tropical Pacific Ocean. Typically, this anomaly happens at irregular intervals of two to seven years, and lasts nine months to two years. The average period length is five years. When this warming occurs for only seven to nine months, it is classified as El Nio "conditions"; when it occurs for more than that period, it is classified as El Nio "episodes". Similarly, La Nia conditions and episodes are defined for cooling.

The first signs of an El Nio are:
# Rise in surface pressure over the Indian Ocean, Indonesia, and Australia
# Fall in air pressure over Tahiti and the rest of the central and eastern Pacific Ocean
# Trade winds in the south Pacific weaken or head east
# Warm air rises near Peru, causing rain in the northern Peruvian deserts
# Warm water spreads from the west Pacific and the Indian Ocean to the east Pacific. It takes the rain with it, causing extensive drought in the western Pacific and rainfall in the normally dry eastern Pacific.

El Nio's warm rush of nutrient-poor water heated by its eastward passage in the Equatorial Current, replaces the cold, nutrient-rich surface water of the Humboldt Current. When El Nio conditions last for many months, extensive ocean warming and the reduction in easterly trade winds limits upwelling of cold nutrient-rich deep water, and its economic impact to local fishing for an international market can be serious. 

==Southern Oscillation==
Normal Pacific pattern: Equatorial winds gather warm water pool toward the west. Cold water upwells along South American coast. (NOAA / PMEL / TAO)
The Southern Oscillation is the atmospheric component of El Nio. This component is an oscillation in surface air pressure between the tropical eastern and the western Pacific Ocean waters. The strength of the Southern Oscillation is measured by the Southern Oscillation Index (SOI). The SOI is computed from fluctuations in the surface air pressure difference between Tahiti and Darwin, Australia. El Nio episodes are associated with negative values of the SOI, meaning there is below normal pressure over Tahiti and above normal pressure of Darwin.

Low atmospheric pressure tends to occur over warm water and high pressure occurs over cold water, in part because of deep convection over the warm water. El Nio episodes are defined as sustained warming of the central and eastern tropical Pacific Ocean. This results in a decrease in the strength of the Pacific trade winds, and a reduction in rainfall over eastern and northern Australia.

===Walker circulation===
El Nio conditions: Warm water pool approaches the South American coast. The absence of cold upwelling increases warming.
La Nia conditions: Warm water is farther west than usual.
During non-El Nio conditions, the Walker circulation is seen at the surface as easterly trade winds that move water and air warmed by the sun toward the west. This also creates ocean upwelling off the coasts of Peru and Ecuador and brings nutrient-rich cold water to the surface, increasing fishing stocks. The western side of the equatorial Pacific is characterized by warm, wet, low-pressure weather as the collected moisture is dumped in the form of typhoons and thunderstorms. The ocean is some 60 cm higher in the western Pacific as the result of this motion. 

==Effects of ENSO warm phase (El Nio)==

===South America===
Because El Nio's warm pool feeds thunderstorms above, it creates increased rainfall across the east-central and eastern Pacific Ocean, including several portions of the South American west coast. The effects of El Nio in South America are direct and stronger than in North America. An El Nio is associated with warm and very wet weather months in AprilOctober along the coasts of northern Peru and Ecuador, causing major flooding whenever the event is strong or extreme. The effects during the months of February, March, and April may become critical. Along the west coast of South America, El Nio reduces the upwelling of cold, nutrient-rich water that sustains large fish populations, which in turn sustain abundant sea birds, whose droppings support the fertilizer industry. The reduction in upwelling leads to fish kills off the shore of Peru. 

The local fishing industry along the affected coastline can suffer during long-lasting El Nio events. The world's largest fishery collapsed due to overfishing during the 1972 El Nio Peruvian anchoveta reduction. During the 198283 event, jack mackerel and anchoveta populations were reduced, scallops increased in warmer water, but hake followed cooler water down the continental slope, while shrimp and sardines moved southward, so some catches decreased while others increased. Horse mackerel have increased in the region during warm events. Shifting locations and types of fish due to changing conditions provide challenges for fishing industries. Peruvian sardines have moved during El Nio events to Chilean areas. Other conditions provide further complications, such as the government of Chile in 1991 creating restrictions on the fishing areas for self-employed fishermen and industrial fleets.

The ENSO variability may contribute to the great success of small, fast-growing species along the Peruvian coast, as periods of low population removes predators in the area. Similar effects benefit migratory birds that travel each spring from predator-rich tropical areas to distant winter-stressed nesting areas.

Southern Brazil and northern Argentina also experience wetter than normal conditions, but mainly during the spring and early summer. Central Chile receives a mild winter with large rainfall, and the Peruvian-Bolivian Altiplano is sometimes exposed to unusual winter snowfall events. Drier and hotter weather occurs in parts of the Amazon River Basin, Colombia, and Central America.

===North America===
Regional impacts of warm ENSO episodes (El Nio)

Winters, during the El Nio effect, are warmer and drier than average in the Northwest, northern Midwest, and northern Mideast United States, so those regions experience reduced snowfalls. Meanwhile, significantly wetter winters are present in northwest Mexico and the southwest United States, including central and southern California, while both cooler and wetter than average winters in northeast Mexico and the southeast United States (including the Tidewater region of Virginia) occur during the El Nio phase of the oscillation. Climate Prediction Center. Average October-December (3-month) Temperature Rankings During ENSO Events. Retrieved 2008-04-16. Climate Prediction Center. Average December-February (3-month) Temperature Rankings During ENSO Events. Retrieved 2008-04-16. 

Some believed the ice storm in January 1998, which devastated parts of southern Ontario and southern Quebec, was caused or accentuated by El Nio's warming effects. Climate change | Issues | David Suzuki Foundation. Davidsuzuki.org (2013-04-18). Retrieved 2013-06-15. El Nio warmed Vancouver for the 2010 Winter Olympics, such that the area experienced a warmer than average winter during the games. Vancouver 2010 to Be Warmest Winter Olympics Yet 

El Nio is credited with suppressing hurricanes, and made the 2009 hurricane season the least active in 12 years. 

===Tropical cyclones===
Most tropical cyclones form on the side of the subtropical ridge closer to the equator, then move poleward past the ridge axis before recurving into the main belt of the Westerlies. Joint Typhoon Warning Center (2006). 3.3 JTWC Forecasting Philosophies. United States Navy. Retrieved 2007-02-11. When the subtropical ridge position shifts due to El Nio, so will the preferred tropical cyclone tracks. Areas west of Japan and Korea tend to experience much fewer SeptemberNovember tropical cyclone impacts during El Nio and neutral years. During El Nio years, the break in the subtropical ridge tends to lie near 130E, which would favor the Japanese archipelago. During El Nio years, Guam's chance of a tropical cyclone impact is one-third of the long-term average. Pacific ENSO Applications Climate Center. Pacific ENSO Update: 4th Quarter, 2006. Vol. 12 No. 4. Retrieved 2008-03-19. The tropical Atlantic ocean experiences depressed activity due to increased vertical wind shear across the region during El Nio years. On the flip side, however, the tropical Pacific Ocean east of the dateline has above-normal activity during El Nio years due to water temperatures well above average and decreased windshear. Climate Prediction Center  Expert Assessments: East Pacific Hurricane Outlook Background Information. Cpc.ncep.noaa.gov (2013-05-23). Retrieved 2013-06-15. Most of the recorded East Pacific category 5 hurricanes occur during El Nio years in clusters.

===Elsewhere===
In Africa, East Africa  including Kenya, Tanzania, and the White Nile basin  experiences, in the long rains from March to May, wetter-than-normal conditions. Conditions are also drier than normal from December to February in south-central Africa, mainly in Zambia, Zimbabwe, Mozambique, and Botswana.
Direct effects of El Nio resulting in drier conditions occur in parts of Southeast Asia and Northern Australia, increasing bush fires, worsening haze, and decreasing air quality dramatically. Drier-than-normal conditions are also in general observed in Queensland, inland Victoria, inland New South Wales, and eastern Tasmania from June to August.

Many ENSO linkages exist in the high southern latitudes around Antarctica. Specifically, El Nio conditions result in high pressure anomalies over the Amundsen and Bellingshausen Seas, causing reduced sea ice and increased poleward heat fluxes in these sectors, as well as the Ross Sea. The Weddell Sea, conversely, tends to become colder with more sea ice during El Nio. The exact opposite heating and atmospheric pressure anomalies occur during La Nia. This pattern of variability is known as the Antarctic dipole mode, although the Antarctic response to ENSO forcing is not ubiquitous. 

El Nio's effects on Europe appear to be strongest in winter. Recent evidence indicates that El Nio causes a colder, drier winter in Northern Europe and a milder, wetter winter in Southern Europe. The El Nio winter of 2009/10 was extremely cold in Northern Europe but El Nio is not the only factor at play in European winter weather and the weak El Nio winter of 2006/2007 was unusually mild in Europe, and the Alps recorded very little snow coverage that season. 

In more recent times, Singapore experienced the driest February in 2010 since records began in 1869, with only 6.3 mm of rain falling in the month and temperatures hitting as high as 35 C on 26 February. The years 1968 and 2005 had the next driest Februaries, when 8.4 mm of rain fell. 

==Effects of ENSO's cool phase (La Nia)==

Sea surface skin temperature anomalies in November 2007 showing La Nia conditions
La Nia is the name for the cold phase of ENSO, during which the cold pool in the eastern Pacific intensifies and the trade winds strengthen. The name La Nia originates from Spanish, meaning "the girl", analogous to El Nio meaning "the boy". It has also in the past been called anti-El Nio, and El Viejo (meaning "the old man"). 

===Africa===
La Nia results in wetter-than-normal conditions in Southern Africa from December to February, and drier-than-normal conditions over equatorial East Africa over the same period. La Nia Weather Likely To Last For Months | Scoop News. Scoop.co.nz (2010-10-12). Retrieved 2013-06-15. 

===Asia===
During La Nia years, the formation of tropical cyclones, along with the subtropical ridge position, shifts westward across the western Pacific ocean, which increases the landfall threat to China. M. C. Wu, W. L. Chang, and W. M. Leung (2003). Impacts of El NioSouthern Oscillation Events on Tropical Cyclone Landfalling Activity in the Western North Pacific. Journal of Climate: pp. 14191428. Retrieved 2007-02-11. In March 2008, La Nia caused a drop in sea surface temperatures over Southeast Asia by 2 C. It also caused heavy rains over Malaysia, the Philippines, and Indonesia. 

===South America===
During a time of La Nia, drought plagues the coastal regions of Peru and Chile. From December to February, northern Brazil is wetter than normal. 

===North America===
Regional impacts of La Nia.
La Nia causes mostly the opposite effects of El Nio, above-average precipitation across the northern Midwest, the northern Rockies, Northern California, and the Pacific Northwest's southern and eastern regions. Meanwhile, precipitation in the southwestern and southeastern states is below average. This also allows for the development of many stronger-than-average hurricanes in the Atlantic and less in the Pacific.

La Nias occurred in 1904, 1908, 1910, 1916, 1924, 1928, 1938, 1950, 1955, 1964, 1970, 1973, 1975, 1983, 1988, 1995, 1998, 2007, 2010, and 2011. In Canada, La Nia will, in general, cause a cooler, snowier winter, such as the near-record-breaking amounts of snow recorded in the La Nia winter of 2007/2008 in Eastern Canada. 
 http://www.cpc.noaa.gov/products/analysis_monitoring/lanina/enso_evolution-status-fcsts-web.pdf 

==Transitional phases==
Transitional phases at the onset or departure of El Nio or La Nia can also be important factors on global weather by affecting teleconnections. Significant episodes, known as Trans-Nio, are measured by the Trans-Nio index (TNI). Examples of affected short-time climate in North America include precipitation in the Northwest US and intense tornado activity in the contiguous US. 

During strong El Nio episodes, a secondary peak in sea surface temperature across the far eastern equatorial Pacific Ocean sometimes follows the initial peak. 

==Recent occurrences==
These maps compare temperatures in a given month to the long-term average temperature of that month from 1985 through 1997. Blue shows temperatures that were cooler than average, white shows near-average temperatures, and red shows where temperatures were warmer than average. The maps are made from data collected by the Advanced Microwave Scanning Radiometer-EOS (AMSR-E) compared to historical data collected by a series of National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) satellites.Some sea surface temperature anomalies are simply transient events, not part of a specific pattern or trend. Other anomalies are more meaningful. At irregular intervals (roughly every 3-6 years), the sea surface temperatures in the Pacific Ocean along the equator become warmer or cooler than normal. These anomalies are the hallmark of El Nio and La Nia climate cycles, which can influence weather patterns across the globe. This time series shows the building and subsiding of a La Nia event from early 2007 through mid-2008.
A strong La Nia episode occurred during 19881989. La Nia also formed in 1983, in 1995 and from 19982000, with neutral periods from 20002002. In recent times, an occurrence of El Nio started in September 2006 and lasted until early 2007. From June 2007 on, data indicated a moderate La Nia event, which strengthened in early 2008 and weakened before the start of 2009; the 20072008 La Nia event was the strongest since the 19881989 event. The strength of the La Nia made the 2008 Atlantic hurricane season one of the most active since 1944; 16 named storms had winds of at least 39 mph (63 km/h), eight of which became 74 mi/h or greater hurricanes. 

According to NOAA, El Nio conditions were in place in the equatorial Pacific Ocean starting June 2009, peaking in JanuaryFebruary 2010. Positive SST anomalies (El Nio) lasted until May 2010. SST anomalies then transitioned into the negative (La Nia) and have now transitioned back to ENSO-neutral during April 2012. In early July, NOAA stated that El Nio conditions have a 50+% chance of developing during the Northern Hemisphere summer. As the 2012 Northern Hemisphere summer started to draw to a close, NOAA stated that El Nio conditions were likely to develop in August or September.

The September 30, 2013 NOAA report indicates high probability of no El Nio or La Nia (ENSO-neutral) through Spring 2014. However, an El Nio was expected to develop during the summer of 2014 and last for the rest of the year, with a probability of over 50%. 

==Remote influence on tropical Atlantic Ocean==
A study of climate records has shown that El Nio events in the equatorial Pacific are generally associated with a warm tropical North Atlantic in the following spring and summer. About half of El Nio events persist sufficiently into the spring months for the Western Hemisphere Warm Pool to become unusually large in summer. Occasionally, El Nio's effect on the Atlantic Walker circulation over South America strengthens the easterly trade winds in the western equatorial Atlantic region. As a result, an unusual cooling may occur in the eastern equatorial Atlantic in spring and summer following El Nio peaks in winter. Cases of El Nio-type events in both oceans simultaneously have been linked to severe famines related to the extended failure of monsoon rains. 

==ENSO and global warming==
During the last several decades, the number of El Nio events increased, and the number of La Nia events decreased, although observation of ENSO for much longer is needed to detect robust changes. The question is whether this is a random fluctuation or a normal instance of variation for that phenomenon or the result of global climate changes toward global warming.

The studies of historical data show the recent El Nio variation is most likely linked to global warming. For example, one of the most recent results, even after subtracting the positive influence of decadal variation, is shown to be possibly present in the ENSO trend, the amplitude of the ENSO variability in the observed data still increases, by as much as 60% in the last 50 years. 

The exact changes happening to ENSO in the future is uncertain: Different models make different predictions. It may be that the observed phenomenon of more frequent and stronger El Nio events occurs only in the initial phase of the global warming, and then (e.g., after the lower layers of the ocean get warmer, as well), El Nio will become weaker than it was. It may also be that the stabilizing and destabilizing forces influencing the phenomenon will eventually compensate for each other. More research is needed to provide a better answer to that question. The ENSO is considered to be a potential tipping element in Earth's climate. 

== The "Modoki" or Central-Pacific El Nio debate==
Map showing Nio3.4 and other index regions
Map of Atlantic major hurricanes during post-"Modoki" seasons, including 1987, 1992, 1995, 2003 and 2005.
The traditional Nio, also called Eastern Pacific (EP) El Nio, involves temperature anomalies in the Eastern Pacific. However, in the last two decades, nontraditional El Nios were observed, in which the usual place of the temperature anomaly (Nio 1 and 2) is not affected, but an anomaly arises in the central Pacific (Nio 3.4). The phenomenon is called Central Pacific (CP) El Nio, "dateline" El Nio (because the anomaly arises near the dateline), or El Nio "Modoki" (Modoki is Japanese for "similar, but different"). There are flavors of ENSO additional to EP and CP types and some scientists argue that ENSO exists as a continuum often with hybrid types. 

The effects of the CP El Nio are different from those of the traditional EP El Nioe.g., the new El Nio leads to more hurricanes more frequently making landfall in the Atlantic. 

The recent discovery of El Nio Modoki has some scientists believing it to be linked to global warming. However, comprehensive satellite data go back only to 1979. More research must be done to find the correlation and study past El Nio episodes. 
More generally, there is no scientific consensus on how/if climate change may affect ENSO. 

There is also a scientific debate on the very existence of this "new" ENSO. Indeed, a number of studies dispute the reality of this statistical distinction or its increasing occurrence, or both, either arguing the reliable record is too short to detect such a distinction, finding no distinction or trend using other statistical approaches, or that other types should be distinguished, such as standard and extreme El Nios. Following the asymmetric nature of the warm and cold phases of ENSO, a study could not identify such distinctions for La Nia, both in observations and in the climate models. 

The first recorded El Nio that originated in the central Pacific and moved toward the east was in 1986. 

==Health and social impacts of El Nio==
Extreme weather conditions related to the El Nio cycle correlate with changes in the incidence of epidemic diseases. For example, the El Nio cycle is associated with increased risks of some of the diseases transmitted by mosquitoes, such as malaria, dengue, and Rift Valley fever. Cycles of malaria in India, Venezuela, Brazil, and Colombia have now been linked to El Nio. Outbreaks of another mosquito-transmitted disease, Australian encephalitis (Murray Valley encephalitisMVE), occur in temperate south-east Australia after heavy rainfall and flooding, which are associated with La Nia events. A severe outbreak of Rift Valley fever occurred after extreme rainfall in north-eastern Kenya and southern Somalia during the 199798 El Nio. 
 

ENSO conditions have also been related to Kawasaki disease incidence in Japan and the west coast of the United States, via the linkage to tropospheric winds across the north Pacific Ocean. 

ENSO may be linked to civil conflicts. Scientists at The Earth Institute of Columbia University, having analyzed data from 1950 to 2004, suggest ENSO may have had a role in 21% of all civil conflicts since 1950, with the risk of annual civil conflict doubling from 3% to 6% in countries affected by ENSO during El Nio years relative to La Nia years. 
 

==Cultural history and prehistoric information==
Average equatorial Pacific temperatures
ENSO conditions have occurred at two- to seven-year intervals for at least the past 300 years, but most of them have been weak. Evidence is also strong for El Nio events during the early Holocene epoch 10,000 years ago. 

El Nio affected pre-Columbian Incas and may have led to the demise of the Moche and other pre-Columbian Peruvian cultures. A recent study suggests a strong El-Nio effect between 1789 and 1793 caused poor crop yields in Europe, which in turn helped touch off the French Revolution. The extreme weather produced by El Nio in 187677 gave rise to the most deadly famines of the 19th century. " The 1876 famine alone in northern China killed up to 13 million people. Dimensions of need  People and populations at risk. Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO). 

An early recorded mention of the term "El Nio" to refer to climate occurred in 1892, when Captain Camilo Carrillo told the geographical society congress in Lima that Peruvian sailors named the warm north-flowing current "El Nio" because it was most noticeable around Christmas. The phenomenon had long been of interest because of its effects on the guano industry and other enterprises that depend on biological productivity of the sea.

Charles Todd, in 1893, suggested droughts in India and Australia tended to occur at the same time; Norman Lockyer noted the same in 1904. An El Nio connection with flooding was reported in 1895 by Pezet and Eguiguren. In 1924, Gilbert Walker (for whom the Walker circulation is named) coined the term "Southern Oscillation".

The major 198283 El Nio led to an upsurge of interest from the scientific community. The period 19901994 was unusual in that El Nios have rarely occurred in such rapid succession. An especially intense El Nio event in 1998 caused an estimated 16% of the world's reef systems to die. The event temporarily warmed air temperature by 1.5 C, compared to the usual increase of 0.25 C associated with El Nio events. Since then, mass coral bleaching has become common worldwide, with all regions having suffered "severe bleaching". 

Major ENSO events were recorded in the years 179093, 1828, 187678, 1891, 192526, 197273, 198283, 199798 and 20092010, with 1997-1998 episode being one of the strongest ever. ENSO Cycle: Recent Evolution, Current Status and Predictions. National Weather Service, Climate Prediction Center. 

== Climate networks ==
Analysis of El Nio events using climate networks shows the dynamics of the climate network is very sensitive to El Nio events. Many links in the network fail during El Nio events. 

==See also==

* La Nia
* Arctic oscillation
* Benguela Nio
* Indian Ocean Dipole
* Pacific Decadal Oscillation
* North Atlantic Oscillation
* Multivariate ENSO index
* 2013 Pacific typhoon season

==References==

* 

==Further reading==
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 

==External links==

* International Research Centre on El Nio-CIIFEN
* Latest ENSO updates & predictions from the International Research Institute for Climate and Society
* PO.DAAC's El Nio Animations
* National Academy of Sciences El Nio/La Nia article
* NOAA FAQ "What is ENSO?"
* Latest El Nio/La Nia Data from NASA
* Economic Costs of El Nio / La Nia and Economic Benefits from Improved Forecasting from "NOAA Socioeconomics" website initiative
* El-NioSouthern Oscillation
* El Nio and La Nia from the 1999 International Red Cross World Disasters Report by Eric J. Lyman.
* ENSO (El NioSouthern Oscillation)
* La Nia episodes in the Tropical Pacific
* NOAA announces 2004 El Nio
* NOAA El Nio Page
* Ocean Motion: El Nio
* SOI (Southern Oscillation Index)
* The Climate of Peru
* What is El Nio?
* What is La Nia?
* El-Nino, La-Nina, Southern Oscillation, ENSO
* Kelvin Wave Renews El Nio  NASA, Earth Observatory image of the day, 2010, March 21
* Animation of ENSO in Victoria, Australia
* Google Map of the El Nio Zone Zoom in on the ocean currents, wind currents, hydrothermal vents, volcanoes, tectonic plates, and weather related to the El Nio Zone.



[[Flute]]

A selection of flutes from around the world

The flute is a family of musical instrument of the woodwind group. Unlike woodwind instruments with reeds, a flute is an aerophone or reedless wind instrument that produces its sound from the flow of air across an opening. According to the instrument classification of HornbostelSachs, flutes are categorized as edge-blown aerophones.

A musician who plays the flute can be referred to as a flute player, a flautist, a flutist, or, less commonly, a fluter. "Fluter", The Free Dictionary by Farlex (Accessed 21 April 2013). "Fluter", Dictionary.com (Accessed 21 April 2013) Webster, Noah "fluter", Webster's Revised Unabridged Dictionary of the English Language; the Dictionary Proper Being the Authentic Ed. of Webster's International Dictionary of One Thousand Eight Hundred and Ninety, edited under the supervision of Noah Porter (Springfield, Mass.: G. & C. Merriam Co., 1913). The term flutenist, found in English up to the 18th century, is no longer used. 

Aside from the voice, flutes are the earliest known musical instruments. A number of flutes dating to about 43,000 to 35,000 years ago have been found in the Swabian Alb region of Germany. These flutes demonstrate that a developed musical tradition existed from the earliest period of modern human presence in Europe. . Citation on p. 248. 

==Etymology==
The word flute first entered the English language during the Middle English period, as floute, or else flowte, flo(y)te, Simpson, J. A. and Weiner, E. S. C. (eds.), "flute, n.1", Oxford English Dictionary, second edition. 20 vols. Oxford: Clarendon Press; New York: Oxford University Press, 1989. ISBN 0198611862. possibly from Old French flaute and from Old Provenal flat, or else from Old French flete, flate, flahute via Middle High German floite or Dutch fluit. Attempts to trace the word back to a Latin root have been pronounced "phonologically impossible" or "inadmissable". The first known use of the word flute was in the 14th century. According to the Oxford English Dictionary, this was in Geoffrey Chaucer's The Hous of Fame, ca. 1384. 

==History==

Chinese women playing flutes, from the 12th-century Song Dynasty remake of the Night Revels of Han Xizai, originally by Gu Hongzhong (10th century)
The oldest flute ever discovered may be a fragment of the femur of a juvenile cave bear, with two to four holes, found at Divje Babe in Slovenia and dated to about 43,000 years ago. However, this has been disputed. Flute History, UCLA. Retrieved June 2007. In 2008 another flute dated back to at least 35,000 years ago was discovered in Hohle Fels cave near Ulm, Germany. Ghosh, Pallab. (2009-06-25) BBC: 'Oldest musical instrument' found. BBC News. Retrieved on 2013-08-10. The five-holed flute has a V-shaped mouthpiece and is made from a vulture wing bone. The researchers involved in the discovery officially published their findings in the journal Nature, in August 2009. The discovery was also the oldest confirmed find of any musical instrument in history, until a redating of flutes found in Geienklsterle cave revealed them to be even older with an age of 42,000 to 43,000 years. 

The flute, one of several found, was found in the Hohle Fels cavern next to the Venus of Hohle Fels and a short distance from the oldest known human carving. On announcing the discovery, scientists suggested that the "finds demonstrate the presence of a well-established musical tradition at the time when modern humans colonized Europe". Scientists have also suggested that the discovery of the flute may help to explain "the probable behavioural and cognitive gulf between" Neanderthals and early modern human. 

A three-holed flute, 18.7 cm long, made from a mammoth tusk (from the Geienklsterle cave, near Ulm, in the southern German Swabian Alb and dated to 30,000 to 37,000 years ago) was discovered in 2004, and two flutes made from swan bones excavated a decade earlier (from the same cave in Germany, dated to circa 36,000 years ago) are among the oldest known musical instruments.
Panflute players. Cantigas de Santa Maria, mid-13th century, Spain
The image captures the elements of the verse and arranges them in tidy registers around the fluting Krishna, with gods riding on boatlike vessels above, ascetics seated to the right, and women in conversation at the left. Such compartmentalization is often used in early Central Indian painting to depict multiple spaces or scenes on a single flat

A playable 9,000-year-old Gudi (literally, "bone flute") was excavated from a tomb in Jiahu along with 29 defunct twins, The bone age flute. BBC. September 23, 1999. made from the wing bones of red-crowned cranes with five to eight holes each, in the Central Chinese province of Henan. 
The earliest extant Chinese transverse flute is a chi () flute discovered in the Tomb of Marquis Yi of Zeng at the Suizhou site, Hubei province, China. It dates from 433 BC, of the later Zhou Dynasty. It is fashioned of lacquered bamboo with closed ends and has five stops that are at the flute's side instead of the top. Chi flutes are mentioned in Shi Jing, compiled and edited by Confucius, according to tradition.

The earliest written reference to a flute is from a Sumerian-language cuneiform tablet dated to c. 26002700 BCE. 
Flutes are also mentioned in a recently translated tablet of the Epic of Gilgamesh, an epic poem whose development spanned the period of approximately 2100600 BCE. Additionally, a set of cuneiform tablets knows as the "musical texts" provide precise tuning instructions for seven scale of a stringed instrument (assumed to be a Babylonian lyre). One of those scales is named embbum, which is an Akkadian word for "flute". 

The Bible, in Genesis 4:21, cites Jubal as being the "father of all those who play the ugab and the kinnor". The former Hebrew term is believed by some to refer to some wind instrument, or wind instruments in general, the latter to a stringed instrument, or stringed instruments in general. As such, Jubal is regarded in the Judeo-Christian tradition as the inventor of the flute (a word used in some translations of this biblical passage). Judith Cohen, "Review of 'Music in Ancient Israel/Palestine: Archaeological, Written, and Comparative Sources', by Joachim Braun". Min-Ad: Israel Studies in Musicology Online. Vol. 3. (2004). http://www.biu.ac.il/hu/mu/min-ad04/BraunRev-2.pdf Elsewhere in the Bible, the flute is referred to as "chalil" (from the root word for "hollow"), in particular in 1 Samuel 10:5, 1 Kings 1:40, Isaiah 5:12 and 30:29, and Jeremiah 48:36. Strong's Hebrew Concordance, "chalil". http://biblesuite.com/hebrew/2485.htm Archeological digs in the Holy Land have discovered flutes from both the Bronze Age (c. 4000-1200 BCE) and the Iron Age (1200-586 BCE), the latter era "witness the creation of the Israelite kingdom and its separation into the two kingdoms of Israel and Judea." 

Some early flutes were made out of tibias (shin bones). The flute has also always been an essential part of Indian culture and mythology, and the cross flute believed by several accounts to originate in India as Indian literature from 1500 BCE has made vague references to the cross flute. 

==Acoustics==

A flute produces sound when a stream of air directed across a hole in the instrument creates a vibration of air at the hole. Flute acoustics, UNSW. Retrieved June 2007. The air stream across this hole creates a Bernoulli, or siphon. This excites the air contained in the usually cylindrical resonant cavity within the flute. The player changes the pitch of the sound produced by opening and closing holes in the body of the instrument, thus changing the effective length of the resonator and its corresponding resonant frequency. By varying the air pressure, a flute player can also change the pitch of a note by causing the air in the flute to resonate at a harmonic rather than the fundamental frequency without opening or closing any holes.

To be louder, a flute must use a larger resonator, a larger air stream, or increased air stream velocity. A flute's volume can generally be increased by making its resonator and tone holes larger. This is why a police whistle, a form of flute, is very wide for its pitch, and why a pipe organ can be far louder than a concert flute: a large organ pipe can contain several cubic feet of air, and its tone hole may be several inches wide, while a concert flute's air stream measures a fraction of an inch across.

The air stream must be directed at the correct angle and velocity, or else the air in the flute will not vibrate. In fippled or ducted flutes, a precisely formed and placed windway will compress and channel the air to the labium ramp edge across the open window. In the pipe organ, this air is supplied by a regulated blower. In non-fipple flutes, the air stream is shaped and directed by the player's lips, called the embouchure. This allows the player a wide range of expression in pitch, volume, and timbre, especially in comparison to fipple/ducted flutes. However, it also makes an end-blown flute or transverse flute considerably more difficult for a beginner to produce a full sound on than a ducted flute, such as the recorder. Transverse and end-blown flutes also take more air to play, which requires deeper breathing and makes circular breathing a considerably trickier proposition.

Generally, the quality called timbre or "tone colour" varies because the flute can produce harmonics in different proportions or intensities. The tone color can be modified by changing the internal shape of the bore, such as the conical taper, or the diameter-to-length ratio. A harmonic is a frequency that is a whole number multiple of a lower register, or "fundamental" note of the flute. Generally the air stream is thinner (vibrating in more modes), faster (providing more energy to excite the air's resonance), and aimed across the hole less deeply (permitting a more shallow deflection of the air stream) in the production of higher harmonics or upper partials.

Head joint geometry appears particularly critical to acoustic performance and tone, but there is no clear consensus on a particular shape amongst manufacturers. Acoustic impedance of the embouchure hole appears the most critical parameter. Critical variables affecting this acoustic impedance include: chimney length (hole between lip-plate and head tube), chimney diameter, and radii or curvature of the ends of the chimney and any designed restriction in the "throat" of the instrument, such as that in the Japanese Nohkan Flute.

A study in which professional players were blindfolded could find no significant differences between instruments made from a variety of different metals. In two different sets of blind listening, no instrument was correctly identified in a first listening, and in a second, only the silver instrument was identified. The study concluded that there was "no evidence that the wall material has any appreciable effect on the sound color or dynamic range of the instrument".

==Categories==
Playing the zampoa, a Pre-Inca instrument and type of pan flute.

In its most basic form, a flute can be an open tube which is blown like a bottle. There are several broad classes of flutes. With most flutes, the musician blows directly across the edge of the mouthpiece, with 1/4 of their bottom lip covering the embouchure hole. However, some flutes, such as the whistle, gemshorn, flageolet, recorder, tin whistle, tonette, fujara, and ocarina have a duct that directs the air onto the edge (an arrangement that is termed a "fipple"). These are known as fipple flutes. The fipple gives the instrument a distinct timbre which is different from non-fipple flutes and makes the instrument easier to play, but takes a degree of control away from the musician.

Another division is between side-blown (or transverse) flutes, such as the Western concert flute, piccolo, fife, dizi and bansuri; and end-blown flutes, such as the ney, xiao, kaval, danso, shakuhachi, Anasazi flute and quena. The player of a side-blown flute uses a hole on the side of the tube to produce a tone, instead of blowing on an end of the tube. End-blown flutes should not be confused with fipple flutes such as the recorder, which are also played vertically but have an internal duct to direct the air flow across the edge of the tone hole.

Flutes may be open at one or both ends. The ocarina, xun, pan pipes, police whistle, and bosun's whistle are closed-ended. Open-ended flutes such as the concert flute and the recorder have more harmonics, and thus more flexibility for the player, and brighter timbres. An organ pipe may be either open or closed, depending on the sound desired.

Flutes may have any number of pipes or tubes, though one is the most common number. Flutes with multiple resonators may be played one resonator at a time (as is typical with pan pipes) or more than one at a time (as is typical with double flutes).

Flutes can be played with several different air sources. Conventional flutes are blown with the mouth, although some cultures use nose flutes. The flue pipes of organs, which are acoustically similar to duct flutes, are blown by bellows or fans.

===Western concert flute===

An illustration of a Western concert flute

The Western concert flute, a descendant of the 19th-century German flute, is a transverse treble flute that is closed at the top. An embouchure hole is positioned near the top, across and into which the player blows. The flute has circular tone holes, larger than the finger holes of its baroque predecessors. The size and placement of tone holes, the key mechanism, and the fingering system used to produce the notes in the flute's range were evolved from 1832 to 1847 by Theobald Boehm, and greatly improved the instrument's dynamic range and intonation over those of its predecessors. Boehm, Theobald. (1964). The Flute and Flute-Playing in Acoustical, Technical, and Artistic Aspects, translated by Dayton C. Miller, with a new introduction by Samuel Baron. New York: Dover Publications. ISBN 0-486-21259-9, pp. 812. With some refinements (and the rare exception of the Kingma system and other custom adapted fingering systems), Western concert flutes typically conform to Boehm's design, known as the Boehm system. Beginner's flutes are normally made of nickel, silver or brass that is silver plated, while professionals use solid silver, gold, and sometimes platinum instruments. There are also modern wooden bodies instruments usually with silver or gold keywork. The wood is usually African Blackwood.

The standard concert flute is pitched in the key of C and has a range of three octaves starting from middle C (or one half-step lower, when a B foot is attached to the instrument). This means that the concert flute is one of the highest common orchestra and concert band instruments.

===Other sizes of modern flutes===
The piccolo, plays an octave higher than the regular treble flute. Lower members of the flute family include the G alto and C bass flutes that are used occasionally, and are pitched a perfect fourth and an octave below the concert flute, respectively. Parts are written for alto flute more frequently than for bass. The contrabass, double contrabass, and hyperbass are other rare forms of the flute pitched two, three, and four octaves below middle C respectively.

Other sizes of flutes and piccolos are used from time to time. A rarer instrument of the modern pitching system is the treble G flute. Instruments made according to an older pitch standard, used principally in wind-band music, include D piccolo, soprano flute (the primary instrument, equivalent to today's concert C flute), F alto flute, and B bass flute.

===Indian flutes===
A Carnatic eight-holed bamboo flute

An eight-holed classical Indian bamboo flute.

The bamboo flute is an important instrument in Indian classical music, and developed independently of the Western flute. The Hindu God Lord Krishna is traditionally considered a master of the bamboo flute. The Indian flutes are very simple compared to the Western counterparts; they are made of bamboo and are keyless. 

Two main varieties of Indian flutes are currently used. The first, the Bansuri, has six finger holes and one embouchure hole, and is used predominantly in the Hindustani music of Northern India. The second, the Venu or Pullanguzhal, has eight finger holes, and is played predominantly in the Carnatic music of Southern India. Presently, the eight-holed flute with cross-fingering technique is common among many Carnatic flutists. Prior to this, the South Indian flute had only seven finger holes, with the fingering standard developed by Sharaba Shastri, of the Palladam school, at the beginning of the 20th century. 
Temple car carving of Krishna playing flute, suchindram, Tamil Nadu, India

The quality of the flute's sound depends somewhat on the specific bamboo used to make it, and it is generally agreed that the best bamboo grows in the Nagercoil area in South India. 

===Chinese flutes===
In China there are many varieties of dizi (), or Chinese flute, with different sizes, structures (with or without a resonance membrane) and number of holes (from 6 to 11) and intonations (different keys). Most are made of bamboo, but can come in wood, jade, bone, and iron. One peculiar feature of the Chinese flute is the use of a resonance membrane mounted on one of the holes that vibrates with the air column inside the tube. It gives the flute a bright sound.

Commonly seen flutes in the modern Chinese orchestra are the bangdi (), qudi (), xindi (), and dadi (). The bamboo flute played vertically is called the xiao (), which is a different category of wind instrument in China.

===Japanese flutes===
The Japanese flute, called the fue, , encompasses a large number of musical flutes from Japan, both of the end-blown and transverse varieties.

===Sodina and suling===
A sodina player in Madagascar

The sodina is an end-blown flute found throughout the island state of Madagascar, located in the Indian Ocean off southeastern Africa. One of the oldest instruments on the island, it bears close resemblance to end-blown flutes found in Southeast Asia and particularly Indonesia, where it is known as the suling, suggesting the predecessor to the sodina was carried to Madagascar in outrigger canoes by the island's original settlers emigrating from Borneo. An image of the most celebrated contemporary sodina flutist, Rakoto Frah (d. 2001), was featured on the local currency. 

===Sring===
The sring (also called blul) is a relatively small, end-blown flute with a nasal tone quality Pahlevanian, Alina. (2001). "Armenia I: Folk Music, 3: Epics", in The New Grove Dictionary of Music and Musicians, second edition, edited by Stanley Sadie and John Tyrrell. London: Macmillan Publishers. found in the Caucasus region of Eastern Armenia. It is made of wood or cane, usually with seven finger holes and one thumb hole, producing a diatonic scale. One Armenian musicologist believes the sring to be the most characteristic of national Armenian instruments. Komitas, Vardapet. (1994). Grakan nshkhark' Komitas Vardapeti beghun grch'n: npast m Komitas Vardapeti srbadasman harts'in, edited by Abel Oghlukian. Montreal: Ganatahayots' Aajnordarani "K'ristonakan Usman ew Astuatsabanut'ean Kedron". 

==See also==
*Diple
*Frula
*Hand flute
*Irish flute
*Jazz flute
*Kaval
*Native American flute
*Palendag
*Pipe and tabor
*Tin whistle
*Washint

==References==

==Bibliography==

*Buchanan, Donna A. 2001. "Bulgaria II: Traditional Music, 2: Characteristics of Pre-Socialist Musical Culture, 18001944, (iii): Instruments". The New Grove Dictionary of Music and Musicians, second edition, edited by Stanley Sadie and John Tyrrell. London: Macmillan Publishers.
*Crane, Frederick. 1972. Extant Medieval Musical Instruments: A Provisional Catalogue by Types. Iowa City: University of Iowa Press. ISBN 0-87745-022-6
*Galway, James. 1982. Flute. Yehudi Menuhin Music Guides. London: Macdonald. ISBN 0-356-04711-3 (cloth); ISBN 0-356-04712-1 (pbk.) New York: Schirmer Books. ISBN 0-02-871380-X Reprinted 1990, London: Kahn & Averill London: Khan & Averill ISBN 1-871082-13-7
*Phelan, James, The Complete Guide to the and Piccolo (Burkart-Phelan, Inc., 2004)
*Putnik, Edwin. 1970. The Art of Flute Playing. Evanston, Illinois: Summy-Birchard Inc. Revised edition 1973, Princeton, New Jersey and Evanston, Illinois. ISBN 0-87487-077-1
*Toff, Nancy. 1985. The Flute Book: A Complete Guide for Students and Performers. New York: Charles's Scribners Sons. ISBN 0-684-18241-6 Newton Abbot: David & Charles. ISBN 0-7153-8771-5 Second Edition 1996, New York: Oxford University Press. ISBN 0-19-510502-8
*Wye, Trevor. 1988. Proper Flute Playing: A Companion to the Practice Books. London: Novello. ISBN 0-7119-8465-4
*Maclagan,Susan J. "A Dictionary for the Modern Flutist", 2009, Lanham, Maryland, USA: Scarecrow Press. ISBN 978-0-8108-6711-6

==External links==

*Essay on the Jiahu flutes from the Heilbrunn Timeline of Art History at The Metropolitan Museum of Art
*A selection of historic flutes from around the world at The Metropolitan Museum of Art
** Walking Stick Flute and Oboe, Georg Henrich Scherer, Butzbach, ca. 175057
** Glass flute, Claude Laurent, Paris, 1813
** Porcelain flute, Saxony, 17601790
** Pair of ivory flutes by Johann Wilhelm Oberlender, mid 18th century, Nuremberg
** Flute by Garion, Paris, ca. 17201740
*nature.com New flutes document the earliest musical tradition in southwestern Germany
* 
* Flute acoustics Resources on flute acoustics from the University of New South Wales.

 



[[Flageolet (disambiguation)]]

A flageolet is a musical instrument.

Flageolet may also refer to:
* Flageolet (organ stop), a pipe organ component
* A type of Common bean
* A type of stringed instrument harmonic

==See also==
* Whistle register, the highest register of the human voice lying above the modal register and falsetto register



[[Association football]]

Association football, more commonly known as football or soccer, See: Names for association football is a sport played between two teams of eleven players with a spherical ball. It is played by 250 million players in over 200 countries, making it the world's most popular sport. The game is played on a rectangular field with a goal at each end. The object of the game is to score by using any part of the body besides the arms and hands to get the ball into the opposing goal.

The goalkeepers are the only players allowed to touch the ball with their hands or arms while it is in play and then only in their penalty area. Outfield players mostly use their feet to strike or pass the ball, but may use their head or torso to strike the ball instead. The team that scores the most goals by the end of the match wins. If the score is level at the end of the game, either a draw is declared or the game goes into extra time and/or a penalty shootout depending on the format of the competition. The Laws of the Game were originally codified in England by The Football Association in 1863. Association football is governed internationally by the International Federation of Association Football (FIFA; ) which organises a World Cup every four years. 

==History==

File:One Hundred Children in the Long Spring.jpg|thumb|Children playing cuju, a precursor of football, in Song Dynasty China]

Two of the earliest recorded football type games from Europe include Episkyros from Ancient Greece and the Roman version Harpastum, which similar to pre-codified "Mob Football" the forerunner of all modern football codes involved more handling the ball than kicking. http://www.rugbyfootballhistory.com/originsofrugby.htm The earliest competitive game to involve kicking a ball (rather than handling it) was cuju, which emerged in China during the Han dynasty (206 BC-220 AD). According to the historian Li You (55-135 AD), there were six players on each team, plus a referee and assistant "whose interpretations of rules must be constant." Players used their head, torso, chest and back (but not hands) to propel a ball towards a rectangular target while members of the opposing team attempted to block them. Near the end of the Tang Dynasty (618-906 AD) the original feather-filled ball was dispensed in favour of a ball containing an air-filled bladder "whose springiness and bounce brought entirely new technical and tactical dimensions to the game," according to FIFA. Rules and regulations underwent further standardisation during the Song Dynasty (960-1279). A manual written by Chen Yuanjing (1200-1266) laid out the technical dimensions of the playing field, including illustrations that show that the game was by then played with a goal formed by two posts and a net. Non-competitive games included kemari in Japan and woggabaliri in Australia. 

Notwithstanding any similarities with other games from around the world, FIFA recognise that no historical connection exists between Association football and any ball game played in antiquity outside Europe. http://www.fifa.com/classicfootball/history/the-game/Britain-home-of-football.html The modern rules of association football are based on the mid-19th century efforts to standardise the widely varying forms of football played in the public schools of England. The history of football in England dates back to at least the eighth century AD. 

The Cambridge Rules, first drawn up at Cambridge University in 1848, were particularly influential in the development of subsequent codes, including association football. The Cambridge Rules were written at Trinity College, Cambridge, at a meeting attended by representatives from Eton, Harrow, Rugby, Winchester and Shrewsbury schools. They were not universally adopted. During the 1850s, many clubs unconnected to schools or universities were formed throughout the English-speaking world, to play various forms of football. Some came up with their own distinct codes of rules, most notably the Sheffield Football Club, formed by former public school pupils in 1857, which led to formation of a Sheffield FA in 1867. In 1862, John Charles Thring of Uppingham School also devised an influential set of rules. 

These ongoing efforts contributed to the formation of The Football Association (The FA) in 1863, which first met on the morning of 26 October 1863 at the Freemasons' Tavern in Great Queen Street, London. The only school to be represented on this occasion was Charterhouse. The Freemason's Tavern was the setting for five more meetings between October and December, which eventually produced the first comprehensive set of rules. At the final meeting, the first FA treasurer, the representative from Blackheath, withdrew his club from the FA over the removal of two draft rules at the previous meeting: the first allowed for running with the ball in hand; the second for obstructing such a run by hacking (kicking an opponent in the shins), tripping and holding. Other English rugby clubs followed this lead and did not join the FA and instead in 1871 formed the Rugby Football Union. The eleven remaining clubs, under the charge of Ebenezer Cobb Morley, went on to ratify the original thirteen laws of the game. These rules included handling of the ball by "marks" and the lack of a crossbar, rules which made it remarkably similar to Victorian rules football being developed at that time in Australia. The Sheffield FA played by its own rules until the 1870s with the FA absorbing some of its rules until there was little difference between the games. 

The Royal Engineers team who reached the first FA Cup final in 1872 
The world's oldest football competition is the FA Cup, which was founded by C. W. Alcock and has been contested by English teams since 1872. The first official international football match also took place in 1872, between Scotland and England in Glasgow, again at the instigation of C. W. Alcock. England is also home to the world's first football league, which was founded in Birmingham in 1888 by Aston Villa director William McGregor. The original format contained 12 clubs from the Midlands and Northern England.

The laws of the game are determined by the International Football Association Board (IFAB). The Board was formed in 1886 after a meeting in Manchester of The Football Association, the Scottish Football Association, the Football Association of Wales, and the Irish Football Association. FIFA, the international football body, was formed in Paris in 1904 and declared that they would adhere to Laws of the Game of the Football Association. The growing popularity of the international game led to the admittance of FIFA representatives to the International Football Association Board in 1913. The board consists of four representatives from FIFA and one representative from each of the four British associations. 

Today, football is played at a professional level all over the world. Millions of people regularly go to football stadiums to follow their favourite teams, while billions more watch the game on television or on the internet. A very large number of people also play football at an amateur level. According to a survey conducted by FIFA published in 2001, over 240 million people from more than 200 countries regularly play football. Football has the highest global television audience in sport. 

In many parts of the world football evokes great passions and plays an important role in the life of individual fans, local communities, and even nations. R. Kapuscinski says that people who are polite, modest or even humble in Europe fall easily into rage with playing or watching soccer games. The Cte d'Ivoire national football team helped secure a truce to the nation's civil war in 2006 and it helped further reduce tensions between government and rebel forces in 2007 by playing a match in the rebel capital of Bouak, an occasion that brought both armies together peacefully for the first time. By contrast, football is widely considered to have been the final proximate cause for the Football War in June 1969 between El Salvador and Honduras. The sport also exacerbated tensions at the beginning of the Yugoslav Wars of the 1990s, when a match between Dinamo Zagreb and Red Star Belgrade degenerated into rioting in May 1990. 

==Etymology and names==

The rules of association football were codified in England by the Football Association in 1863 and the name association football was coined to distinguish the game from the other forms of football played at the time, specifically rugby football. The term soccer originated in England, first appearing in the 1880s as an Oxford "-er" abbreviation of the word "association". 

Within the English-speaking world, association football is now usually called football in the United Kingdom, and mainly soccer in Canada and the United States. Other countries, such as Australia, Ireland and New Zealand, may use either or both terms interchangeably.

==Gameplay==
A goalkeeper saving a close-range shot from inside the penalty area

Association football is played in accordance with a set of rules known as the Laws of the Game. The game is played using a spherical ball (of 28 in circumference in FIFA play), known as the football (or soccer ball). Two teams of eleven players each compete to get the ball into the other team's goal (between the posts and under the bar), thereby scoring a goal. The team that has scored more goals at the end of the game is the winner; if both teams have scored an equal number of goals then the game is a draw. Each team is led by a captain who has only one official responsibility as mandated by the Laws of the Game: to be involved in the coin toss prior to kick-off or penalty kicks. 

The primary law is that players other than goalkeepers may not deliberately handle the ball with their hands or arms during play, though they do use their hands during a throw-in restart. Although players usually use their feet to move the ball around, they may use any part of their body (notably, "heading" with the forehead) other than their hands or arms. Within normal play, all players are free to play the ball in any direction and move throughout the pitch, though the ball cannot be received in an offside position. 

A player executing a slide tackle to dispossess an opponent
In game play, players attempt to create goal-scoring opportunities through individual control of the ball, such as by dribbling, passing the ball to a team-mate, and by taking shots at the goal, which is guarded by the opposing goalkeeper. Opposing players may try to regain control of the ball by intercepting a pass or through tackling the opponent in possession of the ball; however, physical contact between opponents is restricted. Football is generally a free-flowing game, with play stopping only when the ball has left the field of play or when play is stopped by the referee for an infringement of the rules. After a stoppage, play recommences with a specified restart. 

At a professional level, most matches produce only a few goals. For example, the 200506 season of the English Premier League produced an average of 2.48 goals per match. The Laws of the Game do not specify any player positions other than goalkeeper, but a number of specialised roles have evolved. Broadly, these include three main categories: strikers, or forwards, whose main task is to score goals; defenders, who specialise in preventing their opponents from scoring; and midfielders, who dispossess the opposition and keep possession of the ball in order to pass it to the forwards on their team. Players in these positions are referred to as outfield players, in order to distinguish them from the goalkeeper. These positions are further subdivided according to the area of the field in which the player spends most time. For example, there are central defenders, and left and right midfielders. The ten outfield players may be arranged in any combination. The number of players in each position determines the style of the team's play; more forwards and fewer defenders creates a more aggressive and offensive-minded game, while the reverse creates a slower, more defensive style of play. While players typically spend most of the game in a specific position, there are few restrictions on player movement, and players can switch positions at any time. The layout of a team's players is known as a formation. Defining the team's formation and tactics is usually the prerogative of the team's manager. 

==Laws==

There are 17 laws in the official Laws of the Game, each containing a collection of stipulation and guidelines. The same laws are designed to apply to all levels of football, although certain modifications for groups such as juniors, seniors, women and people with physical disabilities are permitted. The laws are often framed in broad terms, which allow flexibility in their application depending on the nature of the game. The Laws of the Game are published by FIFA, but are maintained by the International Football Association Board (IFAB). In addition to the seventeen laws, numerous IFAB decisions and other directives contribute to the regulation of football.

===Players, equipment, and officials===

File:Howard Webb3.jpg|thumb|The referee officiates in a football match] 
Each team consists of a maximum of eleven players (excluding substitutes), one of whom must be the goalkeeper. Competition rules may state a minimum number of players required to constitute a team, which is usually seven. Goalkeepers are the only players allowed to play the ball with their hands or arms, provided they do so within the penalty area in front of their own goal. Though there are a variety of positions in which the outfield (non-goalkeeper) players are strategically placed by a coach, these positions are not defined or required by the Laws. 

The basic equipment or kit players are required to wear includes a shirt, shorts, socks, footwear and adequate shin guards. An athletic supporter and protective cup is highly recommended for male players by medical experts and professionals. Headgear is not a required piece of basic equipment, but players today may choose to wear it to protect themselves from head injury. Players are forbidden to wear or use anything that is dangerous to themselves or another player, such as jewellery or watches. The goalkeeper must wear clothing that is easily distinguishable from that worn by the other players and the match officials. 

A number of players may be replaced by substitutes during the course of the game. The maximum number of substitutions permitted in most competitive international and domestic league games is three, though the permitted number may vary in other competitions or in friendly matches. Common reasons for a substitution include injury, tiredness, ineffectiveness, a tactical switch, or timewasting at the end of a finely poised game. In standard adult matches, a player who has been substituted may not take further part in a match. IFAB recommends that "that a match should not continue if there are fewer than seven players in either team." Any decision regarding points awarded for abandoned games is left to the individual football associations. 

A game is officiated by a referee, who has "full authority to enforce the Laws of the Game in connection with the match to which he has been appointed" (Law 5), and whose decisions are final. The referee is assisted by two assistant referees. In many high-level games there is also a fourth official who assists the referee and may replace another official should the need arise. 

===Pitch===

See Imperial version)]]
As the Laws were formulated in England, and were initially administered solely by the four British football associations within IFAB, the standard dimensions of a football pitch were originally expressed in imperial units. The Laws now express dimensions with approximate metric equivalents (followed by traditional units in brackets), though popular use tends to continue to use traditional units in English-speaking countries with a relatively recent history of metrication (or only partial metrication), such as Britain. 

The length of the pitch for international adult matches is in the range of 100110 m (110120 yd) and the width is in the range of 6475 m (7080 yd). Fields for non-international matches may be 90120 m (100130 yd) length and 4590 m (50100 yd) in width, provided that the pitch does not become square. In 2008, the IFAB initially approved a fixed size of 105 m (344 ft) long and 68 m (223 ft) wide as a standard pitch dimension for international matches; however, this decision was later put on hold and was never actually implemented. 

The longer boundary lines are touchlines, while the shorter boundaries (on which the goals are placed) are goal lines. A rectangular goal is positioned at the middle of each goal line. The inner edges of the vertical goal posts must be 7.32 m (8 yd) apart, and the lower edge of the horizontal crossbar supported by the goal posts must be 2.44 m (8 ft) above the ground. Nets are usually placed behind the goal, but are not required by the Laws. 

In front of the goal is the penalty area. This area is marked by the goal line, two lines starting on the goal line 16.5 m (18 yd) from the goalposts and extending 16.5 m (18 yd) into the pitch perpendicular to the goal line, and a line joining them. This area has a number of functions, the most prominent being to mark where the goalkeeper may handle the ball and where a penalty foul by a member of the defending team becomes punishable by a penalty kick. Other markings define the position of the ball or players at kick-offs, goal kicks, penalty kicks and corner kicks. 

===Duration and tie-breaking methods===
A standard adult football match consists of two periods of 45 minutes each, known as halves. Each half runs continuously, meaning that the clock is not stopped when the ball is out of play. There is usually a 15-minute half-time break between halves. The end of the match is known as full-time. The referee is the official timekeeper for the match, and may make an allowance for time lost through substitutions, injured players requiring attention, or other stoppages. This added time is called additional time in FIFA documents, but most commonly referred to as stoppage time or injury time, while loss time can also be used as a synonym. The duration of stoppage time is at the sole discretion of the referee. The referee alone signals the end of the match. In matches where a fourth official is appointed, toward the end of the half the referee signals how many minutes of stoppage time he intends to add. The fourth official then informs the players and spectators by holding up a board showing this number. The signalled stoppage time may be further extended by the referee. Added time was introduced because of an incident which happened in 1891 during a match between Stoke and Aston Villa. Trailing 10 and with just two minutes remaining, Stoke were awarded a penalty. Villa's goalkeeper kicked the ball out of the ground, and by the time the ball had been recovered, the 90 minutes had elapsed and the game was over. The Sunday Times Illustrated History Of Football Reed International Books Limited 1996. p.11 ISBN 1-85613-341-9 The same law also stands that the duration of either half is extended until the penalty kick to be taken or retaken is completed, thus no game shall end with a penalty to be taken. 

Some football competitions use a penalty shootout to decide the winner if a match ends as a draw
In league competitions, games may end in a draw. In knockout competitions where a winner is required various methods may be employed to break such a deadlock, some competitions may invoke replays. For example in the FA Cup prior to the semi-finals. A game tied at the end of regulation time may go into extra time, which consists of two further 15-minute periods. If the score is still tied after extra time, some competitions allow the use of penalty shootouts (known officially in the Laws of the Game as "kicks from the penalty mark") to determine which team will progress to the next stage of the tournament. Goals scored during extra time periods count toward the final score of the game, but kicks from the penalty mark are only used to decide the team that progresses to the next part of the tournament (with goals scored in a penalty shootout not making up part of the final score). 

In competitions using two-legged matches, each team competes at home once, with an aggregate score from the two matches deciding which team progresses. Where aggregates are equal, the away goals rule may be used to determine the winners, in which case the winner is the team that scored the most goals in the leg they played away from home. If the result is still equal, extra time and potentially a penalty shootout are required. 

In the late 1990s and early 2000s, the IFAB experimented with ways of creating a winner without requiring a penalty shootout, which was often seen as an undesirable way to end a match. These involved rules ending a game in extra time early, either when the first goal in extra time was scored (golden goal), or if one team held a lead at the end of the first period of extra time (silver goal). Golden goal was used at the World Cup in 1998 and 2002. The first World Cup game decided by a golden goal was France's victory over Paraguay in 1998. Germany was the first nation to score a golden goal in a major competition, beating Czech Republic in the final of Euro 1996. Silver goal was used in Euro 2004. Both these experiments have been discontinued by IFAB. 

===Ball in and out of play===

Under the Laws, the two basic states of play during a game are ball in play and ball out of play. From the beginning of each playing period with a kick-off until the end of the playing period, the ball is in play at all times, except when either the ball leaves the field of play, or play is stopped by the referee. When the ball becomes out of play, play is restarted by one of eight restart methods depending on how it went out of play:
A player takes a free kick, while the opposition form a "wall" to try to block the ball
* Kick-off: following a goal by the opposing team, or to begin each period of play. 
* Throw-in: when the ball has crossed the touchline; awarded to opposing team to that which last touched the ball. 
* Goal kick: when the ball has wholly crossed the goal line without a goal having been scored and having last been touched by a player of the attacking team; awarded to defending team. 
* Corner kick: when the ball has wholly crossed the goal line without a goal having been scored and having last been touched by a player of the defending team; awarded to attacking team. 
* Indirect free kick: awarded to the opposing team following "non-penal" fouls, certain technical infringements, or when play is stopped to caution or dismiss an opponent without a specific foul having occurred. A goal may not be scored directly (without the ball first touching another player) from an indirect free kick. 
* Direct free kick: awarded to fouled team following certain listed "penal" fouls. A goal may be scored directly from a direct free kick.
* Penalty kick: awarded to the fouled team following a foul usually punishable by a direct free kick but that has occurred within their opponent's penalty area. 
* Dropped-ball: occurs when the referee has stopped play for any other reason, such as a serious injury to a player, interference by an external party, or a ball becoming defective. 

===Misconduct===

====On-field====

A player scores a penalty kick given after an offence is committed inside the penalty area
A foul occurs when a player commits an offence listed in the Laws of the Game while the ball is in play. The offences that constitute a foul are listed in Law 12. Handling the ball deliberately, tripping an opponent, or pushing an opponent, are examples of "penal fouls", punishable by a direct free kick or penalty kick depending on where the offence occurred. Other fouls are punishable by an indirect free kick. 

The referee may punish a player's or substitute's misconduct by a caution (yellow card) or dismissal (red card). A second yellow card at the same game leads to a red card, and therefore to a dismissal. A player given a yellow card is said to have been "booked", the referee writing the player's name in his official notebook. If a player has been dismissed, no substitute can be brought on in their place. Misconduct may occur at any time, and while the offences that constitute misconduct are listed, the definitions are broad. In particular, the offence of "unsporting behaviour" may be used to deal with most events that violate the spirit of the game, even if they are not listed as specific offences. A referee can show a yellow or red card to a player, substitute or substituted player. Non-players such as managers and support staff cannot be shown the yellow or red card, but may be expelled from the technical area if they fail to conduct themselves in a responsible manner. 

Rather than stopping play, the referee may allow play to continue if doing so will benefit the team against which an offence has been committed. This is known as "playing an advantage". The referee may "call back" play and penalise the original offence if the anticipated advantage does not ensue within "a few seconds". Even if an offence is not penalised due to advantage being played, the offender may still be sanctioned for misconduct at the next stoppage of play. 

The referee's decision in all on-pitch matters is considered final. The score of a match cannot be altered after the game, even if later evidence shows that decisions (including awards/non-awards of goals) were incorrect.

====Off-field====

Along with the general administration of the sport, football associations and competition organisers also enforce good conduct in wider aspects of the game, dealing with issues such as comments to the press, clubs' financial management, doping, age fraud and match fixing. Most competitions enforce mandatory suspensions for players which are sent off in a game. For example, see the The Football Association's rules regarding player suspensions in FA competitions: Some on-field incidents, if considered very serious (such as allegations of racial abuse), may result in competitions deciding to impose heavier sanctions than those normally associated with a red card. For example, the English Premier League fined and levied an 8-match suspension on Luis Surez for racially abusing Patrice Evra Some associations allow for appeals against player suspensions incurred on-field if clubs feel a referee was incorrect or unduly harsh. 

Sanctions for such infractions may be levied on individuals or on to clubs as a whole. Penalties may include fines, points deductions (in league competitions) or even expulsion from competitions. For example, the English and Scottish leagues will often deduct 10 points from a team that enters financial administration. Among other administrative sanctions are penalties against game forfeiture. Teams that had forfeited a game or had been forfeited against would be awarded a technical loss or win.

==Governing bodies==

 Headquarters of FIFA, the world governing body of football
The recognised international governing body of football (and associated games, such as futsal and beach soccer) is FIFA. The FIFA headquarters are located in Zrich, Switzerland. Six regional confederations are associated with FIFA; these are: 

* Asia: Asian Football Confederation (AFC)
* Africa: Confederation of African Football (CAF)
* Europe: Union of European Football Associations (UEFA)
* North/Central America & Caribbean: Confederation of North, Central American and Caribbean Association Football (CONCACAF)
* Oceania: Oceania Football Confederation (OFC)
* South America: Confederacin Sudamericana de Ftbol/Confederao Sul-americana de Futebol (South American Football Confederation; CONMEBOL)

National associations oversee football within individual countries. These are generally synonymous with sovereign states, (for example: the Fdration Camerounaise de Football in Cameroon) but also include a smaller number of associations responsible for sub-national entities or autonomous regions (for example the Scottish Football Association in Scotland). 208 national associations are affiliated both with FIFA and with their respective continental confederations. 

While FIFA is responsible for arranging competitions and most rules related to international competition, the actual Laws of the Game are set by the International Football Association Board, where each of the UK Associations has one vote, while FIFA collectively has four votes. 

==International competitions==

A minute's silence before an international match
The major international competition in football is the World Cup, organised by FIFA. This competition takes place over every four years. Approximately 190200 national teams compete in qualifying tournaments within the scope of continental confederations for a place in the finals. The finals tournament, which is held every four years, involves 32 national teams competing over a four-week period. The number of competing teams has varied over the history of the competition. The most recent changed was in 1998, from 24 to 32. The most recent edition of the tournament is the 2014 FIFA World Cup, which is being held in Brazil from 12 June to 13 July 2014.

There has been a football tournament at every Summer Olympic Games since 1900, except at the 1932 games in Los Angeles. Before the inception of the World Cup, the Olympics (especially during the 1920s) had the same status as the World Cup. Originally, the event was for amateurs only; however, since the 1984 Summer Olympics, professional players have been permitted, albeit with certain restrictions which prevent countries from fielding their strongest sides. The Olympic men's tournament is played at Under-23 level. In the past the Olympics have allowed a restricted number of over-age players per team;. A women's tournament was added in 1996; in contrast to the men's event, full international sides without age restrictions play the women's Olympic tournament. 

Spanish footballers celebrating winning the UEFA European Championship 
After the World Cup, the most important international football competitions are the continental championships, which are organised by each continental confederation and contested between national teams. These are the European Championship (UEFA), the Copa Amrica (CONMEBOL), African Cup of Nations (CAF), the Asian Cup (AFC), the CONCACAF Gold Cup (CONCACAF) and the OFC Nations Cup (OFC). The FIFA Confederations Cup is contested by the winners of all six continental championships, the current FIFA World Cup champions and the country which is hosting the Confederations Cup. This is generally regarded as a warm-up tournament for the upcoming FIFA World Cup and does not carry the same prestige as the World Cup itself. The most prestigious competitions in club football are the respective continental championships, which are generally contested between national champions, for example the UEFA Champions League in Europe and the Copa Libertadores in South America. The winners of each continental competition contest the FIFA Club World Cup. 

==Domestic competitions==

Borussia Dortmund against Schalke in the Bundesliga, the top football league in Germany
The governing bodies in each country operate league systems in a domestic season, normally comprising several divisions, in which the teams gain points throughout the season depending on results. Teams are placed into tables, placing them in order according to points accrued. Most commonly, each team plays every other team in its league at home and away in each season, in a round-robin tournament. At the end of a season, the top team is declared the champion. The top few teams may be promoted to a higher division, and one or more of the teams finishing at the bottom are relegated to a lower division. 

The teams finishing at the top of a country's league may be eligible also to play in international club competitions in the following season. The main exceptions to this system occur in some Latin American leagues, which divide football championships into two sections named Apertura and Clausura (Spanish for Opening and Closing), awarding a champion for each. The majority of countries supplement the league system with one or more "cup" competitions organised on a knock-out basis.

Some countries' top divisions feature highly paid star players; in smaller countries and lower divisions, players may be part-timers with a second job, or amateurs. The five top European leagues  the Bundesliga (Germany), Premier League (England), La Liga (Spain), Serie A (Italy), and Ligue 1 (France)  attract most of the world's best players and each of the leagues has a total wage cost in excess of 600 million/763 million/US$1.185 billion. 

==Women's association football==

Two players trying to gain control of the ball in the Frauen-Bundesliga
Women have been playing association football since the first recorded women's games in the late 19th century. It has traditionally been associated with charity games and physical exercise, particularly in the United Kingdom. This perception began to change in the 1970s with the breakthrough of organised women's association football. Association football is the most prominent team sport for women in several countries, and one of the few women's team sports with professional leagues.

The growth in women's football has seen major competitions being launched at both national and international level mirroring the male competitions. Women's football faced many struggles throughout its fight for right. It had a "golden age" in the United Kingdom in the early 1920s when crowds reached 50,000 at some matches; this was stopped on 5 December 1921 when England's Football Association voted to ban the game from grounds used by its member clubs. The FA's ban was rescinded in December 1969 with UEFA voting to officially recognise women's football in 1971. The FIFA Women's World Cup was inaugurated in 1991 and has been held every four years since. 

==Variants and casual play==

File:Street Football Morocco.jpg|thumb|Children in Morocco playing an informal football match in a public space]
Variants of football have been codified for reduced-sized teams (i.e. Five-a-side football) play in non-field environments (i.e. Beach soccer, Indoor soccer, and Futsal) and for teams with disabilities (i.e. Paralympic association football).

Bandy is a variant of hockey played on ice the size of a football pitch, to rules which are very much like the rules of association football. It is often nicknamed "the football of winter" and is played professionally in Russia and in Sweden.

One of the attractions of association football is that a casual game can be played with only minimal equipment  a basic game can be played on almost any open area of reasonable size with just a ball and items to mark the positions of two sets of goalposts. Such games can often have team sizes that vary considerably from 11-a-side, use a limited and/or modified subset of the official rules, and are likely to be self-officiated by the players.

==See also==

*Association football culture
*Association football tactics and skills
*List of association football clubs
*List of association football stadiums by country
*List of men's national association football teams
*List of women's national association football teams
*List of top association football goal scorers
*List of top association football goal scorers by country
*List of women's association football clubs
*Lists of association football players

==References==

==External links==

* Federation Internationale de Football Association (FIFA)
* The Laws of the Game (LOTG)
* The Rec.Sport.Soccer Statistics Foundation (RSSSF)
* 

 



[[First National]]

First National film poster from 1918
First National was an association of independent theater owners in the United States that expanded from exhibiting movies to distributing them and eventually to producing them as a movie studio called First National Pictures, Inc. (19171936). In 1928, it merged with Warner Bros.

== Early history ==
The First National Exhibitors' Circuit was founded in 1917 by the merger of 26 of the biggest first-run cinema chains in the United States of America, eventually controlling over 600 cinemas, more than 200 of them so-called "first run" houses (as opposed to the "second run" neighborhood theaters to which films moved when their first-run box office receipts dwindled).

First National was the brainchild of Thomas L. Tally, who was reacting to the overwhelming influence of Paramount Pictures, which dominated the market. In 1912, he thought that a conglomerate of theaters throughout the nation could buy and/or produce and distribute their own films. Tally was soon partnered with West Virginian James Dixon Williams, and they formed First National Exhibitors Circuit. Among the more than two dozen exhibitors who attended the first meeting held in New York on April 25, 1917, were Frederick Dahnken of the Turner and Dahnken Circuit in San Francisco, Harry O. Schwalbe of Philadelphia, Samuel Roxy Rothafel of New York, Earl H. Hulsey of Dallas, and Nathan H. Gordon of Boston.

Between 1917 and 1918, they made contracts with Mary Pickford and Charlie Chaplin, the first million-dollar deals in the history of film. For the latter, his contract allowed him to produce his films without a set release schedule. However, the production of the feature film The Kid ran so long that the company started to complain. To address their concerns Chaplin invited the exhibitors to the studio, and they were so impressed by the project and charmed by the players, especially co-star Jackie Coogan, that they agreed to be patient. That patience was ultimately rewarded with The Kid becoming a major critical and box office success. 

==Rivalry with Paramount==
Adolph Zukor of Paramount Pictures was threatened by First National's financial power and its control over the lucrative first-run theaters and decided to enter the cinema business as well. With a $10 million investment, Paramount built its own chain of first-run movie theaters after a secret plan to merge with First National failed. Ironically, this led to the foundation of United Artists by Douglas Fairbanks, D. W. Griffith, Pickford, and Chaplin and to the loss of First National's biggest stars.

First National Exhibitors' Circuit was reincorporated in 1919 as Associated First National Pictures, Inc. and its subsidiary Associated First National Theatres, Inc., with 5,000 independent theater owners as members. "New Incorporations," The New York Times, November 18, 1919, p. 25. "Picture Plays and People," The New York Times, February 1, 1920, p. XX4. 

In the early 1920s, Paramount attempted a hostile takeover, buying several of First National's member firms.

Associated First National Pictures expanded from only distributing films to producing them in 1924 and changed its corporate name to First National Pictures, Inc. "New Incorporations," The New York Times, May 6, 1924, p. 36. It built its 62 acre (0.25 km2) studio lot in Burbank in 1926. "First National Properties," The Wall Street Journal, May 21, 1926, p. 16. The Motion Picture Theatre Owners of America and the Independent Producers' Association declared war in 1925 on what they termed a common enemy&mdash;the "film trust" of Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer, Paramount, and First National, which they claimed dominated the industry not only by producing and distributing motion pictures but also by entering into exhibition as well. "Theatre Owners Open War on Hays," The New York Times, May 12, 1925, p. 14. 

==Merger with Warner Bros.==
With the success of The Jazz Singer and The Singing Fool, Warner Bros. purchased a majority interest in First National in September 1928. Warner Bros. held 42,000 shares of common stock out of 72,000 outstanding shares while Fox Pictures held 21,000 shares; 12,000 shares were publicly held. "Warner Buys First National", The Wall Street Journal, September 27, 1928, p. 3. Fox sold its shares of First National to Warner Bros. in November 1929. "Fox Holdings in First National Pictures Sold," The Washington Post, November 4, 1929, p. 3. Warner Bros. acquired access to First National's affiliated chain of theaters, while First National acquired access to Vitaphone sound equipment. But the trademarks were kept separate, and films by First National continued to be credited solely to "First National Pictures" until 1936. Although both studios produced "A" and "B" budget pictures, generally the prestige productions, costume dramas, and musicals were made by Warner Bros., while First National specialized in modern comedies, dramas, and crime stories. Short subjects were made by yet another affiliated company, The Vitaphone Corporation (which took its name from the sound process).

In July 1936, stockholders of First National Pictures, Inc. (primarily Warner Bros.) voted to dissolve the corporation and distribute its assets among the stockholders in line with a new tax law which provided for tax-free consolidations between corporations. "Film Concern Dissolves," The New York Times, July 12, 1936, p. F1. 

From 1941 to 1958, most Warner Bros. films bore the combined trademark "A Warner Bros.-First National Picture." American Film Institute Catalog of Motion Pictures, volumes F4 and F5. 

==Notable First National productions==
Made before the merger with Warner Bros. Pictures in 1936.
1925 film poster
* Tarzan of the Apes (1918, distributor) Films of the Golden Age, A History of First National Pictures IMDB, Company credits for Tarzan of the Apes 
* A Virtuous Vamp (1919) produced by and starring Constance Talmadge
* Smilin' Through (1922)
* The Brass Bottle (1923)
* The Isle of Lost Ships (1923)
* Ashes of Vengeance (1923)
* Flaming Youth (1923)
* So Big (1924)
* The Sea Hawk (1924)
* Cytherea (1924) part-Technicolor film
* The Lost World (1925)
* We Moderns (1925)
* Ella Cinders (1926)
* Twinkletoes (1926)
* Irene (1926) part-Technicolor film
* Camille (1926)
* Her Wild Oat (1927)
* The Stolen Bride (1927)
* Oh, Kay! (1928)
* Lilac Time (1928)
After Purchase by Warner Bros.
* The Divine Lady (1929)
* Synthetic Sin (1929)
* Footlights and Fools (1929)
* The Dawn Patrol (1930)
* Kismet (1930)
* Five Star Final (1931)
* Little Caesar (1931)
* Cabin in the Cotton (1932)
* Doctor X (1932)
* The Dark Horse (1932)
* Silver Dollar (1932)
* 20,000 Years in Sing Sing (1932)
* Two Seconds (1932)
* Union Depot (1932)
* Convention City (1933)
* The Little Giant (1933)
* The World Changes (1933)
* Wonder Bar (1934)
* The Irish in Us (1935)
* Hollywood Hotel (1937)

==See also==
* United States v. Paramount Pictures, Inc.
==Footnotes==
*Jeff Codori (2012), Colleen Moore; A Biography of the Silent Film Star, McFarland Publishing,(Print ISBN 978-0-7864-4969-9, EBook ISBN 978-0-7864-8899-5).

==References==

==External links==
* 
*The Lost Films of First National Pictures
*Freebase, First National: Films distributed



[[Francis Ford Coppola]]

Francis Ford Coppola (; born April 7, 1939 ) is an American film director, producer and screenwriter. He was part of the New Hollywood wave of filmmaking.

In 1970, he won the Academy Award for Best Original Screenplay as co-writer, with Edmund H. North, of Patton (1970). His directorial prominence was cemented with the release in 1972 of The Godfather, a film which revolutionized movie-making in the gangster genre, earning praise from both critics and the public before winning three Academy Awardsincluding his second Oscar (Best Adapted Screenplay, with Mario Puzo), Best Picture, and his first nomination for Best Director.

He followed with The Godfather Part II in 1974, which became the first sequel to win the Academy Award for Best Picture. Highly regarded by critics, it brought him three more Academy Awards: Best Adapted Screenplay, Best Director and Best Picture, and made him the second director, after Billy Wilder, to be honored three times for the same film. 

The Conversation, which he directed, produced and wrote, was released that same year, winning the Palme d'Or at the 1974 Cannes Film Festival. He next directed 1979's Apocalypse Now. Notorious for its over-long and strenuous production, the film was nonetheless critically acclaimed for its vivid and stark depiction of the Vietnam War, winning the Palme d'Or at the 1979 Cannes Film Festival. Coppola is one of only eight filmmakers to win two Palme d'Or awards.

While a number of Coppola's ventures in the 1980s and 1990s were critically lauded, he has never quite achieved the same commercial success with films as in the 1970s. Featured Filmmaker: Francis Ford Coppola - IGN. Retrieved October 18, 2010. 

==Early life==
Coppola was born in Detroit, Michigan, to father Carmine Coppola, a flautist with the Detroit Symphony Orchestra, and mother Italia (ne Pennino). Coppola is the second of three children: his older brother was August Coppola, his younger sister is actress Talia Shire. Born into a family of Italian immigrant ancestry, his paternal grandparents came to the United States from Bernalda, Basilicata. His maternal grandfather, popular Italian composer Francesco Pennino, immigrated from Naples, Italy. Coppola received his middle name in honor of Henry Ford, not only because he was born in the Henry Ford Hospital but also because of his musician-father's association with the automobile manufacturer. At the time of Coppola's birth, his father was a flautist as well as arranger and assistant orchestra director for The Ford Sunday Evening Hour, an hour-long concert music radio series sponsored by the Ford Motor Company. Two years after Coppola's birth, his father was named principal flautist for the NBC Symphony Orchestra and the family moved to New York, settling in Woodside, Queens, where Coppola spent the remainder of his childhood.

Contracting polio as a boy, Coppola was bedridden for large periods of his childhood, allowing him to indulge his imagination with homemade puppet theater productions. Reading A Streetcar Named Desire at age 15 was instrumental in developing his interest in theater. Eager to be involved in film-craft, he created 8mm features edited from home movies with such titles as The Rich Millionaire and The Lost Wallet. As a child, Coppola was a mediocre student, but he was so much interested in technology and engineering that his friends nicknamed him "Science". Trained initially for a career in music, he became proficient on the tuba and won a music scholarship to the New York Military Academy. Overall, Coppola attended 23 other schools before he eventually graduated from the Great Neck North High School. He entered Hofstra College in 1955 with a major in theater arts. There he was awarded a scholarship in playwriting. This furthered his interest in directing theater despite the disapproval of his father, who wanted him to study engineering. Coppola was profoundly impressed after seeing Sergei Eisenstein's , especially with the movie's quality of editing. It was at this time Coppola decided he would go into cinema rather than theater. Coppola says he was tremendously influenced to become a writer early on by his brother, August, in whose footsteps he would also follow by attending both of his brother's alma maters: Hofstra and UCLA. Coppola also gives credit to the work of Elia Kazan and for its influence on him as a director. Amongst Coppola's classmates at Hofstra were James Caan, Lainie Kazan and radio artist Joe Frank. He later cast Lainie Kazan in One from the Heart and Caan in The Rain People and The Godfather.

While pursuing his bachelor's degree, Coppola was elected president of The Green Wig (the university's drama group) and the Kaleidoscopians (its musical comedy club). He then merged the two into The Spectrum Players and under his leadership, they staged a new production each week. Coppola also founded the cinema workshop at Hofstra and contributed prolifically to the campus literary magazine. He won three D. H. Lawrence Awards for theatrical production and direction and received a Beckerman Award for his outstanding contributions to the school's theater arts division. While a graduate student, one of his teachers was Dorothy Arzner, whose encouragement Coppola later acknowledged as pivotal to his film career. 

==Career==

===1960s===
Coppola enrolled in UCLA Film School for graduate work in film. There he directed a short horror film called The Two Christophers inspired by Edgar Allan Poe's "William Wilson", and Ayamonn the Terrible, a film about a sculptor's nightmares coming to life, before directing the experimental softcore comedy Tonight for Sure in 1962. 

At UCLA, Coppola met Jim Morrison. He later used Morrison's song "The End" in Apocalypse Now. 

The company that hired him for Tonight for Sure brought him back to re-cut a German film titled Mit Eva fing die Snde an directed by Fritz Umgelter. He added some new 3-D color footage and earned a writer's and director's credit for The Bellboy and the Playgirls, also a box-office failure. Coppola was hired as an assistant by Roger Corman and his first job for Corman was to dub and re-edit a Russian science fiction film, Nebo zovyot, which he turned into a sex-and-violence monster movie entitled Battle Beyond the Sun, released in 1962. Impressed by Coppola's perseverance and dedication, Corman hired him as dialogue director on Tower of London (1962), sound man for The Young Racers (1963) and associate producer of The Terror (1963). 

While on location in Ireland for The Young Racers in 1963, Corman, ever alert for an opportunity to produce a decent movie on a shoestring budget, persuaded Coppola to make a low-budget horror movie with funds left over from the movie. Coppola wrote a brief draft story idea in one night, incorporating elements from Hitchcock's Psycho, and the result impressed Corman enough to give him the go-ahead. On a budget of $40,000 ($20,000 from Corman and $20,000 from another producer who wanted to buy the movie's English rights), Coppola directed in a period of nine days Dementia 13, his first feature from his own screenplay. The film recouped its expenses and later became a cult film among horror buffs. It was on the sets of Dementia 13 that he met his future wife Eleanor Jessie Neil.

In 1965, Coppola won the annual Samuel Goldwyn Award for the best screenplay (Pilma, Pilma) written by a UCLA student. This secured him a job as a scriptwriter with Seven Arts. In between, he co-wrote the scripts for This Property Is Condemned (1966) and Is Paris Burning? (1966). However, with fame still eluding him and partly out of desperation, Coppola bought the rights to the David Benedictus novel You're a Big Boy Now and fused it with a story idea of his own, resulting in You're a Big Boy Now (1966). This was his UCLA thesis project that also received a theatrical release via Warner Bros. This movie brought him some critical acclaim and eventually his Master of Fine Arts Degree from UCLA School of Theater, Film and Television in 1967. "Profile: Francis Ford Coppola", UCLA School of Theater, Film, and Television, Executive Board 

Following the success of You're a Big Boy Now, Coppola was offered the reins of the movie version of the Broadway musical Finian's Rainbow, starring Petula Clark in her first American film and veteran Fred Astaire. Producer Jack Warner was nonplussed by Coppola's shaggy-haired, bearded, "hippie" appearance and generally left him to his own devices. He took his cast to the Napa Valley for much of the outdoor shooting, but these scenes were in sharp contrast to those obviously filmed on a Hollywood soundstage, resulting in a disjointed look to the film. Dealing with outdated material at a time when the popularity of film musicals was already on the downslide, Coppola's result was only semi-successful, but his work with Clark no doubt contributed to her Golden Globe Best Actress nomination. The film introduced to him George Lucas, who became his lifelong friend as well as production assistant in his next film The Rain People in 1969. It was written, directed and initially produced by Coppola himself, though as the movie advanced, he exceeded his budget and the studio had to underwrite the remainder of the movie. The film won the Golden Shell at the 1969 San Sebastian Film Festival.

In 1969, Coppola took it upon himself to subvert the studio system which he felt had stifled his visions, intending to produce mainstream pictures to finance off-beat projects and give first-time directors their chance to direct. He decided he would name his future studio "Zoetrope" after receiving a gift of zoetropes from Mogens Scot-Hansen, founder of a studio called Lanterna Film and owner of a famous collection of early motion picture-making equipment. While touring Europe, Coppola was introduced to alternative filmmaking equipment and inspired by the bohemian spirit of Lanterna Film, he decided he would build a deviant studio that would conceive and implement creative, unconventional approaches to filmmaking. Upon his return home, Coppola and George Lucas searched for a mansion in Marin County to house the studio. However, in 1969, with equipment flowing in and no mansion found yet, the first home for Zoetrope Studio became a warehouse in San Francisco on Folsom Street. The studio went on to become an early adopter of digital filmmaking, including some of the earliest uses of HDTV. In his book The American Cinema, Andrew Sarris wrote, " is probably the first reasonably talented and sensibly adaptable directorial talent to emerge from a university curriculum in film-making... may be heard from more decisively in the future." Sarris, Andrew (1968). The American Cinema (Paperback ed.). New York, NY: EP Dutton and Co., Inc. p. 210. 

===1970s===
Coppola epitomized a group of filmmakers known as the "New Hollywood" that emerged in the early 1970s with ideas that challenged conventional film-making. The group included Steven Spielberg, Martin Scorsese, Brian De Palma, Terrence Malick, Robert Altman, Woody Allen, William Friedkin, Philip Kaufman and George Lucas. 

====Patton (1970)====

Coppola co-wrote the script for Patton in 1970 along with Edmund H. North. This earned him his first Academy Award for Best Original Screenplay. However, it was not easy for Coppola to convince Franklin J. Schaffner that the opening scene would work. Coppola later revealed in an interview: 
"When the title role was offered to George C. Scott, he remembered having read Coppola's screenplay earlier. He stated flatly that he would accept the part only if they used Coppola's script. 'Scott is the one who resurrected my version,' says Coppola." 
The movie opens with Scott's rendering of Patton's famous military "Pep Talk" to members of the Third Army, set against a huge American flag. Coppola and North had to tone down Patton's actual language to avoid an R rating; in the opening monologue, the word "fornicating" replaced "fucking" when criticizing the The Saturday Evening Post. Over the years, this opening monologue has become an iconic scene and has spawned parodies in numerous films, political cartoons and television shows.

====The Godfather (1972)====

The release of The Godfather in 1972 was a milestone in cinema. The near 3-hour-long epic, which chronicled the saga of the Corleone family, received overwhelmingly positive reviews from critics and fetched Coppola the Academy Award for Best Adapted Screenplay, which he shared with Mario Puzo and two Golden Globe Awards: for Best Director and Best Screenplay. However, Coppola had to face a lot of difficulties while filming The Godfather. He was not Paramount's first choice to direct the movie; Italian director Sergio Leone was initially offered the job, but declined in order to direct his own gangster opus, Once Upon a Time in America. Peter Bogdanovich was then approached but he also declined the offer and made What's Up, Doc? instead; Bogdanovich has often said that he would have cast Edward G. Robinson in the lead had he accepted the film. According to Robert Evans, head of Paramount Pictures at the time, Coppola also did not initially want to direct the film because he feared it would glorify the Mafia and violence and thus reflect poorly on his Sicilian and Italian heritage; on the other hand, Evans specifically wanted an Italian-American to direct the film because his research had shown that previous films about the Mafia that were directed by non-Italians had fared dismally at the box office and he wanted to, in his own words, "smell the spaghetti". When Coppola hit upon the idea of making it a metaphor for American capitalism, however, he eagerly agreed to take the helm. The Kid Stays in the Picture (2002), documentary film about Evans' life 

There was disagreement between Paramount and Coppola on the issue of casting; Coppola stuck to his plan of casting Marlon Brando as Vito Corleone, though Paramount wanted either Ernest Borgnine or Danny Thomas. At one point, Coppola was told by the then-president of Paramount that "Marlon Brando will never appear in this motion picture". After pleading with the executives, Coppola was allowed to cast Brando only if he appeared in the film for much less salary than his previous films, perform a screen-test and put up a bond saying that he would not cause a delay in the production (as he had done on previous film sets). The Godfather DVD Collection documentary A Look Inside, Coppola chose Brando over Ernest Borgnine on the basis of Brando's screen test, which also won over the Paramount leadership. Brando later won an Academy Award for his portrayal, which he refused to accept. Coppola would later recollect: 
After it was released, the film received widespread praise. It went on to win multiple awards, including Academy Award for Best Adapted Screenplay for Coppola. The film routinely features at the top in various polls for the greatest movies ever. It has been selected for preservation in the United States National Film Registry. In addition, it was ranked third, behind Citizen Kane, and Casablanca on the initial AFI's 100 Years100 Movies list by the American Film Institute. It was moved up to second when the list was published again, in 2008. Director Stanley Kubrick believed that The Godfather was possibly the greatest movie ever made and had without question the best cast. Michael Herr for Vanity Fair "He watched The Godfather again the night before and was reluctantly suggesting for the tenth time that it was possibly the greatest movie ever made and certainly the best-cast." 

====The Conversation (1974)====

Coppola's next film, The Conversation, further cemented his position as one of the most talented auteurs of Hollywood. The movie was partly influenced by Michelangelo Antonionis Blowup (1966) Murch in Ondaatje, 2002, p. 152 and generated a lot of speculation and interest when news leaked that the film utilized the very same surveillance and wire-tapping equipment that members of the Nixon administration used to spy on political opponents prior to the Watergate scandal. Coppola insisted that this was purely coincidental. The script for The Conversation, was completed in the mid-1960s (before the election of Richard Nixon); the spying equipment used in the film was developed through research and use of technical advisers. Not by revelatory newspaper stories about the Watergate break-in. However, the audience interpreted the film to be a reaction to both the Watergate scandal and its fall-out. The movie was a critical success and Coppola won his first Palme d'Or at the 1974 Cannes Film Festival.

====The Great Gatsby (1974)====

During the filming of The Conversation, Coppola wrote the screenplay for The Great Gatsby. However, in the commentary track to the DVD of The Godfather Coppola states, "I don't think that script was made." Commentary track, The Godfather, The Godfather Collection 2008 Blu-ray, ASIN: B000NTPDSW, 

====The Godfather Part II (1974)====

Coppola shot The Godfather Part II parallel to The Conversation and it was the last major American motion picture to be filmed in Technicolor. George Lucas commented on the film after its five-hour-long preview, telling Coppola: "You have two films. Take one away, it doesn't work", referring to the movie's portrayal of two parallel storylines; one of a young Vito Corleone and the other of his son Michael. In the director's commentary on the DVD edition of the film (released in 2002), Coppola states that this film was the first major motion picture to use "Part II" in its title. Paramount was initially opposed to his decision to name the movie The Godfather Part II. According to Coppola, the studio's objection stemmed from the belief that audiences would be reluctant to see a film with such a title, as the audience would supposedly believe that, having already seen The Godfather, there was little reason to see an addition to the original story. However, the success of The Godfather Part II began the Hollywood tradition of numbered sequels. The movie was released in 1974 and went on to receive tremendous critical acclaim, with many deeming it superior to its predecessor. It was nominated for 11 Academy Awards and received 6 Oscars, including 3 for Coppola: Best Picture, Best Adapted Screenplay and Best Director.

The Godfather Part II is ranked as the #1 greatest movie of all time in TV Guide's "50 Best Movies of All Time" and is ranked at #7 on Entertainment Weekly's list of the "100 Greatest Movies of All Time". The film is also featured on movie critic Leonard Maltin's list of the "100 Must-See Films of the 20th Century", as well as Roger Ebert's "Great Movies" list. It was also featured on Sight & Sound's list of the ten greatest films of all time in 2002, ranking at #4. 

Coppola was the third director to have two nominations for Best Picture in the same year. Victor Fleming was the first in 1939 with Gone With the Wind and The Wizard of Oz; Alfred Hitchcock repeated the feat the next year with Foreign Correspondent and Rebecca. Since Coppola, two other directors have done the same: Herbert Ross in 1977 with The Goodbye Girl and The Turning Point, and Steven Soderbergh in 2000 with Erin Brockovich and Traffic. Coppola, however, is the only one to have produced the pictures.

====Apocalypse Now (1979)====

Following the success of The Godfather, The Conversation and The Godfather Part II, Coppola began filming Apocalypse Now, an adaptation of Conrads Heart of Darkness set in Cambodia during the Vietnam War (Coppola himself briefly appears as a TV news director). Before production of the film began, Coppola went to his mentor Roger Corman for advice about shooting in the Philippines, since Corman had filmed several pictures there. Coppola said that all the advice Corman offered was "Don't go". The production of the film was plagued by numerous problems, including typhoons, nervous breakdowns, the firing of Harvey Keitel, Martin Sheen's heart attack, extras from the Philippine military and half of the supplied helicopters leaving in the middle of scenes to go fight rebels and an unprepared Brando with a bloated appearance (which Coppola attempted to hide by shooting him in the shadows). It was delayed so often it was nicknamed Apocalypse When? The 1991 documentary film , directed by Eleanor Coppola (Francis's wife), Fax Bahr and George Hickenlooper, chronicles the difficulties the crew went through making Apocalypse Now and features behind-the-scenes footage filmed by Eleanor. After filming Apocalypse Now, Coppola famously stated: "We were in the jungle, there were too many of us, we had access to too much money, too much equipment and little by little, we went insane."

The film was overwhelmingly lauded by critics when it finally appeared in 1979 and was selected for the 1979 Cannes Film Festival, winning the Palme d'Or along with The Tin Drum, directed by Volker Schlndorff. When the film screened at Cannes, he quipped: "My film is not about Vietnam, it is Vietnam." Apocalypse Nows reputation has grown in time and it is now regarded by many as a masterpiece of the New Hollywood era and is frequently cited as one of the greatest movies ever made. Roger Ebert considers it to be the finest film on the Vietnam war and included it on his list for the 2002 Sight & Sound poll for the greatest movie of all time. 

In 2001, Coppola re-released Apocalypse Now as Apocalypse Now Redux, restoring several sequences lost from the original 1979 cut of the film, thereby expanding its length to 200 minutes.

===1980s===

====One from the Heart (1982)====

Apocalypse Now marked the end of the golden phase of Coppola's career. His musical fantasy One from the Heart, although pioneering the use of video-editing techniques which are standard practice in the film industry today, ended with a disastrous box-office gross of $636,796 against a US$26 million budget, far from enough to recoup the costs incurred in the production of the movie and he was forced to sell his 23-acre Zoetrope Studio in 1983. He would spend the rest of the decade working to pay off his debts. (Zoetrope Studios finally filed for Chapter 11 bankruptcy in 1990, after which its name was changed to American Zoetrope). In addition Coppola himself was forced into US bankruptcy court 3 times over the next 8 years.

====Hammett (1982)====

Following the disastrous One from the Heart, Coppola co-directed Hammett along with Wim Wenders in the same year. Although Coppola was not credited for his effort, according to one source, "by the time the final version was released in 1982, only 30 percent of Wenders' footage remained and the rest was completely reshot by Coppola, whose mere 'executive producer' credit is just a technicality." 

====The Outsiders (1983)====

In 1983, he directed The Outsiders, a film adaptation of the novel of the same name by S. E. Hinton. Coppola credited his inspiration for making the film to a suggestion from middle school students who had read the novel. The Outsiders is notable for being the breakout film for a number of young actors who would go on to become major stars. These included major roles for Matt Dillon, Ralph Macchio and C. Thomas Howell. Also in the cast were Patrick Swayze, Rob Lowe, Emilio Estevez, Diane Lane and Tom Cruise. Matt Dillon and several others also starred in Coppola's related film, Rumble Fish, which was also based on a S. E. Hinton novel and filmed at the same time as The Outsiders on-location in Tulsa, Oklahoma. Carmine Coppola wrote and edited the musical score, including the title song "Stay Gold", which was based upon a famous Robert Frost poem and performed for the movie by Stevie Wonder. The film was a moderate box-office success, drawing a revenue of $25 million against a budget of $10 million. 

====Rumble Fish (1983)====

Rumble Fish was based on the novel of the same name by S. E. Hinton, who also co-wrote the screenplay. Shot in black-and-white as an homage to German expressionist films, Rumble Fish centres on the relationship between a revered former gang leader (Mickey Rourke) and his younger brother, Rusty James (Matt Dillon). The film bombed at the box office, earning a meagre $2.5 million against a budget of $10 million and once again aggravated Coppola's financial troubles.

====The Cotton Club (1984)====

In 1984 Coppola directed the Robert Evans-produced The Cotton Club. The film was nominated for several awards, including Golden Globes for Best Director and Best Picture (Drama) and the Oscars for Best Film Editing and Best Art-Direction. However, the film failed miserably at the box-office, recouping only $25.9 million of the $47.9 million privately invested by brothers Fred and Ed Doumani. Greatest Box-Office Bombs, Disasters and Flops of All-Time. Retrieved October 18, 2010. 

====Rip Van Winkle (1984)====

The same year he directed an episode of Faerie Tale Theatre entitled Rip Van Winkle, where Harry Dean Stanton played the lead role. 

====Captain EO (1986)====

In 1986, along with producer George Lucas, he was able to indulge himself by making Captain EO, a 17-minute space fantasy for Disney theme parks starring pop superstar Michael Jackson. At a cost of about one million dollars per minute of film, it was therefore, minute-for-minute, the most expensive motion picture made at the time. 

====Peggy Sue Got Married (1986)====

In 1986 Coppola released the comedy Peggy Sue Got Married starring Kathleen Turner, Coppola's nephew Nicolas Cage and Jim Carrey. Much like The Outsiders and Rumble Fish, Peggy Sue Got Married centered around teenage youth. The film earned Coppola positive feedback and provided Kathleen Turner her first and only Oscar nomination. It was the first box-office success for Coppola since Apocalypse Now and the film ranked number 17 on Entertainment Weeklys list of "50 Best High School Movies". 

====Gardens of Stone (1987)====

The following year, Coppola re-teamed with James Caan for Gardens of Stone, but the film was overshadowed by the death of Coppola's eldest son Gian-Carlo Coppola during the film's production. The movie was not a critical success and performed poorly at the box office, earning only $5.6 million against a budget of $13 million. 

====Tucker: The Man and His Dream (1988)====

Coppola directed Tucker: The Man and His Dream the following year. A biopic based on the life of Preston Tucker and his attempt to produce and market the Tucker '48, Coppola had originally conceived the project as a musical with Marlon Brando after the release of The Godfather Part II. Ultimately it was Jeff Bridges who played the role of Preston Tucker. Budgeted at $24 million, the film received positive reviews and earned three nominations at the 62nd Academy Awards, although its $19.65 million box office was a disappointment. Two awards came its way: Martin Landau won the Golden Globe for Best Supporting Actor and Dean Tavoularis took BAFTA's honors for Best Production Design.

====New York Stories (1989)====

In 1989 Coppola teamed up with fellow Oscar-winning directors Martin Scorsese and Woody Allen for an anthology film called New York Stories. Coppola directed the Life Without Zo segment, starring his sister Talia Shire and also co-wrote the film with his daughter Sofia Coppola. Life Without Zo was mostly panned by critics and was generally considered the segment that brought the film's overall quality down. Hal Hinson of The Washington Post wrote a particularly scathing review, stating that "It's impossible to know what Francis Coppola's Life Without Zo is. Co-written with his daughter Sofia, the film is a mystifying embarrassment; it's by far the director's worst work yet." 

===1990s===

====The Godfather Part III (1990)====

Francis Ford Coppola at the 1996 Cannes Film Festival
In 1990, he released the third and final chapter of The Godfather series: The Godfather Part III. Coppola successfully managed to get Al Pacino, Diane Keaton and Talia Shire to return to the franchise, but Robert Duvall refused to reprise his role as Tom Hagen over salary disagreements. While not as critically acclaimed as the first two films, it was still a box office success, earning a revenue of $136 million against a budget of $54 million. Some reviewers criticized the casting of Coppola's daughter Sofia, who had stepped into the leading role of Mary Corleone which had been abandoned by Winona Ryder just as filming began. The Godfather Part III. Retrieved October 18, 2010. Despite this, The Godfather Part III went on to gather 7 Academy Award nominations, including Best Director and Best Picture. The film failed to win any of these awards, the only film in the trilogy to do so.

====Bram Stoker's Dracula (1992)====

In 1992, Coppola directed and produced Bram Stoker's Dracula. Adapted from Bram Stoker's novel, it was intended to be more faithful to the book than previous film adaptations. Coppola cast Gary Oldman in the film's title role, with Keanu Reeves, Winona Ryder and Anthony Hopkins in supporting roles. The movie became a box-office hit, grossing $82,522,790 domestically, making it the 15th highest-grossing film of the year. It fared much better overseas grossing $133,339,902 for a total worldwide gross of $215,862,692 against a budget of $40 million, Movie Dracula - Box Office Data, News, Cast Information from The Numbers making it the 9th highest grossing film of the year worldwide. The film won Academy Awards for Costume Design, Makeup and Sound Editing.

====Jack (1996)====

Coppola's next project was Jack, which was released on August 9, 1996. It starred Robin Williams as Jack Powell, a ten-year-old boy whose cells are growing at four times the normal rate, so at the age of ten he looks like a 40-year-old man. With Diane Lane, Brian Kerwin and Bill Cosby, Jack also featured Jennifer Lopez, Fran Drescher and Michael McKean in supporting roles. Although a moderate box-office success, grossing $58 million domestically on an estimated $45 million budget, it was panned by critics, many of whom disliked the film's abrupt contrast between actual comedy and tragic melodrama. It was also unfavourably compared with the 1988 film Big, in which Tom Hanks also played a child in a grown man's body. Most critics felt that the screenplay was poorly written, not funny and the dramatic material was unconvincing and unbelievable. Other critics felt that Coppola was too talented to be making this type of film. Although ridiculed for making the film, Coppola has defended it, saying he is not ashamed of the final cut of the movie. He had been friends with Robin Williams for many years and had always wanted to work with him as an actor. When Williams was offered the screenplay for Jack he said he would only agree to do it if Coppola agreed to sign on as director.

====The Rainmaker (1997)====

The last film Coppola directed in the 90s, The Rainmaker was based on the 1995 novel of the same name by John Grisham. An ensemble courtroom drama, the film was well received by critics, earning an 88% rating on Rotten Tomatoes. The Rainmaker reviews at Rotten Tomatoes Roger Ebert gave The Rainmaker three stars out of four, remarking: "I have enjoyed several of the movies based on Grisham novels... but I've usually seen the storyteller's craft rather than the novelist's art being reflected. By keeping all of the little people in focus, Coppola shows the variety of a young lawyer's life, where every client is necessary and most of them need a lot more than a lawyer." The Rainmaker review by Roger Ebert, Chicago Sun-Times, November 21, 1997 James Berardinelli also gave the film three stars out of four, saying that "the intelligence and subtlety of The Rainmaker took me by surprise" and that the film "stands above any other filmed Grisham adaptation". The Rainmaker review by James Berardinelli, ReelViews.net, 1997 Grisham said of the film, "To me it's the best adaptation of any of books... I love the movie. It's so well done." The film grossed about $45 million domestically. This would be more than the estimated production budget of $40 million, but a disappointment compared with previous films adapted from a Grisham novel.

====Pinocchio dispute with Warner Bros.====
In the late 1980s, Coppola started considering concepts for a motion picture based upon the 19th century novel The Adventures of Pinocchio and in 1991, Coppola and Warner Bros. began discussing the project as well as two others: involving the life of J. Edgar Hoover and the children's novel The Secret Garden. These discussions led to negotiations for Coppola to both produce and direct the Pinocchio project for Warners, as well as The Secret Garden (which was made in 1993 and produced by American Zoetrope, but directed by Agnieszka Holland) and Hoover, which never came to fruition. (A film was eventually to be made by Clint Eastwood in 2011 as J. Edgar, which was distributed by Warners.)

But, in mid-1991, Coppola and Warners came to disagreement over the compensation to be paid to Coppola for his directing services on Pinocchio. The parties deferred this issue and finally a settlement was reached in 1998, when the jurors in the resultant court case awarded Coppola $20 million as compensation for losing the Pinocchio film project. However, they also awarded him a further $60 million in punitive damages on top, stemming from his charges that Warner Bros. sabotaged his intended version. This is the largest civil financial verdict ever against a Hollywood studio.

====Contact dispute with Carl Sagan/Warner Bros.====

During the filming of Contact on December 28, 1996, Coppola filed a lawsuit against Carl Sagan and Warner Bros. Sagan had died a week earlier and Coppola claimed that Sagan's novel Contact was based on a story the pair had developed for a television special back in 1975, titled First Contact. Under their development agreement, Coppola and Sagan were to split proceeds from the project with American Zoetrope and Children's Television Workshop Productions, as well as any novel Sagan would write. The TV program was never produced, but in 1985, Simon & Schuster published Sagan's Contact and Warner Bros. moved forward with development of a film adaptation. Coppola sought at least $250,000 in compensatory damages and an injunction against production or distribution of the film. Even though Sagan was shown to have violated some of the terms of the agreement, the case was dismissed in February 1998 because Coppola had waited too long to file suit. 

===2000s===

====Youth Without Youth (2007)====
Francis Ford Coppola at the 2001 Cannes Film Festival.

After a 10-year hiatus, Coppola returned to film direction with Youth Without Youth in 2007, based on the novella of the same name by Romanian author Mircea Eliade. The film was poorly reviewed, currently holding a 30% 'rotten' rating on Rotten Tomatoes. It was made for about $19 million and was given a limited release, only managing $2,624,759 at the box-office. As a result, Coppola announced his plans to produce his own films in order to avoid the marketing input that goes into most films and so trying to make them appeal to too wide an audience.

====Tetro (2009)====

In 2009, Coppola released Tetro. It was "set in Argentina, with the reunion of two brothers. The story follows the rivalries born out of creative differences passed down through generations of an artistic Italian immigrant family." The film received generally positive reviews from critics. On Metacritic, the film has an average metascore of 63% based on 19 reviews. Rotten Tomatoes reported that 68% of critics gave positive reviews based on 71 reviews with an average score of 5.6/10. Overall, the Rotten Tomatoes consensus was: "A complex meditation on family dynamics, Tetros arresting visuals and emotional core compensate for its uneven narrative." Roger Ebert of the Chicago Sun-Times gave the film 3 stars, praising the film for being "boldly operatic, involving family drama, secrets, generations at war, melodrama, romance and violence". Ebert also praised Vincent Gallo's performance and claimed that Alden Ehrenreich is "the new Leonardo DiCaprio". Todd McCarthy of Variety gave the film a B+ judging that "when Coppola finds creative nirvana, he frequently has trouble delivering the full goods." Richard Corliss of TIME gave the film a mixed review, praising Ehrenreich's performance, but claiming Coppola "has made a movie in which plenty happens, but nothing rings true." It has made $2,636,774 worldwide, against a budget of $5,000,000. Tetro (2009) - Box office / business 

===2010s===

====Twixt (2011)====

Twixt, starring Val Kilmer, Elle Fanning, Joanne Whalley and Bruce Dern and narrated by Tom Waits, was released to film festivals in late 2011 and was released theatrically in early 2012. It received critical acclaim in France. 

==Commercial ventures==

===American Zoetrope===
In 1971, Coppola and George Lucas co-produced the latter's first film, THX 1138. Shortly after completion of production they brought the finished film to Warner Bros., along with several other scripts for potential projects at their newly founded company, American Zoetrope. However, studio executives strongly disliked all the scripts, including THX and demanded that Coppola repay the $300,000 they had loaned him for the Zoetrope studio, as well as insisting on cutting five minutes from the film. The debt nearly closed Zoetrope and forced Coppola to reluctantly focus on The Godfather. 

===Zoetrope Virtual Studio===
His company American Zoetrope also administers the innovative Zoetrope Virtual Studio, a complete motion picture production studio for members only. Launched in June 2000, the culmination of more than four years work, it brings together departments for screenwriters, directors, producers and other filmmaker artists, plus new departments for other creative endeavours, offering powerful e-collaborative tools. Filmmaker members can workshop a wide range of film arts, including music, graphics, design and film and video.

===Inglenook Winery===
Coppola, with his family, expanded his business ventures to include winemaking in California's Napa Valley, when in 1975 he purchased the former home and adjoining vineyard of Gustave Niebaum in Rutherford, California using proceeds from the first movie in the Godfather trilogy. His winery produced its first vintage in 1977 with the help of his father, wife and children stomping the grapes barefoot and every year the family has a harvest party to continue the tradition. 

After purchasing the property, he produced wine under the Niebaum-Coppola label. When he purchased the former Inglenook Winery chateau in 1995, he renamed the winery Rubicon Estate Winery in 2006. On 11 April 2011, Coppola acquired the iconic Inglenook trademark paying more, he said, for the trademark than he did for the entire estate and announced that the estate would once again be known by its historic original name, Inglenook. Its grapes are now entirely organically grown and its Inglenook Chablis is one of the five most-widely-selling wines in US restaurants. 

===Francis Ford Coppola Presents===
Coppola is also the owner of Francis Ford Coppola Presents, a lifestyle brand under which he markets goods from companies he owns or controls. It includes films and videos, resorts, cafes, a literary magazine, a line of pastas and pasta sauces called Mammarella Foods and a winery.

====Winery====
The Francis Ford Coppola Winery near Geyserville, California, located on the former Chateau Souverain Winery, where he has opened a family-friendly facility, is influenced by the idea of the Tivoli Gardens in Copenhagen, with swimming pools, bocce courts and a restaurant. The winery displays several of Coppola's Oscars along with memorabilia from his movies, including Vito Corleones desk from The Godfather and a restored 1948 Tucker Sedan as used in .

====Resorts====
Palazzo Margherita in Bernalda, owned by Coppola
Included in the Francis Ford Coppola Presents lifestyle brand are several hotels and resorts around the world. The Blancaneaux Lodge in Belize, which from the early 1980s was a family retreat until it was opened to the public in 1993 as a 20-room luxury resort and The Turtle Inn, in Placencia, Belize, (both of which have won several prestigious awards including "Travel + Leisure's World's Best: Best Resort in Central & South America"); La Lancha in Lago Petn Itz, Guatemala; Jardin Escondido in Buenos Aires, Argentina and Palazzo Margherita in Bernalda, Italy. 

====Cafe and restaurant====
In San Francisco, Coppola owns a restaurant named Cafe Zoetrope, located in the Sentinel Building where American Zoetrope is based. It serves traditional Italian cuisine and wine from his personal estate vineyard and bottling company and for 14 years he co-owned the Rubicon restaurant in San Francisco along with Robin Williams and Robert De Niro. Rubicon closed in August 2008. 

====Literary publications====
He brought out the San Francisco-based City Magazine in the 1970s, but lost $1.5 million on this venture. 

In 1997, Coppola founded , a literary magazine devoted to short stories and design. The magazine publishes fiction by emerging writers alongside more recognizable names, such as Woody Allen, Margaret Atwood, Haruki Murakami, Alice Munro, Don DeLillo, Mary Gaitskill, and Edward Albee; as well as essays, including ones from Mario Vargas Llosa, David Mamet, Steven Spielberg, and Salman Rushdie. Each issue is designed, in its entirety, by a prominent artist, one usually working outside his / her expected field. Previous guest designers include Gus Van Sant, Tom Waits, Laurie Anderson, Marjane Satrapi, Guillermo del Toro, David Bowie, David Byrne, and Dennis Hopper. Coppola serves as founding editor and publisher of All-Story.

==Other ventures==
Coppola spends considerable time in Buenos Aires, Argentina, where he is establishing a subsidiary of his production company, Zoetrope.

He was the jury president at the 1996 Cannes Film Festival and he also took part as a special guest at the 46th International Thessaloniki Film Festival in Greece. 

Coppola stated that The Godfather Part IV was never made as Mario Puzo died before they had a chance to write the film. http://www.gq-magazine.co.uk/entertainment/articles/2011-03/15/gq-film-godfather-part-four/mario-puzo Andy Garcia has since claimed the film's script was nearly produced. 

Over the years, Francis Coppola has given political contributions to several candidates of the Democratic Party, including Mike Thompson and Nancy Pelosi for the U.S. House of Representatives and Barbara Boxer and Alan Cranston for the U.S. Senate. Francis Ford Coppola. Newsmeat. 

For quite some time, he had been planning to direct an epic movie named Megalopolis, a story about the aftermath and reconstruction of New York City after a mega-disaster, but after the city was hit by the real life disaster of September 11, the project was suddenly seen as being too sensitive. In 2007 he stated that "I have abandoned that as of now. I plan to begin a process of making one personal movie after another and if something leads me back to look at that, which I'm sure it might, I'll see what makes sense to me." 

==Personal life==
In February 1963, Coppola married Eleanor Neil, whom he met on the set of Dementia 13. They had three children: Gian-Carlo, born 1963; Roman, born 1965 and Sofia, born 1971.

Gian-Carlo Coppola, was in the early stages of a film production career when he was killed on May 26, 1986 in a speedboat accident. His daughter Gia was born to Jacqui de la Fontaine the January after his death and has followed her father and paternal relatives into the acting industry.

Sofia Coppola appeared in all three Godfather films, the first two movies uncredited: as the infant being baptised at the end of The Godfather; as a young child on board ship in The Godfather Part II and in a supporting role as Michael Corleone's daughter Mary in The Godfather Part III and is now an Academy Award-winning writer and nominated director. Her films include The Virgin Suicides and Lost in Translation. In 2004, she became the first American woman to be nominated for the Academy Award for Best Director for Lost in Translation.

Coppola's surviving son, Roman Coppola, is a filmmaker and music video director whose filmography includes the feature film CQ and music videos for The Strokes, as well as co-writing two Wes Anderson films, The Darjeeling Limited and Moonrise Kingdom. He was also second-unit director on Bram Stokers Dracula. Roman Coppola - IMDb 

Coppola often works with family members in his films: He cast his two sons in The Godfather as extras during the street fight scene involving Sonny and Carlo Rizzi and at Vito Corleones funeral.

His sister, Talia Shire, played Connie Corleone in all three Godfather films.

His father Carmine, a composer and professional musician, co-wrote much of the music for The Godfather, The Godfather Part II (for which he received an Oscar for Best Music, Original Dramatic Score, shared with Nino Rota) and The Godfather Part III (for which he was nominated for another Oscar for Best Original Song) and Apocalypse Now (for which he was nominated for a BAFTA Anthony Asquith Award for Film Music). In addition, Carmine and his wife Italia appear as the couple in the elevator scene in One from the Heart. Coppola is a cousin of the Italian conductor Riccardo Muti.

Coppola's nephew, Nicolas Cage, son of his brother, the academic August Coppola, starred in Coppola's film Peggy Sue Got Married and was featured in Rumble Fish and The Cotton Club.

Other famous members of Coppola's family include nephews Jason Schwartzman and Robert Schwartzman, sons of Talia Shire. Jason Schwartzman has starred in several films, including Rushmore and Slackers. He also co-wrote (along with director Wes Anderson and cousin Roman Coppola) and starred in the 2007 film The Darjeeling Limited. Jason Schwartzman is the lead singer in the solo project Coconut Records and was also the drummer in the band "Phantom Planet". Robert Schwartzman was the lead singer of the band Rooney. He appeared in The Princess Diaries as well as having small appearances in several films, including his cousin Sofia's The Virgin Suicides.

An interesting insight into Coppola's attitudes and feelings was given when answering the standard Marcel Proust questions at the conclusion of his interview episode of the Inside the Actors Studio TV programme (Season 7, Episode 14):
*What is your favourite word?: Hope - speranza
*What is your least favourite word?: No
*What turns you on?: Life, everything
*What turns you off?: For insurance purposes, kids can't go. I don't know the word. I hate it so much I don't even know it
*What sound or noise do you love?: The flute
*What sound or noise do you hate?: A gasoline leaf-blower
*What is your favourite curse-word?: I don't have a favourite curse word. If I curse in front of a woman, I give her $1.
*What profession, other than your own, would you like to attempt?: Architect
*What profession would you absolutely not like to do?: Executioner
*If Heaven exists, what would you like to hear God say when you arrive at the Pearly Gates?: Welcome 

==Honors==
*In the 2002 poll of the Sight and Sound publication, Coppola ranked #4 in the Directors' top ten directors of all time and #10 in the Critics' top ten directors of all time. 
*He featured at #17 in MovieMaker Magazine's 25 most influential directors of all-time. 
*He also ranked #9 in toptenreviews' list of top directors of all time and at #21 in Entertainment Weekly's top 50 directors of all time. 
*Four of Coppola's films, The Godfather; The Godfather Part II; Apocalypse Now and Patton featured in the Writers Guild of America, West list of 101 greatest screenplays ever. 
*Three of his films feature in AFI's 100 Years...100 Movies: The Godfather (at #2), Apocalypse Now (at #28) and The Godfather Part II (at #32). The Godfather also ranks at #11 in AFI's 100 Years100 Thrills. The following Coppola films were also nominated for the list: American Graffiti (1973) - Producer; The Conversation (1974) - Director/Producer/Screenwriter; Patton (1970) - Screenwriter.
*In 1991, he was honored with the Berlinale Camera at the Berlin International Film Festival. 
*In 1992, he was awarded a Golden Lion  Honorary Award at the Venice Film Festival. 
*In 1998, the Directors Guild of America honored him with a Lifetime Achievement Award. 
*He was honored with a special 50th anniversary award for his impressive career at the 2002 San Sebastin International Film Festival. 
*The same year he received a gala tribute from Film Society of Lincoln Center. 
*In 2003, he was awarded a Lifetime Achievement Award at the Denver Film Festival. 
*He was given an honorary award at the 2007 Antalya Golden Orange Film Festival. 
*In 2010, the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences decided to honor him with the Irving G. Thalberg Memorial Award at the 2nd Governor's Awards in November. The honor was bestowed on him on November 13, along with Jean-Luc Godard, Kevin Brownlow and Eli Wallach. 
*In 2013, he was awarded a Praemium Imperiale in the theatre/film category. 
*There are three generations of Oscar winners in the Coppola family: Carmine, his son Francis Ford, his granddaughter Sofia Coppola and his nephew Nicolas Cage. They are the second family to do so, the first being the Hustons - Walter Huston, John Huston and Anjelica Huston. 
*Coppola serves as the "Honorary Consul H. E. Francis Ford Coppola" in San Francisco for the Central American nation of Belize. Honorary Consulates of Belize from Ministry of Foreign Affairs (Belize) 
*George Lucas said that he based the Han Solo character in Star Wars on Coppola. 

==Filmography==

 Film 
 Year Title Director Screenwriter Producer Notes 
 1962 Tonight for Sure First film 
 1962 
 1963 Dementia 13 First feature film 
 1963 Uncredited co-director and associate producer 
 1966 You're a Big Boy Now Nominated  Palme d'OrNominated  Golden Globe Award for Best Motion Picture  Musical or ComedyNominated  Writers Guild of America Award for Best American Screenplay - Comedy 
 1966 Is Paris Burning? Co-written with Gore Vidal 
 1968 Finian's Rainbow Nominated  Golden Globe Award for Best Motion Picture  Musical or Comedy 
 1969 Golden Shell at San Sebastin International Film Festival 
 1970 Patton Academy Award for Best Writing (Original Screenplay) 
 1971 THX 1138 
 1972 Academy Award for Best PictureAcademy Award for Best Writing (Adapted Screenplay)David di Donatello for Best Foreign FilmDirectors Guild of America Award for Outstanding Achievement in Feature FilmGolden Globe Award for Best Motion Picture  DramaGolden Globe Award for Best DirectorGolden Globe Award for Best ScreenplayGolden Screen Award, GermanyKansas City Film Critics Circle Award for Best DirectorWriters Guild of America Award for Best Drama Adapted from Another MediumNominated  Academy Award for Best DirectorNominated  Best Audio Commentary at DVD Exclusive Awards 
 1973 American Graffiti Kansas City Film Critics Circle Award for Best FilmNominated  Academy Award for Best PictureGolden Globe Award for Best Motion Picture  Musical or Comedy 
 1974 The Great Gatsby 
 1974 Palme d'OrPrize of the Ecumenical Jury- Special MentionKansas City Film Critics Circle Award for Best DirectorNational Board of Review Award for Best DirectorNominated  Academy Award for Best Original ScreenplayNominated  BAFTA Award for Best DirectionNominated  BAFTA Award for Best ScreenplayNominated  Video Premiere Award at DVD Exclusive AwardsNominated  Directors Guild of America Award for Outstanding Achievement in Feature FilmNominated  Best Motion Picture ScreenplayNominated  Golden Globe Award for Best Motion PictureNominated  Golden Globe Award for Best DirectorNominated  Golden Globe Award for Best ScreenplayNominated  Writers Guild of America Award for Best Drama Written Directly for the ScreenNominated  Academy Award for Best Picture 
 1974 Academy Award for Best PictureAcademy Award for Best DirectorAcademy Award for Best Writing (Adapted Screenplay)Directors Guild of America Award for Outstanding Directorial Achievement in Feature FilmKansas City Film Critics Circle Award for Best DirectorNational Society of Film Critics Award for Best DirectorWriters Guild of America Award for Best Drama Adapted from Another MediumNominated  Golden Globe Award for Best Motion Picture  DramaNominated  Golden Globe Award for Best DirectorNominated  Golden Globe Award for Best Screenplay 
 1979 Apocalypse Now Palme d'OrFIPRESCI PrizeGolden Globe Award for Best DirectorBAFTA Award for Best DirectionDavid di Donatello for Best Foreign FilmGolden Screen Award, GermanyLondon Film Critics Circle Award for Best FilmNominated  Academy Award for Best PictureNominated  Academy Award for Best DirectorNominated  Academy Award for Best Adapted ScreenplayNominated  BAFTA Award for Best FilmNominated  Best Foreign Language Film at Cinema Brazil Grand Prize (2002)Nominated  Csar Award for Best Foreign FilmNominated  Directors Guild of America Award for Outstanding Achievement in Feature FilmNominated  Golden Globe Award for Best Motion PictureNominated  Grammy Award for Best Album of Original Score Written for a Motion Picture or Television SpecialNominated  Writers Guild of America Award for Best Drama Written Directly for the Screen 
 1979 The Black Stallion 
 1980 Kagemusha David di Donatello for Best Producer 
 1982 One from the Heart 
 1983 Nominated  Golden Prize at the 13th Moscow International Film Festival Nominated  Best Family Feature Motion Picture at the Young Artist Awards 
 1983 Koyaanisqatsi 
 1983 Rumble Fish FIPRESCI Prize at San Sebastin International Film FestivalOCIC Award at the San Sebastin International Film Festival 
 1984 Nominated  Golden Globe Award for Best DirectorNominated  Golden Globe Award for Best Motion PictureNominated  Japan Academy Prize for Outstanding Foreign Language Film 
 1986 Peggy Sue Got Married Nominated  Golden Globe Award for Best Motion Picture  Musical or ComedyNominated  Saturn Award for Best Science Fiction Film 
 1987 Gardens of Stone Nominated  Golden Prize at the Moscow International Film Festival Nominated  Political Film Society Award for Peace 
 1988 
 1989 New York Stories Co-director, co-writer 
 1990 Best Foreign Film (Mejor Pelcula Extranjera) at Fotogramas de PlataNominated  Academy Award for Best PictureNominated  Academy Award for Best DirectorNominated  Directors Guild of America Award for Outstanding Achievement in Feature FilmNominated  Golden Globe Award for Best Motion PictureNominated  Golden Globe Award for Best DirectorNominated  Golden Globe Award for Best Screenplay 
 1992 Bram Stoker's Dracula Saturn Award for Best DirectionSaturn Award for Best Horror FilmBest Foreign Film (Mejor Pelcula Extranjera) at Fotogramas de PlataNominated  Hugo Award for Best Dramatic Presentation 
 1993 
 1993 The Secret Garden Los Angeles Film Critics Association Award for Best MusicNominated  BAFTA Award for Best Actress in a Supporting Role (Maggie Smith) 
 1994 Frankenstein Nominated  Saturn Award for Best Horror Film 
 1995 Kidnapped 
 1996 Jack Nominated  Best Family Feature - Musical or Comedy at Young Artist Awards 
 1997 Nominated  USC Scripter AwardNominated  Political Film Society Award for Democracy 
 1999 
 1999 Sleepy Hollow 
 2001 CQ 
 Jeepers Creepers 
 2003 Jeepers Creepers 2 
 2006 Marie Antoinette 
 2007 Youth Without Youth 
 2009 Tetro 
 2010 Somewhere 
 2011 On the Road 
 2011 Twixt 
 2013 The Bling Ring 

==See also==

* Coppola family tree
* List of celebrities who own wineries and vineyards
* List of wine personalities

==References==

==Further reading==
* 

==External links==

* 
* 
* Francis Ford Coppola: Texas Monthly Talks, YouTube video posted on November 24, 2008
* 2007 Francis Ford Coppola Video Interview with InterviewingHollywood.com
* Bibliography at the University of California Berkeley Library
* "Perfecting the Rubicon: An interview with Francis Ford Coppola"
* "Back to Bernalda" by Coppola, T (International Herald Tribune Style Magazine), December 8, 2012
* 

 



[[Finland]]

Finland (; ; ), officially the Republic of Finland, "Republic of Finland", or "" in Finnish, "" in Swedish, and "" in Sami, is the long protocol name, which is however not defined by law. Legislation only recognizes the short name. is a Nordic country situated in the Fennoscandian region of Northern Europe. It is bordered by Sweden to the west, Norway to the north, Russia to the east, and Estonia to the south across the Gulf of Finland.

As of 2013, Finland's population was around 5.5 million, with the majority concentrated in its southern regions. In terms of area, it is the eighth largest country in Europe and the most sparsely populated country in the European Union. Finland is a parliamentary republic with a central government based in the capital of Helsinki, local governments in 336 municipalities and an autonomous region, the land Islands. About one million residents live in the Greater Helsinki area (consisting of Helsinki, Espoo, Vantaa and Kauniainen), which also produces a third of the country's GDP. Other large cities include Tampere, Turku, Oulu, Jyvskyl, Lahti, and Kuopio.

From the late 12th century until 1809, Finland was part of Sweden, a legacy reflected in the prevalence of the Swedish language and its official status. It then became an autonomous Grand Duchy within the Russian Empire until the Russian Revolution, which prompted the Finnish Declaration of Independence. This was followed by a civil war where the pro-Bolshevik "Reds" were defeated by the pro-conservative "Whites" with support from the German Empire. After a brief attempt to establish a monarchy, Finland became a republic. Finland's experience of World War II involved three separate conflicts: the Winter War (19391940) and Continuation War (19411944) against the Soviet Union and the Lapland War (19441945) against Nazi Germany. Following the end of the war, Finland joined the United Nations in 1955 and established an official policy of neutrality. Nevertheless, it remained fairly active on the world stage, joining the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) in 1969, the European Union in 1995, and the eurozone at its inception in 1999.

Finland was a relative latecomer to industrialisation, remaining a largely agrarian country until the 1950s. Thereafter, it rapidly developed an advanced economy while building an extensive Nordic-style welfare state, resulting in widespread prosperity and one of the highest per capita incomes in the world. Subsequently, Finland is a top performer in numerous metrics of national performance, including education, economic competitiveness, civil liberties, quality of life, and human development. Finland is also a member of the United Nations, the Council of Europe and the World Trade Organization.

==Etymology and concept of Finland==

===Etymology===

The name Finland appears on three rune-stones. Two were found in the Swedish province of Uppland and have the inscription finlonti (U 582). The third was found in Gotland, in the Baltic Sea. It has the inscription finlandi (G 319) and dates from the 13th century. The name can be assumed to be related to the tribe name Finns, which is mentioned first known time AD 98 (disputed meaning).

====Suomi====
The name Suomi (Finnish for "Finland") has uncertain origins, but a candidate for a cognate is the Proto-Baltic word *em, meaning "land". In addition to the close relatives of Finnish (the Finnic languages), this name is also used in the Baltic languages Latvian and Lithuanian. Alternatively, the Indo-European word *gm-on "man" (cf. Gothic guma, Latin homo) has been suggested, being borrowed as *oma. The word originally referred only to the province of Finland Proper, and later to the northern coast of Gulf of Finland, with northern regions such as Ostrobothnia still being sometimes excluded until later. Earlier theories suggested derivation from suomaa (fen land) or suoniemi (fen cape), and parallels between saame (Sami, a Finno-Ugric people in Lapland), and Hme (a province in the inland) were drawn, but these theories are now considered outdated. SUOMI(TTAVIA ETYMOLOGIOITA). kotikielenseura.fi 

===Concept===
In the 12th and 13th centuries, the term "Finland" mostly referred to the area around bo (Turku), a region that later became known as Finland Proper, while the other parts of the country were called Tavastia and Karelia, but which could also sometimes be collectively referred to as "sterland" (compare Norrland). (Medieval politics concerned tribes such as the Finns, the Tavastians and the Karelians more than geographical boundaries.)

In the 15th century, "Finland" became a common name for the whole land area to the east of the Bothnian Sea, possibly even including land, when the archipelago was seen as belonging to bo (Turku). What the term actually refers to can vary between sources, also the boundaries to the east and the north were not exact. A sort of establishment for Finland as a unity, if only in name, came when John III of Sweden called his duchy as the "grand duchy of Finland" (about 1580), as a strategy to meet the claims of the Russian tsar. The term became part of the title of the King of Sweden but had little practical meaning. The Finnish land area had the same standing as the area to the west of the Bothnian Sea and the Finnish part of the realm had the same representation in the parliament as the western part had. In 1637, Queen Christina named Per Brahe the Younger as Governor General of Finland, land, and Ostrobothnia (other parts of Sweden had also had governor generals).

The modern boundaries of Finland actually came to use only after the end of Sweden-Finland. What was signed over to Russia in 1809 was not so much a "Finland" as six counties, land, and a little part of Vsterbotten County. The boundary between the new Grand Duchy of Finland and the remaining part of Sweden could have been drawn along the river Kemijoki, which was the boundary between Vsterbotten County and sterbotten County (Ostrobothnia) at the timewhich the Swedish proposed in the peace negotiationsor along the river Kalix, thereby including the Finnish-speaking part of the Torne Valleywhich the Russians proposed. The boundary, which followed the Torne River and the Muonio River to the fells Saana and Halti in the northwest, was a compromise, which later became what the concept of Finland came to stand forat least after the tsar Alexander I of Russia permitted the parts of Finland located to the east of the Kymi River which were conquered by Russia in 1721 and 1743, called "Old Finland", to be administratively included in "New Finland" in 1812.

==History==

===Prehistory===

According to archaeological evidence, the area now comprising Finland was settled at the latest around 8500 BCE during the Stone Age as the ice sheet of the last ice age receded. The artifacts the first settlers left behind present characteristics that are shared with those found in Estonia, Russia and Norway. Herkules.oulu.fi. People, material, culture and environment in the north. Proceedings of the 22nd Nordic Archaeological Conference, University of Oulu, 1823 August 2004 Edited by Vesa-Pekka Herva Gummerus Kirjapaino The earliest people were hunter-gatherers, using stone tools. Dr. Pirjo Uino of the National Board of Antiquities, ThisisFinland"Prehistory: The ice recedesman arrives". Retrieved 24 June 2008. The first pottery appeared in 5200 BCE when the Comb Ceramic culture was introduced. History of Finland and the Finnish People from stone age to WWII. Retrieved 24 June 2008. The arrival of the Corded Ware culture in southern coastal Finland between 3000 and 2500 BCE may have coincided with the start of agriculture. Professor Frank Horn of the Northern Institute for Environmental and Minority Law University of Lappland writing for Virtual Finland on National Minorities of Finland. Retrieved 24 June 2008. Even with the introduction of agriculture, hunting and fishing continued to be important parts of the subsistence economy.

The Bronze Age (1500500 BCE) and Iron Age (500 BCE1200 CE) were characterised by extensive contacts with other cultures in the Fennoscandian and Baltic regions. There is no consensus on when Uralic languages and Indo-European languages were first spoken in the area of contemporary Finland. During the first millennium AD, early Finnish was spoken in agricultural settlements in southern Finland, whereas Smi-speaking populations occupied most parts of the country.

===Swedish era===
The Swedish Empire following the Treaty of Roskilde of 1658.Dark green: Sweden proper, as represented in the Riksdag of the Estates. Other greens: Swedish dominions and possessions.
Now lying within Helsinki, Suomenlinna is a UNESCO World Heritage Site consisting of an inhabited sea fortress built on six islands. It is one of Finland's most popular tourist attractions.

Swedish kings established their rule in the Northern Crusades from the 12th century until 1249. Sawyer and Sawyer: Medieval Scandinavia, p. 67. University of Minnesota Press, 1993 The area of present-day Finland became a fully consolidated part of the Swedish kingdom. Swedish-speaking settlers arrived at the coastal regions during the medieval time. In the 17th century, Swedish became the dominant language of the nobility, administration and education; Finnish was chiefly a language for the peasantry, clergy and local courts in predominantly Finnish-speaking areas.

During the Protestant Reformation, the Finns gradually converted to Lutheranism. In the 16th century, Mikael Agricola published the first written works in Finnish. The first university in Finland, The Royal Academy of Turku, was established in 1640. Finland suffered a severe famine in 16961697, during which about one-third of the Finnish population died, and a devastating plague a few years later. In the 18th century, wars between Sweden and Russia twice led to the occupation of Finland by Russian forces, times known to the Finns as the Greater Wrath (17141721) and the Lesser Wrath (17421743). "Finland and the Swedish Empire". Federal Research Division, Library of Congress. It is estimated that almost an entire generation of young men was lost during the Great Wrath, due namely to the destruction of homes and farms and to the burning of Helsinki. By this time Finland was the predominant term for the whole area from the Gulf of Bothnia to the Russian border.

Two Russo-Swedish wars in twenty-five years served as reminders to the Finnish people of how precarious their position between Sweden and Russia was. An increasingly vocal elite in Finland soon determined that Finnish ties with Sweden were becoming too costly, and following Gustav III's War (17881790), the Finnish elite's desire to break with Sweden only heightened. 

In the late eighteenth century a politically active portion of the Finnish nobility became utterly convinced that, due to Sweden and Russia's repeated use of Finland as a battlefield, it would be in the country's best interests to seek autonomy. Even before the Russo-Swedish War of 17881790, there were conspiring Finns, among them Col G. M. Sprengtporten, who had supported Gustav III's coup in 1772. Sprengporten fell out with the king and resigned his commission in 1777. In the following decade he tried to secure Russian support for an autonomous Finland, and later became an adviser to Catherine II. 

Notwithstanding the efforts of Finland's elite and nobility to break ties with Sweden, there was no genuine independence movement in Finland until the early twentieth century. As a matter of fact, at this time the Finnish peasantry was outraged by the actions of their elite and almost exclusively supported Gustav's actions against the conspirators. (The High Court of Turku condemned Sprengtporten as a traitor c. 1793.) 

===Russian Empire era===

On 29 March 1809, having been taken over by the armies of Alexander I of Russia in the Finnish War, Finland became an autonomous Grand Duchy in the Russian Empire until the end of 1917. In 1811 Alexander I incorporated Russian Vyborg province into the Grand Duchy of Finland. During the Russian era, the Finnish language began to gain recognition. From the 1860s onwards, a strong Finnish nationalist movement known as the Fennoman movement grew. Milestones included the publication of what would become Finland's national epicthe Kalevalain 1835, and the Finnish language's achieving equal legal status with Swedish in 1892.

The Finnish famine of 18661868 killed 15% of the population, making it one of the worst famines in European history. The famine led the Russian Empire to ease financial regulations, and investment rose in following decades. Economic and political development was rapid. Growth and Equity in Finland, World Bank The GDP per capita was still half of that of the United States and a third of that of Britain. 

In 1906, universal suffrage was adopted in the Grand Duchy of Finland. However, the relationship between the Grand Duchy and the Russian Empire soured when the Russian government made moves to restrict Finnish autonomy. For example, the universal suffrage was, in practice, virtually meaningless, since the tsar did not have to approve any of the laws adopted by the Finnish parliament. Desire for independence gained ground, first among radical liberals Mickelsson, Rauli. Suomen puolueetHistoria, muutos ja nykypiv. Vastapaino 2007. and socialists.

===Civil war and early independence===
White Guard of Lammi.

After the 1917 February Revolution, the position of Finland as part of the Russian Empire was questioned, mainly by Social Democrats. Since the head of state was the Czar of Russia, it was not clear who the chief executive of Finland was after the revolution. The parliament, controlled by social democrats, passed the so-called Power Act The Finnish Civil War, Federal Research Division of the Library of Congress to give the highest authority to parliament. This was rejected by the Russian Provisional Government and by the right-wing parties in Finland. The Provisional Government dissolved the parliament by force, which the social democrats considered illegal since the right to do so had been stripped from the Russians by the Power Act.

New elections were conducted, in which right-wing parties won a slim majority. Some social democrats refused to accept the result and still claimed that the dissolution of the parliament (and thus the ensuing elections) were extralegal. The two nearly equally powerful political blocs, the right-wing parties and the social democratic party, were highly antagonized.

The October Revolution in Russia changed the game anew. Suddenly, the right-wing parties in Finland started to reconsider their decision to block the transfer of highest executive power from the Russian government to Finland, as radical Communists took power in Russia. Rather than acknowledge the authority of the Power Law of a few months earlier, the right-wing government declared independence on 6 December 1917.

On 27 January 1918, the official opening shots of the war were fired in two simultaneous events. The government started to disarm the Russian forces in Pohjanmaa, and the Social Democratic Party staged a coup. The latter succeeded in controlling southern Finland and Helsinki, but the white government continued in exile from Vaasa. This sparked the brief but bitter civil war. The Whites, who were supported by Imperial Germany, prevailed over the Reds. After the war, tens of thousands of Reds and suspected sympathizers were interned in camps, where thousands died by execution or from malnutrition and disease. Deep social and political enmity was sown between the Reds and Whites and would last until the Winter War and beyond. The civil war and activist expeditions into Soviet Russia strained Eastern relations.

After a brief flirtation with monarchy, Finland became a presidential republic, with Kaarlo Juho Sthlberg elected as its first president in 1919. The FinnishRussian border was determined by the Treaty of Tartu in 1920, largely following the historic border but granting Pechenga () and its Barents Sea harbour to Finland. Finnish democracy did not see any Soviet coup attempts and survived the anti-Communist Lapua Movement. The relationship between Finland and the Soviet Union was tense. Germany's relations with democratic Finland cooled also after the Nazis' rise to power. Army officers were trained in France, and relations to Western Europe and Sweden were strengthened.

In 1917, the population was three million. Credit-based land reform was enacted after the civil war, increasing the proportion of capital-owning population. About 70% of workers were occupied in agriculture and 10% in industry. The largest export markets were the United Kingdom and Germany.

===World War II===
Areas ceded by Finland to the Soviet Union after the Winter War in 1940 and the Continuation War in 1944. The Porkkala land lease was returned to Finland in 1956. Finland covered an area of approximately 385000 km2 before the handover.

During World War II, Finland fought the Soviet Union twice: in the Winter War of 19391940 after the Soviet Union had attacked Finland; and in the Continuation War of 19411944, following Operation Barbarossa, in which Germany had invaded the Soviet Union. For 872 days, the German army besieged Leningrad, the USSR's second largest city. David Glantz (2001). "The siege of Leningrad, 194144: 900 days of terror". Zenith Imprint. p. 33. ISBN 0-7603-0941-8 The siege of Leningrad resulted in the deaths of some one million of the city's inhabitants. Timothy Snyder (2010). Bloodlands: Europe Between Hitler and Stalin. Basic Books. p. 173. ISBN 0-465-00239-0 Finnish troops controlled some of the areas around the city but refused to attack or let Germans use those areas for attack; whether they should be said to have helped in the siege or refused to help is controversial. After fighting a major Soviet offensive in June/July 1944 to a standstill, Finland reached an armistice with the Soviet Union. This was followed by the Lapland War of 19441945, when Finland fought against the retreating German forces in northern Finland.

The treaties signed in 1947 and 1948 with the Soviet Union included Finnish obligations, restraints and reparationsas well as further Finnish territorial concessions begun in the Moscow Peace Treaty of 1940. As a result of the two wars, Finland was forced to cede most of Finnish Karelia, Salla and Petsamo, which amounted to 10% of its land area and 20% of its industrial capacity, including the ports of Vyborg (Viipuri) and ice-free Liinakhamari (Liinahamari). Almost the whole population, some 400,000 persons, fled these areas. Finland was never occupied by Soviet forces and retained its independence, however, at a loss of about 93,000 soldiers.

Finland rejected Marshall aid, in apparent deference to Soviet desires. However, the United States provided secret development aid and helped the (non-communist) Social Democratic Party in hopes of preserving Finland's independence. Hidden help from across the Atlantic, Helsingin Sanomat Establishing trade with the Western powers, such as the United Kingdom, and the reparations to the Soviet Union caused Finland to transform itself from a primarily agrarian economy to an industrialised one. For example, the Valmet corporation was founded to create materials for war reparations. Even after the reparations had been paid off, Finlandpoor in certain resources necessary for an industrialized nation (such as iron and oil)continued to trade with the Soviet Union in the framework of bilateral trade.

===Cold War===
In 1950, 46% of Finnish workers were occupied in agriculture and a third lived in urban areas. The new jobs in manufacturing, services and trade quickly attracted people to the towns. The average number of births per woman declined from a baby boom peak of 3.5 in 1947 to 1.5 in 1973. When baby-boomers entered the workforce, the economy did not generate jobs fast enough, and hundreds of thousands emigrated to the more industrialized Sweden, with emigration peaking in 1969 and 1970. The 1952 Summer Olympics brought international visitors. Finland took part in trade liberalization in the World Bank, the International Monetary Fund and the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade.

Urho Kekkonen, the eighth president of Finland
Officially claiming to be neutral, Finland lay in the grey zone between the Western countries and the Soviet Union. The YYA Treaty (Finno-Soviet Pact of Friendship, Cooperation and Mutual Assistance) gave the Soviet Union some leverage in Finnish domestic politics. This was extensively exploited by president Urho Kekkonen against his opponents. He maintained an effective monopoly on Soviet relations from 1956 on, which was crucial for his continued popularity. In politics, there was a tendency of avoiding any policies and statements that could be interpreted as anti-Soviet. This phenomenon was given the name "Finlandization" by the German press.

Despite close relations with the Soviet Union, Finland remained a Western European market economy. Various industries benefited from trade privileges with the Soviets, which explains the widespread support that pro-Soviet policies enjoyed among business interests in Finland. Economic growth was rapid in the postwar era, and by 1975 Finland's GDP per capita was the 15th highest in the world. In the 1970s and 1980s, Finland built one of the most extensive welfare states in the world. Finland also negotiated with the EEC (a predecessor of the European Union) a treaty that mostly abolished customs duties towards the EEC starting from 1977, although Finland did not fully join. In 1981, president Urho Kekkonen's failing health forced him to retire after holding office for 25 years.

Miscalculated macroeconomic decisions, a banking crisis, the collapse of its largest single trading partner (the Soviet Union) and a global economic downturn caused a deep recession in Finland in the early 1990s. The depression bottomed out in 1993, and Finland saw steady economic growth for more than ten years.

===Recent history===
Like other Nordic countries, Finland has decentralised its economy since the late 1980s. Financial and product market regulation was loosened. Some state enterprises have been privatized and there have been some modest tax cuts. Finland joined the European Union in 1995, and the Eurozone in 1999.

The population is aging with the birth rate at 10.42 births per 1,000 population, or a fertility rate of 1.8. With a median age of 42.7 years, Finland is one of the oldest countries; half of voters are estimated to be over 50 years old.

The Finnish markka was replaced by the euro in 2002. As a preparation for this date, the minting of the new euro coins started as early as 1999; this is why the first euro coins from Finland have the year 1999 on them, instead of 2002 like some of the other countries of the Eurozone. Three different designs (one for 2 coin, one for 1 coin and one for the other six coins) were selected for the Finnish coins. In 2007, in order to adopt the new common map like the rest of the Eurozone countries, Finland changed the common side of its coins.

==Geography==
Atlas of Finland.)]]

Lying approximately between latitudes 60 and 70 N, and longitudes 20 and 32 E, Finland is one of the world's northernmost countries. Of world capitals, only Reykjavk lies more to the north than Helsinki. The distance from the southernmostHankoto the northernmost point in the countryNuorgamis 1160 km.

Finland is a country of thousands of lakes and islandsabout 188,000 lakes (larger than 500 m2) and 179,000 islands. Its largest lake, Saimaa, is the fourth largest in Europe. The area with most lakes is called Finnish Lakeland. The greatest concentration of islands is found in the southwest in the Archipelago Sea between continental Finland and the main island of land.

Much of the geography of Finland is explained by the Ice Age. The glaciers were thicker and lasted longer in Fennoscandia compared with the rest of Europe. Their eroding effects have left the Finnish landscape mostly flat with few hills and fewer mountains. Its highest point, the Halti at 1324 m, is found in the extreme north of Lapland at the border between Finland and Norway. The highest mountain whose peak is entirely in Finland is Ridnitsohkka at 1,316 m (4,318 ft), directly adjacent to Halti.

The retreating glaciers have left the land with morainic deposits in formations of eskers. These are ridges of stratified gravel and sand, running northwest to southeast, where the ancient edge of the glacier once lay. Among the biggest of these are the three Salpausselk ridges that run across southern Finland.

The Whooper Swan, Finland's national bird.
Having been compressed under the enormous weight of the glaciers, terrain in Finland is rising due to the post-glacial rebound. The effect is strongest around the Gulf of Bothnia, where land steadily rises about 1 cm a year. As a result, the old sea bottom turns little by little into dry land: the surface area of the country is expanding by about 7 km2 annually. Relatively speaking, Finland is rising from the sea. "Finland." Encyclopdia Britannica. Encyclopdia Britannica Ultimate Reference Suite. Chicago: Encyclopdia Britannica, 2011. 

Forest covers 86% of the country's land area, Finland is the most forested country in Europe. forest.fi the largest forested area in Europe. The forest consists of pine, spruce, birch and other species. Finland is the largest producer of wood in Europe and among the largest in the world.

The landscape is covered mostly (75% of land area) by coniferous taiga forests and fens, with little arable land. The most common type of rock is granite. It is a ubiquitous part of the scenery, visible wherever there is no soil cover. Moraine or till is the most common type of soil, covered by a thin layer of humus of biological origin. Podzol profile development is seen in most forest soils except where drainage is poor. Gleysols and peat bogs occupy poorly drained areas.

===Biodiversity===

Phytogeographically, Finland is shared between the Arctic, central European and northern European provinces of the Circumboreal Region within the Boreal Kingdom. According to the WWF, the territory of Finland can be subdivided into three ecoregions: the Scandinavian and Russian taiga, Sarmatic mixed forests and Scandinavian Montane Birch forest and grasslands. Taiga covers most of Finland from northern regions of southern provinces to the north of Lapland. On the southwestern coast, south of the Helsinki-Rauma line, forests are characterized by mixed forests, that are more typical in the Baltic region. In the extreme north of Finland, near the tree line and Arctic Ocean, Montane Birch forests are common.

The brown bear (Ursus arctos) is Finland's national animal.
Similarly, Finland has a diverse and extensive range of fauna. There are at least sixty native mammalian species, 248 breeding bird species, over seventy fish species and eleven reptile and frog species present today, many migrating from neighboring countries thousands of years ago.
Large and widely recognized wildlife mammals found in Finland are the brown bear (the national animal), gray wolf, wolverine and elk. Three of the more striking birds are the Whooper Swan, a large European swan and the national bird of Finland; the Capercaillie, a large, black-plumaged member of the grouse family; and the European Eagle-owl. The latter is considered an indicator of old-growth forest connectivity, and has been declining because of landscape fragmentation. The most common breeding birds are the Willow Warbler, Common Chaffinch and Redwing. Of some seventy species of freshwater fish, the northern pike, perch and others are plentiful. Atlantic salmon remains the favourite of fly rod enthusiasts.

The endangered Saimaa Ringed Seal, one of only three lake seal species in the world, exists only in the Saimaa lake system of southeastern Finland, down to only 300 seals today. It has become the emblem of the Finnish Association for Nature Conservation. 

===Climate===
Repovesi National Park in southeastern Finland.

The main factor influencing Finland's climate is the country's geographical position between the 60th and 70th northern parallels in the Eurasian continent's coastal zone. In the Kppen climate classification, the whole of Finland lies in the boreal zone characterized by warm summers and freezing winters. Within the country, the temperateness varies considerably between the southern coastal regions and the extreme north, showing characteristics of both a maritime and a continental climate. Finland is near enough to the Atlantic Ocean to be continuously warmed by the Gulf Stream. The Gulf Stream combines with the moderating effects of the Baltic Sea and numerous inland lakes to explain the unusually warm climate compared with other regions that share the same latitude, such as Alaska, Siberia and southern Greenland. 

Winters of southern Finland (when mean daily temperature remains below 0 C) are usually about 100 days long, and the snow typically covers the land from about late November to mid-April. Even in the most temperate regions of the south, the harshest winter nights can see the temperatures fall to -30 C. Climatic summers (when mean daily temperature remains above 10 C) in southern Finland last from about late May to mid-September, and in the inland, the warmest days of July can reach 35 C. Although most of Finland lies on the taiga belt, the southernmost coastal regions are sometimes classified as hemiboreal. 

Pyh-Luosto National Park, Lapland.
In northern Finland, particularly in Lapland, the winters are long and cold, while the summers are relatively warm but short. The most severe winter days in Lapland can see the temperature fall down to -45 C. The winter of the north lasts for about 200 days with permanent snow cover from about mid-October to early May. Summers in the north are quite short, only two to three months, but can still see maximum daily temperatures above 25 C during heat waves. No part of Finland has Arctic tundra, but Alpine tundra can be found at the fells Lapland. 

The Finnish climate is suitable for cereal farming only in the southernmost regions, while the northern regions are suitable for animal husbandry. 

A quarter of Finland's territory lies within the Arctic Circle and the midnight sun can be experienced for more days the farther north one travels. At Finland's northernmost point, the sun does not set for 73 consecutive days during summer, and does not rise at all for 51 days during winter. 

===Regions===
Finland consists of 19 regions called in Finnish and in Swedish. The regions are governed by regional councils which serve as forums of cooperation for the municipalities of a region. The main tasks of the regions are regional planning and development of enterprise and education. In addition, the public health services are usually organized on the basis of regions. Currently, the only region where a popular election is held for the council is Kainuu. Other regional councils are elected by municipal councils, each municipality sending representatives in proportion to its population.

In addition to inter-municipal cooperation, which is the responsibility of regional councils, each region has a state Employment and Economic Development Centre which is responsible for the local administration of labour, agriculture, fisheries, forestry and entrepreneurial affairs. The Finnish Defence Forces regional offices are responsible for the regional defence preparations and for the administration of conscription within the region.

Regions represent dialectal, cultural and economic variations better than the former provinces, which were purely administrative divisions of the central government. Historically, regions are divisions of historical provinces of Finland, areas which represent dialects and culture more accurately.

Six Regional State Administrative Agencies were created by the state of Finland in 2010, each of them responsible for one of the regions called in Finnish and in Swedish; in addition, land was designated a seventh region. These take over some of the tasks of the earlier Provinces of Finland (the lnis), which were abolished. 

 In English In Finnish In Swedish Capital Regional state administrative agency Lapland Rovaniemi Lapland Northern Ostrobothnia Oulu Northern Finland Kainuu Kajaani Northern Finland North Karelia Joensuu Eastern Finland Northern Savonia Kuopio Eastern Finland Southern Savonia Mikkeli Eastern Finland Southern Ostrobothnia Seinjoki Western and Central Finland Central Ostrobothnia Kokkola Western and Central Finland Ostrobothnia Vaasa Western and Central Finland Pirkanmaa Tampere Western and Central Finland Central Finland Jyvskyl Western and Central Finland Satakunta Pori South-Western Finland Finland Proper Turku South-Western Finland South Karelia Lappeenranta Southern Finland Pijnne Tavastia Lahti Southern Finland Tavastia Proper Hmeenlinna Southern Finland Uusimaa Helsinki Southern Finland Kymenlaakso Kouvola Southern Finland land Islands The role that the regional councils serve on Mainland Finland are on the land Islands handled by the autonomous Government of land. land 

The region of Eastern Uusimaa was consolidated with Uusimaa on 1 January 2011. 

===Administrative divisions===

A steam boat on Lake Pijnne leaving Jyvskyl, the capital of Central Finland.

The fundamental administrative divisions of the country are the municipalities, which may also call themselves towns or cities. They account for half of public spending. Spending is financed by municipal income tax, state subsidies, and other revenue. There are 336 municipalities, and most have fewer than 6,000 residents. People often identify with their municipality.

In addition to municipalities, two intermediate levels are defined. Municipalities co-operate in seventy sub-regions and nineteen regions. These are governed by the member municipalities and have only limited powers. The autonomous province of land has a permanent democratically elected regional council. In the Kainuu region, there is a pilot project underway with regional elections. Sami people have a semi-autonomous Sami Domicile Area in Lapland for issues on language and culture.

The Tammerkoski rapids in the inland city of Tampere.
In the following chart, the number of inhabitants includes those living in the entire municipality (kunta/kommun), not just in the built-up area. The land area is given in km, and the density in inhabitants per km (land area). The figures are as of . The capital regioncomprising Helsinki, Vantaa, Espoo and Kauniainenforms a continuous conurbation of one million people. However, common administration is limited to voluntary cooperation of all municipalities, e.g. in Helsinki Metropolitan Area Council.

Municipalities (thin borders) and regions (thick borders) of Finland (2009).

 City Population Land area Density 
 Helsinki 
 Espoo 
 Tampere 
 Vantaa 
 Oulu 
 Turku 
 Jyvskyl 
 Kuopio 
 Lahti 
 Kouvola 
 Pori 
 Joensuu 
 Lappeenranta 
 Hmeenlinna 
 Vaasa 

==Politics==
The Parliament of Finland's main building.

===Constitution===
The Constitution of Finland defines the political system. Finland is a parliamentary democracy, and the prime minister is the country's most powerful politician. The constitution in its current form came into force on 1 March 2000, and was amended on 1 March 2012. Citizens can run and vote in parliamentary, municipal, and presidential elections, and in European Union elections.

===President===
According to the Constitution, the President of Finland is the head of state. Finland was formerly considered a semi-presidential parliamentary system, but under the 2000 constitution, and even further under its 2012 amendment, the presidency became largely a ceremonial, non-executive position. Formerly a semi-presidential republic, it is now a parliamentary republic according to David Arter, First Chair of Politics at Aberdeen University. In his "Scandinavian Politics Today" (Manchester University Press, revised 2008), he quotes Jaakko Nousiainen in "From semi-presidentialism to parliamentary government" (Scandinavian Political Studies 24 (2) pp. 95109) as follows: "There are hardly any grounds for the epithet 'semi-presidential'." Arter's own conclusions are only slightly more nuanced: "The adoption of a new constitution on 1 March 2000 meant that Finland was no longer a case of semi-presidential government other than in the minimalist sense of a situation where a popularly elected fixed-term president exists alongside a prime minister and cabinet who are responsible to parliament (Elgie 2004: 317)". According to the Finnish Constitution, the president has no possibility to rule the government without the ministerial approval, and does not have the power to dissolve the parliament under his or her own desire. Finland is actually represented by its prime minister, and not by its president, in the Council of the Heads of State and Government of the European Union. The 2012 constitution reduced the powers of the president even further. The position still does entail some powers, including responsibility for foreign policy (excluding affairs related to the European Union) in cooperation with the cabinet, being the head of the armed forces, some decree powers, and some appointive powers. Direct, one- or two-stage elections are used to elect the president for a term of six years and for a maximum of two consecutive terms. The current president is Sauli Niinist; he took office on 1 March 2012. The former presidents were K. J. Sthlberg (19191925), L. K. Relander (19251931), P. E. Svinhufvud (19311937), Kysti Kallio (19371940), Risto Ryti (19401944), C. G. E. Mannerheim (19441946), J. K. Paasikivi (19461956), Urho Kekkonen (19561982), Mauno Koivisto (19821994), Martti Ahtisaari (19942000), and Tarja Halonen (20002012).

===Parliament===

The 200-member unicameral Parliament of Finland exercises supreme legislative authority. It may alter the constitution and ordinary laws, dismiss the cabinet, and override presidential vetoes. Its acts are not subject to judicial review; the constitutionality of new laws is assessed by the parliament's constitutional law committee. The parliament is elected for a term of four years using the proportional D'Hondt method within a number of multi-seat constituencies through open list multi-member districts. Various parliament committees listen to experts and prepare legislation. The speaker is currently Eero Heinluoma (Social Democrats). The Parliament: Parliament Elected Speakers 

Since universal suffrage was introduced in 1906, the parliament has been dominated by the Centre Party (former Agrarian Union), the National Coalition Party (conservatives), and the Social Democrats. These parties have enjoyed approximately equal support, and their combined vote has totalled about 6580% of all votes. Their lowest common total of MPs, 121, was reached in the 2011 elections. For a few decades after 1944, the Communists were a strong fourth party. Due to the electoral system of proportional representation, and the relative reluctance of voters to switch their support between parties, the relative strengths of the parties have commonly varied only slightly from one election to another. However, there have been some long-term trends, such as the rise and fall of the Communists during the Cold War; the steady decline into insignificance of the Liberal party and its predecessors from 1906 to about 1980; and the rise of the Green party and its predecessor since 1983. In the 2011 elections, the True Finns achieved exceptional success, increasing its representation from 5 to 39 seats, and thus surpassing the Centre Party. The source for historical information on party support is the Finnish Wikipedia's article on the parliament 

The autonomous province of land, which forms a federacy with Finland, elects one member to the parliament, who traditionally joins the parliamentary group of the Swedish People's Party of Finland. (The province also holds elections for its own permanent regional council, and in the 2011 elections, land Centre was the largest party.)

The Parliament can be dissolved by a recommendation of the Prime minister endorsed by the President. This procedure has never been used, although the parliament was dissolved several times under the pre-2000 constitution, when this action was the sole prerogative of the president.

After the parliamentary elections on 17 April 2011, the seats were divided among eight parties as follows:

 Party Seats Net gain/loss % of seats % of votes 
 National Coalition Party 44 6 22.0 20.4 
 Social Democratic Party 42 -3 21.0 19.1 
 True Finns 39 +34 19.5 19.1 
 Centre Party 35 -16 17.5 15.8 
 Left Alliance 14 -2 7.0 8.1 
 Green League 10 -5 5.0 7.3 
 Swedish People's Party 9 0 4.5 4.3 
 Christian Democrats 6 -1 3.0 4.0 
 Others 1a 0 0.5 0.4 
 

===Cabinet===
After parliamentary elections, the parties negotiate among themselves on forming a new cabinet (the Finnish Government), which then has to be approved by a simple majority vote in the parliament. The cabinet can be dismissed by a parliamentary vote of no confidence, although this rarely happens (the last time in 1957), as the parties represented in the cabinet usually make up a majority in the parliament. The Finnish Wikipedia's article on Motion of no confidence 

The cabinet exercises most executive powers, and originates most of the bills that the parliament then debates and votes on. It is headed by the Prime Minister of Finland, and consists of him or her, of other ministers, and of the Chancellor of Justice. The current prime minister is Alexander Stubb (National Coalition Party). Each minister heads his or her ministry, or, in some cases, has responsibility for a subset of a ministry's policy. After the prime minister, the most powerful minister is the minister of finance.

As no one party ever dominates the parliament, Finnish cabinets are multi-party coalitions. As a rule, the post of prime minister goes to the leader of the biggest party and that of the minister of finance to the leader of the second biggest.

===Law===

The judicial system of Finland is a civil law system divided between courts with regular civil and criminal jurisdiction and administrative courts with jurisdiction over litigation between individuals and the public administration. Finnish law is codified and based on Swedish law and in a wider sense, civil law or Roman law. The court system for civil and criminal jurisdiction consists of local courts (krjoikeus, tingsrtt), regional appellate courts (hovioikeus, hovrtt), and the Supreme Court (korkein oikeus, hgsta domstolen). The administrative branch of justice consists of administrative courts (hallinto-oikeus, frvaltningsdomstol) and the Supreme Administrative Court (korkein hallinto-oikeus, hgsta frvaltningsdomstolen). In addition to the regular courts, there are a few special courts in certain branches of administration. There is also a High Court of Impeachment for criminal charges against certain high-ranking officeholders.

Around 92% of residents have confidence in Finland's security institutions. Policing corruption, International Perspectives. The overall crime rate of Finland is not high in the EU context. Some crime types are above average, notably the highest homicide rate in Western Europe. A day fine system is in effect and also applied to offenses such as speeding.

Finland has successfully fought against government corruption, which was more common in the 1970s and 1980s. The History of Corruption in Central Government By Seppo Tiihonen, International Institute of Administrative Sciences For instance, economic reforms and EU membership introduced stricter requirements for open bidding and many public monopolies were abolished. Today, Finland has a very low number of corruption charges; Transparency International ranks Finland as one of the least corrupt countries in Europe. Also, Finland's public records are among the world's most transparent.

In 2008, Transparency International criticized the lack of transparency of the system of Finnish political finance. Vaalijohtaja: Vaalirahoituslain rikkominen melko yleist YLE 15 May 2008 According to GRECO in 2007 corruption should be taken into account in the Finnish system of election funds better. Evaluation Report on Finland on Incriminations, Theme I, s. 21, GRECO 37.12.2007 A scandal revolving around campaign finance of the 2007 parliamentary elections broke out in spring 2008. Nine Ministers of Government submitted incomplete funding reports and even more of the members of parliament. The law includes no punishment of false funds reports of the elected politicians.

===Foreign relations===

Ahtisaari receives his Nobel prize

According to the 2012 constitution, the president (currently Sauli Niinist) leads foreign policy in cooperation with the government, except that the president has no role in EU affairs. Finnish constitution, Section 93. 

In 2008, president Martti Ahtisaari was awarded the Nobel Peace Prize. Finland was considered a cooperative model state, and Finland did not oppose proposals for a common EU defence policy. This was reversed in the 2000s, when Tarja Halonen and Erkki Tuomioja made Finland's official policy to resist other EU members' plans for common defence. "Finland's foreign policy idea" ("Suomen ulkopolitiikan idea"), Risto Penttil, 2008. 

===Social security===

Finland has one of the world's most extensive welfare systems, one that guarantees decent living conditions for all residents, Finns and non-citizens. Since the 1980s the social security has been cut back, but still the system is one of the most comprehensive in the world. Created almost entirely during the first three decades after World War II, the social security system was an outgrowth of the traditional Nordic belief that the state was not inherently hostile to the well-being of its citizens, but could intervene benevolently on their behalf. According to some social historians, the basis of this belief was a relatively benign history that had allowed the gradual emergence of a free and independent peasantry in the Nordic countries and had curtailed the dominance of the nobility and the subsequent formation of a powerful right wing. Finland's history has been harsher than the histories of the other Nordic countries, but not harsh enough to bar the country from following their path of social development. Text from PD source: US Library of Congress: A Country Study: Finland, Library of Congress Call Number DL1012 .A74 1990. 

===Armed forces===
Sisu tracked transport vehicle of the Finnish Army. Most conscripts receive training for warfare in winter, and transport vehicles such as this give mobility in heavy snow.

The Finnish Defence Forces consist of a cadre of professional soldiers (mainly officers and technical personnel), currently serving conscripts, and a large reserve. The standard readiness strength is 34,700 people in uniform, of which 25% are professional soldiers. A universal male conscription is in place, under which all male Finnish nationals above 18 years of age serve for 6 to 12 months of armed service or 12 months of civilian (non-armed) service.

Alternative non-military service for men is possible, as is voluntary military service for women (currently approximately 500 annually). Women's voluntary service (in Finnish) Finland is the only non-NATO EU country bordering Russia. Finland's official policy states that the 350,000 reservists, armed mostly with ground weaponry, are a sufficient deterrent.

The armed forces favour partnerships with Western institutions such as NATO, WEU and the EU, but are careful to avoid politics. Hgglund, Gustav. Leijona ja kyyhky. Finland's defence budget equals about 2 billion or about 1.41.6% of the GDP. Finnish defence expenditure is around the sixth highest in the EU. Tyvoimakustannukset puuttuvat puolustusmenoista, Statistics Finland (in Finnish): Eurostat ranking is sixth, but the third when conscription is accounted. 

Voluntary post-conscription overseas peacekeeping service is popular, and troops serve around the world in UN, NATO and EU peacekeeping missions. Residents claim around 80% homeland defence willingness, one of the highest rates in Europe. Jane's World Armies: Finland. For update: "FinlandDefence Industry (Finland), Defence Industry Country Overview: Summary"; full article by subscription. 

The armed forces are under the command of the Chief of Defence (currently General Ari Puheloinen), who is directly subordinate to the president in matters related to military command. The branches of the military are the army, the navy and the air force. The border guard is under the Ministry of the Interior but can be incorporated into the Defence Forces when required for defence readiness.

==Economy==
Angry Birds, a mobile phone game developed in Finland, has become a commercial hit both domestically and internationally.

Finland has a highly industrialized mixed economy with a per capita output equal to that of other European economies such as France, Germany, Belgium or the UK. The largest sector of the economy is services at 66%, followed by manufacturing and refining at 31%. Primary production is 2.9%. With respect to foreign trade, the key economic sector is manufacturing. The largest industries are electronics (22%), machinery, vehicles and other engineered metal products (21.1%), forest industry (13%) and chemicals (11%).

Finland has timber and several mineral and freshwater resources. Forestry, paper factories, and the agricultural sector (on which taxpayers spend around 3 billion euros annually) are politically sensitive to rural residents. The Greater Helsinki area generates around a third of GDP. In a 2004 OECD comparison, high-technology manufacturing in Finland ranked second largest after Ireland. Knowledge-intensive services have also ranked the smallest and slow-growth sectorsespecially agriculture and low-technology manufacturingsecond largest after Ireland. Finland Economy 2004, OECD Overall short-term outlook was good and GDP growth has been above many EU peers.

Finland's real-terms GDP growth, 19982011.
Finland is highly integrated in the global economy, and international trade is a third of GDP. The European Union makes 60% of the total trade. The largest trade flows are with Germany, Russia, Sweden, United Kingdom, United States, Netherlands and China. Trade policy is managed by the European Union, where Finland has traditionally been among the free trade supporters, except for agriculture. Finland is the only Nordic country to have joined the Eurozone.

Finland's climate and soils make growing crops a particular challenge. The country lies between latitudes 60N and 70N, and has severe winters and relatively short growing seasons that are sometimes interrupted by frosts. However, because the Gulf Stream and the North Atlantic Drift Current moderate the climate, Finland contains half of the world's arable land north of 60 north latitude. Annual precipitation is usually sufficient, but it occurs almost exclusively during the winter months, making summer droughts a constant threat. In response to the climate, farmers have relied on quick-ripening and frost-resistant varieties of crops, and they have cultivated south-facing slopes as well as richer bottomlands to ensure production even in years with summer frosts. Most farmland had originally been either forest or swamp, and the soil had usually required treatment with lime and years of cultivation to neutralize excess acid and to develop fertility. Irrigation was generally not necessary, but drainage systems were often needed to remove excess water. Finland's agriculture was efficient and productiveat least when compared with farming in other European countries. 

Aleksanterinkatu, a commercial street in Helsinki.
Forests play a key role in the country's economy, making it one of the world's leading wood producers and providing raw materials at competitive prices for the crucial wood-processing industries. As in agriculture, the government has long played a leading role in forestry, regulating tree cutting, sponsoring technical improvements, and establishing long-term plans to ensure that the country's forests continue to supply the wood-processing industries. To maintain the country's comparative advantage in forest products, Finnish authorities moved to raise lumber output toward the country's ecological limits. In 1984 the government published the Forest 2000 plan, drawn up by the Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry. The plan aimed at increasing forest harvests by about 3% per year, while conserving forestland for recreation and other uses. 

Private sector employees amount to 1.8 million, out of which around a third with tertiary education. The average cost of a private sector employee per hour was 25.1 euros in 2004. Tehdyn tytunnin hinta 2327 euroa, Statistics Finland As of 2008 average purchasing power-adjusted income levels are similar to those of Italy, Sweden, Germany and France. In 2006, 62% of the workforce worked for enterprises with less than 250 employees and they accounted for 49% of total business turnover and had the strongest rate of growth. The female employment rate is high. Gender segregation between male-dominated professions and female-dominated professions is higher than in the US. The Nordic Model of Welfare: A Historical Reappraisal, by Niels Finn Christiansen The proportion of part-time workers was one of the lowest in OECD in 1999. 

Graphical depiction of Finland's product exports in 28 colour-coded categories.
The employment rate was 68% and the unemployment rate was 6.8% in early 2008. 18% of residents are outside the job market at the age of 50 and less than a third are working at the age of 61. Unfunded pensions and other promises such as health insurances are a dominant future liability, though Finland is much better prepared than countries such as France or Germany. Directly held public debt has been reduced to around 32% of GDP in 2007. In 2007, the average household savings rate was 3.8 and household debt 101% of annual disposable income, a typical level in Europe. Taloussanomat.fi Home ownership rate is 60%.

As of 2006, 2.4 million households reside in Finland. The average size is 2.1 persons; 40% of households consist of a single person, 32% two persons and 28% three or more persons. Residential buildings total 1.2 million and the average residential space is 38 m2 per person. The average residential property without land costs 1,187 euro per sq metre and residential land 8.6 euro per sq metre. 74% of households had a car. There are 2.5 million cars and 0.4 million other vehicles. 

Around 92% have a mobile phone and 83.5% (2009) Internet connection at home. The average total household consumption was 20,000 euro, out of which housing consisted of about 5500 euro, transport about 3000 euro, food and beverages excluding alcoholic beverages at around 2500 euro, and recreation and culture at around 2000 euro. According to Invest in Finland, private consumption grew by 3% in 2006 and consumer trends included durables, high quality products, and spending on well-being. "Retail growth best in Finland for five years". For updates, see the Invest in Finland website. 

===Energy===
The two existing units of the Olkiluoto Nuclear Power Plant. On the far left is a visualization of a third unit, which, when completed, will become Finland's fifth commercial nuclear reactor. 

Anyone can enter the free and largely privately owned financial and physical Nordic energy markets traded in NASDAQ OMX Commodities Europe and Nord Pool Spot exchanges, which have provided competitive prices compared with other EU countries. As of 2007, Finland has roughly the lowest industrial electricity prices in the EU-15 (equal to France). Electricity pricesindustrial users. eurostat.ec.europa.eu 

In 2006, the energy market was around 90 terawatt hours and the peak demand around 15 gigawatts in winter. This means that the energy consumption per capita is around 7.2 tons of oil equivalent per year. Industry and construction consumed 51% of total consumption, a relatively high figure reflecting Finland's industries. Finland's hydrocarbon resources are limited to peat and wood. About 1015% of the electricity is produced by hydropower, which is little compared with more mountainous Sweden or Norway. In 2008, renewable energy forms (mainly hydropower and various forms of wood energy) made high 30.5% compared with the EU average 10.3% in final energy consumption. 

Finland has four privately owned nuclear reactors producing 18% of the country's energy and one research reactor at the Otaniemi campus. The fifth AREVA-Siemens-built reactorthe world's largest at 1600 MWe and a focal point of Europe's nuclear industryhas faced many delays and is currently scheduled to be operational by 20182020, a decade after the original planned opening. 
 A varying amount (517%) of electricity has been imported from Russia (at around 3 gigawatt power line capacity), Sweden and Norway.

Finland negotiated itself expensive Kyoto and EU emission terms. They might be causing an increase in energy prices, amplified by the aging and soon decommissioned production capacity. Energy companies are about to increase nuclear power production, as in July 2010 the Finnish parliament granted permits for additional two new reactors.

===Transport===

The extensive road system is utilized by most internal cargo and passenger traffic. The annual state operated road network expenditure of around 1 billion euro is paid with vehicle and fuel taxes which amount to around 1.5 billion euro and 1 billion euro.

Icebreakers enable shipping even during severe winters.
The state-owned VR Group operates a railway network serving all major cities.
The main international passenger gateway is Helsinki-Vantaa Airport with almost 15 million passengers in 2011. Oulu Airport is the second largest and around 25 airports have scheduled passenger services. The Helsinki-Vantaa based Finnair, Blue1 and Flybe Nordic sell air services both domestically and internationally. Helsinki has an optimal location for great circle (i.e. the shortest and most efficient) routes between Western Europe and the Far East.

Despite low population density, the Government spends annually around 350 million euro in maintaining 5865 km of railway tracks. Rail transport is handled by state owned VR Group, which has 5% passenger market share (out of which 80% are urban trips in Greater Helsinki) and 25% cargo market share. Transport and communications ministryRail. For year 2009 update: Finnish Railway Statistics 2010. For subsequent years when available: Finnish Railway Statistics. liikennevirasto.fi Since 12 December 2010, Karelian Trains, a joint venture between Russian Railways and VR (Finnish Railways), has been running Alstom Pendolino operated high-speed services between Saint Petersburg's Finlyandsky and Helsinki's Central railway stations. These services are branded as "Allegro" trains. Journey from Helsinki to Saint Petersburg takes only three and a half hours.

The majority of international cargo utilizes ports. Port logistics prices are low. Vuosaari Harbour in Helsinki is the largest container port after completion in 2008 and others include Kotka, Hamina, Hanko, Pori, Rauma, and Oulu. There is passenger traffic from Helsinki and Turku, which have ferry connections to Tallinn, Mariehamn and Stockholm. The Helsinki-Tallinn route, one of the busiest passenger sea routes in the world, has also been served by a helicopter line.

===Industry===

Finland was rapidly industrialized after the Second World War, achieving GDP per capita levels equal to that of Japan or the UK in the beginning of the 1970s. Initially, most development was based on two broad groups of export-led industries, the "metal industry" (metalliteollisuus) and "forest industry" (metsteollisuus). The "metal industry" includes shipbuilding, metalworking, the car industry, engineered products such as motors and electronics, and production of metals (steel, copper and chromium). The world's biggest cruise ships are built in Finnish shipyards. The "forest industry" (metsteollisuus) includes forestry, timber, pulp and paper, and is a logical development based on Finland's extensive forest resources (77% of the area is covered by forest, most of it in renewable use). In the pulp and paper industry, many of the largest companies are based in Finland (Ahlstrom, M-real, UPM). However, the Finnish economy has diversified, with expansion into fields such as electronics (e.g. Nokia), metrology (Vaisala), transport fuels (Neste Oil), chemicals (Kemira), engineering consulting (Pyry) and information technology (e.g. Rovio, known for Angry Birds), and is no longer dominated by the two sectors of metal and forest industry. Likewise, the structure has changed, with the service sector growing, with manufacturing reducing in importance; agriculture is only a minor part. Despite this, production for export is still more prominent than in Western Europe, thus making Finland more vulnerable to global economic trends.

Based on the Economist Intelligence Unit report released in September 2011, Finland has clinched the second place after the United States on Benchmarking IT Industry Competitiveness 2011 which scored on 6 key indicators: overall business environment, technology infrastructure, human capital, legal framework, public support for industry development, and research and development landscape. 

===Public policy===

Finnish politicians have often emulated other Nordics and the Nordic model. The Nordic Model by Torben M. Andersen, Bengt Holmstrm, Seppo Honkapohja, Sixten Korkman, Hans Tson Sderstrm, Juhana Vartiainen Nordics have been free-trading and relatively welcoming to skilled migrants for over a century, though in Finland immigration is relatively new. The level of protection in commodity trade has been low, except for agricultural products. 

Finland has top levels of economic freedom in many areas. Finland is ranked 16th in the 2008 global Index of Economic Freedom and 9th in Europe. While the manufacturing sector is thriving, the OECD points out that the service sector would benefit substantially from policy improvements. 

The 2007 IMD World Competitiveness Yearbook ranked Finland 17th most competitive. The World Economic Forum 2008 index ranked Finland the 6th most competitive. In both indicators, Finland's performance was next to Germany, and significantly higher than most European countries. In the Business competitiveness index 20072008 Finland ranked third in the world.

Economists attribute much growth to reforms in the product markets. According to the OECD, only four EU-15 countries have less regulated product markets (UK, Ireland, Denmark and Sweden) and only one has less regulated financial markets (Denmark). Nordic countries were pioneers in liberalizing energy, postal, and other markets in Europe. The legal system is clear and business bureaucracy less than most countries. Property rights are well protected and contractual agreements are strictly honoured. Finland is rated the least corrupted country in the world in the Corruption Perceptions Index and 13th in the Ease of Doing Business Index. This indicates exceptional ease in cross-border trading (5th), contract enforcement (7th), business closure (5th), tax payment (83rd) and low worker hardship (127th). Economy Rankings, Doing Business Report 2008, World Bank 

Finnish law forces all workers to obey the national contracts that are drafted every few years for each profession and seniority level. The agreement becomes universally enforceable provided that more than 50% of the employees support it, in practice by being a member of a relevant trade union. The unionization rate is high (70%), especially in the middle class (AKAVA80%). A lack of a national agreement in an industry is considered an exception. 

===Tourism===

Silja Symphony, one of the Baltic sea cruiseferries, passing Kustaanmiekka strait in Helsinki.

In 2005, Finnish tourism grossed over 6.7 billion with a 5% increase from the previous year. Much of the sudden growth can be attributed to the globalisation and modernisation of the country as well as a rise in positive publicity and awareness. There are many attractions in Finland which attracted over 4 million visitors in 2005.

The Finnish landscape is covered with thick pine forests, rolling hills and complemented with a labyrinth of lakes and inlets. Much of Finland is pristine and virgin as it contains 37 national parks from the Southern shores of the Gulf of Finland to the high fells of Lapland. It is also an urbanised region with many cultural events and activities.

Commercial cruises between major coastal and port cities in the Baltic region, including Helsinki, Turku, Tallinn, Stockholm and Travemnde, play a significant role in the local tourism industry. Finland is regarded as the home of Saint Nicholas or Santa Claus, living in the northern Lapland region. Above the Arctic Circle, in midwinter, there is a polar night, a period when the sun does not rise for days or weeks, or even months, and correspondingly, midnight sun in the summer, with no sunset even at midnight. Lapland is so far north that the Aurora Borealis, fluorescence in the high atmosphere due to solar wind, is seen regularly in the fall, winter and spring.

Outdoor activities range from Nordic skiing, golf, fishing, yachting, lake cruises, hiking, kayaking among many others. At Finland's northernmost point, in the heart of summer, the Sun does not completely set for 73 consecutive days. Wildlife is abundant in Finland. Bird-watching is popular for those fond of avifauna, however hunting is also popular. Elk and hare are common game in Finland. Olavinlinna in Savonlinna hosts the annual Savonlinna Opera Festival.

==Demographics==

The population of Finland is currently about 5,500,000. Finland has an average population density of 18 inhabitants per square kilometre. This is the third-lowest population density of any European country, behind those of Norway and Iceland. Finland's population has always been concentrated in the southern parts of the country, a phenomenon that became even more pronounced during 20th-century urbanisation. The largest cities in Finland are those of the Greater Helsinki metropolitan areaHelsinki, Espoo and Vantaa. Other cities with population over 100.000 are Tampere, Turku, Oulu, Jyvskyl and Lahti.

The share of foreign citizens in Finland is 3.4%, among the lowest in the European Union. Most of them are from Russia, Estonia and Sweden. The children of foreigners are not automatically given Finnish citizenship. If they are born in Finland and cannot get citizenship of any other country, they become citizens. Syntympaikan perusteella lapsi saa Suomen kansalaisuuden silloin, kun lapsi syntyy Suomessa eik voi saada minkn vieraan valtion kansalaisuutta. 

===Languages===

Finnish and Swedish are the official languages of Finland. Finnish predominates nationwide while Swedish is spoken in some coastal areas in the west and south and in the autonomous region of land. The Sami language is an official language in northern Lapland. Also Finnish Romani and Finnish Sign Language are recognized in the constitution. The Nordic languages and Karelian are also specially treated in some contexts.

The native language of 90% of the population is Finnish, which is part of the Finnic subgroup of the Uralic languages. The language is one of only four official EU languages not of Indo-European origin. Finnish is closely related to Karelian and Estonian and more remotely to the Sami languages and Hungarian.

Swedish is the native language of 5.4% of the population (Swedish-speaking Finns), 

To the north, in Lapland, are the Sami people, numbering around 7000 According to the Finnish Population Registry Centre and the Finnish Sami parliament, the Sami population living in Finland was 7,371 in 2003. See Regional division of Sami people in Finland by age in 2003 (in Finnish). and recognized as an indigenous people. About a quarter of them speak a Sami language as their mother tongue. There are three Sami languages that are spoken in Finland: Northern Sami, Inari Sami and Skolt Sami. Unofficial names for Finland in Sami languages are: Suopma (Northern Sami), Suom (Inari Sami) and Lddjnnam (Skolt Sami). See Geonames.de Finnish Romani is spoken by some 5,0006,000 people, See Kalo Finnish Romani language who usually also speak Finnish. The Finnish Sign Language is used as a first language by 4,0005,000 people. Tatar language is spoken by a Finnish Tatar minority of about 800 people who moved to Finland mainly during the Russian rule from the 1870s until the 1920s. 

The rights of minority groups (in particular Sami, Swedish-speaking Finns and Romani people) are protected by the constitution. 

Immigrant languages include Russian (1.1%), Estonian (0.6%), Somali, English and Arabic (see Languages of Finland). 

The best-known foreign languages are English (63%), German (18%), and French (3%). English is studied by most pupils as a compulsory subject from the third or fifth grade (at 9 or 11 years of age respectively) in the comprehensive school (in some schools other languages can be chosen instead). German, French and Russian can be studied as second foreign languages from the eighth grade (at 14 years of age; some schools may offer other options). A third foreign language may be studied in upper secondary school or university (at 16 years of age or over).

Norwegian and, to some extent, Danish are mutually intelligible with Swedish and are thus understood by a significant minority, although studied only slightly in school.

===Religion===

 Religion in Finland Population structure Statistics Finland 
 year Evangelical Lutheran Church of Finland Finnish Orthodox Church Other No religious affiliation 
 1900 98.1% 1.7% 0.2% 0.0% 
 1950 95.0% 1.7% 0.5% 2.8% 
 1980 90.3% 1.1% 0.7% 7.8% 
 1990 87.8% 1.1% 0.9% 10.2% 
 2000 85.1% 1.1% 1.1% 12.7% 
 2005 83.2% 1.1% 1.2% 14.5% 
 2010 78.3% 1.1% 1.4% 19.2% 
 2011 77.3% 1.1% 1.5% 20.1% 
 2012 76.4% 1.1% 1.4% 21.0% 
 2013 75.3% 1.1% 1.4% 22.1% 

Petjvesi Old Church is an old wooden Lutheran church and a UNESCO World Heritage site.

Approximately 4.1 million (or 75.3% at the end of 2013) Finns are members of the Evangelical Lutheran Church of Finland. The Evangelical Lutheran Church of Finland is one of the largest Lutheran churches in the world, although its share of the country's population has declined by roughly one percent annually in recent years. The second largest group, accounting for 22.1% of the population in 2013, has no religious affiliation. The non-religious group is growing quickly from just below 13% in the year 2000. A small minority belong to the Finnish Orthodox Church (1.1%). Other Protestant denominations and the Roman Catholic Church in Finland are significantly smaller, as are the Muslim, Jewish and other non-Christian communities (totaling 1.4%). The main Lutheran and Orthodox churches are national churches of Finland with special roles such as in state ceremonies and schools. 

In 2012, 75.3% of Finnish children were baptized Lutheran church member statistics evl.fi 1.2.2013 and 82.3% were confirmed in 2012 at the age of 15, Church statistical yesrbook 2012 The Evangelical Lutheran Church of Finland and over 90% of the funerals are Christian. However, the majority of Lutherans attend church only for special occasions like Christmas ceremonies, weddings and funerals. The Lutheran Church estimates that approximately 2% of its members attend church services weekly. The average number of church visits per year by church members is approximately two. According to a 2010 Eurobarometer poll, 33% of Finnish citizens responded that "they believe there is a God"; 42% answered that "they believe there is some sort of spirit or life force"; and 22% that "they do not believe there is any sort of spirit, God, or life force". According to ISSP survey data (2008), 8% consider themselves "highly religious", and 31% "moderately religious". http://tampub.uta.fi/bitstream/handle/10024/65683/uskonto_suomalaisten_elamassa_2011.pdf?sequence=1 In the same survey, 28% reported themselves as "agnostic" and 29% as "non-religious".

===Health===

Life expectancy was estimated in 2013 at 83.2 years for women and 76.1 years for men (average of 79.6 years). There are 307 residents for each doctor. About 19% of health care is funded directly by households and 77% by taxation.

A recent study by The Lancet medical journal found that Finland has the lowest stillbirth rate out of 193 countries, including UK, France and New Zealand. In April 2012, Finland was ranked 2nd in Gross National Happiness in a report published by The Earth Institute. 

===Society===
According to UNICEF, Finland ranks fourth in the world in child well-being (behind the Netherlands, Sweden and Denmark). 

In 1906, Finland was the first nation in the world to give full suffrage (the right to vote and to run for office) to all adult citizens, including women. Finland was the first nation in the world to give all (adult) citizens full suffrage, in other words the right to vote and to run for office (in 1906). New Zealand was the first country in the world to grant all (adult) citizens the right to vote (in 1893), but women did not get the right to run for the New Zealand legislature until 1919. Finnish women were the first in Europe to gain the franchise, and by the 1980s they routinely constituted about one-third of the membership of the Eduskunta (parliament) and held several ministerial posts. In the 1980s, about 75% of adult women worked outside the home; they made up about 48% of the work force. Finnish women were as well educated as their male counterparts, and, in some cases, the number of women studying at the university level, for example, was slightly ahead of the number of men. In addition to an expanding welfare system, which since World War II had come to provide them with substantial assistance in the area of childbearing and child-rearing, women had made notable legislative gains that brought them closer to full equality with men. 

The Equality Law that went into effect in 1987 committed the country to achieving full equality for women. In the late 1980s, there was a timetable listing specific goals to be achieved during the remainder of the twentieth century. The emphasis was to be equality for everyone, rather than protection for women. Efforts were undertaken not only to place women in occupations dominated by males, but also to bring males into fields traditionally believed to belong to the women's sphere, such as child care and elementary school teaching. Another aim was for women to occupy a more equal share of decision-making positions. After examining the position of women around the world, the Washington-based Population Crisis Committee reported in 1988 that Finland, slightly behind top-ranked Sweden and just ahead of the United States, was one of the best places in which a woman could live. The group reached this conclusion after examining the health, educational, economic, and legal conditions that affect women's lives. In a number of areas, however, the country's small feminist movement maintained that the circumstances in which Finnish women lived needed to be improved. Most striking was the disparity in wages. Although women made up just under half the work force and had a tradition of working outside the home, they earned only about two-thirds of the wages paid to men. Finland also has been relatively slow (by European standards) to deal legally with the problem of domestic violence. According to a report by Amnesty International: "Finland is repeatedly reminded of its widespread problem of violence against women and recommended to take more efficient measures to deal with the situation. International criticism concentrates on the lack of measures to combat violence against women in general and in particular on the lack of a national action plan to combat such violence and on the lack of legislation on domestic violence. (...) Compared with Sweden, Finland has been slower to reform legislation on violence against
women. In Sweden, domestic violence was already illegal in 1864, while in Finland such
violence was not outlawed until 1970, over a hundred years later. In Sweden the punishment of victims of incest was abolished in 1937, but not until 1971 in Finland. Rape within marriage was criminalised in Sweden in 1962, but the equivalent Finnish legislation only came into force in 1994  making Finland one of the last European countries to criminalise marital rape. In addition, assaults taking place on private property did not become impeachable offences in Finland until 1995. Only in 1997 did victims of sexual offences and domestic violence in Finland become entitled to government-funded counselling and support services for the duration of their court cases." (pp. 8991)  Case Closed  Rape and human rights in the Nordic countries 

Finland was ranked second in the Global Gender Gap Report 2012. http://www3.weforum.org/docs/WEF_GenderGap_Report_2012.pdf Finland has general elections every fourth year.

==Culture==
Mikael Agricola, the father of the Finnish written language.

===Education and science===
Auditorium in Aalto University's main building, designed by Alvar Aalto.

Most pre-tertiary education is arranged at municipal level. Even though many or most schools were started as private schools, today only around 3 percent of students are enrolled in private schools (mostly specialist language and international schools), much less than in Sweden and most other developed countries. Pre-school education is rare compared with other EU countries and formal education is usually started at the age of 7. Primary school takes normally six years and lower secondary school three years. Most schools are managed by municipal officials.

The flexible curriculum is set by the Ministry of Education and the Education Board. Education is compulsory between the ages of 7 and 16. After lower secondary school, graduates may either enter the workforce directly, or apply to trade schools or gymnasiums (upper secondary schools). Trade schools offer a vocational Education: Approximately 40% of an age group choose this path after the lower secondary school. Academically oriented gymnasiums have higher entrance requirements and specifically prepare for Abitur and tertiary education. Graduation from either formally qualifies for tertiary education.

In tertiary education, two mostly separate and non-interoperating sectors are found: the profession-oriented polytechnics and the research-oriented universities. Education is free and living expenses are to a large extent financed by the government through student benefits. There are 20 universities and 30 polytechnics in the country. Helsinki University is ranked 75th in the Top University Ranking of 2010. The World Economic Forum ranks Finland's tertiary education No. 1 in the world. Around 33% of residents have a tertiary degree, similar to Nordics and more than in most other OECD countries except Canada (44%), United States (38%) and Japan (37%). The proportion of foreign students is 3% of all tertiary enrollments, one of the lowest in OECD, while in advanced programs it is 7.3%, still below OECD average 16.5%. Education at Glance 2007: Finland, OECD 

More than 30% of tertiary graduates are in science-related fields. Forest improvement, materials research, environmental sciences, neural networks, low-temperature physics, brain research, biotechnology, genetic technology and communications showcase fields of study where Finnish researchers have had a significant impact. 

Finland had a long tradition of adult education, and by the 1980s nearly one million Finns were receiving some kind of instruction each year. Forty percent of them did so for professional reasons. Adult education appeared in a number of forms, such as secondary evening schools, civic and workers' institutes, study centres, vocational course centres, and folk high schools. Study centres allowed groups to follow study plans of their own making, with educational and financial assistance provided by the state. Folk high schools are a distinctly Nordic institution. Originating in Denmark in the nineteenth century, folk high schools became common throughout the region. Adults of all ages could stay at them for several weeks and take courses in subjects that ranged from handicrafts to economics. 

Finland is highly productive in scientific research. In 2005, Finland had the fourth most scientific publications per capita of the OECD countries. In 2007, 1,801 patents were filed in Finland. 

===Literature===

Written Finnish could be said to have existed since Mikael Agricola translated the New Testament into Finnish during the Protestant Reformation, but few notable works of literature were written until the nineteenth century and the beginning of a Finnish national Romantic Movement. This prompted Elias Lnnrot to collect Finnish and Karelian folk poetry and arrange and publish them as Kalevala, the Finnish national epic. The era saw a rise of poets and novelists who wrote in Finnish, notably Aleksis Kivi and Eino Leino. Many writers of the national awakening wrote in Swedish, such as the national poet Johan Ludvig Runeberg and Zachris Topelius.

After Finland became independent, there was a rise of modernist writers, most famously the Finnish-speaking Mika Waltari and Swedish-speaking Edith Sdergran. Frans Eemil Sillanp was awarded the Nobel Prize in Literature in 1939. The Second World War prompted a return to more national interests in comparison to a more international line of thought, characterized by Vin Linna. Besides Kalevala and Waltari, the Swedish-speaking Tove Jansson is the most translated Finnish writer. Popular modern writers include Arto Paasilinna, Ilkka Remes, Kari Hotakainen, Sofi Oksanen and Jari Tervo, while the best novel is annually awarded the prestigious Finlandia Prize.

===Visual arts===

Art, such as this triptych depicting the story of Aino in the Kalevala were important for promoting the idea of a Finnish nation.

Finns have made major contributions to handicrafts and industrial design. Finland's best-known sculptor of the twentieth century was Win Aaltonen, remembered for his monumental busts and sculptures. Finnish architecture is famous around the world. Among the top of the twentieth century Finnish architects to win international recognition are Eliel Saarinen (designer of the widely recognised Helsinki Central railway station and many other public works) and his son Eero Saarinen. Alvar Aalto, who helped bring functionalist architecture to Finland, is also famous for his work in furniture, textiles and glassware.

===Television===
Finland's most internationally successful TV shows are the backpacking travel documentary series Madventures and the reality TV show The Dudesons, about four childhood friends who perform stunts and play pranks on each other (in similar vein to the American TV show Jackass).

===Music===
The Finnish composer Jean Sibelius (18651957), a significant figure in the history of classical music.

====Classical====
Much of the Finland's classical music is influenced by traditional Karelian melodies and lyrics, as comprised in the Kalevala. Karelian culture is perceived as the purest expression of the Finnic myths and beliefs, less influenced by Germanic influence than the Nordic folk dance music that largely replaced the kalevaic tradition. Finnish folk music has undergone a roots revival in recent decades, and has become a part of popular music.

The people of northern Finland, Sweden and Norway, the Sami, are known primarily for highly spiritual songs called Joik. The same word sometimes refers to lavlu or vuelie songs, though this is technically incorrect.

The first Finnish opera was written by the German-born composer Fredrik Pacius in 1852. Pacius also wrote the music to the poem Maamme/Vrt land (Our Country), Finland's national anthem. In the 1890s Finnish nationalism based on the Kalevala spread, and Jean Sibelius became famous for his vocal symphony Kullervo. He soon received a grant to study runo singers in Karelia and continued his rise as the first prominent Finnish musician. In 1899 he composed Finlandia, which played its important role in Finland gaining independence. He remains one of Finland's most popular national figures and is a symbol of the nation.

Today, Finland has a very lively classical music scene and many of Finland's important composers are still alive, such as Magnus Lindberg, Kaija Saariaho, Kalevi Aho, Aulis Sallinen, and Einojuhani Rautavaara. The composers are accompanied by a large number of great conductors such as Esa-Pekka Salonen, Osmo Vnsk, Jukka-Pekka Saraste, and Leif Segerstam. Some of the internationally acclaimed Finnish classical musicians are Karita Mattila, Soile Isokoski, Pekka Kuusisto, Olli Mustonen, and Linda Lampenius.

====Pop====
Perttu Kivilaakso of Apocalyptica.
Iskelm (coined directly from the German word Schlager, meaning "hit") is a traditional Finnish word for a light popular song. Finnish popular music also includes various kinds of dance music; tango, a style of Argentine music, is also popular. The light music in Swedish-speaking areas has more influences from Sweden. Modern Finnish popular music includes a number of prominent rock bands, jazz musicians, hip hop performers, dance music acts, etc.

During the early 1960s, the first significant wave of Finnish rock groups emerged, playing instrumental rock inspired by groups such as The Shadows. Around 1964, Beatlemania arrived in Finland, resulting in further development of the local rock scene. During the late 1960s and 1970s, Finnish rock musicians increasingly wrote their own music instead of translating international hits into Finnish. During the decade, some progressive rock groups such as Tasavallan Presidentti and Wigwam gained respect abroad but failed to make a commercial breakthrough outside Finland. This was also the fate of the rock and roll group Hurriganes. The Finnish punk scene produced some internationally acknowledged names including Terveet Kdet in the 1980s. Hanoi Rocks was a pioneering 1980s glam rock act that inspired the hit American hard rock group Guns N' Roses among others. 

Many Finnish metal bands have gained international recognition. HIM and Nightwish are some of Finland's most internationally known bands. HIM's 2005 album Dark Light went gold in the United States. Apocalyptica are an internationally famous Finnish group who are most renowned for mixing strings-led classical music with classic heavy metal. Other well-known metal bands are Amorphis, Children of Bodom, Impaled Nazarene, Korpiklaani, Sentenced, Sonata Arctica, Stratovarius, Turisas, Finntroll, Ensiferum and Waltari.

After Finnish hard rock/heavy metal band Lordi won the 2006 Eurovision Song Contest, Finland hosted the competition in 2007.

===Cinema===

In the film industry, notable directors include Aki Kaurismki, Mauritz Stiller, Spede Pasanen and Hollywood film director and producer Renny Harlin. Around twelve feature films are made each year. 

===Media and communications===
Linus Torvalds, the Finnish software engineer best known for creating the popular open-source operating system Linux.

Thanks to its emphasis on transparency and equal rights, Finland's press has been rated the freest in the world. 2010 Freedom of the Press Survey (retrieved 4 May 2011). 

Today, there are around 200 newspapers, 320 popular magazines, 2,100 professional magazines, 67 commercial radio stations, three digital radio channels and one nationwide and five national public service radio channels.

Each year, around 12,000 book titles are published and 12 million records are sold. 

Sanoma publishes the newspaper Helsingin Sanomat (its circulation of 412,000 making it the largest), the tabloid Ilta-Sanomat, the commerce-oriented Taloussanomat and the television channel Nelonen. The other major publisher Alma Media publishes over thirty magazines, including the newspaper Aamulehti, tabloid Iltalehti and commerce-oriented Kauppalehti. Worldwide, Finns, along with other Nordic peoples and the Japanese, spend the most time reading newspapers. 

YLE, Finland's public broadcasting station, operates five television channels and thirteen radio channels in both national languages. YLE is funded through a mandatory television license and fees for private broadcasters. All TV channels are broadcast digitally, both terrestrially and on cable. The commercial television channel MTV3 and commercial radio channel Radio Nova are owned by Nordic Broadcasting (Bonnier and Proventus Industrier).

Around 79% of the population use the Internet. Finland had around 1.52 million broadband Internet connections by the end of June 2007 or around 287 per 1,000 inhabitants. All Finnish schools and public libraries have Internet connections and computers and most residents have a mobile phone. Value-added services are rare. Information technology has become part of Finns' everyday life (Statistics Finland). In October 2009, Finland's Ministry of Transport and Communications committed to ensuring that every person in Finland would be able to access the Internet at a minimum speed of one megabit-per-second beginning July 2010. 

===Cuisine===

Karelian pasty (karjalanpiirakka) is a traditional Finnish dish made from a thin rye crust with a filling of rice. Butter, often mixed with boiled egg (eggbutter or munavoi), is spread over the hot pastries before eating.

Finnish cuisine is notable for generally combining traditional country fare and haute cuisine with contemporary style cooking. Fish and meat play a prominent role in traditional Finnish dishes from the western part of the country, while the dishes from the eastern part have traditionally included various vegetables and mushrooms. Refugees from Karelia contributed to foods in eastern Finland.

Finnish foods often use wholemeal products (rye, barley, oats) and berries (such as bilberries, lingonberries, cloudberries, and sea buckthorn). Milk and its derivatives like buttermilk are commonly used as food, drink or in various recipes. Various turnips were common in traditional cooking, but were replaced with the potato after its introduction in the 18th century.

According to the statistics, red meat consumption has risen, but still Finns eat less beef than many other nations, and more fish and poultry. This is mainly because of the high cost of meat in Finland.

===Public holidays===

All official holidays in Finland are established by Acts of Parliament. Christian holidays include Christmas, New Year's Day, Epiphany, Easter, Ascension Day, Pentecost, Midsummer Day (St. John's Day) and All Saints' Day, while secular holidays include May Day, Independence Day, New Year's Day, and Midsummer. Christmas is the most extensively celebrated, and at least 24 to 26 December is taken as a holiday.

===Sports===
Finland's men's national ice hockey team is ranked as one of the best in the world. The team has won two world championship titles (in 1995 & 2011) and six Olympic medals.

Various sporting events are popular in Finland. Pespallo, resembling baseball, is the national sport of Finland, although the most popular sports in terms of spectators are ice hockey, athletics, cross-country skiing, ski jumping and Formula One. Tss ovat Suomen suosituimmat lajit | Urheilu. Iltalehti.fi (3 January 2012). Retrieved on 9 June 2012. 

In terms of medals and gold medals won per capita, Finland is the best performing country in Olympic history. Finland first participated at the Olympic Games in 1908, while still an autonomous Grand Duchy within the Russian Empire. At the 1912 Summer Olympics, great pride was taken in the three gold medals won by the original "Flying Finn" Hannes Kolehmainen.

Finland was one of the most successful countries at the Olympic Games before World War II. At the 1924 Summer Olympics, Finland, a nation then of only 3.2 million people, came second in the medal count. In the 1920s and 1930s, Finnish long-distance runners dominated the Olympics, with Paavo Nurmi winning a total of nine Olympic gold medals between 1920 and 1928 and setting 22 official world records between 1921 and 1931. Nurmi is often considered the greatest Finnish sportsman and one of the greatest athletes of all time.

For over 100 years, Finnish male and female athletes have consistently excelled at the javelin throw. The event has brought Finland nine Olympic gold medals, five world championships, five European championships and 24 world records.

In addition to Kolehmainen and Nurmi, some of Finland's most internationally well-known and successful sportspeople are long-distance runners Ville Ritola and Lasse Virn; ski-jumpers Matti Nyknen and Janne Ahonen; cross-country skiers Veikko Hakulinen, Eero Mntyranta, Marja-Liisa Kirvesniemi and Mika Myllyl; rower Pertti Karppinen; gymnast Heikki Savolainen; professional skateboarder Arto Saari; ice hockey players Jari Kurri, Teemu Selnne, and Saku Koivu; football players Jari Litmanen and Sami Hyypi; alpine skiers Kalle Palander and Tanja Poutiainen; Formula One world champions Keke Rosberg, Mika Hkkinen and Kimi Rikknen; four-time World Rally champions Juha Kankkunen and Tommi Mkinen; 13-time World Enduro Champion Juha Salminen, seven-time champion Kari Tiainen, and the five-time champions Mika Ahola and Samuli Aro.

The 1952 Summer Olympics were held in Helsinki. Other notable sporting events held in Finland include the 1983 and 2005 World Championships in Athletics.

Some of the most popular recreational sports and activities include floorball, Nordic walking, running, cycling and skiing, football.

Football however is the most played team sport when looking at the amount of players the country consists and the popularity of football is rising year after year. 

==International rankings==

==See also==

==Notes and references==

==Further reading==

* Chew, Allen F. The White Death: The Epic of the Soviet-Finnish Winter War (ISBN 0-87013-167-2).
* Engle, Eloise and Paananen, Pauri. The Winter War: The Soviet Attack on Finland 19391940 (ISBN 0-8117-2433-6).
* Insight Guide: Finland (ISBN 981-4120-39-1).
* Jakobson, Max. Finland in the New Europe (ISBN 0-275-96372-1).
* Jutikkala, Eino; Pirinen, Kauko. A History of Finland (ISBN 0-88029-260-1).
* Klinge, Matti. Let Us Be Finns: Essays on History (ISBN 951-1-11180-9).
* Lavery, Jason. The History of Finland, Greenwood Histories of the Modern Nations, Greenwood Press, 2006 (ISBN 0-313-32837-4, ISSN 1096-2905).
* Lewis, Richard D. Finland: Cultural Lone Wolf (ISBN 1-931930-18-X).
* Lonely Planet: Finland (ISBN 1-74059-791-5)
* Mann, Chris. Hitler's Arctic War: The German Campaigns in Norway, Finland, and the USSR 19401945 (ISBN 0-312-31100-1).
* Rusama, Jaakko. Ecumenical Growth in Finland (ISBN 951-693-239-8).
* Singleton, Fred. A Short History of Finland (ISBN 0-521-64701-0).
* Subrenat, Jean-Jacques. Listen, there's music from the forest; a brief presentation of the Kuhmo Chamber Music Festival (ISBN 952-92-0564-3).
* Swallow, Deborah. Culture Shock! Finland: A Guide to Customs and Etiquette (ISBN 1-55868-592-8).
* Trotter, William R. A Frozen Hell: The Russo-Finnish Winter War of 19391940 (ISBN 1-56512-249-6).

==External links==

;Overviews and data
* 
* 
* Finland profile from the BBC News
* Key Development Forecasts for Finland from International Futures
* Population in Finland 17502010
* Appendix figure 2. The largest groups by native language 2001 and 2011 (Statistics Finland)
* Official statistical information about Finland from Findicator.
;Government
* This is Finland, the official English-language online portal (administered by the Finnish Ministry for Foreign Affairs)
* Finland (University of Colorado at Boulder Libraries Government Publications)

;Maps
* 
* 

;Travel
* Official Travel Site of Finland



[[Flagellate]]

"Flagellata" from Encyclopdia Britannica
"Flagellata" from Ernst Haeckel's Artforms of Nature, 1904
Parasitic excavate (Giardia lamblia)
Green alga (Chlamydomonas)
A flagellate is an organism with one or more whip-like organelles called flagella. Some cells in animals may be flagellate, for instance the spermatozoa of most phyla. Flowering plants do not produce flagellate cells, but ferns, mosses, green algae, some gymnosperms and other closely related plants do. Likewise, most fungi do not produce cells with flagellae, but the primitive fungal chytrids do. Many protists take the form of single-celled flagellates.

The word flagellate describes a particular construction characteristic of many eukaryotic organisms and their means of motion. The term does not imply any specific relationship or classification of the organisms that possess flagellae. However, the term "flagellate" is included in other terms (such as "dinoflagellate" and "zooflagellate") which often are more formally characterized. 

== Form and behavior ==
Eukaryotic flagella are supported by microtubules in a characteristic arrangement, with nine fused pairs surrounding two central singlets. These arise from a basal body. In some flagellates, flagella direct food into a cytostome or mouth, where food is ingested. Flagella often support hairs, called mastigonemes, or contain rods. Their ultrastructure plays an important role in classifying eukaryotes.

Among protoctists and microscopic animals, a flagellate is an organism with one or more whip-like organelles called flagella. Some cells in animals may be flagellate, for instance the spermatozoa of most phyla. Flowering plants do not produce flagellate cells, but ferns, mosses, green algae, and some gymnosperms and closely related plants do so. Likewise, most fungi do not produce cells with flagellae, but the primitive fungal chytrids do. Many protists take the form of single-celled flagellates.

Flagella are generally used for propulsion. They may also be used to create a current that brings in food. In most things, one or more flagella are located at or near the anterior of the cell e.g. Euglena. Often there is one directed forwards and one trailing behind. Among animals, fungi, and Choanozoa, which make up a group called the opisthokonts, there is a single posterior flagellum. They are from the phylum Mastigophora. They can cause diseases and they can make their own food. They reproduce by binary fission.They spend most of their existence moving or feeding. Many parasites that affect human health or economy are flagellates. Flagellates are the major consumers of primary and secondary production in aquatic ecosystems - consuming bacteria and other protists.

== Flagellata or Mastigophora ==
In older classifications, some protozoa were grouped in Flagellata (or Mastigophora), sometimes divided in Phytoflagellata (Phytomastigina) and Zooflagellata (Zoomastigina). They were sometimes grouped with Sarcodina (ameboids) in Sarcomastigophora. 

Modern classifications place these example genera into the following groups (see Kudo system):

 Genera Classification Older classification 
 Multicilia, Mastigamoeba, Phalansterium Amoebozoa Zoomastigina 
 Ancyromonas Apusozoa Zoomastigina 
 Cercomonas Rhizaria Zoomastigina 
 Trypanosoma, Bodo, Oxymonas, Giardia, Trichomonas Excavata Zoomastigina 
 Bicosoeca Chromalveolata > Heterokontophyta > Bicosoecea Zoomastigina 
 Salpingoeca, Codosiga Opisthokonta > Choanoflagellata Zoomastigina 
 Cryptomonas Chromalveolata > Cryptophyta Phytomastigina 
 Pontosphaera Chromalveolata > Haptophyta Phytomastigina 
 Chromulina, Synura Chromalveolata > Heterokontophyta Phytomastigina 
 Prorocentrum, Peridinium Chromalveolata > Alveolata > Dinophyta Phytomastigina 
 Chlamydomonas, Volvox, Nephroselmis Archaeplastida > Viridiplantae > Chlorophyta Phytomastigina 
 Euglena Excavata > Euglenozoa Phytomastigina 

==References==

==External links==

* 
* The Flagellates. Unity, diversity and evolution. Ed.: Barry S. C. Leadbeater and J. C. Green Taylor and Francis, London 2000.

 

[[Function]]

Function may refer to:

*Function (biology), explaining why a feature survived selection
*Subroutine, also called a function, a sequence of instructions within a larger computer program
*Function (engineering), related to the selected property of a system
*Function (language), in linguistics, a way of achieving an aim using language
*Function (mathematics), a relation that associates an input to a single output according to some rule
*Function model, a structured representation of the functions, activities or processes
*Function object, or functor or functionoid, a concept of object-oriented programming
*Function Drinks, a beverage company based in Redondo Beach, California.
*Diatonic function, a term in music theory
*"Function" (song), a 2012 song by American rapper E-40 featuring YG, Iamsu! & Problem
*A social event

==See also==
*Functionalism (disambiguation)
*Function hall
*Functional (disambiguation)
*Functionality in polymer chemistry - see Structural unit
*Functor



[[Flavor]]

Flavor (or flavour; see spelling differences) is the sensory impression of a food or other substance, and is determined mainly by the chemical senses of taste and smell. The "trigeminal senses", which detect chemical irritants in the mouth and throat as well as temperature and texture, are also very important to the overall Gestalt of flavor perception. The flavor of the food, as such, can be altered with natural or artificial flavorants, which affect these senses.

Flavorant is defined as a substance that gives another substance flavor, altering the characteristics of the solute, causing it to become sweet, sour, tangy, etc.

Of the three chemical senses, smell is the main determinant of a food item's flavor. While the taste of food is limited to sweet, sour, bitter, salty, umami (savory), pungent or piquant, and metallic &ndash; the seven basic tastes &ndash; the smells of a food are potentially limitless. A food's flavor, therefore, can be easily altered by changing its smell while keeping its taste similar. Nowhere is this better exemplified than in artificially flavored jellies, soft drinks and candies, which, while made of bases with a similar taste, have dramatically different flavors due to the use of different scents or fragrances. The flavorings of commercially produced food products are typically created by flavorists.

Although the terms "flavoring" or "flavorant" in common language denote the combined chemical sensations of taste and smell, the same terms are usually used in the fragrance and flavors industry to refer to edible chemicals and extracts that alter the flavor of food and food products through the sense of smell. Due to the high cost or unavailability of natural flavor extracts, most commercial flavorants are nature-identical, which means that they are the chemical equivalent of natural flavors but chemically synthesized rather than being extracted from the source materials. Identification of nature-identical flavorants are done using technology such as headspace techniques.

==Flavorants or flavorings==
Flavorings are focused on altering the flavors of natural food product such as meats and vegetables, or creating flavor for food products that do not have the desired flavors such as candies and other snacks. Most types of flavorings are focused on scent and taste. Few commercial products exist to stimulate the trigeminal senses, since these are sharp, astringent, and typically unpleasant flavors.

There are three principal types of flavorings used in foods, under definitions agreed in the E.U. and Australia: From Australian Food Standards Guidelines 

 Type Description 
 Natural flavoring substances Flavoring substances obtained from plant or animal raw materials, by physical, microbiological or enzymatic processes. They can be either used in their natural state or processed for human consumption, but cannot contain any nature-identical or artificial flavoring substances. 
 Nature-identical flavoring substances Flavoring substances that are obtained by synthesis or isolated through chemical processes, which are chemically and organoleptically identical to flavoring substances naturally present in products intended for human consumption. They cannot contain any artificial flavoring substances. 
 Artificial flavoring substances Flavoring substances not identified in a natural product intended for human consumption, whether or not the product is processed. These are typically produced by fractional distillation and additional chemical manipulation of naturally sourced chemicals, crude oil or coal tar. Although they are chemically different, in sensory characteristics are the same as natural ones. 

===Regulations on natural flavoring===
UK Food Law defines a natural flavor as:

The U.S. Code of Federal Regulations describes a "natural flavorant" as:

The European Union's guidelines for natural flavorants are slightly different. REGULATION (EC) No 1334/2008 Certain artificial flavorants are given an E number, which may be included on food labels. COMMISSION REGULATION (EU) No 1129/2011 

Most artificial flavors are specific and often complex mixtures of singular naturally occurring flavor compounds combined together to either imitate or enhance a natural flavor. These mixtures are formulated by flavorists to give a food product a unique flavor and to maintain flavor consistency between different product batches or after recipe changes. The list of known flavoring agents includes thousands of molecular compounds, and the flavor chemist (flavorist) can often mix these together to produce many of the common flavors. Many flavorants consist of esters, which are often described as being "sweet" or "fruity". 

 Chemical Odor 
 Diacetyl Buttery 
 Isoamyl acetate Banana 
 Benzaldehyde Bitter almond 
 Cinnamic aldehyde Cinnamon 
 Ethyl propionate Fruity 
 Methyl anthranilate Grape 
 Limonene Orange 
 Ethyl decadienoate Pear 
 Allyl hexanoate Pineapple 
 Ethyl maltol Sugar, Cotton candy 
 Ethylvanillin Vanilla 
 Methyl salicylate Wintergreen 

The compounds used to produce artificial flavors are almost identical to those that occur naturally. It has been suggested that artificial flavors may be safer to consume than natural flavors due to the standards of purity and mixture consistency that are enforced either by the company or by law. Natural flavors in contrast may contain impurities from their sources while artificial flavors are typically more pure and are required to undergo more testing before being sold for consumption. 

Flavors from food products are usually the result of a combination of natural flavors, which set up the basic smell profile of a food product while artificial flavors modify the smell to accent it. 

Unlike smelling, which occurs upon inhalation, the sensing of flavors in the mouth occurs in the exhalation phase of breathing and is perceived differently by an individual. In other words, the smell of food is different depending on when you are smelling it in front of you or whether it has already entered your mouth. 

===Taste===
While salt and sugar can technically be considered flavorants that enhance salty and sweet tastes, usually only compounds that enhance umami, as well as other secondary flavors are considered and referred to as taste flavorants. Artificial sweeteners are also technically flavorants. 

Umami or "savory" flavorants, more commonly called taste or flavor enhancers, are largely based on amino acids and nucleotides. These are typically used as sodium or calcium salts. Umami flavorants recognized and approved by the European Union include :

 Acid Description 
 Glutamic acid salts This amino acid's sodium salt, monosodium glutamate (MSG), is one of the most commonly used flavor enhancers in food processing. Mono and diglutamate salts are also commonly used. 
 Glycine salts Simple amino acid salts typically combined with glutamic acid as flavor enhancers. 
 Guanylic acid salts Nucleotide salts typically combined with glutamic acid as flavor enhancers. 
 Inosinic acid salts Nucleotide salts created from the breakdown of AMP. Due to high costs of production, typically combined with glutamic acid as flavor enhancers. 
 5'-ribonucleotide salts Nucleotide salts typically combined with other amino acids and nucleotide salts as flavor enhancers. 

Certain organic and inorganic acids can be used to enhance sour tastes, but like salt and sugar these are usually not considered and regulated as flavorants under law. Each acid imparts a slightly different sour or tart taste that alters the flavor of a food.

 Acid Description 
 Acetic acid Gives vinegar its sour taste and distinctive smell 
 Ascorbic acid Found in oranges and green peppers and gives a crisp, slightly sour taste. Better known as vitamin C. 
 Citric acid Found in citrus fruits and gives them their sour taste 
 Fumaric acid Not found in fruits, used as a substitute for citric and tartaric acid 
 Lactic acid Found in various milk or fermented products and give them a rich tartness 
 Malic acid Found in apples and gives them their sour/tart taste 
 Phosphoric acid Used in all cola drinks to give an acid taste 
 Tartaric acid Found in grapes and wines and gives them a tart taste 

===Color===
The color of food can affect one's expectations of the flavor significantly. 
In one study, adding more red color to a drink increased the sweetness with darker colored solutions being rated 210% better than lighter ones, even though it had 1% less sucrose concentration. 

==Dietary restrictions==
Food manufacturers are sometimes reluctant about informing consumers about the source from where the flavor is obtained and whether it has been produced with the incorporation of substances such as animal by-products glycerin (note that glycerin is also available from vegetable sources), gelatin, and the like, and the use of alcohol in the flavors. Many Jews, Jains, Hindus, and Muslims adhere to religious dietary laws, and vegans to personal convictions, which restrict the use of animal by-products and/or alcohol in foods unless subject to oversight and inspection by their respective religious authority or moral beliefs. 
In many Western countries, some consumers rely on a Jewish Kosher Pareve certification mark to indicate that natural flavorings used in a food product are free of meat and dairy (although they can still contain fish). The Vegan Society's Sunflower symbol (which is currently used by over 260 companies worldwide) can also be used to see which products do not use any animal ingredients (including flavorings and colorings).

Similarly, persons with known sensitivities or allergies to food products are advised to avoid foods that contain generic "natural flavors" or to first determine the source of the flavoring before consuming the food. Such flavors may be derived from a variety of source products that are themselves common allergens, such as dairy, soy, sesame, eggs, and nuts. 

==Flavor creation==
Most food and beverage companies do not create their own flavors but instead employ the services of a flavor company. Food and beverage companies may require flavors for new products, product line extensions (e.g., low fat versions of existing products) or changes in formula or processing for existing products. In 2011, about US$10.6 billion were generated with the sale of flavors; the majority of the flavors used are consumed in processed and packaged food. Artificial strawberry flavoring, being the easiest to create, is manufactured by vaporizing the strawberry natural flavoring. Ceresana, market study Flavors, December 2012, http://www.ceresana.com/en/market-studies/chemicals/flavors/ 

The flavor creation is done by a specially trained scientist called a "flavorist". The flavorist's job combines extensive scientific knowledge of the chemical palette with artistic creativity to develop new and distinctive flavors. The flavor creation begins when the flavorist receives a brief from the client. In the brief the client will attempt to communicate exactly what type of flavor they seek, in what application it will be used, and any special requirements (e.g., must be all natural). The communication barrier can be quite difficult to overcome since most people aren't experienced at describing flavors. The flavorist will use his or her knowledge of the available chemical ingredients to create a formula and compound it on an electronic balance. The flavor will then be submitted to the client for testing. Several iterations, with feedback from the client, may be needed before the right flavor is found.

Additional work may also be done by the flavor company. For example, the flavor company may conduct sensory taste tests to test consumer acceptance of a flavor before it is sent to the client or to further investigate the "sensory space." The flavor company may also employ application specialists who work to ensure the flavor will work in the application for which it is intended. This may require special flavor delivery technologies that are used to protect the flavor during processing or cooking so that the flavor is only released when eaten by the end consumer.

==Determination==
Few standards are available or being prepared for sensory analysis of flavors. e.g. ISO 13301:2002 Sensory analysis -- Methodology -- General guidance for measuring odor, flavor and taste detection thresholds by a three-alternative forced-choice (3-AFC) procedure. or ISO 6564:1985 Sensory analysis -- Methodology -- Flavor profile methods. In chemical analysis of flavors, solid phase extraction (SPE), solid phase microextraction (SPME), and headspace gas chromatography are applied to extract and separate the flavor compounds in the sample. The determination is typically done by various mass spectrometric techniques. Use of Ozone Depleting Substances in Laboratories. TemaNord 2003:516. norden.org 

== Scientific resources ==
* Flavour and Fragrance Journal

==See also==

* ester (for list of some artificial flavor chemical compounds)
* food additive
* fragrance oil
* katsuobushi
* off-flavours
* palatability
* seasoning
* taste bud

==References==

==External links==

* How Stuff Works How do artificial flavors work?
* The Science in artificial flavor creation
* Monell Chemical Senses Center
* Flavourists view
* The Science of taste

 



[[Frisian languages]]

The Frisian Laurie Bauer, 2007, The Linguistics Students Handbook, Edinburgh languages are a closely related group of Germanic languages, spoken by about 500,000 members of Frisian ethnic groups, who live on the southern fringes of the North Sea in the Netherlands, Germany and Denmark. The Frisian dialects are close living languages to English, after Scots. However, modern English and Frisian are mostly unintelligible to each other. Frisian languages bear similarities to Low German, Dutch (from which many Frisian words have been borrowed), and Danish. Additional shared linguistic characteristics between the Great Yarmouth area, Friesland, and Denmark are likely to have resulted from the close trading relationship these areas maintained during the centuries-long Hanseatic League of the Late Middle Ages.

==Division==
There are three varieties of Frisian: West Frisian, Saterland Frisian, and North Frisian. Some linguists consider these three varieties, despite their mutual unintelligibility, to be dialects of one single Frisian language, whereas others consider them to be three separate languages, as do their speakers. West Frisian is strongly influenced by Dutch, and, similar to Dutch, is described as being "between" English and German. The other Frisian varieties, meanwhile, have been influenced by German, Low German, and Danish. The North Frisian language especially is further segmented into several strongly diverse dialects. Stadsfries is not Frisian, but a Dutch dialect influenced by Frisian. Frisian is called Frysk in West Frisian, Frisk in Saterland Frisian, and Frasch, Fresk, Freesk, and Friisk in the dialects of North Frisian.

The situation in the Dutch province of Groningen and the German region of East Frisia is more complex: The local Low Saxon dialects of Gronings and East Frisian Low Saxon are a mixture of Frisian and Low Saxon dialects; it is believed that Frisian was spoken there at one time, only to have been gradually replaced by the language of the city of Groningen. This local language is now, in turn, being replaced by standard Dutch.

===Speakers===
Most Frisian speakers live in the Netherlands, primarily in the province of Friesland, since 1997 officially using its West Frisian name of Frysln, where the number of native speakers is about 350,000. An increasing number of native Dutch speakers in the province are learning Frisian as a second language. 

In Germany, there are about 2,000 "Gegenwrtige Schtzungen schwanken zwischen 1.500 und 2.500." Marron C. Fort: Das Saterfriesische. In: Horst Haider Munske,Nils rhammar: Handbuch des Friesischen  Handbook of Frisian Studies. Niemayer (Tbingen 2001). speakers of Saterland Frisian in the Saterland region of Lower Saxony; the Saterland's marshy fringe areas have long protected Frisian speech there from pressure by the surrounding Low German and standard German.

In the Nordfriesland (North Frisia) region of the German province of Schleswig-Holstein, there are 10,000 Ethnologue.com North Frisian speakers. Although many of these live on the mainland, most are found on the islands, notably Sylt, Fhr, Amrum, and Heligoland. The local corresponding North Frisian dialects are still in use.

===Status===
Saterland and North Frisian Gesetz zur Frderung des Friesischen im ffentlichen Raum - Wikisource are officially recognised and protected as minority languages in Germany, and West Frisian is one of the two official languages in the Netherlands, the other being Dutch.
ISO 639-1 code fy and ISO 639-2 code fry were assigned to "Frisian", but that was changed in November 2005 to "Western Frisian". According to the ISO 639 Registration Authority the "previous usage of code has been for Western Frisian, although language name was "Frisian". 

The new ISO 639 code stq is used for the Saterland Frisian language, a variety of Eastern Frisian (not to be confused with East Frisian Low Saxon, a West Low German dialect).
The new ISO 639 code frr is used for the North Frisian language variants spoken in parts of Schleswig-Holstein.

The Ried fan de Fryske Beweging took care of the Frisian language varieties being constitutionalized. Nevertheless, Saterland Frisian and most dialects of North Frisian are seriously endangered. Matthias Brenzinger, Language Diversity Endangered, Mouton de Gruter, The Hague: 222 

==History==
Old Frisian text from 1345.

===Old Frisian===

In the early Middle Ages the Frisian lands stretched from the area around Bruges, in what is now Belgium, to the river Weser, in northern Germany. At that time, the Frisian language was spoken along the entire southern North Sea coast. Today this region is sometimes referred to as Great Frisia or Frisia Magna, and many of the areas within it still treasure their Frisian heritage, even though in most places the Frisian languages have been lost.

Frisian is the language most closely related to English and Scots, but after at least five hundred years of being subject to the influence of Dutch, modern Frisian in some aspects bears a greater similarity to Dutch than to English; one must also take into account the centuries-long drift of English away from Frisian. Thus the two languages have become less mutually intelligible over time, partly due to the marks which Dutch and Low German have left on Frisian, and partly due to the vast influence some languages (in particular Norman French) have had on English throughout the centuries. Although intelligibility is often strained between the two languages (especially spoken), the Northumbrian dialect of English bears a striking similarity to Frisian in many ways.

Old Frisian, Rolf H. Bremmer Jr, An Introduction to Old Frisian. History, Grammar, Reader, Glossary (Amsterdam & Philadelphia, 2009) however, was very similar to Old English. Historically, both English and Frisian are marked by the loss of the Germanic nasal in word like us (s; uns in German), soft (sft; sanft) or goose (goes; Gans): see Anglo-Frisian nasal spirant law. Also, when followed by some vowels, the Germanic k softened to a ch sound; for example, the Frisian for cheese and church is tsiis and tsjerke, whereas in Dutch it is kaas and kerk, and in High German the respective words are Kse and Kirche. Contrarily, this did not happen for chin and choose, which are kin and kieze. 

One rhyme demonstrates the palpable similarity between Frisian and English: "Butter, bread, and green cheese is good English and good Frise," which is pronounced more or less the same in both languages (Frisian: "Bter, brea, en griene tsiis is goed Ingelsk en goed Frysk.") The History of English: A Linguistic Introduction. Scott Shay, Wardja Press, 2008, ISBN 0-615-16817-5, ISBN 978-0-615-16817-3 

One major difference between Old Frisian and modern Frisian is that in the Old Frisian period (c.1150-c.1550) grammatical cases still existed. Some of the texts that are preserved from this period are from the twelfth or thirteenth, but most are from the fourteenth and fifteenth centuries. Generally, all these texts are restricted to legalistic writings. Although the earliest definite written examples of Frisian are from approximately the 9th century, there are a few examples of runic inscriptions from the region which are probably older and possibly in the Frisian language. These runic writings however usually do not amount to more than single- or few-word inscriptions, and cannot be said to constitute literature as such. The transition from the Old Frisian to the Middle Frisian period (c.1550-c.1820) in the sixteenth century is based on the fairly abrupt halt in the use of Frisian as a written language.

===Middle Frisian===

Up until the fifteenth century Frisian was a language widely spoken and written, but from 1500 onwards it became an almost exclusively oral language, mainly used in rural areas. This was in part due to the occupation of its stronghold, the Dutch province of Friesland (Frysln), in 1498, by Duke Albert of Saxony, who replaced Frisian as the language of government with Dutch.

Afterwards this practice was continued under the Habsburg rulers of the Netherlands (the German Emperor Charles V and his son, the Spanish King Philip II), and even when the Netherlands became independent, in 1585, Frisian did not regain its former status. The reason for this was the rise of Holland as the dominant part of the Netherlands, and its language, Dutch, as the dominant language in judicial, administrative and religious affairs.

In this period the great Frisian poet Gysbert Japiks (160366), a schoolteacher and cantor from the city of Bolsward, who largely fathered modern Frisian literature and orthography, was really an exception to the rule.

His example was not followed until the nineteenth century, when entire generations of Frisian authors and poets appeared. This coincided with the introduction of the so-called newer breaking system, a prominent grammatical feature in almost all West Frisian dialects, with the notable exception of Southwest Frisian. Therefore, the Modern Frisian period is considered to have begun at this point in time, around 1820.

==Family tree==
Each of the Frisian languages has several dialects. Between some, the differences are such that they rarely hamper understanding; only the number of speakers justifies the denominator of "dialect". In other cases, even neighbouring dialects may hardly be mutually intelligible.

*West Frisian language, spoken in the Netherlands.
** Clay Frisian (Klaaifrysk)
*** Westereendersk
** Wood Frisian (Wldfrysk)
*** Noardhoeks
** South Frisian (Sdhoeks)
** Southwest Frisian (Sdwesthoeksk)
** Schiermonnikoogs
** Hindeloopen Frisian
** Aasters
** Westers
*East Frisian language, spoken in Lower Saxony, Germany.
** Saterland Frisian language
** Several extinct dialects
*** Wangerooge Frisian
*** Wursten Frisian
*North Frisian language, spoken in Schleswig-Holstein, Germany.
** Mainland dialects
***Mooring
***Goesharde Frisian (Hoorning)
***Wiedingharde Frisian
***Halligen Frisian
***Karrharde Frisian
** Island dialects
***Sl'ring
***Fering
***mrang
***Heligolandic (Halunder)

==Text samples==

===The Lord's Prayer===
The Lord's Prayer in Standard Western Frisian (Frysk):

:Us Heit, dy't yn de himelen is
:jins namme wurde hillige.
:Jins keninkryk komme.
:Jins wollen barre,
:allyk yn 'e himel
:sa ek op ierde.
:Jou s hjoed s deistich brea.
:En ferjou s s skulden,
:allyk ek wy ferjouwe s skuldners.
:En lied s net yn fersiking,
:mar ferlos s fan 'e kweade.
:Jowes is it keninkryk en de krft
:en de hearlikheid oant yn ivichheid. "Amen"

The English translation in the 1662 Anglican Book of Common Prayer:

:Our Father, which art in Heaven
:Hallowed be thy Name.
:Thy Kingdom come.
:Thy will be done,
:in earth as it is in Heaven.
:Give us this day our daily bread.
:And forgive us our trespasses,
:As we forgive them that trespass against us.
:And lead us not into temptation;
:But deliver us from evil.
:thine is the kingdom, the power, and the glory,
:For ever and ever. Amen.

(NB: Which was changed to "who", in earth to "on earth," and them that to "those who" in the 1928 version of the Church of England prayer book and used in other later Anglican prayer books too. However, the words given here are those of the original 1662 book as stated)

===Comparative sentence===
*Saterland Frisian: Die Wnt strookede dt Wucht uum ju Keeuwe un oapede hier ap do Sooken.
*North Frisian (Mooring dialect): Di dreng aide dt foomen am dt kan n mket har aw da siike.
*West Frisian: De jonge streake it famke om it kin en tute har op 'e wangen.
*Gronings: t Jong fleerde t wicht om kinne tou en smokte heur op wange.
*East Frisian Low Saxon: De Fent/Jung straktde dat Wicht um't Kinn to un tuutjede hr up de Wangen.
*
*
*
*
*
*
*Lancashire dialect and accent: Th' lad strorkt 'lass on 'jib an busst er on th' cheaks.
*Modern Scots: The laddie straikit the lassie aboot the chin an kisst her on the chowk.

==See also==
*Frisia
*Frisian Islands
*Frisians

==References==

===Notes===

===General references===

*Omniglot links to various Frisian resources
*Tresoar - Frisian Historical and Literary Centre
*

==External links==

*The Frisian foundation
*Frisian-English dictionary
*'Hover & Hear' Frisian pronunciations, and compare with equivalents in English and other Germanic languages.
*
*Description of language including audio files
*Frisian radio
*Radio news in North Frisian

 



[[French language]]

French ( or ) is a Romance language, belonging to the Indo-European family that is an official language in 29 countries, most of which form la francophonie (in French), the community of French-speaking countries. It is an official language of all United Nations agencies and of a large number of international organizations, including the European Union, NATO, WTO, and the ICRC. In 2011, French was deemed by Bloomberg Businessweek to be one of the top three most useful languages for business, behind English and Chinese, but ahead of Spanish and other European languages. Mandarin Chinese Most Useful Business Language After English John Lauerman, Aug 30, 2011, Bloomberg News 

French is spoken as a first language in France, the Romandy region in Switzerland, Wallonia and Brussels in Belgium, Monaco, the provinces of Quebec, Ontario and New Brunswick (Acadia region) in Canada, also in Haiti, the Acadiana region of the U.S. state of Louisiana, the northern parts of the U.S. states of Maine, New Hampshire and Vermont in the New England region, and by various communities elsewhere. Other speakers of French, who often speak it as a second language, are distributed throughout many parts of the world, the largest numbers of whom reside in Francophone Africa. La Francophonie dans le monde 20062007 published by the Organisation internationale de la Francophonie. Nathan, Paris, 2007. In Africa, French is most commonly spoken in Gabon (where 80% report fluency), Mauritius (78%), Algeria (75%), Senegal and Cte d'Ivoire (70%). French is estimated as having 110 million native speakers and 190 million more second language speakers. The World's 10 Most Influential Languages Top Languages. Retrieved 11 April 2011. 

French is an Italic language descended from the spoken Latin language of the Roman Empire, as are languages such as Italian, Portuguese, Spanish, Romanian, Lombard, Catalan, Sicilian and Sardinian. Its closest relatives are the other langues d'ollanguages historically spoken in northern France and in Belgium, which French has largely supplanted. French was also influenced by native Celtic languages of Roman Gaul and by the (Germanic) Frankish language of the post-Roman Frankish invaders. Today, owing to France's past overseas expansion, there are numerous French-based creole languages, most notably Haitian.

According to France's Ministry of Foreign and European Affairs, 77 million in Europe speak French natively. Outside of France, the highest numbers of French speakers are found in Canada (25% of the population, of whom most live in Quebec), Belgium (45% of the population), Switzerland (20% of the population) and Luxembourg. In 2013, the Ministry identified French as the second most spoken language in Europe, after German and before English. Twenty percent of non-Francophone Europeans know how to speak French, totaling roughly 145.6 million people in Europe alone. As a result of extensive colonial ambitions of France and Belgium (at that time governed by a French-speaking elite), between the 17th and 20th centuries, French was introduced to colonies in the Americas, Africa, Polynesia, the Levant, Southeast Asia, and the Caribbean.

According to a demographic projection led by the Universit Laval and the Rseau Dmographie de l'Agence universitaire de la francophonie, French speakers will number approximately 500 million people in 2025 and 650 million people, or approximately 7% of the world's population by 2050. Estimates in 2013 suggest that French speakers will reach 1 billion by 2060. http://www.lefigaro.fr/culture/2013/03/20/03004-20130320ARTFIG00318-un-milliard-de-francophones-en-2060.php 

==Geographic distribution==

=== Europe ===
Spoken by 12% of the EU population, French is the third most widely spoken mother tongue in the European Union (after German at 18% and English at 13%); it is also the third most widely known language of the Union, after English (47% of the EU population report to know how to speak English, whilst 30% of Europeans understand German and 23% master French). European Commission. (2005). Europeans and Languages 

====Legal status in France====

According to the Constitution of France, French has been the official language of the Republic since 1992 Loi constitutionnelle 1992  (although the ordinance of Villers-Cotterts have made it official since 1539). France mandates the use of French in official government publications, public education except in specific cases (though these dispositions are often ignored) and legal contracts; advertisements must bear a translation of foreign words.
In addition to French, there are a variety of regional languages and dialects who are constitutionally recognised as being part of the French patrimony. France has signed the European Charter for Regional Languages, but did not ratify it since it was ruled non-compliant by the Constitutional council in 1999. Has decided as follows:  Article 1  The European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages contains clauses contrary to the Constitution. The European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages and Education Mercator Retrieved 11 April 2011 

====Belgium====

Bilingual signs in Brussels.

In Belgium, French is the official language of Wallonia (excluding a part of the East Cantons, which are German-speaking) and one of the two official languagesalong with Dutchof the Brussels-Capital Region, where it is spoken by the majority of the population, though often not as their primary language. 
  The linguistic situation in Belgium (and in particular various estimations of the population speaking French and Dutch in Brussels) is discussed in detail. French and German are not official languages nor recognized minority languages in the Flemish Region, although along borders with the Walloon and Brussels-Capital regions, there are a dozen municipalities with language facilities for French speakers. A mirror situation exists for the Walloon Region with respect to the Dutch and German languages. In total, native French speakers make up about 40% of the country's population, while the remaining 60% speak Dutch as a first language. Of the latter, 59% claim French as a second or third language, meaning that about three quarters of the Belgian population can speak French. 
 40%+60%*59%=75.4% 

====Switzerland====

French is one of the four official languages of Switzerland (along with German, Italian and Romansh) and is spoken in the western part of Switzerland called Romandie, of which Geneva is the largest city. The language divisions in Switzerland do not coincide with political subdivisions and some cantons have bilingual status for example, cities such Biel/Bienne or cantons such as Valais-Fribourg-Berne. French is the native language of about 20% of the Swiss population and is spoken by 50.4% of the population.

Most of Swiss French is mutually compatible with the standard French spoken in France, but it is often used with small differences, such as those involving numbers after 69 and slight differences in other vocabulary terms.

====Monaco and Andorra====

Although Mongasque is the national language of the Principality of Monaco, French is the only official language, and French nationals make up some 47% of the population.

Catalan is the only official language of Andorra; however, French is commonly used because of the proximity to France and the fact that the French President is, with the bishop of Urgell, Spain, a co-prince of the territory. French nationals make up 7% of the population.
French EU map.svg|right|thumb|Knowledge of French in the European Union and candidate countries [http://ec.europa.eu/public_opinion/archives/ebs/ebs_243_en.pdf EUROPA, data for EU25, published before 2007 enlargement. ]]

====Luxembourg====

French is one of three official languages of the Grand Duchy of Luxembourg, alongside German and Luxembourgish, the natively spoken language of Luxembourg. French is primarily used for administrative purposes by the government, and is also the primary language used to converse with foreigners. Luxembourg's education system is trilingual: the first cycle of basic school is in Luxembourgish, before changing officially to German for most branches; while in secondary school, the language of instruction changes to French for most subjects, such as mathematics and science. At the Luxembourg University courses are offered in French, German and English. 

====Italy====

French is also an official language in the small region of Aosta Valley, Italy. Though most non-Italophone people in the region speak Franco-Provenal as their mother tongue, http://www.fondchanoux.org/risultatisondage_1_0_555.aspx they use standard French to write, because the international recognition of Franco-Provenal as a separate language (as opposed to a dialect or patois of French) was quite recent. In 2001, 75.41% of the Valdotainian population is French-speaking, 96.01% declared to know Italian, 55.77% the Valdotainian Franco-Provenal patois, and 50.53% all of them. Assessorat de l'ducation et la culture de la rgion autonome Valle d'Aoste - Dpartement de la surintendance des coles, Profil de la politique linguistique ducative, Le Chteau d., 2009, p. 20. 

====The United Kingdom and the Channel Islands====

French is a large minority language and immigrant language in the United Kingdom. Over 310,000 French people live in the UK, and the language is also spoken by a large number of the African immigrants in the UK. French is also the most popular foreign language studied in UK schools. According to a 2006 European Commission report, 23% of UK residents are able to carry on a conversation in French. 

Modern and Middle English reflect a mixture of Ol and Old English lexicons after the Norman Conquest of England in 1066, when a Norman-speaking aristocracy took control of a population whose mother tongue was Germanic in origin. Due to the intertwined histories of England and continental possessions of the English Crown, many formal and legal words from Modern English have French roots. Therefore words such as buy and sell are of Germanic origin, purchase and vend are from Old French.

French is an official language in both Jersey and Guernsey. Both use French to some degree, mostly in an administrative or ceremonial capacity. Jersey Legal French is the standardized variety used in Jersey. However, Norman (in its local forms, Guernsiais and Jrriais) is the historical vernacular of the islands.

===North and South America===

==== Canada ====

The "arrt" signs (French for "stop") are used in Canada while the international stop, which is also a valid French word, is used in France as well as other French-speaking countries and regions.

French is the second most common language in Canada, after English, and both are official languages at the federal level. French is the sole official language in the province of Quebec, being the mother tongue for some 7 million people, or almost 80.1% (2006 Census) of the province. About 95.0% of the people of Quebec speak French as either their first or second language, and for some as their third language. Quebec is also home to the city of Montreal, which is the world's fourth largest French speaking city, by number of first language speakers. New Brunswick and Manitoba are the only officially bilingual provinces, though full bilingualism is enacted only in New Brunswick, where about one third of the population is Francophone. French is also an official language of all of the territories (Northwest Territories, Nunavut, and Yukon). Out of the three, Yukon has the most French speakers, comprising just under 4% of the population. Furthermore, while French is not an official language in Ontario, the French Language Services Act ensures that provincial services are to be available in the language. The Act applies to areas of the province where there are significant Francophone communities, namely Eastern Ontario and Northern Ontario. Elsewhere, sizable French-speaking minorities are found in southern Manitoba, Nova Scotia, and the Port au Port Peninsula in Newfoundland and Labrador, where the unique Newfoundland French dialect was historically spoken. Smaller pockets of French speakers exist in all other provinces.

About 9,487,500 of Canadians speak French as their first language, or around 30% of the country, with 2,065,300 constituting secondary speakers. Due to the increased bilingual school programs and French immersion classes in English Canada, the portion of Canadians proficient in French has risen significantly in the past two decades, and is still rising.

The difference between French spoken in Quebec and French spoken in France is similar in degree to that between American and British English.
In Quebec, where the majority of French-speaking Canadians live, the Office qubcois de la langue franaise () regulates Quebec French and ensures the Charter of the French Language (Bill 101 & 104) is respected.

==== Haiti ====

French is one of Haiti's two official languages. It is the principal language of writing, school instruction, and administrative use. It is spoken by all educated Haitians and is used in the business sector. It is also used in ceremonial events such as weddings, graduations and church masses. About 70%80% of the country's population have French as their first language; the rest speak it as a secondary language in varying degrees of proficiency from basic level to fluent. The second official language is the recently standardized Haitian Creole, which virtually the entire population of Haiti speaks. Haitian Creole is one of the French-based creole languages, drawing the large majority of its vocabulary from French, with influences from West African languages, as well as several European languages. Haitian Creole is closely related to Louisiana Creole and the creole from the Lesser Antilles. Ministere de L'eduaction Nationale 

====French overseas regions and collectivities in the Americas====
French is the official language in France's overseas regions of French Guiana, Guadeloupe, and Martinique, and overseas collectivities of Saint Barthlemy, St. Martin and Saint Pierre and Miquelon. These overseas regions and collectivities had a population of 1,094,442 inhabitants in Jan. 2013:
*Guadeloupe: 405,739
*Martinique: 386,486
*French Guiana: 250,109
*Saint Martin: 36,703
*Saint Barthlemy: 9,343
*Saint Pierre and Miquelon: 6,062

====United States====

French language spread in the United States. Counties marked in yellow are those where 612% of the population speaks French at home; brown, 1218%; red, over 18%. French-based creole languages are not included. According to the U.S. Census Bureau (2011), French is the fourth Language Use in the United States: 2011, American Community Survey Reports, Camille Ryan, Issued August 2013 most-spoken language in the United States after English, Spanish, and Chinese, when all forms of French are considered together and all dialects of Chinese are similarly combined. French remains the second most-spoken language in the states of Louisiana, Maine, Vermont and New Hampshire.

Louisiana is home to many distinct dialects, collectively known as Louisiana French. Cajun French has the largest number of speakers, mostly living in Acadiana. According to the 2000 United States Census, there are over 194,000 people in Louisiana who speak French at home, the most of any state if Creole French is excluded. U.S. Census Bureau, Census 2000 Summary File 3  Language Spoken at Home: 2000. New England French, essentially a variant of Canadian French, is spoken in parts of New England. Missouri French was historically spoken in Missouri and Illinois (formerly known as Upper Louisiana), but is nearly extinct today. 

====Brazil====
The Portuguese language is heavily influenced by more than a millennium of perennial contact with several dialects of both Ol (chiefly French after France became the major European power) and Occitan (chiefly Provenal around the troubadour apex in the Middle Ages, see Galician-Portuguese lyric), in lexicon (up to 1520% in some estimates, at least 5000 word roots), phonology (chiefly among the European and more Europeanized Brazilian dialects) and orthography. Exhibition at the Museum of the Portuguese Language shows the French influence in our language Contacts between French and Portuguese or the first's influences on the second The influence of loanwords in the Portuguese language: a process of globalization, ideology and communication After greater and continual Portuguese immigration, and Tupi influence, Dialects of Brazil: the palatalization of the phonemes /t/ and /d/ the status of French as a language of culture in the Western world for centuries and the presence of Swiss immigrants (sixth largest European group to Brazil) for a considerable span of time is popularly regarded to be the main source of difference between the group of dialects spoken in Florianpolis, Rio de Janeiro, Esprito Santo and surrounding regions, and those elsewhere in Brazil (it was also more indirectly influenced by French due to the larger Portuguese influence there and the stronger Francophile feel in the Portuguese culturePortuguese and French influence are often confused). What is the territorial formation of the state of Rio de Janeiro  Yahoo! Answers Portugal's Portuguese got an apparent French influence due to Napoleon's invasion of Portugal?  Yahoo! Answers What is the French influence on our Portuguese language?  Yahoo! Answers The learning of French is historically the most important and has always been strong among the Lusophone high societies, and for a great span of time it was also a foreign language strong among the class general populaces of both Portugal and Brazil, only surpassed in the globalised postmodernity by English, in both, and more recently by Spanish, in the latter. The importance of the French language in Brazil: marks and milestones in the early periods of teaching Presence of the French language and literature in Brazil  for a history of Franco-Brazilian bonds of cultural affection What are the French thinking influences still present in Brazil? France in Brazil Year  the importance of cultural diplomacy 

The French language was also briefly spoken in Brazil during the colonial attempts of France Antarctique and France quinoxiale at the 16th and 17th centuries respectively (the expulsing of early French colonists by the Portuguese culminated on the founding of the cities of Rio de Janeiro and So Lus respectively). Also, as mentioned above, the language was used by several communities of immigrants and expatriates in the 18th, 19th and 20th centuries, chiefly Swiss, but also some French and Belgians, and the anti-Portuguese factor of Brazilian nationalism in the 19th century led to an increased use of the French language in detriment of Portuguese, as France was seen at the time as a model of civilization and progress. , p. 19 

Today the Karipuna indigenous community (nearly 30,000 people) of Amap in Northern Brazil speaks a French creole, the Lanc-Patu creole, possibly related to the French Guiana Creole.

===Africa===
French is the fastest growing language on the continent (in terms of either official or foreign language). 

French-language signs outside a drugstore (pharmacy) in Port-Bout, Abidjan, in 2009.

A majority of the world's French-speaking population lives in Africa. According to the 2007 report by the Organisation internationale de la Francophonie, an estimated 115 million African people spread across 31 Francophone countries can speak French as either a first or a second language. This number does not include the people living in non-Francophone African countries who have learned French as a foreign language. Due to the rise of French in Africa, the total French-speaking population worldwide is expected to reach 700 million people in 2050. 

French is mostly a second language in Africa, but it has become a first language in some urban areas, such as the region of Abidjan, Cte d'Ivoire Le franais  Abidjan : Pour une approche syntaxique du non-standard by Katja Ploog, CNRS Editions, Paris, 2002. and in Libreville, Gabon. French is also becoming a first language in Ouagadougou, Burkina Faso. Faso#Le fran.C3.A7ais langue officielle et administrative] The classification of French as a second language in Francophone Africa is debatable because it is often the only language spoken and written in schools, administration, radio, television and the Internet; for many Africans, it is the only language in which they know how to read and write fluently. The following thirteen countries use French exclusively to teach school: Bnin, Burkina Faso, Centrafrique, Congo, Congo (Rpublique dmocratique du), Cte d'Ivoire, Gabon, Guine, Mali, Niger, Sngal, Tchad and Togo. The prevalence of the language is noticeable in popular music, in which French is often mixed with various indigenous languages. There is not a single African French, but multiple forms that diverged through contact with various indigenous African languages. "En Afrique, il est impossible de parler d'une forme unique du franais mais..." In fact, the term African French is a misnomer, as forms are different from country to country, and the root of the French spoken in a particular country depends on its former colonial empire. French spoken in Benin, for example, is closer to that spoken in France than to French spoken in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, which is chiefly derived from Belgian French.

In the territories of the Indian Ocean, the French language is often spoken alongside French-derived creole languages, the major exception being Madagascar. There, a Malayo-Polynesian language (Malagasy) is spoken alongside French.

Sub-Saharan Africa is the region where the French language is most likely to expand, because of the expansion of education and rapid population growth. France-Diplomatie "Furthermore, the demographic growth of Southern hemisphere countries leads us to anticipate a new increase in the overall number of French speakers." It is also where the language has evolved the most in recent years. "Le franais, langue en volution. Dans beaucoup de pays francophones, surtout sur le continent africain, une proportion importante de la population ne parle pas couramment le franais (mme s'il est souvent la langue officielle du pays). Ce qui signifie qu'au fur et  mesure que les nouvelles gnrations vont  l'cole, le nombre de francophones augmente : on estime qu'en 2015, ceux-ci seront deux fois plus nombreux qu'aujourd'hui." c) Le sabir franco-africain: Some vernacular forms of French in Africa can be difficult to understand for French speakers from other countries, Rpublique centrafricaine: (One example of a variety of African French that is difficult to understand for European French speakers). but written forms of the language are very closely related to those of the rest of the French-speaking world.

French is an official language in the following African countries, most of them former French or Belgian colonies:

* Benin
* Burkina Faso
* Burundi
* Cameroon
* Central African Republic
* Chad
* Comoros
* Congo, Republic of the
* Cte d'Ivoire
* Democratic Republic of the Congo
* Djibouti
* Equatorial Guinea (former colony of Spain)
* Gabon
* Guinea
* Madagascar
* Mali
* Mauritius
* Niger
* Rwanda
* Senegal
* Seychelles
* Togo

In addition, French is an administrative language and widely used, though not on an official basis, in Mauritius, where approximately 78% of the population speak French. French is also spoken in the Maghreb states:
* Algeria (see also languages of Algeria)
* Mauritania (see also languages of Mauritania)
* Morocco (see also languages of Morocco)
* Tunisia (see also languages of Tunisia)

====Algeria====
Algiers Metro subway ticket, in Standard Arabic and in French.
Most urban Algerians have some working knowledge of French, and a high (though unknown) percentage speak it fluently (as much as around 70-80%). However, because of the country's colonial past, the predominance of French has long been politically problematic.

Numerous reforms have been implemented in recent decades to improve the status of both Arabic and, in recent years to a much minor degree, Tamazight in relation to French, especially in education. For this reason, although Algeria is certainly one of the most Francophone of countries in the world outside of France, and has perhaps the second largest number of French speakers, Algrie: situation gographique et dmolinguistique it does not participate in the Francophonie association.

====Egypt====
Bilingual Arabic-French street sign in Alexandria, Egypt.
The official language in Egypt is literary Arabic, and it is mandatory in all schools. While English is the most commonly used second language in Egypt, French is known by some Egyptians. Many Egyptians learn English and French in addition to Arabic. Private schools have either English or French as the main language of instruction. Egypt participates in the Francophonie. There are two French-speaking universities in the country, the Universit Franaise d'gypte and the Universit Senghor.

====French overseas departments and territories in Africa====
French is also the official language of Mayotte and Runion, two overseas departments of France located in the southwest Indian Ocean.

===Asia===

====Southeast Asia====

French was the official language of the colony of French Indochina, comprising modern-day Vietnam, Laos, and Cambodia. It continues to be an administrative language in Laos and Cambodia, although its influence has waned in recent years. French Declines in Indochina, as English Booms, International Herald Tribune, 16 October 1993: "In both Cambodia and Laos, French remains the official second language of government." In colonial Vietnam, the elites primarily spoke French, while many servants who worked in French households spoke a French pidgin known as "Ty Bi" (now extinct). After French rule ended, South Vietnam continued to use French in administration, education, and trade. [http://www.englishaustralia.com.au/index.cgi?E=hcatfuncs&PT=sl&X=getdoc&Lev1=pub_c07_07&Lev2=c06_thinh ] Since the Fall of Saigon and the opening of a unified Vietnam's economy, French has gradually been effectively displaced as the main foreign language of choice by English. French nevertheless maintains its colonial legacy by being spoken as a second language by the elderly and elite populations and is presently being revived in higher education and continues to be a diplomatic language in Vietnam.

====Middle East====
Town sign in Standard Arabic and French at the entrance of Rechmaya in Lebanon.
A former French colony, Lebanon designates Arabic as the sole official language, while a special law regulates cases when French can be publicly used. French is widely used as a second language by the Lebanese, and is taught in many schools as a secondary language along with Arabic and English. The language is also used on bank notes, on road signs, and on official buildings (alongside Arabic). Similarly, Syria was also a French colony until 1943, but the French language is largely extinct in the country and is only limited to some members of the elite and middle classes. A significant French-speaking community is also present in Israel, primarily among the community of Maghrebi Jews, and many secondary schools offer French as a foreign language.

====India====
French has de jure official status in the Indian union territory of Puducherry (formerly Pondicherry) along with the native languages of Tamil, Telugu, and Malayalam. However at the district level, French is only official in the districts of Pondicherry and Mah, while the other two districts of the territory designate local languages as official. Furthermore, according to the French Institute of Pondicherry, French is "very little spoken" in Puducherry, with only about 1% of the territory's population being able to speak the language. French Institute of Pondicherry "French is however very little spoken, Tamil and English being the dominant languages." (See also: French India)

===Oceania and Australasia===
A 500-CFP franc (4.20; US$5.65) banknote, used in French Polynesia, New Caledonia and Wallis and Futuna.
French is an official language of the Pacific Island nation of Vanuatu where 45% of the population can speak French. In the French special collectivity of New Caledonia, 97% of the population can speak, read and write French, whereas only 1% have no knowledge of French. In French Polynesia, 95% of the population can speak, read and write French, whereas only 2% have no knowledge of French. In the French collectivity of Wallis and Futuna, 78% of the population can speak, read and write French, whereas 17% have no knowledge of French. 

==Dialects==

* Acadian French
* African French
* Aostan French
* Belgian French
* Cambodian French
* Canadian French
* French-based creole languages
* Guyana French
* Haitian French
* Indian French
* Jersey Legal French
* Lao French
* Louisiana French
* Maghreb French (North African French)
* Meridional French
* Metropolitan French
* Missouri French
* New Caledonian French
* Newfoundland French
* New England French
* Quebec French
* South East Asian French
* Swiss French
* Vietnamese French
* West Indian French

Dialects of the French language in the world

==History==

French is a Romance language (meaning that it is descended primarily from Vulgar Latin) that evolved out of the Gallo-Romance dialects spoken in northern France.

French was the most important language of diplomacy and international relations from the 17th century to approximately the middle of the 20th century. English has now taken over that role, following the Second World War as the US became the dominant global power. The French language today: a linguistic introductionGoogle Books Retrieved 27 June 2011 Stanley Meisler of the Los Angeles Times said that the fact that the Treaty of Versailles was also written in English as well as French was the "first diplomatic blow" against the language. Meisler, Stanley. "Seduction Still Works : French--a Language in Decline." Los Angeles Times. March 1, 1986. p. 2. Retrieved on May 18, 2013. 

French remains one of the most important diplomatic languages, with the language being one of the working languages of NATO, the International Olympic Committee, the UN Secretariat, the Council of Europe, the International Court of Justice, the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development, Organization of American States, European Commission, the Eurovision Song Contest the European Space Agency, World Trade Organisation and the North American Free Trade Agreement. It is also a working language in nonprofit organisations such as the Red Cross, Amnesty International, Mdecins sans Frontires, or Mdecins du Monde. French, an international language  French Ministry of Foreign Affairs 

==Phonology==

Although there are many French regional accents, foreign learners normally use only one variety of the language.
* There are a maximum of 17 vowels in French, not all of which are used in every dialect: plus the nasalized vowels and . In France, the vowels , and are tending to be replaced by , and in many people's speech, but the distinction of and is present in Meridional French. In Quebec and Belgian French, the vowels , , and are present.
* Voiced stops (i.e., ) are typically produced fully voiced throughout.
* Voiceless stops (i.e., ) are unaspirated.
* Nasals: The velar nasal can occur in final position in borrowed (usually English) words: parking, camping, swing. The palatal nasal can occur in word initial position (e.g., gnon), but it is most frequently found in intervocalic, onset position or word-finally (e.g., montagne).
* Fricatives: French has three pairs of homorganic fricatives distinguished by voicing, i.e., labiodental , dental , and palato-alveolar . Notice that are dental, like the plosives and the nasal .
* French has one rhotic whose pronunciation varies considerably among speakers and phonetic contexts. In general, it is described as a voiced uvular fricative, as in roue, "wheel". Vowels are often lengthened before this segment. It can be reduced to an approximant, particularly in final position (e.g., fort), or reduced to zero in some word-final positions. For other speakers, a uvular trill is also common, and an apical trill occurs in some dialects.
* Lateral and central approximants: The lateral approximant is unvelarised in both onset (lire) and coda position (il). In the onset, the central approximants , , and each correspond to a high vowel, , , and respectively. There are a few minimal pairs where the approximant and corresponding vowel contrast, but there are also many cases where they are in free variation. Contrasts between and occur in final position as in paye, "pay", vs. pays, "country".

French pronunciation follows strict rules based on spelling, but French spelling is often based more on history than phonology. The rules for pronunciation vary between dialects, but the standard rules are:
* final consonants: Final single consonants, in particular s, x, z, t, d, n, p and g are normally silent. (A consonant is considered "final" when no vowel follows it even if one or more consonants follow it.) The final letters f, k, q, and l, however, are normally pronounced. The final c is sometimes pronounced like in bac, sac, roc but can also be silent like in blanc or estomac. The final r is usually silent when it follows an e in a word of two or more syllables, but it is pronounced in some words (hiver, super, cancer etc.). 
** When the following word begins with a vowel, however, a silent consonant may once again be pronounced, to provide a liaison or "link" between the two words. Some liaisons are mandatory, for example the s in les amants or vous avez; some are optional, depending on dialect and register, for example, the first s in deux cents euros or euros irlandais; and some are forbidden, for example, the s in beaucoup d'hommes aiment. The t of et is never pronounced and the silent final consonant of a noun is only pronounced in the plural and in set phrases like pied--terre.
** Doubling a final n and adding a silent e at the end of a word (e.g., chien  chienne) makes it clearly pronounced. Doubling a final l and adding a silent e (e.g., gentil  gentille) adds a sound if the l is preceded by the letter i.
* elision or vowel dropping: Some monosyllabic function words ending in a or e, such as je and que, drop their final vowel when placed before a word that begins with a vowel sound (thus avoiding a hiatus). The missing vowel is replaced by an apostrophe. (e.g., je ai is instead pronounced and spelled  j'ai). This gives, for example, the same pronunciation for l'homme qu'il a vu ("the man whom he saw") and l'homme qui l'a vu ("the man who saw him"). However, for Belgian French the sentences are pronounced differently; in the first sentence the syllable break is as "qu'il-a", while the second breaks as "qui-l'a". It can also be noted that, in Quebec French, the second example (l'homme qui l'a vu) is more emphasized on l'a vu.

==Writing system==

=== Alphabet ===

French is written with the 26 letters of the basic Latin script, with four diacritics appearing on vowels (circumflex accent, acute accent, grave accent, diaeresis) and the cedilla appearing in "".

There are two ligatures, "" and "".

===Orthography===

French spelling, like English spelling, tends to preserve obsolete pronunciation rules. This is mainly due to extreme phonetic changes since the Old French period, without a corresponding change in spelling (see Vocabulary below). Moreover, some conscious changes were made to restore Latin orthography:
* Old French doit > French doigt "finger" (Latin digitus)
* Old French pie > French pied "foot" pes (stem: ped-)

As a result, it can be difficult to predict the spelling of a word based on the sound. Final consonants are generally silent, except when the following word begins with a vowel (see Liaison (French)). For example, the following words end in a vowel sound: pied, aller, les, , beaux. The same words followed by a vowel, however, may sound the consonants, as they do in these examples: beaux-arts, les amis, pied--terre.

On the other hand, a given spelling usually leads to a predictable sound. In particular, a given vowel combination or diacritic predictably leads to one phoneme.

French writing, as with any language, is affected by the spoken language. In Old French, the plural for animal was animals. The sequence was unstable and was turned into a diphthong . This change was then reflected in the orthography: animaus. The us ending, very common in Latin, was then abbreviated by copyists (monks) by the letter x, resulting in a written form animax. As the French language further evolved, the pronunciation of au turned into so that the u was reestablished in orthography for consistency, resulting in modern French animaux (pronounced first before the final was dropped in contemporary French). The same is true for cheval pluralized as chevaux and many others. In addition, castel pl. castels became chteau pl. chteaux
* Nasal: n and m. When n or m follows a vowel or diphthong, the n or m becomes silent and causes the preceding vowel to become nasalized (i.e., pronounced with the soft palate extended downward so as to allow part of the air to leave through the nostrils). Exceptions are when the n or m is doubled, or immediately followed by a vowel. The prefixes en- and em- are always nasalized. The rules are more complex than this but may vary between dialects.
* Digraphs: French uses not only diacritics to specify its large range of vowel sounds and diphthongs, but also specific combinations of vowels, sometimes with following consonants, to show which sound is intended.
* Gemination: Within words, double consonants are generally not pronounced as geminates in modern French (but geminates can be heard in the cinema or TV news from as recently as the 1970s, and in very refined elocution they may still occur). For example, illusion is pronounced and not . But gemination does occur between words. For example, une info ("a news item" or "a piece of information") is pronounced , whereas une nympho ("a nymphomaniac") is pronounced .
* Accents are used sometimes for pronunciation, sometimes to distinguish similar words, and sometimes for etymology alone.
** Accents that affect pronunciation
*** The acute accent (l'accent aigu)  (e.g., coleschool) means that the vowel is pronounced instead of the default .
*** The grave accent (l'accent grave)  (e.g., lvepupil) means that the vowel is pronounced instead of the default .
*** The circumflex (l'accent circonflexe)  (e.g. fortforest) shows that an e is pronounced and that an  is pronounced . In standard French, it also signifies a pronunciation of for the letter , but this differentiation is disappearing. In the late 19th century, the circumflex was used in place of s after a vowel, where that letter s was not pronounced. Thus, forest became fort and hospital became hpital.
*** The diaeresis (le trma) (e.g., nafnaive, NolChristmas) as in English, specifies that this vowel is pronounced separately from the preceding one, not combined, and is not a schwa.
*** The cedilla (la cdille)  (e.g., garonboy) means that the letter  is pronounced in front of the back vowels a, o and u (c is otherwise before a back vowel). C is always pronounced in front of the front vowels e, i, and y, thus  is never found in front of front vowels.
** Accents with no pronunciation effect
*** The circumflex does not affect the pronunciation of the letters i or u and, in most dialects, a as well. It usually indicates that an s came after it long ago, as in le (isle, compare with English island). The explanation is that some words share the same orthography, so the circumflex is put here to spot the difference between the two words. For example, dites (you say) / dtes (you said), or even du (of the) / d (past for the verb devoir = must, have to, owe; in this case, the circumflex splits at the plural and the feminine).
*** All other accents are used only to distinguish similar words, as in the case of distinguishing the adverbs l and o ("there", "where") from the article la ("the" feminine singular) and the conjunction ou ("or"), respectively.

Some proposals exist to simplify the existing writing system, but they still fail to gather interest. Fontik.fr writing system proposal. Ortofasil writing system proposal. Alfograf writing system proposal. Ortograf.net writing system proposal. 

==Grammar==

French grammar shares several notable features with most other Romance languages, including
* the loss of Latin's declensions
* only two grammatical genders
* the development of grammatical articles from Latin demonstratives
* new tenses formed from auxiliaries

French declarative word order is subjectverbobject although a pronoun object precedes the verb. Some types of sentences allow for or require different word orders, in particular inversion of the subject and verb like "Parlez-vous franais?" when asking a question rather than just "Vous parlez franais?" Both questions mean the same thing, however, a rising inflection is always used on both of them whenever asking a question, especially on the second one. Specifically, the first translates into "Do you speak French?" while the second one is literally just "You speak French?"

==Vocabulary==
The majority of French words derive from Vulgar Latin or were constructed from Latin or Greek roots. In many cases a single etymological root appears in French in a "popular" or native form, inherited from Vulgar Latin, and a learned form, borrowed later from Classical Latin. The following pairs consist of a native noun and a learned adjective:
* brother: frre / fraternel from Latin frater / fraternalis
* finger: doigt / digital from Latin digitus / digitalis
* faith: foi / fidle from Latin fides / fidelis
* eye: il / oculaire from Latin oculus / ocularis

However a historical tendency to gallicise Latin roots can be identified, whereas English conversely leans towards a more direct incorporation of the Latin:
* pninsule / peninsula
* teindre / extinguish
* noyau / nucleus
* surhomme / superman
* ensoleillement / insolation

There are also noun-noun and adjective-adjective pairs:
* thing/cause: chose / cause from Latin causa
* cold: froid / frigide from Latin frigidum

It can be difficult to identify the Latin source of native French words, because in the evolution from Vulgar Latin, unstressed syllables were severely reduced and the remaining vowels and consonants underwent significant modifications.

More recently the linguistic policy of the French language academies of France and Quebec has been to provide French equivalents http://metro.co.uk/2012/10/01/french-fight-franglais-with-alternatives-for-english-technology-terms-590128/ to (mainly English) imported words, either by using existing vocabulary, extending its meaning or deriving a new word according to French morphological rules. The result is often two (or more) co-existing terms for describing the same phenomenon, with varying rates of success for the French equivalent.
* mercatique / marketing
* finance fantme / shadow banking
* bloc-notes / blog
* ailire / wingsuit
* tiers-lieu / coworking

It is estimated that 12% (4,200) of common French words found in a typical dictionary such as the Petit Larousse or Micro-Robert Plus (35,000 words) are of foreign origin (where Greek and Latin learned words are not seen as foreign). About 25% (1,054) of these foreign words come from English and are fairly recent borrowings. The others are some 707 words from Italian, 550 from ancient Germanic languages, 481 from other Gallo-Romance languages, 215 from Arabic, 164 from German, 160 from Celtic languages, 159 from Spanish, 153 from Dutch, 112 from Persian and Sanskrit, 101 from Native American languages, 89 from other Asian languages, 56 from other Afro-Asiatic languages, 55 from Slavic languages and Baltic languages, 10 from Basque and 144 (about 3%) from other languages. Walter & Walter 1998. 

===Numerals===
The French counting system is partially vigesimal: twenty () is used as a base number in the names of numbers from 60 to 99.

The French word for 80 is , literally "four twenties", and the word for 75 is , literally "sixty-fifteen". This reform arose after the French Revolution to unify the different counting systems (mostly vigesimal near the coast, because of Celtic (via Breton) and Viking influences).

This system is comparable to the archaic English use of score, as in "fourscore and seven" (87), or "threescore and ten" (70).

In Old French (during the Middle Ages), all numbers from 30 to 99 could be said in either base 10 or base 20, e.g. vint et doze (twenty and twelve) for 32, dous vinz et diz (two twenties and ten) for 50, uitante for 80, or nonante for 90. 

Belgian French, Swiss French and the French used in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Rwanda and Burundi are different in this respect.

In Belgium and Switzerland 70 and 90 are and . In Switzerland, depending on the local dialect, 80 can be (Geneva, Neuchtel, Jura) or (Vaud, Valais, Fribourg). Octante had been used in Switzerland in the past, but is now considered archaic. . See also the English Wikipedia article on Welsh language, especially the section "Counting system" and its note on the influence of Celtic in the French counting system. In Belgium and in its former African colonies, however, quatre-vingts is universally used.

It should also be noted that French, like most European languages, uses a space to separate thousands Dans un souci de lisibilit, on spare les milliers par une espace inscable dans les nombres exprimant une quantit : 1 000 m, 342 234 euros, 1 234 C, etc.  En revanche, dans les nombres ayant fonction de numrotage (pages, dates, articles de code), les chiffres ne sont jamais spars : la page 1254 de ldition de 1992 ; larticle 1246 du Code civil.  La virgule (et non le point comme chez les anglo-saxons) spare la partie entire de la partie dcimale :  vaut environ 3,14 ; 14,5 est la moiti de 29. where English uses a comma or (more recently) a space. The comma is used in French numbers as a decimal point: 2,5 = deux virgule cinq.

==== Units ====
Cardinal numbers in French, from 1 to 20, are as follows:
* One: un/une (m) ~ (f)
* Two: deux 
* Three: trois 
* Four: quatre 
* Five: cinq 
* Six: six 
* Seven: sept 
* Eight: huit 
* Nine: neuf 
* Ten: dix 
* Eleven: onze 
* Twelve: douze 
* Thirteen: treize 
* Fourteen: quatorze 
* Fifteen: quinze 
* Sixteen: seize 
* Seventeen: dix-sept 
* Eighteen: dix-huit 
* Nineteen: dix-neuf 
* Twenty: vingt 
After Twenty, numbers use base ten logic (vingt et un, vingt-deux, vingt-trois...)

==== Tens ====
Cardinal numbers in French, by tens from 10 to 100, are as follow:
* Ten: dix 
* Twenty: vingt 
* Thirty: trente 
* Forty: quarante 
* Fifty: cinquante 
* Sixty: soixante 
* Seventy: soixante-dix or septante 
* Eighty: quatre-vingts , huitante or octante 
* Ninety: quatre-vingt-dix or nonante 
* One hundred: cent 
After Twenty, numbers use base ten logic (cent dix, cent vingt, cent trente...)

==== Hundreds ====
Cardinal numbers in French, by hundreds from 100 to 2000, are as follow:
* One hundred: cent 
* Two hundreds: deux cents
* Three hundreds: trois cents, (Archaism: quinze-vingts)
* Four hundreds: quatre cents
* Five hundreds: cinq cents
* Six hundreds: six cents
* Seven hundreds: sept cents
* Eight hundreds: huit cents
* Nine hundreds: neuf cents
* One thousand: mille
* One thousand one hundred: onze cents or mille cent
* One thousand two hundreds: douze cents or mille deux cents
* One thousand three hundreds: treize cents or mille trois cents
* One thousand four hundreds: quatorze cents or mille quatre cents
* One thousand five hundreds: quinze cents or mille cinq cents
* One thousand six hundreds: seize cents or mille six cents
* One thousand seven hundreds: dix-sept cents or mille sept cents
* One thousand height hundreds: dix-huit cents or mille huit cents
* One thousand nine hundreds: dix-neuf cents or mille neuf cents
* Two thousands: deux mille
After deux mille (2000), only the second option is used (deux mille cent, deux mille deux cents, deux mille trois cents...)

Nota Bene: The words vingt and cent take the plural -s only when they are the last word of the number: quatre-vingts (eighty) and quatre-vingt-un (eighty-one), cinq cents (five hundreds) and cinq cent trente (five hundreds and thirty). When a number using vingt or cent is used as an ordinal numeral adjective, the words vingt or cent stay unchanged Vingt et cent se terminent par un s quand ils sont prcds d'un nombre qui les multiplie mais ils restent invariable s'ils sont suivis d'un autre nombre ou de mille. On dira ainsi euros mais deux cent vingt euros; quatre-vingts hommes mais quatre-vingt-deux hommes. Ils restent galement invariables lorsquils sont employs comme adjectifs numraux ordinaux: page deux cent; page quatre-vingt; lan mille neuf cent.

En revanche, vingt et cent varient devant millier, million, milliard, qui sont des noms et non des adjectifs numraux: deux cents millions dannes; trois cents milliers dhabitants. 

==== Scales ====
Cardinal numbers in French, by exponentiation points, from 100 to 1020, are as follow:
* One: un/une (m) ~ (f)
* Ten: dix 
* One hundred: cent 
* One thousand: mille 
* Ten thousands: dix mille
* Hundred thousand: cent mille
* One million: un million 
* Ten millions: dix millions
* Hundred millions: cent millions 
* One billion: un milliard 
* Ten billion: dix milliards
* Hundred billion: cent milliards
* One trillion: un billion
* Ten trillion: dix billions
* Hundred trillion: cent billions
* One quadrillion: un billiard
* Ten quadrillion: dix billiards
* Hundred quadrillion: cent billiards
* One quintillion: un trillion
* Ten quintillion: dix trillions
* Hundred quintillion: cent trillions

==Words==

 English French Quebec accent Touraine accent 
 French Franais (people) or franais (language) 
 English Anglais (people) or anglais (language) 
 Yes Oui (si when countering an assertion or a question expressed in the negative) 
 No Non 
 Hello! Bonjour ! (formal) or Salut ! (informal) or \"All\" (Quebec French or when answering on the telephone) 
 Good evening! Bonsoir ! 
 Good night! Bonne nuit ! 
 Goodbye! Au revoir ! 
 Have a nice day! Bonne journe ! 
 Please/if you please Sil vous plat (formal) or Sil te plat (informal) 
 Thank you Merci 
 You are welcome De rien (informal) or Ce nest rien (informal) (\"it is nothing\") or Je vous en prie (formal) or Je ten prie (informal) or Bienvenue (Quebec) 
 I am sorry Pardon or Dsol or Je suis dsol (if male) / Je suis dsole (if female) or Excuse-moi (informal) / Excusez-moi (formal) / \"Je regrette\" / / 
 Who? Qui ? 
 What? Quoi ? (informal; used as \"What?\" in English)) or Pardon ? (formal; used the same as \"Pardon ?\" in English) 
 When? Quand ? 
 Where? O ? 
 Why? Pourquoi ? 
 What is your name? Comment vous appelez-vous ? (formal) or Comment tappelles-tu ? (informal) , , 
 My name is... Je m'appelle... 
 Which Quel/Quels(pl.)/Quelle(fem.) 
 Because Parce que / Car 
 Because of  cause de 
 Therefore Donc 
 Maybe Peut-tre 
 How? Comment ? 
 How much? Combien ? 
 I do not understand. Je ne comprends pas. 
 Yes, I understand. Oui, je comprends. Except when responding to a negatively posed question, in which case Si is used preferentially over Oui 
 I agree Je suis daccord. \"Daccord\" can be used without je suis. 
 Help! Au secours ! ( laide !) 
 At what time...?  quelle heure...? 
 Today Aujourd'hui 
 Can you help me, please? Pouvez-vous maider sil vous plat ? / Pourriez-vous maider sil vous plat ? (formal) or Peux-tu maider sil te plat ? / Pourrais-tu maider sil te plat (informal) 
 Where are the toilets? O sont les toilettes ? 
 Do you speak English? Parlez-vous (l')anglais ? / Est-ce que vous parlez (l')anglais ? 
 I do not speak French. Je ne parle pas franais. 
 I do not know. Je sais pas. (syntax mistake On nglige trop souvent de faire entendre ladverbe ne, en faisant de pas lunique marque de ngation : Je veux pas, je sais pas. Cette habitude, rpandue dans le langage parl, est une vritable faute. and over-familiar  Pop. ou trs fam. suppression de ne ) Je ne sais pas. Je ne sais. (formal) 
 I know. Je sais. 
 I am thirsty. Jai soif. (literally, \"I have thirst\") 
 I am hungry. Jai faim. (literally, \"I have hunger\") 
 How are you? / How are things going? / How is everything? Comment allez-vous ? (formal) or a va ? / Comment a va ? (informal) 
 I am (very) well / Things are going (very) well // Everything is (very) well Je vais (trs) bien (formal) or a va (trs) bien. / Tout va (trs) bien (informal) 
 I am (very) bad / Things are (very) bad / Everything is (very) bad Je vais (trs) mal (formal) or a va (trs) mal / Tout va (trs) mal (informal) 
 I am all right/so-so / Everything is all right/so-so Assez bien or a va comme ci, comme a or simply a va.. (Sometimes said: Couci, coua. , informal: \"bof\") i.e. Comme ci, comme a. ) 
 I am fine. a va bien. 
 (How) may I help you? / Do you need help? / We need help! (Comment) puis-je vous aider ? Avez-vous besoin d'aide ? Nous avons besoin d'aide ! 

==See also==

* Alliance franaise
* Franais fondamental
* Francization
* French language in the United States
* French proverbs
* Language education
* List of countries where French is an official language
* List of English words of French origin
* List of French loanwords in Persian
* List of French words and phrases used by English speakers
* Official bilingualism in Canada

== Notes and references ==

==Further reading==
* Nadeau, Jen-Benot, and Julie Barlow (2006). The Story of French. First U.S. ed. New York: St. Martin's Press. ISBN 0-312-34183-0

==External links==

===Organizations===
* Fondation Alliance franaise: an international organization for the promotion of French language and culture 
* Agence de promotion du FLE: Agency for promoting French as a foreign language
* Learn French with Native Speakers: Learn French with Native Speakers

===Courses and tutorials===
* Franais interactif: interactive French program, University of Texas at Austin
* Tex's French Grammar, University of Texas at Austin
* Free online French grammar
* Learn French at About
* French lessons at Wikiotics: podcasts, vocabulary quizzes, and more
* FSI French language course: Free written and audio course made by the U.S. Foreign Service.

===Online dictionaries===
* Collins Online EnglishFrench Dictionary
* Centre national de ressources textuelles et lexicales: monolingual dictionaries (including the Trsor de la langue franaise), language corpora, etc.

===Vocabulary===
* Swadesh list in English and French

====Numbers====
* 

 



[[Formula fiction]]

In popular culture, formula fiction is literature in which the storylines and plots have been reused to the extent that the narratives are predictable. It is similar to genre fiction, which identifies a number of specific settings that are frequently reused. The label of formula fiction is used in literary criticism as a mild pejorative to imply lack of originality.

Formula fiction is similar to genre fiction. The label of genre fiction is typically assigned because of the reuse of settings, content, layout, and/or style. The label of formula fiction is assigned because of the reuse of plot, plot devices and stock characters.

Genres like high fantasy, Westerns and science fiction space opera often have specific settings, such as a pseudo-Medieval European setting, the Old West, or outer space. Approaching a given genre, certain assumed background information covers the nature and purpose of possible predictable elements of the story, such as the appearance of dragons and wizards in high fantasy, warp drives in science fiction, or shootouts at high noon in Westerns. These set-ups are taken for granted by the genre conventions, and need not be explained for the reader anew... though it should also be noted that these elements can easily be treated subversively as well, playing with some of the preconceptions inherent in formula fiction.

The formula is defined specifically by predictable narrative structure. Formulaic tales incorporate plots that have been reused so often as to be easily recognizable. Perhaps the most clearly formulaic plots characterize the romantic comedy genre; in a book or film labeled as such, viewers already know its most basic central plot, including to some extent the ending. This does not always prove to be detrimental to a given work's reception, however, as the popularity of the aforementioned genre demonstrates.

Formula fiction should not be confused with pastiche (the mimicking of another work or author's style), though the latter by its nature may include elements of the former; the same holds true of some parody and satirical works as well, which may well include formulaic elements such as common stereotypes or caricatures, or which may use formulaic elements in order to mock them or point out their supposedly clich or unrealistic nature. Indeed, between parody, satire and such subgenres as romantic comedy, comedy as a whole often relies on either formulaic elements, or the mocking of such elements.

Formula fiction is often stereotypically associated with early pulp magazine markets, though some works published in that medium, such as "The Cold Equations", subvert the supposed expectations of the common narrative formula of that time.

The dissection and tracking of common formulaic tropes - as well as their subversions and new permutations - has become reasonably popular in not only academic circles (the Final Girl theory being one such example, as well as to some extent Campbell's The Hero with a Thousand Faces), but also amongst more casual amateur circles, with websites such as TV Tropes Wiki.

==See also==
*Clich
*Comedy
*Film genre
*Genre fiction
*Literary criticism
*Literary fiction
*Parody
*Pastiche
*Pulp fiction
*Romantic comedy
*Satire
*Trope

==References==

 

==External links==
* The "Basic" Plots in Literature
* TV Tropes Wiki, a "trope-tracking" website



[[Field (mathematics)]]

In abstract algebra, a field is a nonzero commutative ring that contains a multiplicative inverse for every nonzero element, or equivalently a ring whose nonzero elements form an abelian group under multiplication. As such it is an algebraic structure with notions of addition, subtraction, multiplication, and division satisfying the appropriate abelian group equations and distributive law. The most commonly used fields are the field of real numbers, the field of complex numbers, and the field of rational numbers, but there are also finite fields, fields of functions, algebraic number fields, p-adic fields, and so forth.

Any field may be used as the scalars for a vector space, which is the standard general context for linear algebra. The theory of field extensions (including Galois theory) involves the roots of polynomials with coefficients in a field; among other results, this theory leads to impossibility proofs for the classical problems of angle trisection and squaring the circle with a compass and straightedge, as well as a proof of the AbelRuffini theorem on the algebraic insolubility of quintic equations. In modern mathematics, the theory of fields (or field theory) plays an essential role in number theory and algebraic geometry.

As an algebraic structure, every field is a ring, but not every ring is a field. The most important difference is that fields allow for division (though not division by zero), while a ring need not possess multiplicative inverses; for example the integers form a ring, but 2x = 1 has no solution in integers. Also, the multiplication operation in a field is required to be commutative. A ring in which division is possible but commutativity is not assumed (such as the quaternions) is called a division ring or skew field. (Historically, division rings were sometimes referred to as fields, while fields were called commutative fields.)

As a ring, a field may be classified as a specific type of integral domain, and can be characterized by the following (not exhaustive) chain of class inclusions:

: Commutative rings  integral domains  integrally closed domains  unique factorization domains  principal ideal domains  Euclidean domains  fields  finite fields.

== Definition and illustration ==

Intuitively, a field is a set F that is a commutative group with respect to two compatible operations, addition and multiplication, with "compatible" being formalized by distributivity, and the caveat that the additive identity (0) has no multiplicative inverse (one cannot divide by 0).

The most common way to formalize this is by defining a field as a set together with two operations, usually called addition and multiplication, and denoted by + and , respectively, such that the following axioms hold; subtraction and division are defined implicitly in terms of the inverse operations of addition and multiplication: That is, the axiom for addition only assumes a binary operation The axiom of inverse allows one to define a unary operation that sends an element to its negative (its additive inverse); this is not taken as given, but is implicitly defined in terms of addition as " is the unique b such that ", "implicitly" because it is defined in terms of solving an equationand one then defines the binary operation of subtraction, also denoted by "", as in terms of addition and additive inverse.
In the same way, one defines the binary operation of division  in terms of the assumed binary operation of multiplication and the implicitly defined operation of "reciprocal" (multiplicative inverse). 
;Closure of F under addition and multiplication
:For all a, b in F, both a + b and a  b are in F (or more formally, + and  are binary operations on F).
;Associativity of addition and multiplication
:For all a, b, and c in F, the following equalities hold: a + (b + c) = (a + b) + c and a  (b  c) = (a  b)  c.
;Commutativity of addition and multiplication
:For all a and b in F, the following equalities hold: a + b = b + a and a  b = b  a.
; Existence of additive and multiplicative identity elements
:There exists an element of F, called the additive identity element and denoted by 0, such that for all a in F, a + 0 = a. Likewise, there is an element, called the multiplicative identity element and denoted by 1, such that for all a in F, a  1 = a. To exclude the trivial ring, the additive identity and the multiplicative identity are required to be distinct.
;Existence of additive inverses and multiplicative inverses
:For every a in F, there exists an element a in F, such that a + (a) = 0. Similarly, for any a in F other than 0, there exists an element a1 in F, such that a  a1 = 1. (The elements a + (b) and a  b1 are also denoted a  b and a/b, respectively.) In other words, subtraction and division operations exist.
;Distributivity of multiplication over addition
:For all a, b and c in F, the following equality holds: a  (b + c) = (a  b) + (a  c).

A field is therefore an algebraic structure F, +, , , 1, 0, 1; of type 2, 2, 1, 1, 0, 0, consisting of two abelian groups:
* F under +, , and 0;
* F \ {0} under , 1, and 1, with 0  1,
with  distributing over +. Wallace, D A R (1998) Groups, Rings, and Fields, SUMS. Springer-Verlag: 151, Th. 2. 

===First example: rational numbers===
A simple example of a field is the field of rational numbers, consisting of numbers which can be written as fractions
a/b, where a and b are integers, and b  0. The additive inverse of such a fraction is simply a/b, and the multiplicative inverse (provided that a  0) is b/a. To see the latter, note that

:

The abstractly required field axioms reduce to standard properties of rational numbers, such as the law of distributivity
:

:

:

:

:
or the law of commutativity and law of associativity.

===Second example: a field with four elements===

 + O I A B 
 O O I A B 
 I I O B A 
 A A B O I 
 B B A I O 

  O I A B 
 O O O O O 
 I O I A B 
 A O A B I 
 B O B I A 

In addition to familiar number systems such as the rationals, there are other, less immediate examples of fields. The following example is a field consisting of four elements called O, I, A and B. The notation is chosen such that O plays the role of the additive identity element (denoted 0 in the axioms), and I is the multiplicative identity (denoted 1 above). One can check that all field axioms are satisfied. For example:
:A  (B + A) = A  I = A, which equals A  B + A  A = I + B = A, as required by the distributivity.
The above field is called a finite field with four elements, and can be denoted F4. Field theory is concerned with understanding the reasons for the existence of this field, defined in a fairly ad-hoc manner, and describing its inner structure. For example, from a glance at the multiplication table, it can be seen that any non-zero element (i.e., I, A, and B) is a power of A: A = A1, B = A2 = A  A, and finally I = A3 = A  A  A. This is not a coincidence, but rather one of the starting points of a deeper understanding of (finite) fields.

===Alternative axiomatizations===
As with other algebraic structures, there exist alternative axiomatizations. Because of the relations between the operations, one can alternatively axiomatize a field by explicitly assuming that there are four binary operations (add, subtract, multiply, divide) with axioms relating these, or (by functional decomposition) in terms of two binary operations (add and multiply) and two unary operations (additive inverse and multiplicative inverse), or other variants.

The usual axiomatization in terms of the two operations of addition and multiplication is brief and allows the other operations to be defined in terms of these basic ones, but in other contexts, such as topology and category theory, it is important to include all operations as explicitly given, rather than implicitly defined (compare topological group). This is because without further assumptions, the implicitly defined inverses may not be continuous (in topology), or may not be able to be defined (in category theory). Defining an inverse requires that one is working with a set, not a more general object.

For a very economical axiomatization of the field of real numbers, whose primitives are merely a set R with 1R, addition, and a binary relation, "<". See Tarski's axiomatization of the reals.

==Related algebraic structures==

The axioms imposed above resemble the ones familiar from other algebraic structures. For example, the existence of the binary operation "", together with its commutativity, associativity, (multiplicative) identity element and inverses are precisely the axioms for an abelian group. In other words, for any field, the subset of nonzero elements F \ {0}, also often denoted F, is an abelian group (F, ) usually called multiplicative group of the field. Likewise (F, +) is an abelian group. The structure of a field is hence the same as specifying such two group structures (on the same set), obeying the distributivity.

Important other algebraic structures such as rings arise when requiring only part of the above axioms. For example, if the requirement of commutativity of the multiplication operation  is dropped, one gets structures usually called division rings or skew fields.

===Remarks===
By elementary group theory, applied to the abelian groups (F, ), and (F, +), the additive inverse a and the multiplicative inverse a1 are uniquely determined by a.

Similar direct consequences from the field axioms include
:(a  b) = (a)  b = a  (b), in particular a = (1)  a
as well as
:a  0 = 0.
Both can be shown by replacing b or c with 0 in the distributive property

==History==
The concept of field was used implicitly by Niels Henrik Abel and variste Galois in their work on the solvability of polynomial equations with rational coefficients of degree five or higher.

In 1857, Karl von Staudt published his Algebra of Throws which provided a geometric model satisfying the axioms of a field. This construction has been frequently recalled as a contribution to the foundations of mathematics.

In 1871, Richard Dedekind introduced, for a set of real or complex numbers which is closed under the four arithmetic operations, the German word Krper, which means "body" or "corpus" (to suggest an organically closed entity), hence the common use of the letter K to denote a field. He also defined rings (then called order or order-modul), but the term "a ring" (Zahlring) was invented by Hilbert. J J O'Connor and E F Robertson, The development of Ring Theory, September 2004. In 1893, Eliakim Hastings Moore called the concept "field" in English. Earliest Known Uses of Some of the Words of Mathematics (F) 

In 1881, Leopold Kronecker defined what he called a "domain of rationality", which is indeed a field of polynomials in modern terms. In 1893, Heinrich M. Weber gave the first clear definition of an abstract field. In 1910, Ernst Steinitz published the very influential paper Algebraische Theorie der Krper (). In this paper he axiomatically studies the properties of fields and defines many important field theoretic concepts like prime field, perfect field and the transcendence degree of a field extension.

Emil Artin developed the relationship between groups and fields in great detail from 1928 through 1942.

==Examples==

===Rationals and algebraic numbers===
The field of rational numbers Q has been introduced above. A related class of fields very important in number theory are algebraic number fields. We will first give an example, namely the field Q() consisting of numbers of the form
:a + b
with a, b  Q, where  is a primitive third root of unity, i.e., a complex number satisfying 3 = 1,   1. This field extension can be used to prove a special case of Fermat's last theorem, which asserts the non-existence of rational nonzero solutions to the equation
:x3 + y3 = z3.
In the language of field extensions detailed below, Q() is a field extension of degree 2. Algebraic number fields are by definition finite field extensions of Q, that is, fields containing Q having finite dimension as a Q-vector space. 

===Reals, complex numbers, and p-adic numbers===
Take the real numbers R, under the usual operations of addition and multiplication. When the real numbers are given the usual ordering, they form a complete ordered field; it is this structure which provides the foundation for most formal treatments of calculus.

The complex numbers C consist of expressions
:a + bi
where i is the imaginary unit, i.e., a (non-real) number satisfying i2 = 1.
Addition and multiplication of real numbers are defined in such a way that all field axioms hold for C. For example, the distributive law enforces
:(a + bi)(c + di) = ac + bci + adi + bdi2, which equals acbd + (bc + ad)i.

The real numbers can be constructed by completing the rational numbers, i.e., filling the "gaps": for example 2 is such a gap. By a formally very similar procedure, another important class of fields, the field of p-adic numbers Qp is built. It is used in number theory and p-adic analysis.

Hyperreal numbers and superreal numbers extend the real numbers with the addition of infinitesimal and infinite numbers.

===Constructible numbers===
Given 0, 1, r1 and r2, the construction yields r1r2
In antiquity, several geometric problems concerned the (in)feasibility of constructing certain numbers with compass and straightedge. For example it was unknown to the Greeks that it is in general impossible to trisect a given angle. Using the field notion and field theory allows these problems to be settled. To do so, the field of constructible numbers is considered. It contains, on the plane, the points 0 and 1, and all complex numbers that can be constructed from these two by a finite number of construction steps using only compass and straightedge. This set, endowed with the usual addition and multiplication of complex numbers does form a field. For example, multiplying two (real) numbers r1 and r2 that have already been constructed can be done using construction at the right, based on the intercept theorem. This way, the obtained field F contains all rational numbers, but is bigger than Q, because for any f  F, the square root of f is also a constructible number.

A closely related concept is that of a Euclidean field, namely an ordered field whose positive elements are closed under square root. The real constructible numbers form the least Euclidean field, and the Euclidean fields are precisely the ordered extensions thereof.

===Finite fields===

Finite fields (also called Galois fields) are fields with finitely many elements. The above introductory example F4 is a field with four elements. F2 consists of two elements, 0 and 1. This is the smallest field, because by definition a field has at least two distinct elements 1  0. Interpreting the addition and multiplication in this latter field as XOR and AND operations, this field finds applications in computer science, especially in cryptography and coding theory.

In a finite field there is necessarily an integer n such that 1 + 1 +  + 1 (n repeated terms) equals 0. It can be shown that the smallest such n must be a prime number, called the characteristic of the field. If a (necessarily infinite) field has the property that 1 + 1 +  + 1 is never zero, for any number of summands, such as in Q, for example, the characteristic is said to be zero.

A basic class of finite fields are the fields Fp with p elements (p a prime number):
:Fp = Z/pZ = {0, 1, ..., p  1},
where the operations are defined by performing the operation in the set of integers Z, dividing by p and taking the remainder; see modular arithmetic. A field K of characteristic p necessarily contains Fp, Jacobson (2009), p. 213 and therefore may be viewed as a vector space over Fp, of finite dimension if K is finite. Thus a finite field K has prime power order, i.e., K has q = p'n elements (where n > 0 is the number of elements in a basis of K over Fp). By developing more field theory, in particular the notion of the splitting field of a polynomial f over a field K, which is the smallest field containing K and all roots of f, one can show that two finite fields with the same number of elements are isomorphic, i.e., there is a one-to-one mapping of one field onto the other that preserves multiplication and addition. Thus we may speak of the finite field with q elements, usually denoted by Fq or GF(q).

===Archimedean fields===

An Archimedean field is an ordered field such that for each element there exists a finite expression 1 + 1 +  + 1 whose value is greater than that element, that is, there are no infinite elements. Equivalently, the field contains no infinitesimals; or, the field is isomorphic to a subfield of the reals. A necessary condition for an ordered field to be complete is that it be Archimedean, since in any non-Archimedean field there is neither a greatest infinitesimal nor a least positive rational, whence the sequence 1/2, 1/3, 1/4, &hellip;, every element of which is greater than every infinitesimal, has no limit. (And since every proper subfield of the reals also contains such gaps, up to isomorphism the reals form the unique complete ordered field.)

===Field of functions===
Given a geometric object X, one can consider functions on such objects. Adding and multiplying them pointwise, i.e., (fg)(x) = f(x)  g(x) this leads to a field. However, due to the presence of possible zeros, i.e., points x  X where f(x) = 0, one has to take poles into account, i.e., formally allowing f(x) = .

If X is an algebraic variety over F, then the rational functions X  F, i.e., functions defined almost everywhere, form a field, the function field of X. Likewise, if X is a Riemann surface, then the meromorphic functions S  C form a field. Under certain circumstances, namely when S is compact, S can be reconstructed from this field.

===Local and global fields===
Another important distinction in the realm of fields, especially with regard to number theory, are local fields and global fields. Local fields are completions of global fields at a given place. For example, Q is a global field, and the attached local fields are Qp and R (Ostrowski's theorem). Algebraic number fields and function fields over Fq are further global fields. Studying arithmetic questions in global fields may sometimes be done by looking at the corresponding questions locallythis technique is called local-global principle.

==Some first theorems==
*Every finite subgroup of the multiplicative group F is cyclic. This applies in particular to Fq, it is cyclic of order q  1. In the introductory example, a generator of F4 is the element A.

*From the point of view of algebraic geometry, fields are points, because the spectrum Spec F has only one point, corresponding to the 0-ideal. This entails that a commutative ring is a field if and only if it has no ideals except {0} and itself. Equivalently, an integral domain is field if and only if its Krull dimension is 0.

*Isomorphism extension theorem

==Constructing fields==

===Closure operations===
Assuming the axiom of choice, for every field F, there exists a field , called the algebraic closure of F, which contains F, is algebraic over F, which means that any element x of satisfies a polynomial equation
:f'n'x'n + f'n1x'n1 +  + f1x + f0 = 0, with coefficients f'n, ..., f0  F,
and is algebraically closed, i.e., any such polynomial does have at least one solution in . The algebraic closure is unique up to isomorphism inducing the identity on F. However, in many circumstances in mathematics, it is not appropriate to treat as being uniquely determined by F, since the isomorphism above is not itself unique. In these cases, one refers to such a as an algebraic closure of F. A similar concept is the separable closure, containing all roots of separable polynomials, instead of all polynomials.

For example, if F = Q, the algebraic closure is also called field of algebraic numbers. The field of algebraic numbers is an example of an algebraically closed field of characteristic zero; as such it satisfies the same first-order sentences as the field of complex numbers C.

In general, all algebraic closures of a field are isomorphic. However, there is in general no preferable isomorphism between two closures. Likewise for separable closures.

===Subfields and field extensions===
A subfield is, informally, a small field contained in a bigger one. Formally, a subfield E of a field F is a subset containing 0 and 1, closed under the operations +, ,  and multiplicative inverses and with its own operations defined by restriction. For example, the real numbers contain several interesting subfields: the real algebraic numbers, the computable numbers and the rational numbers are examples.

The notion of field extension lies at the heart of field theory, and is crucial to many other algebraic domains. A field extension F / E is simply a field F and a subfield E  F. Constructing such a field extension F / E can be done by "adding new elements" or adjoining elements to the field E. For example, given a field E, the set F = E(X) of rational functions, i.e., equivalence classes of expressions of the kind
:
where p(X) and q(X) are polynomials with coefficients in E, and q is not the zero polynomial, forms a field. This is the simplest example of a transcendental extension of E. It also is an example of a domain (the ring of polynomials in this case) being embedded into its field of fractions .

The ring of formal power series is also a domain, and again the (equivalence classes of) fractions of the form p(X)/ q(X) where p and q are elements of form the field of fractions for . This field is actually the ring of Laurent series over the field E, denoted .

In the above two cases, the added symbol X and its powers did not interact with elements of E. It is possible however that the adjoined symbol may interact with E. This idea will be illustrated by adjoining an element to the field of real numbers R. As explained above, C is an extension of R. C can be obtained from R by adjoining the imaginary symbol i which satisfies i2 = 1. The result is that R=C. This is different from adjoining the symbol X to R, because in that case, the powers of X are all distinct objects, but here, i2=1 is actually an element of R.

Another way to view this last example is to note that i is a zero of the polynomial p(X) = X2 + 1. The quotient ring can be mapped onto C using the map . Since the ideal (X2+1) is generated by a polynomial irreducible over R, the ideal is maximal, hence the quotient ring is a field. This nonzero ring map from the quotient to C is necessarily an isomorphism of rings.

The above construction generalises to any irreducible polynomial in the polynomial ring E, i.e., a polynomial p(X) that cannot be written as a product of non-constant polynomials. The quotient ring F = E / (p(X)), is again a field.

Alternatively, constructing such field extensions can also be done, if a bigger container is already given. Suppose given a field E, and a field G containing E as a subfield, for example G could be the algebraic closure of E. Let x be an element of G not in E. Then there is a smallest subfield of G containing E and x, denoted F = E(x) and called field extension F / E generated by x in G. Jacobson (2009), p. 213 Such extensions are also called simple extensions. Many extensions are of this type; see the primitive element theorem. For instance, Q(i) is the subfield of C consisting of all numbers of the form a + bi where both a and b are rational numbers.

One distinguishes between extensions having various qualities. For example, an extension K of a field k is called algebraic, if every element of K is a root of some polynomial with coefficients in k. Otherwise, the extension is called transcendental. The aim of Galois theory is the study of algebraic extensions of a field.

===Rings vs fields===
Adding multiplicative inverses to an integral domain R yields the field of fractions of R. For example, the field of fractions of the integers Z is just Q.
Also, the field F(X) is the quotient field of the ring of polynomials F. "Getting back" the ring from the field is sometimes possible; see discrete valuation ring.

Another method to obtain a field from a commutative ring R is taking the quotient R / m, where m is any maximal ideal of R. The above construction of F = E / (p(X)), is an example, because the irreducibility of the polynomial p(X) is equivalent to the maximality of the ideal generated by this polynomial. Another example are the finite fields Fp = Z / pZ.

===Ultraproducts===
If I is an index set, U is an ultrafilter on I, and F'i is a field for every i in I, the ultraproduct of the F'i with respect to U is a field.

For example, a non-principal ultraproduct of finite fields is a pseudo finite field; i.e., a PAC field having exactly one extension of any degree.
This construction is important to the study of the elementary theory of finite fields.

==Galois theory==

Galois theory aims to study the algebraic extensions of a field by studying the symmetry in the arithmetic operations of addition and multiplication. The fundamental theorem of Galois theory shows that there is a strong relation between the structure of the symmetry group and the set of algebraic extensions.

In the case where F / E is a finite (Galois) extension, Galois theory studies the algebraic extensions of E that are subfields of F. Such fields are called intermediate extensions. Specifically, the Galois group of F over E, denoted Gal(F/E), is the group of field automorphisms of F that are trivial on E (i.e., the bijections  : F  F that preserve addition and multiplication and that send elements of E to themselves), and the fundamental theorem of Galois theory states that there is a one-to-one correspondence between subgroups of Gal(F/E) and the set of intermediate extensions of the extension F/E. The theorem, in fact, gives an explicit correspondence and further properties.

To study all (separable) algebraic extensions of E at once, one must consider the absolute Galois group of E, defined as the Galois group of the separable closure, Esep, of E over E (i.e., Gal(Esep/E). It is possible that the degree of this extension is infinite (as in the case of E = Q). It is thus necessary to have a notion of Galois group for an infinite algebraic extension. The Galois group in this case is obtained as a "limit" (specifically an inverse limit) of the Galois groups of the finite Galois extensions of E. In this way, it acquires a topology. As an inverse limit of finite discrete groups, it is equipped with the profinite topology, making it a profinite topological group The fundamental theorem of Galois theory can be generalized to the case of infinite Galois extensions by taking into consideration the topology of the Galois group, and in the case of Esep/E it states that there this a one-to-one correspondence between closed subgroups of Gal(Esep/E) and the set of all separable algebraic extensions of E (technically, one only obtains those separable algebraic extensions of E that occur as subfields of the chosen separable closure Esep, but since all separable closures of E are isomorphic, choosing a different separable closure would give the same Galois group and thus an "equivalent" set of algebraic extensions).

==Generalizations==
There are also proper classes with field structure, which are sometimes called Fields, with a capital F:
*The surreal numbers form a Field containing the reals, and would be a field except for the fact that they are a proper class, not a set.
*The nimbers form a Field. The set of nimbers with birthday smaller than 22n, the nimbers with birthday smaller than any infinite cardinal are all examples of fields.

In a different direction, differential fields are fields equipped with a derivation. For example, the field R(X), together with the standard derivative of polynomials forms a differential field. These fields are central to differential Galois theory. Exponential fields, meanwhile, are fields equipped with an exponential function that provides a homomorphism between the additive and multiplicative groups within the field. The usual exponential function makes the real and complex numbers exponential fields, denoted Rexp and Cexp respectively.

Generalizing in a more categorical direction yields the field with one element and related objects.

===Exponentiation===
One does not in general study generalizations of fields with three binary operations. The familiar addition/subtraction, multiplication/division, exponentiation/root-extraction operations from the natural numbers to the reals, each built up in terms of iteration of the last, mean that generalizing exponentiation as a binary operation is tempting, but has generally not proven fruitful; instead, an exponential field assumes a unary exponential function from the additive group to the multiplicative group, not a partially defined binary function. Note that the exponential operation of is neither associative nor commutative, nor has a unique inverse ( are both square roots of 4, for instance), unlike addition and multiplication, and further is not defined for many pairsfor example, does not define a single number. These all show that even for rational numbers exponentiation is not nearly as well-behaved as addition and multiplication, which is why one does not in general axiomatize exponentiation.

==Applications==

The concept of a field is of use, for example, in defining vectors and matrices, two structures in linear algebra whose components can be elements of an arbitrary field.

Finite fields are used in number theory, Galois theory, coding theory and combinatorics; and again the notion of algebraic extension is an important tool.

Fields of characteristic 2 are useful in computer science.

==See also==

* Category of fields
* Glossary of field theory for more definitions in field theory.
* Heyting field
* Lefschetz principle
* Puiseux series
* Ring
* Vector space
* Vector spaces without fields

==Notes==

==References==

* , especially Chapter 13
* 
* . See especially Book 3 (ISBN 0-521-27288-2) and Book 6 (ISBN 0-521-27291-2).
* 
* James Ax (1968), The elementary theory of finite fields, Ann. of Math. (2), 88, 239271

==External links==

* 
* Field Theory Q&A
*Fields at ProvenMath definition and basic properties.
*



[[Factorial]]

 Selected members of the factorial sequence ; values specified in scientific notation are rounded to the displayed precision 
 n n! 
 0 1 
 1 1 
 2 2 
 3 6 
 4 24 
 5 120 
 6 720 
 7 
 8 
 9 
 10 
 11 
 12 
 13 
 14 
 15 
 16 
 17 
 18 
 19 
 20 
 25 
 50 
 70 
 100 
 450 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 ]] 10 

In mathematics, the factorial of a non-negative integer n, denoted by n!, is the product of all positive integers less than or equal to n. For example,
:

The value of 0! is 1, according to the convention for an empty product. Ronald L. Graham, Donald E. Knuth, Oren Patashnik (1988) Concrete Mathematics, Addison-Wesley, Reading MA. ISBN 0-201-14236-8, p. 111 

The factorial operation is encountered in many areas of mathematics, notably in combinatorics, algebra, and mathematical analysis. Its most basic occurrence is the fact that there are n! ways to arrange n distinct objects into a sequence (i.e., permutations of the set of objects). This fact was known at least as early as the 12th century, to Indian scholars. N. L. Biggs, The roots of combinatorics, Historia Math. 6 (1979) 109136 
The notation n! was introduced by Christian Kramp in 1808. says Krempe though. 

The definition of the factorial function can also be extended to non-integer arguments, while retaining its most important properties; this involves more advanced mathematics, notably techniques from mathematical analysis.

==Definition==
The factorial function is formally defined by the product

:

or by the recurrence relation

:

The factorial function can also be defined by using the power rule as
: http://ocw.mit.edu/courses/mathematics/18-01-single-variable-calculus-fall-2006/lecture-notes/lec4.pdf 

All of the above definitions incorporate the instance

:

in the first case by the convention that the product of no numbers at all is 1. This is convenient because:
* There is exactly one permutation of zero objects (with nothing to permute, "everything" is left in place).
* The recurrence relation (n + 1)! n!  (n + 1), valid for n > 0, extends to n = 0.
* It allows for the expression of many formulae, such as the exponential function, as a power series:
:: 
* It makes many identities in combinatorics valid for all applicable sizes. The number of ways to choose 0 elements from the empty set is . More generally, the number of ways to choose (all) n elements among a set of n is .

The factorial function can also be defined for non-integer values using more advanced mathematics, detailed in the section below. This more generalized definition is used by advanced calculators and mathematical software such as Maple or Mathematica.

==Applications==

Although the factorial function has its roots in combinatorics, formulas involving factorials occur in many areas of mathematics.
* There are n! different ways of arranging n distinct objects into a sequence, the permutations of those objects.
* Often factorials appear in the denominator of a formula to account for the fact that ordering is to be ignored. A classical example is counting k-combinations (subsets of k elements) from a set with n elements. One can obtain such a combination by choosing a k-permutation: successively selecting and removing an element of the set, k times, for a total of
::
:possibilities. This however produces the k-combinations in a particular order that one wishes to ignore; since each k-combination is obtained in k! different ways, the correct number of k-combinations is
::
:This number is known as the binomial coefficient , because it is also the coefficient of X'k in (1 + X)n.
* Factorials occur in algebra for various reasons, such as via the already mentioned coefficients of the binomial formula, or through averaging over permutations for symmetrization of certain operations.
* Factorials also turn up in calculus; for example they occur in the denominators of the terms of Taylor's formula, where they are used as compensation terms due to the n-th derivative of x'n being equivalent to n!.
* Factorials are also used extensively in probability theory.
* Factorials can be useful to facilitate expression manipulation. For instance the number of k-permutations of n can be written as
::
:while this is inefficient as a means to compute that number, it may serve to prove a symmetry property of binomial coefficients:
::

==Number theory==

Factorials have many applications in number theory. In particular, n! is necessarily divisible by all prime numbers up to and including n. As a consequence, n > 5 is a composite number if and only if
:

A stronger result is Wilson's theorem, which states that
:
if and only if p is prime.

Adrien-Marie Legendre found that the multiplicity of the prime p occurring in the prime factorization of n! can be expressed exactly as
:

This fact is based on counting the number of factors p of the integers from 1 to n. The number of multiples of p in the numbers 1 to n are given by ; however, this formula counts those numbers with two factors of p only once. Hence another factors of p must be counted too. Similarly for three, four, five factors, to infinity. The sum is finite since p i can only be less than or equal to n for finitely many values of i, and the floor function results in 0 when applied for p i > n.

The only factorial that is also a prime number is 2, but there are many primes of the form n!  1, called factorial primes.

All factorials greater than 1! are even, as they are all multiples of 2. Also, all factorials from 5! upwards are multiples of 10 (and hence have a trailing zero as their final digit), because they are multiples of 5 and 2.

==Series of reciprocals==
The reciprocals of factorials produce a convergent series: (see e)
:
Although the sum of this series is an irrational number, it is possible to multiply the factorials by positive integers to produce a convergent series with a rational sum:
:
The convergence of this series to 1 can be seen from the fact that its partial sums are less than one by an inverse factorial.
Therefore, the factorials do not form an irrationality sequence. . 

==Rate of growth and approximations for large n==
Plot of the natural logarithm of the factorial
As n grows, the factorial n! increases faster than all polynomials and exponential functions (but slower than double exponential functions) in n.

Most approximations for n! are based on approximating its natural logarithm
:

The graph of the function f(n) = log n! is shown in the figure on the right. It looks approximately linear for all reasonable values of n, but this intuition is false.
We get one of the simplest approximations for log n! by bounding the sum with an integral from above and below as follows:

:

which gives us the estimate

:

Hence log n! is (n log n) (see Big O notation). This result plays a key role in the analysis of the computational complexity of sorting algorithms (see comparison sort). From the bounds on log n! deduced above we get that

:

It is sometimes practical to use weaker but simpler estimates. Using the above formula it is easily shown that for all n we have , and for all n  6 we have .

For large n we get a better estimate for the number n! using Stirling's approximation:

:

In fact, it can be proved that for all n we have

:

Another approximation for log n! is given by Srinivasa Ramanujan 

:
:
Thus it is even smaller than the next correction term of Stirling's formula.

==Computation==
If efficiency is not a concern, computing factorials is trivial from an algorithmic point of view: successively multiplying a variable initialized to 1 by the integers 2 up to n (if any) will compute n!, provided the result fits in the variable. In functional languages, the recursive definition is often implemented directly to illustrate recursive functions.

The main practical difficulty in computing factorials is the size of the result. To assure that the exact result will fit for all legal values of even the smallest commonly used integral type (8-bit signed integers) would require more than 700 bits, so no reasonable specification of a factorial function using fixed-size types can avoid questions of overflow. The values 12! and 20! are the largest factorials that can be stored in, respectively, the 32-bit and 64-bit integers commonly used in personal computers. Floating-point representation of an approximated result allows going a bit further, but this also remains quite limited by possible overflow. Most calculators use scientific notation with 2-digit decimal exponents, and the largest factorial that fits is then 69!, because 69! < 10100 < 70!. Calculators that use 3-digit exponents can compute larger factorials, up to, for example, 253!  5.2 on HP calculators and 449!  3.9 on the TI-86. The calculator seen in Mac OS X, Microsoft Excel and Google Calculator, as well as the freeware Fox Calculator, can handle factorials up to 170!, which is the largest factorial whose floating-point approximation can be represented as a 64-bit IEEE 754 floating-point value. The scientific calculator in Windows 7 and Windows 8 is able to calculate factorials up to 3248!.

Most software applications will compute small factorials by direct multiplication or table lookup. Larger factorial values can be approximated using Stirling's formula. Wolfram Alpha can calculate exact results for the ceiling function and floor function applied to the binary, natural and common logarithm of n! for values of n up to 249999, and up to 20,000,000! for the integers.

If the exact values of large factorials are needed, they can be computed using arbitrary-precision arithmetic. Instead of doing the sequential multiplications , a program can partition the sequence into two parts, whose products are roughly the same size, and multiply them using a divide-and-conquer method. This is often more efficient. GNU MP software manual, "Factorial Algorithm" (retrieved 22 January 2013). 

The asymptotically best efficiency is obtained by computing n! from its prime factorization. As documented by Peter Borwein, prime factorization allows n! to be computed in time O(n(log n log log n)2), provided that a fast multiplication algorithm is used (for example, the SchnhageStrassen algorithm). Peter Borwein. "On the Complexity of Calculating Factorials". Journal of Algorithms 6, 376380 (1985) Peter Luschny presents source code and benchmarks for several efficient factorial algorithms, with or without the use of a prime sieve. Peter Luschny, Fast-Factorial-Functions: The Homepage of Factorial Algorithms. 

==Extension of factorial to non-integer values of argument==
===The Gamma and Pi functions===

The factorial function, generalized to all real numbers except negative integers. For example, 0! = 1! = 1, (0.5)! = , (0.5)! = .

Besides nonnegative integers, the factorial function can also be defined for non-integer values, but this requires more advanced tools from mathematical analysis. One function that "fills in" the values of the factorial (but with a shift of 1 in the argument) is called the Gamma function, denoted (z), defined for all complex numbers z except the non-positive integers, and given when the real part of z is positive by

:

Its relation to the factorials is that for any natural number n
:

Euler's original formula for the Gamma function was

:

An alternative notation, originally introduced by Gauss, is sometimes used. The Pi function, denoted (z) for real numbers z no less than 0, is defined by

:

In terms of the Gamma function it is

:

It truly extends the factorial in that

:

In addition to this, the Pi function satisfies the same recurrence as factorials do, but at every complex value z where it is defined

:

In fact, this is no longer a recurrence relation but a functional equation.
Expressed in terms of the Gamma function this functional equation takes the form

:

Since the factorial is extended by the Pi function, for every complex value z where it is defined, we can write:

:

The values of these functions at half-integer values is therefore determined by a single one of them; one has

:

from which it follows that for n  N,

:

For example,
:

It also follows that for n  N,

:

For example,
:

The Pi function is certainly not the only way to extend factorials to a function defined at almost all complex values, and not even the only one that is analytic wherever it is defined. Nonetheless it is usually considered the most natural way to extend the values of the factorials to a complex function. For instance, the BohrMollerup theorem states that the Gamma function is the only function that takes the value 1 at 1, satisfies the functional equation (n + 1) = n(n), is meromorphic on the complex numbers, and is log-convex on the positive real axis. A similar statement holds for the Pi function as well, using the (n) = n(n  1) functional equation.

However, there exist complex functions that are probably simpler in the sense of analytic function theory and which interpolate the factorial values. For example, Hadamard's 'Gamma'-function which, unlike the Gamma function, is an entire function. Peter Luschny, Hadamard versus Euler - Who found the better Gamma function?. 

Euler also developed a convergent product approximation for the non-integer factorials, which can be seen to be equivalent to the formula for the Gamma function above:

:

However, this formula does not provide a practical means of computing the Pi or Gamma function, as its rate of convergence is slow.

===Applications of the Gamma function===
The volume of an n-dimensional hypersphere of radius R is

:

===Factorial at the complex plane===
Amplitude and phase of factorial of complex argument
Representation through the Gamma-function allows evaluation of factorial of complex argument. Equilines of amplitude and phase of factorial are shown in figure. Let . Several levels of constant modulus (amplitude) and constant phase are shown. The grid covers range
,

with unit step. The scratched line shows the level .

Thin lines show intermediate levels of constant modulus and constant phase. At poles , phase and amplitude are not defined. Equilines are dense in vicinity of singularities along negative integer values of the argument.

For , the Taylor expansions can be used:
:
The first coefficients of this expansion are

 approximation 
 0 
 1 
 2 
 3 

where is the Euler constant and is the Riemann zeta function. Computer algebra systems such as Sage (mathematics software) can generate many terms of this expansion.

===Approximations of factorial===
For the large values of the argument,
factorial can be approximated through the integral of the
digamma function, using the continued fraction representation.
This approach is due to T. J. Stieltjes (1894). Writing z! = exp(P(z)) where P(z) is
: 
Stieltjes gave a continued fraction for p(z)
: 
The first few coefficients an are Digital Library of Mathematical Functions, http://dlmf.nist.gov/5.10 

 n an 
 0 1 / 12 
 1 1 / 30 
 2 53 / 210 
 3 195 / 371 
 4 22999 / 22737 
 5 29944523 / 19733142 
 6 109535241009 / 48264275462 

There is common misconception, that or 
for any complex z  0. Indeed, the relation through the logarithm is valid only for specific range of values of z in vicinity of the real axis, while . The larger is the real part of the argument, the smaller should be the imaginary part. However, the inverse relation, z! = exp(P(z)), is valid for the whole complex plane apart from zero. The convergence is poor in vicinity of the negative part of the real axis. (It is difficult to have good convergence of any approximation in vicinity of the singularities). While or , the 6 coefficients above are sufficient for the evaluation of the factorial with the complex precision. For higher precision more coefficients can be computed by a rational QD-scheme (H. Rutishauser's QD algorithm). Peter Luschny, On Stieltjes' Continued Fraction for the Gamma Function.. 

===Non-extendability to negative integers===
The relation n! = n  (n  1)! allows one to compute the factorial for an integer given the factorial for a smaller integer. The relation can be inverted so that one can compute the factorial for an integer given the factorial for a larger integer:

:

Note, however, that this recursion does not permit us to compute the factorial of a negative integer; use of the formula to compute (1)! would require a division by zero, and thus blocks us from computing a factorial value for every negative integer. (Similarly, the Gamma function is not defined for non-positive integers, though it is defined for all other complex numbers.)

==Factorial-like products and functions==
There are several other integer sequences similar to the factorial that are used in mathematics:

===Primorial===
The primorial is similar to the factorial, but with the product taken only over the prime numbers.

=== Double factorial ===

The product of all the odd integers up to some odd positive integer n is called the double factorial of n, and denoted by n!!. . That is,
:
For example, 9!! = 1  3  5  7  9 = 945.

The sequence of double factorials for n = 1, 3, 5, 7, ... starts as
: 1, 3, 15, 105, 945, 10395, 135135, .... 

Double factorial notation may be used to simplify the expression of certain trigonometric integrals, to provide an expression for the values of the Gamma function at half-integer arguments and the volume of hyperspheres, . and to solve many counting problems in combinatorics including counting binary trees with labeled leaves and perfect matchings in complete graphs. . 

===Multifactorials===
A common related notation is to use multiple exclamation points to denote a multifactorial, the product of integers in steps of two (), three (), or more. The double factorial is the most commonly used variant, but one can similarly define the triple factorial () and so on. One can define the k-th factorial, denoted by , recursively for non-negative integers as

:
though see the alternative definition below.

Some mathematicians have suggested an alternative notation of for the double factorial and similarly for other multifactorials, but this has not come into general use.

The factorial operation is encountered in many different areas of mathematics, notably in combinatorics, algebra and mathematical analysis. Its most basic occurrence is the fact that there are n! ways to arrange n distinct objects into a sequence (i.e., permutations of the set of objects). This fact was known to Indian scholars at least as early as the 12th century.

In the same way that is not defined for negative integers, and is not defined for negative even integers, is not defined for negative integers divisible by .

====Alternative extension of the multifactorial====
Alternatively, the multifactorial z!(k) can be extended to most real and complex numbers z by noting that when z is one more than a positive multiple of k then
:
This last expression is defined much more broadly than the original; with this definition, z!(k) is defined for all complex numbers except the negative real numbers evenly divisible by k. This definition is consistent with the earlier definition only for those integers z satisfying z  1 mod k.

In addition to extending z!(k) to most complex numbers z, this definition has the feature of working for all positive real values of k. Furthermore, when k = 1, this definition is mathematically equivalent to the (z) function, described above. Also, when k = 2, this definition is mathematically equivalent to the alternative extension of the double factorial.

===Quadruple factorial===

The quadruple factorial is not the multifactorial n!(4); it is a much larger number given by (2n)!/n!, starting as

:1, 2, 12, 120, 1680, 30240, 665280, ... .

It is also equal to

: 

===Superfactorial===

Neil Sloane and Simon Plouffe defined a superfactorial in The Encyclopedia of Integer Sequences (Academic Press, 1995) to be the product of the first factorials. So the superfactorial of 4 is

:

In general

:

Equivalently, the superfactorial is given by the formula
:
which is the determinant of a Vandermonde matrix.

The sequence of superfactorials starts (from ) as

:1, 1, 2, 12, 288, 34560, 24883200, 125411328000, ... 

====Alternative definition====

Clifford Pickover in his 1995 book Keys to Infinity used a new notation, n$, to define the superfactorial
:
or as,
:
where the (4) notation denotes the hyper4 operator, or using Knuth's up-arrow notation,
:
This sequence of superfactorials starts:
:
:
:
Here, as is usual for compound exponentiation, the grouping is understood to be from right to left:
:

===Hyperfactorial===
Occasionally the hyperfactorial of n is considered. It is written as H(n) and defined by

:

For n = 1, 2, 3, 4, ... the values H(n) are 1, 4, 108, 27648,... .

The asymptotic growth rate is

: 

where A = 1.2824... is the GlaisherKinkelin constant. H(14) = 1.8474...1099 is already almost equal to a googol, and H(15) = 8.0896...10116 is almost of the same magnitude as the Shannon number, the theoretical number of possible chess games. Compared to the Pickover definition of the superfactorial, the hyperfactorial grows relatively slowly.

The hyperfactorial function can be generalized to complex numbers in a similar way as the factorial function. The resulting function is called the K-function.

==See also==

* Alternating factorial
* Digamma function
* Exponential factorial
* Factorial number system
* Factorial prime
* Factorion
* Gamma function
* List of factorial and binomial topics
* Pochhammer symbol, which gives the falling or rising factorial
* Stirling's approximation
* Subfactorial
* Trailing zeros of factorial
* Triangular number, the additive analogue of factorial

==Notes==

==References==
* 
* 

==External links==
* All about factorial notation n!
* 
* 
* 
* "Double Factorial Derivations"
* Animated Factorial Calculator: shows factorials calculated as if by hand using common elementary school algorithms
* A simple C source code for finding big factorials



[[Cinema of Germany]]

Cinema of Germany refers to the film industry based in Germany. Cinema in Germany can be traced back to the late 19th century. German cinema has made major technical and artistic contributions to film.

Unlike other national cinemas, which developed in the context of relatively continuous and stable political systems, Germany witnessed major changes to its identity during the 20th century. Those changes determined the periodisation of national cinema into a succession of distinct eras and movements. 

The Babelsberg Studio near Berlin was the first large-scale film studio in the world (founded 1912) and the forerunner to Hollywood. It still produces global blockbusters every year.
==18951918 German Empire==
The UFA (short for Universum Film AG) is the historical home of the German film industry and produces films since 1917 - until today.

The history of cinema in Germany can be traced back to the years shortly after the medium's birth. On November 1, 1895 Max Skladanowsky and his brother Emil demonstrated their self-invented film projector the Bioscop at the Wintergarten music hall in Berlin. A 15-minute series of eight short films, it was the first screening of films to a paying audience in Europe. This performance pre-dated the first paying public display of the Lumire brothers' Cinematographe in Paris on December 28 of the same year, a performance that Max Skladanowsky attended and at which he was able to ascertain that the Cinematographe was technically superior to his Bioscop. Other German film pioneers included the Berliners Oskar Messter and Max Gliewe, two of several individuals who independently in 1896 first used a Geneva drive (which allows the film to be advanced intermittently one frame at a time) in a projector, and the cinematographer Guido Seeber.

In its earliest days, the cinematograph was perceived as an attraction for upper class audiences, but the novelty of moving pictures did not last long. Soon, trivial short films were being shown as fairground attractions aimed at the working and lower-middle class. The booths in which these films were shown were known in Germany somewhat disparagingly as Kintopps. Film-makers with an artistic bent attempted to counter this view of cinema with longer movies based on literary models, and the first German "artistic" films began to be produced from around 1910, an example being the Edgar Allan Poe adaptation The Student of Prague (1913) which was co-directed by Paul Wegener and Stellan Rye, photographed by Guido Seeber and starring actors from Max Reinhardt's company.

Early film theorists in Germany began to write about the significance of Schaulust, or "visual pleasure", for the audience, including the Dada movement writer Walter Serner: "If one looks to where cinema receives its ultimate power, into these strangely flickering eyes that point far back into human history, suddenly it stands there in all its massiveness: visual pleasure." Visually striking sets and makeup were key to the style of the expressionist films that were produced shortly after World War I.

Cinemas themselves began to be established landmarks in the years immediately before World War I. Before this, German filmmakers would tour with their works, travelling from fairground to fairground. The earliest ongoing cinemas were set up in cafes and pubs by owners who saw a way of attracting more customers. The storefront cinema was called a Kientopp, and this is where films were viewed for the most part before World War I. The first standalone, dedicated cinema in Germany was opened in Mannheim in 1906, and by 1910, there were over 1000 cinemas operating in Germany. Henny Porten and Asta Nielsen (the latter originally from Denmark) were the first major film stars in Germany. 

Prior to 1914, however, many foreign films were imported. In the era of the silent film there were no language boundaries and Danish and Italian films were particularly popular in Germany. The public's desire to see more films with particular actors led to the development in Germany, as elsewhere, of the phenomenon of the film star; the actress Henny Porten was one of the earliest German stars. Public desire to see popular film stories being continued encouraged the production of film serials, especially in the genre of mystery films, which is where the director Fritz Lang began his illustrious career.

The outbreak of World War I and the subsequent boycott of, for example, French films left a noticeable gap in the market. By 1916, there already existed some 2000 fixed venues for movie performances and initially film screenings had to supplemented or even replaced by variety turns. In 1917 a process of concentration and partial nationalisation of the German film industry began with the founding of Universum Film AG (UFA), which was partly a reaction to the very effective use that the Allied Powers had found for the new medium for the purpose of propaganda. Under the aegis of the military, so-called Vaterland films were produced, which equalled the Allies' films in the matter of propaganda and disparagement of the enemy. Audiences however did not care to swallow the patriotic medicine without the accompanying sugar of the light-entertainment films which, consequently, Ufa also promoted. The German film industry soon became the largest in Europe.

==19181933 Weimar Republic==
UFA Studios in Berlin-Tempelhof, 1920
from metropolis.JPG|thumb|1927's Metropolis by Fritz Lang was the first feature length science fiction film in history. [http://www.scififilmhistory.com/index.php?pageID=metro SciFi Film History - Metropolis (1927) - Although the first science fiction film is generally agreed to be Georges Mlis' A Trip To The Moon (1902), Metropolis (1926) is the first feature length outing of the genre. (scififilmhistory.com, retrieved 15 May 2013) It was produced at Studio Babelsberg, Germany. (Photo shows the statue of the film figure Maria at Filmpark Babelsberg)]]

Three inventors came up with the Tri-Ergon sound-on-film system in 1918. From 1922 to 1926, they tried to introduce the process to film production, and UFA showed an interest, but, possibly due to financial difficulties, never made a sound film. Bordwell, David and Thompson, Kristen. (2003) "Film History An Introduction". New York: McGraw-Hill, p.200. In the period immediately following World War I, the film industry boomed, helped by the 1920s German inflation. This enabled film makers to borrow money in Papiermark which would be vastly devalued by the time it had to be repaid. Nevertheless, film budgets were tight and the need to save money was a contributing factor to the rise of German Expressionism, as was the desire to move forward and embrace the future that swept most of Europe at the time. Expressionist movies relied heavily on symbolism and artistic imagery rather than stark realism to tell their stories. Given the grim mood in post-WWI Germany, it was not surprising that these films focused heavily on crime and horror. The film usually credited with sparking the popularity of expressionism is Robert Wiene's The Cabinet of Dr. Caligari (1920). It painted a picture on the cinema screen with non-realistic sets built with exaggerated geometry, images painted on the floors and walls to represent objects (and often light and shadow), and a story involving the dark hallucinations of an insane man. An exaggerated acting style and unnatural costume design are other trademarks of this movement. Other notable works of Expressionism are Friedrich Wilhelm Murnau's Nosferatu (1922), and Carl Boese and Paul Wegener's (1920). The Expressionist movement died down during the mid-1920s, but it continued to influence world cinema for years afterward. Its influence is particularly noticeable in American horror films and film noir, and the works of European directors as diverse as Jean Cocteau and Ingmar Bergman.

UFA had been privatised in 1921 by a sale of the state's holdings to the Deutsche Bank and had become the mainstay of an industry that produced up to 600 feature films a year in the 1920s. In addition to UFA, there were some 230 film companies in business in Berlin alone at this time. However, film industry financing was a fragile business in the unstable economy of the Weimar Republic, and this, coupled with the industry's tendency to overreach itself financially (such as in the production of Fritz Lang's Metropolis (1927), perhaps the most famous German film of this period), frequently led to bankruptcies and financial ruin. UFA itself was forced to go into a disadvantageous partnership called Parufamet with the American studios Paramount and MGM in 1925 before being taken over by the nationalist industrialist and newspaper owner Alfred Hugenberg in 1927. The company's financial travails did not prevent it from producing numerous significant films throughout this period, among them, Ernst Lubitsch's Madame Du Barry (1919), Lang's epic production of Die Nibelungen, and Murnau's The Last Laugh (1925), and the development of the studios at Babelsberg, originally established in 1912 but later taken over by UFA and expanded massively to accommodate the filming of Metropolis, gave the German film industry a highly developed infrastructure. Babelsberg was at the centre of German filmmaking for several years, "the German equivalent to Hollywood". 

In addition to developments in the industry itself, the Weimar period saw the birth of film criticism as a serious discipline whose practitioners included Rudolf Arnheim in Die Weltbhne and in Film als Kunst (1932), Bla Balzs in Der Sichtbare Mensch (1924), Siegfried Kracauer in the Frankfurter Zeitung, and Lotte H. Eisner in the Filmkurier.

After the influence of Expressionism began to wane a variety of other genres and styles developed in the 1920s. Movies influenced by New Objectivity with socially concerned themes and a return to realism, among them films by Georg Wilhelm Pabst such as Joyless Street (Die Freudlose Gasse) (1925), Pandora's Box (1929), and The Loves of Jeanne Ney became widespread in the later 1920s. The movement is best characterized by tendency to understand reality and characters in terms of inanimate objects and personal possessions. Often associated with "street films." The influence of New Objectivity may also be seen in the trend towards so-called "asphalt" and "morality" films which dealt with scandalous subjects like abortion, prostitution, homosexuality, oral sex and addiction. Contrastingly, in the same period the genre of the Bergfilm was also developed, mainly by the director Arnold Fanck, in which individuals were shown battling against nature in the mountains. Animators and directors of experimental film such as Lotte Reiniger, Oskar Fischinger and Walter Ruttmann were also very active in Germany in the 1920s. Ruttman's experimental documentary (1927) epitomises the energy of 1920s Berlin. The polarised politics of the Weimar period were also reflected in some its movies. A series of patriotic films on Prussian history starring Otto Gebhr as Frederick the Great were produced throughout the 1920s and were popular with the nationalist right-wing, who strongly criticised the "asphalt" films' decadence.

Many of the films during that came out of Germany at this time were historical spectacles designed to pull in a large crowd and international release all while adhering to a smaller budget. Ernst Lubitsch's Madame DuBarry explored the French revolution through window of the intimate life of King Louis' mistress. Many of his films tended to how the intimate and petty passions of the rich and powerful are ironically responsible for huge historical events in the public realm.

The fourth key artistic movement of German cinema at this time was that of Kammerspiel or "chamber drama." Associated in particular with the screenwriter Carl Meyer and films such as Murnau's Last Laugh, this movement was in many ways a reaction against spectacle and expressionism. These films tended to revolve around ordinary people living in often dreary, ordinary settings. Often called "instinct" films because they emphasized the impulses and intimate psychology of the characters. The number of sets was often kept to a small number as well. This movement also relied heavily on the use of camera movements to explore the rather intimate and simple spaces.

The arrival of sound at the very end of the 1920s produced a final artistic flourish of German film before the collapse of the Weimar Republic in 1933. Sound production and distribution were quickly taken up by the German film industry and by 1932 Germany had 3,800 cinemas equipped to play sound films. Der blaue Engel (1930) by the Austrian director Josef von Sternberg was Germany's first talkie (shot simultaneously in German and English) and made an international star of Marlene Dietrich. Other early sound films of note include Berlin Alexanderplatz, Pabst's Bertolt Brecht adaptation The Threepenny Opera and Lang's M (all 1931) as well as Hochbaum's Razzia in Sankt Pauli & produced by Justin Rosenfeld (1932). Brecht was also one of the creators of the explicitly communist film Kuhle Wampe (1932), which was banned soon after its release.

Aside from the major movements already addressed, German filmmakers at this time were known as innovators for their creative usage of Mise-en-scene and camera movement.

Some classic films of this era include the following:

File:M poster.jpg|M (1931), directed by Fritz Lang
File:Pandora's Box (film).png|Pandora's Box (1929), directed by Georg Wilhelm Pabst
File:CABINETOFDRCALIGARI-poster.jpg|The Cabinet of Dr. Caligari (1920), directed by Robert Wiene.

==19331945 Nazi Germany==

The Titania-Palast in Berlin-Steglitz, an Art Deco style movie theater opened in 1928
The uncertain economic and political situation in Weimar Germany had already led to a number of film-makers and performers leaving the country, primarily for the United States; Ernst Lubitsch moved to Hollywood as early as 1923, the Hungarian-born Michael Curtiz in 1926. Some 1,500 directors, producers, actors and other film professionals emigrated in the years after the Nazis came to power. Among them were such key figures as the producer Erich Pommer, the studio head of Ufa, stars Marlene Dietrich and Peter Lorre, and director Fritz Lang. Lang's exodus to America is legendary; it is said that Metropolis so greatly impressed Joseph Goebbels that he asked Lang to become the head of his propaganda film unit. Lang fled to America instead, where he had a long and prosperous career. Many up-and-coming German directors also fled to the U.S., having a major influence on American film as a result. A number of the Universal Horror films of the 1930s were directed by German emigrees, including Karl Freund, Joe May and Robert Siodmak. Directors Edgar Ulmer and Douglas Sirk and the Austrian-born screenwriter (and later director) Billy Wilder also emigrated from Nazi Germany to Hollywood success. Not all those in the film industry threatened by the Nazi regime were able to escape; the actor and director Kurt Gerron, for example, perished in a concentration camp.

Within weeks of the Machtergreifung, Alfred Hugenberg had effectively turned over Ufa to the ends of the Nazis, excluding Jews from employment in the company in March 1933, several months before the foundation in June of the Reichsfilmkammer (Reich Chamber of Film), the body of the Nazi state charged with control of the film industry, which marked the official exclusion of Jews and foreigners from employment in the German film industry. As part of the process of Gleichschaltung all film production in Germany was subordinate to the Reichsfilmkammer, which was directly responsible to Goebbel's Propaganda ministry, and all those employed in the industry had to be members of the Reichsfachschaft Film. "Non-Aryan" film professionals and those whose politics or personal life were unacceptable to the Nazis were excluded from the Reichsfachschaft and thus denied employment in the industry. Some 3,000 individuals were affected by this employment ban. In addition, as journalists were also organised as a division of the Propaganda Ministry, Goebbels was able to abolish film criticism in 1936 and replace it with Filmbeobachtung (film observation); journalists could only report on the content of a film, not offer judgement on its artistic or other worth.

With the German film industry now effectively an arm of the totalitarian state, no films could be made that were not ostensibly in accord with the views of the ruling regime. However, despite the existence of anti-semitic propaganda works such as The Eternal Jew (1940)which was a box-office flopand the more sophisticated but equally anti-semitic Jud S (1940), which achieved commercial success at home and elsewhere in Europe, the majority of German films from the National Socialist period were intended principally as works of entertainment. The import of foreign films was legally restricted after 1936 and the German industry, which was effectively nationalised in 1937, had to make up for the missing foreign films (above all American productions). Entertainment also became increasingly important in the later years of World War II when the cinema provided a distraction from Allied bombing and a string of German defeats. In both 1943 and 1944 cinema admissions in Germany exceeded a billion, Kinobesuche in Deutschland 1925 bis 2004 Spitzenorganisation der Filmwirtschaft e. V and the biggest box office hits of the war years were Die groe Liebe (1942) and Wunschkonzert (1941), which both combine elements of the musical, wartime romance and patriotic propaganda, Frauen sind doch bessere Diplomaten (1941), a comic musical which was one of the earliest German films in colour, and Wiener Blut (1942), the adaptation of a Johann Strau comic operetta. The importance of the cinema as a tool of the state, both for its propaganda value and its ability to keep the populace entertained, can be seen in the filming history of Veit Harlan's Kolberg (1945), the most expensive film of the Nazi era, for the shooting of which tens of thousands of soldiers were diverted from their military positions to appear as extras.

Despite the emigration of many film-makers and the political restrictions, the period was not without technical and aesthetic innovations, the introduction of Agfacolor film production being a notable example. Technical and aesthetic achievement could also be turned to the specific ends of the Nazi state, most spectacularly in the work of Leni Riefenstahl. Riefenstahl's Triumph of the Will (1935), documenting the 1934 Nuremberg Rally, and Olympia (1938), documenting the 1936 Summer Olympics, pioneered techniques of camera movement and editing that have influenced many later films. Both films, particularly Triumph of the Will, remain highly controversial, as their aesthetic merit is inseparable from their propagandising of Nazi ideals.

==19451989 East Germany ==

East German cinema initially profited from the fact that much of the country's film infrastructure, notably the former UFA studios, lay in the Soviet occupation zone which enabled film production to get off the ground more quickly than in the Western sectors. The authorities in the Soviet Zone were keen to re-establish the film industry in their sector and an order was issued to re-open cinemas in Berlin in May 1945 within three weeks of German capitulation. The film production company Deutsche Film-Aktiengesellschaft or DEFA was founded on May 17, 1946, and took control of the film production facilities in the Soviet Zone which had been confiscated by order of the Soviet Military Administration in Germany in October 1945. Theoretically a joint-stock company, the majority interest in DEFA was actually held by the Socialist Unity Party of Germany (SED) which became the ruling party of the German Democratic Republic (GDR) after 1949, formally placing DEFA as the state-owned monopoly for film production in East Germany. A sister "company", Progress Filmverleih, had also been established as a similar monopoly for domestic film distribution, its principal "competition" being Sovexportfilm, which handled distribution of Soviet films.

In total DEFA produced some 900 feature films during its existence as well as around 800 animated films and over 3000 documentaries and short films. In its early years, production was limited due to strict controls imposed by the authorities which restricted the subject-matter of films to topics that directly contributed to the Communist project of the state. Excluding newsreels and educational films, only 50 films were produced between 1948 and 1953. However, in later years numerous films were produced on a variety of themes. DEFA had particular strengths in children's films, notably fairy tale adaptations such as Drei Haselnsse fr Aschenbrdel (Three Nuts for Cinderella) (1973), but it also attempted other genre works: science-fiction, for example Der schweigende Stern (The Silent Star) (1960), an adaptation of a Stanislaw Lem novel, or "red westerns" such as The Sons of the Great Mother Bear (1966) in which, in contrast to the typical American western, the heroes tended to be Native Americans. Many of these genre films were co-productions with other Warsaw Pact countries.

Notable non-genre films produced by DEFA include Wolfgang Staudte's adaptation of Heinrich Mann's Der Untertan (1951); Konrad Wolf's Der geteilte Himmel (Divided Heaven) (1964), an adaptation of Christa Wolf's novel; Frank Beyer's adaptation of Jurek Becker's Jacob the Liar (1975), the only East German film to be nominated for an Oscar; The Legend Of Paul And Paula (1973), directed by Heiner Carow from Ulrich Plenzdorf's novel; and Solo Sunny (1980), again the work of Konrad Wolf.

However, film-making in the GDR was always constrained and oriented by the political situation in the country at any given time. Ernst Thlmann, the communist leader in the Weimar period, was the subject of several hagiographical films in the 1950s and although East German filmmaking moved away from this overtly Stalinist approach in the 1960s, filmmakers were still subject to the changing political positions, and indeed the whims, of the SED leadership. For example, DEFA's full slate of contemporary films from 1966 were denied distribution, among them Frank Beyer's Traces of Stones (1966) which was pulled from distribution after three days, not because it was antipathetic to communist principles, but because it showed that such principles, which it fostered, were not put into practice at all times in East Germany. The huge box-office hit The Legend of Paul and Paula was initially threatened with a distribution ban because of its satirical elements and supposedly only allowed a release on the say-so of Party General Secretary Erich Honecker.

In the late 1970s numerous film-makers left the GDR for the West as a result of restrictions on their work, among them director Egon Gnther and actors Angelica Domrse, Eva-Maria Hagen, Katharina Thalbach, Hilmar Thate, Manfred Krug and Armin Mueller-Stahl. Many had been signatories of a 1976 petition opposing the expatriation of socially critical singer-songwriter Wolf Biermann and had had their ability to work restricted as a result.

In the final years of the GDR, the availability of television and the programming and films on television broadcasts reaching into the GDR via the uncontrollable airwaves, DEFA's productions' importance was reduced, although its continuing role in producing shows for East German television channel remained. Following the Wende, DEFA had ceased production altogether, and its studios and equipment was sold off by the Treuhand in 1992, but its intellectual property rights were handed to the charitable DEFA-Stiftung (DEFA Foundation) which exploits these rights in conjunction with a series of private companies, especially the quickly privatized Progress Film GmbH, which has issued several East German films with English subtitles since the mid-1990s.

==19451989 West Germany==

===19451960 Reconstruction===

The occupation and reconstruction of Germany by the Four Powers in the period immediately after the end of World War II brought a major and long-lasting change to the economic conditions under which the industry in Germany had previously operated. The holdings of Ufa were confiscated by the Allies and, as part of the process of decartelisation, licences to produce films were shared between a range of much smaller companies. In addition, the Occupation Statute of 1949, which granted partial independence to the newly created Federal Republic of Germany, specifically forbade the imposition of import quotas to protect German film production from foreign competition, the result of lobbying by the American industry as represented by the MPAA.

Amidst the devastation of the Stunde Null year of 1945 cinema attendance was unsurprisingly down to a fraction of its wartime heights, but already by the end of the decade it had reached levels that exceeded the pre-war period. For the first time in many years, German audiences had free access to cinema from around the world and in this period the films of Charlie Chaplin remained popular, as were melodramas from the United States. Nonetheless, the share of the film market for German films in this period and into the 1950s remained relatively large, taking up some 40 percent of the total market. American films took up around 30 percent of the market despite having around twice as many films in distribution as the German industry in the same time frame (Schneider 1990:35, 42 & 44).

Many of the German films of the immediate post-war period can be characterised as belonging to the genre of the Trmmerfilm (literally "rubble film"). These films show strong affinities with the work of Italian neorealists, not least Roberto Rossellini's neorealist trilogy which included Germany Year Zero (1948), and are concerned primarily with day-to-day life in the devastated Germany and an initial reaction to the events of the Nazi period (the full horror of which was first experienced by many in documentary footage from liberated concentration camps). Such films include Wolfgang Staudte's Die Mrder sind unter uns (The Murderers are among us) (1946), the first film made in post-war Germany, and Wolfgang Liebeneiner's Liebe 47 (Love 47) (1949), an adaptation of Wolfgang Borchert's play Drauen vor der Tr.

Despite the advent of a regular television service in the Federal Republic in 1952, cinema attendances continued to grow through much of the 1950s, reaching a peak of 817.5 million visits in 1956. The majority of the films of this period set out to do no more than entertain the audience and had few pretensions to artistry or active engagement with social issues. The defining genre of the period was arguably the Heimatfilm ("homeland film"), in which morally simplistic tales of love and family were played out in a rural setting, often in the mountains of Bavaria, Austria or Switzerland. In their day Heimatfilms were of little interest to more scholarly film critics, but in recent years they have been the subject of study in relation to what they say about the culture of West Germany in the years of the Wirtschaftswunder. Other film genres typical of this period were adaptations of operettas, hospital melodramas, comedies and musicals. Many films were remakes of earlier Ufa productions shorn of the nationalistic Blut und Boden traits of those Nazi-period films.

Rearmament and the founding of the Bundeswehr in 1955 brought with it a wave of war films which tended to depict the ordinary German soldiers of World War II as brave and apolitical. Bartov, Omer Celluloid Soldiers: Cinematic Images of the Wehrmacht pages 130143 from Russia War, Peace and Diplomacy edited by Ljubica & Mark Erickson, London: Weidenfeld & Nicolson, 2004 page 136. The Israeli historian Omer Bartov wrote that German films of the 1950s showed the average German soldier as a heroic victim: noble, tough, brave, honourable, and patriotic while fighting hard in a senseless war for a regime that he did not care for. Bartov, Omer Celluloid Soldiers: Cinematic Images of the Wehrmacht pages 130143 from Russia War, Peace and Diplomacy edited by Ljubica & Mark Erickson, London: Weidenfeld & Nicolson, 2004 pages 134135. The 08/15 film trilogy of 195455 concerns a sensitive young German soldier who would rather play the piano than fight, and who fights on the Eastern Front without understanding why; however, no mention is made of the genocidal aspects of Germany's war in East. Bartov, Omer Celluloid Soldiers: Cinematic Images of the Wehrmacht pages 130143 from Russia War, Peace and Diplomacy edited by Ljubica & Mark Erickson, London: Weidenfeld & Nicolson, 2004 page 136. The last of the 08/15 films ends with Germany occupied by a gang of American soldiers portrayed as bubble-gum chewing, slack-jawed morons and uncultured louts, totally inferior in every respect to the heroic German soldiers shown in the 08/15 films. The only exception is the Jewish American officer, who is shown as both hyper-intelligent and very unscrupulous, which Bartov noted seems to imply that the real tragedy of World War II was the Nazis did not get a chance to exterminate all of the Jews, who have now returned with Germany's defeat to once more exploit the German people. 

In The Doctor of Stalingrad (1958) dealing with German POWs in the Soviet Union, Germans are portrayed as more civilized, humane and intelligent than the Soviets, who are showed for the most part as Mongol savages who brutalized the German POWs. Bartov, Omer Celluloid Soldiers: Cinematic Images of the Wehrmacht pages 130143 from Russia War, Peace and Diplomacy edited by Ljubica & Mark Erickson, London: Weidenfeld & Nicolson, 2004 page 137. One of the German POWs successfully seduces the beautiful and tough Red Army Captain Alexandra Kasalniskaya (Eva Bartok) who prefers him to the sadistic camp commandant, which as Bartov comments also is meant to show that even in defeat, German men were more sexually virile and potent than their Russian counterparts. In Hunde, wolt ihr ewig leben? (Dogs, do you want to live forever?) of 1959, which deals with the Battle of Stalingrad, the focus is on celebrating the heroism of the German soldier in that battle, who are shown as valiantly holding out against overwhelming odds with no mention at all of what those soldiers were fighting for, namely National Socialist ideology or the Holocaust. Bartov, Omer Celluloid Soldiers: Cinematic Images of the Wehrmacht pages 130143 from Russia War, Peace and Diplomacy edited by Ljubica & Mark Erickson, London: Weidenfeld & Nicolson, 2004 page 138. This period also saw a number of films that depicted the military resistance to Hitler. In Des Teufels General (The Devil's General) of 1954, a Luftwaffe general named Harras loosely modeled after Ernst Udet, appears at first to be cynical fool, but turns out to an anti-Nazi who is secretly sabotaging the German war effort by designing faulty planes. Bartov, Omer Celluloid Soldiers: Cinematic Images of the Wehrmacht pages 130143 from Russia War, Peace and Diplomacy edited by Ljubica & Mark Erickson, London: Weidenfeld & Nicolson, 2004 pages 132133. Bartov commented that in this film, the German officer corps is shown as a group of fundamentally noble and civilized men who happened to be serving an evil regime made up of a small gang of gangsterish misfits totally unrepresentative of German society, which served to exculpate both the officer corps and by extension Germany society. Bartov, Omer Celluloid Soldiers: Cinematic Images of the Wehrmacht pages 130143 from Russia War, Peace and Diplomacy edited by Ljubica & Mark Erickson, London: Weidenfeld & Nicolson, 2004 page 133 Bartov wrote that no German film of the 1950s showed the deep commitment felt by many German soldiers to National Socialism, the utter ruthless way the German Army fought the war and the mindless nihilist brutality of the later Wehrmacht. Bartov, Omer Celluloid Soldiers: Cinematic Images of the Wehrmacht pages 130143 from Russia War, Peace and Diplomacy edited by Ljubica & Mark Erickson, London: Weidenfeld & Nicolson, 2004 page 135. Bartov wrote that German film-makers liked to show the heroic last stand of the 6th Army at Stalingrad, but none has so far showed the 6th Army's massive co-operation with the Einsatzgruppen in murdering Soviet Jews in 1941. Bartov, Omer Celluloid Soldiers: Cinematic Images of the Wehrmacht pages 130143 from Russia War, Peace and Diplomacy edited by Ljubica & Mark Erickson, London: Weidenfeld & Nicolson, 2004 page 139. 

Even though there are countless film adaptations of Edgar Wallace novels worldwide, the crime films produced by the German company Rialto Film between 1959 and 1972 are the best-known of those, to the extent that they form their own subgenre known as Krimis (abbreviation for the German term "Kriminalfilm" (or "Kriminalroman"). Other Edgar Wallace adaptations in a similar style were made by the Germans Artur Brauner and Kurt Ulrich, and the British producer Harry Alan Towers.

The international significance of the West German film industry of the 1950s could no longer measure up to that of France, Italy, or Japan. German films were only rarely distributed internationally as they were perceived as provincial. International co-productions of the kind which were becoming common in France and Italy tended to be rejected by German producers (Schneider 1990:43). However a few German films and film-makers did achieve international recognition at this time, among them Bernhard Wicki's Oscar-nominated Die Brcke (The Bridge) (1959), and the actresses Hildegard Knef and Romy Schneider.

===19601970 Cinema in crisis and popular productions===
In the late 1950s, the growth in cinema attendance of the preceding decade first stagnated and then went into freefall throughout the 1960s. By 1969 West German cinema attendance at 172.2 million visits per year was less than a quarter of its 1956 post-war peak. As a consequence of this, numerous German production and distribution companies went out of business in the 1950s and 1960s and cinemas across the Federal Republic closed their doors; the number of screens in West Germany almost halved between the beginning and the end of the decade.

Initially, the crisis was perceived as a problem of overproduction. Consequently, the German film industry cut back on production. 123 German movies were produced in 1955, only 65 in 1965. However, many German film companies followed the 1960s trends of international co-productions with Italy and Spain in such genres as spaghetti westerns and Eurospy films with films shot in those nations or in Yugoslavia that featured German actors in the casts.

The roots of the problem lay deeper in changing economic and social circumstances. Average incomes in the Federal Republic rose sharply and this opened up alternative leisure activities to compete with cinema-going. At this time too, television was developing into a mass medium that could compete with the cinema. In 1953 there were only 1,000,000 sets in West Germany; by 1962 there were 7 million (Connor 1990:49) (Hoffman 1990:69).

The majority of films produced in the Federal Republic in the 1960s were genre works: westerns, especially the series of movies adapted from Karl May's popular genre novels which starred Pierre Brice as the Apache Winnetou and Lex Barker as his white blood brother Old Shatterhand; thrillers and crime films, notably a series of Edgar Wallace movies from Rialto Film in which Klaus Kinski, Heinz Drache, Wolfgang Vlz, and Joachim Fuchsberger were among the regular players. The traditional Krimi films expanded into series based on German pulp fiction heroes such as Jerry Cotton played by George Nader and Kommissar X played by Tony Kendall and Brad Harris. West Germany also made several horror films including ones starring Christopher Lee. The two genres were combined in the return of Doctor Mabse in a series of several films of the early 1960s.

At the end of the 1960s softcore sex films, both the relatively serious Aufklrungsfilme (sex education films) of Oswalt Kolle and such exploitation films as Schulmdchen-Report (Schoolgirl Report) (1970) and its successors were produced into the 1970s. Such movies were commercially successful and often enjoyed international distribution, but won little acclaim from critics.

===19601980 New German Cinema===

As a reaction to the artistic and economic stagnation of German cinema, a group of young film-makers issued the Oberhausen Manifesto on February 28, 1962. This call to arms, which included Alexander Kluge, Edgar Reitz, Peter Schamoni and Franz Josef Spieker among its signatories, provocatively declared "Der alte Film ist tot. Wir glauben an den neuen" ("The old cinema is dead. We believe in the new cinema"). Other up-and-coming filmmakers allied themselves to this Oberhausen group, among them Rainer Werner Fassbinder, Volker Schlndorff, Werner Herzog, Jean-Marie Straub, Wim Wenders, Werner Schroeter and Hans-Jrgen Syberberg in their rejection of the existing German film industry and their determination to build a new industry founded on artistic excellence rather than commercial dictates. Most of these directors organized themselves in, or partially co-operated with, the film production and distribution company Filmverlag der Autoren established in 1971, which throughout the 1970s brought forth a number of critically and internationally acclaimed films (see below).

Despite the foundation of the Kuratorium Junger Deutscher Film (Young German Film Committee) in 1965, set up under the auspices of the Federal Ministry of the Interior to support new German films financially, the directors of this New German Cinema, who rejected co-operation with the existing film industry, were consequently often dependent on money from television. Young filmmakers had the opportunity to test their mettle in such programmes as the stand-alone drama and documentary series Das kleine Fernsehspiel (The Little TV Play) or the television films of the crime series Tatort. However, the broadcasters sought TV premieres for the films which they had supported financially, with theatrical showings only occurring later. As a consequence, such films tended to be unsuccessful at the box office. 

This situation changed after 1974 when the Film-Fernseh-Abkommen (Film and Television Accord) was agreed between the Federal Republic's main broadcasters, ARD and ZDF, and the German Federal Film Board (a government body created in 1968 to support film-making in Germany). Information on the Filmfrderungsanstalt (FFA)  German Federal Film Board This accord, which has been repeatedly extended up to the present day, provides for the television companies to make available an annual sum to support the production of films which are suitable for both theatrical distribution and television presentation. (The amount of money provided by the public broadcasters has varied between 4.5 and 12.94 million euros per year). Under the terms of the accord, films produced using these funds can only be screened on television 24 months after their theatrical release. They may appear on video or DVD no sooner than six months after cinema release. As a result of the funds provided by the Film-Fernseh-Abkommen, German films, particularly those of the New German Cinema, gained a much greater opportunity to enjoy box-office success before they played on television (Blaney 1992:204). Despite the difficulty in finding a large domestic audience, the films of these directors also began gaining critical acclaim and their foreign audiences grew throughout the 1970s. 

The artistically ambitious and socially critical films of the New German Cinema strove to delineate themselves from what had gone before and the works of auteur film-makers such as Kluge and Fassbinder are examples of this, although Fassbinder in his use of stars from German cinema history also sought a reconciliation between the new cinema and the old. In addition, a distinction is sometimes drawn between the avantgarde "Young German Cinema" of the 1960s and the more accessible "New German Cinema" of the 1970s. For their influences the new generation of film-makers looked to Italian neorealism, the French Nouvelle Vague and the British New Wave but combined this eclectically with references to the well-established genres of Hollywood cinema. The New German Cinema dealt with contemporary German social problems in a direct way that had been lacking in West German cinema until then; the Nazi past, the plight of the Gastarbeiter ("guest workers"), and modern social developments, were all subjects prominent in New German Cinema films. 

The new movement saw German cinema return to international critical significance for the first time since the end of the Weimar Republic. Films such as Kluge's Abschied von Gestern (1966), Herzog's Aguirre, the Wrath of God (1972), Fassbinder's Fear Eats the Soul (1974) and The Marriage of Maria Braun (1979), and Wenders' Paris, Texas (1984) found international acclaim and critical approval. Often the work of these auteurs was first recognised abroad rather than in Germany itself. The work of post-war Germany's leading novelists Heinrich Bll and Gnter Grass provided source material for the adaptations The Lost Honour of Katharina Blum (1975) (by Schlndorff and Margarethe von Trotta) and The Tin Drum (1979) (by Schlndorff alone) respectively, the latter becoming the first German film to win the Academy Award for Best Foreign Language Film. The New German Cinema also allowed for female directors to come to the fore and for the development of a feminist cinema which encompassed the works of directors such as Margarethe von Trotta, Helma Sanders-Brahms, Helke Sander and Cristina Perincioli.

===19801989===
Having achieved some of its goals, among them the establishment of state funding for the film industry and renewed international recognition for German films, the New German Cinema had begun to show signs of fatigue by the 1980s, even though many of its proponents continued to enjoy individual success. In addition, the "aesthetic left" nature of New German Cinema (in the words of the critic Enno Patalas ) no longer coincided with the spirit of the times.

Among the commercial successes for German films of the 1980s were the Otto film series beginning in 1985 starring comedian Otto Waalkes, Wolfgang Petersen's adaptation of The NeverEnding Story (1984), and the internationally successful Das Boot (1981), which still holds the record for most Academy Award nominations for a German film (six). Other notable film-makers who came to prominence in the 1980s include producer Bernd Eichinger and directors Doris Drrie, Uli Edel, and Loriot.

Away from the mainstream, the splatter film director Jrg Buttgereit, the experimental film director Werner Nekes and the provocative Christoph Schlingensief all came to prominence in the 1980s.The development of arthouse cinemas (Programmkinos) from the 1970s onwards provided a venue for the works of less mainstream film-makers.

This rise of underground cinema coincided with Germany's surge drug culture and related rave clubs leading to the development of many subculture movies like September a movie in the vein of Dope (London 1968). The associated rave scene this genre helped to spawn had major ramifications for the art house cinema that was to come out of Germany for the next twenty years.

From the mid-1980s the spread of videocassette recorders and the arrival of private TV channels such as RTL Television provided new competition for theatrical film distribution. Cinema attendance, having rallied slightly in the late 1970s after an all-time low of 115.1 million visits in 1976, dropped sharply again from the mid-1980s to end at just 101.6 million visits in 1989. However, the availability of a back catalogue of films on video also allowed for a different relationship between the viewer and an individual film, while private TV channels brought new money into the film industry and provided a launch pad from which new talent could later move into film.

==19902013 Federal Republic of Germany==
A modern cinema in Dortmund
John Rabe (2009), directed by Florian Gallenberger, filming on location in Shanghai harbour.
Today's biggest producers include Bavaria Film, Constantin Film, Studio Hamburg, and UFA. Recent film releases such as Run Lola Run by Tom Tykwer, Good Bye Lenin! by Wolfgang Becker, Head-On by Fatih Akin, and Downfall by Oliver Hirschbiegel have arguably managed to recapture the provocative and innovative nature of 1970s New German cinema. A number of modern German films such as Downfall, Sophie Scholl  The Final Days, The Lives of Others, and The Counterfeiters address the nature of totalitarianism in 20th-century Germany.

Nina Hoss
Other notable directors working in German currently include Snke Wortmann, Caroline Link (winner of an Academy Award), Romuald Karmakar, Harun Farocki, Hans-Christian Schmid, Andreas Dresen, Dennis Gansel, Ulrich Khler and Ulrich Seidl, as well as comedy directors Michael Herbig and Sven Unterwaldt.

Germany has recently experienced an influx of independent and underground films (mostly pertaining to the horror genre). Directors in this popular circle include Andreas Schnaas, Olaf Ittenbach, Jorg Buttgereit, Timo Rose and Daryush Shokof with some highly original works beginning with his Seven Servants.

The new decade has also seen a resurgence of the German film industry, with bigger-budget films and good returns at the German box office.

German production companies have been quite commonly involved in expensive French and Italian productions from Spaghetti Westerns to French comic book adaptations. In recent years, German production interests have also become very involved with American television and film production to help offset the costs of such productions, as evidenced by the company credits in certain films and TV shows.

Germany have a long cooperation with the Swedish film industry, which started as early as during the 1960s. German film industry has primarily been economically involved in Swedish films, but does not put itself in the artistic product. However, some German actors have had small parts in Swedish films and some Swedish actors have had small parts in German films. The co-operation became stronger during the end of the 1990s.

==German Film Academy ==
The Deutsche Filmakademie was founded in 2003 in Berlin and aims to provide native filmmakers a forum for discussion and a way to promote the reputation of German cinema through publications, presentations, discussions and regular promotion of the subject in the schools.

===Awards===
Since 2005, the winners of the Deutscher Filmpreis, also known as the Lolas are elected by the members of the Deutsche Filmakademie. With a cash prize of three million euros it is the most highly endowed German cultural award.

 Year English title Original title Director(s) 
 2005 Go for Zucker Alles auf Zucker! 
 2006 The Lives of Others Das Leben der Anderen 
 2007 Four Minutes Vier Minuten 
 2008 The Edge of Heaven Auf der anderen Seite 
 2009 John Rabe John Rabe 
 2010 The White Ribbon Das weie Band 
 2011 Vincent Wants to Sea Vincent will Meer 
 2012 Stopped on Track Halt auf freier Strecke 
 2013 Oh Boy Oh Boy 
 

==Festivals==
A sign advertising the Berlin International Film Festival, also known as Berlinale, 2011.
===Berlinale===
The Berlin International Film Festival also called the Berlinale, is one of the world's leading film festivals and most reputable media events. 2010 Berlin Film Festival. The Hollywood Reporter It is held in Berlin, Germany. China film wins top Berlin award, BBC News Founded in West Berlin in 1951, the festival has been celebrated annually in February since 1978. With 274,000 tickets sold and 487,000 admissions it is considered the largest publicly attended film festival worldwide. Most frequented film festivals, filmfestivals.com Facts and Figures of the Berlinale, berlinale.com Up to 400 films are shown in several sections, representing a comprehensive array of the cinematic world. Around twenty films compete for the awards called the Golden and Silver Bears. Since 2001 the director of the festival has been Dieter Kosslick. , 18 February 2008 Speed Interview with Dieter Kosslick Berlinale Chief, filmfestivalstv.com, 18 February 2008 

The festival, the EFM and other satellite events are attended by around 20,000 professionals from over 130 countries. 2009 Berlinale Press release, berlinale.de, 18. February 2008 More than 4200 journalists are responsible for the media exposure in over 110 countries. Kosslick zieht positive Berlinale-Bilanz (German), PR-inside.com At high-profile feature film premieres, movie stars and celebrities are present at the red carpet. Madonna at the Berlinale, YouTube, 19 February 2008 The Berlinale has established
a cosmopolitan character integrating art, glamour, commerce and a global media attention. Berlinale Profile, berlinale.de 

== German Federal Film Fund ==
The main production incentive provided by governmantal authorities is the German Federal Film Fund (DFFF). The DFFF is a grant given by the German Federal Commissioner for Culture and the Media. To receive the grant a producer has to fulfill different requirements including a cultural eligibility test. The fund offers 60 million euros a year to film producers and or co-producers and grants can amount to up to 20% of the approved German production costs. At least 25% the production costs must be spent in Germany, or only 20%, if the production costs are higher than 20 million euros. The DFFF has been established in 2007 and supported projects in all categories and genres.

==Film schools==
 University of Television and Film Munich
Several institutes, both government run and private, provide formal education in various aspects of filmmaking.

*Deutsche Film- und Fernsehakademie Berlin (dffb) Berlin
*Film Academy Baden-Wuerttemberg, Ludwigsburg
*international filmschool cologne, Cologne
*Hochschule fr Fernsehen und Film Mnchen, Munich
* Hochschule fr Film und Fernsehen Konrad Wolf, Potsdam

==See also==

* European Film Academy
* Cinema of the world
* History of cinema
* Kammerspielfilm
* List of films set in Berlin
* German underground horror
* World cinema

==Further reading==
* Bergfelder, Tim, et al. eds. The German Cinema Book (2008)
* Blaney, Martin. Symbiosis or Confrontation? (Bonn, 1992)
* Brockman, Stephen. A Critical History of German Film (2011)
* Garncarz, Joseph, and Annemone Ligensa, eds. The Cinema of Germany (Wallflower Press, distributed by Columbia University Press; 2012) 264 pages; analyses of 24 works from silent movies to such contemporary films as "Good Bye, Lenin!"
* Hake, Sabine. German National Cinema (2002; 2nd ed. 2008)
* Hoffman, Kay 1990 Am Ende Video  Video am Ende? Berlin
* Kapczynski, Jennifer M. and Michael D. Richardson, eds. (2012) A New History of German Cinema (Rochester Camden House, 2012) 673 pp. online review
*Kracauer, Siegfried. (2004) . Princeton: Univ. of Princeton Press. ISBN 0-691-11519-2
*Schneider, Irmela 1990 Film, Fernsehen & Co. Heidelberg.
*Fay, Jennifer. 2008. Theaters of Occupation: Hollywood and the Reeducation of Postwar Germany. Minneapolis: Univ. of Minnesota Press. ISBN 978-0-8166-4745-3

==References==

 

==External links==
*German Film History
* Bavaria Film German Film & TV Producer Bavaria Film
* Biographies and autographs of the early German film era
* Web portal on German film of the Goethe-Institut  Articles and news on German filmmakers, movies, festivals
* 7 Thought Provoking German Films A look at thought-provoking modern German cinema

 

[[Frivolous litigation]]

In law, frivolous litigation is the practice of starting or carrying on lawsuits that, due to their lack of legal merit, have little to no chance of being won. The term does not include cases that may be lost due to other matters not related to legal merit. While colloquially, a person may term a lawsuit to be frivolous if he or she personally finds a claim to be absurd, in legal usage "frivolous litigation" consists of a claim or defense that is presented where the party (or the party's legal counsel) had reason to know that the claim or defense was manifestly insufficient or futile. The fact that a claim is lost does not imply that it was frivolous.

Frivolous litigation may be based on absurd legal theories, may involve a superabundance or repetition of motions or additional suits, may be uncivil or harassing to the court, or may claim extreme remedies. A claim or defense may be frivolous because it had no underlying justification in fact, or because it was not presented with an argument for a reasonable extension or reinterpretation of the law. A claim may be deemed frivolous because existing laws unequivocally prohibit such a claim, such as a so-called Good Samaritan law.

In the United States, Rule 11 of the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure and similar state rules require that an attorney perform a due diligence investigation concerning the factual basis for any claim or defense. Jurisdictions differ on whether a claim or defense can be frivolous if the attorney acted in good faith. Because such a defense or claim wastes the court's and the other parties' time, resources and legal fees, sanctions may be imposed by a court upon the party or the lawyer who presents the frivolous defense or claim. The law firm may also be sanctioned, or even held in contempt.

==Federal statutes and rules of court penalizing frivolous litigation==
In the U.S. Tax Court, frivolous arguments may result in a penalty of up to $25,000 under . Similarly, section 7482 of the Internal Revenue Code provides that the U.S. Supreme Court and the U.S. Courts of Appeals may impose penalties in which the taxpayer's appeal of a U.S. Tax Court decision was "maintained primarily for delay" or where "the taxpayer's position in the appeal is frivolous or groundless." See paragraph (4) of subsection (c) of . A common example, as shown below, is an argument based on tax protestor claims.

In a noncriminal case in a U.S. District Court, a litigant (or a litigant's attorney) who presents any pleading, written motion or other paper to the court is required, under Rule 11 of the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure, to certify that, to the best of the presenter's knowledge and belief, the legal contentions "are warranted by existing law or by a nonfrivolous argument for the extension, modification, or reversal of existing law or the establishment of new law". Rule 11(b)(2), Federal Rules of Civil Procedure. Monetary civil penalties for violation of this rule may in some cases be imposed on the litigant or the attorney under Rule 11. Rule 11(c), Federal Rules of Civil Procedure. 

In one case, the Seventh Circuit Court issued an order giving such an attorney "14 days to show cause why he should not be fined $10,000 for his frivolous arguments". United States v. Patridge, 507 F.3d 1092, 2007-2 U.S. Tax Cas. (CCH) paragr. 50,806 (7th Cir. 2007), cert. denied, 552 U.S. 1280, 128 S.Ct. 1721 (2008). A similar rule penalizing frivolous litigation applies in U.S. Bankruptcy Court under Rule 9011. Rule 9011(b)(2) and Rule 9011(c), Federal Rules of Bankruptcy Procedure. 

The U.S. Congress has enacted section 1912 of title 28 of the U.S Code providing that in the U.S. Supreme Court and in the U.S. Courts of Appeals where litigation by the losing party has caused damage to the prevailing party, the court may impose a requirement that the losing party pay the prevailing party for those damages. See . 

Litigants who represent themselves (in forma pauperis and pro se) sometimes make frivolous arguments due to their limited knowledge of the law and procedure. The particular tendency of prisoners to bring baseless lawsuits led to passage of the Prison Litigation Reform Act of 1995, which limits the ability of prisoners to bring actions without payment. 

==Court treatment of frivolous arguments==
An example of a Court's treatment of frivolous arguments is found in the case of Crain v. Commissioner, 737 F.2d 1417 (1984), from the United States Court of Appeals for the Fifth Circuit:

::Glenn Crain appeals from the dismissal of his Tax Court petition challenging the constitutional authority of that body and defying the jurisdiction of the Internal Revenue Service to levy taxes on his income. Crain asserts that he "is not subject to the jurisdiction, taxation, nor regulation of the state," that the "Internal Revenue Service, Incorporated" lacks authority to exercise the judicial power of the United States, that the Tax Court is unconstitutionally attempting to exercise Article III powers, and that jurisdiction over his person has never been affirmatively proven.

::We perceive no need to refute these arguments with somber reasoning and copious citation of precedent; to do so might suggest that these arguments have some colorable merit. The constitutionality of our income tax system&mdash;including the role played within that system by the Internal Revenue Service and the Tax Court&mdash;has long been established. We affirm the dismissal of Crain's spurious "petition" and the assessment of a penalty imposed by the Tax Court for instituting a frivolous proceeding. .

::The government asks us to assess penalties against Crain for bringing this frivolous appeal, as is authorized by Fed. R. App. P. 38. In Parker v. C. I. R., 724 F. 2d 469, 472 (5th Cir. 1984), we sounded "a cautionary note to those who would persistently raise arguments against the income tax which have been put to rest for years. The full range of sanctions in Rule 38 hereafter shall be summoned in response to a totally frivolous appeal."

::We are sensitive to the need for the courts to remain open to all who seek in good faith to invoke the protection of law. An appeal that lacks merit is not always&mdash;or often&mdash;frivolous. However, we are not obliged to suffer in silence the filing of baseless, insupportable appeals presenting no colorable claims of error and designed only to delay, obstruct, or incapacitate the operations of the courts or any other governmental authority. Crain's present appeal is of this sort. It is a hodgepodge of unsupported assertions, irrelevant platitudes, and legalistic gibberish. The government should not have been put to the trouble of responding to such spurious arguments, nor this court to the trouble of "adjudicating" this meritless appeal.

::Accordingly, we grant the government's request. The United States shall recover from appellant Crain twice its cost of this appeal. Additionally, we assess against Crain a damage award of $2000 in favor of the appellee United States. Crain v. Commissioner, 737 F.2d 1417, 84-2 U.S. Tax Cas. (CCH) paragr. 9721 (5th Cir. 1984) (per curiam). 

==Impact upon filing attorney==
Filing a claim that is ultimately deemed frivolous can be highly damaging to the attorney so filing. Attorney Daniel Evans writes:

==Examples of frivolous court filings==
===Washington v. Alaimo===
In Washington v. Alaimo 934 F. Supp. 1395 (S.D. Ga. 1996). the court listed more than seventy-five frivolous "motions" (a request for a court to issue an order), all of which required the attention of the Court, including the following:

* "Motion to Behoove an Inquisition"
* "Motion for Judex Delegatus"
* "Motion for Restoration of Sanity"
* "Motion for Deinstitutionalization"
* "Motion for Publicity"
* "Motion to Vacate Jurisdiction"
* "Motion for Cesset processus"
* "Motion for Nunc pro tunc"
* "Motion for Psychoanalysis"
* "Motion to Impeach Judge Alaimo"
* "Motion to Renounce Citizenship"
* "Motion to Exhume Body of Alex Hodgson"
* "Motion to Invoke and Execute Rule 15 Rule 15, Federal Rules of Civil Procedure. &mdash;Retroactive Note: The Court's School Days are Over"
* "Motion for Skin Change Operation"
* "Motion for Catered Food Services"
* "Motion to Kiss My Ass"

Washington, an inmate from Georgia, was eventually prohibited from filing any future lawsuits or motions in any district court unless he first posted a contempt bond of $1,500. To be deemed frivolous, a litigant's arguments must strike beyond the pale. Weblogger Chris Pearson quotes more extensively from Washington v. Alaimo in 

===Pearson v. Chung===
Pearson v. Chung, the case of a Washington, D.C. judge, Roy Pearson, who sued a dry cleaning business for 67 million dollars (later lowered to $54 million), has been cited as an example of frivolous litigation. According to Pearson, the dry cleaners lost his pants (which he brought in for a $10.50 alteration) and refused his demands for a large refund. Pearson believed that a sign saying "Satisfaction Guaranteed" in the window of the shop legally entitled him to a refund for the cost of the pants, estimated at $1,000. The $54 million total also included $2.0 million in "mental distress" and $15,000 which he estimated to be the cost of renting a car every weekend to go to another dry cleaners. 

===Johathan Lee Riches===
In 2010, Federal prosecutors asked a judge to help them stop Jonathan Lee Riches from filing any more lawsuits, arguing that his frequent filings were frivolous. 

===Gloria Dawn Ironbox===
In July 2013, the Human Rights Tribunal of Ontario dismissed a complaint laid by a man posing as Gloria Dawn Ironbox, a fictional feminist attorney on popular television series Family Guy. The claimant alleged that the A&W marketing scheme was "heteronormative", "phallocentric" and promoted "cross-sectional hegemony." Citing feelings of distress and alienation over the lack of "LGBT" representation in A&W naming conventions, he demanded $50,000 in damages for injury to dignity and self-respect as well as an order requiring A&W to adopt naming conventions which include non-traditional families. One such product the claimant demanded was the "Pillow Biter", described by the claimant as "a large, dark slab of meat stuffed firmly between two, white, clenched buns." 

===Sirgiorgio Sanford Clardy===

In January 2014, Sirgiorgio Sanford Clardy, who is serving a 100-year prison sentence for a beating of a prostitute and her customer, has filed "a $100 million lawsuit against Nike", for which Clardy claims the shoe manufacturer is partially responsible. Clardy says that "Nike should have placed a label in his Jordan shoes warning consumers that they could be used as a dangerous weapon. He was wearing a pair when he repeatedly stomped the face of a john who was trying to leave a Portland hotel without paying Clardy's prostitute in June 2012." According to The Oregonian, this lawsuit has gained "considerable attention across the nation and the world." 

==See also==

*Abuse of process
*Anders v. California
*Barratry
*Franchise fraud
*Frivolous or vexatious
*Jonathan Lee Riches
*Judith Richardson Haimes
*Malicious prosecution
*Michigan Lawsuit Abuse Watch
*Pearson v. Chung
*Stella Awards
*SLAPP
*Spamigation
*Tax protester arguments
*Tax protester (United States)
*Tort reform
*Vexatious litigation

==Notes==

==External links==
*Lawsuit.no: Frivolous lawsuit archive



[[Fiddle]]

A fiddle is any bowed string musical instrument, most often the violin. It is also a colloquial term for the instrument used by players in all genres, including classical music. Fiddle playing, or fiddling, refers to various styles of music.

Common distinctions between violins and fiddles reflect the differences in the instruments used to play folk and classical music. However, it is not uncommon for classically trained violinists to play folk music, and today many fiddle players have classical training. Many traditional (folk) styles are aural traditions, so are taught 'by ear' rather than with written music.

==History==

The medieval fiddle emerged in 10th-century Europe, deriving from the Byzantine lira (Greek:, Latin:lira, English:lyre), a bowed string instrument of the Byzantine Empire and ancestor of most European bowed instruments. "fiddle." Encyclopdia Britannica. 2009. Encyclopdia Britannica Online. 6 March 2009. Anthony Baines: The Oxford Companion to Musical Instruments. Oxford University Press, USA (November 12, 1992). The first recorded reference to the bowed lira was in the 9th century by the Persian geographer Ibn Khurradadhbih (d. 911); in his lexicographical discussion of instruments he cited the lira (lr) as a typical instrument of the Byzantines and equivalent to the rabb played in the Islamic Empires. Margaret J. Kartomi: On Concepts and Classifications of Musical Instruments. Chicago Studies in Ethnomusicology, University of Chicago Press, 1990 p. 124. Lira spread widely westward to Europe; in the 11th and 12th centuries European writers use the terms fiddle and lira interchangeably when referring to bowed instruments (Encyclopdia Britannica. 2009).

Over the centuries, Europe continued to have two distinct types of fiddles: one, relatively square-shaped, held in the arms, became known as the lira da braccio (arm viol) family and evolved into the violin; the other, with sloping shoulders and held between the knees, was the lira da gamba (leg viol) group. During the Renaissance the gambas were important and elegant instruments; they eventually lost ground to the louder (and originally less aristocratic) lira da braccio family. stringed instrument. (2009). In Encyclopdia Britannica. Retrieved March 14, 2009, from 
Encyclopdia Britannica Online (Encyclopdia Britannica. 2009). 

==Etymology==

The etymology of fiddle is uncertain: the Germanic fiddle may derive from the same early Romance word as does violin, or it may be natively Germanic. 

: (as access to the OED online is not free, the relevant excerpt is provided) "The ultimate origin is obscure. The [Teutonic] word bears a singular resemblance in sound to its [medieval Latin] synonym vitula, vidula, whence [Old French] viole, Pr. viula, and (by adoption from these [languages]) [Italian], [Spanish], [Portuguese] viola: see [viol]. The supposition that the early [Romance] vidula was adopted independently in more than one [Teutonic language] would account adequately for all the [Teutonic] forms; on the other hand, *fiuln- may be an [Old Teutonic] word of native etymology, though no satisfactory [Teutonic] derivation has been found."
 The name seems however to be related to Icelandic Fila and also Old English fiele. A native Germanic ancestor of fiddle may even be the ancestor of the early Romance form of violin. Mario Pei, The Story of the English Language (New York: Simon and Schuster, 1967), p. 109. Historically, fiddle also referred to a predecessor of today's violin. Like the violin, it tended to have four strings, but came in a variety of shapes and sizes. Another family of instruments that contributed to the development of the modern fiddle are the viols, which are held between the legs and played vertically, and have fretted fingerboards.

==Ensembles==
Peter Stampfel from the Holy Modal Rounders
In performance, a solo fiddler, or one fiddler or two with a group of other instrumentalists, is the norm, though twin fiddling is represented in some North American, Scandinavian, Scottish and Irish styles. Violins, on the other hand, are commonly grouped in sections. These contrasting traditions may be vestiges of historical performance settings: large concert halls where violins were played required more instruments, before electronic amplification, than did more intimate dance halls and houses that fiddlers played in.

The difference was likely compounded by the different sounds expected of violin music and fiddle music. Historically, the majority of fiddle music was dance music, while violin music had either grown out of dance music or was something else entirely. Violin music came to value a smoothness that fiddling, with its dance-driven clear beat, did not always follow. In situations that required greater volume, a fiddler (as long as they kept the beat) could push their instrument harder than could a violinist. (Different fiddle traditions have different values, as detailed below. These explanations present the differences between fiddle music and other violin music.)

Following the folk revivals of the second half of the 20th century, however, it has become common for less formal situations to find large groups of fiddlers playing togethersee for example the Calgary Fiddlers, and Swedish Spelmanslag folk-musician clubs, and the worldwide 
 phenomenon of Irish sessions.

===Scottish fiddle with cello===
In the very late 20th century, a few artists have successfully attempted a reconstruction of the Scottish tradition of violin and "big fiddle," or cello. Notable recorded examples include Iain Fraser and Christine Hanson, Amelia Kaminski and Christine Hanson's Bonnie Lasses and Alasdair Fraser and Natalie Haas' Fire and Grace. 

===Balkan fiddle with kontra===
Hungarian, Slovenian, and Romanian fiddle players are often accompanied by a three-stringed variant of the violaknown as the kontraand by double bass, with cimbalom and clarinet being less standard yet still common additions to a band. In Hungary, a three stringed viola variant with a flat bridge, called the kontra or hromhros brcsa makes up part of a traditional rhythm section in Hungarian folk music. The flat bridge allows for three string chords to be played. A three stringed double bass variant is also used.

==Styles==
To a greater extent than classical violin playing, fiddle playing is characterized by a huge variety of ethnic or folk music traditions, each of which has its own distinctive sound.

===Europe===

====Great Britain====
* English folk music fiddling, including
**The Northumbrian fiddle style, which features "seconding", an improvised harmony part played by a second fiddler.
* Scottish fiddling, including:
**Shetland fiddling, which includes trowie tunes said to come from peerie folk. The style is characterized by "ringing strings" and syncopated rhythms.
**A Lowland Scots tradition strongly influenced by baroque violin technique with staccato and Scotch snap bowing techniques in addition to the use of double stops.
**A Scottish Borders tradition with a repertoire heavy in hornpipes and with heavy use of double stops.
**A Highland tradition, highly influenced by the ornamentation and mixolydian scale of the Great Highland Bagpipe, as well as smoother bowing than other Scottish fiddle styles and a swinging of the 6/8 jig rhythm.
**An Orkney tradition with simpler bowing and ornamentation but with tunes featuring accidentals. 
* Welsh fiddling (Welsh Ffidil; see Ar Log), a recently revived tradition.

====Ireland====
* Irish Folk music fiddling including:
**Donegal fiddling from the northwest in Ulster, which features mazurkas and a Scottish-influenced repertoire including Strathspey and Highland Fling dances. Fiddlers tend to play fast and make heavy use of staccato bowing and may from time to time "play the bass," meaning a second fiddler may play a melody an octave below where a first fiddler is playing it.
**Sligo fiddling from northern Connacht, which like Donegal fiddling tends to be fast, but with a bouncier feel to the bowing.
**Galway fiddling southern Connacht, which is slower than Sligo or Donegal traditions, with a heavier emphasis on ornamentation. Additionally, tunes are occasionally played in Eb or Bb to match the tonality of flat pipes.
**Clare fiddling from northern Munster, which tends to be played near the slower Galway tempo yet with a greater emphasis on the melody itself rather than ornamentation.
**Sliabh Luachra fiddling from the southwest in Munster, characterized by a unique repertoire of polkas and slides, as well as the use of double stops and drones as well as playing the melody in two octaves as in Donegal. 

====Scandinavia====
* Swedish fiddling (including Ltfiol playing; see also Spelmanslag and Gammaldans), including traditions from:
**Jmtland
**Dalarna
* Norwegian fiddling (including Hardanger fiddling; see also Bygdedans and Gammaldans), including traditions from:
**Rros and Nord-Noreg styles, both using the standard fiddle.
**Finnskogen, using the standard fiddle, but featuring some flatted notes influenced by Finnish folk music.
**Voss and Telemark styles, both using the Hardanger fiddle.
**Setesdal, which uses both standard and Hardanger fiddles.
* Finnish fiddling, including the regional styles of:
**Kaustinen
**Ostrobothnia, heavily influenced by Swedish fiddling.

====Continental Europe====
* Austrian fiddling
* French fiddling, including an old tradition from Corrze and a revived one from Brittany
* Hungarian folk music traditions
* Italian fiddling 
* Klezmer fiddling 
* Polish fiddling
* Mainland Portuguese and Azorean fiddling
* Romanian fiddling 

===Americas===

====North America====
American fiddling, a broad category including traditional and modern styles.

Tradition
*Blues fiddling
*Cajun and Zydeco fiddling
*Old-time fiddling, including:
**Fiddling from Appalachia, the most well-known style today, featuring heavy use of droning and double-stops as well as syncopated bowing patterns.
**Midwestern fiddling, highly influenced by Scandinavian music.
**Ozarks fiddling, faster and crisper bowing than Appalachia.
**Texas fiddling, with influences from Mexican fiddling and an emphasis on competitive playing.Fiddler Kenny Baker.
**New England fiddling, with strong influences from Qubcois and British repertoires.
**Northwest fiddling, with influences from both Ozark and Midwestern fiddle styles, though with a strong emphasis on competitive playing like Texas fiddling.
*Tohono O'odham fiddling, a Native American style heavily influenced by Mexican fiddling and featuring irregular counts and harmonies in thirds, fourths, and sixths.

Modern
*Bluegrass fiddling
*Country fiddling
*Western swing style fiddling 

Canadian fiddling
Fiddling remains popular in Canada, and the various homegrown styles of fiddling are seen as an important part of the country's cultural identity, as celebrated during the opening ceremony of the Vancouver 2010 Winter Olympics.
*Cape Breton fiddling, with a distinct Scottish influence
*French Canadian fiddling including "crooked tunes," that is, tunes with irregular beat patterns.
*Mtis fiddling, of central and western Canada featuring strong French Canadian influence, but with even more "crooked" tunes. 
*Newfoundland and Labrador fiddling
*Maritimes, Acadian or Downeast style of fiddling, which has many similarities to Cape Breton fiddling
*English Canadian fiddling or Anglo-Canadian fiddling

====Latin America====
* Forr, a type of music from Brazil, including the rabeca fiddle tradition
* Mexican fiddling, including mariachi, huapango, son huasteco and son calentano
* Peruvian violin

===Other Areas===
* African fiddle
*Australian folk music traditions
* Morna fiddling from Cape Verde
* Indian fiddle
* Indian classical music

==Relations==

===Variants===
*Hardanger fiddle
*Stroh violin or phonofiddle, known in Romanian as Vioara cu goarn.

===Near Relations===
*Cello
*Double bass
*Kontra
*Rebec
*Rabeca
*Viola

===Distant Relations===
*Byzantine lyra, the medieval bowed instrument of the Byzantine Empire
*Cretan Lyra
*Crwth
*Gadulka
*Gudok
*Gusle
*Hurdy gurdy also known as the wheel fiddle
*Lijerica
*Nyckelharpa

==See also==
* List of All-Ireland Champions
* List of fiddlers
* Hardanger fiddle
* Jazz violin
* Kontra
* Ltfiol
* Rabeca
* Rock violin
* Vioara cu goarn

==References==

==Bibliography==
* The Fiddle Book, by Marion Thede, (1970), Oak Publications. ISBN 0-8256-0145-2.
* The Fiddler's Fakebook, by David Brody, (1983), Oak Publications. US ISBN 0-8256-0238-6; UK ISBN 0-7119-0309-3.
* Oldtime Fiddling Across America, by David Reiner and Peter Anick (1989), Mel Bay Publications. ISBN 0-87166-766-5. Has transcriptions (standard notation) and analysis of tunes from multiple regional and ethnic styles.
* The Portland Collection, by Susan Songer, (1997), ISBN 0-9657476-0-3 (Vol. 2 ISBN 0-9657476-1-1)
*North American Fiddle Music: a research and information guide by Drew Beisswenger (2011) Routledge. ISBN 978-0-415-99454

==External links==

* Faroese fiddle
* Fiddle and Alternative Strings Forum
* Fiddle Fork
* Fiddle Hangout
* Kimberley Fraser's Fiddle Blog - Cape Breton Fiddler Kimberley Fraser discusses issues relevant to traditional fiddle music.
* Voyager Records' catalog,organized by region, has clips of many North American styles.
* A French Violin fiddle method website - video, text, and forum with explanation (with tablatures).
* The Fiddler's Companion, an encyclopedia of historical notes on tunes from British, Celtic, and American traditions.
* Encyclopedia of Oklahoma History and Culture - Fiddling
* Traditional Irish fiddle Players
* Difference Between Fiddle and Violin



[[List of female tennis players]]

This is a list of female tennis players who meet one or more of the following criteria:

* In singles, she must have reached
** either the WTA Top 200 world rankings on or after January 1, 2000
** or the WTA Top 100 world rankings before January 1, 2000, and the ranking must be verifiable
** or she must have reached at least the quarterfinals of at least one Grand Slam tournament before the inception of the WTA world rankings system.
* In doubles, she must have won at least one WTA Tour event.

==List==

Name Nationality Birth Death Grand Slam singles titles Notes 
 Egypt 1960 French Championships quarterfinalist 
 Croatia 1983 Ranked World No. 143 in 2004 
 Australia 1983 Ranked World No. 138 in 2009 
 United States 1968 Ranked World No. 67 in singles and World No. 8 in doubles 1989 
 United States 1989 Ranked World No. 158 in 2009 
 United States 1965 Wimbledon quarterfinalist 
 United States 1943 2009 Three doubles titles 
 United States 1957 Ranked World No. 21 in 1983 
 United States 1962 Ranked World No. 65 in 1983 
 Bolivia 1989 Ranked World No. 187 in 2009 
 Croatia 1988 Ranked World No. 159 in 2006 
 Spain 1905 1998 Ranked World No. 2 at the end of the year in 1927 and 1928  1926/1927/1928 Wimbledon runner-up 
 Brazil 1983 Ranked World No. 132 in 2005 
 Uzbekistan 1984 Ranked World No. 50 in singles in 2008 and World No. 36 in doubles in 2010 
 France 1963 Ranked World No. 57 in 1984 
 France 1954 French Championships quarterfinalist 
 Estonia 1982 Ranked World No. 63 in 2006 
 Ukraine 1990 Ranked World No. 163 in 2010 
 United States 1959 Ranked World No. 66 in singles in 1985 and World No. 55 in doubles in 1987 
 Ukraine 1979 Ranked World No. 180 in 2005 
 Belgium 1972 Ranked World No. 16 in singles and World No. 21 in doubles in 1997 
 United States 1969 Ranked World No. 49 in singles and World No. 3 in doubles in 1997 
 Argentina 1984 Ranked World No. 149 in 2006 
 Germany Hungary 1979 Ranked World No. 40 in 2011 
 Argentina Peru 1967 Ranked World No. 14 in singles in 1990 and World No. 27 in doubles in 1988 
 Spain 1992 Ranked World No. 167 in 2011 
 United States 1935 1959 Wimbledon women's doubles champion  1956/1959 U.S. Championships women's doubles champion 
 Japan 1976 Ranked World No. 21 in singles in 2005 and World No. 13 in doubles in 2006 
 United States 1978 Ranked World No. 95 in singles in 2004 and World No. 59 in doubles in 2003 
 Germany 1909 1963 2 Ranked World No. 2 at the end of the year in 1930 and 1931  1931 French Championships champion  1931 Wimbledon champion  1930 French Championships mixed doubles champion 
 United States 1962 2 Ranked World No. 1 in 1980  1979/1981 US Open champion  1980 Wimbledon mixed doubles champion 
 Sweden 1984 Ranked World No. 29 in 2006 
 Belarus 1989 1 Ranked World No. 1 in singles in 2012 and World No. 7 in doubles in 2008  2012/2013 Australian Open champion  2007 US Open and 2008 French Open mixed doubles champion 
 Germany 1974 Ranked World No. 27 in singles and World No. 45 in doubles 
 Hungary 1993 Ranked World No. 176 in singles in 2011 
 Bulgaria 1975 Ranked World No. 68 in singles in 1999 and World No. 53 in doubles in 2001 
 Germany 1979 Ranked World No. 130 in singles and World No. 90 in doubles in 2000 
 Switzerland 1989 Ranked World No. 37 in singles and World No. 44 in doubles in 2010 
 Australia 1956 Ranked World No. 4 in 1979  1977 Australian Open women's doubles champion 
 United Kingdom 1983 Ranked World No. 49 in 2010 
 Austria 1980 Ranked World No. 19 in 2007 
 Belarus 1979 Ranked World No. 49 in singles and World No. 81 in doubles in 1998 
 Australia 1973 Ranked World No. 157 in singles and World No. 32 in doubles in 1998; won one WTA doubles title in 2002 
 Russia 1987 Ranked World No. 48 in 2007 
 United Kingdom 1956 1 Ranked World No. 3  1976 French Open champion 
 Germany 1978 Ranked World No. 180 in 2004 
 Germany 1977 Ranked World No. 46 in 2004 
 Spain 1961 French Championships quarterfinalist 
 Germany 1984 Ranked World No. 57 in singles in 2011 and World No. 55 in doubles in 2012 
 Germany 1990 Ranked World No. 31 in 2012 
 United States 1949 Ranked World No. 8 at the end of the year in 1969 
 France 1984 Ranked World No. 7 in singles in 2012 and World No. 15 in doubles in 2004 
 Switzerland 1966 Ranked World No. 60 in 1983 
 Canada 1967 Highest ranking was World No. 8 
 Netherlands 1977 Ranked World No. 92 in 2001 
 Indonesia 1970 Ranked World No. 19 in singles in 1997 and World No. 9 in doubles in 1998 
 Australia 1912 2000 3 Ranked World No. 8 at the end of the year in 1934  1933/1934/1936 Australian Championships champion  1934 Australian Championships mixed doubles champion 
 Italy 1972 Ranked World No. 71 in 1993 
 Argentina 1960 1964 Wimbledon quarterfinalist  1965 French Championships quarterfinalist 
 United Kingdom 1885 1972 Ranked World No. 4 at the end of the year in 1923  1919/1922/1923 Wimbledon semifinalist  1921 Wimbledon women's doubles runner-up  1920 Olympic silver medalist in women's doubles 
 Germany 1994 Ranked World No. 164 in 2012 
 1926 Wimbledon quarterfinalist 
 Czech Republic 1983 Ranked World No. 16 in singles and World No. 34 in doubles in 2002 
 South Africa 1978 Ranked World No. 116 in singles in 1998 and World No. 49 in doubles in 2000 
 Germany 1975 Ranked World No. 29 in 1996 
 France 1975 Ranked World No. 84 in 2002 
 Romania 1990 Ranked World No. 38 in singles in 2011 and World No. 38 in doubles in 2012 
 Czechoslovakia 1978 French Open quarterfinalist 
 Czech Republic 1983 Ranked World No. 25 in singles in 2009 and World No. 17 in doubles in 2011 
 United States 1966 Ranked World No. 27 in 1984 
 Italy 1977 Ranked World No. 73 in 1993 
 Netherlands 1991 Ranked World No. 174 in 2011 
 Spain 1973 Ranked World No. 90 in 2001 
 United States 1919 2011 5 Ranked World No. 1 at the end of the year in 1946  1946 Wimbledon champion  1942/1943/1944/1946 U.S. Championships champion  1946 French Championships mixed doubles champion 
 Ukraine 1983 Ranked World No. 83 in singles and World No. 56 in doubles in 2006 
 Australia 1902 1998 1927/1929/1931 Australian Championships women's doubles champion  1935 Australian Championships mixed doubles champion 
 United States 1980 Ranked World No. 130 in 2003 
 Poland 1979 Ranked World No. 146 in singles in 2000 and World No. 176 in doubles in 2001 
 United Kingdom 1863 1946 6 1886/1890/1894/1897/1899/1900 Wimbledon champion 
 Czech Republic 1984 Ranked World No. 59 in singles in 2007 and World No. 59 in doubles in 2006 
 Zimbabwe 1979 Ranked World No. 31 in singles in 1999 and World No. 1 in doubles in 2005  2007 Australian Open women's doubles champion  2004/2005/2007 Wimbledon women's doubles champion  2008 US Open women's doubles champion  2010 Australian Open mixed doubles champion  2003 French Open mixed doubles champion  2004/2010 Wimbledon mixed doubles champion  2008 US Open mixed doubles champion 
 Australia 1936 1963 French Championships quarterfinalist 
 Czech Republic 1976 Ranked World No. 143 in singles in 2006 and World No. 82 in doubles in 2004 
 United Kingdom 1949 Wimbledon quarterfinalist 
 Czech Republic 1973 Ranked World No. 47 in singles in 1993 and World No. 59 in doubles in 1995 
 Romania 1992 Ranked World No. 151 in singles in 2011 World No. 96 in doubles in 2011 
 Czech Republic 1958 (mother; alternative name: Kateina Bhmov-Skronsk) Doubles champion at 1984 Virginia Slims of Pennsylvania. Ranked World No. 157 in 1986 (doubles) 
 Czech Republic 1986 (daughter; alternative name: Kateina Klapkov) Junior French Open doubles champion in 2004. Ranked World No. 107 in 2006 (singles) 
 Netherlands 1964 Ranked World No. 29 in singles in 1990 and World No. 4 in doubles in 1998 
 Australia 1916 2001 6 Ranked World No. 4 at the end of the year in 1947 and 1948  1937/1940/1946/1947/1948/1951 Australian Championships champion  1936/1937/1938/1939/1940/1947/1948/1949/1951/1952 Australian Championships women's doubles champion  1940/1946/1947/1948 Australian Championships mixed doubles champion 
 Ukraine 1984 Ranked World No. 19 in singles and World No. 11 in doubles in 2008  2008 Australian Open women's doubles champion 
 Ukraine 1986 Ranked World No. 29 in singles in 2009 and World No. 9 in doubles in 2008  2008 Australian Open women's doubles champion 
 United States 1965 Ranked World No. 9 in 1984 
 Uruguay 1951 1976 French Open women's doubles champion  1975 French Open mixed doubles champion 
 Italy 1967 Ranked World No. 28 in 1991 
 Netherlands 1973 Ranked World No. 29 in singles in 1996 and World No. 16 in doubles in 1997  1994 French Open mixed doubles champion 
 United Kingdom 1881 1970 1 1909 Wimbledon Champion  1908 Olympic silver medalist in singles 
 United Kingdom 1979 Ranked World No. 199 in singles in 2006 and World No. 69 in doubles in 2009 
 South Africa 1956 1974 Wimbledon quarterfinalist  1977 French Open quarterfinalist 
 Italy 1949 French Championships semifinalist 
 United Kingdom Ranked World No. 6 at the end of the year in 1948  1946 Wimbledon quarterfinalist 
 Canada 1994 Ranked World No. 18 https://ca.sports.yahoo.com/tennis/rankings?gender=w&type=singles in 2014  2014 Australian Championships semifinalist 
 Netherlands 1903 1998 1 Ranked World No. 8 at the end of the year in 1928  1927 French Championships champion  1929 French Championships women's doubles champion  1924 Olympic bronze medalist in mixed doubles 
 Russia 1983 Ranked World No. 14 in singles in 2005 and World No. 14 in doubles in 2003 
 United States 1965 Ranked World No. 49 in 1987 
 Ireland 1993 Highest ranked Irish female Tennis player at world number 494. in March 2012 
 Australia 1969 Ranked World No. 24 in singles in 1993 and World No. 11 in doubles in 1992  1992 Olympic bronze medalist in women's doubles 
 Puerto Rico 1977 Ranked World No. 27 in 2000 
 United Kingdom 1934 1 Ranked World No. 3 at the end of the year in 1957  1957 French Championships champion  1957 French Championships women's doubles champion  1958 French Championships mixed doubles champion 
 Russia 1985 Ranked World No. 129 in 2011 
 Belarus France 1984 Ranked World No. 108 in 2011 
 France 1979 Ranked World No. 34 in singles and World No. 85 in doubles in 2007 
 United States 1990 Ranked World No. 153 in 2009 
 Bermuda 2006 1955/1958 French Championships semifinalist 
 Italy 1980 Ranked World No. 55 in singles in 2011 
 Soviet Union 1971 Ranked World No. 46 in 1991 
 United Kingdom 1990 Singles world number 194 in November 2011. 
 France 1893 1983 2 1913/1914 French Championships champion  1911/1924 French Championships mixed doubles champion  1912 Olympic gold medalist in singles and bronze medalist in mixed doubles 
 United States 1923 5 Ranked World No. 1 at the end of the year in 1955  1947 U.S. Championships champion  1950 Australian Championships champion  1948/1949/1955 Wimbledon champion  1950 Australian Championships women's doubles champion  1946/1947/1949 French Championships women's doubles champion  1946/1948/1949/1950/1954 Wimbledon women's doubles champion  1942/1943/1944/1945/1946/1947/1948/1949/1950/1955/1956/1957 U.S. Championships women's doubles champion  1946/1947/1948/1950 Wimbledon mixed doubles champion  1942/1947/1948/1949 U.S. Championships mixed doubles champion 
 United States 1968 Ranked World No. 45 in 1984 
 United States 1891 1971 3 Ranked World No. 3 at the end of the year in 1921  1912/1913/1914 U.S. Championships champion  1912/1913/1914/1921/1925 U.S. Championships women's doubles champion  1926 Wimbledon women's doubles champion  1912/1913/1914/1921 U.S. Championships mixed doubles champion 
 France Ranked World No. 10 at the end of the year 1954  1954 French Championships runner-up 
 Czech Republic 1960 Ranked World No. 24 in 1983 
 West Germany 1936 1959 Wimbledon quarterfinalist  1956 French Championships quarterfinalist 
 West Germany 1956 French Championships quarterfinalist 
 Brazil 1939 7 Ranked World No. 1 at the end of the year in 1959 and 1960  1959/1960/1964 Wimbledon champion  1959/1963/1964/1966 U.S. Championships champion  1958/1960/1963/1965/1966 Wimbledon women's doubles champion  1960/1962/1966/1968 U.S. Championships women's doubles champion  1960 Australian Championships women's doubles champion  1960 French Championships women's doubles champion  1960 French Championships mixed doubles champion 
 West Germany 1963 Ranked World No. 7 in 1983 
 United States 1962 Ranked World No. 27 in 1985 
 Ukraine 1986 Ranked World No. 183 in 2010 
 United States 1976 Ranked World No. 96 in 2001 
 Australia 1900 1985 2 1931/1932 Australian Championships champion  1932 Australian Championships women's doubles champion 
 United Kingdom 1934 Ranked World No. 6 at the end of the year in 1956  1956 French Championships women's doubles champion  1956 Wimbledon women's doubles champion 
 Romania 1988 Ranked World No. 146 in singles in 2012 
 Turkey 1989 Ranked World No. 168 in 2011 
 Russia 1985 Ranked World No. 66 in singles in 2006 
 Australia 1967 Ranked World No. 45 in singles in 1989 and World No. 27 in doubles in 1988 
 Spain 1987 Ranked World No. 160 in 2011 
 Philippines 1974 3-time Hinampang Open Champion; 3-time WTA Med Week Masters 1000 Champion; 4-time Dublin Open doubles champion with Zenia Grace Catamin; Copenhagen Open finalist 
 Philippines 1974 3-time Hinampang Open Champion; 3-time WTA Med Week Masters 1000 Champion; 4-time Dublin Open doubles champion with Cherie Chariz Cadayday; Florence Open finalist 
 France 1964 Ranked World No. 94 in 1987 
 Belgium 1970 Ranked World No. 43 in singles in 1997 and World No. 87 in doubles in 1999 
 Italy 1982 Ranked World No. 41 in singles in 2004 and World No. 33 in doubles in 2006 
 Italy 1978 Ranked World No. 158 in singles and World No. 93 in doubles in 2000 
 United States 1976 3 Ranked World No. 1 for a total of 17 weeks in 2001 and 2002  Ranked World No. 28 in doubles in 1992  2001/2002 Australian Open champion  2001 French Open champion  1992 Olympic gold medalist in singles 
 United States 1982 Ranked World No. 90 in singles in 2003 and World No. 67 in doubles in 2004 
 United States 1957 Ranked World No. 33 in singles in 1980  1977 French Open mixed doubles champion 
 United States 1969 Ranked World No. 31 in 1988 
 United States 1963 Ranked World No. 14 in 1984 
 United States 1948 Ranked World No. 3 at the end of the year in 1970  1967/1968/1969/1970/1971/1973 Wimbledon women's doubles champion  1970/1972 Wimbledon mixed doubles champion  1967/1971/1974/1982 US Open women's doubles champion  1975 US Open mixed doubles champion 
 Switzerland 1985 Ranked World No. 45 in singles in 2003 and World No. 19 in doubles in 2004 
 United States 1967 Ranked World No. 18 in 1984 
 Italy 1978 Ranked World No. 83 in singles and World No. 51 in doubles in 2001 
 Colombia 1979 Ranked World No. 35 in singles in 2006 and World No. 82 in doubles in 2008 
 Puerto Rico 1981 Ranked World No. 125 in singles in 2004 
 United Kingdom 1989 Ranked World No. 174 in singles in 2010 
 Switzerland 1972 Ranked World No. 34 in 1990 
 Australia 1946 1972/1976/1977 (January)/1977 (December) Australian Open women's doubles champion  1977 Wimbledon women's doubles champion 
 France 1951 French Championships quarterfinalist 
 Italy 1965 Ranked World No. 15 in 1988 
 Czech Republic 1977 Ranked World No. 95 in singles in 1997 
 Slovakia 1979 Ranked World No. 58 in 2004 
 Czech Republic 1985 Ranked World No. 31 in singles in 2011 
 Georgia 1982 Ranked World No. 134 in singles in 2007 
 Russia 1987 Ranked World No. 5 in singles and World No. 53 in doubles in 2007 
 Russia 1987 Ranked World No. 151 in 2009 
 Chan Chin-wei Taiwan 1985 Ranked World No. 152 in singles in 2006 and World No. 88 in doubles in 2007 
 Chan Yung-jan Taiwan 1989 Ranked World No. 50 in singles in 2007 and World No. 6 in doubles in 2008 
 Chang Kai-Chen Taiwan 1991 Ranked World No. 82 in 2010 
 Chen Yanchong China 1987 Ranked World No. 187 in 2006 
 United States 1916 1 Ranked World No. 6 at the end of the year in 1946  1938 Australian Championships champion 
 United States 1974 Ranked World No. 62 in 1999 
 Czech Republic 1979 Ranked World No. 31 in singles in 2003 and World No. 74 in doubles in 2006 
 Soviet Union 1958 1975 Australian Open semifinalist 
 Cho Yoon-jeong Korea 1979 Ranked World No. 45 in singles and World No. 98 in doubles in 2003 
 Chuang Chia-jung Taiwan 1985 Ranked World No. 177 in singles in 2006 and World No. 5 in doubles in 2008 
 Slovakia 1989 Australian Open Runner-up 2014 
 Romania 1990 Ranked World No. 23 in singles and World No. 35 in doubles in 2009 
 Belgium 1983 4 Ranked World No. 1 in singles and doubles in 2003  2005/2009/2010 US Open champion  2011 Australian Open champion and 3 times WTA-Champion and by doubles:  2003 Wimbledon champion  2003 Roland Garros champion 
 France 1978 Ranked World No. 55 in singles in 1999 and World No. 61 in doubles in 2000 
 South Africa 1971 Ranked World No. 3 in singles in 1997 and World No. 15 in doubles in 1993 
 Australia 1937 1958 Wimbledon mixed doubles champion 
 United States 1989 Ranked World No. 97 in 2012 
 France 1983 Ranked World No. 61 in singles in 2003 and World No. 54 in doubles in 2005 
 France 1982 Ranked World No. 60 in singles in 2009 and World No. 49 in doubles in 2010 
 1924 Wimbledon quarterfinalist 
 Australia 1953 1972 Australian Open quarterfinalist 
 Australia 1930 Ranked World No. 8 at the end of the year in 1955  1955 Wimbledon quarterfinalist 
 United States 1958 Ranked World No. 38 in singles in 1983 and World No. 17 in doubles in 1992 
 Spain 1988 Ranked World No. 199 in 2010 
 United States 1934 1969 9 Ranked World No. 1 at the end of the year from 1952 through 1954  1953 Australian Championships champion  1953/1954 French Championships champion  1952/1953/1954 Wimbledon champion  1951/1952/1953 U.S. Championships champion  1953 Australian Championships women's doubles champion  1954 French Championships women's doubles champion  1954 French Championships mixed doubles champion 
 Greece 1926 Wimbledon quarterfinalist 
 United States 1912 1996 2 Ranked World No. 4 at the end of the year in 1934  1941/1945 U.S. Championships champion  1930/1932/1934/1935/1937/1938/1939/1940/1941 U.S. Championships women's doubles champion  1938/1939 Wimbledon women's doubles champion  1932/1935/1937/1941 U.S. Championships mixed doubles champion  1939 French Championships mixed doubles champion 
 United Kingdom 1870 1966 5 1895/1896/1898/1901/1908 Wimbledon champion  1900 Olympic gold medalist in singles and mixed doubles 
 New Zealand 1965 Ranked World No. 17 in 1989 
 France 1990 Ranked World No. 11 in singles in 2009 
 Spain 1990 Ranked World No. 179 in singles in 2011 
 Australia 1942 24  Ranked World No. 1 at the end of the year from 1962 through 1965 and in 1969, 1970, and 1973  One of three players to have won every possible title (singles, doubles, mixed doubles) at all four Grand Slam events.  Australian Open champion 1960/1961/1962/1963/1964/1965/1966/1969/1970/1971/1973  Australian Open women's doubles champion 1961/1962/1963/1965/1969/1970/1971/1973  Australian Championships mixed doubles champion 1963/1964  French Open champion 1962/1964/1969/1970/1973  French Open women's doubles champion 1964/1965/1966/1973  French Open mixed doubles champion 1963/1964/1965/1969  US Open champion 1962/1965/1969/1970/1973  US Open women's doubles champion 1963/1968/1970/1973/1975  US Open mixed doubles champion 1961/1962/1963/1964/1965/1969/1970/1972  Wimbledon champion 1963/1965/1970  Wimbledon women's doubles champion 1964/1969  Wimbledon mixed doubles champion 1963/1965/1966/1968/1975 
 France 1959 French Championships quarterfinalist 
 Belgium 1976 Ranked World No. 37 in singles in 1996 and World No. 32 in doubles in 2000 
 Australia 1903 1933 5 Ranked World No. 3 at the end of the year in 1928  1925/1926/1928/1929/1930 Australian Championships champion  1924/1925/1928/1929/1931 Australian Championships women's doubles champion  1924/1925/1928/1929 Australian Championships mixed doubles champion 
 Argentina 1982 Ranked World No. 106 in singles in 2007 
 Australia 1932 Australian Championships women's doubles champion  1931/1932/1933 Australian Championships mixed doubles champion 
 United States 1974 Ranked World No. 39 in singles in 2006 and World No. 41 in doubles in 2008 
 Romania 1975 Ranked World No. 59 in singles in 1997 and World No. 40 in doubles in 1998 
 United Kingdom 1966 Ranked World No. 24 in singles in 1985 
 Germany 1968 Ranked World No. 20 in singles in 1989 and World No. 77 in doubles in 1987 
 United States 1961 Ranked World No. 48 in 1981 
 United States 1972 Ranked World No. 38 in 1991 
 United Kingdom Ranked World No. 9 at the end of the year in 1949  1949/1952 French Championships quarterfinalist 
 Hungary 1982 Ranked World No. 37 in singles in 2009 and World No. 80 in doubles in 2010 
 Sweden 1968 Ranked World No. 63 in singles and World No. 95 in doubles in 1990 
 Finland 1970 Ranked World No. 59 in singles in 1993 and World No. 52 in doubles in 1996 
 United States 1961 Ranked World No. 31 in singles in 1983 and World No. 24 in doubles in 1990 
 Greece 1982 Ranked World No. 14 in singles in 2003 and World No. 21 in doubles in 2007 
 Mexico 1939 1957 Wimbledon quarterfinalist  1958 French Championships quarterfinalist 
 Japan 1970 Ranked World No. 4 in singles in 1995 and World No. 33 in doubles in 1992 
 United States 1976 3 Ranked World No. 1 in singles at the end of the year in 1998, 2001, 2004, and 2005 and World No. 2 in doubles at the end of the year in 1997  Ranked World No. 1 in singles for a total of 98 weeks from 1998 through 2002 and from 2004 through 2006  1998 US Open champion  1999 Wimbledon champion  2000 Australian Open champion  1996 French Open women's doubles champion  1997 US Open women's doubles champion  1999 Wimbledon women's doubles champion 
 United States 1926 Ranked World No. 5 at the end of the year in 1950  1950 French Championships semifinalist 
 France 1970 Ranked World No. 46 in 1992 
 France 1979 Ranked World No. 11 in singles in 2006 and World No. 8 in doubles in 2007 
 Latvia 1983 Ranked World No. 54 in doubles in 2010 
 Australia 1985 Ranked World No. 39 in singles in 2008 and World No. 9 in doubles in 2009 
 Russia 1981 Ranked World No. 3 in singles in 2009 and World No. 5 in doubles in 2003 
 France 1966 Ranked World No. 35 in singles in 1988 and World No. 20 in doubles in 1989 
 Italy 1989 Ranked World No. 132 in 2009 
 Belgium 1970 Ranked World No. 77 in 1988 
 France 1973 Ranked World No. 141 in singles in 1997 and World No. 49 in doubles in 2004 
 Brazil 1966 Ranked World No. 31 in 1988 
 Russia 1990 Ranked World No. 105 in singles in 2009 
 Argentina 1976 Ranked World No. 42 in singles and World No. 93 in doubles in 2001 
 United States 1979 Ranked World No. 89 in singles in 2008 and World No. 66 in doubles in 2009 
 Kazakhstan 1993 Ranked World No. 143 in 2011 
 Slovakia 1992 Ranked World No. 156 in 2002 
 United Kingdom 1871 1960 5 1887/1888/1891/1892/1893 Wimbledon champion 
 Australia Yugoslavia Serbia andMontenegro 1983 Ranked World No. 4 in singles and World No. 10 in doubles in 2002 
 Japan 1991 Ranked World No. 107 in 2011 
 Russia 1989 Ranked World No. 86 in 2011 
 Poland 1986 Ranked World No. 37 in singles and World No. 62 in doubles in 2006 
 Spain 1981 Ranked World No. 40 in singles and World No. 45 in doubles in 2006 
 Australia 1980 Ranked World No. 64 in singles in 2001 and World No. 52 in doubles in 2002 
 Austria 1970 Ranked World No. 70 in 1994 
 Russia 1986 Ranked World No. 31 in singles in 2005 and World No. 27 in doubles in 2007 
 Romania 1972 Ranked World No. 15 in singles and World No. 21 in doubles in 1997 
 Canada 1971 Ranked World No. 47 in singles in 1999 and World No. 77 in doubles in 2006 
 Germany 1980 Ranked World No. 166 in 2002 
 Canada 1986 Ranked World No. 95 in singles in 2008 
 Romania 1989 Ranked World No. 26 in 2011 and World No. 41 in doubles in 2011 
 Argentina 1985 Ranked World No. 26 in singles in 2005 and World No. 1 in doubles in 2010  2011 Australian Open women's doubles champion 
 South Africa 1943 Ranked World No. 6 at the end of the year in 1965 and 1966  1966 French Championships mixed doubles champion 
 United States 1918 6 Ranked World No. 1 at the end of the year from 1947 through 1950  1946/1949 French Championships champion  1948/1949/1950 U.S. Championships champion  1947 Wimbledon champion  1946/1947/1949 French Championships women's doubles champion  1946/1948/1949/1950/1954 Wimbledon women's doubles champion  1941/1942/1943/1944/1945/1946/1947/1948/1949/1950/1955/1956/1957 U.S. Championships women's doubles champion  1962 Wimbledon mixed doubles champion  1943/1944/1945/1946/1950/1956/1958/1959/1960 U.S. Championships mixed doubles champion 
 Colombia 1989 Ranked World No. 94 in 2010 
 United Kingdom 1960 Ranked World No. 5 in 1984  Australian Mixed Doubles Champion 1991  Wimbledon Mixed Doubles Champion 1987 
 France 1942 1 Ranked World No. 3 at the end of the year in 1967  1967 French Championships champion  1967 French Championships women's doubles champion  1968/1969/1970/1971 French Open women's doubles champion  1969/1972 US Open women's doubles champion  1968/1971/1973 French Open mixed doubles champion  1976 Wimbledon mixed doubles champion 
 Denmark 1980 Ranked World No. 77 in singles in 2002 and World No. 90 in doubles in 2000 
 Belarus 1986 Ranked World No. 134 in singles and World No. 64 in doubles in 2008 
 Australia 1944 Ranked World No. 9 at the end of the year in 1964  1963 French Championships quarterfinalist  1962/1963 Australian Championships women's doubles champion  1963 U.S. Championships women's doubles champion  1963 Australian Championships mixed doubles champion (shared - final abandoned because of rain) 
 West Germany 1948 1972/1973/1974 French Open quarterfinalist 
 Russia 1966 Ranked World No. 76 in singles in 1989 and World No. 26 in doubles in 1988 
 Romania 1973 Ranked World No. 135 in singles in 2003 and World No. 40 in doubles in 2006 
 United States 1946 1967 Wimbledon quarterfinalist 
 Canada 1986 Ranked World No. 149 in singles in 2010 
 Italy 1972 Ranked World No. 11 in singles in 2002 and World No. 24 in doubles in 1999 
 Australia 1978 Ranked World No. 57 in singles and World No. 60 in doubles in 1997 
 Japan 1971 Ranked World No. 26 in singles in 1994 and World No. 98 in doubles in 1995 
 New Zealand 1988 Ranked World No. 49 in singles and World No. 43 in doubles in 2008 
 Croatia 1973 Ranked World No. 61 in 1993 
 Italy 1987 Ranked World No. 6 in singles in 2012 and No. 1 in doubles in 2012  2012 French Open women's doubles champion  2012 US Open women's doubles champion  2013 Australian Open women's doubles champion  ITF World Champion in doubles, 2012 (with Roberta Vinci) 
 Argentina 1985 Ranked World No. 166 in singles in 2009 
 United States 1954 18 Ranked World No. 1 at the end of the year in 1975, 1976, 1977, 1980, and 1981  Ranked World No. 1 for a total of 262 weeks from 1975 through 1982 and in 1985  1974/1975/1979/1980/1983/1985/1986 French Open champion  1974/1976/1981 Wimbledon champion  1975/1976/1977/1978/1980/1982 US Open champion  1982/1984 Australian Open champion  1974/1975 French Open women's doubles champion  1976 Wimbledon women's doubles champion 
 Bulgaria 1987 Ranked World No. 147 in 2011 
 United States 1971 Ranked World No. 55 in singles in 1990 
 South Africa United States 1960 Ranked World No. 15 in singles in 1990 and World No. 12 in doubles in 1986  1981/1983 French Open women's doubles champion 
 United States 1990 Ranked World No. 74 in singles in 2011 
 United States 1940 1963 Wimbledon quarterfinalist  1962 French Championships quarterfinalist 
 Switzerland 1973 Ranked World No. 80 in 1992 
 Australia 1971 Ranked World No. 61 in singles in 1989 and World No. 36 in doubles in 1992 
 Austria 1976 Ranked World No. 127 in 2002 
 Belgium 1976 Ranked World No. 79 in singles in 1996 and World No. 46 in doubles in 1995 
 Ukraine 1983 Ranked World No. 63 in singles in 2006 and World No. 34 in doubles in 2007 
 France 1988 Ranked World No. 107 in 2007 
 United States 1965 Ranked World No. 19 in singles and World No. 4 in doubles in 1989  1991 Australian Open women's doubles champion 
 Australia 1986 Ranked World No. 109 in 2010 
 Argentina 1981 Ranked World No. 26 in singles in 2003 
 Puerto Rico United States 1964 Ranked World No. 17 in singles and World No. 1 in doubles in 1991  1988/1990/1992/1995/1996 US Open women's doubles champion  1991/1992/1993/1994/1995/1997 French Open women's doubles champion  1992/1993/1994/1997 Wimbledon women's doubles champion  1993/1994 Australian Open women's doubles champion  1992/1996 Olympic gold medalist in women's doubles 
 United States 1971 Ranked World No. 4 in singles in 1990 and World No. 4 in doubles in 1991  1991 Australian Open women's doubles champion  1996 French Open women's doubles champion  1992/1996 Olympic gold medalist in women's doubles  1990/1992 Australian Open runner-up  1993 French Open runner-up  1992/1996 Olympic gold medalist in women's doubles  1992 Olympic bronze medalist in singles 
 Spain 1986 Ranked World No. 185 in singles in 2009 
 Italy 1966 Ranked World No. 36 in singles in 1994 and World No. 33 in doubles in 1993 
 France 1986 Ranked World No. 171 in 2009 
 Canada 1990 Ranked World No. 114 in singles and World No. 83 in doubles in 2010 
 Australia 1967 Ranked World No. 96 in singles in 1989 and World No. 48 in doubles in 1990 
 Slovakia 1981 Ranked World No. 98 in 2003 
 Australia 1946 Australian Championships women's doubles champion 
 United States 1930 Ranked World No. 3 at the end of the year in 1954, 1955, and 1958  1955 French Championships women's doubles champion 
 United Kingdom 1931 Ranked World No. 8 at the end of the year in 1954  1954 Wimbledon quarterfinalist 
 Belgium 1986 Ranked World No. 13 in 2013 
 Italy 1982 Ranked World No. 132 in singles in 2010 
 Russia 1984 Ranked World No. 168 in singles and World No. 79 in doubles in 2002 
 Hungary 1974 Ranked World No. 107 in 1999 
 France 1981 Ranked World No. 62 in singles in 2003 and World No. 42 in doubles in 2008 
 Germany 1970 Ranked World No. 67 in 1994 
 United States 1972 Ranked World No. 13 in singles in 1995 and World No. 24 in doubles in 1993 
 United States 1927 4 Ranked World No. 1 at the end of the year in 1956  1957 Australian Championships champion  1951 French Championships champion  1956 Wimbledon champion  1956 U.S. Championships champion  1957 Australian Championships women's doubles champion  1950/1951/1952/1953 French Championships women's doubles champion  1951/1952/1953 Wimbledon women's doubles champion  1951/1952/1953/1954 U.S. Championships women's doubles champion  1956 Wimbledon mixed doubles champion 
 Japan 1986 Ranked World No. 143 in 2006 
 Japan 1981 Ranked World No. 84 in singles in 2005 and World No. 13 in doubles in 2002 
 Argentina 1968 Ranked World No. 23 in singles in 1988 and World No. 62 in doubles in 1991 
 France 1973 Ranked World No. 37 in singles and World No. 6 in doubles in 1998 
 Italy 1987 Ranked World No. 183 in 2007 
 United States 1963 Ranked World No. 8 in 1984 
 Switzerland 1976 Ranked World No. 42 in singles in 2002 and World No. 22 in doubles in 2004 
 Argentina 1973 Ranked World No. 85 in singles and World No. 87 in doubles in 1993 
 Romania 1984 Ranked World No. 54 in singles in 2008 and World No. 63 in doubles in 2009 
 United States 1954 1975 French Open quarterfinalist 
 Italy 1977 Ranked World No. 22 in singles in 2007 and World No. 25 in doubles in 2001 
 France 1993 Ranked World No. 135 in 2011 
 Spain 1979 Ranked World No. 139 in 2005 
 Argentina 1983 Ranked World No. 191 in 2005 
 Spain 1988 Ranked World No. 146 in 2010 
 United States 1963 Ranked World No. 4 in singles in 1989 and World No. 5 in doubles in 1988  1987 Australian Open mixed doubles champion  1988/1990 Wimbledon mixed doubles champion 
 Italy 1967 Ranked World No. 32 in singles in 1987 and World No. 50 in doubles in 1991 
 Mexico 1973 Ranked World No. 34 in 1996 
 Germany 1982 Ranked World No. 121 in 2004 
 Greece 1990 Ranked World No. 176 in 2011 
 Greece 1987 Ranked World No. 200 in 2009 
 Czech Republic 1976 Ranked World No. 48 in 1997 
 United States 1955 1979 French Open quarterfinalist 
 France 1974 Ranked World No. 73 in 1995 
 United States 1927 2003 5 Ranked World No. 1 at the end of the year in 1957 and 1958  1956 French Championships champion  1957/1958 Wimbledon Championships champion  1957/1958 U.S. Championships champion 
 Italy 1991 Ranked World No. 73 in singles in 2013 
 Argentina 1949 1974 French Open semifinalist 
 Germany 1976 Ranked World No. 53 in singles in 1999 and World No. 85 in doubles in 2000 
 United States 1989 Ranked World No. 102 in 2009 
 Israel 1990 Ranked World No. 129 in singles in 2013 
 United Kingdom 1896 1992 2 Ranked World No. 2 at the end of the year in 1923, 1924, and 1926  1924/1926 Wimbledon Championships champion  1924 Olympic silver medalist in women's doubles and bronze medalist in singles  1920 Olympic gold medalist in women's doubles, silver medalist in mixed doubles, and bronze medalist in singles 
 Australia 1973 Ranked World No. 79 in singles in 1991 and World No. 68 in doubles in 1990 
 Romania 1987 Ranked World No. 149 in 2011 
 Italy 1967 Ranked World No. 39 in singles in 1990 and World No. 23 in doubles in 1995 
 United Kingdom Ranked World No. 10 at the end of the year in 1929 and 1931  1929 Wimbledon semifinalist 
 Croatia 1965 Ranked World No. 27 in singles and World No. 55 in doubles in 1987 
 France 1988 Ranked World No. 12 in singles in 2008 and World No. 91 in doubles in 2007 
 Russia 1979 Ranked World No. 135 in singles in 2003 and World No. 139 in doubles in 1998 
 United Kingdom 1964 Ranked World No. 46 in 1988 
 United States 1963 Ranked World No. 18 in 1987 
 Australia 1951 7 Ranked World No. 1 in 1976  1974/1975/1976/1977(December) Australian Open Champion  1971 French Open champion  1971/1980 Wimbledon champion  1971/1974/1975/1976/1977(December) Australian Open women's doubles champion  1974 Wimbledon women's doubles champion  1972 French Open mixed doubles champion 
 Germany 1988 Ranked World No. 15 in singles in 2012 and World No. 31 in doubles in 2011 
 Argentina 1973 Ranked World No. 19 in singles in 1994 and World No. 9 in doubles in 1995 
 United States Ranked World No. 6 at the end of the year in 1923, 1924, and 1925  1918 U.S. Championships runner-up  1918/1919/1920/1926 U.S. Championships women's doubles champion 
 Belarus 1988 Ranked World No. 35 in singles in 2008 and World No. 34 in doubles in 2010 
 United States 1943 2008 Ranked World No. 4 at the end of the year in 1964  1965 U.S. Championships women's doubles champion  1966 Australian Championships women's doubles champion 
 Germany 1969 22 Ranked World No. 1 at the end of the year in 1987, 1988, 1989, 1990, 1993, 1994, 1995, and 1996  1988/1989/1990/1994 Australian Open champion  1987/1988/1993/1995/1996/1999 French Open champion  1988/1989/1991/1992/1993/1995/1996 Wimbledon champion  1988/1989/1993/1995/1996 US Open champion  1988 Wimbledon women's doubles champion  1992 Olympic silver medalist in singles  1988 Olympic gold medalist in singles and bronze medalist in doubles. Ranked World No. 1 for 377 weeks. 
 United States 1970 Ranked World No. 35 in singles in 1992 and World No. 24 in doubles in 1994 
 Australia 1979 Ranked World No. 159 in 2002 
 Italy 1975 Ranked World No. 24 in singles and World No. 26 in doubles in 2001 
 South Africa 1981 Ranked World No. 144 in singles in 2005 and World No. 54 in doubles in 2010 
 United States 1981 Ranked World No. 28 in singles in 2003 and World No. 47 in doubles in 2007 
 Netherlands 1944 1966 Wimbledon quarterfinalist 
 Germany 1985 Ranked World No. 14 in singles and World No. 7 in doubles in 2006  2009 Wimbledon mixed doubles champion 
 Germany 1986 Ranked World No. 164 in 2012 
 Italy 1970 Ranked World No. 79 in singles in 1993 
 United States 1970 Ranked World No. 29 in singles and World No. 31 in doubles in 1993 
 Australia Slovakia 1987 Ranked World No. 25 in singles in 2011 and World No. 51 in doubles in 2007 
 Poland 1978 Ranked World No. 30 in singles in 1998 and World No. 86 in doubles in 1997 
 Hungary 1981 Ranked World No. 76 in singles in 2002 and World No. 93 in doubles in 2003 
 Philippines 1992 Ranked World No. 32 in singles in 2010 
 United States 1986 Ranked World No. 123 in singles in 2009 and World No. 52 in doubles in 2006  2009 US Open mixed doubles champion 
 Belgium 1952 1979 Australian Open quarterfinalist 
 United States 1969 Ranked World No. 17 in 1987 
 Australia 1972 Ranked World No. 60 in singles in 1997 and World No. 26 in doubles in 1998 
 Argentina 1981 Ranked World No. 134 in singles in 2004 
 Slovakia 1973 Ranked World No. 10 in 1997 
 Germany 1969 Ranked World No. 13 in singles in 1995 and World No. 94 in doubles in 1994 
 United States 1969 Ranked World No. 32 in 1988 
 France 1970 Ranked World No. 7 in singles and World No. 1 in doubles in 2000  2000 US Open women's doubles champion 
 Romania 1991 Ranked World No. 3 in 2014 
 United States 1957 Ranked World No. 56 in 1983 
 United States 1990 Ranked World No. 116 in 2011 
 Han Xinyun People's Republic of China 1990 Ranked World No. 129 in singles in 2011 and World No. 90 in doubles in 2008 
 West Germany 1959 Ranked World No. 5 in 1983 
 Slovakia 1983 Ranked World No. 5 in singles in 2003 and in doubles in 2002  2001 Wimbledon mixed doubles champion  2002 Australian Open mixed doubles champion  2005 French Open mixed doubles champion  2005 US Open mixed doubles champion 
 United States 1936 3 Ranked World No. 2 at year-end in 1957, 1960, and 1961  1960 French Championships champion  1960/1961 U.S. Championships champion  1957/1959/1960/1963 Wimbledon women's doubles champion  1955/1957/1960 French Championships women's doubles champion  1958/1959/1960/1961/1962 U.S. Championships women's doubles champion  1957/1959/1960 Wimbledon mixed doubles champion  1955/1961 French Championships mixed doubles champion 
 United Kingdom Ranked World No. 8 at year-end in 1939  1939 Wimbledon quarterfinalist 
 South Africa 1958 1981 French Open women's doubles champion 
 United States 1985 Ranked World No. 39 in singles in 2003 and World No. 39 in doubles in 2007 
 United States 1902 1999 1931 Wimbledon mixed doubles champion  Top-ranked player in the United States in 1930 
 United States 1962 Ranked World No. 70 in 1983 
 Australia 1949 1972 Australian Open women's doubles champion 
 United Kingdom 1950 Wimbledon quarterfinalist 
 United States 1925 6 Ranked World No. 1 at year-end in 1951  1949 Australian Championships champion  1950/1952 French Championships champion  1951 Wimbledon champion  1954/1955 U.S. Championships champion  1950 Australian Championships women's doubles champion  1948/1950/1951/1952/1953 French Championships women's doubles champion  1947/1951/1952/1953 Wimbledon women's doubles champion  1951/1952/1953/1954 U.S. Championships women's doubles champion  1949/1950 Australian Championships mixed doubles champion  1951/1952/1953 French Championships mixed doubles champion  1951/1952/1953/1954/1955 Wimbledon mixed doubles champion  1951/1952/1953/1954/1955 U.S. Championships mixed doubles champion 
 United States 1946 1967 Wimbledon semifinalist 
 United States 1971 Ranked World No. 23 in singles and World No. 17 in doubles in 1996 
 Australia 1950 1972 Australian Open quarterfinalist 
 United States 1984 Ranked World No. 95 in singles in 2005 and World No. 86 in doubles in 2008 
 1923 Wimbledon quarterfinalist 
 United Kingdom Ranked World No. 6 at year-end in 1932  1932 Wimbledon semifinalist 
 Hungary 1977 Ranked World No. 178 in 2001 
 South Africa 1910 Ranked World No. 5 at year-end in 1929  1929 Wimbledon quarterfinalist  1927 French Championships women's doubles champion 
 United States 1945 Ranked World No. 5 at year-end in 1969 
 United States 1968 Ranked World No. 29 in singles and World No. 38 in doubles in 1995 
 Belgium 1982 7 Ranked World No. 1 in singles at the end of the year in 2003, 2006, and 2007 and World No. 23 in doubles in 2002  2003/2005/2006/2007 French Open champion  2003/2007 US Open champion  2004 Australian Open champion  Ranked World No. 1 for 125 weeks 
 Germany 1981 Ranked World No. 137 in singles in 2005 and World No. 110 in doubles in 2002 
 United States 1959 Ranked World No. 36 in singles in 1985 and World No. 40 in doubles in 1988 
 Slovenia 1991 Ranked World No. 35 in singles and World No. 56 in doubles in 2011 
 United States 1964 Ranked World No. 31 in singles in 1983 and World No. 26 in doubles in 1988 
 France 1966 Ranked World No. 42 in singles in 1986 and World No. 35 in doubles in 1988 
 Canada 1964 Ranked World No. 64 in singles in 1988 and World No. 6 in doubles in 1989 
 United Kingdom Ranked World No. 6 at year-end in 1949  1949 Wimbledon quarterfinalist  1946 French Championships quarterfinalist 
 Switzerland 1980 5 Ranked World No. 1 in singles at the end of the year in 1997, 1999, and 2000  Ranked World No. 1 in doubles in 1998  1997/1998/1999 Australian Open champion  1997 Wimbledon champion  1997 US Open champion  1996/1998 Wimbledon women's doubles champion  1997/1998/1999/2002 Australian Open women's doubles champion  1998/2000 French Open women's doubles champion  1998 US Open women's doubles champion  2006 Australian Open mixed doubles champion  Ranked World No. 1 for 209 weeks 
 Japan 1971 Ranked World No. 72 in singles and World No. 26 in doubles in 1997  1997 French Open mixed doubles champion 
 Japan 1979 Ranked World No. 143 in 2006 
 Czech Republic 1988 Ranked World No. 197 in 2009 
 Czech Republic 1986 Ranked World No. 87 in singles in 2011 and World No. 38 in doubles in 2010 
 Australia 1934 1954 Australian Championships runner-up 
 United Kingdom 1959 Ranked World No. 33 in singles in 1981 and World No. 6 in doubles in 1984 
 Austria 1991 Ranked World No. 161 in 2010 
 United States 1949 1972 Wimbledon quarterfinalist 
 United States 1955 Ranked World No. 39 in 1984 
 United Kingdom 1883 1979 1912/1913 Wimbledon semifinalist  1920 Olympic silver medalist in singles and women's doubles 
 Czechoslovakia 1976 French Open quarterfinalist 
 United States 1981 Ranked World No. 52 in singles in 2001 and World No. 55 in doubles in 2005 
 Australia 1909 1968 1939/1947 Australian Championships runner-up  1930/1936/1937/1939 Australian Championships mixed doubles champion  1954 French Championships women's doubles champion 
 Netherlands 1976 Ranked World No. 72 in singles in 1999 and World No. 88 in doubles in 2000 
 Germany Ranked World No. 8 at year-end in 1932 and 1937  1936 Wimbledon quarterfinalist 
 United States 1965 Ranked World No. 10 in singles in 1984, and World No. 45 in doubles in 1988 
 United States 1943 1965 Wimbledon quarterfinalist 
 Czech Republic 1985 Ranked World No. 41 in singles in 2011 and World No. 8 in doubles in 2012 
 Czech Republic 1984 Ranked World No. 168 in singles and World No. 55 in doubles in 2008 
 Slovakia 1982 Ranked World No. 146 in singles in 2003 and World No. 151 in doubles in 2005 
 Hsieh Su-Wei Republic of China 1986 Ranked World No. 78 in singles in 2008 and World No. 9 in doubles in 2009 
 Hu Na People's Republic of China United States 1963 Ranked World No. 48 in singles in 1988 and World No. 49 in doubles in 1990 
 Germany 1974 Ranked World No. 4 in singles in 1996 and World No. 30 in doubles in 2000 
 South Africa United States 1976 Ranked World No. 131 in singles in 1999 and World No. 1 in doubles in 2007  2005/2007 Wimbledon women's doubles champion  2007 Australian Open women's doubles champion  2008 US Open women's doubles champion  2009 French Open mixed doubles champion  2010 US Open mixed doubles champion 
 Austria 1966 Ranked World No. 37 in 1984 
 Australia 1950 Ranked World No. 9 at year-end in 1974 
 Slovakia 1974 Ranked World No. 31 in singles and World No. 3 in doubles in 2003 
 Canada 1965 Ranked World No. 28 in singles in 1993 and World No. 36 in doubles in 1987 
 Belarus 1974 Ranked World No. 91 in 1993 
 Japan 1982 Ranked World No. 182 in 2011 
 Japan 1964 Ranked World No. 26 in singles in 1988 and World No. 34 in doubles in 1987 
 Argentina 1987 Ranked World No. 167 in singles in 2010 
 United States 1980 Ranked World No. 51 in singles and World No. 84 in doubles in 2002 
 United States 1966 Ranked World No. 39 in 1986 
 Russia 1987 Ranked World No. 136 in 2009 
 Serbia 1987 1 Ranked World No. 1 in singles in 2008 and World No. 50 in doubles in 2006  2008 French Open champion 
 United States 1986 Ranked World No. 45 in 2006 
 United States 1908 1997 5 Ranked World No. 1 at the end of the year in 1936  1932/1933/1934/1935 U.S. Championships champion  1936 Wimbledon champion  1932/1934/1935 U.S. Championships women's doubles champion  1934 U.S. Championships mixed doubles champion 
 United States 1965 Ranked World No. 3 at the end of the year in 1982 and 1983  1981 French Open mixed doubles champion 
 Australia 1969 Ranked World No. 83 in singles in 1993 and World No. 42 in doubles in 1991 
 Hungary 1991 Ranked World No. 147 in singles in 2012 
 Serbia 1985 Ranked World No. 1 in singles at the end of the year in 2008 and World No. 43 in doubles in 2006  2007 Wimbledon mixed doubles champion 
 Poland 1984 Ranked World No. 46 in doubles in 2010 
 Yugoslavia 1956 1 Ranked World No. 8 at year-end in 1976  1977 French Open champion  1978 French Open women's doubles champion 
 United Kingdom 1967 Ranked World No. 56 in 1992 
 Yugoslavia 1978 Ranked World No. 72 in singles and World No. 88 in doubles in 1996 
 Poland 1912 1980 Ranked World No. 3 at year-end in 1937  1939 French Championships women's doubles champion 
 Jeon Mi-Ra Korea 1978 Ranked World No. 129 in singles in 2003 
 United States 1897 1979 Ranked World No. 8 at year-end in 1922  1919/1920 U.S. Championships runner-up  1918/1919/1920/1921 U.S. Championships women's doubles champion  1919 U.S. Championships mixed doubles champion  1924 Olympic silver medalist in mixed doubles 
 Canada 1976 Ranked World No. 48 in singles and World No. 40 in doubles in 2000 
 Russia 1977 Ranked World No. 51 in singles in 2005 and World No. 50 in doubles in 2003 
 France 1985 Ranked World No. 59 in 2009 
 Switzerland 1961 Ranked World No. 28 in singles in 1983 and World No. 26 in doubles in 1988 
 United Kingdom 1938 3 Ranked World No. 2 at year-end in 1967 and 1969  1961/1966 French Championships champion  1969 Wimbledon champion  1963/1968/1969 French Championships women's doubles champion  1969 Australian Championships mixed doubles champion  1969 Wimbledon mixed doubles champion 
 United States 1879 1965 2 1899/1902 U.S. Championships champion  1902 U.S. Championships women's doubles champion  1901 U.S. Championships mixed doubles champion  1900 Olympic bronze medalist in singles and mixed doubles 
 New Zealand 1990 Ranked World No. 157 in 2010 
 United States 1957 1 Ranked World No. 78 in 1983  1979 Australian Open champion  1983 French Open mixed doubles champion 
 United States 1959 Ranked World No. 5 in singles and World No. 6 in doubles in 1984  1980 French Open women's doubles champion  1980/1985 Wimbledon women's doubles champion  1981 Australian Open women's doubles champion  1981 US Open women's doubles champion  1986 French Open mixed doubles champion  1986 Wimbledon mixed doubles champion 
 Serbia 1991 Ranked World No. 50 in 2011 
 Argentina 1988 Ranked World No. 132 in singles in 2009 and World No. 96 in doubles in 2008 
 Bosnia and Herzegovina 1980 Ranked World No. 99 in singles in 2004 and World No. 59 in doubles in 2006 
 United Kingdom 1965 Singles career-high of world number 125 achieved 6 August 1984. 
 Slovakia 1990 Ranked World No. 197 in 2011 
 Georgia 1990 Ranked World No. 156 in singles in 2010 
 Japan 1971 Ranked World No. 24 in singles in 1995 and World No. 65 in doubles in 1994 
 Netherlands 1974 Ranked World No. 70 in singles and World No. 97 in doubles in 1995 
 Germany 1976 Ranked World No. 43 in singles in 2001 
 Estonia 1985 Ranked World No. 16 in 2011 
 Greece 1965 Ranked World No. 43 in 1987 
 Hungary 1983 Ranked World No. 44 in 2004 
 Bulgaria Kazakhstan 1989 Ranked World No. 35 in 2005 
 Sweden 1963 1984 Wimbledon quarterfinalist 
 Philippines 1974 1992-1994 Wimbey Champion 
 Switzerland 1965 Ranked World No. 76 in singles in 1987 and World No. 85 in doubles in 1986 
 Canada 1969 Ranked World No. 13 in singles in 1989 and World No. 26 in doubles in 1991 
 United States 1971 Ranked World No. 77 in singles in 1992 and World No. 92 in doubles in 1993 
 United States 1944 
 United Kingdom 1983 Ranked World No. 48 in singles and World No. 98 in doubles in 2009 
 Germany 1988 Ranked World No. 10 in singles and World No. 147 in doubles in 2012 
 Japan 1969 Ranked World No. 68 in singles in 1991 and World No. 34 in doubles in 1992 
 Japan 1968 Ranked World No. 49 in singles in 1990 and World No. 93 in doubles in 1991 
 Japan 1972 Ranked World No. 44 in singles and World No. 18 in doubles in 1997 
 United States 1943 12 Ranked World No. 1 at the end of the year in 1966, 1967, 1968, 1971, 1972, and 1974  1966/1967/1968/1972/1973/1975 Wimbledon champion  1967/1971/1972/1974 US Open champion  1968 Australian Championships champion  1972 French Open champion  1961/1962/1965/1967/1968/1970/1971/1972/1973/1979 Wimbledon women's doubles champion  1972 French Open women's doubles champion  1964/1967/1974/1978/1980 US Open women's doubles champion  1968 Australian Championships mixed doubles champion  1967/1970 French Open mixed doubles champion  1967/1971/1973/1974 Wimbledon mixed doubles champion  1967/1971/1973/1976 US Open mixed doubles champion 
 United States 1989 Ranked World No. 50 in singles in 2006 and World No. 4 in doubles in 2010  2010 Wimbledon women's doubles champion  2010 US Open women's doubles champion 
 Russia 1987 Ranked World No. 18 in singles in 2008 and World No. 9 in doubles in 2011 
 United States 1987 Ranked World No. 151 in 2005 
 United States 1955 Ranked World No. 31 in 1983 
 Austria 1990 Ranked World No. 190 in 2010 
 Germany 1987 Ranked World No. 167 in singles and World No. 125 in doubles in 2009 
 Germany 1980 Ranked World No. 133 in 2005 
 Czech Republic 1978 Ranked World No. 41 in 1998 
 Austria 1982 2008 Ranked no.95 in doubles in 2005Won 23 titles on ITF Circuit 
 Slovenia 1986 Ranked World No. 99 in singles in 2008 and World No. 81 in doubles in 2009 
 Russia 1989 Ranked World No. 20 in singles in 2011 and World No. 10 in doubles in 2010 
 Germany 1979 Ranked World No. 87 in singles in 2007 
 South Africa 1956 Ranked World No. 19 in singles in 1979 and World No. 1 in doubles in 1976 
 Italy 1987 Ranked World No. 35 in 2008 
 United States 1925 Ranked World No. 5 at year-end in 1955 and 1957  1955/1957 French Championships runner-up 
 Germany 1975 Ranked World No. 45 in 1994 
 West Germany 1963 Ranked World No. 4 in 1985  1985 US Open women's doubles champion  1987 Wimbledon women's doubles champion  1988 Olympic bronze medalist in women's doubles 
 United States 1982 Ranked World No. 162 in singles in 2007 and World No. 31 in doubles in 2009 
 Hungary 1924 2006 1 Ranked World No. 2 at year-end in 1958  1958 French Championships champion 
 Ukraine 1985 Ranked World No. 50 in singles and World No. 39 in doubles in 2008 
 Poland 1988 Ranked World No. 182 in 2008 
 Croatia 1981 Ranked World No. 32 in singles and World No. 30 in doubles in 2004 
 Bulgaria 1990 Ranked World No. 152 in 2011 
 Russia 1978 Ranked World No. 91 in singles and World No. 46 in doubles in 2003 
 Russia 1981 Ranked World No. 8 in singles in 2000 and World No. 1 in doubles in 1999  1999/2002 Australian Open women's doubles champion 
 Netherlands 1989 Ranked World No. 30 in singles in 2008 and World No. 34 in doubles in 2006 
 Australia 1946 1977 Ranked World No. 9 at year-end in 1970  1970 French Open semifinalist  1970/1977 Australian Open semifinalist  1968 Australian Championships women's doubles champion 
 Switzerland 1966 Ranked World No. 94 in 1989 
 Russia 1984 Ranked World No. 25 in singles and World No. 22 in doubles in 2004 
 Ukraine 1983 Ranked World No. 183 in 2004 
 Luxembourg 1975 Ranked World No. 18 in singles in 2002 
 Slovenia 1974 Ranked World No. 95 in singles in 1995 and World No. 19 in doubles in 2002 
 Czechoslovakia 1974 Ranked World No. 58 in singles in 1993 
 South Africa 1973 Ranked World No. 21 in singles in 1998 and World No. 91 in doubles in 2002 
 South Africa 1958 1978 Wimbledon quarterfinalist 
 Austria 1968 Ranked World No. 37 in singles and World No. 45 in doubles in 1996 
 Czech Republic 1979 Ranked World No. 177 in singles in 2000 
 Slovakia 1990 Ranked World No. 103 in 2009 
 Slovakia 1982 Ranked World No. 101 in 2010 
 Poland 1961 Ranked World No. 64 in singles in 1987 and World No. 35 in doubles in 1989 
 Russia 1987 Ranked World No. 59 in singles in 2007 and World No. 28 in doubles in 2010 
 United States 1966 Ranked World No. 52 in 1986 and World No. 92 in doubles in 1993 
 Russia 1989 Ranked World No. 65 in 2010 
 Australia 1970 Ranked World No. 45 in singles and World No. 25 in doubles in 1994 
 Slovakia 1983 Ranked World No. 59 in singles and World No. 78 in doubles in 2004 
 Belarus 1986 Ranked World No. 125 in singles in 2009 and World No. 66 in doubles in 2008 
 Hungary 1978 Ranked World No. 47 in 2000 
 Ukraine 1988 Ranked World No. 76 in 2005 
 United States 1976 French Open quarterfinalist 
 Russia 1985 2 Ranked World No. 2 at the end of the year in 2007  2004 US Open champion  2005/2012 Australian Open women's doubles champion  2009 French Open champion 
 Czech Republic 1990 1 Ranked World No. 6 in singles in 2011  2011 Wimbledon champion 
 Argentina 1971 Ranked World No. 26 in singles in 1994 and World No. 27 in doubles in 1999 
 France 1945 French Championships runner-up 
 Finland 1986 Ranked World No. 50 in singles and World No. 64 in doubles in 2006 
 United Kingdom 1906 1985 Ranked World No. 7 at year-end in 1926  1925 Wimbledon runner-up 
 Germany 1982 Ranked World No. 59 in singles and World No. 60 in doubles in 2001 
 United Kingdom 1878 1960 7 1903/1904/1906/1910/1911/1913/1914 Wimbledon champion 1908 Olympic gold medalist in singles 
 Australia 1895 1 Ranked World No. 10 in 1924  1924 Australian Championships champion  1923/1924/1925 Australian Championships women's doubles champion  1923 Australian Championships mixed doubles champion 
 France 1916 1 Ranked World No. 7 at year-end in 1946  1948 French Championships champion 
 Czech Republic 1970 Ranked World No. 53 in singles in 1997 and World No. 35 in doubles in 1993 
 Italy 1970 Ranked World No. 56 in 1990 
 Russia 1986 Ranked World No. 93 in 2010 
 Portugal 1993 Ranked World No. 76 in 2009 
 United Kingdom 1879 1965 1 1912 Wimbledon champion  1914 Wimbledon mixed doubles champion 
 Sweden 1988 Ranked World No. 46 in 2011 
 United States 1952 Ranked World No. 42 in 1983 
 France 1985 Ranked World No. 180 in 2010 
 Ukraine 1981 Ranked World No. 146 in 2005 
 Italy 1933 1954 French Championships semifinalist 
 United States 1964 Ranked World No. 19 in 1983 
 Lee Duk-Hee Korea 1953 Ranked World No. 47 in 1983 
 Republic of China 1976 Ranked World No. 79 in singles in 1998 and World No. 20 in doubles in 2003 
 Lee Jin-A Korea 1985 Ranked World No. 158 in 2010 
 Lee Ye-Ra Korea 1987 Ranked World No. 178 in 2008 
 United States 1977 Ranked World No. 33 in singles in 1996 and World No. 86 in doubles in 1998  1960/1961 Australian Championships mixed doubles champion 
 Australia 1941 Ranked World No. 7 at year-end in 1963  1960/1961/1962/1963 Australian Championships runner-up  1960/1961 Australian Championships mixed doubles champion 
 France 1899 1938 12 Ranked World No. 1 at year-end from 1921 through 1926  1919/1920/1921/1922/1923/1925 Wimbledon champion  1920/1921/1922/1923/1925/1926 French Championships champion 
 Spain 1973 Ranked World No. 27 in 2000 
 United States Uzbekistan 1986 Ranked World No. 74 in singles in 2010 
 Thailand 1991 Ranked World No. 150 in singles in 2011 
 United States 1954 French Championships quarterfinalist 
 Li Fang People's Republic of China 1973 Ranked World No. 36 in singles in 1998 and World No. 49 in doubles in 1994 
 Li Na People's Republic of China 1982 2 Ranked World No. 3 in singles in 2013 and World No. 54 in doubles in 2006  2011/2013 Australian Open runner-up  2011 French Open champion  2014 Australian Open champion 
 Li Ting People's Republic of China 1980 Ranked World No. 136 in singles in 2005 and World No. 19 in doubles in 2004 
 Ireland 1979 Ranked World No. 181 in singles in 2003 
 Russia 1975 Ranked World No. 15 in singles in 1999 and World No. 3 in doubles in 2004  2002 Wimbledon mixed doubles champion  2007 Australian Open mixed doubles champion 
 Sweden 1963 Ranked World No. 10 in 1985 
 Sweden 1963 Ranked World No. 87 in singles in 1988 and World No. 44 in doubles in 1995 
 Israel 1986 Ranked World No. 35 in 2005 
 Poland 1992 Ranked World No. 163 in 2011 
 Germany 1989 Ranked World No. 12 and World No. 35 in doubles in 2012 
 Croatia 1987 Ranked World No. 95 in 2006 
 United Kingdom 1908 1982 3 Ranked World No. 1 at year-end in 1934  1934/1937 Wimbledon champion  1935 Australian Championships champion  1934/1935/1936 Wimbledon mixed doubles champion 
 Liu Nannan People's Republic of China 1983 Ranked World No. 141 in 2005 
 Chile 1915 1994 1 Ranked World No. 1 at year-end in 1937  1937 U.S. Championships champion 
 Spain 1980 Ranked World No. 35 in singles in 2005 and World No. 5 in doubles in 2009 
 France 1979 Ranked World No. 27 in singles in 2004 and World No. 15 in doubles in 2003 
 United States 1972 Ranked World No. 65 in singles and World No. 45 in doubles in 2000 
 Australia 1918 2 Ranked World No. 7 at year-end in 1952  1952/1954 Australian Championships champion 
 United Kingdom 1971 Ranked World No. 76 in 1990 
 France 1972 Ranked World No. 57 in singles in 1993 and World No. 59 in doubles in 1992 
 United States 1960 Ranked World No. 19 in singles in 1985 and World No. 31 in doubles in 1992 
 France 1945 1968/1971 French Open quarterfinalist 
 Lu Jingjing China 1989 Ranked World No. 178 in singles in 2011 
 Thailand 1987 Ranked World No. 200 in singles in 2011 
 Italy 1977 Ranked World No. 58 in singles in 1997 
 Croatia 1982 Ranked World No. 32 in singles and World No. 19 in doubles in 1998  1998 Australian Open women's doubles champion 
 United States 1961 Ranked World No. 57 in singles in 1983 and World No. 37 in doubles in 1987 
 Ukraine 1974 Ranked World No. 96 in singles in 1998 and World No. 45 in doubles in 1984 
 Ukraine 1984 Ranked World No. 140 in singles in 2011 and World No. 99 in doubles in 2007 
 Russia 1990 Ranked World No. 171 in singles in 2009 
 Ukraine 1985 Ranked World No. 149 in 2008 
 United States 1968 Ranked World No. 75 in singles in 1986 and World No. 38 in doubles in 1992 
 United States 1964 Ranked World No. 177 in singles and World No. 50 in doubles in 1988  Won one WTA doubles title 
 Argentina 1961 1980 French Open quarterfinalist  1980/1983 US Open quarterfinalist 
 Belgium 1982 Ranked World No. 151 in singles in 2007 
 United States 1964 Ranked World No. 3 in singles in 1985 and World No. 18 in doubles in 1990 
 Croatia 1977 1 Ranked World No. 4 in singles in 1996 and World No. 24 in doubles in 1995  1997 French Open champion 
 Russia 1988 Ranked World No. 29 in singles in 2011 and World No. 18 in doubles in 2010 
 Russia 1973 Ranked World No. 43 in singles in 1996 and World No. 36 in doubles in 1995 
 Bulgaria 1969 Ranked World No. 6 in singles in 1990 and World No. 24 in doubles in 1994 
 Bulgaria 1975 Ranked World No. 4 in singles in 1996 and World No. 13 in doubles in 2004 
 Bulgaria 1967 Ranked World No. 3 in 1985  1984 US Open mixed doubles champion 
 Germany 1987 Ranked World No. 64 in singles in 2009 and World No. 73 in doubles in 2010 
 Norway United States 1884 1959 8 Ranked World No. 2 at year-end in 1921 and 1922  1915/1916/1917/1918/1920/1921/1922/1926 U.S. Championships champion  1916/1917 U.S. Championships women's doubles champion  1917/1922/1923 U.S. Championships mixed doubles champion 
 Croatia 1985 Ranked World No. 83 in 2005 
 Czechoslovakia Australia 1962 4 Ranked World No. 3 in 1984  1980/1987 Australian Open champion  1981 French Open champion  1985 US Open champion  1989 US Open women's doubles champion 
 Hungary 1978 Ranked World No. 30 in singles in 2004 and World No. 13 in doubles in 2003 
 Italy 1947 French Championships quarterfinalist 
 Russia 1968 Ranked World No. 66 in singles in 1992 and World No. 18 in doubles in 1994 
 United States 1913 1990 5 Ranked World No. 1 at the end of the year in 1939  1936/1938/1939/1940 U.S. Championships champion  1939 Wimbledon champion  1937/1938/1939/1940 U.S. Championships women's doubles champion  1938/1939 Wimbledon women's doubles champion  1936/1938/1939/1940 U.S. Championships mixed doubles champion  1937/1938/1939 Wimbledon mixed doubles champion 
 Canada 1990 Ranked World No. 38 in 2011 
 Hungary 1979 Ranked World No. 101 in singles and World No. 71 in doubles in 2000 
 Spain 1983 Ranked World No. 47 in singles in 2004 and World No. 47 in doubles in 2005 
 Australia 1936 
 Czechoslovakia 1958 1977/1978 French Open semifinalist 
 Croatia 1991 Ranked World No. 54 in 2011 
 United States 1970 Ranked World No. 58 in 1989 
 Czech Republic 1975 Ranked World No. 94 in 1997 
 Germany 1972 Ranked World No. 49 in singles in 1991 
 United States 1947 1970 Wimbledon quarterfinalist 
 Spain 1972 1 Ranked World No. 2 at the end of the year in 1995  1994 Wimbledon champion  1992/2004 Olympic silver medalist in women's doubles  1996 Olympic bronze medalist in women's doubles 
 Spain 1976 Ranked World No. 66 in singles and World No. 82 in doubles in 2003 
 Spain 1982 Ranked World No. 19 in singles and World No. 4 in doubles in 2010 
 Bosnia and Herzegovina 1979 Ranked World No. 187 in 2008 
 Austria 1972 Ranked World No. 50 in singles in 1997 
 United States 1964 Ranked World No. 32 in singles in 1986 and World No. 49 in doubles in 1987 
 West Germany 1941 Ranked World No. 6 at year-end in 1970  1970 French Open runner-up  1976 French Open women's doubles runner-up 
 Romania 1985 Ranked World No. 145 in 2006 
 Slovenia 1980 Ranked World No. 38 in singles and World No. 34 in doubles in 2003 
 France 1908 1980 2 Ranked World No. 3 at year-end in 1932  1938/1939 French Championships champion  1933/1934/1937 Wimbledon women's doubles champion  1933/1934/1936/1937/1938/1939 French Championships women's doubles champion  1937/1938 French Championships mixed doubles champion 
 Australia 1951 1978 Australian Open semifinalist 
 United States 1985 Ranked World No. 30 in singles in 2011 and World No. 12 in doubles in 2010  2012 Australian Open mixed doubles champion 
 France 1979 2 Ranked World No. 1 in 2004 and 2006  2006 Australian Open champion  2006 Wimbledon champion 
 United States 1956 1977/1978 French Open quarterfinalist  1978 US Open quarterfinalist 
 Austria 1986 Ranked World No. 70 in 2009 
 United States 1983 Ranked World No. 117 in singles in 2004 
 United States 1971 Ranked World No. 18 in singles in 1996 and World No. 5 in doubles in 1994  1995 US Open mixed doubles champion 
 United States 1992 Ranked World No. 45 in 2011 
 Netherlands 1929 Wimbledon quarterfinalist 
 United States 1963 Ranked World No. 9 in singles in 1988 and World No. 4 in doubles in 1987  1987 Australian Open women's doubles champion  1988 French Open mixed doubles champion 
 Australia 1971 Ranked World No. 28 in singles in 1991 and World No. 15 in doubles in 1992 
 Australia 1974 Ranked World No. 139 in singles in 2000 and World No. 32 in doubles in 2005 
 Spain 1982 Ranked World No. 16 in singles in 2009 and World No. 3 in doubles in 2008  2008 French Open women's doubles champion 
 Brazil 1956 Ranked World No. 51 in 1983 
 Soviet Union Ukraine 1971 Ranked World No. 23 in singles in 2003 and World No. 21 in doubles in 1994 
 Germany 1968 Ranked World No. 40 in singles in 1987 and World No. 85 in doubles in 1996 
 Belgium 1957 French Championships quarterfinalist 
 Netherlands 1959 Ranked World No. 31 in singles in 1983 and World No. 34 in doubles in 1986 
 Soviet Union Georgia 1968 Ranked World No. 12 in singles in 1991 and World No. 21 in doubles in 1995 
 Austria 1983 Ranked World No. 60 in 2007 
 United States 1949 1974/1975 Australian Open women's doubles champion  1974 Wimbledon women's doubles champion 
 Romania 1955 1977 French Open runner-up 
 Romania 1981 Ranked World No. 176 in singles in 2005 
 Croatia 1987 Ranked World No. 197 in 2011 
 Switzerland 1984 Ranked World No. 33 in 2003 
 United States 1977 Ranked World No. 40 in 1998 
 United States 1977 Ranked World No. 100 in 1998 
 Luxembourg 1985 Ranked World No. 128 in singles in 2010 
 Australia 1963 Ranked World No. 23 in singles in 1988 and World No. 68 in doubles in 1990 
 Australia 1965 Ranked World No. 66 in singles in 1987 
 Brazil 1968 Ranked World No. 99 in 1988 
 India 1986 Ranked World No. 27 in singles and World No. 11 in doubles in 2011. 2009 Australian Open Mixed Doubles Champion 
 Romania 1991 Ranked World No. 199 in 2012 
 Japan 1971 Ranked World No. 51 in singles in 1995 and World No. 12 in doubles in 1997 
 France 1993 Ranked World No. 171 in singles in 2010 
 United Kingdom 1949 1972 French Open quarterfinalist 
 Australia 1894 1985 2 Ranked World No. 10 at year-end in 1922 and 1923  1922/1923 Australian Championships champion  1930/1933/1934 Australian Championships women's doubles champion 
 Australia 1981 Ranked World No. 8 in singles and World No. 6 in doubles in 2005  2005 Australian Open women's doubles champion  2007 French Open women's doubles champion 
 Argentina 1988 Ranked World No. 175 in singles in 2010 
 Belgium 1973 Ranked World No. 9 in singles in 1998 and World No. 21 in doubles in 2000 
 Argentina 1976 Ranked World No. 191 in singles in 1995 and World No. 23 in doubles in 2001  Winner of 9 doubles titles 
 Brazil 1976 Ranked World No. 118 in singles in 1986 and World No. 82 in doubles in 1987  Winner of 1 doubles title 
 Spain 1975 Ranked World No. 22 in singles in 2002 
 United States 1905 1998 19 Ranked World No. 1 at the end of the year in 1927, 1928, 1929, 1930, 1931, 1932, 1933, 1935, and 1938  1923/1924/1925/1927/1928/1929/1931 U.S. Championships champion  1927/1928/1929/1930/1932/1933/1935/1938 Wimbledon champion  1928/1929/1930/1932 French Championships champion  1922/1924/1925/1928 U.S. Championships women's doubles champion  1924/1927/1930 Wimbledon women's doubles champion  1930/1932 French Championships women's doubles champion  1924/1928 U.S. Championships mixed doubles champion  1929 Wimbledon mixed doubles champion  1924 Olympic gold medalist in singles and in doubles 
 Australia 1990 Ranked World No. 132 in 2008 
 United States 1940 Ranked World No. 9 at year-end in 1959  1959 Wimbledon semifinalist 
 United States 1978 Ranked World No. 29 in singles in 1998 and World No. 1 in doubles in 2000  1999 Wimbledon women's doubles champion  2001 Australian Open mixed doubles champion 
 Japan 1980 Ranked World No. 41 in singles in 2005 and World No. 59 in doubles in 2007 
 Japan 1990 Ranked World No. 42 in singles in 2011 and World No. 65 in doubles in 2009 
 Soviet Union 1949 Ranked World No. 7 at year-end in 1975  1974 French Open women's doubles champion 
 United Kingdom 1932 3 Ranked World No. 1 at year-end in 1961  1955 French Championships champion  1958 Australian Championships champion  1961 Wimbledon champion  1955 Wimbledon women's doubles champion 
 France 1970 Ranked World No. 67 in 1993 
 United Kingdom 1952 French Championships quarterfinalist 
 Morocco 1979 Ranked World No. 139 in 2002 
 South Africa 1962 Ranked World No. 46 in 1984 
 United States 1961 Ranked World No. 18 in singles in 1984 and World No. 28 in doubles in 1987 
 United Kingdom 1905 2006 Ranked World No. 7 at year-end in 1930  1930 Wimbledon quarterfinalist  1931 Wimbledon women's doubles champion 
 Germany 1982 Ranked World No. 33 in singles in 2007 and World No. 47 in doubles in 2008 
 South Africa 1962 Ranked World No. 55 in 1983 
 Netherlands 1967 Ranked World No. 43 in singles in 1990 and World No. 22 in doubles in 1995 
 Russia 1981 1 Ranked World No. 2 in singles in 2004 and World No. 15 in doubles in 2005  2004 French Open champion 
 Yugoslavia 1980 Ranked World No. 81 in singles in 1999 and World No. 74 in doubles in 2000 
 Japan 1974 Ranked World No. 28 in singles and World No. 31 in doubles in 1995 
 United States 1956 Ranked World No. 25 in singles in 1986 and World No. 11 in doubles in 1988  1978/1980 Australian Open women's doubles champion 
 Hungary 1977 Ranked World No. 122 in singles in 2006 and World No. 96 in doubles in 2004 
 Slovakia 1978 Ranked World No. 21 in singles in 2001 and World No. 37 in doubles in 2002 
 Japan 1983 Ranked World No. 47 in singles in 2007 and World No. 64 in doubles in 2008 
 Japan 1982 Ranked World No. 105 in singles in 2011 
 Japan 1991 Ranked World No. 101 in singles in 2010 
 Czechoslovakia United States 1956 18 Ranked World No. 1 at year-end in 1978, 1979, 1982, 1983, 1984, 1985, and 1986  1978/1979/1982/1983/1984/1985/1986/1987/1990 Wimbledon champion  1981/1983/1985 Australian Open champion  1982/1984 French Open champion  1983/1984/1986/1987 US Open champion  1980/1982/1983/1984/1985/1987/1988/1989 Australian Open women's doubles champion  1975/1982/1984/1985/1986/1987/1988 French Open women's doubles champion  1976/1979/1981/1982/1983/1984/1986 Wimbledon women's doubles champion  1977/1978/1980/1983/1984/1986/1987/1989/1990 US Open women's doubles champion  2003 Australian Open mixed doubles champion  1974/1985 French Open mixed doubles champion  1985/1993/1995/2003 Wimbledon mixed doubles champion  1985/1987/2006 US Open mixed doubles champion  Ranked World No. 1 for 331 weeks 
 Latvia 1966 Ranked World No. 58 in singles in 1996 and World No. 1 in doubles in 1992  1989 French Open women's doubles champion  1991 Wimbledon women's doubles champion  1992 Wimbledon mixed-doubles champion  1994/1996 Australian Open mixed-doubles champion  1995 French Open mixed-doubles champion 
 Canada 1974 Ranked World No. 64 in 2000 
 United States 1962 Ranked World No. 60 in 1984 
 Czech Republic 1976 Ranked World No. 72 in singles in 1998 and World No. 85 in doubles in 1997 
 Hungary 1985 Ranked World No. 130 in 2004 
 United States 1953 1975/1977 French Open semifinalist 
 Greece 1928 Wimbledon quarterfinalist 
 Romania 1987 Ranked World No. 28 in singles in 2012 and World No. 24 in doubles in 2010 
 France 1969 Ranked World No. 94 in 1992 
 Bulgaria New Zealand 1974 Ranked World No. 68 in singles in 2001 and World No. 87 in doubles in 1998 
 Sweden 1984 Ranked World No. 152 in 2005 
 Netherlands 1974 Ranked World No. 80 in singles and World No. 47 in doubles in 1999 
 United States 1965 1985 Wimbledon quarterfinalist 
 Czechoslovakia Czech Republic 1968 1 Ranked World No. 2 in singles at the end of the year in 1997 and World No. 1 in doubles in 1990  1998 Wimbledon champion  1989/1990/1995/1998 Wimbledon women's doubles champion  1990/1995 Australian Open women's doubles champion  1990/1991/1998 French Open women's doubles champion  1994/1997/1998 US Open women's doubles champion  1988/1989 Australian Open mixed doubles champion  1988 US Open mixed doubles champion  1989 Wimbledon mixed doubles champion 
 Poland 1969 Ranked World No. 47 in 1995 
 United Kingdom 1986 Ranked World No. 84 in 2010 
 Japan 1978 Ranked World No. 39 in singles and World No. 98 in doubles in 2004 
 Israel 1973 Ranked World No. 75 in 2007 
 Mexico 1935 Ranked World No. 6 at year-end in 1961  1958 French Championships women's doubles champion  1959 French Championships mixed doubles champion 
 Germany 1971 Ranked World No. 98 in 1991 
 Japan 1965 Ranked World No. 75 in 1989 
 Japan 1978 Ranked World No. 178 in singles in 2006 
 Romania 1989 Ranked World No. 53 in singles in 2009 and World No. 78 in doubles in 2010 
 Poland 1977 Ranked World No. 72 in singles in 1996 and World No. 69 in doubles in 1999 
 Czech Republic 1980 Ranked World No. 74 in 2004 
 Italy 1986 Ranked World No. 46 in singles in 2006 
 Netherlands 1972 Ranked World No. 25 in singles in 1993 and World No. 19 in doubles in 1997 
 United States 1978 Ranked World No. 41 in singles in 2001 and World No. 77 in doubles in 1999 
 Belarus 1980 Ranked World No. 96 in 2001 
 United States 1991 Ranked World No. 31 in 2010 
 Croatia 1985 Ranked World No. 131 in 2007 
 Kyrgyzstan 1989 Ranked World No. 163 in 2009 
 Bulgaria Germany 1972 Ranked World No. 62 in singles and World No. 38 in doubles in 1996 
 Croatia 1983 Ranked World No. 136 in 2008 
 Russia 1989 Ranked World No. 127 in 2010 
 Russia 1976 Ranked World No. 20 in singles in 2002 and World No. 75 in doubles in 2003 
 Greece 1973 Ranked World No. 72 in singles in 1999 
 France 1966 Ranked World No. 20 in singles and World No. 38 in doubles in 1988 
 Park Sung-hee Korea 1975 Ranked World No. 57 in singles in 1995 and World No. 34 in doubles in 1998 
 Russia 1962 Ranked World No. 72 in singles in 1989 and World No. 8 in doubles in 1988 
 United States 1979 Ranked World No. 85 in 2000 
 France 1986 Ranked World No. 40 in 2008 
 Spain 1982 Ranked World No. 46 in singles in 2010 and World No. 59 in doubles in 2008 
 Spain 1953 French Championships quarterfinalist 
 Czech Republic 1980 Ranked World No. 89 in singles and World No. 35 in doubles in 2005 
 Austria 1990 Ranked World No. 35 in 2007 
 Austria 1970 Ranked World No. 10 in singles in 1996 and World No. 83 in doubles in 1989 
 France 1988 Ranked World No. 187 in singles in 2010 
 Russia 1991 Ranked World No. 14 in singles in 2011 and World No. 70 in doubles in 2009 
 Switzerland 1 Ranked World No. 4 at year-end in 1932  1945 French Championships champion  1935 French Championships mixed doubles champion 
 Argentina 1966 Ranked World No. 28 in singles in 1991 and World No. 12 in doubles in 1990 
 South Africa 1892 Ranked World No. 6 at year-end in 1922  1927 French Championships runner-up  1927 French Championships women's doubles champion 
 Israel 1987 Ranked World No. 11 in singles in 2011 and World No. 14 in doubles in 2008 
 Australia 1991 Ranked World No. 145 in singles in 2011 and World No. 94 in doubles in 2010 
 Canada 1982 Ranked World No. 106 in singles in 2005 and World No. 54 in doubles in 2010 
 Peng Shuai China 1986 Ranked World No. 14 in singles in 2011 and World No. 13 in doubles in 2009 
 Italy 1982 Ranked World No. 10 in singles in 2009 and World No. 1 in doubles in 2011  2011 Australian Open women's doubles champion 
 Ukraine 1982 Ranked World No. 55 in singles and World No. 35 in doubles in 2008 
 Brazil 1988 Ranked World No. 196 in 2007 
 Argentina 1967 Ranked World No. 51 in singles in 1988 
 Italy 1969 Ranked World No. 54 in singles and World No. 71 in doubles in 1997 
 Romania 1980 Ranked World No. 120 in 2006 
 Philippines 1974 3-time Hinampang Open Champion; 3-time WTA Med Week Masters 1000 Champion; World No.1 in 1996-1999 
 Russia 1991 Ranked World No. 37 in 2011 
 Czech Republic 1975 Ranked World No. 26 in singles in 2005 and World No. 3 in doubles in 2008 
 Germany 1987 Ranked World No. 9 in singles in 2011 and World No. 68 in doubles in 2009 
 Russia 1982 Ranked World No. 3 in singles in 2006 and World No. 3 in doubles in 2005 
 West Germany 1961 Ranked World No. 17 in singles in 1983 and World No. 16 in doubles in 1988 
 Germany 1992 Ranked World No. 190 in 2012 
 United States 1966 Ranked World No. 20 in singles in 1986 and World No. 37 in doubles in 1989 
 France 1983 Ranked World No. 120 in 2004 
 Italy 1973 Ranked World No. 37 in 1991 
 Portugal 1982 Ranked World No. 142 in 2006 
 France 1975 2 Ranked World No. 3 in singles in 1995 and World No. 3 in doubles in 2000  1995 Australian Open champion  2000 French Open champion  2000 French Open women's doubles champion  2005 Wimbledon mixed doubles champion 
 France 1981 Ranked World No. 61 in singles and World No. 95 in doubles in 2007 
 Czechoslovakia Hungary 1946 1974 French Open quarterfinalist 
 France 1988 Ranked World No. 177 in 2010 
 Bulgaria 1987 Ranked World No. 31 in 2010 
 Slovenia 1981 Ranked World No. 29 in singles in 2004 and World No. 63 in doubles in 2000 
 France 1975 Ranked World No. 29 in singles in 1996 
 Russia 1990 Ranked World No. 93 in 2011 
 Italy 1975 Ranked World No. 45 in singles in 1996 and World No. 90 in doubles in 1997 
 Austria 1977 Ranked World No. 27 in singles in 1999 and World No. 78 in doubles in 2001 
 Czech Republic 1992 Ranked World No. 121 in singles and World No. 91 in doubles in 2012 
 Czech Republic 1992 Ranked World No. 143 in singles in 2012 and World No. 93 in doubles in 2012 
 United States 1971 Ranked World No. 14 in singles in 1997 and World No. 6 in doubles in 2001  2000 Wimbledon mixed doubles champion 
 Germany 1968 Ranked World No. 29 in singles in 1990 and World No. 24 in doubles in 1994 
 Czechoslovakia 1970 Ranked World No. 49 in singles in 1989 and World No. 83 in doubles in 1991 
 United States 1961 Ranked World No. 10 in singles in 1983, and World No. 15 in doubles in 1988 
 Belarus 1979 Ranked World No. 55 in singles in 2002 and World No. 25 in doubles in 2008 
 Indonesia 1981 Ranked World No. 74 in singles in 2002 and World No. 24 in doubles in 2003 
 United States 1925 Ranked World No. 7 at year-end in 1954  1954 Wimbledon semifinalist 
 Australia 1973 Ranked World No. 35 in singles in 2002 and World No. 18 in doubles in 2001 
 United States 1948 French Championships quarterfinalist 
 South Africa 1934 Ranked World No. 3 at year-end in 1960  1959 Australian Championships women's doubles champion  1959/1961/1962 French Championships women's doubles champion  1959 Australian Championships mixed doubles champion 
 Germany 1969 Ranked World No. 31 in singles in 1991 and World No. 32 in doubles in 1996 
 Czech Republic 1979 Ranked World No. 103 in singles in 2002 and World No. 46 in doubles in 2004 
 Russia 1987 Ranked World No. 32 in 2007 
 United Kingdom 1975 Ranked World No. 125 in singles in 2000 and World No. 67 in doubles in 1998 
 United States 1966 Ranked World No. 40 in singles in 1986 
 France 1969 Ranked World No. 45 in singles in 1991 
 United Kingdom Ranked World No. 9 at year-end in 1952  1948/1952 Wimbledon quarterfinalist  1953 French Championships quarterfinalist 
 Poland 1989 Ranked World No. 6 in singles in 2012 and World No. 25 in doubles in 2011 
 Poland 1990 Ranked World No. 62 in singles in 2009 
 Czechoslovakia 1968 Ranked World No. 26 in singles in 1991 and World No. 45 in doubles in 1990 
 Slovenia 1980 Ranked World No. 162 in singles and World No. 84 in doubles in 2000 
 Madagascar 1977 Ranked World No. 44 in 2005 
 India 1985 Ranked World No. 144 in singles in 2008 
 United States 1973 Ranked World No. 15 in singles in 1997 and World No. 1 in doubles in 2000  2000 Australian Open women's doubles champion  2001 Wimbledon women's doubles champion  2001/2005 US Open women's doubles champion  2006 French Open women's doubles champion  1996/2002 US Open mixed doubles champion  1999 Wimbledon mixed doubles champion  2003 French Open mixed doubles champion 
 France 1983 Ranked World No. 16 in singles in 2009 and World No. 82 in doubles in 2001 
 South Africa 1926 1952 French Championships semifinalist 
 United States 1979 Ranked World No. 62 in singles in 2002 and World No. 51 in doubles in 2003 
 Italy 1965 Ranked World No. 13 in singles in 1988 and World No. 25 in doubles in 1991 
 United States 1969 Ranked World No. 10 in singles in 1989 and World No. 10 in doubles in 1992 
 Australia 1947 1 Ranked World No. 5 at year-end in 1971  1977 (January) Australian Open champion  1968/1977 Australian Championships/Open women's doubles champion  1978 Wimbledon women's doubles champion 
 South Africa 1968 Ranked World No. 26 in singles in 1989 and World No. 10 in doubles in 1990 
 South Africa 1962 1983 Wimbledon quarterfinalist 
 Austria 1967 Ranked World No. 60 in singles in 1994 
 United States 1966 Ranked World No. 78 in singles in 1989 and World No. 31 in doubles in 1988 
 Australia 1934 2 1956/1959 Australian Championships champion  1961 Australian Championships women's doubles champion  1960/1961 Australian Championships mixed doubles champion 
 South Africa 1968 Ranked World No. 26 in singles in 1991 and World No. 27 in doubles in 1988 
 United States 1955 Ranked World No. 50 in singles in 1983 and World No. 24 in doubles in 1986 
 France 1987 Ranked World No. 16 in singles in 2010 
 United States 1942 2 Ranked World No. 3 at the end of the year in 1968  1967 Australian Championships champion  1968 French Open champion  1966 Australian Championships women's doubles champion  1965/1966 U.S. Championships women's doubles champion 
 Czech Republic 1977 Ranked World No. 62 in 1996 
 United Kingdom 1929 Wimbledon semifinalist 
 United States 1949 Wimbledon semifinalist 
 United States 1967 Ranked World No. 7 in singles in 1986 and World No. 13 in doubles in 1993 
 Paraguay 1975 Ranked World No. 51 in singles in 2001 and World No. 52 in doubles in 2003 
 United States 1980 Ranked World No. 57 in singles in 1999 and World No. 92 in doubles in 2002 
 United States 1990 Ranked World No. 104 in singles in 2011 
 Germany 1973 Ranked World No. 24 in singles in 1993 and World No. 23 in doubles in 2002 
 Australia 1899 1966 1 Ranked World No. 10 at year-end in 1928  1927 Australian Championships champion  1922/1923/1926/1928 Australian Championships women's doubles champion  1922/1926/1927 Australian Championships mixed doubles champion 
 United Kingdom 1994 Ranked World No. 35 in singles in 2013 and World No. 90 in doubles in 2013 
 Russia 1989 Ranked World No. 74 in singles in 2011 
 Australia Russia 1982 Ranked World No. 62 in singles in 2010 and World No. 36 in doubles in 2008 
 Russia 1989 Ranked World No. 157 in singles and World No. 76 in doubles in 2010 
 Germany 1977 Ranked World No. 69 in singles in 2003 
 Australia 1991 Ranked World No. 138 in singles in 2009 
 United States 1985 Ranked World No. 82 in singles in 2007 
 Italy 1965 Ranked World No. 74 in 1989 
 Italy 1971 Ranked World No. 77 in 1990 
 Romania 1959 Ranked World No. 49 in 1983 
 1923 Wimbledon quarterfinalist 
 Poland 1985 Ranked World No. 42 in doubles in 2010  Winner of two WTA doubles titles 
 Netherlands 1974 Ranked World No. 30 in singles in 1993 and World No. 93 in doubles in 1996 
 France 1948 1973 French Open quarterfinalist 
 France 1980 Ranked World No. 118 in 2004 
 Spain 1973 Ranked World No. 28 in singles in 1999 and World No. 1 in doubles in 2003  2001/2002/2004/2005/2008 French Open women's doubles champion  2002/2003/2004 US Open women's doubles champion  2004 Australian Open women's doubles champion  2000 French Open mixed doubles champion 
 United States 1976 Ranked World No. 6 in singles in 1996 and World No. 9 in doubles in 1996 
 Romania Ranked World No. 9 at year-end in 1948  1947 French Championships quarterfinalist 
 Netherlands 1990 Ranked World No. 78 in singles in 2011 
 United States 1954 Ranked World No. 22 in singles in 1983 and World No. 32 in doubles in 1987 
 Estonia 1983 Ranked World No. 162 in 2008 
 Romania 1955 1 Ranked World No. 8 in 1979  1978 French Open champion  1978 French Open women's doubles champion 
 United States 1892 1979 Ranked World No. 3 at year-end in 1927  1914/1922/1930/1932/1933/1934 French Championships women's doubles champion  1914/1919/1920/1921/1922/1923/1925/1926/1927/1930/1933/1934 Wimbledon women's doubles champion  1926 U.S. Championships women's doubles champion  1913/1914 French Championships mixed doubles champion  1919/1921/1923/1927/1928/1930/1932 Wimbledon mixed doubles champion  1926/1933 U.S. Championships mixed doubles champion 
 Slovakia 1988 Ranked World No. 40 in singles in 2009 and World No. 62 in doubles in 2011 
 Argentina 1970 1 Ranked World No. 3 in singles in 1989 and World No. 3 in doubles in 1988  1990 US Open champion  1988 Wimbledon women's doubles champion. 1988 Olympic silver medalist in singles. 
 Japan 1976 Ranked World No. 56 in singles in 1998 and World No. 49 in doubles in 1997 
 Czech Republic 1987 Ranked World No. 22 in singles in 2007 and World No. 72 in doubles in 2009 
 Russia 1986 Ranked World No. 1 in singles in 2009 and World No. 8 in doubles in 2008  2007 US Open women's doubles champion 
 Poland 1984 Ranked World No. 138 in 2006 
 Argentina 1983 Ranked World No. 65 in singles in 2008 and World No. 45 in doubles in 2002 
 France 1982 Ranked World No. 90 in 2008 
 Spain 1977 Ranked World No. 33 in singles in 2004 and World No. 78 in doubles in 2006 
 Spain 1971 4 Ranked World No. 1 in singles in 1995 and World No. 1 in doubles in 1992  1989/1994/1998 French Open champion  1994 US Open champion  1992/1995/1996 Australian Open women's doubles champion  1993/1994 US Open women's doubles champion  1995 Wimbledon women's doubles champion  1990/1992 French Open mixed doubles champion  1993 Australian Open mixed doubles champion  2000 US Open mixed doubles champion 
 Sweden 1948 
 Sweden 1961 Ranked World No. 91 in 1983 
 United States 1956 Ranked World No. 44 in singles in 1984 and World No. 31 in doubles in 1987 
 Romania 1980 Ranked World No. 91 in 1999 
 Italy 1981 Ranked World No. 27 in singles and World No. 5 in doubles in 2007  2007 French Open women's doubles champion 
 Italy 1980 Ranked World No. 144 in 2002 
 United Kingdom 1889 Ranked World No. 8 at year-end in 1924  1924 Wimbledon semifinalist 
 Ukraine 1987 Ranked World No. 79 in singles in 2008 and World No. 62 in doubles in 2010 
 Russia 1991 Ranked World No. 127 in singles in 2011 
 Ukraine 1984 Ranked World No. 172 in 2006 
 Japan 1951 1975 French Open quarterfinalist  1975 Wimbledon women's doubles champion 
 Japan 1973 Ranked World No. 14 in singles and World No. 98 in doubles in 1995 
 Mary Sawyer Australia 1979 Australian Open semifinalist 
 Netherlands 1944 1971 French Open semifinalist 
 Germany 1987 Ranked World No. 165 in 2009 
 Luxembourg 1983 Ranked World No. 41 in singles and World No. 71 in doubles in 2004 
 South Africa 1984 Ranked World No. 65 in 2011 
 Austria 1976 Ranked World No. 7 in singles in 1999 and World No. 8 in doubles in 2001 
 Denmark 1966 Ranked World No. 34 in singles in 1986 and World No. 14 in doubles in 1988 
 Italy 1980 1 Ranked World No. 4 in singles in 2011 and World No. 8 in doubles in 2007  2010 French Open champion 
 South Africa 1967 Ranked World No. 75 in 1988 
 Austria 1977 Ranked World No. 90 in 1996 
 Switzerland 1978 Ranked World No. 7 in singles and World No. 15 in doubles in 2005 
 United States 1992 Ranked World No. 164 in 2011 
 Netherlands 1988 Ranked World No. 196 in 2011 
 Germany 1982 Ranked World No. 52 in singles and World No. 99 in doubles in 2006 
 Netherlands 1970 Ranked World No. 9 in singles in 1996 and World No. 7 in doubles in 1995 
 West Germany 1940 Ranked World No. 5 at year-end in 1964  1964 French Championships semifinalist 
 South Africa 1939 2001 Ranked World No. 8 at year-end in 1963  1959 Australian Championships women's doubles champion  1959/1961/1962/1963 French Championships women's doubles champion  1962 French Championships mixed doubles champion 
 Austria 1979 Ranked World No. 40 in singles in 1999 
 Austria 1972 Ranked World No. 52 in singles in 1995 and World No. 60 in doubles in 1993 
 United Kingdom 1912 2001 2 Ranked World No. 5 at year-end in 1933 and 1934  1933/1934 French Championships champion  1935 French Championships women's doubles champion  1935 French Championships mixed doubles champion 
 South Africa 1931 1958 French Championships semi-finalist 
 1949/1954 French Championships quarter-finalist 
 Yugoslavia United States 1973 9 Ranked World No. 1 in singles at the end of the year in 1991, 1992, and 1995  Ranked World No. 16 in doubles in 1991  1991/1992/1993/1996 Australian Open champion  1990/1991/1992 French Open champion  1991/1992 US Open champion 1990/1991/1992 WTA Year-End Champion  Won 53 career WTA titles  Ranked World No. 1 in singles for a total of 178 weeks 
 Kazakhstan 1979 Ranked World No. 85 in singles in 2002 and World No. 31 in doubles in 2000 
 Mexico 1988 Ranked World No. 126 in 2011 
 Japan 1986 Ranked World No. 142 in 2009 
 Venezuela 1980 Ranked World No. 48 in singles in 2007 and World No. 29 in doubles in 2005 
 Spain 1979 Ranked World No. 19 in singles and World No. 25 in doubles in 2004 
 Italy 1976 Ranked World No. 38 in singles and World No. 69 in doubles in 2002 
 Italy 1980 Ranked World No. 60 in singles in 2007 and World No. 47 in doubles in 2006 
 Romania 1986 Ranked World No. 145 in 2004 
 Latvia 1990 Ranked World No. 36 in 2011 
 Tunisia 1977 Ranked World No. 75 in singles in 2001 and World No. 47 in doubles in 2008 
 Russia 1987 4 Ranked World No. 1 in 2005  2004 Wimbledon champion  2006 US Open champion  2008 Australian Open champion 2012 French Open championRanked World No. 1 for a total of 21 weeks 
 United States 1979 Ranked World No. 11 in singles in 2001 and World No. 4 in doubles in 2005 
 United Kingdom 1947 1992 1970 Wimbledon quarterfinalist 
 United Kingdom 1897 1953 1921/1924 Wimbledon quarterfinalist  1924 Olympic bronze medalist in women's doubles  1931 Wimbledon women's doubles champion 
 United Kingdom 1911 1983 1 Ranked World No. 4 at the end of the year in 1929  1930 U.S. Championships champion  1930/1931/1933 U.S. Championships women's doubles champion  1931 French Championships women's doubles champion  1929/1931 U.S. Championships mixed doubles champion  1931/1932 French Championships mixed doubles champion 
 United States 1962 Ranked World No. 3 in 1984  1984/1985/1987/1988 French Open women's doubles champion  1981/1982/1983/1984/1986 Wimbledon women's doubles champion  1983/1984/1986/1987/1991 US Open women's doubles champion  1982/1983/1984/1985/1987/1988/1989 Australian Open women's doubles champion  1987 Wimbledon mixed-doubles champion 
 Russia Kazakhstan 1987 Ranked World No. 29 in singles and World No. 7 in doubles in 2010  2010 Wimbledon women's doubles champion  2010 US Open women's doubles champion 
 France 1979 Ranked World No. 24 in singles in 2000 and World No. 15 in doubles in 2001 
 Germany 1988 Ranked World No. 183 in singles in 2011 and World No. 122 in doubles in 2009 
 Portugal 1983 Ranked World No. 133 in 2009 
 Italy 1960 Ranked World No. 31 in 1983 
 France 1956 1978 French Open semifinalist 
 Canada 1966 Ranked World No. 70 in singles in 1989 and World No. 32 in doubles in 1995 
 Germany 1968 Ranked World No. 41 in singles in 1995 and World No. 44 in doubles in 1996 
 Czech Republic 1974 Ranked World No. 58 in singles in 1993 
 Russia 1980 Ranked World No. 124 in 2004 
 United States 1970 Ranked World No. 19 in 1989 
 Israel 1976 Ranked World No. 15 in 2003 
 United States 1959 Ranked World No. 12 in 1982  1981 Australian Open women's doubles champion  1980/1982 French Open women's doubles champion  1980 Wimbledon women's doubles champion  1981 US Open women's doubles champion  1980/1984 French Open mixed-doubles champion  1982 Wimbledon mixed-doubles champion  1981/1982 US Open mixed-doubles champion 
 United Kingdom Ranked World No. 5 at the end of the year in 1951  1951 French Championships semifinalist 
 United States 1957 Ranked World No. 87 in 1983 
 United Kingdom 1971 Ranked World No. 55 in singles in 1999 
 United States 1964 Ranked World No. 68 in 1986 
 Australia 1963 Ranked World No. 20 in singles in 1987 and World No. 5 in doubles in 1988  1985 Wimbledon women's doubles champion  1991 Wimbledon mixed-doubles champion  1983/1990 US Open mixed-doubles champion 
 United States 1977 Ranked World No. 33 in singles in 1998 
 Spain 1987 Ranked World No. 90 in 2011 
 United Kingdom 1986 Ranked World No. 99 in singles in 2009 
 United States 1981 Ranked World No. 66 in singles in 2005 and World No. 40 in doubles in 2009 
 Germany Denmark 1908 1981 3 Ranked World No. 2 at year-end in 1936  1935/1936/1937 French Championships champion  1933 Wimbledon mixed doubles champion 
 Romania 1974 Ranked World No. 7 in singles in 1997 and World No. 16 in doubles in 1995 
 Croatia 1984 Ranked World No. 17 in 2004 
 Slovenia 1981 Ranked World No. 20 in singles in 2006 and World No. 3 in doubles in 2008  1999/2006/2010 French Open mixed doubles champion  2003 US Open mixed doubles champion  2011 Australian Open mixed doubles champion 
 Czech Republic 1978 Ranked World No. 87 in singles and World No. 63 in doubles in 2006 
 United States 1968 Ranked World No. 48 in singles in 1990 and World No. 33 in doubles in 1994 
 United Kingdom 1914 2005 Ranked World No. 2 at year-end in 1939  1935 French Championships women's doubles champion  1935/1936 Wimbledon women's doubles champion 
 Lithuania 1986 Ranked World No. 197 in 2009 
 United States 1912 1987 Ranked World No. 10 at year-end in 1934 and 1936  1936 U.S. Championships women's doubles champion 
 United States 1957 Ranked World No. 94 in singles in 1983 
 United States 1993 Ranked World No. 17 in singles in 2013 
 South Africa 1957 Ranked World No. 10 at year-end in 1980  1980 Wimbledon quarterfinalist 
 United States 1980 Ranked World No. 18 in singles in 2002 and World No. 67 in doubles in 2003 
 United Kingdom 1988 Ranked World No. 178 in 2009 
 Australia 1984 1 Ranked World No. 4 in singles in 2011 and World No. 1 in doubles in 2006  2011 US Open Champion  2006 French Open women's doubles champion  2005 US Open women's doubles champion  2005 Australian Open mixed-doubles champion  2008 Wimbledon mixed-doubles champion 
 Netherlands 1945 Ranked World No. 5 in 1977  1972/1979 French Open women's doubles champion  1972 Wimbledon women's doubles champion  1972/1977/1979 US Open women's doubles champion  1978/1981 Wimbledon mixed-doubles champion  1977/1978 US Open mixed-doubles champion 
 Sweden 1969 Ranked World No. 80 in singles in 1989 and World No. 45 in doubles in 1995 
 Czech Republic 1972 Ranked World No. 33 in singles in 1991 and World No. 14 in doubles in 1993 
 Australia 1971 Ranked World No. 64 in 1996  2000 Australian Open women's doubles champion  2001/2004 Wimbledon women's doubles champion  2001 US Open women's doubles champion  2000 Australian Open mixed-doubles champion  2001 US Open mixed-doubles champion 
 Slovakia 1972 Ranked World No. 31 in singles in 1996 and World No. 62 in doubles in 1995 
 Argentina 1976 Ranked World No. 9 in singles in 2004 and World No. 1 in doubles in 2002  2001/2002/2004/2005 French Open women's doubles champion  2002/2003/2004 US Open women's doubles champion  2004 Australian Open women's doubles champion 
 Spain 1988 Ranked World No. 22 in 2009 
 Mexico 1947 1968 French Open quarterfinalist 
 Slovakia 1980 Ranked World No. 37 in 2002 
 Japan 1975 Ranked World No. 8 in singles in 2004 and World No. 1 in doubles in 2000  2000 US Open women's doubles champion  2003 French Open women's doubles champion  2003 Wimbledon women's doubles champion  1999 US Open mixed-doubles champion 
 France 1959 Ranked World No. 52 in singles in 1984 and World No. 13 in doubles in 1988 
 Czech Republic 1965 Ranked World No. 4 in 1985  1990/1992 Australian Open women's doubles champion  1990 French Open women's doubles champion  1987/1989/1990/1996 Wimbledon women's doubles champion  1985/1993 US Open women's doubles champion  1991 French Open mixed-doubles champion  1994/1996/1997 Wimbledon mixed-doubles champion  1993 US Open mixed-doubles champion 
 Czechoslovakia 1931 1982 Ranked World No. 5 at the end of the year in 1962  1962 Wimbledon runner-up  1957 French Championships mixed-doubles champion 
 South Africa 1919 Ranked World No. 6 at the end of the year in 1947  1947/1949 French Championships mixed-doubles champion  1949 Wimbledon mixed-doubles champion 
 Sun Shengnan People's Republic of China 1987 Ranked World No. 50 in doubles in 2007 
 Sun Tiantian People's Republic of China 1981 Ranked World No. 77 in singles and World No. 16 in doubles in 2007  2008 Australian Open mixed-doubles champion 
 United States 1942 1 Ranked World No. 4 at the end of the year in 1962  1962 Wimbledon champion  1961/1962 Wimbledon women's doubles champion  1964 U.S Championships women's doubles champion 
 United States 1886 1975 3 1904 U.S. Championships champion  1905/1907 Wimbledon champion  1904 U.S. Championships women's doubles champion 
 Netherlands 1947 
 Sweden 1975 Ranked World No. 28 in singles in 1996 and World No. 28 in doubles in 2000 
 Czech Republic 1971 Ranked World No. 33 in singles in 1991 and World No. 75 in doubles in 1993 
 Ukraine 1994 Ranked World No. 200 in singles on 5 March 2012 
 South Africa 1971 Ranked World No. 28 in singles in 1996 and World No. 11 in doubles in 1998  1999 Australian Open mixed doubles champion  2000 French Open mixed doubles champion 
 Romania 1987 Ranked World No. 187 in singles in 2008 
 Hungary 1945 1975 French Open quarter-finalist 
 Hungary 1988 Ranked World No. 13 in singles in 2008 and World No. 22 in doubles in 2007 
 Japan 1987 Ranked World No. 128 in 2006 
 Croatia 1978 Ranked World No. 18 in singles in 2000 and World No. 54 in doubles in 2004 
 Netherlands 1984 Ranked World No. 129 in 2007 
 Thailand 1977 Ranked World No. 19 in singles in 2002 and World No. 15 in doubles in 2004 
 France 1965 Ranked World No. 20 in singles in 1984 and World No. 16 in doubles in 1986 
 South Africa 1903 1970 1927 French, 1929 Wimbledon quarterfinalist 
 Argentina 1968 Ranked World No. 29 in singles in 1988 and World No. 12 in doubles in 1998 
 Ukraine 1976 Ranked World No. 45 in singles in and World No. 9 in doubles in 1999 
 Georgia 1990 Ranked World No. 82 in 2011 
 France 1967 Ranked World No. 3 in singles in 2000 and World No. 3 in doubles in 2002 
 United States 1981 Ranked World No. 68 in 2003 
 Indonesia 1976 Ranked World No. 82 in singles in 1994 
 United States 1951 1977 French Open quarterfinalist 
 Australia 1937 Ranked World No. 7 at the end of the year in 1968  1968 Wimbledon runner-up  1964/1967/1969/1970 Australian Championships/Open women's doubles champion  1966 Wimbledon women's doubles champion  1966 French Championships women's doubles champion  1970/1971 US Open women's doubles champion 
 Hungary 1966 Ranked World No. 7 in 1984  1986 French Open women's doubles champion 
 Argentina 1972 Ranked World No. 70 in 1991 
 France 1972 Ranked World No. 9 in singles and World No. 8 in doubles in 2000 
 Canada 1988 Ranked World No. 112 in 2010 
 Australia 1967 Ranked World No. 53 in singles in 1986 and World No. 18 in doubles in 1990 
 United States 1964 Ranked World No. 27 in singles in 1983 
 Finland 1969 Ranked World No. 73 in 1992 
 France 1987 Ranked World No. 165 in 2010 
 Serbia 1982 Ranked World No. 199 in 2006 
 United States 1922 1 Ranked World No. 4 at the end of the year in 1950  1947 French Championships champion  1948 French Championships women's doubles champion  1947 Wimbledon women's doubles champion  1948 French Championships mixed doubles champion 
 Czechoslovakia 1954 1978 Australian Open women's doubles champion  1978 French Open mixed doubles champion 
 Croatia 1993 Ranked World No. 154 in 2010 
 Spain 1974 Ranked World No. 27 in singles in 2002 and World No. 66 in doubles in 2001 
 United Kingdom 1941 1 Ranked World No. 2 at the end of the year in 1959  1959 French Championships champion  1960 Australian Championships women's doubles champion 
 Ukraine 1989 Ranked World No. 126 in 2011 
 United States 1978 Ranked World No. 35 in singles and World No. 28 in doubles in 2007 
 United Kingdom Ranked World No. 10 at year-end in 1951  1951 Wimbledon quarterfinalist 
 United States 1950 1971 French Open quarter-finalist 
 Uzbekistan 1982 Ranked World No. 16 in singles and World No. 28 in doubles in 2002 
 Australia 1952 Ranked World No. 3 in singles in 1985  1977 US Open runner-up  1979 French Open runner-up  1980 Australian Open runner-up  1978 Wimbledon women's doubles champion  1979 French Open women's doubles champion  1979/1982 US Open women's doubles champion  1979/1982 French Open mixed-doubles champion  1980 US Open mixed-doubles champion  1983/1984 Australian Open mixed-doubles champion 
 Australia 1942 2 Ranked World No. 2 at the end of the year in 1963  1963/1965 French Championships champion  1964/1965/1967 Australian Championships women's doubles champion  1964/1965 French Championships women's doubles champion  1964 Wimbledon women's doubles champion  1961 U.S. Championships women's doubles champion  1961/1964 Wimbledon mixed doubles champion 
 1926 Wimbledon quarterfinalist 
 United States 1986 Ranked World No. 196 in singles in 2007 
 India 1983 Ranked World No. 122 in singles in 2005 and World No. 87 in doubles in 2007 
 Czech Republic 1978 Ranked World No. 18 in doubles in 2007 
 Romania 1985 Ranked World No. 157 in 2010 
 South Africa 1964 Ranked World No. 39 in singles in 1984 
 Czech Republic 1989 Ranked World No. 7 in singles in 2007 
 Ukraine 1983 Ranked World No. 32 in 2007 
 Italy 1905 1996 1933 Wimbledon quarterfinalist 
 United States 1991 Ranked World No. 89 in 2011 
 Czech Republic 1975 Ranked World No. 115 in singles in 2001 and World No. 135 in doubles in 2002 
 Peru 1963 Ranked World No. 66 in 1984 
 Switzerland 1978 Ranked World No. 76 in 2001 
 Venezuela 1974 Ranked World No. 26 in singles and World No. 15 in doubles in 2004 
 South Africa 1956 Ranked World No. 20 in 1983 
 Russia 1986 Ranked World No. 22 in singles and World No. 15 in doubles in 2009 
 Brazil 1971 Ranked World No. 76 in 1989 
 Italy 1982 Ranked World No. 103 in 2006 
 Argentina 1956 Ranked World No. 99 in singles in 1988 
 Belgium 1976 Ranked World No. 61 in singles in 1997 
 Italy 1983 Ranked World No. 12 in singles in 2013 and World No. 1 in doubles in 2012  Year-end World No. 1 in doubles in 2012  2012 French Open women's doubles champion  2012 US Open women's doubles champion  2013 Australian Open women's doubles champion  ITF World Champion in doubles, 2012 (with Sara Errani) 
 Netherlands 1970 Ranked World No. 111 in singles in 1994 and World No. 9 in doubles in 1998 
 Thailand 1983 Ranked World No. 172 in 2004 
 Switzerland 1990 Ranked World No. 63 in singles in 2010 
 Slovakia 1981 Ranked World No. 191 in singles in 2001 and World No. 180 in doubles in 2000 
 Germany 1953 Wimbledon quarterfinalist 
 Czechoslovakia 1944 1968 and 1970 French Open quarter-finalist 
 Czech Republic 1983 Ranked World No. 74 in singles in 2010 and World No. 40 in doubles in 2008 
 Kazakhstan 1984 Ranked World No. 64 in singles in 2009 and World No. 31 in doubles in 2007 
 Croatia 1984 Ranked World No. 191 in 2008 
 South Africa 1938 
 United Kingdom 1945 3 Ranked World No. 2 at the end of the year in 1968  1968 US Open champion  1977 Wimbledon champion  1972 Australian Open champion  1973 Australian Open women's doubles champion  1973 French Open women's doubles champion  1973 and 1975 US Open women's doubles champion 
 United States 1952 Ranked World No. 29 in singles in 1984 and World No. 31 in doubles in 1987 
 Wang Shi-ting Republic of China 1973 Ranked World No. 26 in singles in 1993 and World No. 39 in doubles in 1998 
 United Kingdom 1929 Ranked World No. 8 at the end of the year in 1956 
 Austria 1978 Ranked World No. 65 in singles in 2000 and World No. 22 in doubles in 2003 
 United States 1976 Ranked World No. 50 in singles in 2004 and World No. 55 in doubles in 2005 
 Belgium 1970 Ranked World No. 48 in singles and World No. 75 in doubles in 1989 
 United States 1968 Ranked World No. 72 in 1997 
 Australia 1978 Ranked World No. 131 in singles in 2002 
 United Kingdom 1992 Ranked World No. 49 in singles in 2012 
 United Kingdom 1864 1946 2 1884/1885 Wimbledon champion 
 United Kingdom 1898 Ranked World No. 2 at year-end in 1929  1929 U.S. Championships runner-up  1928/1929 Wimbledon women's doubles champion  1929 U.S. Championships women's doubles champion  1928 French Championships women's doubles champion 
 Canada 1976 Ranked World No. 107 in singles and World No. 95 in doubles in 2000 
 Germany 1980 Ranked World No. 36 in 2002 
 United States 1989 Ranked World No. 190 in 2011 
 Argentina 1948/1952 French Championships quarterfinalist 
 Luxembourg 1946 French Championships quarterfinalist 
 Australia 1982 Ranked World No. 147 in singles in 2003 and World No. 91 in doubles in 2002 
 United States 1939 1958 Wimbledon quarterfinalist 
 United States 1929 2002 Ranked World No. 4 at year-end in 1951  1951 Wimbledon quarterfinalist 
 United States 1961 Ranked World No. 19 in singles in 1986 and World No. 18 in doubles in 1988 
 United States 1963 Ranked World No. 15 in singles in 1987 and World No. 8 in doubles in 1990  1988 US Open women's doubles champion  1989 US Open mixed-doubles champion 
 United States 1960 Ranked World No. 28 in singles in 1987 and World No. 18 in doubles in 1990 
 United States 1968 Ranked World No. 41 in singles in 1991 and World No. 60 in doubles in 1997 
 United Kingdom 1907 1979 Ranked World No. 3 at year-end in 1931  1928 French Championships runner-up  1931 U.S. Championships runner-up  1928/1931 French Championships women's doubles champion  1931 U.S. Championships women's doubles champion  1928/1929 French Championships mixed-doubles champion  1927 U.S. Championships mixed-doubles champion 
 Australia 1953 Winner of 3 WTA Tour doubles titles and a runner-up in doubles at the 1978 Australian Open 
 Indonesia 1963 Won the doubles at WTA Tier V event at Pattaya in 1991 
 Belgium 1989 Ranked World No. 12 in singles and World No. 72 in doubles in 2010 
 Indonesia 1984 Ranked World No. 55 in singles in 2003 and World No. 15 in doubles in 2004 
 Brazil 1986 Ranked World No. 186 in 2007 
 Slovakia 1988 Ranked World No. 128 in 2009 
 Austria 1966 Ranked World No. 12 in singles in 1997 and World No. 29 in doubles in 1989  1996 Wimbledon quaraterfinalist  1996 US Open quarterfinalist 
 United States 1886 1974 4 1909/1910/1911/1919 U.S. Championships champion  1909/1910/1911/1915/1924/1928 U.S. Championships women's doubles champion  1924 Wimbledon women's doubles champion  1909/1910/1911/1915/1918/1920 U.S. Championships mixed doubles champion  1924 Olympic gold medalist in women's doubles and mixed doubles 
 United States 1981 17 Ranked World No. 1 at the end of the year in 2002, 2009 and 2013, and ranked World No. 1 in doubles in 2010  ITF World Champion: singles, 2002, 2009, 2012; doubles, 2009 (with Venus Williams)  2003/2005/2007/2009/2010 Australian Open champion  2002/2013 French Open champion  2002/2003/2009/2010/2012 Wimbledon champion  1999/2002/2008/2012/2013 US Open champion  2012 Olympic Singles Gold Medalist  2000/2008/2012 Olympic Doubles Gold Medalist  2001/2003/2009/2010 Australian Open women's doubles champion  1999/2010 French Open women's doubles champion  2000/2002/2008/2009/2012 Wimbledon women's doubles champion  1999/2009 US Open women's doubles champion  1998 Wimbledon mixed-doubles champion  1998 US Open mixed-doubles champion  Ranked World No. 1 for a total of 170 weeksSee also: Williams sisters 
 United States 1980 7 Ranked World No. 1 in singles in 2002 and World No. 1 in doubles in 2010  ITF World Champion in doubles, 2009 (with Serena Williams)  2000/2001/2005/2007/2008 Wimbledon champion  2000/2001 US Open champion  2000 Olympic Singles Gold Medalist  2000/2008/2012 Olympic Doubles Gold Medalist  2001/2003/2009/2010 Australian Open women's doubles champion  1999/2010 French Open women's doubles champion  2000/2002/2008/2009/2012 Wimbledon women's doubles champion  1999/2009 US Open women's doubles champion  1998 Australian Open mixed-doubles champion  1998 French Open mixed-doubles champion  Ranked World No. 1 for a total of 11 weeksSee also: Williams sisters 
 South Africa 1952 French Championships quarterfinalist 
 United States 1967 Ranked World No. 21 in singles in 1995 and World No. 45 in doubles in 1992 
 Netherlands 1967 Ranked World No. 64 in 1989 
 Germany 1984 Ranked World No. 119 in singles in 2010 and World No. 99 in doubles in 2011 
 United Kingdom 1968 Ranked World No. 77 in singles in 1994 and World No. 59 in doubles in 1996 
 Denmark 1990 Ranked World No. 1 in singles at the end of the year in 2010 and World No. 52 in doubles in 2014 
 Canada 1987 Ranked World No. 21 in 2009 
 Xie Yanze People's Republic of China 1984 Ranked World No. 184 in 2004 
 Belarus 1986 Ranked World No. 49 in singles and World No. 67 in doubles in 2006 
 Yan Zi People's Republic of China 1984 Ranked World No. 40 in singles in 2008 and World No. 4 in doubles in 2006  2006 Australian Open women's doubles champion  2006 Wimbledon women's doubles champion 
 Japan 1959 Ranked World No. 89 in 1984 
 Yi Jing-Qian People's Republic of China 1974 Ranked World No. 69 in 1996 
 Japan 1982 Ranked World No. 148 in 2009 
 Japan 1976 Ranked World No. 52 in singles in 1997 and World No. 51 in doubles in 1999 
 Yuan Meng China 1986 Ranked World No. 86 in 2008 
 Czech Republic 1986 Ranked World No. 39 in singles in 2010 and World No. 14 in doubles in 2011 
 Czech Republic 1985 Ranked World No. 78 in 2010 
 Czech Republic 1982 Ranked World No. 27 in 2006 
 Switzerland 1970 Ranked World No. 27 in 1991 
 Czech Republic 1978 Ranked World No. 195 in singles in 2003 and World No. 189 in doubles in 2000 
 Slovenia 1987 Ranked World No. 93 in 2009 
 Zhang Ling Hong Kong 1989 Ranked World No. 184 in 2011 
 Zhang Shuai People's Republic of China 1989 Ranked World No. 73 in singles in 2011 
 Zheng Jie People's Republic of China 1983 Ranked World No. 15 in singles in 2009 and World No. 3 in doubles in 2006  2006 Australian Open women's doubles champion  2006 Wimbledon women's doubles champion 
 Zhou Yi-Miao People's Republic of China 1991 Ranked World No. 194 in 2010 
 Germany 1973 Ranked World No. 73 in singles in 1993 and World No. 96 in doubles in 1994 
 Czech Republic 1970 Ranked World No. 22 in singles in 1991 and World No. 38 in doubles in 1993 
 Colombia 1979 Ranked World No. 16 in singles in 2005 
 Belarus 1971 Ranked World No. 5 in singles in 1989 and World No. 1 in doubles in 1991  1989/1992/1993/1994/1995/1997 French Open women's doubles champion  1991/1992/1995/1996 US Open women's doubles champion  1991/1992/1993/1994/1997 Wimbledon women's doubles champion  1993/1994/1997 Australian Open women's doubles champion  1990 & 1995 Australian Open mixed-doubles champion 
 Russia 1984 Ranked World No. 4 in singles in 2010 and World No. 9 in doubles in 2005  2006 US Open women's doubles champion  2012 Australian Open women's doubles champion  2004 US Open mixed-doubles champion  2006 Wimbledon mixed-doubles champion 

==References==

==See also==

*List of male tennis players
*List of tennis players
*List of sportspeople
*List of WTA number 1 ranked players
*List of Grand Slam Women's Singles champions

 
Female
Tennis players

[[Flugelhorn]]

The flugelhorn (also spelled fluegelhorn, flugel horn, or flgelhornfrom German, wing horn, ) is a brass instrument that resembles a trumpet but has a wider, conical bore. Some sources falsely consider it to be a member of the saxhorn family developed by Adolphe Sax (who also developed the saxophone). Other historians assert that it derives from the valve bugle designed by Michael Saurle (father) in Munich in 1832 (Royal Bavarian privilege for a "chromatic Flgelhorn" 1832), which predates Adolphe Sax's work. 

==Etymology==
The German word Flgel translates into English as wing or flank. The instrument was used on the battlefield to summon the flanks of an army. 

==Structure and variants==
The flugelhorn is built in the same B pitch as many trumpets and cornets. It usually has three piston valves and employs the same fingering system as other brass instruments, but four-piston valve and rotary valve variants also exist. It can thus be played without too much trouble by trumpet and cornet players, though some adaptation to their playing style may be needed. It is usually played with a more deeply conical mouthpiece than either trumpets or cornets (though not as conical as a horn mouthpiece).

Some modern flugelhorns feature a fourth valve that lowers the pitch a perfect fourth (similar to the fourth valve on some euphoniums, tubas, and piccolo trumpets, or the trigger on trombones). This adds a useful low range that, coupled with the flugelhorn's dark sound, extends the instrument's abilities. More often, however, players use the fourth valve in place of the first and third valve combination, which is somewhat sharp (compensated for on trumpets and cornets and some three-valve flugelhorns by a slide for the first or third valve).

A pair of bass flugelhorns in C, called fiscorns are played in the Catalan cobla bands which provide music for sardana dancers.

==Timbre==
 A rotary valve B flugelhorn
The tone is "fatter" and usually regarded as more "mellow" and "dark" than the trumpet or cornet. The sound of the flugelhorn has been described as halfway between a trumpet and a French horn, whereas the cornet's sound is halfway between a trumpet and a flugelhorn. Cecil Forsyth: Orchestration, p. 165. The flugelhorn is as agile as the cornet but more difficult to control in the high register (from approximately written G above the staff), where in general it "slots" or locks onto notes less easily. It is not generally used for aggressive or bright displays as trumpets and cornets often are, but tends more towards a softer and more reflective role.

==Use==
The flugelhorn appears mainly in jazz, brass band music, and popular music, though it appears occasionally in orchestral music. Famous orchestral works with flugelhorn include Igor Stravinsky's Threni, Ralph Vaughan Williams's Ninth Symphony, Danzon no. 2 by Arturo Marquez, and Michael Tippett's third symphony. The flugelhorn is sometimes substituted for the post horn in Mahler's Third Symphony. In HK Gruber's trumpet concerto Busking (2007) the soloist is directed to play a flugelhorn in the slow middle movement. The flugelhorn figured prominently in many of Burt Bacharach's 1960s pop song arrangements. It is featured in a solo role in Bert Kaempfert's 1962 recording of That Happy Feeling. Flugelhorns have occasionally been used as the alto or low soprano voice in a drum and bugle corps.

==Famous players==
Joe Bishop, as a member of the Woody Herman band in 1936, was one of the earliest jazz musicians to use the flugelhorn. Shorty Rogers and Kenny Baker began playing it in the early fifties, and Clark Terry used it in Duke Ellington's orchestra in the mid-1950s. Chet Baker recorded several albums on the instrument in the 1950s and 1960s. Miles Davis further popularized the instrument in jazz on the albums Miles Ahead and Sketches of Spain, (both arranged by Gil Evans) though he did not use it much on later projects. Other prominent jazz flugelhorn players include Freddie Hubbard, Tom Browne, Lee Morgan, Art Farmer, Roy Hargrove, Hugh Masekela, Feya Faku, Tony Guerrero, Jimmy Owens, Maynard Ferguson, Terumasa Hino, Woody Shaw, Guido Basso, Kenny Wheeler, Tom Harrell, Bill Coleman, Thad Jones, Arturo Sandoval, Lee Loughnane of the rock band Chicago, Mike Metheny, and Harry Beckett. Most jazz flugelhorn players use the instrument as an auxiliary to the trumpet, but in the 1970s Chuck Mangione gave up playing the trumpet and concentrated on the flugelhorn alone, notably on "Feels So Good". Mangione, in an interview during an Olympic Games telecast on ABC for which he wrote the theme "Give It All You Got", referred to the flugelhorn as "... the right baseball glove."

Pop flugelhorn players include Probyn Gregory (Brian Wilson Band), Rick Braun, Mic Gillette, Jeff Oster, and Zach Condon of Beirut. Another notable player is Scott Spillane of the American indie rock band Neutral Milk Hotel.

==Footnotes==

==References==
* Ralph T. Dudgeon, Franz X. Streitwieser: The Fluegelhorn. Edition Bochinsky, 2004, English/German, ISBN 3-932275-83-7
* "Flugelhorn", The New Grove Dictionary of Music and Musicians, second edition, edited by Stanley Sadie and John Tyrrell (London, 2001
* "Flugelhorn", The New Grove Dictionary of Jazz, second edition, edited by Barry Kernfeld (London, 2002)
* The Gazette, July 10, 2009, http://www.montrealgazette.com/entertainment/Montreal+International+Jazz+Festival+Beirut+conversation/1779539/story.html

==External links==

* An enthusiast's flugelhorn guide with many details of individual makes.
* An overview and brief history of the flugelhorn including a short sound clip.
* How to play a flugelhorn



[[Folk music]]

Folk music includes both traditional music and the genre that evolved from it during the 20th century folk revival. The term originated in the 19th century but is often applied to music that is older than that. Some types of folk music are also called world music.

Traditional folk music has been defined in several ways: as music transmitted by mouth, as music of the lower classes, and as music with unknown composers. It has been contrasted with commercial and classical styles. One meaning often given is that of old songs, with no known composers; another is music that has been transmitted and evolved by a process of oral transmission or performed by custom over a long period of time.

Starting in the mid-20th century a new form of popular folk music evolved from traditional folk music. This process and period is called the (second) folk revival and reached a zenith in the 1960s. This form of music is sometimes called contemporary folk music or folk revival music to distinguish it from earlier folk forms. Smaller similar revivals have occurred elsewhere in the world at other times, but the term folk music has typically not been applied to the new music created during those revivals. This type of folk music also includes fusion genres such as folk rock, folk metal, electric folk, and others. While contemporary folk music is a genre generally distinct from traditional folk music, in English it shares the same name, and it often shares the same performers and venues as traditional folk music. Even individual songs may be a blend of the two.

==Traditional folk music==

===Definitions===
A consistent definition of traditional folk music is elusive. The terms folk music, folk song, and folk dance are comparatively recent expressions. They are extensions of the term folklore, which was coined in 1846 by the English antiquarian William Thoms to describe "the traditions, customs, and superstitions of the uncultured classes." Percy Scholes, The Oxford Companion to Music, OUP 1977, article "Folk Song". The term is further derived from the German expression Volk, in the sense of "the people as a whole" as applied to popular and national music by Johann Gottfried Herder and the German Romantics over half a century earlier. A.L.Lloyd, Folk Song in England, Panther Arts, 1969, p. 13. Traditional folk music also includes most indigenous music.

However, despite the assembly of an enormous body of work over some two centuries, there is still no certain definition of what folk music (or folklore, or the folk) is. Richard Middleton, Studying Popular Music, Philadelphia: Open University Press (1990/2002). ISBN 0-335-15275-9, p. 127. Folk music may tend to have certain characteristics but it cannot clearly be differentiated in purely musical terms. One meaning often given is that of "old songs, with no known composers", Ronald D. Cohen Folk music: the basics (CRC Press, 2006), pp. 12. another is that of music that has been submitted to an evolutionary "process of oral transmission.... the fashioning and re-fashioning of the music by the community that give it its folk character." International Folk Music Council definition (1954/5), given in Lloyd (1969) and Scholes (1977). 

Such definitions depend upon "(cultural) processes rather than abstract musical types...", upon "continuity and oral transmission...seen as characterizing one side of a cultural dichotomy, the other side of which is found not only in the lower layers of feudal, capitalist and some oriental societies but also in 'primitive' societies and in parts of 'popular cultures'." Charles Seeger (1980), citing the approach of Redfield (1947) and Dundes (1965), quoted in Middleton (1990) p.127. One widely used definition is simply "Folk music is what the people sing". Donaldson, 2011 page 13 

For Scholes, as well as for Cecil Sharp and Bla Bartk, A. L. Lloyd, Folk Song in England, Panther Arts, 1969, pp. 145. there was a sense of the music of the country as distinct from that of the town. Folk music was already, "...seen as the authentic expression of a way of life now past or about to disappear (or in some cases, to be preserved or somehow revived)," Middleton, Richard 1990, p. 127. Studying Popular Music. Milton Keynes; Philadelphia: Open University Press. ISBN 0-335-15276-7 (cloth), ISBN 0-335-15275-9 (pbk) particularly in "a community uninfluenced by art music" and by commercial and printed song. Lloyd rejected this in favour of a simple distinction of economic class yet for him true folk music was, in Charles Seeger's words, "associated with a lower class" in culturally and socially stratified societies. In these terms folk music may be seen as part of a "schema comprising four musical types: 'primitive' or 'tribal'; 'elite' or 'art'; 'folk'; and 'popular'." Charles Seeger (1980) quoted in Middleton (1990) p. 127. 

Music in this genre is also often called traditional music. Although the term is usually only descriptive, in some cases people use it as the name of a genre. For example, the Grammy Award previously used "traditional music" for folk music that is not contemporary folk music.

====Characteristics====
From a historical perspective, traditional folk music had these characteristics: 

* It was transmitted through an oral tradition. Before the 20th century, ordinary farm workers and factory workers were usually illiterate. They acquired songs by memorizing them. Primarily, this was not mediated by books, recorded or transmitted media. Singers may extend their repertoire using broadsheets, song books or CDs, but these secondary enhancements are of the same character as the primary songs experienced in the flesh.

* The music was often related to national culture. It was culturally particular; from a particular region or culture. In the context of an immigrant group, folk music acquires an extra dimension for social cohesion. It is particularly conspicuous in immigrant societies, where Greek Australians, Somali Americans, Punjabi Canadians and others strive to emphasize their differences from the mainstream. They learn songs and dances that originate in the countries their grandparents came from.

* They commemorate historical and personal events. On certain days of the year, such as Easter, May Day and Christmas, particular songs celebrate the yearly cycle. Weddings, birthdays and funerals may also be noted with songs, dances and special costumes. Religious festivals often have a folk music component. Choral music at these events brings children and non-professional singers to participate in a public arena, giving an emotional bonding that is unrelated to the aesthetic qualities of the music.

* The songs have been performed, by custom, over a long period of time, usually several generations.

As a side-effect, the following characteristics are sometimes present:

* There is no copyright on the songs. Hundreds of folk songs from the 19th century have known authors but have continued in oral tradition to the point where they are considered traditional for purposes of music publishing. This has become much less frequent since the 1940s. Today, almost every folk song that is recorded is credited with an arranger.

* Fusion of cultures: In the same way that people can have a mixed background, with parents originating in different continents, so too music can be a blend of influences. A particular rhythmic pattern, or a characteristic instrument, is enough to give a traditional feel to music, even when it has been composed recently. It is easy to recognize the presence of a bagpipe or a tabla in a piece of music. The young are usually much less offended by the dilution or adaptation of songs this way. Equally an electric guitar can be added to an old song. The relevant factors may include instrumentation, tunings, voicings, phrasing, subject matter, and even production methods.

* Non-commercial.

====Terminology====
=====Tune=====
In folk music, a tune is a short instrumental piece, a melody, often with repeating sections, and usually played a number of times. A collection of tunes with structural similarities is known as a tune-family. The most common form for tunes in folk music is AABB, also known as binary form.

In some traditions, tunes may be strung together in medleys or "sets."

===Origins===
Indians always distinguished between classical and folk music, though in the past even classical Indian music used to rely on the unwritten transmission of repertoire.
Throughout most of human prehistory and history, listening to recorded music was not possible. Music was made by common people during both their work and leisure. The work of economic production was often manual and communal. Manual labor often included singing by the workers, which served several practical purposes. It reduced the boredom of repetitive tasks, it kept the rhythm during synchronized pushes and pulls, and it set the pace of many activities such as planting, weeding, reaping, threshing, weaving, and milling. In leisure time, singing and playing musical instruments were common forms of entertainment and history-tellingeven more common than today, when electrically enabled technologies and widespread literacy make other forms of entertainment and information-sharing competitive. 

Opinions differed on the origins of folk music. Some said it was art music that was changed and probably debased by oral transmissionothers said it reflects the character of the race that produced it. Traditionally, the cultural transmission of folk music is through learning by ear, although notation may also be used. The competition of individual and collective theories of composition set different demarcations and relations of folk music with the music of tribal societies on the one hand and of "art" and "court" music on the other. The traditional cultures that did not rely upon written music or had less social stratification could not be readily categorized. In the proliferation of popular music genres, some traditional folk music became also referred to "World music" or "Roots music".

The American conception of "folk composition" has often drawn on Afro-American music.
The English term "folklore", to describe traditional folk music and dance, entered the vocabulary of many continental European nations, each of which had its folk-song collectors and revivalists. The distinction between "authentic" folk and national and popular song in general has always been loose, particularly in America and Germany - for example popular songwriters such as Stephen Foster could be termed "folk" in America. A.L.Lloyd, Folk Song in England, Panther Arts, 1969 The International Folk Music Council definition allows that the term can also apply to music that, "...has originated with an individual composer and has subsequently been absorbed into the unwritten, living tradition of a community. But the term does not cover a song, dance, or tune that has been taken over ready-made and remains unchanged." Quoted by both Scholes (1977) and Lloyd (1969). 

The postWorld War II folk revival in America and in Britain started a new genre, contemporary folk music and brought an additional meaning to the term folk music. The popularity of "contemporary folk" recordings caused the appearance of the category "Folk" in the Grammy Awards of 1959: in 1970 the term was dropped in favor of "Best Ethnic or Traditional Recording (including Traditional Blues)", while 1987 brought a distinction between "Best Traditional Folk Recording" and "Best Contemporary Folk Recording". After that they had a "Traditional music" category that subsequently evolved into others. The term "folk", by the start of the 21st century, could cover singer song-writers, such as Donovan from Scotland and American Bob Dylan, who emerged in the 1960s and much more. This completed a process to where "folk music" no longer meant only traditional folk music. 

===Subject matter===
Armenian traditional musicians
Apart from instrumental music that forms a part of traditional folk music, especially dance music traditions, much traditional folk music is vocal music, since the instrument that makes such music is usually handy. As such, most traditional folk music has meaningful lyrics.

Narrative verse looms large in the traditional folk music of many cultures. This encompasses such forms as traditional epic poetry, much of which was meant originally for oral performance, sometimes accompanied by instruments. Many epic poems of various cultures were pieced together from shorter pieces of traditional narrative verse, which explains their episodic structure and often their in medias res plot developments. Other forms of traditional narrative verse relate the outcomes of battles and other tragedies or natural disasters.

Sometimes, as in the triumphant Song of Deborah found in the Biblical Book of Judges, these songs celebrate victory. Laments for lost battles and wars, and the lives lost in them, are equally prominent in many traditions; these laments keep alive the cause for which the battle was fought. The narratives of traditional songs often also remember folk heroes such as John Henry to Robin Hood. Some traditional song narratives recall supernatural events or mysterious deaths.

Hymns and other forms of religious music are often of traditional and unknown origin. Western musical notation was originally created to preserve the lines of Gregorian chant, which before its invention was taught as an oral tradition in monastic communities. Traditional songs such as Green grow the rushes, O present religious lore in a mnemonic form. In the Western world, Christmas carols and other traditional songs preserve religious lore in song form.

Work songs frequently feature call and response structures and are designed to enable the laborers who sing them to coordinate their efforts in accordance with the rhythms of the songs. They are frequently, but not invariably, composed. In the American armed forces, a lively tradition of jody calls ("Duckworth chants") are sung while soldiers are on the march. Professional sailors made use of a large body of sea shanties. Love poetry, often of a tragic or regretful nature, prominently figures in many folk traditions. Nursery rhymes and nonsense verse also are frequent subjects of traditional songs.

===Folk song transformations and variations===

Korean traditional musicians
Naxi traditional musicians
Music transmitted by word of mouth through a community, in time, develops many variants, because this kind of transmission cannot produce word-for-word and note-for-note accuracy. Indeed, many traditional singers are quite creative and deliberately modify the material they learn.

For example the words of "I'm a Man You Don't Meet Every Day" (Roud 975) are known from a broadside in the Bodleian Library. The date is almost certainly before 1900, and it seems to be Irish. In 1958 the song was recorded in Canada (My Name is Pat and I'm Proud of That). Scottish traveler Jeannie Robertson from Aberdeen, made the next recorded version in 1961. She has changed it to make reference to "Jock Stewart", one of her relatives, and there are no Irish references. In 1976 Scottish artist Archie Fisher deliberately altered the song to remove the reference to a dog being shot. In 1985 The Pogues took it full circle by restoring all the Irish references.

Because variants proliferate naturally, it is naive to believe that there is such a thing as the single "authentic" version of a ballad such as "Barbara Allen". Field researchers in traditional song (see below) have encountered countless versions of this ballad throughout the English-speaking world, and these versions often differ greatly from each other. None can reliably claim to be the original, and it is possible that the "original" version ceased to be sung centuries ago. Any version can lay an equal claim to authenticity, so long as it is truly from a traditional singing community and not the work of an outside editor.

Cecil Sharp had an influential idea about the process of folk variation: he felt that the competing variants of a traditional song would undergo a process akin to biological natural selection: only those new variants that were the most appealing to ordinary singers would be picked up by others and transmitted onward in time. Thus, over time we would expect each traditional song to become aesthetically ever more appealing  it would be collectively composed to perfection, as it were, by the community.

A literary interest in the popular ballad was not new; it dates back to Thomas Percy and William Wordsworth. English Elizabethan and Stuart composers had often evolved their music from folk themes, the classical suite was based upon stylised folk-dances and Joseph Haydn's use of folk melodies is noted. But the emergence of the term "folk" coincided with an "outburst of national feeling all over Europe" that was particularly strong at the edges of Europe, where national identity was most asserted. Nationalist composers emerged in Central Europe, Russia, Scandinavia, Spain and Britain: the music of Dvok, Smetana, Grieg, Rimsky-Korsakov, Brahms, Liszt, de Falla, Wagner, Sibelius, Vaughan Williams, Bartk and many others drew upon folk melodies.

===Regional forms===
The Steinegger brothers, traditional pipers of Grundlsee, Styria, 1880
While the loss of traditional folk music in the face of the rise of popular music is a worldwide phenomenon, it is not one occurring at a uniform rate throughout the world. While even many tribal cultures are losing traditional folk music and folk cultures, the process is most advanced "where industrialization and commercialisation of culture are most advanced". Alison Vardy, et al., About Traditional Music Page, Celtic Harp Sheet Music site. Accessed 16 February 2007. Yet in nations or regions where traditional folk music is a badge of cultural or national identity, the loss of traditional music can be slowed; this is held to be true, for instance in the case of Bangladesh, Hungary, India, Ireland, Scotland, Latvia, Turkey, Portugal, Brittany, and Galicia, Greece and Crete all of which retain their traditional music to some degree, in some such areas the decline of traditional music and loss of traditions has been reversed.

This is most obvious where tourist agencies brand some regions with the word "Celtic". Guide books and posters from Ireland, Scotland in Gaelic, English, Doric and Scots, Cornwall, Brittany and Nova Scotia refer to live music performances. Local government often sponsors and promotes performances during tourist seasons, and revives lost traditions.

===Early folk music, fieldwork and scholarship===
Much of what is known about pre-recording-era folk music comes to us from scholarly fieldwork and writings. Most documented activity regarding folk music from the era prior to electronic recording, distribution and broadcast of folk music consists of the work of scholars, collectors and proponents.

====19th-century Europe====
Starting in the 19th century, interested people  academics and amateur scholars  started to take note of what was being lost, and there grew various efforts aimed at preserving the music of the people. One prominent such effort was the collection by Francis James Child in the late 19th century of the texts of over three hundred ballads in the English and Scots traditions (called the Child Ballads) most of which predated the 16th century. 

Contemporaneously with Child came the Reverend Sabine Baring-Gould, and later and more significantly Cecil Sharp who worked in the early 20th century to preserve a great body of English rural traditional song, music and dance, under the aegis of what became and remains the English Folk Dance and Song Society (EFDSS). Sharp also worked in America, recording the traditional songs of the Appalachian Mountains in 19161918 in collaboration with Maud Karpeles and Olive Dame Campbell and is considered the first major scholar covering American folk music. Donaldson, 2011 p 20 

Campbell and Sharp are represented under other names by actors in the modern movie Songcatcher. Throughout the 1960s and early to mid-1970s, American scholar Bertrand Harris Bronson published an exhaustive, four-volume collection of the then-known variations of both the texts and tunes associated with what came to be known as the Child Canon. He also advanced some significant theories concerning the workings of oral-aural tradition.

Similar activity was also under way in other countries. One of the most extensive was perhaps the work done in Riga by Krisjanis Barons who between the years between 1894 and 1915 published six volumes including the texts of 217 996 Latvian folk songs; the Latvju dainas. In Norway the work of collectors such as Ludvig Mathias Lindeman was extensively used by Edvard Grieg in his Lyric Pieces for piano and in other works, which became immensely popular.

Around this time, composers of classical music developed a strong interest in traditional song collecting, and a number of outstanding composers carried out their own field work on traditional song. These included Percy Grainger and Ralph Vaughan Williams in England and Bla Bartk in Hungary. These composers, like many of their predecessors, both made arrangements of folk songs and incorporated traditional material into original classical compositions. The Latviju dainas are extensively used in the classical choral works of Andrejs Jurns, Jnis Cimze, and Emilis Melngailis.

====North America====
Locations in Southern and Central Appalachia visited by the British folklorist Cecil Sharp in 1916 (blue), 1917 (green), and 1918 (red). Sharp sought "old world" English and Scottish ballads passed down to the region's inhabitants from their British ancestors. He collected hundreds of such ballads, the most productive areas being the Blue Ridge Mountains of North Carolina and the Cumberland Mountains of Kentucky.

Earliest American scholars were with The American Folklore Society (AFS), which emerged in the late 1800s. Their studies expanded to include Native American music, but still treated folk music as a historical item preserved in isolated societies as well Donaldson, 2011, p 22-23 since it is a very popular type of music.
In North America, during the 1930s and 1940s, the Library of Congress worked through the offices of traditional music collectors Robert Winslow Gordon, Alan Lomax and others to capture as much North American field material as possible. Lomax was the first prominent scholar to study distinctly American folk music such as that of cowboys and southern blacks. His first major published work was in 1911, Cowboy Songs and Other Frontier Ballads. Donaldson, 2011, p 24-26 and was arguably the most prominent US folk music scholar of his time, notably during the beginnings of the folk music revival in the 1930s and early 1940s.

People who studied traditional song sometimes hoped that their work would restore traditional music to the people. For instance, Cecil Sharp campaigned, with some success, to have English traditional songs (in his own heavily edited and expurgated versions) to be taught to school children.

One strong theme amongst folk scholars in the early decades of the 20th century was regionalism. This tended to recognize the diversity of folk music (and related cultures) based on regions of the US rather than based on just its roots. Later, a dynamic of class and circumstances was added to this. Donaldson, 2011, p 32-37 

The most prominent regionalists were literary figures with a particular interest in folklore. Carl Sandburg often traveled the U.S. as a writer and a poet. He also collected songs in his travels and, in 1927, published them in a book American Songbag. "In his collections of folk songs, Sandburg added a class dynamic to popular understandings of American folk music. This was the final element of the foundation upon which the early folk music revivalists constructed their own view of Americanism. Sandburg's working class Americans joined with the ethnically racially and regionally diverse citizens that other scholars, public intellectuals, and folklorists celebrated their own definitions of the American folk, definitions that the folk revivalists used in constructing their own understanding of American folk music, and an overarching American identity". Donaldson, 2011 

Prior to the 1930s, larger scale themes and linkages between were mostly drawn by folk music scholars and collectors. The 1930s saw the beginnings of larger scale themes, commonalities, themes and linkages in folk music developing in the populace and practitioners as well, often related to the great depression. Donaldson, 2011, p 39-55 Regionalism and cultural pluralism grew as influences and themes. During this time folk music began to become enmeshed with political and social activism themes and movements. Two related developments were the U.S. Communist Party's interest in folk music as a way to reach and influence Americans, Donaldson, 2011, p 72-74 and politically active prominent folk musicians and scholars seeing communism as a possible better system, through the lens of the Great Depression. Donaldson, 2011, p 67-70 Woody Guthrie is a great example of a songwriter and artist with such an outlook.

Much of the folk music growth in the 1930s was in the area of live performance, particularly in folk festivals that began during the 1930s. Donaldson, 2011, p 44-52 President Franklin Roosevelt was a fan of folk music, hosted folk concerts at the White House and often patronized folk festivals. Donaldson, 2011, p 42-43 One prominent festival was Sarah Gertrude Knott's National Folk Festival. It moved to Washington D.C. in 1937 under the sponsorship of the Washington Post. It remained there, held at Constitution Hall through 1942. Donaldson, 2011, p 103-104 Folk festivals were activist, seen as forces for social good, integrating wartime perspectives into the process. The folk music movement, festivals, and the wartime effort were seen as forces for democracy, cultural pluralism, and the removal of culture and race-based barriers. Donaldson, 2011, p 105-107 

The American folk music revivalists of the 1930s approached folk music in different ways. "Traditionalists like Sarah Gertrude Knott and John Lomax viewed folk music as cultural traditions from a bygone era. Functionalist folklorists like Botkin and Alan Lomax recognized that, though rooted in the past, folk music remained culturally relevant for the communities that maintained the traditions. Left-wing revivalists like Charles Seeger and Lawrence Gellert interpreted folk music as a grass-roots cultural form that came from the people and was written for the people such that it could be used in 'people's' struggles for social and political rights. Despite the revivalists' various political views and different opinions regarding the nature of authentic folk music, they all shared an understanding of Americanism that grounded the nation's identity in cultural pluralism and political democracy" Donaldson, 2011, p 87 By the end of the 1930s they along with the musicians and others had turned American folk music into a social movement. 

Sometimes folk musicians became scholars and advocates themselves. For example, Jean Ritchie (born in 1922) was the youngest child of a large family from Viper, Kentucky that had preserved many of the old Appalachian traditional songs. Ritchie, living in a time when the Appalachians had opened up to outside influence, was university educated and ultimately moved to New York City, where she made a number of classic recordings of the family repertoire and published an important compilation of these songs. (See also Hedy West)

In January 2012, the American Folklife Center at the Library of Congress, with the Association for Cultural Equity, announced that they would release Lomax's vast archive of 1946 and later recording in digital form. Lomax spent the last 20 years of his life working on an interactive multimedia educational computer project he called the Global Jukebox, which included 5,000 hours of sound recordings, 400,000 feet of film, 3,000 videotapes, and 5,000 photographs. "The Premiere of the Global Jukebox". Radio interview with Don Fleming by John Hockenberry on PRI's The Takeaway. As of March 2012 this has been accomplished. Approximately 17,400 of Lomax's recordings from 1946 and later have been made available free online. 

This is material from Alan Lomaxs independent archive, begun in 1946, which has been digitized and offered by the Association for Cultural Equity. This is "distinct from the thousands of earlier recordings on acetate and aluminum discs he made from 1933 to 1942 under the auspices of the Library of Congress. This earlier collectionwhich includes the famous Jelly Roll Morton, Woody Guthrie, Lead Belly, and Muddy Waters sessions, as well as Lomaxs prodigious collections made in Haiti and Eastern Kentucky (1937)  is the provenance of the American Folklife Center" at the library of Congress

===National and regional forms===

====Africa====

The African lamellophone, thumb piano or mbira
Africa is a vast continent and its regions and nations have distinct musical traditions. The music of North Africa for the most part has a different history from Sub-Saharan African music traditions. GCSE Music  Edexcel Areas of Study, Coordination Group Publications, UK, 2006, page 34, quoting examination board syllabus. 

The music and dance forms of the African diaspora, including African American music and many Caribbean genres like soca, calypso and Zouk; and Latin American music genres like the samba, rumba, salsa; and other clave (rhythm)-based genres, were founded to varying degrees on the music of African slaves, which has in turn influenced African popular music.

====Asia====

Paban Das Baul, baul singer at Nine Lives concert, 2009.
Many Asian civilizations distinguish between art/court/classical styles and "folk" music, though cultures that do not depend greatly upon notation and have much anonymous art music must distinguish the two in different ways from those suggested by western scholars. For example the late Alam Lohar is a good example of a classical South Asian folk singer of great repute.

=====Folk music of China=====

Archaeological discoveries date Chinese folk music back 7000 years; it is largely based on the pentatonic scale.

Han traditional weddings and funerals usually include a form of oboe called a suona and apercussive ensembles called a chuigushou. Ensembles consisting of mouth organs (sheng), shawms (suona), flutes (dizi) and percussion instruments (especially yunluo gongs) are popular in northern villages; their music is descended from the imperial temple music of Beijing, Xi'an, Wutai shan and Tianjin. Xi'an drum music, consisting of wind and percussive instruments, is popular around Xi'an, and has received some commercial popularity outside of China. Another important instrument is the sheng, pipes, an ancient instrument that is ancestor of all Western free reed instruments, such as the accordion. Parades led by Western-type brass bands are common, often competing in volume with a shawm/chuigushou band.

In southern Fujian and Taiwan, Nanyin or Nanguan is a genre of traditional ballads. They are sung by a woman accompanied by a xiao and a pipa, as well as other traditional instruments. The music is generally sorrowful and typically deals with a love-stricken women. Further south, in Shantou, Hakka and Chaozhou, erxian and zheng ensembles are popular.Sizhu ensembles use flutes and bowed or plucked string instruments to make harmonious and melodious music that has become popular in the West among some listeners. These are popular in Nanjing and Hangzhou, as well as elsewhere along the southern Yangtze area. Sizhu has been secularized in cities but remains spiritual in rural areas.Jiangnan Sizhu (silk and bamboo music from Jiangnan) is a style of instrumental music, often played by amateur musicians in tea houses in Shanghai; it has become widely known outside of its place of origin. Guangdong Music or Cantonese Music is instrumental music from Guangzhou and surrounding areas. It is based on Yueju (Cantonese Opera) music, together with new compositions from the 1920s onwards. Many pieces have influences from jazz and Western music, using syncopation and triple time. This music tells stories, myths and legends. One of the most popular folk songs of China is Mo Li Hua ("Beautiful Jasmine").

=====Traditional folk music of Sri Lanka=====

The genre of Sri Lankan music is known as Oriental music.
The art, music and dances of Sri Lanka were derived from the elements of nature, and have been enjoyed and developed in the Buddhist environment. The music is of several types and uses only a few types of instruments. The folk songs and poems were used in social gatherings to work together. The Indian influenced classical music has grown to be unique. http://www.naadro.com/#home The traditional drama, music and songs are typically Sri Lankan.
The temple paintings and carvings used birds, elephants, wild animals, flowers and trees, and the Traditional 18 Dances display the dancing of birds and animals. For example:
*Mayura Wannama  The dance of the Peacock
*Hanuma Wannama  The dance of the Monkey
*Gajaga Wannama  The dance of the elephant

Musical types include:

*Local drama music includes Kolam, Nadagam and Noorthy types. Kolam music is based on low country tunes and it is not a developed form of music. It is limited to approximately 3-4 notes and is used by the ordinary people for pleasure and entertainment.
*Nadagam music is a more developed form of drama influenced from South Indian street drama which was introduced by some south Indian Artists. Phillippu Singho from Negombo in 1824 Performed Harishchandra Nadagama in Hnguranketha which was originally written in Telingu language. Later Maname, Sanda kinduru and few others were introduced. Don Bastian of Dehiwala introduced Noorthy firstly by looking at Indian dramas and then John De Silva developed it as did Ramayanaya in 1886.
*Sinhala light music is currently the most popular type of music in Sri Lanka and enriched with the influence of folk music, kolam music, nadagam music, noorthy music, film music, classical music, western music and others. Some artists visited India to learn music and later started introducing light music. Ananda Samarakone was the pioneer of this and also composed the national anthem.
Maestro Premasiri Khemadasa playing folk composition and Dinesh Subasinghe performing Sri Lankan Ravanahatha 

The classical Sinhalese Orchestra consists of five categories of instruments, but among the percussion instruments, the drum is essential for dance. 
The vibrant beat of the rhythm of the drums form the basic of the dance. The dancers feet bounce off the floor and they leap and swirl in patterns that reflect the complex rhythms of the drum beat. This drum beat may seem simple on the first hearing but it takes a long time to master the intricate rhythms and variations, which the drummer sometimes can bring to a crescendo of intensity. There are six common types of drums falling within 3 styles (one faced. two faced, and flat faced):

*The typical Sinhala Dance is identified as the Kandyan dance and the Gatabera drum is indispensable to this dance.
*Yak-bera is the demon drum or the, drum used in low country dance in which the dancers wear masks and perform devil dancing, which has become a highly developed form of art.
*The Dawula is a barrel shaped drum, and it was used as a companion drum in the past, to keep strict time with the beat.
*The Thammattama is flat, two faced drum. The drummer strikes the drum on the two surfaces on top with sticks, unlike the others where you drum on the sides. This is a companion drum to the afore mentioned Dawula.
*A small double headed hand drum, used to accompany songs. It is mostly heard in the poetry dances (vannam).
*The Rabana is a flat faced circular drum and comes in several sizes. The large Rabana has to be placed on the floor like a circular short-legged table and several people (especially the womenfolk) can sit around it and beat on it with both hands. This is used in festivals such as the Sinhalese New Year and ceremonies such as weddings. The resounding beat of the Rabana symbolizes the joyous moods of the occasion. The small Rabana is a form of mobile drum beat since the player carries it wherever he goes.

Other instruments include:

*The "Thalampata" - 2 small cymbals joined together by a string.
*The wind section, is dominated by an instrument akin to the clarinet. This is not normally used for the dances. This is important to note because the Sinhalese dance is not set to music as the western world knows it; rhythm is king.
*The flutes of metal such as silver & brass produce shrill music to accompany Kandyan Dances, while the plaintive strains of music of the reed flute may pierce the air in devil-dancing. The conch-shell (Hakgediya) is another form of a natural instrument, and the player blows it to announce the opening of ceremonies of grandeur.
*The Ravanahatha (ravanhatta, rawanhattha, ravanastron or ravana hasta veena) is a bowed fiddle popular in Western India. It is believed to have originated among the Hela civilisation of Sri Lanka in the time of King Ravana. The bowl is made of cut coconut shell, the mouth of which is covered with goat hide. A dandi, made of bamboo, is attached to this shell. The principal strings are two: one of steel and the other of a set of horsehair. The long bow has jingle bells 

====Australia====

Folk song traditions were taken to Australia by early settlers from England, Scotland and Ireland and gained particular foothold in the rural outback. The rhyming songs, poems and tales written in the form of bush ballads often relate to the itinerant and rebellious spirit of Australia in The Bush, and the authors and performers are often referred to as bush bards. Kerry O'Brien December 10, 2003 7:30 Report, abc.net.au The 19th century was the golden age of bush ballads. Several collectors have catalogued the songs including John Meredith whose recording in the 1950s became the basis of the collection in the National Library of Australia. 

The songs tell personal stories of life in the wide open country of Australia. Typical subjects include mining, raising and droving cattle, sheep shearing, wanderings, war stories, the 1891 Australian shearers' strike, class conflicts between the landless working class and the squatters (landowners), and outlaws such as Ned Kelly, as well as love interests and more modern fare such as trucking. G. Smith, Singing Australian: A History of Folk and Country Music (Pluto Press Australia, 2005), p. 2. The most famous bush ballad is
Waltzing Matilda, which has been called "the unofficial national anthem of Australia." Who'll come a waltzing Matilda with me?", The National Library of Australia, retrieved 14 March 2008. 

Indigenous Australian music includes the music of Australian Aborigines and Torres Strait Islanders, who are collectively called Indigenous Australians; it incorporates a variety of distinctive traditional music styles practiced by Indigenous Australian peoples, as well as a range of contemporary musical styles of and fusion with European traditions as interpreted and performed by indigenous Australian artists. Music has formed an integral part of the social, cultural and ceremonial observances of these peoples, down through the millennia of their individual and collective histories to the present day. The traditional forms include many aspects of performance and musical instrumentation unique to particular regions or Indigenous Australian groups. Equal elements of musical tradition are common through much of the Australian continent, and even beyond. The culture of the Torres Strait Islanders is related to that of adjacent parts of New Guinea and so their music is also related. Music is a vital part of Indigenous Australians' cultural maintenance. Wilurarra Creative (2010). Music 

====Europe====

Scottish traditional musicians in Edinburgh

=====Celtic traditional music=====

Celtic music is a term used by artists, record companies, music stores and music magazines to describe a broad grouping of musical genres that evolved out of the folk musical traditions of the Celtic peoples. These traditions include Irish, Scottish, Manx, Cornish, Welsh, Breton traditions. Asturian and galician music is often included, though there is no significant research showing that this has any close musical relationship. Brittany's Folk revival began in the 1950s with the "bagado" and the "kan-ha-diskan" before growing to world fame through Alan Stivell's work since the mid-1960s. 

In Ireland, The Clancy Brothers and Tommy Makem (although its members were all Irish-born, the group became famous while based in New York's Greenwich Village), The Dubliners, Clannad, Planxty, The Chieftains, The Pogues, The Corrs, The Irish Rovers, and a variety of other folk bands have done much over the past few decades to revitalise and re-popularise Irish traditional music. These bands were rooted, to a greater or lesser extent, in a tradition of Irish music and benefited from the efforts of artists such as Seamus Ennis and Peter Kennedy. 

In Scotland, The Corries, Silly Wizard, Capercaillie, Runrig, Jackie Leven, Julie Fowlis, Karine Polwart, Alasdair Roberts, Dick Gaughan, Wolfstone, Boys of the Lough, and The Silencers have keep Scottish folk vibrant and fresh by mixing traditional Scottsh and Gaelic folks songs with more contemporary genres. These artists have also been commercially successful in continental Europe and North America.

=====Central and Eastern Europe=====

During the Communist era national folk dancing in the Eastern Block was actively promoted by the state. Dance troupes from Russia and Poland toured non-communist Europe from about 1937 to 1990. The Red Army Choir recorded many albums. Eastern Europe is also the origin of the Jewish Klezmer tradition.

The polka is a central European dance and also a genre of dance music familiar throughout Europe and the Americas. It originated in the middle of the 19th century in Bohemia. Polka is still a popular genre of folk music in many European countries and is performed by folk artists in Poland, Latvia, Lithuania, Czech Republic, Netherlands, Croatia, Slovenia, Germany, Hungary, Austria, Switzerland, Italy, Ukraine, Belarus, Russia and Slovakia. Local varieties of this dance are also found in the Nordic countries, United Kingdom, Republic of Ireland, Latin America (especially Mexico), and in the United States.

German Volkslieder perpetuated by Liederhandschriften manuscripts like Carmina Burana date back to medieval Minnesang and Meistersinger traditions. Those folk songs revived in the late 18th century period of German Romanticism, first promoted by Johann Gottfried Herder and other advocates of the Enlightenment, later compiled by Achim von Arnim and Clemens Brentano (Des Knaben Wunderhorn) as well as by Ludwig Uhland.

The Volksmusik and folk dances genre, especially in the Alpine regions of Bavaria, Austria, Switzerland (Kuhreihen) and South Tyrol, up to today has clinged on rustic communities against the backdrop of industrialisationLow German shanties or the Wienerlied (Schrammelmusik) being notable exceptions. Slovene folk music in Upper Carniola and Styria also originated from the Alpine traditions. Traditional Volksmusik is not to be confused with commercial Volkstmliche Musik variations, strongly related to German Schlager music.

The Hungarian group Muzsiks played numerous American tours and participated in the Hollywood movie The English Patient while the singer Mrta Sebestyn worked with the band Deep Forest. The Hungarian tnchz movement, started in the 1970s, involves strong cooperation between musicology experts and enthusiastic amateurs. However, traditional Hungarian folk music and folk culture barely survived in some rural areas of Hungary, and it has also begun to disappear among the ethnic Hungarians in Transylvania. The tnchz movement revived broader folk traditions of music, dance, and costume together and created a new kind of music club. The movement spread to ethnic Hungarian communities elsewhere in the world.

=====Balkan music=====

Tanec, Republic of Macedonia
The Balkan folk music was influenced by the mingling of Balkan ethnic groups in the period of Ottoman Empire. It comprises the music of Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Greece, Montenegro, Serbia, Romania, Republic of Macedonia, Albania, Turkey, some of the historical states of Yugoslavia or the State Union of Serbia and Montenegro and geographical regions such as Thrace. Some music is characterised by complex rhythm.

An important part of the whole Balkan folk music is the music of the local Romani ethnic minority. A female choir from Bulgarian State Radio recorded Le Mystre des Voix Bulgares.

=====Nordic folk music=====

Nordic folk music includes a number of traditions in Northern European, especially Scandinavian, countries. The Nordic countries are generally taken to include Iceland, Norway, Finland, Sweden and Denmark. Sometimes it is taken to include Greenland and historically the Baltic countries of Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania.

The many regions of the Nordic countries share certain traditions, many of which have diverged significantly. It is possible to group together the Baltic states (or, sometimes, only Estonia) and parts of northwest Russia as sharing cultural similarities, contrasted with Norway, Sweden, Denmark and the Atlantic islands of, Iceland and the Faroe Islands. Greenland's Inuit culture has its own musical traditions, influenced by Scandinavian culture. Finland shares many cultural similarities with both the Baltic nations and the Scandinavian nations. The Saami of Sweden, Norway, Finland and Russia have their own unique culture, with ties to the neighboring cultures.

Swedish folk music is a genre of music based largely on folkloric collection work that began in the early 19th century in Sweden. Kaminsky, David (2005) pages 3341. "Hidden Traditions: Conceptualizing Swedish Folk Music in the Twenty-First Century." Ph.D. Dissertation, Harvard University. The primary instrument of Swedish folk music is the fiddle. Another common instrument, unique to Swedish traditions, is the nyckelharpa. Most Swedish instrumental folk music is dance music; the signature music and dance form within Swedish folk music is the polska. Vocal and instrumental traditions in Sweden have tended to share tunes historically, though they have been performed separately. Jersild,Margareta (1976) pages 5366. "Om frhllandet mellan vokalt och instrumentalt i svensk folkmusik. Svensk tidskrift fr musikforskning 58(2): 53-66. 
 Beginning with the folk music revival of the 1970s, vocalists and instrumentalists have also begun to perform together in folk music ensembles.

====Latin and South America====

Andean music comes from the general area inhabited by Quechuas, Aymaras and other peoples that roughly in the area of the Inca Empire prior to European contact. It includes folklore music of parts of Argentina, Bolivia, Ecuador, Chile, Colombia, Peru and Venezuela. Andean music is popular to different degrees across Latin America, having its core public in rural areas and among indigenous populations. The Nueva Cancin movement of the 1970s revived the genre across Latin America and bought it to places where it was unknown or forgotten.

Nueva cancin (Spanish for 'new song') is a movement and genre within Latin American and Iberian music of folk music, folk-inspired music and socially committed music. It some respects its development and role is similar to the second folk music revival. This includes evolution of this new genre from traditional folk music, essentially contemporary folk music except that that English genre term is not commonly applied to it. Nueva cancion is recognized as having played a powerful role in the social upheavals in Portugal, Spain and Latin America during the 1970s and 1980s.

Nueva cancion first surfaced during the 1960s as "The Chilean New Song" in Chile. The musical style emerged shortly afterwards in Spain and other areas of Latin America where it came to be known under similar names. Nueva cancin renewed traditional Latin American folk music, and was soon associated with revolutionary movements, the Latin American New Left, Liberation Theology, hippie and human rights movements due to political lyrics. It would gain great popularity throughout Latin America, and is regarded as a precursor to Rock en espaol.

Cueca is a family of musical styles and associated dances from Chile, Bolivia, Peru, and Argentina.

Trova and Son are styles of traditional Cuban music originating in the province of Oriente that includes influences from Spanish song and dance such as Bolero and contradanza as well as Afro-Cuban rhythm and percussion elements.

Moda de viola is the name designed to Brazilian folk music. Is often performed with a 6-string nylon acoustic guitar, but the most traditional instrument is the viola caipira. The songs basically detailed the hardness of life of those who work in the country. The themes are usually associated with the land, animals, folklore, impossible love and separation. Although there are some upbeat songs, most of them are nostalgic and melancholic.

====North America====
=====Canada=====
French-Canadian lumberjacks playing the fiddle, with sticks for percussion, in a lumber camp in 1943.

Canada's traditional folk music is particularly diverse. Even prior to liberalizing its immigration laws in the 1960s, Canada was ethnically diverse with dozens of different Indigenous and European groups present. In terms of music, academics do not speak of a Canadian tradition, but rather ethnic traditions (Acadian music, Irish-Canadian music, Blackfoot music, Innu music, Inuit music, Mtis fiddle, etc.) and later in Eastern Canada regional traditions (Newfoundland music, Cape Breton fiddling, Quebecois music, etc.)

"Knowledge of the history of Canada", wrote Isabelle Mills in 1974, "is essential in understanding the mosaic of Canadian folk song. Part of this mosaic is supplied by the folk songs of Canada brought by European and Anglo-Saxon settlers to the new land." Mills, Isabelle (1974). http://cjtm.icaap.org/content/2/v2art5.html The Heart of the Folk Song, Canadian Journal for Traditional Music Vol. 2 She describes how the French colony at Qubec brought French immigrants, followed before long by waves of immigrants from Great Britain, Germany, and other European countries, all bringing music from their homelands, some of which survives into the present day. Ethnographer and folklorist Marius Barbeau estimated that well over ten thousand French folk songs and their variants had been collected in Canada. Many of the older ones had by then died out in France.

Music as professionalized paid entertainment grew relatively slowly in Canada, especially remote rural areas, through the 19th and early 20th centuries. While in urban music clubs of the dance hall/vaudville variety became popular, followed by jazz, rural Canada remained mostly a land of traditional music. Yet when American radio networks began broadcasting into Canada in the 1920s and 1930s, the audience for Canadian traditional music progressively declined in favour of American Nashville-style country music and urban styles like jazz. The Americanization of Canadian music led the Canadian Radio League to lobby for a national public broadcaster in the 1930s, eventually leading to the creation of the Canadian Broadcasting Corporation (CBC) in 1936. The CBC promoted Canadian music, including traditional music, on its radio and later television services, but the mid-century craze for all things "modern" led to the decline of folk music relative to rock and pop. Canada was however influenced by the folk music revival of the 1960s.

=====United States=====

American traditional music is also called roots music. Roots music is a broad category of music including bluegrass, country music, gospel, old time music, jug bands, Appalachian folk, blues, Cajun and Native American music. The music is considered American either because it is native to the United States or because it developed there, out of foreign origins, to such a degree that it struck musicologists as something distinctly new. It is considered "roots music" because it served as the basis of music later developed in the United States, including rock and roll, contemporary folk music, rhythm and blues, and jazz. Some of these genres are considered to be traditional folk music.

*Cajun music, an emblematic music of Louisiana, is rooted in the ballads of the French-speaking Acadians of Canada. Cajun music is often mentioned in tandem with the Creole-based, Cajun-influenced zydeco form, both of Acadiana origin. These French Louisiana sounds have influenced American popular music for many decades, especially country music, and have influenced pop culture through mass media, such as television commercials.

*Appalachian music is the traditional music of the region of Appalachia in the Eastern United States. It is derived from various European and African influences, including English ballads, Irish and Scottish traditional music (especially fiddle music), hymns, and African-American blues. First recorded in the 1920s, Appalachian musicians were a key influence on the early development of Old-time music, country music, and bluegrass, and were an important part of the American folk music revival. Instruments typically used to perform Appalachian music include the banjo, American fiddle, fretted dulcimer, and guitar. Ted Olson, "Music  Introduction". Encyclopedia of Appalachia (Knoxville, Tenn.: University of Tennessee Press, 2006), pp. 11091120. Early recorded Appalachian musicians include Fiddlin' John Carson, Henry Whitter, Bascom Lamar Lunsford, the Carter Family, Clarence Ashley, Frank Proffitt, and Dock Boggs, all of whom were initially recorded in the 1920s and 1930s. Several Appalachian musicians obtained renown during the folk revival of the 1950s and 1960s, including Jean Ritchie, Roscoe Holcomb, Ola Belle Reed, Lily May Ledford, and Doc Watson. Country and bluegrass artists such as Loretta Lynn, Roy Acuff, Dolly Parton, Earl Scruggs, Chet Atkins, and Don Reno were heavily influenced by traditional Appalachian music. Artists such as Bob Dylan, Jerry Garcia, and Bruce Springsteen have performed Appalachian songs or rewritten versions of Appalachian songs.

*The Carter Family was a traditional American folk music group that recorded between 1927 and 1956. Their music had a profound impact on bluegrass, country, Southern Gospel, pop and rock musicians. They were the first vocal group to become country music stars; a beginning of the divergence of country music from traditional folk music. Their recordings of such songs as "Wabash Cannonball" (1932), "Will the Circle Be Unbroken" (1935), "Wildwood Flower" (1928), and "Keep On the Sunny Side" (1928) made them country standards. 

*Oklahoma and southern US plains Before recorded history American Indians in this area used songs and instrumentation; music and dance remain the core of ceremonial and social activities. "Stomp dance" remains at its core, a "call and response" form; instrumentation is provided by rattles or shackles worn on the legs of women. "Other southeastern nations have their own complexes of sacred and social songs, including those for animal dances and friendship dances, and songs that accompany stickball games. Central to the music of the southern Plains Indians is the drum, which has been called the heartbeat of Plains Indian music. Most of that genre can be traced back to activities of hunting and warfare, upon which plains culture was based." The drum is central to the music of the southern plains Indians. During the reservation period, they used music to relieve boredom. Neighbors gathered, exchanged and created songs and dances; this is a part of the roots of the modern inter-tribal powwow. Another common instrument is the courting flute. African American folk music in the area has roots in slavery and emancipation. "Sacred music, both a capella and instrumentally accompanied, is at the heart of the tradition. Early spirituals framed Christian beliefs within native practices and were heavily influenced by the music and rhythms of Africa." Spirituals are prominent, and often use a call and response pattern. "Gospel developed after the Civil War (186165). It relied on biblical text for much of its direction, and the use of metaphors and imagery was common. Gospel is a "joyful noise," sometimes accompanied by instrumentation and almost always punctuated by hand clapping, toe tapping, and body movement." "Shape-note or sacred harp singing developed in the early 19th century as a way for itinerant singing instructors to teach church songs in rural communities. They taught using song books in which musical notations of tones were represented by geometric shapes that were designed to associate a shape with its pitch. Sacred harp singing became popular in many Oklahoma rural communities, regardless of ethnicity." Later the blues tradition developed, with roots in and parallels to sacred music. Then jazz developed, born from a blend of "blend of ragtime, gospel, and blues" "Anglo-Scots-Irish music traditions gained a place in Oklahoma after the Land Run of 1889. Because of its size and portability, the fiddle was the core of early Oklahoma Anglo music, but other instruments such as the guitar, mandolin, banjo, and steel guitar were added later. Various Oklahoma music traditions trace their roots to the British Isles, including cowboy ballads, western swing, and contemporary country and western." "Mexican immigrants began to reach Oklahoma in the 1870s, bringing beautiful canciones and corridos love songs, waltzes, and ballads along with them. Like American Indian communities, each rite of passage in Hispanic communities is accompanied by traditional music. The acoustic guitar, string bass, and violin provide the basic instrumentation for Mexican music, with maracas, flute, horns, or sometimes accordion filling out the sound." Other Europeans (such as Bohemians and Germans) settled in the late 19th century. Their social activities centered on community halls, "where local musicians played polkas and waltzes on the accordion, piano, and brass instruments." Later Asians contributed to the musical mix. "Ancient music and dance traditions from the temples and courts of China, India, and Indonesia are preserved in Asian communities throughout the state, and popular song genres are continually layered on to these classical music forms" 

==Folk music revivals==

"Folk music revival" refers to either a period of renewed interest in traditional folk music, or to an event or period which transforms it; the latter usually includes a social activism component. A prominent example of the former is the British folk revival of approximately 18901920. The most prominent and influential example of the latter (to the extent that it is usually called "the folk music revival") is the folk revival of the mid 20th century, centered in the English-speaking world which gave birth to contemporary folk music. See the "Contemporary folk music" section for a description of this revival.

One earlier revival influenced western classical music. Such composers as Percy Grainger, Ralph Vaughan Williams and Bla Bartk, made field recordings or transcriptions of folk singers and musicians.

In Spain, Isaac Albniz (18601909) produced piano works reflect his Spanish heritage, including the Suite Iberia (19061909). Enrique Granados (18671918) composed zarzuela, Spanish light opera, and Danzas Espaolas - Spanish Dances. Manuel de Falla (18761946) became interested in the cante jondo of Andalusian flamenco, the influence of which can be strongly felt in many of his works, which include Nights in the Gardens of Spain and Siete canciones populares espaolas ("Seven Spanish Folksongs", for voice and piano). Composers such as Fernando Sor and Francisco Tarrega established the guitar as Spain's national instrument. Modern Spanish folk artists abound (Mil i Maria, Russian Red, et al.) modernizing while respecting the traditions of their forebears.

Flamenco grew in popularity through the 20th century, as did northern styles such as the Celtic music of Galicia. French classical composers, from Bizet to Ravel, also drew upon Spanish themes, and distinctive Spanish genres became universally recognized.

Folk music revivals or roots revivals also encompass a range of phenomena around the world where there is a renewed interest in traditional music. This is often by the young, often in the traditional music of their own country, and often included new incorporation of social awareness, causes, and evolutions of new music in the same style. Nueva cancin, a similar evolution of a new form of socially committed music occurred in several Spanish speaking countries.

===First British folk revival===
The "first" British folk revival was a roots revival which occurred approximately 18901920 and was marked by heightened interest in traditional music and its preservation. It arose from earlier developments, perhaps combined with changes in the nature of British identity, led to a much more intensive and academic attempt to record what was seen as a vanishing tradition, and is now usually referred to as the first English or British folk revival.

==Contemporary folk music==

Starting in the mid-20th century a new form of popular folk music evolved from traditional folk music. This process and period is called the (second) folk revival and reached a zenith in the 1960s. The most common name for this new form of music is also "folk music", but is often called "contemporary folk music" or "folk revival music" to make the distinction. This type of folk music also includes fusion genres such as folk rock, electric folk, and others. While contemporary folk music is a genre generally distinct from traditional folk music, it often shares the same English name, performers and venues as traditional folk music; even individual songs may be a blend of the two.

Definitions of "contemporary folk music" are generally vague and variable. Here it is taken to mean all music that is called folk that is not traditional music, a set of genres that began with and then evolved from the folk revival of the mid-20th century. According to Hugh Blumenfeld, for the American folk scene, in general it is:

*"Anglo-American, embracing acoustic and/or tradition-based music from the U.K. and the United States.
* Mainly European in its musical origins and linguistically predominantly English-based.
* The few exceptions to this model are derived mainly from prevailing political/historical conditions in the Anglo-American world and the demographics of folk fans: Celtic music, blues, some Central and South American music, Native American music, and Klezmer." This is the common use of the term "contemporary folk music", but is not the only case of evolution of new forms from traditional ones. Nueva cancin, a similar evolution of a new form of socially committed music, occurred in several Spanish-speaking countries, for example.

Contemporary country music descends ultimately from a rural American folk tradition but has evolved differently. Bluegrass music is a professional development of American old time music, intermixed with blues and jazz.

===Folk revival of the mid-20th century in the English-speaking countries===
Woody Guthrie
Pete Seeger

While the Romantic nationalism of the folk revival had its greatest influence on art-music, the "second folk revival" of the later 20th century brought a new genre of popular music with artists marketed through concerts, recordings and broadcasting. This is the genre that remains as "contemporary folk music" even when traditional music is considered to be a separate genre. One of the earliest figures in this revival was Woody Guthrie, Traditional songs  Folk song lyrics of the world who sang traditional songs in the 1930s and 1940s as well as composing his own. Among Guthrie's friends and followers as a collector, performer, and composer was Pete Seeger.

In the 1930s, Jimmie Rodgers, in the 1940s Burl Ives, in the early 1950s Seeger's group The Weavers and Harry Belafonte, and in the late 1950s The Kingston Trio as well as other professional, commercial groups became popular. In 19631964, the ABC television network aired the Hootenanny television series devoted to this brand of folk music and also published the associated magazine ABC-TV Hootenanny. Starting in 1950, the Sing Out!, Broadside, and The Little Sandy Review magazines helped spread both traditional and composed songs, as did folk-revival-oriented record companies.

In the United Kingdom, the folk revival fostered young artists like The Watersons, Martin Carthy and Roy Bailey and a generation of singer-songwriters such as Bert Jansch, Ralph McTell, Donovan and Roy Harper; all seven achieved initial prominence in the 1960s. Bob Dylan, Paul Simon and Tom Paxton visited Britain for some time in the early 1960s, the first two especially making later use of the traditional English material they heard.

In 1950, prominent American folklorist and collector of traditional songs Alan Lomax came to Britain and met A. L. 'Bert' Lloyd and Ewan MacColl, a meeting credited as inaugurating the second British folk revival. In London, the colleagues opened The Ballads and Blues Club, eventually renamed the Singers' Club, possibly the first folk club in the UK; it closed in 1991. As the 1950s progressed into the 1960s, the folk revival movement gathered momentum in both Britain and America.

In much of rural Canada, traditional and country-folk music were the predominant styles of music until the 1950s, ahead even of the globally popular jazz and swing. Traditional folk took this predominance into early Canadian television with many country-themed shows on its early airwaves. All Around the Circle (19641975) showcased the traditional Irish- and English-derived music of Newfoundland, for example. But by far the most important of these was Don Messer's Jubilee (19571973), which helped to bridge the gap between rural country-folk and the folk revival that was emerging from urban coffee shops and folk clubs. The show helped to launch the careers of country-folk singers Stompin' Tom Connors and Catherine McKinnon.

The folk revival spawned Canada's first true wave of internationally successful artists such as Ian & Sylvia, Gordon Lightfoot, Leonard Cohen, Joni Mitchell, and Buffy Sainte-Marie. At the same time, Quebec folk singer-songwriters like Gilles Vigneault and groups such as La Bottine Souriante were doing the same in the French-speaking world. English-speaking Canadian folk artists tended to move the United States to pursue larger audiences until the introduction of so-called "Canadian content" rules for radio and television in the 1970s. At the same time, Canadian folk music became more formalized and commercialized with the rise of specialized folk festivals (beginning with the Miramichi Folksong Festival in 1958), increased radio airplay on rock, pop, and easy listening radio stations, the introduction of the Juno Award for Folk Artist of the Year in 1971, and even an academic journal the Canadian Folk Music Journal in 1973.

The mid- and late 1960s saw fusion forms of folk (such as folk rock) achieve prominence never before seen by folk music, but the early 1960s were perhaps the zenith of non-fusion folk music prominence in the music scene.

According to some, during the Depression, folk music reflected social realities of poverty and disempowerment of common people through vernacularized lyrics expressing the harsh realities of hard times and poverty. Often newly composed songs in traditional style by writers like Guthrie also featured a humorous and satirical tone. Most of the audience for folk music in those years were part of the working class, and many of these songs expressed resistance to the social order and an anger towards the government. Ellis, Iain. "Resistance And Relief: The Wit And Woes Of Early Twentieth Century Folk And Country Music." Humor: International Journal Of Humor Research 23.2 (2010): 161178. Literary Reference Center Plus. Web. 14 September 2012 

===Major performers who emerged from the 1940s to the early 1960s===

Some major folk music performers who emerged during the 1940s, 1950s and early 1960s were:
Burl Ives
*Woody Guthrie (1912 1967) was an American singer-songwriter and folk musician, whose musical legacy includes hundreds of political, traditional and children's songs, ballads and improvised works. He frequently performed with the slogan This Machine Kills Fascists displayed on his guitar. His best-known song is "This Land Is Your Land". Many of his recorded songs are archived in the Library of Congress. Library of Congress. Related Material - Woody Guthrie Sound Recordings at the American Folklife Center. Retrieved on November 27, 2007. In the 1930s Guthrie traveled with migrant workers from Oklahoma to California while learning, rewriting, and performing traditional folk and blues songs along the way. Many the songs he composed were about his experiences in the Dust Bowl era during the Great Depression, earning him the nickname the "Dust Bowl Balladeer". Throughout his life, Guthrie was associated with United States communist groups, though he was never formally joined the Party. Spivey, Christine A. The Student Historical Journal 19961997, Loyola University New Orleans, 1996. Guthrie fathered American folk musician Arlo Guthrie. During his later years Guthrie served as a figurehead in the folk movement, providing inspiration to a generation of new folk musicians, including mentor relationships with Ramblin' Jack Elliott and Bob Dylan. Such songwriters as Bob Dylan, Phil Ochs, Bruce Springsteen, Pete Seeger, Joe Strummer and Tom Paxton have acknowledged their debt to Guthrie as an influence.

*The Almanac Singers Almanac members Millard Lampell, Lee Hays, Pete Seeger, and Woody Guthrie began playing together informally in 1940; the Almanac Singers were formed in December 1940. They invented a driving, energetic performing style, based on what they felt was the best of American country string band music, black and white. They evolved towards controversial topical music. Two of the regular members of the group, Pete Seeger and Lee Hays, later became founding members of The Weavers.

*Burl Ives - as a youth, Ives dropped out of college to travel around as an itinerant singer during the early 1930s, earning his way by doing odd jobs and playing his banjo and guitar. In 1930, he had a brief, local radio career on WBOW radio in Terre Haute, Indiana, and in the 1940s he had his own radio show, titled The Wayfaring Stranger, titled after one of the popular ballads he sang. The show was very popular, and in 1946 Ives was cast as a singing cowboy in the film Smoky. Ives went on to play parts in other popular film as well. His first book, The Wayfaring Stranger, was published in 1948. Cultural Equality - Alan Lomax profile Burl Ives (19091995) by Ellen Harold and Peter Stone 

*Pete Seeger had met and been influenced by many important folk musicians (and singer-songwriters with folk roots), especially Woody Guthrie and Lead Belly. Seeger had labor movement involvements, and he met Guthrie at a "Grapes of Wrath" migrant workers concert on March 3, 1940, and the two thereafter began a musical collaboration (which included the Almanac Singers) and then formed The Weavers. As a songwriter, Seeger authored or co-authored "Where Have All the Flowers Gone?", "If I Had a Hammer (The Hammer Song)", (composed with Lee Hays of The Weavers), and "Turn, Turn, Turn!", all three of which have been recorded by many artists both in and outside the folk revival movement and are still sung throughout the world. In 1948, Seeger wrote the first version of his now-classic How to Play the Five-String Banjo, an instructional book that many banjo players credit with starting them off on the instrument. He has recorded, sung, and performed for more than seventy years and has become the most powerful force in the American folk revival after Guthrie. Peter Dreier, "Pete Seeger Deserves One More Honor -- the Nobel Peace Prize"The Huffington Post 5/4/09. 

*The Weavers were formed in 1947 by Pete Seeger, Ronnie Gilbert, Lee Hays, and Fred Hellerman. After they debuted at the Village Vanguard in New York in 1948, they were then discovered by arranger Gordon Jenkins and signed with Decca Records, releasing a series of successful but heavily orchestrated single songs. The group's political associations in the era of the Red Scare forced them to break up in 1952; they re-formed in 1955 with a series of successful concerts and album recordings on Vanguard Records. A fifth member, Erik Darling, sometimes sat in with the group when Seeger was unavailable and ultimately replaced Seeger in The Weavers when the latter resigned from the quartet in a dispute about its commercialism in general and its specific agreement to record a cigarette commercial. David King Dunaway, How Can I Keep From Singing? 

*Harry Belafonte, another influential performer, started his career as a club singer in New York to pay for his acting classes. In 1952, he signed a contract with RCA Victor and released his first record album, Mark Twain and Other Folk Favorites. His breakthrough album Calypso (1956) was the first LP to sell over a million copies. The album spent 31 weeks at number one, 58 weeks in the top ten, and 99 weeks on the US charts. It introduced American audiences to Calypso music and Belafonte was dubbed the "King of Calypso." Belafonte went on to record in many genres, including blues, American folk, gospel, and more. In 1959, he starred in Tonight With Belafonte a nationally televised special that introduced Odetta in her debut to a prime time audience. She sang Water Boy and performed a duet with Belafonte of There's a Hole in My Bucket that hit the national charts in 1961. Clarke, SP, "Odetta- American Folk Music Pioneer" 

Odetta performing in 2006
*Odetta - In 1953 singers Odetta and Larry Mohr recorded an LP that was released in 1954 as Odetta and Larry, an album that was partially recorded live at San Francisco's Tin Angel bar. Odetta enjoyed a long and respected career with a repertoire of traditional songs and blues until her death in 2009. 

*The Kingston Trio was formed in 1957 in the Palo Alto, California area by Bob Shane, Nick Reynolds, and Dave Guard, who were just out of college. They were greatly influenced by the Weavers, the calypso sounds of Belafonte, and other semi-pop folk artists such as the Gateway Singers and The Tarriers. The unprecedented popularity and album sales of this group from 1957 to 1963 (including fourteen top ten and five number one LPs on the Billboard charts Rubeck, Shaw, Blake et al., The Kingston Trio On Record (Naperville IL: KK Inc, 1986), p. 11 ISBN 978-0-9614594-0-6 ) was a significant factor in creating a commercial and mainstream audience for folk-styled music where little had existed prior to their emergence. The Kingston Trio's success was followed by other highly successful pop-folk acts, such as The Limeliters.

The Limeliters
*The Limeliters are an American folk music group, formed in July 1959 by Lou Gottlieb (bass), Alex Hassilev (baritone), and Glenn Yarbrough (tenor). The group was active from 1959 until 1965, when they disbanded. After a hiatus of sixteen years Yarbrough, Hassilev, and Gottlieb reunited and began performing as The Limeliters again.

*Joan Baezs career began in 1958 in Cambridge, Massachusetts, where at 17 she gave her first coffee-house concert. She was invited to perform at the premiere Newport Folk Festival in 1959 by pop folk star Bob Gibson, after which Baez was sometimes called "the barefoot Madonna", gaining renown for her clear voice and three-octave range. She recorded her first album for a Vanguard Records the following year  a collection of laments and traditional folk ballads from the British Isles, accompanying the songs with guitar. Her second LP release went gold, as did her next (live) albums. One record featured her rendition of a song by the then-unknown Bob Dylan. In the early 1960s, Baez moved into the forefront of the American folk-music revival. Increasingly, her personal convictions  peace, social justice, anti-poverty  were reflected in the topical songs that made up a growing portion of her repertoire, to the point that Baez became a symbol for these particular concerns.

*The Chad Mitchell Trio began in 1959 and emerged in the early 1960s. The group performed a mix of creatively arranged traditional songs and contemporary numbers that frequently included satiric and political overtones.

*The Highwaymen were an early 1960s "collegiate folk" group that originated at Wesleyan University and had a Billboard number-one hit in 1961 with "Michael", a version of the African-American spiritual Michael, Row the Boat Ashore, and another Top 20 hit in 1962 with "Cottonfields". "Michael" sold over one million copies, and was awarded a gold record. 

*The New Christy Minstrels are a folk music group founded by Randy Sparks in 1961. 
Bogdanov, Vladimir; Woodstra, Chris; Erlewine, Stephen Thomas, All music guide: The Definitive Guide to Popular Music, Hal Leonard Corporation, 2001. Cf. p.793 They recorded over 20 albums and had several hits, including "Green, Green", "Saturday Night", "Today", "Denver", and "This Land is Your Land". Their 1962 debut album, Presenting The New Christy Minstrels won a Grammy Award and sat in the Billboard charts for two years. 

*The Rooftop Singers were an American progressive folk singing trio in the early 1960s, best known for the hit record "Walk Right In".

*The Serendipity Singers was a nine-member group that started at the University of Colorado and became known nationally in 1964 for a heavily pop-inflected approach to folk music.

*Bob Dylan often performed and sometimes toured with Joan Baez, starting when she was a singer of mostly traditional songs. As Baez adopted some of Dylan's songs into her repertoire and even introduced Dylan to her avid audiences, a large following on the folk circuit, it helped the young songwriter to gain initial recognition. By the time Dylan recorded his first LP (1962) he had developed a style reminiscent of Woody Guthrie. He began to write songs that captured the "progressive" mood on the college campuses and in the coffee houses. Though by 1964 there were many new guitar-playing singer/songwriters, it is arguable that Dylan eventually became the most popular of these younger folk-music-revival performers.

*Peter, Paul and Mary debuted in the early 1960s and were an American trio who ultimately became one of the biggest musical acts of the 1960s. The trio was composed of Peter Yarrow, Paul Stookey and Mary Travers. They were one of the main folk music torchbearers of social commentary music in the 1960s. As the decade passed, their music incorporated more elements of pop and rock.

*Judy Collins debuted in the early 1960s. At first, she sang traditional folk songs or songs written by others  in particular the protest songwriters of the time, such as Tom Paxton, Phil Ochs, and Bob Dylan. She also recorded her own versions of important songs from the period, such as Dylan's "Mr. Tambourine Man", Pete Seeger's "Turn, Turn, Turn" and Eric Andersen's "Thirsty Boots".

*The Seekers, an Australian folk and pop music group, were formed in 1962. They moved to the UK in 1963 and blended traditional music, contemporary folk music and pop, an illustration of the rapid evolution and diversification of the genre. The Seekers enjoyed great popularity in the English-speaking world with hit songs like "I Know I'll Never Find Another You", "A World Of Our Own," and "Georgy Girl".

* Canada's duo of Ian Tyson and Sylvia Fricker, performing as Ian & Sylvia, released their first album in 1963. The duo featured a creative mix of traditional American and Canadian folk songs in both English and French as well as contemporary singer-songwriter compositions by Dylan and Paxton, and numbers that they themselves composed like "Four Strong Winds" and "Someday Soon" by Tyson and "You Were On My Mind" by Fricker.

===The mid-1960s through the early 1970s===
Joan Baez and Bob Dylan during the civil rights "March on Washington for Jobs and Freedom", August 28, 1963.
The large musical, political, lifestyle, and counterculture changes most associated with "the 60s" occurred during the second half of the decade and the first year or two of the 1970s. Folk music underwent a related rapid evolution, expansion and diversification at that same time. Major changes occurred through the evolution of established performers such as Bob Dylan, Joan Baez, Judy Collins, The Seekers and Peter Paul and Mary, and also through the creation of new fusion genres with rock and pop. Much of this evolution began in the early 1960s and emerged into prominence in the mid and late 1960's. One performance "crucible" for this evolution was Greenwich Village New York. Dylan's use of electric instruments helped inaugurate the genres of folk rock and country rock, particularly by his album John Wesley Harding. 

These changes represented a further departure from traditional folk music. The Byrds with hits such as Seeger's "Turn! Turn! Turn!" were emblematic of a new term folk rock. Barry McGuire left The New Christy Minstrels and recorded Eve of Destruction in 1965. Other performers such as Simon & Garfunkel and The Mamas & the Papas created new, hard-to-classify music that was folk-inflected and often included in discussions of folk rock. 

During this period, the term "protest music" was often used to characterize folk music with topical political themes. Folk singers and songwriters such as Phil Ochs, Buffy Sainte-Marie, Arlo Guthrie and Tom Paxton followed in Woody Guthrie's footsteps, writing "protest music" and topical songs and expressing support for various causes including the American Civil Rights Movement and anti-war causes associated with the Vietnam War. A number of performers who had begun their careers singing largely traditional material, as typified by Baez and Collins, began to write their own material.

The Canadian performers Gordon Lightfoot, Leonard Cohen, Bruce Cockburn and Joni Mitchell represented such fusions and enjoyed great popularity in the U.S.; all four were eventually invested with the Order of Canada. Many of the acid rock bands of San Francisco began by playing acoustic folk and blues. The Smothers Brothers television shows featured many folk performers, including the formerly blacklisted Pete Seeger. 
 

Bonnie Koloc is a Chicago-based American folk music singer-songwriter who made her recording debut in 1971, three years after several popular recordings by Melanie, who had released her first album in 1968 with a folk/pop blend.

The late 1960s saw the advent of electric folk groups. This is a form of folk rock, with a focus on indigenous (European, and, emblematically, English) songs. A key electric folk moment was the release of Fairport Convention's album Liege and Lief. Guitarist Richard Thompson declared that the music of the band demanded a corresponding "English Electric" style, while bassist Ashley Hutchings formed Steeleye Span to pursue a more traditional repertoire performed in the electric folk style. Exponents of electric folk music such as Fairport Convention, Pentangle, Alan Stivell and Mr. Fox saw electrification of traditional musical forms as a means to reach a far wider audience.

===Mid-1970s through present day===
Starting in the 1970s folk music was fueled by new singer-songwriters such as Steve Goodman, John Prine, Emmylou Harris, Joni Mitchell, John Denver, and many more. In the British Isles, The Pogues in the early 1980s and Ireland's The Corrs in the 1990s brought traditional tunes back into the album charts. The Corrs were active from 1990 to 2006 and performed Celtic and pop music, and created a blend of the two. Carrie Newcomer emerged with Stone Soup in 1984 and has been performing individually since 1991.

Malicorne, a French electric folk group emerged in 1973, starting with traditional music and then later blended it with pop. Canadian Stan Rogers wrote and performed folk music with strong historical and nautical themes, emerging in 1976. Si Kahn emerged in 1974 at the more political and topical end of the folk music spectrum.

In the 1980s, the Washington Squares played "throwback" folk music. Suzanne Vega proformed folk an folk-oriented pop music. The The Knitters propagated cowpunk or folk punk, which eventually evolved into alt country. More recently the same spirit has been embraced and expanded on by artists such as Dave Alvin, Miranda Stone and Steve Earle.

In the second half of the 1990s, once more, folk music made an impact on the mainstream music via a younger generation of artists such as Eliza Carthy, Kate Rusby and Spiers and Boden. Canada's biggest selling folk group of the 1990s and 2000s was the Celtic, rock-tinged Great Big Sea from Newfoundland, who have had 4 albums certified platinum in Canada as of 2013, and one, Up from 1995, that went 4 times platinum.

Hard rock and heavy metal bands such as Korpiklaani, Skyclad, Waylander, Ensiferum and Finntroll meld elements from a wide variety of traditions, including in many cases instruments such as fiddles, tin whistles, accordions and bagpipes. Folk metal often favours pagan-inspired themes.

Viking metal is defined in its folk stance, incorporating folk interludes into albums (e.g., Bergtatt and Kveldssanger, the first two albums by once-folk metal, now-experimental band Ulver). Mumford & Sons a folk rock and indie folk band was formed in 2007 and achieved prominence in 2010.

===Specialty sub-genres===
Filk music can be considered folk music stylistically and culturally (though the 'community' it arose from, science fiction fandom, is an unusual and thoroughly modern one). Neofolk began in the 1980s, fusing traditional European folk music with post-industrial music, historical topics, philosophical commentary, traditional songs and paganism. The genre is largely European.

Anti folk began in New York City in the 1980s. Folk punk, known in its early days as rogue folk, is a fusion of folk music and punk rock. It was pioneered by the London-based Irish band The Pogues in the 1980s. Industrial folk music is a characterization of folk music normally referred to under other genres, and covers music of or about industrial environments and topics, including related protest music.

Other sub-genres include Indie folk, Techno-folk, Freak folk and Americana and fusion genres such as folk metal, progressive folk, psychedelic folk, and neofolk.

==Notable venues==

The National Folk Festival (USA) is an itinerant folk festival in the United States. Since 1934, it has been run by the National Council for the Traditional Arts (NCTA) and has been presented in 26 communities around the nation. After leaving some of these communities, the National Folk Festival has spun off several locally run folk festivals in its wake including the Lowell Folk Festival, the Richmond Folk Festival, the American Folk Festival and, most recently, the Montana Folk Festival.

The National Folk Festival (UK) in England has been running for over thirty five years  starting off as a festival organized in Keele University.

The National Folk Festival is Australias premier folk festival event and is attended by over 50,000 people.

The four-day Philadelphia Folk Festival began in 1962. It is sponsored by the non-profit Philadelphia Folksong Society. The event hosts contemporary and traditional artists in genres including World/Fusion, Celtic, Singer/Songwriter, Folk Rock, Country, Klezmer, and Dance. It is held annually on the third weekend in August. The event now hosts approximately 12,000 visitors, presenting bands on 6 stages.

The Newport Folk Festival is an annual folk festival held near Newport, Rhode Island. It ran most year from 1959 to 1970, and 1985 to the present, with an attendance of approximately 10,000 persons.

It is sometimes claimed that the earliest folk festival was the Mountain Dance and Folk Festival, 1928, in Asheville, North Carolina, founded by Bascom Lamar Lunsford. Sidmouth Festival began in 1954, and Cambridge Folk Festival began in 1965. The Cambridge Folk Festival in Cambridge, England is noted for having a very wide definition of who can be invited as folk musicians. The "club tents" allow attendees to discover large numbers of unknown artists, who, for ten or 15 minutes each, present their work to the festival audience.

Stan Rogers is a lasting fixture of the Canadian folk festival Summerfolk, held annually in Owen Sound, Ontario, where the main stage and amphitheater are dedicated as the "Stan Rogers Memorial Canopy". The festival is firmly fixed in tradition, with Rogers' song "The Mary Ellen Carter" being sung by all involved, including the audience and a medley of acts at the festival.

The Canmore Folk Music Festival is Alberta's longest running folk music festival. The Feast of the Hunters' Moon in Indiana draws approximately 60,000 visitors per year.

Folk music is popular among some audiences today, with folk music clubs meeting to share traditional-style songs, and there are major folk music festivals in many countries, e.g. the Woodford Folk Festival, National Folk Festival and Port Fairy Folk Festival are amongst Australia's largest major annual events, attracting top international folk performers as well as many local artists.

Urkult Nsker, ngermanland held August each year http://www.urkult.se/ Festival website is purportedly Sweden's largest world-music festival.

==See also==

* Anthology of American Folk Music
* Canadian Folk Music Awards
* Folk process
* List of classical and art music traditions
* List of folk festivals
* Roud Folk Song Index
*The Voice of the People anthology of UK folk songs

==Notes and references==

==References==
These are the references with multiple abbreviated cites with varying page numbers
* Donaldson, Rachel Clare, 2011 Music for the People: the Folk Music Revival And American Identity, 19301970, Ph.D. Dissertation, Vanderbilt University, May 2011, Nashville, Tennessee

==Further reading==
(does not include those used as references)

===Traditional folk music===

* Reprinted in McAllester, David Park (ed.) (1971) Readings in ethnomusicology New York: Johnson Reprint. 
*
*Bevil, Jack Marshall (1984). Centonization and Concordance in the American Southern Uplands Folksong Melody: A Study of the Musical Generative and Transmittive Processes of an Oral Tradition. PhD Thesis, North Texas University, Ann Arbor: University Microfilms International. 
*
*Bevil, Jack Marshall (1987). "A Paradigm of Folktune Preservation and Change Within the Oral Tradition of a Southern Appalachian Community, 19161986." Unpublished. Read at the 1987 National Convention of the American Musicological Society, New Orleans.
* Bronson, Bertrand Harris. The Ballad As Song (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1969).
* Bronson, Bertrand Harris. The Singing Tradition of Child's Popular Ballads (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1976).
* Bronson, Bertrand Harris. The Traditional Tunes of the Child Ballads, with Their Texts, According to the Extant Records of Great Britain and North America, 4 volumes (Princeton and Berkeley: Princeton University and University of California Presses, 1959, ff.).
*Cartwright, Garth (2005). Princes Amongst Men: Journeys with Gypsy Musicians. London: Serpent's Tail. ISBN 1-85242-877-5
*Carson, Ciaran (1997). Last Night's Fun: In and Out of Time with Irish Music. North Point Press. ISBN 978-0-86547-515-1
*Cowdery, James R. (1990). The Melodic Tradition of Ireland. Kent, OH: Kent State University Press. ISBN 978-0-87338-407-0
*Farsani, Mohsen (2003) Lamentations chez les nomades bakhtiari d'Iran. Paris: Universit Sorbonne Nouvelle.
*Harker, David (1985). Fakesong: The Manufacture of British 'Folksong', 1700 to the Present Day. Milton Keynes ; Philadelphia: Open University Press. ISBN 0-335-15066-7
*Jackson, George Pullen (1933). White Spirituals in the Southern Uplands: The Story of the Fasola Folk, Their Songs, Singings, and "Buckwheat Notes". Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press. Reprinted by Kessinger Publishing (2008) ISBN 978-1-4366-9044-7
* (August 6)
* Karpeles, Maud. An Introduction to English Folk Song. 1973. Oxford. Oxford University Press.
*
*Nelson, David Taylor (2012) "Bla Bartk: The Father of Ethnomusicology," Musical Offerings: Vol. 3: No. 2, Article 2. http://digitalcommons.cedarville.edu/musicalofferings/vol3/iss2/2
*
*
* Rooksby, Rikky, Dr Vic Gammon et al. The Folk Handbook. (2007). Backbeat
* Sharp, Cecil. Folk Song: Some Conclusions. 1907. Charles River Books
* Sharp, Cecil English Folk Songs from the Southern Appalachians. Collected by Cecil J. Sharp. Ed. Maud Karpeles. 1932. London. Oxford University Press.
*

===Contemporary folk music===

*Cantwell, Robert. When We Were Good: The Folk Revival. Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1996. ISBN 0-674-95132-8
* Cohen, Ronald D., Folk music: the basics, Routledge, 2006.
* Cohen, Ronald D., A history of folk music festivals in the United States, Scarecrow Press, 2008
*Cohen, Ronald D. Rainbow Quest: The Folk Music Revival & American Society, 19401970. Amherst: University of Massachusetts Press, 2002. ISBN 1-55849-348-4
*Cohen, Ronald D., ed. Wasn't That a Time? Firsthand Accounts of the Folk Music Revival. American Folk Music Series no. 4. Lanham, Maryland and Folkstone, UK: The Scarecrow Press, Inc. 1995.
*Cohen, Ronald D., and Dave Samuelson. Songs for Political Action. Booklet to Bear Family Records BCD 15720 JL, 1996.
*Cray, Ed, and Studs Terkel. Ramblin Man: The Life and Times of Woody Guthrie. W.W. Norton & Co., 2006.
*Cunningham, Agnes "Sis", and Gordon Friesen. Red Dust and Broadsides: A Joint Autobiography. Amherst: University of Massachusetts Press, 1999. ISBN 1-55849-210-0
* De Turk, David A.; Poulin, A., Jr., The American folk scene; dimensions of the folksong revival, New York : Dell Pub. Co., 1967
*Denisoff, R. Serge. Great Day Coming: Folk Music and the American Left. Urbana: University of Illinois Press, 1971.
*Denisoff, R. Serge. Sing Me a Song of Social Significance. Bowling Green University Popular Press, 1972. ISBN 0-87972-036-0
*Denning, Michael. The Cultural Front: The Laboring of American Culture in the Twentieth Century. London: Verso, 1996.
*Dunaway, David. How Can I Keep From Singing: The Ballad of Pete Seeger. 1990 Villard, 2008. ISBN 0-306-80399-2
*Eyerman, Ron, and Scott Barretta. "From the 30s to the 60s: The folk Music Revival in the United States". Theory and Society: 25 (1996): 50143.
*Eyerman, Ron, and Andrew Jamison. Music and Social Movements. Mobilizing Traditions in the Twentieth Century. Cambridge University Press, 1998. ISBN 0-521-62966-7
*Filene, Benjamin. Romancing the Folk: Public Memory & American Roots Music. Chapel Hill: The University of North Carolina Press, 2000. ISBN 0-8078-4862-X
*Goldsmith, Peter D. Making People's Music: Moe Asch and Folkways Records. Washington, DC: Smithsonian Institution Press, 1998. ISBN 1-56098-812-6
*Hajdu, David. Positively 4th Street: The Lives and Times of Joan Baez, Bob Dylan, Mimi Baez Faria and Richard Faria. New York: North Point Press, 2001. ISBN 0-86547-642-X
*Hawes, Bess Lomax. Sing It Pretty. Urbana and Chicago: University of Illinois Press, 2008
*Jackson, Bruce, ed. Folklore and Society. Essay in Honor of Benjamin A. Botkin. Hatboro, Pa Folklore Associates, 1966
*Lieberman, Robbie. "My Song Is My Weapon:" People's Songs, American Communism, and the Politics of Culture, 193050. 1989; Urbana: University of Illinois Press, 1995. ISBN 0-252-06525-5
*Lomax, Alan, Woody Guthrie, and Pete Seeger, eds. Hard Hit Songs for Hard Hit People. New York: Oak Publications, 1967. Reprint, Lincoln University of Nebraska Press, 1999.
*Lynch, Timothy. Strike Song of the Depression (American Made Music Series). Jackson: University Press of Mississippi, 2001.
*Middleton, Richard (1990). Studying Popular Music. Milton Keynes; Philadelphia: Open University Press. ISBN 0-335-15276-7 (cloth), ISBN 0-335-15275-9 (pbk).
*Reuss, Richard, with posthumously by Joanne C. Reuss. American Folk Music and Left Wing Politics. 19271957. American Folk Music Series no. 4. Lanham, Maryland and Folkstone, UK: The Scarecrow Press, Inc. 2000.
*Rubeck, Jack; Shaw, Allan; Blake, Ben et al. The Kingston Trio On Record. Naperville, IL: KK, Inc, 1986. ISBN 978-0-9614594-0-6
*Scully, Michael F. (2008). The Never-Ending Revival: Rounder Records and the Folk Alliance. Urbana: University of Illinois Press.
*Seeger, Pete. Where Have All the Flowers Gone: A Singer's Stories. Bethlehem, Pa.: Sing Out Publications, 1993.
*Sharp, Charles David. Waitin' On Wings, What Would Woody Guthrie Say. Riverside, Mo.: Wax Bold Records, 2012.
*Willens, Doris. Lonesome Traveler: The Life of Lee Hays. New York: Norton, 1988.
*Weissman, Dick. Which Side Are You On? An Inside History of the Folk Music Revival in America. New York: Continuum, 2005. ISBN 0-8264-1698-5
*Wolfe, Charles, and Kip Lornell. The Life and Legend of Leadbelly. New York: Da Capo 1999.

===Covering both traditional music and contemporary folk music===

* Cooley, Timothy J. Making Music in the Polish Tatras: Tourists, Ethnographers, and Mountain Musicians. Indiana University Press, 2005 (Hardcover with CD). ISBN 0-253-34489-1
* Czekanowska, Anna. Polish Folk Music: Slavonic Heritage  Polish Tradition  Contemporary Trends. Cambridge Studies in Ethnomusicology, Reissue 2006 (Paperback). ISBN 0-521-02797-7
*Pegg, Carole (2001). "Folk Music". The New Grove Dictionary of Music and Musicians, edited by Stanley Sadie and John Tyrrell. London: Macmillan.
*van der Merwe, Peter (1989). Origins of the Popular Style: The Antecedents of Twentieth-Century Popular Music. Oxford: Clarendon Press. ISBN 0-19-316121-4.

==External links==

* Folk Alliance International Prominent folk music organization
* Foxbeard Folk Music Sharing Folk Music
* The Crooked Road: Heritage music trail-A 243-mile historical music oriented trail.
* Folk Alley A Non-Profit Listener Supported Folk Music Resource, Streaming online since 2004
* Ben Gray Lumpkin Digital Folk Music Collection Howard B. Waltz Music Library, University of Colorado Boulder
* 
* Free scores (songs) at www.traditional-songs.com
* Folk Radio UK - Playing folk music of the British Isles and beyond + the latest Folk Music News and Reviews
* 
* Welsh Ballads Website
* The Traditional Music in England project, World and Traditional Music section at the British Library Sound Archive

 

 

[[Frank]]

Frank may refer to:

==People==
=== Individuals ===
* Frank (given name)
* Frank (surname)

=== Groups of people ===
* A member of the medieval Germanic people, the Franks
* French people ancestors
* Crusaders in medieval Middle Eastern history
* Levantines (Latin Christians) known as Franco-Levantines, Latin Christian residents in the Middle East

=== Fictional characters ===
* Frank (fictional rabbit), man-sized rabbit from the movie Donnie Darko
* F.R.A.N.K., Belgian born DJ, well known for his hit 'Discotex'
* Frank "The hunter", one of the player's wingmen in the game Blazing Angels
* Frank, Kya's brother in the Kya Dark Lineage videogame
* Frank, a character on the television show 
* Franky (One Piece), cyborg from anime and manga One Piece
* TV's Frank, character from Mystery Science Theater 3000 named for Frank Lanham
* Frank Heffley a character from the "Diary of a Wimpy Kid" book series
==Currency==
*Liechtenstein frank, the currency of Liechtenstein since 1920
*Swiss frank (or franc), the currency of Switzerland since 1850
*Westphalian frank, currency of the Kingdom of Westphalia between 1808 and 1813

==Places==
* Frank, Alberta, Canada
* Frank, California, USA
* Frank, West Virginia, USA
* Frank Slide, Canada
* Frank Sound Forest, Cayman Islands

==Media==

=== Cinema ===
* Frank Film, a 1973 American animated short
* Frank (film), a 2014 comedy directed by Lenny Abrahamson

=== Music ===
* Frank (Amy Winehouse album)
* Frank (Squeeze album)
* Frank (band), four-piece girl band created for a Channel 4 comedy drama series

=== Literature ===
* Frank (comics), series of experimental comic books by Jim Woodring
* Frank (magazine), Canadian scandal sheet
* , review published by the Clinton School of Public Service
* Frank and Ernest (comic strip), comic strip

=== Television ===
* Frank TV, show starring Frank Caliendo
* Totally Frank, comedy drama series

==Other uses==
* FRANK (drugs), British Government drugs awareness campaign
* Franking, marking mail as being paid for
* Nakajima Ki-84 (Nato code: Frank), Japanese WWII fighter aircraft
* Tropical Storm Frank (disambiguation), a typhoon name assigned by PAGASA in the Philippines
* Frank, an alternate name for a hot dog or sausage

==See also==
* Franc
* Franck
* Frankie (disambiguation)



[[Fullerene]]

A fullerene is any molecule composed entirely of carbon, in the form of a hollow sphere, ellipsoid, tube, and many other shapes. Spherical fullerenes are also called buckyballs, and they resemble the balls used in football (soccer). Cylindrical ones are called carbon nanotubes or buckytubes. Fullerenes are similar in structure to graphite, which is composed of stacked graphene sheets of linked hexagonal rings; but they may also contain pentagonal (or sometimes heptagonal) rings. Fullerene, Encyclopdia Britannica on-line 

The first fullerene molecule to be discovered, and the family's namesake, buckminsterfullerene (C60), was prepared in 1985 by Richard Smalley, Robert Curl, James Heath, Sean O'Brien, and Harold Kroto at Rice University. The name was a homage to Buckminster Fuller, whose geodesic domes it resembles. The structure was also identified some five years earlier by Sumio Iijima, from an electron microscope image, where it formed the core of a "bucky onion." Fullerenes have since been found to occur in nature. More recently, fullerenes have been detected in outer space. According to astronomer Letizia Stanghellini, "Its possible that buckyballs from outer space provided seeds for life on Earth." 

The discovery of fullerenes greatly expanded the number of known carbon allotropes, which until recently were limited to graphite, diamond, and amorphous carbon such as soot and charcoal. Buckyballs and buckytubes have been the subject of intense research, both for their unique chemistry and for their technological applications, especially in materials science, electronics, and nanotechnology.

==History==
The icosahedral fullerene C540, another member of the family of fullerenes.

The icosahedral C60H60 cage was mentioned in 1965 as a possible topological structure. Eiji Osawa of Toyohashi University of Technology predicted the existence of C60 in 1970. He noticed that the structure of a corannulene molecule was a subset of a Association football shape, and he hypothesised that a full ball shape could also exist. Japanese scientific journals reported his idea, but it did not reach Europe or the Americas.

Also in 1970, R. W. Henson (then of the Atomic Energy Research Establishment) proposed the structure and made a model of C60. Unfortunately, the evidence for this new form of carbon was very weak and was not accepted, even by his colleagues. The results were never published but were acknowledged in Carbon in 1999. 
 
 

Independently from Henson, in 1973 a group of scientists from the USSR, directed by Prof. Bochvar, made a quantum-chemical analysis of the stability of C60 and calculated its electronic structure. As in the previous cases, the scientific community did not accept the theoretical prediction. The paper was published in 1973 in Proceedings of the USSR Academy of Sciences (in Russian). 
 

In mass spectrometry, discrete peaks appeared corresponding to molecules with the exact mass of sixty or seventy or more carbon atoms. In 1985, Harold Kroto (then of the University of Sussex), James R. Heath, Sean O'Brien, Robert Curl and Richard Smalley, from Rice University, discovered C60, and shortly thereafter came to discover the fullerenes. 
 
Kroto, Curl, and Smalley were awarded the 1996 Nobel Prize in Chemistry for their roles in the discovery of this class of molecules. C60 and other fullerenes were later noticed occurring outside the laboratory (for example, in normal candle-soot). By 1991, it was relatively easy to produce gram-sized samples of fullerene powder using the techniques of Donald Huffman, Wolfgang Krtschmer and Konstantinos Fostiropoulos. Fullerene purification remains a challenge to chemists and to a large extent determines fullerene prices. So-called endohedral fullerenes have ions or small molecules incorporated inside the cage atoms. Fullerene is an unusual reactant in many organic reactions such as the Bingel reaction discovered in 1993. Carbon nanotubes were recognized in 1991. 
 

Minute quantities of the fullerenes, in the form of C60, C70, C76, C82 and C84 molecules, are produced in nature, hidden in soot and formed by lightning discharges in the atmosphere. 
 In 1992, fullerenes were found in a family of minerals known as Shungites in Karelia, Russia. 
 

In 2010, fullerenes (C60) have been discovered in a cloud of cosmic dust surrounding a distant star 6500 light years away. Using NASA's Spitzer infrared telescope the scientists spotted the molecules' unmistakable infrared signature. Sir Harry Kroto, who shared the 1996 Nobel Prize in Chemistry for the discovery of buckyballs commented: "This most exciting breakthrough provides convincing evidence that the buckyball has, as I long suspected, existed since time immemorial in the dark recesses of our galaxy." Stars reveal carbon 'spaceballs', BBC, July 22, 2010. 

===Naming===
Buckminsterfullerene (C60) was named after Richard Buckminster Fuller, a noted architectural modeler who popularized the geodesic dome. Since buckminsterfullerenes have a shape similar to that sort of dome, the name was thought appropriate. Buckminsterfullerene, C60. Sussex Fullerene Group. chm.bris.ac.uk As the discovery of the fullerene family came after buckminsterfullerene, the shortened name 'fullerene' is used to refer to the family of fullerenes. The suffix "-ene" indicates that each C atom is covalently bonded to three others (instead of the maximum of four), a situation that classically would correspond to the existence of bonds involving two pairs of electrons ("double bonds").

==Types of fullerene==
Since the discovery of fullerenes in 1985, structural variations on fullerenes have evolved well beyond the individual clusters themselves. Examples include: 
 
*Buckyball clusters: smallest member is (unsaturated version of dodecahedrane) and the most common is ;
*Nanotubes: hollow tubes of very small dimensions, having single or multiple walls; potential applications in electronics industry;
*Megatubes: larger in diameter than nanotubes and prepared with walls of different thickness; potentially used for the transport of a variety of molecules of different sizes; 
 
*polymers: chain, two-dimensional and three-dimensional polymers are formed under high-pressure high-temperature conditions; single-strand polymers are formed using the Atom Transfer Radical Addition Polymerization (ATRAP) route; 
*nano"onions": spherical particles based on multiple carbon layers surrounding a buckyball core; proposed for lubricants; 
 
*linked "ball-and-chain" dimers: two buckyballs linked by a carbon chain; 
 
*fullerene rings. 
 

===Buckyballs===
C60 with isosurface of ground state electron density as calculated with DFT
Many association footballs have the same shape as buckminsterfullerene, C60

====Buckminsterfullerene====

Buckminsterfullerene is the smallest fullerene molecule containing pentagonal and hexagonal rings in which no two pentagons share an edge (which can be destabilizing, as in pentalene). It is also the most common in terms of natural occurrence, as it can often be found in soot.

The structure of C60 is a truncated icosahedron, which resembles an association football ball of the type made of twenty hexagons and twelve pentagons, with a carbon atom at the vertices of each polygon and a bond along each polygon edge.

The van der Waals diameter of a C60 molecule is about 1.1 nanometers (nm). The nucleus to nucleus diameter of a C60 molecule is about 0.71 nm.

The C60 molecule has two bond lengths. The 6:6 ring bonds (between two hexagons) can be considered "double bonds" and are shorter than the 6:5 bonds (between a hexagon and a pentagon). Its average bond length is 1.4 angstroms.

Silicon buckyballs have been created around metal ions.

====Boron buckyball====
A type of buckyball which uses boron atoms, instead of the usual carbon, was predicted and described in 2007. The B80 structure, with each atom forming 5 or 6 bonds, is predicted to be more stable than the C60 buckyball. 
 One reason for this given by the researchers is that the B-80 is actually more like the original geodesic dome structure popularized by Buckminster Fuller, which uses triangles rather than hexagons. However, this work has been subject to much criticism by quantum chemists 
 
 as it was concluded that the predicted Ih symmetric structure was vibrationally unstable and the resulting cage undergoes a spontaneous symmetry break, yielding a puckered cage with rare Th symmetry (symmetry of a volleyball). The number of six-member rings in this molecule is 20 and number of five-member rings is 12. There is an additional atom in the center of each six-member ring, bonded to each atom surrounding it. By employing a systematic global search algorithm, later it was found that the previously proposed B80 fullerene is not global minimum for 80 atom boron clusters and hence can not be found in nature. http://journals.aps.org/prl/abstract/10.1103/PhysRevLett.106.225502 In the same paper by Sandip De et al., it was concluded that born energy land scape is significantly different from other fullerenes already found in nature hence pure boron fullerenes are unlikely to exist in nature.

====Other buckyballs====
Another fairly common fullerene is C70, 
 but fullerenes with 72, 76, 84 and even up to 100 carbon atoms are commonly obtained.

In mathematical terms, the structure of a fullerene is a trivalent convex polyhedron with pentagonal and hexagonal faces. In graph theory, the term fullerene refers to any 3-regular, planar graph with all faces of size 5 or 6 (including the external face). It follows from Euler's polyhedron formula, V  E + F = 2 (where V, E, F are the numbers of vertices, edges, and faces), that there are exactly 12 pentagons in a fullerene and V/2  10 hexagons.

 200px 200px 200px 200px 
 20-fullerene(dodecahedral graph) 26-fullerene graph 60-fullerene(truncated icosahedral graph) 70-fullerene graph 

The smallest fullerene is the dodecahedral C20. There are no fullerenes with 22 vertices. 
 The number of fullerenes C2n grows with increasing n = 12, 13, 14, ..., roughly in proportion to n9 . For instance, there are 1812 non-isomorphic fullerenes C60. Note that only one form of C60, the buckminsterfullerene alias truncated icosahedron, has no pair of adjacent pentagons (the smallest such fullerene). To further illustrate the growth, there are 214,127,713 non-isomorphic fullerenes C200, 15,655,672 of which have no adjacent pentagons. Optimized structures of many fullerene isomers are published and listed on the web. 
Fowler, P. W. and Manolopoulos, D. E. Cn Fullerenes. nanotube.msu.edu 

Trimetasphere carbon nanomaterials were discovered by researchers at Virginia Tech and licensed exclusively to Luna Innovations. This class of novel molecules comprises 80 carbon atoms () forming a sphere which encloses a complex of three metal atoms and one nitrogen atom. These fullerenes encapsulate metals which puts them in the subset referred to as metallofullerenes. Trimetaspheres have the potential for use in diagnostics (as safe imaging agents), therapeutics and in organic solar cells. 

===Carbon nanotubes===
This rotating model of a carbon nanotube shows its 3D structure.

Nanotubes are cylindrical fullerenes. These tubes of carbon are usually only a few nanometres wide, but they can range from less than a micrometer to several millimeters in length. They often have closed ends, but can be open-ended as well. There are also cases in which the tube reduces in diameter before closing off. Their unique molecular structure results in extraordinary macroscopic properties, including high tensile strength, high electrical conductivity, high ductility, high heat conductivity, and relative chemical inactivity (as it is cylindrical and "planar"  that is, it has no "exposed" atoms that can be easily displaced). One proposed use of carbon nanotubes is in paper batteries, developed in 2007 by researchers at Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute. 
 Another highly speculative proposed use in the field of space technologies is to produce high-tensile carbon cables required by a space elevator.

====Carbon nanobuds====

Nanobuds have been obtained by adding buckminsterfullerenes to carbon nanotubes.

===Fullerite===
The C60 fullerene in crystalline form

Fullerites are the solid-state manifestation of fullerenes and related compounds and materials.

"Ultrahard fullerite" is a coined term frequently used to describe material produced by high-pressure high-temperature (HPHT) processing of fullerite. Such treatment converts fullerite into a nanocrystalline form of diamond which has been reported to exhibit remarkable mechanical properties. 
 
Fullerite (scanning electron microscope image)

===Inorganic fullerenes===
Materials with fullerene-like molecular structures but lacking carbon include MoS2, WS2, TiS2 and NbS2. Prof. J. M. Martin from Ecole Central de Lyon in France tested the new material under isostatic pressure and found it to be stable up to at least 350 tons/cm2. 

==Properties==
For the past decade, the chemical and physical properties of fullerenes have been a hot topic in the field of research and development, and are likely to continue to be for a long time. Popular Science has discussed possible uses of fullerenes (graphene) in armor. In April 2003, fullerenes were under study for potential medicinal use: binding specific antibiotics to the structure to target resistant bacteria and even target certain cancer cells such as melanoma. The October 2005 issue of Chemistry & Biology contains an article describing the use of fullerenes as light-activated antimicrobial agents. 
 

In the field of nanotechnology, heat resistance and superconductivity are some of the more heavily studied properties.

A common method used to produce fullerenes is to send a large current between two nearby graphite electrodes in an inert atmosphere. The resulting carbon plasma arc between the electrodes cools into sooty residue from which many fullerenes can be isolated.

There are many calculations that have been done using ab-initio quantum methods applied to fullerenes. By DFT and TD-DFT methods one can obtain IR, Raman and UV spectra. Results of such calculations can be compared with experimental results.

===Aromaticity===
Researchers have been able to increase the reactivity of fullerenes by attaching active groups to their surfaces. Buckminsterfullerene does not exhibit "superaromaticity": that is, the electrons in the hexagonal rings do not delocalize over the whole molecule.

A spherical fullerene of n carbon atoms has n pi-bonding electrons, free to delocalize. These should try to delocalize over the whole molecule. The quantum mechanics of such an arrangement should be like one shell only of the well-known quantum mechanical structure of a single atom, with a stable filled shell for n = 2, 8, 18, 32, 50, 72, 98, 128, etc.; i.e. twice a perfect square number; but this series does not include 60. This 2(N + 1)2 rule (with N integer) for spherical aromaticity is the three-dimensional analogue of Hckel's rule. The 10+ cation would satisfy this rule, and should be aromatic. This has been shown to be the case using quantum chemical modelling, which showed the existence of strong diamagnetic sphere currents in the cation. 
 

As a result, C60 in water tends to pick up two more electrons and become an anion. The nC60 described below may be the result of C60 trying to form a loose metallic bond.

===Chemistry===

Fullerenes are stable, but not totally unreactive. The sp2-hybridized carbon atoms, which are at their energy minimum in planar graphite, must be bent to form the closed sphere or tube, which produces angle strain. The characteristic reaction of fullerenes is electrophilic addition at 6,6-double bonds, which reduces angle strain by changing sp2-hybridized carbons into sp3-hybridized ones. The change in hybridized orbitals causes the bond angles to decrease from about 120 in the sp2 orbitals to about 109.5 in the sp3 orbitals. This decrease in bond angles allows for the bonds to bend less when closing the sphere or tube, and thus, the molecule becomes more stable.

Other atoms can be trapped inside fullerenes to form inclusion compounds known as endohedral fullerenes. An unusual example is the egg shaped fullerene Tb3N@C84, which violates the isolated pentagon rule. 
 Recent evidence for a meteor impact at the end of the Permian period was found by analyzing noble gases so preserved. 
 Metallofullerene-based inoculates using the rhonditic steel process are beginning production as one of the first commercially-viable uses of buckyballs.

===Solubility===
C60 in solution

C60 in extra virgin olive oil showing the characteristic purple color of pristine C60 solutions.

Fullerenes are sparingly soluble in many solvents. Common solvents for the fullerenes include aromatics, such as toluene, and others like carbon disulfide. Solutions of pure buckminsterfullerene have a deep purple color. Solutions of C70 are a reddish brown. The higher fullerenes C76 to C84 have a variety of colors. C76 has two optical forms, while other higher fullerenes have several structural isomers. Fullerenes are the only known allotrope of carbon that can be dissolved in common solvents at room temperature.

Solvent C60 C70 
 1-chloronaphthalene 51 mg/mL * 
 1-methylnaphthalene 33 mg/mL * 
 1,2-dichlorobenzene 24 mg/mL 36.2 mg/mL 
 1,2,4-trimethylbenzene 18 mg/mL * 
 tetrahydronaphthalene 16 mg/mL * 
 carbon disulfide 8 mg/mL 9.875 mg/mL 
 1,2,3-tribromopropane 8 mg/mL * 
 chlorobenzene 7 mg/mL * 
 xylene 5 mg/mL 3.985 mg/mL(p-xylene) 
 bromoform 5 mg/mL * 
 cumene 4 mg/mL * 
 toluene 3 mg/mL 1.406 mg/mL 
 benzene 1.5 mg/mL 1.3 mg/mL 
 carbon tetrachloride 0.447 mg/mL 0.121 mg/mL 
 chloroform 0.25 mg/mL * 
 n-hexane 0.046 mg/mL 0.013 mg/mL 
 cyclohexane 0.035 mg/mL 0.08 mg/mL 
 tetrahydrofuran 0.006 mg/mL * 
 acetonitrile 0.004 mg/mL * 
 methanol 0.000 04 mg/mL * 
 water 1.31011 mg/mL * 
 pentane 0.004 mg/mL 0.002 mg/mL 
 heptane * 0.047 mg/mL 
 octane 0.025 mg/mL 0.042 mg/mL 
 isooctane 0.026 mg/mL * 
 decane 0.070 mg/mL 0.053 mg/mL 
 dodecane 0.091 mg/mL 0.098 mg/mL 
 tetradecane 0.126 mg/mL * 
 acetone * 0.0019 mg/mL 
 isopropanol * 0.0021 mg/mL 
 dioxane 0.0041 mg/mL * 
 mesitylene 0.997 mg/mL 1.472 mg/mL 
 dichloromethane 0.254 mg/mL 0.080 mg/mL 
 * : Solubility not measured 
 

Some fullerene structures are not soluble because they have a small band gap between the ground and excited states. These include the small fullerenes C28, 
 C36 and C50. The C72 structure is also in this class, but the endohedral version with a trapped lanthanide-group atom is soluble due to the interaction of the metal atom and the electronic states of the fullerene. Researchers had originally been puzzled by C72 being absent in fullerene plasma-generated soot extract, but found in endohedral samples. Small band gap fullerenes are highly reactive and bind to other fullerenes or to soot particles.

Solvents that are able to dissolve buckminsterfullerene (C60 and C70) are listed at left in order from highest solubility. The solubility value given is the approximate saturated concentration. 
 
 
 
 

Solubility of C60 in some solvents shows unusual behaviour due to existence of solvate phases (analogues of crystallohydrates). For example, solubility of C60 in benzene solution shows maximum at about 313 K. Crystallization from benzene solution at temperatures below maximum results in formation of triclinic solid solvate with four benzene molecules C604C6H6 which is rather unstable in air. Out of solution, this structure decomposes into usual face-centered cubic (fcc) C60 in few minutes' time. At temperatures above solubility maximum the solvate is not stable even when immersed in saturated solution and melts with formation of fcc C60. Crystallization at temperatures above the solubility maximum results in formation of pure fcc C60. Millimeter-sized crystals of C60 and C70 can be grown from solution both for solvates and for pure fullerenes. 
 
 

===Quantum mechanics===
In 1999, researchers from the University of Vienna demonstrated that wave-particle duality applied to molecules such as fullerene. 
 One of the co-authors of this research, Julian Voss-Andreae, has since created several sculptures symbolizing wave-particle duality in fullerenes (see Fullerenes in popular culture for more detail).

===Superconductivity===

===Chirality===
Some fullerenes (e.g. C76, C78, C80, and C84) are inherently chiral because they are D2-symmetric, and have been successfully resolved. Research efforts are ongoing to develop specific sensors for their enantiomers.

==Construction==

Two theories have been proposed to describe the molecular mechanisms that make fullerenes. The older, bottom-up theory proposes that they are built atom-by-atom. The alternative top-down approach claims that fullerenes form when much larger structures break into constituent parts. 

In 2013 researchers discovered that asymmetrical fullerenes formed from larger structures settle into stable fullerenes. The synthesized substance was a particular metallofullerene consisting of 84 carbon atoms with two additional carbon atoms and two yttrium atoms inside the cage. The process produced approximately 100 micrograms. 

However, they found that the asymmetrical molecule could theoretically collapse to form nearly every known fullerene and metallofullerene. Minor perturbations involving the breaking of a few molecular bonds cause the cage to become highly symmetrical and stable. This insight supports the theory that fullerenes can be formed from graphene when the appropriate molecular bonds are severed. form 

==Applications==

===Tumor research===
While past cancer research has involved radiation therapy, photodynamic therapy is important to study because breakthroughs in treatments for tumor cells will give more options to patients with different conditions. More recent experiments using HeLa cells in cancer research involves the development of new photosensitizers with increased ability to be absorbed by cancer cells and still trigger cell death. It is also important that a new photosensitizer does not stay in the body for a long time to prevent unwanted cell damage. 

 

Fullerenes can be made to be absorbed by HeLa cells. The C60 derivatives can be delivered to the cells by using the functional groups L-phenylalanine, folic acid, and L-arginine among others. 

 
The purpose for functionalizing the fullerenes is to increase the solubility of the molecule by the cancer cells. Cancer cells take up these molecules at an increased rate because of an upregulation of transporters in the cancer cell, in this case amino acid transporters will bring in the L-arginine and L-phenylalanine functional groups of the fullerenes. 

 

Once absorbed by the cells, the C60 derivatives would react to light radiation by turning molecular oxygen into reactive oxygen which triggers apoptosis in the HeLa cells and other cancer cells that can absorb the fullerene molecule. This research shows that a reactive substance can target cancer cells and then be triggered by light radiation, minimizing damage to surrounding tissues while undergoing treatment. 

 

When absorbed by cancer cells and exposed to light radiation, the reaction that creates reactive oxygen damages the DNA, proteins, and lipids that make up the cancer cell. This cellular damage forces the cancerous cell to go through apoptosis, which can lead to the reduction in size of a tumor. Once the light radiation treatment is finished the fullerene will reabsorb the free radicals to prevent damage of other tissues. 

 Since this treatment focuses on cancer cells it is a good option for patients whose cancer cells are within reach of light radiation. As this research continues into the future it will be able to penetrate deeper into the body and more effectively absorbed by cancer cells. 

==Safety and toxicity==

Moussa et al. (19967) 
 
 studied the in vivo toxicity of C60 after intra-peritoneal administration of large doses. No evidence of toxicity was found and the mice tolerated a dose of 5 g/kg of body weight. Mori et al. (2006) 
 could not find toxicity in rodents for C60 and C70 mixtures after oral administration of a dose of 2 g/kg body weight and did not observe evidence of genotoxic or mutagenic potential in vitro.
Other studies could not establish the toxicity of fullerenes: on the contrary, the work of Gharbi et al. (2005) 
 suggested that aqueous C60 suspensions failing to produce acute or subacute toxicity in rodents could also protect their livers in a dose-dependent manner against free-radical damage. In 2012, it was revealed that oral administration prolonged the lifespan of rats by nearly 100% without showing toxic effects. In a more recent video interview filmed in October 2012 and placed online, Professor Moussa states that pure C60 is not toxic. 

A comprehensive and recent review on fullerene toxicity is given by Kolosnjaj et al. (2007). 
 
 These authors review the works on fullerene toxicity beginning in the early 1990s to present, and conclude that very little evidence gathered since the discovery of fullerenes indicate that C60 is toxic.

With reference to nanotubes, a 2008 study 
 on carbon nanotubes introduced into the abdominal cavity of mice led the authors to suggest comparisons to "asbestos-like pathogenicity". It should be noted that this was not an inhalation study, though there have been several performed in the past, therefore it is premature to conclude that nanotubes should be considered to have a toxicological profile similar to asbestos. Conversely, and perhaps illustrative of how the various classes of molecules which fall under the general term fullerene cover a wide range of properties, Sayes et al. found that in vivo inhalation of C60(OH)24 and nano-C60 in rats gave no effect, whereas in comparison quartz particles produced an inflammatory response under the same conditions. 
 As stated above, nanotubes are quite different in chemical and physical properties to C60, i.e., molecular weight, shape, size, physical properties (such as solubility) all are very different, so from a toxicological standpoint, different results for C60 and nanotubes are not suggestive of any discrepancy in the findings.

When considering toxicological data, care must be taken to distinguish as necessary between what are normally referred to as fullerenes: (C60, C70, ...); fullerene derivatives: C60 or other fullerenes with covalently bonded chemical groups; fullerene complexes (e.g., water-solubilized with surfactants, such as C60-PVP; host-guest complexes, such as with cyclodextrin), where the fullerene is supermolecular bound to another molecule; C60 nanoparticles, which are extended solid-phase aggregates of C60 crystallites; and nanotubes, which are generally much larger (in terms of molecular weight and size) molecules, and are different in shape to the spheroidal fullerenes C60 and C70, as well as having different chemical and physical properties.

The above different molecules span the range from insoluble materials in either hydrophilic or lipophilic media, to hydrophilic, lipophilic, or even amphiphilic molecules, and with other varying physical and chemical properties. Therefore any broad generalization extrapolating for example results from C60 to nanotubes or vice versa is not possible, though technically all are fullerenes, as the term is defined as a close-caged all-carbon molecule. Any extrapolation of results from one molecule to other molecules must take into account considerations based on a quantitative structural analysis relationship study (QSARS), which mostly depends on how close the molecules under consideration are in physical and chemical properties.

==Popular culture==

Examples of fullerenes in popular culture are numerous. Fullerenes appeared in fiction well before scientists took serious interest in them. In a humorously speculative 1966 column for New Scientist, David Jones suggested that it may be possible to create giant hollow carbon molecules by distorting a plane hexagonal net by the addition of impurity atoms. 
 

On 4 September 2010, Google used an interactively rotatable fullerene Google archive of the Sep. 4 2010 logo. C60 as the second 'o' in their logo to celebrate the 25th anniversary of the discovery of the fullerenes. 25th anniversary of the Buckyball celebrated by interactive Google Doodle, Telegraph.co.uk 4 September 2010 Google celebrates 25 years of the 'buckyball'. Guardian.co.uk, 4 September 2010. 

==See also==

*Buckypaper
*Truncated rhombic triacontahedron
*Dodecahedrane
*Carbocatalysis
*Fullerene ligand

==References==

==External links==

*Properties of C60 fullerene
*Richard Smalley's autobiography at Nobel.se
*Sir Harry Kroto's webpage
*Simple model of Fullerene.
*Rhonditic Steel
*Introduction to fullerites
*Bucky Balls, a short video explaining the structure of C60 by the Vega Science Trust
*Giant Fullerenes, a short video looking at Giant Fullerenes
*Optimized structures of many fullerene isomers
*Graphene, 15 September 2010, BBC Radio program Discovery

 



[[Francis II]]

Francis II may refer to:

* Francis II, Duke of Brittany (14331488)
* Francesco II Gonzaga, Marquess of Mantua (14661519)
* Francis II of France (15441560)
* Francis II, Duke of Lorraine (15721632)
* Francesco II d'Este, Duke of Modena (16621694)
* Francis II Rkczi, Duke of Transylvania (16761735)
* Francis II, Holy Roman Emperor (17681835)
* Francis II of the Two Sicilies (18361894)
* Franz, Duke of Bavaria (born 1933), called "Francis II" by supporters of the Jacobite claim to the thrones of England, Scotland, Ireland and France.

== See also ==
*Francesco II (disambiguation)



[[Fallacies of definition]]

Fallacies of definition refer to the various ways in which definitions can fail to have merit. The term is used to suggest an analogy with an informal fallacy.

== Circularity ==

If one concept is defined by another, and the other is defined by the first, this is known as circular definition, somewhat similar to a circular reasoning: neither offers us any enlightenment about what we wanted to know. 

A straightforward example would be to define Jew as: 'Person believing in Judaism' , and Judaism as: 'Religion of the Jewish people' .

== Overly broad or narrow definitions ==

A definition is no good if it defines its subject with overly wide or narrow parameters. For example, "a shape with four sides of equal length" is not a good definition for 'square'. Why? Not only squares have four sides of equal length; rhombi do as well. This is proven by identifying not only the term being defined, but also the conditions in the definition. Likewise, defining a 'rectangle' as "a shape with four perpendicular sides of equal length" is not valid because it is too narrow. 

== Obscurity ==

Definitions can go wrong by using ambiguous, obscure, or figurative language. If 'beauty' is defined as 'aesthetically successful', one must continue to break down and define the following definition. This can often lead to circular definitions. Definitions should be defined in the most prosaic form of language to be understood. Failure to elucidate provides fallacious definitions. 

An often quoted example is Samuel Johnson's definition for oats: "Oats: a grain which in England is generally given to horses, but in Scotland, supports the people", to which his Scots friend, Lord Elibank, retorted, "Yes, and where else will you see such horses and such men?" 

== Self-contradictory statements in context ==

Often statements can contradict themselves due to a difference in definitions while defining something. For example, the statement "A society is free if and only if liberty is maximized and people are required to take responsibility for their actions" is true or paradoxical, depending on the individual's definition of liberty. If liberty is taken to mean "the ability to exercise one's rights as provided for by the law and nature" then this is true, but if it means "the state when one is not held to nor required to perform anything against their will" then this is clearly false. 

== See also ==

* Equivocation
* Fallacy
* Formal fallacy
* Informal fallacy

== References ==



[[Fredericton]]

Fredericton () is the capital of the Canadian province of New Brunswick. The city is situated in the west-central portion of the province and is one of the main urban centres in New Brunswick. The Saint John River flows west to east as it bisects the city and provides the dominant natural feature for the municipality. In the 2011 census, the city's population was 56,224, 2006 Community Profiles - Census Metropolitan Area/Census Agglomeration making it the third largest city in the province after Saint John and Moncton.

An important cultural, artistic, and educational centre for the province, Fredericton is home to two universities, the New Brunswick College of Craft and Design, and cultural institutions such as the Beaverbrook Art Gallery, the Fredericton Region Museum, and The Playhouse, a performing arts venue. The city hosts the annual Harvest Jazz & Blues Festival, attracting regional and international jazz, blues, rock, and world artists.

As a provincial capital, its economy is inextricably tied to the fortunes of the public sector; however, the city also contains a growing IT and commercial sector. The city has the highest percentage of residents with a post-secondary education in the province and one of the highest per capita incomes.

Fredericton has been evaluated favourably in recent years for its competitive quality of life and potential for business development. In 2013, Foreign Direct Investment magazine reviewed Fredericton's economic potential and quality of life, and named it first amongst North America's Top 10 Micro Cities, improving from its second-place rank in 2011. Amongst 200 Canadian communities, Fredericton placed seventh in MoneySense magazine's Best Places to Live in 2012, but dropped to 78th in 2013. 

==History==

The area of the present-day City of Fredericton was first used for seasonal farming by the Mi'kmaq and Maliseet peoples. Corn was the primary crop grown in the area. Interestingly, the site of Fredericton served as a sort of capital for Aboriginals in the area. Aucpaque, the "principal village" of the Aboriginals in the area, was located a few kilometres upriver from the site of present-day Fredericton.

===French colony===
The first European contact was by the French in the late 17th century, who granted the land to Joseph Robineau de Villebon. During King William's War, the Governor of Acadia Villebon built Fort Nashwaak on the north side of the St John River, at the mouth of the Nashwaak River. For most of the war, Fort Nashwaak served as the capital of the French colony of Acadia and orchestrated numerous military raids on English settlers on the New England/ Acadia border.

==== Siege of Fort Nashwaak (1696)====

Acadian Governor Villebon, and the location of the Capital of Acadia at Fort Nashwaak (originally called Fort St. Joseph) on the St. John River, became a source of torment for the settlers of New England. Within weeks of an attack launched from Fort Nashwaak on Pemaquid, Maine (present day Bristol, Maine), the New Englanders struck back. In 1696, an expedition under command of Major Benjamin Church set out to destroy Fort Nashwaak (present day Fredericton). Villebon had been alerted and prepared his defences. On October 18, the British troops arrived opposite the fort, landed three cannons, and assembled earthworks on the south bank of the Nashwaak River. There was a fierce exchange of fire for two days, with the advantage going to the better-sited Acadian guns. The New Englanders were defeated, with 8 soldiers killed and 17 wounded. The Acadians sustained losses of one killed and two wounded. 

After Villebon's death in 1700 and a devastating flood, the fort was abandoned. The Fredericton area was first permanently settled and named Pointe-Sainte-Anne (often anglicized to Ste. Anne's Point) in 1732 by Acadians fleeing Nova Scotia after the British took over the territory (1710). Their townsite was on the south side of the river, approximately a mile upriver from Fort Nashwaak. William O. Raymond The River St. John 1910 

====Raid on Ste. Anne's Point (1759)====
The British captured Ste. Anne's Point during the expulsion of the Acadians, burning the settlement to the ground in the St. John River Campaign (1759).

A 1762 settlement attempt by the British was unsuccessful due to the hostility of local Acadian and Aboriginal populations. These settlers ended up building a community downriver at what is today the town of Maugerville (pronounced "majorville"). However, three fur traders managed to permanently settle there in 1768.

The flag of Fredericton.

===British colony===
In 1783, United Empire Loyalists settled in Ste. Anne's Point after the American Revolution, although many died during the harsh and long first winter in Fredericton. Those who perished during that winter were buried in what became the Loyalist cemetery, which is still found on the south bank of the Saint John River. When spring came, more Loyalists left the new settlement to take up land grants in other areas of the countryside.

When New Brunswick became a separate colony from Nova Scotia in 1784, Ste. Anne's Point became the provincial capital, winning out over Parrtown (present-day Saint John) due to its central inland location meaning it was less prone to American attack from the sea. A street plan was laid out to the west of the original townsite, King's College (now the University of New Brunswick) was founded, and the locale was renamed "Frederick's Town", in honour of the second son of King George III of the United Kingdom, Prince Frederick Augustus, Duke of York. The name was shortened to Fredericton shortly after the city became the official provincial capital of New Brunswick on April 25, 1785. Thus, in a period of less than three years, the area of Fredericton went from being a sparsely populated region to being the capital of the new colony of New Brunswick.

The same attributes that made Fredericton the capital city also made it an ideal spot for a military installation. Many of the original military buildings downtown still stand, and are now tourist attractions.

A building was constructed to house the provincial legislative assembly in 1788, but it was destroyed by a fire in 1880. Two years later, the present Legislature Building was constructed.

The first major expansion of the city occurred on July 1, 1945 when it amalgamated with the town of Devon. Today the city of Fredericton comprises Fredericton proper, and the boroughs of Silverwood, Nashwaaksis, Barker's Point and Marysville, which were incorporated into the city in 1973.

===Historic Marysville===
One of the communities annexed to Fredericton in 1973, Marysville, has a unique and distinctive history of its own. Marysville is located on the Nashwaak River - a tributary of the Saint John River - just north of pre-1973 Fredericton. The community is distinguished by its 19th-century mill and historic buildings, which include nineteenth century company houses and buildings patterned after those of British industrial towns.

Marysville can be described as a prime example of a nineteenth-century mill town. In the 1830s, a saw mill was built on the site of Marysville by two local entrepreneurs. However, the saw mill frequently changed ownership and never showed a profit. It was Alexander Gibson (popularly referred to as "Boss Gibson") who turned this situation around and built a prosperous industrial town. In 1883, under the direction of Gibson, construction began of a cotton mill which was state of the art for its time. "Boss" Gibson named the company town that grew up around the mill Marysville in honour of his wife.

In 1908, having faced financial problems, Gibson sold the mill to a Montreal-based company which, in turn, sold it to Canadian Cottons Ltd. After World War II, foreign competition devastated the mill's business and it ceased operations in 1954. There were numerous attempts to re-open the mill however, in 1980, it closed its doors permanently.

The mill was renovated and re-opened in 1985 as provincial government offices. The mill still remains the dominant feature in the Marysville skyline.

Central to Marysville is Alexander Gibson Memorial School, or AGMS. It was constructed in 1926. Additions to the school occurred in 1957 and in 1977 following a fire. It holds over 300 children from kindergarten to grade 5.

==Neighbourhoods==
Neighbourhoods in Fredericton include:
*Downtown Frederiction (CBD)
*Silverwood
*Hanwell
*Town Plat
*West Platt
*Sunshine Gardens
*Skyline Acres
*Lincoln Heights
*Douglas
*Sunset Acres
*Nashwaaksis
*Brookside West
*St. Mary's
*Devon
*Marysville
*Barker's Point
*North Brook

The City of Fredericton is bisected by the Saint John River. This has created two distinctive regions of the city characterized as the "Northside" and the "Southside".
The Beaverbrook Art Gallery.
The Southside is characterized by a downtown core consisting of provincial government departments, historical buildings, and numerous business establishments, banks, and law firms. Downtown also hosts many of the city's cultural attractions such as The Playhouse, the Fredericton Region Museum (formerly the York-Sunbury Museum), and the Beaverbrook Art Gallery. Many notable historical buildings are also located in or near downtown, including many grand Victorian-era residences, the New Brunswick Legislative Building, and Christ Church Cathedral. South of downtown, the city's elevation rises along a sloping hill (part of the river valley feature of the city).

"The Hill", as it is called, includes an area known as "College Hill", where the adjoining campuses of the University of New Brunswick and St. Thomas University are located, slightly southeast of the downtown area.

Southwest of the universities on the crest of the hill near the highway interchange between Route 8 and Route 7 is the Dr. Everett Chalmers Regional Hospital.

East of the universities is the Skyline Acres/Southwood Park area, consisting of a core of older established suburbs, and newer more affluent areas such as Poets Hill.

Downtown Fredericton's Queen St was named one of the country's "Great Streets" by the Canadian Institute of Planners in 2012.

Occupying the hill southwest of downtown is Odell Park, a large preserved forest area. Its trails and wooded areas are a favourite for hiking, jogging, dog walking, and cross-country skiing for city residents. Odell Park borders on the Fredericton Botanic Garden. West of the park and garden is Hanwell Road, Golf Club Road, and Silverwood neighbourhoods consisting largely of suburban residences.

South of the "Hill Area", where it plateaus, is a sizeable shopping district consisting of two mallsThe Fredericton Uptown Centre (formerly the Fredericton Mall) and The Regent Mallas well as numerous other retail outlets. The Uptown Centre decided to follow the American trend of eliminating indoor passageways between retail outlets; this has also resulted in the closure of many of its smaller independent outlets.

The city's "Northside" consists of several boroughs which were at one time separate communities. These include Devon, Nashwaaksis, Marysville and Barker's Point. These communities are largely suburban neighbourhoods and retail outlets. Main Street (in Nashwaaksis) which becomes Union Street in Devon, runs along the northern bank of the St. John River. It includes numerous retail outlets as well as an eclectic array of businesses including IT firms, law firms, and real estate agents. Also located on the Northside is the Brookside Mall, a retail mall anchored by Sobeys, Alcool NB Liquor and a Lawtons Drugs store as well as government offices. A new retail "power centre" development including Canadian Tire/Marks Work Warehouse, Kent Building Supplies and a Wal-Mart, is located at Two-Nations Crossing. Willie O'Ree Place - a new multi-million dollar hockey complex - opened in the same area in 2007.

The Northside is also home to the Saint Mary's First Nation Indian reserve, which includes a community centre and a shopping centre. During the Christmas season, the neighbourhood has some of the most spectacular and creative decorations in the city.

==Geography and climate==
Fredericton is located at the bottom of the Saint John River, with most of the city's post-war suburban development occurring on the gently sloping hills on either side of the river (although the downtown core is flat and lies low to the river).

At an altitude of about 17 metres above sea level, Fredericton is nestled in the Pennsylvanian Basin. It contrasts markedly from the older parts of the province. There are prominently two distinct areas in the region that are divided around the area of Wilsey Road, in the east end of the city. In the west side, the bedrock underneath the earth is topographically dominant, whereas the other is controlled by Pleistocene and recent deposits leading to the rivers (resulting in the area being shallow and wide). Fredericton and its surroundings are rich in water resources, which, coupled with highly arable soil, make the Fredericton region ideal for agriculture. The Saint John River and one of its major tributaries, the Nashwaak River, come together in Fredericton. The uninhabited parts of the city are heavily forested.

Fredericton has a humid continental climate (Kppen climate classification Dfb) and has a mild climate compared to most of Canada, although its location away from the coast means it is more prone to extreme temperatures than most other major cities in Atlantic Canada. The average January low temperature is -16 C; while the average high in July high is 26 C. Canada's National Climate Archive - Archives climatiques nationales du Canada | Meteorological Service of Canada - Service mtorologique du Canada 

The city gets a fair amount of precipitation, although major paralyzing snow and rain storms such as blizzards and hurricanes are uncommon compared to more coastal cities like Saint John, New Brunswick or Halifax (but do happen on occasion). On average, Fredericton receives approximately 1100 mm of precipitation per year. Snowfall is common between late November and early April, and snow usually stays on the ground beginning in December. Flooding occurs during the spring of most years on area rivers and affects the city's low-lying neighbourhoods.

==Education and research==

===Universities and colleges===
Looking down the hill from UNB towards downtown and the Saint John River.
Fredericton's status as an educational centre is evident in the city's two degree granting universities: the University of New Brunswick (UNB) and St. Thomas University (STU).

====University of New Brunswick (UNB)====
The University of New Brunswick was founded in 1785, making it the oldest public university in North America, compared to the oldest private university, Harvard University, in 1636. Built in 1826, UNB's Old Arts Building is the oldest university building still in use in Canada. UNB also houses Renaissance College, which is a leading leadership training institution in New Brunswick. UNB houses a Faculty of Law which is one of two Anglophone common-law schools in Atlantic Canada.

====St. Thomas University (STU)====
St. Thomas University (STU) is the province's only Catholic university and has been located in Fredericton since 1964, when it moved from its Chatham, New Brunswick campus. It is a liberal arts university with programs in gerontology, criminology, journalism, social work, native studies, and education. STU offers an excellent program in Human Rights and is the home of the Atlantic Human Rights Research and Development Centre.

The University of Fredericton was founded in 2006, making it the youngest private university in Canada. It is a degree-granting online university providing certificate and graduate degree programs in business leadership. UFred offers MBA and EMBA Programs under Section 3 of the Degree Granting Act of the Province of New Brunswick in Canada. "Degree Granting Act in New Brunswick" 

====Other Institutions====
Fredericton is also home to several colleges, and similar institutions. Most notably, the New Brunswick College of Craft and Design which houses the province's leading programs in photography and visual arts. The New Brunswick Community College maintains a small campus in Fredericton providing two-year degree programs oriented to quick entry into the job market; however, NBCC's major campuses are located in other communities. That will change in the spring of 2011 when a larger campus is completed on the grounds of UNB. The Maritime College of Forest Technology maintains its English-language campus in the city; MCFT is a small post-secondary school training students from across the Maritime provinces.

Other institutions include 3D and 2D Animation schools such as the Centre for Arts and Technology, along with the more recent "The Gaming and Animation Institute of Fredericton". Located on the north side is a small Pentecostal College, the Northeast Christian College, which trains and certifies Pentecostal ministers.

====Online Universities====
Alongside Fredericton's more established universities, the city also is home to several online for-profit universities. University of Fredericton (UFred) and Yorkville University are currently operational. Yorkville offers graduate programs in counselling psychology and adult education. Meritus closed in 2012. These universities typically have offices downtown.

===School system===
Fredericton's schools are located in the Anglophone West School District (formerly known as District 18, and prior to that, District 26). Fredericton is home to three public high schools, two operating in the English language and one in the French language. Fredericton High School, which was once the largest school in the Commonwealth of Nations, primarily serves students living on Fredericton's south side. It is also one of the oldest public high schools in Canada tracing its beginnings to 1785 - having celebrated its bicentennial in 1985. Fredericton High School is home to several sports teams - including basketball, hockey, soccer, and football - which dominated New Brunswick provincial high school sports championships during much of the 1980s and 1990s. The school motto is "Palma Non Sine Pulvere", Latin for "No Reward Without Effort" (literally "no palm without dust").

Leo Hayes High School, which opened in 1999, primarily serves students living on Fredericton's north side. The high school is a Public Private Partnership, known as a P3. Leo Hayes' current principal is Brad Sturgeon. The motto of the school is "Somnia Sunt Circuli Veritatis", Latin for "Dreams are the Seedlings of Reality". Leo Hayes High School places priority on both Arts and Athletics, in addition to Academia. In addition, there are four middle schools, fourteen elementary schools and three private schools in the city. A recent issue with middle schools in the city has been the location of George Street Middle School and Albert Street Middle School close to the city centre. This fails to account for the city's changing demographic which has seen the growth of suburban neighbourhoods. In 2009 Albert Street Middle School was replaced by Bliss Carman Middle School, located in the Kimble Road Park area of Skyline Acres. Albert Street Middle School has since been demolished, with a new YMCA having been erected in its place.

Fredericton is also serviced by the French language cole Sainte-Anne and cole des Btisseurs, which provides K-5 (DB) and 6-12 (ESA) French language education. cole Sainte-Anne is in the same building as that used by the French community centre - the Centre communautaire Sainte-Anne, which also houses the French public library, the Dr. Margurite Michaud Library, and an amphitheatre. Both schools are administered by a school district system (Francophone South School District/District 1) separate from that which governs the English language schools in the city. Fredericton is also home to a private Christian school, Devon Park Christian School, which is located on the Northside. Its current principal is Jonathan McAloon.

===Research===
Fredericton hosts several major research centres - dealing with policy development, agriculture, forestry, and engineering. These research institutions are connected to the city's two universities as well as the provincial and federal governments.

The Hugh John Flemming Forestry Centre (including Provincial and Federal Departments) is the leading forestry research centre in Atlantic Canada. This Centre carries out major research endeavours in forestry management and scientific research. The Centre closely collaborates with the Forestry Department at the University of New Brunswick which is one of the top Forestry Departments in Canada. As well, research and development in agriculture and crop development is carried out at the Agricultural Research Station in Lincoln.

The University of New Brunswick is the site of several major research centres in social science, forestry, geomatics and biomedical engineering, and policy development. These include the Centre for Conflict Studies, which carries out research on military and strategic issues and the Muriel McQueen Fergusson Centre for Family Violence Research, which carries out multi-disciplinary research on family violence issues. Furthermore, the Institute of Biomedical Engineering has completed groundbreaking work on prosthetic limbs to aid war amputees in developing countries.

As well, the city's growing IT sector has been the basis for new research on IT and computer programming development, including the October 2002 opening of the National Research Council of Canada Institute for Information Technology  e-Business facility, located on the University of New Brunswick campus.

Fredericton is also the home of New Brunswick's Provincial Research Organization (PRO), RPC. RPC specializes in applied research and technical services in support of New Brunswick industry. Specializations include capabilities in aquaculture, mining, manufacturing, energy and the environment. RPC 

==Economy==
The 19th and early 20th centuries, the lumber industry - with its corresponding mills - was a primary sector of Fredericton's economy. Over the course of the 20th century, this industry declined and gave way to the provincial government and the universities becoming the primary employers in the city.

The policies of centralizing provincial government functions during the 1960s under New Brunswick Premier Louis Robichaud - along with the expanded role of the public sector characteristic of the 1960s/70s - led to a sizeable expansion of the city's population. It was during these decades that the Hill area on the city's Southside was largely developed and bedroom communities such as New Maryland emerged.

King's Place, Downtown Fredericton.
The 1960s also saw an expansion of the University of New Brunswick - due to increased post-war university enrolment - as well as the construction of the Fredericton campus of Saint Thomas University. Also contributing to this expansion was the move of the Law School from Saint John to the Fredericton area. This expansion of the post-secondary sector also contributed to Fredericton's population growth during the 1960s and 1970s. Since then, the city's population has continued to grow though at a slower rate due to slower growth of the government sector - along with hiring freezes and in some cases layoffs - during the Frank McKenna and Bernard Lord governments.

In recent years, increased student enrolment at the city's universities has led to greater demand for rental property. This has led to the construction of new university residences and apartment buildings in the city, and increased rates of rent - making them the highest rental rates in the province.

The predominance of the universities and government provide Fredericton with a measure of economic stability. The city has not been subject to the uncertainty and hardships faced by Atlantic Canadian cities dealing with mill shutdowns and the decline of the mining and fishing industries. For this reason, Fredericton is one of the few Atlantic Canadian cities that has actually reported a population increase in recent years.

The city has been investing actively in IT infrastructure. The City of Fredericton won of the "Judges Innovation Award" at the 2004 Canadian Information Productivity Awards due to their "Fred-eZone" free municipality wide WiFi network initiative. This and other innovations by the city's utelco, e-Novations, led Intel to do a case study on their successes. Fred-eZone spans much of the citys downtown and parts of surrounding residential areas, as well as peripheral commercial areas such as Fredericton's Regent Mall. In 2008 and 2009 the Intelligent Community Forum selected Fredericton as a Top 7 Intelligent Community, based partly on the City's work in the IT sector. 

Recently, the New Brunswick government has been seeking to attract more immigrants to the province (and consequently the Fredericton area) to increase the labour force and compensate for an aging population.

The Greater Fredericton Region has also established an investment attraction program called Invest Greater Fredericton. The purpose is to provide investors and site selectors with one central source for economic information such as real estate, demographics, key industries and more.

==Culture==
The Beaverbrook Art Gallery
Due to the presence of the universities, Fredericton is more cosmopolitan than many cities its size. This is reflected in cuisine offered by local ethnic restaurants (which include Caribbean, Chinese, Greek, Indian, Korean, Italian, Japanese, Lebanese, Mexican, Pakistani and Vietnamese foods). There are also several retail outlets that sell ethnic products and artifacts.

Fredericton is an important cultural centre of the region featuring art galleries, the New Brunswick College of Craft and Design, museums and theatres which promote local artistic and literary talent. The federal government named Fredericton the "Cultural Capital of Canada" for the year 2009. Canada Officer's Square is an outdoor public space located at the centre of the city. It serves as a venue for outdoor concerts during the summer, featuring a variety of local and national talent. During the winter, Officer's Square is transformed into an outdoor skating rink.

Architecturally, Fredericton spans more than two centuries. The city features an eclectic mix of buildings and residences ranging from classical Victorian style to modern office buildings and architecture. Frederictons skyline is also distinguished by many historic churches. There are 12 National Historic Sites of Canada in Fredericton. 

===Arts===
Statue of Lord Beaverbrook.
The Beaverbrook Art Gallery is New Brunswick's provincial art gallery. It was established in 1959 by Lord Beaverbrook as a gift to his native province. Fredericton is also home to several commercial art galleries.

The Playhouse hosts plays and musicals throughout the year, as well as presenting visiting comedians and musical performances by both Canadian and international artists. The Playhouse is the main venue for Theatre New Brunswick (TNB). TNB was founded by prominent Canadian director Walter Learning in 1969, and is the provinces largest professional theatre company.

Every fall Fredericton hosts the Harvest Jazz & Blues Festival. The week-long festival draws artists from all over North America. Since its inception in 1991, the event has grown into a large, diverse festival which has attracted artists from around the world including Buddy Guy, Warren Haynes, Oscar Peterson, and Parliament. The festival also provides a stage for local, provincial, and Maritime talent, and has been pivotal in the development of many New Brunswick groups and performers, including Hot Toddy, Abstract Operation, Grand Theft Bus, David Myles, and Ross Neilsen.

Fredericton is home to the New Brunswick Summer Music Festival, which, each August, features professional chamber music by top local players and nationally renowned performers. Motion Ensemble, NBs contemporary music organization, is also based here. In addition, Symphony New Brunswick performs most of its season in Fredericton.

Every November Fredericton hosts the Silver Wave Film Festival. Originally called the Tidal Wave Film Festival, it has been running since 2001. Each year attendance and interest in the festival has risen. Because of the its relationship with the Toronto Film Festival, the Silver Wave Festival offers Frederictonians the opportunity to see films that would otherwise be overlooked in their smaller market. Films created by New Brunswickers are also screened at the festival. Many of the local films come from shorts created through the University of New Brunswick and the New Brunswick Filmmaker's Co-operative.

Historically, Fredericton has been referred to as the Poets' Corner of Canada, because it was the birthplace of Bliss Carman, Charles G. D. Roberts and Francis Joseph Sherman. For many years, it was the home of the acclaimed Governor General's Award-winning poet, playwright, and journalist Alden Nowlan.

Prominent writers and poets living in Fredericton include Raymond Fraser, Robert Gibbs, M.T. Dohaney, Herb Curtis, Wayne Curtis, David Adams Richards, Robert Hawkes, Shari Andrews, Mark Anthony Jarman and Joe Blades.

===Sports and recreation===
The Bill Thorpe Walking Bridge crosses the Saint John River as part of the city's trail system

There are no professional sports teams in Fredericton, although both universities have extensive athletic programs. The UNB Varsity Reds and St. Thomas Tommies are rivals in most sports. When their men's hockey teams play (UNB has no women's hockey program in the AUS), the matches are called the "Battle of the Hill". The UNB Varsity Reds men hockey team has experienced recent success in national competition, winning the Canadian Interuniversity Sport (CIS) championships in the 20082009 and 20102011 seasons. They also finished in second place to the University of Alberta during the 20072008 championship. Other Varsity (AUS) sports at UNB include women's soccer and swimming, along with men's and women's cross country, track and field, basketball and volleyball. Club sports (non-varsity) include baseball, cheerleading, cricket, fencing, football, golf, wrestling and men's rugby.

At St. Thomas University, their men's and women's hockey and Cross Country teams compete in the AUS conference of the CIS, while their other sports teams (which include men's and women's soccer, rugby, golf, basketball, and volleyball) play in the Atlantic Collegiate Athletic Association (ACAA) conference of the Canadian Collegiate Athletic Association (CCAA). The Tommies men's volleyball team has won four ACAA titles, including 2012, while the men's and women's basketball teams were both 2012 CCAA Bronze Medalists.

The American Hockey League was once represented in Fredericton, with the Fredericton Express playing between 1981 and 1988, and the Fredericton Canadiens between 1990 and 1999. The "AAA" hockey system in Fredericton still uses the name Canadiens as their team names in Pee Wee, Bantam, and Midget levels.

Fredericton has a total of 5 permanent rink facilities which have a combined seven ice surfaces. On the Northside, the York Arena, opened in 1947, is the oldest arena still in use in the city. Also on the Northside is the new Willie O'Ree Place, known to local residents as the "O'Reena" or the "Willie O'Rink." Named after Hockey pioneer Willie O'Ree (who was born in Fredericton) the rink is dedicated to the first black hockey player to be drafted into the National Hockey League. The actual building, which serves as the home for the Leo Hayes High School Lions, houses two NHL-sized ice surfaces, as well as meeting facilities, an indoor track and a small YMCA workout centre, while outside in Scotiabank Park North there is a soccer field and beach volleyball courts.

On the Southside, the Lady Beaverbrook Rink (opened in 1954), the former home of St. Thomas University's hockey programs, and the Aitken University Centre )opened in 1976 and owned by the University of New Brunswick) were joined in 2012 by the brand new Grant  Harvey Centre, named after two more Fredericton-born NHL alumni - Danny Grant and Buster Harvey - which is another two rink complex; one NHL sized and the other Olympic. The Grant  Harvey Centre also houses a walking track and meeting facilities. Behind the arena is the new Abony Family Tennis Centre, a six court indoor tennis facility and to the South is Scotiabank Park South has an artificial turf soccer pitch as well as a two acre, fenced dog park. As of 2012, the Grant  Harvey Centre has replaced the Lady Beaverbrook Rink as the home of the St. Thomas Tommies and the Fredericton High School Black Kats.

Fredericton has a strong Rugby history with the Fredericton Loyalists RFC. Each summer the Loyalists host the New Brunswick Black Spruce team which competes in the Rugby Canada Super League.

There are healthy programs in both baseball and softball at all age levels around the city. The Fredericton U18 Twins hosted the Canadian U18 Softball Fast Pitch Championships in 2011 and 2012, while the Senior Twins hosted the National Senior Fast Pitch Championships in 2012. In baseball, the Fredericton Senior Royals celebrated their 100th anniversary in 2011 and their 11th (17th including when the team was the Marysville Royals) New Brunswick Senior Baseball League Championship in 2012. That same Royals program produced Matt Stairs, a Major League baseball player and local legend who played for Team Canada in the 1988 Summer Olympics and won the World Series with the Philadelphia Phillies in 2008.

Fredericton has several large parks, including Odell Park, Reading Park, Queen's Square, Officer's Square, Carleton Park and Wilmot Park. Killarney Lake and nearby Mactaquac Provincial Park have small beaches which are popular in the summer. These, along with the river, provide excellent venues for water sports. Skiing and snowboarding at nearby Crabbe Mountain are also common winter activities among city residents, as is skating on the outdoor rinks at Officer's and Queen's Squares. There are also several trails within the city which are used in the winter for cross-country skiing. Fredericton also boasts public and private facilities for archery, soccer, track and field, golf, football, fencing, rowing, sailing, swimming, curling, martial arts, bowling, paintball, and lawn bowling.

==Government and politics==
NB Legislative Building, seat of New Brunswick Government since 1882
Fredericton City Hall, a National Historic Site of Canada, in 2005

===Administrative structure===
Fredericton has a mayor-council and non-partisan form of government, with the mayor and council serving fixed four-year terms (three years until 2004), and elections held in May. The current mayor is Brad Woodside, who first served from 1986 until 1999 but was re-elected in 2004. He has since won two further elections, extending his tenure through to 2016.

The city is divided into twelve wards (six on each side of the Saint John River), with each ward electing one councillor.

The Boyce Farmers Market, open on Saturday mornings, is a place where municipal, provincial and federal politicians frequently visit to mingle with their electorate - something which has evolved into a political tradition.

===Fredericton and provincial/federal politics===
Provincially, Fredericton elected Progressive Conservatives from 1952 until electoral sweep of the Liberal Party in 1987 when they won every seat in New Brunswick under Frank McKenna. Since then there has been greater political alteration in the provincial electoral landscape in Fredericton.

In 1991, the right-wing Confederation of Regions Party won the riding of Fredericton North (along with several other nearby ridings). In 1999 Progressive Conservatives swept all three Fredericton area seats; however, in 2003, Fredericton-North and Fredericton-Fort Nashwaak returned to the Liberals. Elections New Brunswick 

Federally, the city forms most of the riding of Fredericton. This riding was formerly known as Fredericton-York-Sunbury but was redistributed prior to the 1997 general election. From 1957 until 1993 Fredericton returned Progressive Conservatives. The 2008 Federal Election saw the Conservative Party of Canada take the seat with former New Maryland MLA Keith Ashfield taking this seat with 42% of the popular vote.

==Demography==
The population of Fredericton is 56,224 (2011 Census). Along with Moncton and Halifax, Fredericton is one of three Maritime cities to register a population increase in recent years.

 Historical populations 
 Censusyear Population 
 
 1861 6,000 
 1871 6,006 
 1881 6,218 
 1891 6,502 
 1901 7,117 
 1911 7,208 
 1921 8,114 
 1931 8,830 
 1941 10,062* 
 1951 16,018 
 1956 18,303 
 1961 19,683 
 1966 22,460 
 1971 24,254 
 1976 45,248** 
 1981 43,723 
 1986 44,352 
 1991 47,510 
 2001 48,560 
 2006 50,535 
 2011 56,224 
 * Boundary change 
 ** City amalgamated with surroundings in 1973 

Colors=
 id:lightgrey value:gray(0.9)
 id:darkgrey value:gray(0.8)
 id:sfondo value:rgb(1,1,1)
 id:barra value:rgb(0.6,0.7,0.8)

ImageSize = width:455 height:303
PlotArea = left:50 bottom:50 top:30 right:30
DateFormat = x.y
Period = from:0 till:60000
TimeAxis = orientation:vertical
AlignBars = justify
ScaleMajor = gridcolor:darkgrey increment:10000 start:0
ScaleMinor = gridcolor:lightgrey increment:1000 start:0
BackgroundColors = canvas:sfondo

BarData=
 bar:1861 text:1861
 bar:1871 text:1871
 bar:1881 text:1881
 bar:1891 text:1891
 bar:1901 text:1901
 bar:1911 text:1911
 bar:1921 text:1921
 bar:1931 text:1931
 bar:1941 text:1941
 bar:1951 text:1951
 bar:1961 text:1961
 bar:1971 text:1971
 bar:1981 text:1981
 bar:1991 text:1991
 bar:2001 text:2001
 bar:2011 text:2011

PlotData=
 color:barra width:20 align:left

 bar:1861 from: 0 till:6000
 bar:1871 from: 0 till:6006
 bar:1881 from: 0 till:6218
 bar:1891 from: 0 till:6502
 bar:1901 from: 0 till:7117
 bar:1911 from: 0 till:7208
 bar:1921 from: 0 till:8114
 bar:1931 from: 0 till:8830
 bar:1941 from: 0 till:10062
 bar:1951 from: 0 till:16018
 bar:1961 from: 0 till:18303
 bar:1971 from: 0 till:24254
 bar:1981 from: 0 till:43723
 bar:1991 from: 0 till:47510
 bar:2001 from: 0 till:48560
 bar:2011 from: 0 till:56224

PlotData=

 bar:1861 at:6000 fontsize:XS text: 6000 shift:(-8,5)
 bar:1871 at:6006 fontsize:XS text: 6006 shift:(-8,5)
 bar:1881 at:6218 fontsize:XS text: 6218 shift:(-8,5)
 bar:1891 at:6502 fontsize:XS text: 6502 shift:(-8,5)
 bar:1901 at:7117 fontsize:XS text: 7117 shift:(-8,5)
 bar:1911 at:7208 fontsize:XS text: 7208 shift:(-8,5)
 bar:1921 at:8114 fontsize:XS text: 8114 shift:(-8,5)
 bar:1931 at:8830 fontsize:XS text: 8830 shift:(-8,5)
 bar:1941 at:10062 fontsize:XS text: 10062 shift:(-8,5)
 bar:1951 at:16018 fontsize:XS text: 16018 shift:(-8,5)
 bar:1961 at:18303 fontsize:XS text: 18303 shift:(-8,5)
 bar:1971 at:24254 fontsize:XS text: 24254 shift:(-8,5)
 bar:1981 at:43723 fontsize:XS text: 43723 shift:(-8,5)
 bar:1991 at:47510 fontsize:XS text: 47510 shift:(-8,5)
 bar:2001 at:48560 fontsize:XS text: 48560 shift:(-8,5)
 bar:2011 at:56224 fontsize:XS text: 56224 shift:(-8,5)

TextData=
 fontsize:S pos:(20,20)
 text:Data from Statistics Canada; increases in 1941 and 1981 were the result of boundary changes.

===Ethnicity===
Fredericton's population is predominantly white. However, a black minority has had a long presence in the city, primarily in the Barker's Point borough. Willie O'Ree, the first black player in the NHL, was from Fredericton. The largest non-white segment of Fredericton's population is made up of First Nations people, who live primarily on the Saint Mary's Reserve located in the city's north side.

In the 1960s and 1970s, an influx of immigrants from Asia and the Middle East began, although their numbers remain small. Since 2000, the city's universities - Saint Thomas University and the University of New Brunswick - have seen a growing number of students from overseas attending.

===Religion===
Christ Church Cathedral
The residents of Fredericton are predominantly Christian, with Protestants forming the largest denomination. The city is notable for its many churches - a high number per capita in comparison to most other Canadian cities. The small Pentecostal Northeast Christian College is located on the city's north side. While the Roman Catholic population is not as large, the city does boast the province's only Roman Catholic university - Saint Thomas University. Recent discussions at Saint Thomas University have concerned whether the university should adopt a more Catholic character.

Fredericton has a synagogue, a mosque, and a Hindu temple as well. The importance of these institutions has been growing in recent years warranting visits by prominent politicians in the area seeking election. On 9 October 2011, a swastika was scrawled on the front door of the community's synagogue, and was investigated as a potential hate crime. A Unitarian fellowship has been serving Fredericton since 1960 as a place for people to find a liberal religious home. Fredericton also hosts a Shambhala Buddhist meditation centre. 

 Main Religious Denominations in Fredericton 
 2001 20111 
 Number % Number % 
 Total Population 47,005 100 55,145 100 
 Christian 38,875 82.7 38,940 70.6 
 - Total Catholic2 13,565 28.8 13,740 24.9 
 - Total Protestant 25,090 53.3 24,985 45.3 
 - Baptist 6,290 11.4 
 - United Church of Canada 5,995 10.9 
 - Protestant, Other3 930 2.0 5,265 9.5 
 - Anglican Church of Canada 5,160 9.4 
 - Pentecostal 1,390 2.5 
 - Presbyterian 785 1.4 
 - Lutheran 100 0.2 
 - Christian Orthodox4 220 0.5 205 0.4 
 No Religious Affiliation 6,975 14.8 14,460 26.2 
 Other 1155 2.5 2,090 3.8 
 - Muslim 455 1.0 685 1.2 
 - Other Religions5 185 0.4 335 0.6 
 - Hindu 200 0.4 330 0.6 
 - Buddhist 135 0.3 255 0.4 
 - Jewish 180 0.4 125 0.2 
 1 The 2011 data is from the National Household Survey and so numbers are estimates. 2Includes Roman Catholic and Ukrainian Catholic 3 Includes persons who report only \"Protestant\" and those who report Christian, and those who report Apostolic, Born-again Christian and Evangelical and those who report from all protestant denominations with less than 0.05% of the population including those who report \"Christian Reformed Church and those who report \"Methodist\" and those who report \"Mennonite\" and those who report \"Christian Missionary Alliance\" and those who report \"Brethren in Christ\" and those who report \"Evangelical Missionary Church\" 4 Includes persons who report \"Orthodox\". Also includes Greek Orthodox, Ukrainian Orthodox, Serbian Orthodox, Armenian Apostolic, Bulgarian Orthodox, Ethiopian Orthodox and Macedonian Orthodox 5 Includes persons who report all Religions with less than 0.05% of the population including Pagan, Wiccan and Sikh as well as persons who report only \"non-denominational\". 

===Language===
While a predominantly Anglophone city, the civil service has seen an increase in the City's Francophone population. This population is serviced by the Centre Communautaire Sainte-Anne (which includes K-12 schooling, a radio station, a public library, and cultural centre). As well, Fredericton is serviced by the Francophone church located on Regent Street.

The linguistic breakdown of Fredericton is as follows:
*75.6% English only
*23.6% Bilingual (French and English)
*0.5% French only
*0.3% Other

==Media==

==Transportation==

===Air===
Air service is provided out of the Fredericton International Airport, located approximately 15 kilometres east of downtown in Lincoln. It is served by Air Canada, which operates direct flights to Toronto, Ottawa, Montreal and Halifax. Seasonal direct flights are also offered to Cuba and the Caribbean during the late winter and early spring months.

===Roads and highways===

Fredericton is located on the Trans-Canada Highway, which passes along the southern municipal boundary. Routes 7 and 8 (the latter being a former alignment of the Trans-Canada) also pass through the city. Two highway bridges, the Westmorland Street Bridge and the Princess Margaret Bridge, cross the Saint John River. Those bridges both feed into controlled-access roads (Routes 8 and 105 serving the city's north side.) The city's highway system is mostly complete, and traffic jams rarely occur.

Streets in downtown follow a grid pattern. In residential areas of downtown, some neighbourhoods are traffic-calmed and include traffic circles at intersections to slow the speed of cars and discourage thoroughfare traffic. Northumberland Street and Odell Avenue have adopted speedbumps to slow fast moving traffic. The pattern of streets in the rest of the city varies including straight thoroughfares (such as Smythe Street, Prospect Street and Regent Street), to curved streets and cul-de-sacs in primarily residential areas.

===Rail and public transit, rail services===
There is no rail service into Fredericton. Passenger service started in 1869 and ended in the 1960s. A brief 1981 revival with Via Rail's Atlantic train connected Saint John and Fredericton to Montreal, passing through Maine; passport restrictions and other complications eventually made passenger service unprofitable, and the last train left Fredericton in November 1993. Freight service stopped in 1996 and all railway tracks have since been abandoned and removed, with the city joining St. John's and Charlottetown as Canada's only provincial capitals without rail service. Since 1 December 2012, Fredericton is served by Maritime Bus connections to points throughout Eastern Canada. 

Fredericton Transit provides bus transit service to most areas of the city. All city buses feature bike racks so that cyclists can take advantage of bus services as well. Furthermore, during the last budget the Federal Government pledged more money towards urban infrastructure - some of this money will go towards upgrading Fredericton's bus transit system.

Fredericton is also served by several taxi companies. The major companies in alphabetical order are: ABC Car Services, Checker Cab, George's Skycab, Loyal Taxi, Standard Taxi and Trius Taxi.

Fredericton first started installing bicycle lanes in July 2008, with a plan to establish 45 kilometres of on-street painted bicycle lanes and 39 kilometres of signed bicycle routes by 2011. 

===Fredericton trail system===
Reading Trail runs through the last remaining old-growth forest in Fredericton's Skyline Acres neighbourhood.
Fredericton has a network of 25 trails totalling more than 85 km on both sides of the St. John and Nashwaak Rivers. Many of the city trails are rail trails that follow old railway lines. These include the Old Train Bridge that spans 0.6 km across the St. John River, providing a panoramic view of downtown Fredericton. Crossing the Nashwaak River is the Sir Karim Fagir Memorial Bridge, located just outside the city limits. The rail trail system in Fredericton is part of the Sentier NB Trail system and some of these trails are also part of the larger Trans-Canada Trail network. Some sections of the trail system are being paved to make it more accessible to non-motorized vehicles such as bicycles and wheelchairs.

Railway service through Fredericton was discontinued by CP Rail in fall 1993 and CN Rail in spring 1996. Following abandonment, both companies sold their right-of-ways to the provincial government which developed the trail network in partnership with the city and volunteer trail organizations. The trails are used by residents for walking, biking, and jogging and boast several scenic vistas along the Saint John and Nashwaak rivers as well as a mix of urban and wooded/natural scenery.

On the south side of the city, CP Rail's Fredericton Subdivision enters the city from Rusagonis to the south, following the Wilsey Road and Beaverbrook Street to the former railway yard where a Sobeys supermarket has been built along Regent Street. The former CP passenger station (York Street Railway Station) is located at the end of the Fredericton Subdivision and, after sitting abandoned for decades, was renovated into a winery and liquor store in 2011.

On the north side of the city, CP Rail's Gibson Subdivision enters the city from Douglas in the west, following the Saint John River through Nashwaaksis to South Devon. CP Rail's Minto Subdivision enters the city from Barker's Point in the east and follows the Saint John River to South Devon and crossing the Nashwaak River. CP Rail's Marysville Spur runs from Barker's Point to Marysville along the east bank of the Nashwaak River.

On the south side, CN Rail's Oromocto Subdivision enters the city from Lincoln in the east and parallels the former CP line to the downtown rail yard and York Street Station. CN's former Centreville Subdivision continues beyond the station to Silverwood in the west; this rail line was abandoned west of the Hanwell Road after the Mactaquac Dam opened in 1968 and flooded the right-of-way through to Woodstock. CN Rail's Nashwaak Subdivision joined the Oromocto Subdivision at Una Junction, immediately north of Beaverbrook Street opposite the University of New Brunswick campus. The line proceeds north, crossing the Saint John River on the Fredericton Railway Bridge, to the former railway yard in South Devon where CP Rail's Gibson and Minto subdivisions join. The Nashwaak Subdivision continues up the Nashwaak River valley to McGivney.

Reading Park Trail, ( ) is a 1.1 km forested trail going through Reading Park in Skyline Acres on the City's south side. Protected by trees, and constructed in a loop, Reading Park Trail is very popular with city residents for walking their dogs. It's also a destination for bird watchers, as the park's old-growth forest is one of the city's last remaining habitats for the pileated woodpecker.

==Attractions==

===Museums and historic buildings===
Robert Burns statue, across from the Provincial Legislature in downtown Fredericton
* Beaverbrook Art Gallery
* New Brunswick Legislative Building
* Old Government House
* Historic Garrison District
* York Sunbury Museum
* Boyce Farmers Market
* Christ Church Cathedral
* New Brunswick Sports Hall of Fame
* Gallery 78
* Science East
* Loyalist Cemetery
* Old Burial Ground
* Sir Howard Douglas Hall (Old Arts Building)

===Parks and public spaces===
Fredericton contains many public parks featuring preserved forest lands - such as Odell Park and Reading Park. Odell Park is adjacent to the Fredericton Botanic Garden. Furthermore, Fredericton features tree-lined streets and elm trees in particular which have earned the city its nickname "The City of Stately Elms". Fredericton's parks and public spaces include:

*Carleton Park - A part of the Northside Riverfront Trail, Carleton Park boasts a large open field and a boat launching area. The park, which was once the site of Alexander "Boss" Gibson's rail yard, is adjacent to the Bill Thorpe Walking Bridge, which provides easy access to the Southside of the City.
* The Green - along the north and south banks of the Saint John River, the green is primarily a walking and biking trail flanked by grassy areas for picnics and sun bathing. Along Waterloo Row, the Green becomes Morrell Park which features two football/soccer fields and a baseball field. Closer to the Downtown, across Saint Annes Point Drive from Officer's Square is the Lighthouse which is an ice cream parlour and tourist attraction, as well as hosting a Tourism Fredericton Information Desk.
* Killarney Lake Park - A lakeside park with a beach and picnic spots as well as an extensive network of nature trails
* Odell Park - features preserved forested areas and well groomed trails, as well as recreational spaces for picnics and outdoor gatherings. In the lower centre of the park is a lodge for events such as wedding receptions and adjacent to Prospect street at the top of the park is the Fredericton Botanic Garden and the Prospect Street Softball Fields.
* Officer's Square - a popular picnic destination in the summer, Officer's Square is the former square for military officers outside the Officer's Baracks (now the Fredericton Regional Museum). The Calithumpians Theatre Company holds daily shows on a permanent stage every weekday throughout the summer. As well, the Fredericton City Guard holds a parade in the Square several times a day throughout the summer. The Square is also a popular venue for outdoor concerts and boasts an outdoor skating rink in the winter.
* Queen Square Park - this popular park, located in the heart of Downtown Fredericton, features a new pool (a hybrid of a kids wading pool with fun water toys and a lap pool), playground, tennis courts and 2 baseball fields. Tennis courts are flooded in winter to create a skating rink.
* Reading Park - a 33 acre passive use park incorporating an open meadow, and a 1.1 kilometre walking trail through a beautiful old-growth forest.
* Wilmot Park - a recreational park in the downtown, across from Old Government House featuring a wading pool, playground, outdoor basketball and tennis courts and the Fredericton Lawn Bowling Centre.

==Partner cities==

* Gangnam-gu, South Korea

==Notable people==

==See also==

*List of cities in Canada
*Fredericton Public Library

==References==

* Dallison, Robert L. "A Tour of Boss Gibson's Marysville: A Nineteenth Century Mill Town." Fredericton Heritage Trust, 1991.
* Hachey, Philip Osmond "The geology and ground water of the Fredericton district." UNB Thesis, 1955.
* McIntyre, Glen, Bruce Oliver and Bob Watson, "A Valuable and Important Place - Fredericton's Loyalist Origins 1783." A Fredericton Historical Research Project, 1983.
* History of Christchurch Cathedral
* Harvest Jazz and Blues Festival 

==External links==

* City of Fredericton
* Fredericton Trail System

 



[[Free software]]

gNewSense, an operating system composed entirely of free software
Free software, software libre, or libre software See is computer software that is distributed along with its source code, and is released under a software license that guarantee users the freedom to run the software for any purpose as well as to study, adapt/modify, and distribute the original software and the adapted/changed versions. Free Software Movement (gnu.org) Philosophy of the GNU Project (gnu.org) What is free software (fsf.org) Free Software Free Society: Selected Essays of Richard M. Stallman, 2nd Edition Free software is often developed collaboratively by volunteer computer programmers.

Free software differs from proprietary software (such as Microsoft Windows), which to varying degrees does not give the user freedoms to study, modify and share the software, and threatens users with legal penalties if they do not conform to the terms of restrictive software licenses. Proprietary software is usually sold as a binary executable program without access to the source code, which prevents users from modifying and patching it, and results in the user becoming dependent on software companies (vendor lock-in) to provide updates and support. Free software is also distinct from freeware, which does not require payment for use, but includes software where the authors or copyright holders of freeware have retained all of the rights to the software, so that it is not necessarily permissible to reverse engineer, modify, or redistribute freeware. Thus, free software is primarily a matter of liberty, not price: users are free to do whatever they want with it  this includes the freedom to redistribute the software free-of-charge, or to sell it (or related services such as support or warranty) for profit. Selling Free Software (gnu.org) 

The term "free software" was coined in 1985 by Richard Stallman, during the founding of the GNU project (a collaborative effort to create a freedom-respecting operating system) and the Free Software Foundation (FSF). The FSF's Free Software Definition states that users of free software are "free" because they do not need to ask for any permission; and they are not restricted in activities through restrictive proprietary licenses (e.g. copy-restriction), or requirements of having to agree to restrictive terms of others (e.g. non-disclosure agreements), and they are not already restricted from the outset (e.g. through deliberate non-availability of source code). 

== History ==

Richard Stallman, founder of the Free Software Movement
From the 1950s up until the early 1970s, it was normal for computer users to have the software freedoms associated with free software. Software was commonly shared by individuals who used computers and by hardware manufacturers who welcomed the fact that people were making software that made their hardware useful. Organizations of users and suppliers, for example, SHARE, were formed to facilitate exchange of software. By the early 1970s, the picture changed: software costs were dramatically increasing, a growing software industry was competing with the hardware manufacturer's bundled software products (free in that the cost was included in the hardware cost), leased machines required software support while providing no revenue for software, and some customers able to better meet their own needs did not want the costs of "free" software bundled with hardware product costs. In United States vs. IBM, filed January 17, 1969, the government charged that bundled software was anticompetitive. While some software might always be free, there would be a growing amount of software that was for sale only. In the 1970s and early 1980s, the software industry began using technical measures (such as only distributing binary copies of computer programs) to prevent computer users from being able to study and modify software. In 1980 copyright law was extended to computer programs.
In 1983, Richard Stallman, longtime member of the hacker community at the MIT Artificial Intelligence Laboratory, announced the GNU project, saying that he had become frustrated with the effects of the change in culture of the computer industry and its users. Software development for the GNU operating system began in January 1984, and the Free Software Foundation (FSF) was founded in October 1985. He developed a free software definition and the concept of "copyleft", designed to ensure software freedom for all.
Some non-software industries are beginning to use techniques similar to those used in free software development for their research and development process; scientists, for example, are looking towards more open development processes, and hardware such as microchips are beginning to be developed with specifications released under copyleft licenses (see the OpenCores project, for instance). Creative Commons and the free culture movement have also been largely influenced by the free software movement.
In the 1950s, 1960s, and 1970s, it was far more common for computer users to have the freedoms that are provided by free software. Software, including source code, was commonly shared by individuals who used computers. Most companies had a business model based on hardware sales, and provided or bundled the software free of charge. Organizations of users and suppliers were formed to facilitate the exchange of software; see, for example, SHARE and DECUS. 
By the late 1960s, the prevailing business model around software was changing. A growing and evolving software industry was competing with the hardware manufacturer's bundled software products; rather than funding software development from hardware revenue, these new companies were selling software directly. Leased machines required software support while providing no revenue for software, and some customers able to better meet their own needs did not want the costs of software bundled with hardware product costs. In United States vs. IBM, filed 17 January 1969, the government charged that bundled software was anticompetitive. While some software might always be free, there would be a growing amount of software that was for sale only. In the 1970s and early 1980s, some parts of the software industry began using technical measures (such as only distributing binary copies of computer programs) to prevent computer users from being able to use reverse engineering techniques to study and customize software they had paid for. In 1980, the copyright law (Pub. L. No. 96-517, 94 Stat. 3015, 3028) was extended to computer programs in the United States. Computer Software 1980 Copyright Act, Pub. L. No. 96-517, 94 Stat. 3015, 3028. 

===1980s: Foundation of the GNU project===
In 1983, Richard Stallman, longtime member of the hacker community at the MIT Artificial Intelligence Laboratory, announced the GNU project, saying that he had become frustrated with the effects of the change in culture of the computer industry and its users. William 2002 Software development for the GNU operating system began in January 1984, and the Free Software Foundation (FSF) was founded in October 1985. An article outlining the project and its goals was published in March 1985 titled the GNU Manifesto. The manifesto included significant explanation of the GNU philosophy, Free Software Definition and "copyleft" ideas.

===1990s: Release of the Linux kernel===
The Linux kernel, started by Linus Torvalds, was released as freely modifiable source code in 1991. The first licence wasn't a free or open-source software licence. However, with version 0.12 in February 1992, he relicensed the project under the GNU General Public License. Much like Unix, Torvalds' kernel attracted the attention of volunteer programmers.
FreeBSD and NetBSD (both derived from 386BSD) were released as free software when the USL v. BSDi lawsuit was settled out of court in 1993. OpenBSD forked from NetBSD in 1995. Also in 1995, The Apache HTTP Server, commonly referred to as Apache, was released under the Apache License 1.0.
Without a kernel, an operating system doesn't exist. Without programs, a kernel is useless.

== Naming ==

The FSF recommends using the term "free software" rather than "open-source software" because, as they state in a paper on Free Software philosophy, the latter term and the associated marketing campaign focuses on the technical issues of software development, avoiding the issue of user freedoms. The FSF also notes that "Open Source" has exactly one specific meaning in common English, namely that "you can look at the source code." Stallman states that while the term "Free Software" can lead to two different interpretations, one of them is consistent with FSF definition of Free Software so there is at least some chance that it could be understood properly, unlike the term "Open Source". Stallman has also stated that considering the practical advantages of free software is like considering the practical advantages of not being handcuffed in that it is not necessary for an individual to consider practical reasons in order to realize that being handcuffed restricts their freedom. "Libre" is often used to avoid the ambiguity of the word "free" in English language; see Gratis versus libre. 

== Definition ==

The first formal definition of free software was published by FSF in February 1986. That definition, written by Richard Stallman, is still maintained today and states that software is free software if people who receive a copy of the software have the following four freedoms. (The numbering begins with zero since many computer systems use zero-based numbering.)
* Freedom 0: The freedom to run the program for any purpose.
* Freedom 1: The freedom to study how the program works, and change it to make it do what you wish.
* Freedom 2: The freedom to redistribute copies so you can help your neighbor.
* Freedom 3: The freedom to improve the program, and release your improvements (and modified versions in general) to the public, so that the whole community benefits.

Freedoms 1 and 3 require source code to be available because studying and modifying software without its source code can range from highly impractical to nearly impossible.

Thus, free software means that computer users have the freedom to cooperate with whom they choose, and to control the software they use. To summarize this into a remark distinguishing libre (freedom) software from gratis (zero price) software, the Free Software Foundation says: "Free software is a matter of liberty, not price. To understand the concept, you should think of 'free' as in 'free speech', not as in 'free beer. See Gratis versus libre.

In the late 1990s, other groups published their own definitions that describe an almost identical set of software. The most notable are Debian Free Software Guidelines published in 1997, and the Open Source Definition, published in 1998.

The BSD-based operating systems, such as FreeBSD, OpenBSD, and NetBSD, do not have their own formal definitions of free software. Users of these systems generally find the same set of software to be acceptable, but sometimes see copyleft as restrictive. They generally advocate permissive free software licenses, which allow others to use the software as they wish, without being legally forced to provide the source code. Their view is that this permissive approach is more free. The Kerberos, X11, and Apache software licenses are substantially similar in intent and implementation.

== Examples ==
Creating a 3D car racing game using the free/open-source Blender Game Engine
Screenshot of Debian GNU/Linux (version 7.1, "Wheezy") with the GNOME desktop environment, Firefox browser, Tor anonymity software, the Gedit text editor, and VLC media player running. Thousands of other free desktop applications are available on the Internet. Users can easily download and install this free software via a simple package manager that comes with most Linux distributions.

The Free Software Directory maintains a large database of free software packages. Some of the best-known examples include the Linux Kernel, the BSD and GNU/Linux operating systems, the GNU Compiler Collection and C library; the MySQL relational database; the Apache web server; and the Sendmail mail transport agent. Other influential examples include the emacs text editor; the GIMP raster drawing and image editor; the X Window System graphical-display system; the LibreOffice office suite; and the TeX and LaTeX typesetting systems.

== Licensing ==

All free software licenses must grant users all the freedoms discussed above. However, unless the applications' licenses are compatible, combining programs by mixing source code or directly linking binaries is problematic, because of license technicalities. Programs indirectly connected together may avoid this problem.

The majority of free software falls under a small set of licenses. The most popular of these licenses are:

* the GNU General Public License
* the GNU Lesser General Public License
* the BSD License
* the Mozilla Public License
* the MIT License
* the Apache License
* the Eclipse Public License

The Free Software Foundation and the Open Source Initiative both publish lists of licenses that they find to comply with their own definitions of free software and open-source software respectively:

* List of FSF approved software licenses
* List of OSI approved software licenses

The FSF list is not prescriptive: free licenses can exist that the FSF has not heard about, or considered important enough to write about. So it's possible for a license to be free and not in the FSF list. The OSI list only lists licenses that have been submitted, considered and approved. All open-source licenses must meet the Open Source Definition in order to be officially recognized as open source software. Free software on the other hand is a more informal classification that does not rely on official recognition. Nevertheless, software licensed under licenses that do not meet the Free Software Definition cannot rightly be considered free software.

Editing an audio file using the free/open-source audio editor Audacity
Apart from these two organizations, the Debian project is seen by some to provide useful advice on whether particular licenses comply with their Debian Free Software Guidelines. Debian doesn't publish a list of approved licenses, so its judgments have to be tracked by checking what software they have allowed into their software archives. That is summarized at the Debian web site. 

It is rare that a license announced as being in-compliance with the FSF guidelines does not also meet the Open Source Definition, although the reverse is not necessarily true (for example, the NASA Open Source Agreement is an OSI-approved license, but non-free according to FSF).

There are different categories of free software.

* Public domain software: the copyright has expired, the work was not copyrighted, or the author has released the software onto the public domain (in countries where this is possible). Since public-domain software lacks copyright protection, it may be freely incorporated into any work, whether proprietary or free. The FSF recommends the CC0 public domain dedication for this purpose. 
* Permissive licenses, also called BSD-style because they are applied to much of the software distributed with the BSD operating systems: these licenses are also known as copyfree as they have no restrictions on distribution. The author retains copyright solely to disclaim warranty and require proper attribution of modified works, and permits redistribution and any modification, even closed-source ones. In this sense, a permissive license provides an incentive to create non-free software, by reducing the cost of developing restricted software. Since this is incompatible with the spirit of software freedom, many people consider permissive licenses to be less free than copyleft licenses.
* Copyleft licenses, with the GNU General Public License being the most prominent: the author retains copyright and permits redistribution under the restriction that all such redistribution is licensed under the same license. Additions and modifications by others must also be licensed under the same "copyleft" license whenever they are distributed with part of the original licensed product. This is also known as a Viral license. Due to the restriction on distribution not everyone considers this type of license to be free. 

== Security and reliability ==
Almost all computer viruses can only affect the Microsoft Windows operating system, but antivirus software such as ClamAV (shown here) is still provided for Linux and other Unix-based systems, so that users can scan files to detect malware that might infect Windows hosts
There is debate over the security of free software in comparison to proprietary software, with a major issue being security through obscurity. A popular quantitative test in computer security is to use relative counting of known unpatched security flaws. Generally, users of this method advise avoiding products that lack fixes for known security flaws, at least until a fix is available.

Free software advocates strongly believe that this methodology is biased by counting more vulnerabilities for the free software, since its source code is accessible and its community is more forthcoming about what problems exist, (This is called "Security Through Disclosure" ) and proprietary software can have undisclosed societal drawbacks, such as disenfranchising less fortunate would-be users of free programs. As users can analyse and trace the source code, many more people with no commercial constraints can inspect the code and find bugs and loopholes than a corporation would find practicable. According to Richard Stallman, user access to the source code makes deploying free software with undesirable hidden spyware functionality far more difficult than for proprietary software. As examples, he named two aspects of Windows XP that reveal information to Microsoft, which were discovered in spite of the estimated 50 million or more lines of Windows code having not been available to individual users for personal auditing. Free or opensource software is acquiring philanthropist funding and being adopted in the mainstream media as a panacea, and even President Barack Obama has become involved, signing an emergency executive order in March of 2014, allocating $6.2 billion dollars to the Opensource Endowment Fund, which will fund undergrad and graduate Computer Science students by providing them training in opensource development and eventual 5, 10, and 15 year contracts under the Opensource Endowment to produce all manner of high-quality free software for the U.S., Britain, Africa, and EU. The project began in over 300 leading American Universities May 1, 2014, and the project funding resumes yearly through the end of 2042.

Some quantitative studies have been done on the subject. 

Many free operating systems such as Debian Linux, OpenBSD, and FreeBSD have more secure default installation configurations than Microsoft Windows, resulting in far fewer compromised systems. Furthermore, users of free operating systems have access to a wide array of free security software, such as the packet analyzer Wireshark (shown here), which they can use to secure their operating systems and networks

=== Binary blobs and other proprietary software===
In 2006, OpenBSD started the first campaign against the use of binary blobs, in kernels. Blobs are usually freely distributable device drivers for hardware from vendors that do not reveal driver source code to users or developers. This restricts the users' freedom effectively to modify the software and distribute modified versions. Also, since the blobs are undocumented and may have bugs, they pose a security risk to any operating system whose kernel includes them. The proclaimed aim of the campaign against blobs is to collect hardware documentation that allows developers to write free software drivers for that hardware, ultimately enabling all free operating systems to become or remain blob-free.

The issue of binary blobs in the Linux kernel and other device drivers motivated some developers in Ireland to launch gNewSense, a Linux based distribution with all the binary blobs removed. The project received support from the Free Software Foundation and stimulated the creation, headed by the Free Software Foundation Latin America, of the Linux-libre kernel. As of October 2012, Trisquel is the most popular FSF endorsed GNU/Linux distribution ranked by Distrowatch (over 12 months). 

== Business model ==
Since free software may be freely redistributed, it is generally available at little or no fee. Free software business models are usually based on adding value such as applications, support, training, customization, integration, or certification. At the same time, some business models that work with proprietary software are not compatible with free software, such as those that depend on the user to pay for a license in order to lawfully use the software product.

Fees are usually charged for distribution on compact discs and bootable USB drives, or for services of installing or maintaining the operation of free software. Development of large, commercially used free software is often funded by a combination of user donations, corporate contributions, and tax money. The SELinux project at the United States National Security Agency is an example of a federally funded free software project.

In practice, for software to be distributed as free software, the source code, a human-readable form of the program from which an executable form is produced, must be accessible to the recipient along with a document granting the same rights to free software under which it was published. Such a document is either a free software license or the release of the source code into the public domain.

Selling software under any free software licence is permissible, as is commercial use. This is true for permissive licences, such as the BSD licence, or copyleft licences such as the GNU GPL.

The Free Software Foundation encourages selling free software. As the Foundation has written, "Distributing free software is an opportunity to raise funds for development. Don't waste it!". For example the GNU GPL that is the Free Software Foundation's license states that "user may charge any price or no price for each copy that you convey, and you may offer support or warranty protection for a fee." 

Microsoft CEO Steve Ballmer stated in 2001 that "Open source is not available to commercial companies. The way the license is written, if you use any open-source software, you have to make the rest of your software open source." This misunderstanding is based on a requirement of copyleft licenses (like the GPL) that if one distributes modified versions of software, they must release the source and use the same license. This requirement does not extend to other software from the same developer. The claim of incompatibility between commercial companies and Free Software is also a misunderstanding. There are several large companies, e.g. Red Hat and IBM, which do substantial commercial business in the development of Free Software.

== Economical aspects and adoption ==

Free software played a significant part in the development of the Internet, the World Wide Web and the infrastructure of dot-com companies. Free software allows users to cooperate in enhancing and refining the programs they use; free software is a pure public good rather than a private good. Companies that contribute to free software can increase commercial innovation amidst the void of patent cross licensing lawsuits. (See mpeg2 patent holders.)

The economic viability of free software has been recognized by large corporations such as IBM, Red Hat, and Sun Microsystems. Many companies whose core business is not in the IT sector choose free software for their Internet information and sales sites, due to the lower initial capital investment and ability to freely customize the application packages.

Under the free software business model, free software vendors may charge a fee for distribution and offer pay support and software customization services. Proprietary software uses a different business model, where a customer of the proprietary software pays a fee for a license to use the software. This license may grant the customer the ability to configure some or no parts of the software themselves. Often some level of support is included in the purchase of proprietary software, but additional support services (especially for enterprise applications) are usually available for an additional fee. Some proprietary software vendors will also customize software for a fee. 

Free software is generally available at no cost and can result in permanently lower TCO costs compared to proprietary software. With free software, businesses can fit software to their specific needs by changing the software themselves or by hiring programmers to modify it for them. Free software often has no warranty, and more importantly, generally does not assign legal liability to anyone. However, warranties are permitted between any two parties upon the condition of the software and its usage. Such an agreement is made separately from the free software license.

A report by Standish Group estimates that adoption of free software has caused a drop in revenue to the proprietary software industry by about $60 billion per year. In spite of this, Eric S. Raymond argues that the term free software is too ambiguous and intimidating for the business community. Raymond promotes the term open-source software as a friendlier alternative for the business and corporate world. 

== See also ==

* Definition of Free Cultural Works
* Free content
* Free and open-source software
* Libre knowledge
* Open format
* Open standard
* Outline of free software
* Public domain
* software lists and comparisons]
* List of formerly proprietary software
* List of free software project directories
* List of free software for Web 2.0 Services

== References ==

== Further reading ==
* Puckette, Miller. "Who Owns our Software?: A first-person case study." eContact (September 2009). Montral: CEC
* Hancock, Terry. "The Jargon of Freedom: 60 Words and Phrases with Context". Free Software Magazine. 2010-20-24
* 

== External links ==

;Definition and philosophy
* Free Software Movement; Philosophy and Intro; The Free Software Definition (gnu.org)
* What is free software? (fsf.org)
* Categories of free and nonfree software (gnu.org)
* Freedom for Users, Not for Software (Benjamin Mako Hill)
* What Does Free Mean? or What do you mean by Free Software? (debian.org)
;Presentations
* Video and audio presentations on Free Software (top link)
* Free as in Freedom (originally the oggcast of the Software Freedom Law Center, it includes a focus on law issues, and other topics)
;Software
* Free Software from the GNU Project
* Free Software Directory (catalog of useful free software)

 

 



[[Free]]

Free may refer to:

* Political freedom
* Economic freedom
* Something given or supplied without payment (gratis)
* Gratis versus Libre, the distinction between the two meanings above

Free may also refer to:

==Media==
* , 2009 book by Chris Anderson
* Free (film), a 2001 dramedy
* Free! (anime), a 2013 anime television series
* "Free" (Desperate Housewives), a television episode

== Arts and philosophy ==
* Freedom (disambiguation)
* Free, to emancipate, to obtain political rights (usually for a disenfranchised group)
* Free, a pseudonym for the activist and writer Abbie Hoffman
* Free content, content without significant legal usability restrictions
* Free will, control exercised by rational agents over their actions and decisions

== Computing == 
* Free (programming), a function that releases dynamically allocated memory for reuse
* Freefont, an open font project
* Free format, a file format which can be used without restrictions
* Free software, software usable and distributable with few restrictions and no payment
* Freeware, a broader class of software available at no cost
* Full Reactive Eyes Entertainment, a video game genre as implemented in the game Shenmue

== Mathematics ==
* Free object
** Free abelian group
** Free algebra
** Free group
** Free module
** Free semigroup
* Free variable

== Music == 

===Performers===
* Free (band), an English rock band
* Free (rapper), an American rapper
* Free, a member of the American band FreeSol
* Free!!, a Spanish mkina band

===Albums===
* Free (Airto album)
* Free (Jann Arden album)
* Free (Rick Astley album)
* Free (Bonfire album)
* Free (Concrete Blonde album)
* Free (Dana International album)
* Free (Chico DeBarge album)
* Free (Gavin DeGraw album)
* Free (For Real album)
* Free (Free album), self-titled album
* Free (David Garrett album)
* Free (Benny Golson album)
* Free (Brad Johner album)
* Free (Libera album)
* Free (Mao Abe album)
* Free (Marcus Miller album), or its title song
* Free (Negativland album)
* Free (OSI album), or its title song
* Free (The Party album)
* Free (Twin Atlantic album)
* Free (Planetshakers album)
* Free (Rivermaya album)
* Free (Kate Ryan album)
* Free (Stone album), live recording
* Free (Kierra Sheard album)
* Free (Virtue album)
* Free..., an EP by Acid King, or its title song
* free*, an album by Jim's Big Ego

===Songs===
* "Free" (Chicago song)
* "Free" (Deniece Williams song)
* "Free" (Erika song)
* "Free" (Estelle song)
* "Free" (Haley Rinehart song)
* "Free" (Mao Abe song)
* "Free" (Ma song)
* "Free" (Natalia Kills song)
* "Free" (Sarah Brightman song)
* "Free" (Stryper song)
* "Free" (Train song)
* "Free" (Ultra Nat song)
* "Free" (Zac Brown Band song)
* "Free", by Alesha Dixon from Fired Up
* "Free", by Blue October UK from One Day Silver, One Day Gold
* "Free", by The Cars from Move Like This
* "Free", by Cat Power from You Are Free
* "Free", by DJ Quicksilver
* "Free", by Dani Harmer
* "Free", by Depeche Mode, B-side to the single "Precious"
* "Free", by Graffiti6 from Colours
* "Free", by Jon Secada from his album Same Dream
* "Free", by Phish from Billy Breathes
* "Free", by Plumb from Beautiful Lumps of Coal
* "Free", by Powerman 5000 from Transform
* "Free", by Prince from 1999
* "Free", by Quiet Riot from Rehab
* "Free", by Stevie Wonder from Characters
* "Free", by VAST from Music for People
* "Free", by Yu Yamada, written as the ending theme for Basquash!

== Organizations ==
* Family Residences and Essential Enterprises, a New York agency providing services for individuals with developmental disabilities
* Fight Repression of Erotic Expression, a University of Minnesota student group, now the Queer Student Cultural Center
* Foundation for Rational Economics and Education, a Lake Jackson, Texas, libertarian think-tank founded by Ron Paul
* Foundation for Research on Economics and the Environment, a think-tank that promotes free-market environmentalism
* Free (ISP), a French internet service provider
* Free Airlines, a Kinshasa Congolese air operator

== Public services ==
* Free education, education provided at no cost to all students
* Free public transport, zero-fare services, funded without collecting fares from passengers

== Other uses ==
* Free (surname)

== See also ==
* Freestyle (disambiguation)
* Freedom (disambiguation)
* Freed (disambiguation)
* Freeman (disambiguation)



[[Free software movement]]

Richard Stallman, founder of the GNU Project and the free software movement

The free-software movement is a social movement Richard Stallman on the nature of the Free software movement in 2008 on emacs-devel mailing list. with the goal of obtaining and guaranteeing certain freedoms for software users, namely the freedom to run the software, to study and change the software, and to redistribute copies with or without changes. Although drawing on traditions and philosophies among members of the 1970s hacker culture, Richard Stallman formally founded the movement in 1983 by launching the GNU Project. 

Stallman founded the Free Software Foundation in 1985 to support the movement.

== Philosophy ==
The philosophy of the movement is that the use of computers should not lead to people being prevented from cooperating with each other. In practice, this means rejecting "proprietary software", which imposes such restrictions, and promoting free software, with the ultimate goal of liberating everyone "in cyberspace"  that is, every computer user. Stallman notes that this action will promote rather than hinder the progression of technology, since "it means that much wasteful duplication of system programming effort will be avoided. This effort can go instead into advancing the state of the art". 

Members of the free-software movement believe that all users of software should have the freedoms listed in The Free Software Definition. Many of them hold that it is immoral to prohibit or prevent people from exercising these freedoms and that these freedoms are required to create a decent society where software users can help each other, and to have control over their computers. 

Some adherents to the free-software movement do not believe that proprietary software is strictly immoral. 

"While social change may occur as an unintended by-product of technological change, advocates of new technologies often have promoted them as instruments of positive social change." This quote by San Jose State professor Joel West explains much of the philosophy, or the reason that the free source movement is alive. If it is assumed that social change is not only affected, but in some points of view, directed by the advancement of technology, is it ethical to hold these technologies from certain people? If not to make a direct change, this movement is in place to raise awareness about the effects that take place because of the physical things around us. A computer, for instance, allows us so many more freedoms than we have without a computer, but should these technological mediums be implied freedoms, or selective privileges? The debate over the morality of both sides to the free software movement is a difficult topic to compromise respective opposition. 

The Free Software Foundation also believes all software needs free documentation, in particular because conscientious programmers should be able to update manuals to reflect modification that they made to the software, but deems the freedom to modify less important for other types of written works. Within the free software movement, the Floss manuals foundation specialises on the goal of providing such documentation. Members of the free software movement advocate that works which serve a practical purpose should also be free. 

== Actions ==

=== Writing and spreading free software ===
The core work of the free software movement focused on software development. The free software movement also rejects proprietary software, refusing to install software that does not give them the freedoms of free software. According to Stallman, "The only thing in the software field that is worse than an unauthorised copy of a proprietary program, is an authorised copy of the proprietary program because this does the same harm to its whole community of users, and in addition, usually the developer, the perpetrator of this evil, profits from it." 

=== Building awareness ===
Some supporters of the free-software movement take up public speaking, or host a stall at software-related conferences to raise awareness of software freedom. This is seen as important since people who receive free software, but who are not aware that it is free software, will later accept a non-free replacement or will add software that is not free software. 

=== Ethical equality ===
Margaret S. Elliot, a researcher in the Institute for Software at the University of California Irvine, not only outlines many benefits that could come from a free software movement, she claims that it is inherently necessary to give every person equal opportunity to utilize the Internet, assuming that the computer is globally accessible. Since the world has become more based in the framework of technology and its advancement, creating a selective internet that allows only some to surf the web freely is nonsensical according to Elliot. If there is a desire to live in a more coexistent world that is benefited by communication and global assistance, then globally free software should be a position to strive for, according to many scholars who promote awareness about the free software movement. The ideas sparked by the GNU associates are an attempt to promote a "cooperative environment" that understands the benefits of having a local community and a global community. 

== Legislation ==
A lot of lobbying work has been done against software patents and expansions of copyright law. Other lobbying focusses directly on use of free software by government agencies and government-funded projects.

The Venezuelan government implemented a free software law in January 2006. Decree No. 3,390 mandated all government agencies to migrate to free software over a two-year period. 

Congressmen Edgar David Villanueva and Jacques Rodrich Ackerman have been instrumental in introducing in Republic of Peru bill 1609 on "Free Software in Public Administration". The incident immediately invited the attention of Microsoft Inc, Peru, whose General Manager wrote a letter to Dr Edgar David Villanueva. Dr Villanueva's response received worldwide attention and is still seen as a classical piece of argumentation favouring use of free software in Governments. 

In the USA, there have been efforts to pass legislation at the state level encouraging use of free software by state government agencies. 

== Subgroups and schisms ==
Like many social movements, the free software movement has ongoing internal conflict between personalities and between supporters of compromise versus strict adherence to values.

=== Open source ===
In 1998, some companies met to create a marketing campaign for free software which would focus on technology rather than ethics. After this Eric Raymond and Bruce Perens founded the Open Source Initiative (OSI), to promote the term "open-source software" as an alternative term for free software. OSI did not agree with the free software movement's position that non-free software is a social problem or that it is unethical, "Free", "Open Source", and Philosophies of Software Ownership arguing instead that open-source is a superior model for software development. 

By 2005, Richard Glass considered the differences to be a "serious fracture" but "vitally important to those on both sides of the fracture" and "of little importance to anyone else studying the movement from a software engineering perspective" since they have had "little effect on the field". 

Some free software advocates use the term free and open-source software (FOSS) as an inclusive compromise, drawing on both philosophies to bring both free software advocates and open-source software advocates together to work on projects with more cohesion. Some users believe that a compromise term encompassing both aspects is ideal, to promote both the user's freedom with the software and also to promote the perceived superiority of an open source development model.

While some people prefer to link the two ideas of "open-source software" and "free software" together, it is important to understand the difference because they offer two separate ideas and values. This ambiguity began in 1998 when people started to use the term "open-source software" rather than "free software". People in the community of free software used these separate terms as a way to differentiate what they did. The open-source movement addresses software being open as a practical question as opposed to an ethical dilemma. In other words, it focuses more on the development. The open-source movement ultimately determines that non-free software is not the solution of best interest.

On the other hand, the free-software movement views non-free software as a social issue and free software as the solution to the problem. Those who work within the free-software community have searched for less ambiguous terms in efforts to refine their definition so there is no confusion, but struggle to find words that do not yield vagueness in English (most other languages do not have this problem). Although the movements have separate values and goals, people in both the open-source community and free-software community collaborate when it comes to practical projects. 

The switch from the free-software movement to the open-source movement has had negative effects on the progression of community,according to Christopher Kelty who dedicates a scholarly chapter to the free-software movements in "Theorizing Media and Practice". The open-source movement denies that selectivity and the privatization of software is unethical. Although the open-source movement is working towards the same social benefits as the free software movement, Kelty claims that by disregarding this fundamental belief of the free-software advocates, one is destroying the overall argument. If it can be claimed that it is ethical to limit the internet and other technology to only users who have the means to use this software, then there is no argument against the way things are at the moment; there is no need to complain if all morality is in affect. 

=== Stallman and Torvalds ===
The two most prominent people attached to the movement, Richard Stallman and Linus Torvalds, may be seen as representatives of the value based versus apolitical philosophies, as well as the GNU versus Linux coding styles. Paradoxically as it seems, it is the symbiosis of their works that make up a complete operating system known as GNU/Linux, or just Linux. In the GNU/Linux naming controversy the FSF argues for the term GNU/Linux because GNU was a longstanding project to develop a free operating system, of which they say the kernel was the last missing piece. 

== Measures of progress ==
Ohloh, a web service founded in 2004 and launched in 2006, monitors the development activity in the free-software community, providing detailed metrics and quantitative analyses on the growth and popularity of projects and programming languages.

== Criticism and controversy ==

=== Should principles be compromised? ===
Some, such as Eric Raymond, criticise the speed at which the free-software movement is progressing, suggesting that temporary compromises should be made for long-term gains. Raymond argues that this could raise awareness of the software and thus increase the free-software movement's influence on relevant standards and legislation. 

Others, such as Richard Stallman, see the current level of compromise to be the bigger worry. 

=== How will programmers get paid? ===
Stallman said that this is where people get the misconception of "free": there is no wrong in programmers' requesting payment for a proposed project. Restricting and controlling the user's decisions on use is the actual violation of freedom. Stallman defends that in some cases, monetary incentive is not necessary for motivation since the pleasure in expressing creativity is a reward in itself (such as music and art). 

== See also ==

* GNU Manifesto
* History of free software
* Linux adoption
* Open-source movement
* Free-culture movement
* Free Software Foundation
* Open Source Initiative
* Software Freedom Conservancy

==References==

== Further reading ==
* David M. Berry, Copy, Rip, Burn: The Politics of Copyleft and Open Source, Pluto Press, 2008, ISBN 0-7453-2414-2
* Johan Soderberg, Hacking Capitalism: The Free and Open Source Software Movement, Routledge, 2007, ISBN 0-415-95543-2

==External links==
* What is Free Software? - Essay by Karl Fogel.
* The Free Software Movement and the Future of Freedom, a 2006 lecture by Richard Stallman
* Free Software Movement intro by FSF
* The GNU Project Philosophy Directory, containing many defining documents of the free software movement
* An interview with Stallman, "Free Software as a social movement"
* Christian Imhorst, Anarchy and Source Code - What does the Free Software Movement have to do with Anarchism?, (licence: GFDL), 2005
* An anti-DRM campaign - by Bill Xu and Richard Stallman
* The Codebreakers - a freely redistributable movie
* Stallman's Free Software Song

*


[[Food]]

Various foods
Foods from plant sources

Food is any substance Encyclopdia Britannica definition consumed to provide nutritional support for the body. It is usually of plant or animal origin, and contains essential nutrients, such as carbohydrates, fats, proteins, vitamins, or minerals. The substance is ingested by an organism and assimilated by the organism's cells in an effort to produce energy, maintain life, or stimulate growth.

Historically, people secured food through two methods: hunting and gathering, and agriculture. Today, most of the food energy consumed by the world population is supplied by the food industry.

Food safety and food security are monitored by agencies like the International Association for Food Protection, World Resources Institute, World Food Programme, Food and Agriculture Organization, and International Food Information Council. They address issues such as sustainability, biological diversity, climate change, nutritional economics, population growth, water supply, and access to food.

The right to food is a human right derived from the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights (ICESCR), recognizing the "right to an adequate standard of living, including adequate food," as well as the "fundamental right to be free from hunger."

==Food sources==
Global average daily calorie consumption in 1995
Most food has its origin in plants. Some food is obtained directly from plants; but even animals that are used as food sources are raised by feeding them food derived from plants. Cereal grain is a staple food that provides more food energy worldwide than any other type of crop. Maize, wheat, and rice  in all of their varieties  account for 87% of all grain production worldwide. Most of the grain that is produced worldwide is fed to livestock.

Some foods not from animal or plant sources include various edible fungi, especially mushrooms. Fungi and ambient bacteria are used in the preparation of fermented and pickled foods like leavened bread, alcoholic drinks, cheese, pickles, kombucha, and yogurt. Another example is blue-green algae such as Spirulina. McGee, 333334. Inorganic substances such as salt, baking soda and cream of tartar are used to preserve or chemically alter an ingredient.

===Plants===

Many plants or plant parts are eaten as food. There are around 2,000 plant species which are cultivated for food, and many have several distinct cultivars. McGee, 253. 

Seeds of plants are a good source of food for animals, including humans, because they contain the nutrients necessary for the plant's initial growth, including many healthful fats, such as Omega fats. In fact, the majority of food consumed by human beings are seed-based foods. Edible seeds include cereals (maize, wheat, rice, et cetera), legumes (beans, peas, lentils, et cetera), and nuts. Oilseeds are often pressed to produce rich oils - sunflower, flaxseed, rapeseed (including canola oil), sesame, et cetera. McGee, Chapter 9. 

Seeds are typically high in unsaturated fats and, in moderation, are considered a health food, although not all seeds are edible. Large seeds, such as those from a lemon, pose a choking hazard, while seeds from cherries and apples contain cyanide which could be poisonous only if consumed in large volumes. 

Fruits are the ripened ovaries of plants, including the seeds within. Many plants and animals have coevolved such that the fruits of the former are an attractive food source to the latter, because animals that eat the fruits may excrete the seeds some distance away. Fruits, therefore, make up a significant part of the diets of most cultures. Some botanical fruits, such as tomatoes, pumpkins, and eggplants, are eaten as vegetables. McGee, Chapter 7. (For more information, see list of fruits.)

Vegetables are a second type of plant matter that is commonly eaten as food. These include root vegetables (potatoes and carrots), bulbs (onion family), leaf vegetables (spinach and lettuce), stem vegetables (bamboo shoots and asparagus), and inflorescence vegetables (globe artichokes and broccoli and other vegetables such as cabbage or cauliflower). McGee, Chapter 6. 

===Animals===

Animals are used as food either directly or indirectly by the products they produce. Meat is an example of a direct product taken from an animal, which comes from muscle systems or from organs.
Various raw meats
Food products produced by animals include milk produced by mammary glands, which in many cultures is drunk or processed into dairy products (cheese, butter, etc.). In addition, birds and other animals lay eggs, which are often eaten, and bees produce honey, a reduced nectar from flowers, which is a popular sweetener in many cultures. Some cultures consume blood, sometimes in the form of blood sausage, as a thickener for sauces, or in a cured, salted form for times of food scarcity, and others use blood in stews such as jugged hare. Davidson, 8182. 

Some cultures and people do not consume meat or animal food products for cultural, dietary, health, ethical, or ideological reasons. Vegetarians choose to forgo food from animal sources to varying degrees. Vegans do not consume any foods that are or contain ingredients from an animal source.

==Production==
Tractor and Chaser bin

Most food has always been obtained through agriculture. With increasing concern over both the methods and products of modern industrial agriculture, there has been a growing trend toward sustainable agricultural practices. This approach, partly fueled by consumer demand, encourages biodiversity, local self-reliance and organic farming methods. Mason Major influences on food production include international organizations (e.g. the World Trade Organization and Common Agricultural Policy), national government policy (or law), and war. Messer, 5391. 

In popular culture, the mass production of food, specifically meats such as chicken and beef, has come under fire from various documentaries, most recently Food, Inc, documenting the mass slaughter and poor treatment of animals, often for easier revenues from large corporations. Along with a current trend towards environmentalism, people in Western culture have had an increasing trend towards the use of herbal supplements, foods for a specific group of person (such as dieters, women, or athletes), functional foods (fortified foods, such as omega-3 eggs), and a more ethnically diverse diet. Popular Culture, Food and - calcium, nutrition, deficiency, body, diet, health, protein, fat 

Several organisations have begun calling for a new kind of agriculture in which agroecosystems provide food but also support vital ecosystem services so that soil fertility and biodiversity are maintained rather than compromised. According to the International Water Management Institute and UNEP, well-managed agroecosystems not only provide food, fiber and animal products, they also provide services such as flood mitigation, groundwater recharge, erosion control and habitats for plants, birds fish and other animals. Boelee, E. (Ed) Ecosystems for water and food security, 2011, IWMI, UNEP 

==Taste perception==

Animals, specifically humans, have five different types of tastes: sweet, sour, salty, bitter, and umami. As animals have evolved, the tastes that provide the most energy (sugar and fats) are the most pleasant to eat while others, such as bitter, are not enjoyable. Evolution of taste receptor may have shaped human sensitivity to toxic compounds Water, while important for survival, has no taste. Fats, on the other hand, especially saturated fats, are thicker and rich and are thus considered more enjoyable to eat.

===Sweet===

Structure of sucrose
Generally regarded as the most pleasant taste, sweetness is almost always caused by a type of simple sugar such as glucose or fructose, or disaccharides such as sucrose, a molecule combining glucose and fructose. New Oxford American Dictionary Complex carbohydrates are long chains and thus do not have the sweet taste. Artificial sweeteners such as sucralose are used to mimic the sugar molecule, creating the sensation of sweet, without the calories. Other types of sugar include raw sugar, which is known for its amber color, as it is unprocessed. As sugar is vital for energy and survival, the taste of sugar is pleasant.

The stevia plant contains a compound known as steviol which, when extracted, has 300 times the sweetness of sugar while having minimal impact on blood sugar. The sweetness multiplier "300 times" comes from subjective evaluations by a panel of test subjects tasting various dilutions compared to a standard dilution of sucrose. Sources referenced in this article say steviosides have up to 250 times the sweetness of sucrose, but others, including stevioside brands such as SweetLeaf, claim 300 times. 1/3 to 1/2 teaspoon (1.62.5 ml) of stevioside powder is claimed to have equivalent sweetening power to 1 cup (237 ml) of sugar. 

===Sour===

Sourness is caused by the taste of acids, such as vinegar in alcoholic beverages. Sour foods include citrus, specifically lemons, limes, and to a lesser degree oranges. Sour is evolutionarily significant as it is a sign for a food that may have gone rancid due to bacteria. States "having an acid taste like lemon or vinegar: she sampled the wine and found it was sour. (of food, esp. milk) spoiled because of fermentation." New Oxford American Dictionary Many foods, however, are slightly acidic, and help stimulate the taste buds and enhance flavor.

===Salty===

Salt mounds in Bolivia.
Saltiness is the taste of alkali metal ions such as sodium and potassium. It is found in almost every food in low to moderate proportions to enhance flavor, although to eat pure salt is regarded as highly unpleasant. There are many different types of salt, with each having a different degree of saltiness, including sea salt, fleur de sel, kosher salt, mined salt, and grey salt. Other than enhancing flavor, its significance is that the body needs and maintains a delicate electrolyte balance, which is the kidney's function. Salt may be iodized, meaning iodine has been added to it, a necessary nutrient that promotes thyroid function. Some canned foods, notably soups or packaged broths, tend to be high in salt as a means of preserving the food longer. Historically speaking, salt has been used as a meat preservative as salt promotes water excretion, thus working as a preservative. Similarly, dried foods also promote food safety. Food Preservatives - Chemistry Encyclopedia - metal, salt 

===Bitter===

Bitterness is a sensation often considered unpleasant characterized by having a sharp, pungent taste. Dark, unsweetened chocolate, caffeine, lemon rind, and some types of fruit are known to be bitter.

===Umami===

Also named as Savoury.

Umami, the Japanese word for delicious, is the least known in Western popular culture but has a long tradition in Asian cuisine. Umami is the taste of glutamates, especially monosodium glutamate (MSG). It is characterized as savory, meaty, and rich in flavor. Salmon and mushrooms are foods high in umami. Meat and other animal byproducts are described as having this taste.

==Cuisine==

Many cultures have a recognizable cuisine, a specific set of cooking traditions using various spices or a combination of flavors unique to that culture, which evolves over time. Other differences include preferences (hot or cold, spicy, etc.) and practices, the study of which is known as gastronomy. Many cultures have diversified their foods by means of preparation, cooking methods, and manufacturing. This also includes a complex food trade which helps the cultures to economically survive by way of food, not just by consumption. Some popular types of ethnic foods include Italian, French, Japanese, Chinese, American, Cajun, Thai, African, and Indian cuisine. Various cultures throughout the world study the dietary analysis of food habits. While evolutionarily speaking, as opposed to culturally, humans are omnivores, religion and social constructs such as morality, activism, or environmentalism will often affect which foods they will consume. Food is eaten and typically enjoyed through the sense of taste, the perception of flavor from eating and drinking. Certain tastes are more enjoyable than others, for evolutionary purposes.

===Presentation===
A French basil salmon terrine, with eye-appealing garnishes

Aesthetically pleasing and eye-appealing food presentations can encourage people to consume foods. A common saying is that people "eat with their eyes". Food presented in a clean and appetizing way will encourage a good flavor, even if unsatisfactory. You first eat with your eyes | Brainfood Food Texture, Andrew J. Rosenthal 

===Contrast in texture===
Texture plays a crucial role in the enjoyment of eating foods. Contrasts in textures, such as something crunchy in an otherwise smooth dish, may increase the appeal of eating it. Common examples include adding granola to yogurt, adding croutons to a salad or soup, and toasting bread to enhance its crunchiness for a smooth topping, such as jam or butter. 

===Contrast in taste===
Another universal phenomenon regarding food is the appeal of contrast in taste and presentation. For example, such opposite flavors as sweetness and saltiness tend to go well together, as in kettle corn and nuts.

===Food preparation===

While many foods can be eaten raw, many also undergo some form of preparation for reasons of safety, palatability, texture, or flavor. At the simplest level this may involve washing, cutting, trimming, or adding other foods or ingredients, such as spices. It may also involve mixing, heating or cooling, pressure cooking, fermentation, or combination with other food. In a home, most food preparation takes place in a kitchen. Some preparation is done to enhance the taste or aesthetic appeal; other preparation may help to preserve the food; others may be involved in cultural identity. A meal is made up of food which is prepared to be eaten at a specific time and place. Mead, 1119 
A refrigerator helps to keep foods fresh.

====Animal preparation====
The preparation of animal-based food usually involves slaughter, evisceration, hanging, portioning, and rendering. In developed countries, this is usually done outside the home in slaughterhouses, which are used to process animals en masse for meat production. Many countries regulate their slaughterhouses by law. For example, the United States has established the Humane Slaughter Act of 1958, which requires that an animal be stunned before killing. This act, like those in many countries, exempts slaughter in accordance to religious law, such as kosher, shechita, and dhabia halal. Strict interpretations of kashrut require the animal to be fully aware when its carotid artery is cut. McGee, 142143. 

On the local level, a butcher may commonly break down larger animal meat into smaller manageable cuts, and pre-wrap them for commercial sale or wrap them to order in butcher paper. In addition, fish and seafood may be fabricated into smaller cuts by a fish monger. However fish butchery may be done on board a fishing vessel and quick-frozen for preservation of quality. McGee, 202206 

====Cooking====
Cooking with a wok in China

The term "cooking" encompasses a vast range of methods, tools, and combinations of ingredients to improve the flavor or digestibility of food. Cooking technique, known as culinary art, generally requires the selection, measurement, and combining of ingredients in an ordered procedure in an effort to achieve the desired result. Constraints on success include the variability of ingredients, ambient conditions, tools, and the skill of the individual cook. McGee Chapter 14. The diversity of cooking worldwide is a reflection of the myriad nutritional, aesthetic, agricultural, economic, cultural, and religious considerations that affect it. Mead, 1119. 

Cooking requires applying heat to a food which usually, though not always, chemically changes the molecules, thus changing its flavor, texture, appearance, and nutritional properties. McGee Cooking certain proteins, such as egg whites, meats, and fish, denatures the protein, causing it to firm. There is archaeological evidence of roasted foodstuffs at Homo erectus campsites dating from 420,000 years ago. Campbell, 312. Boiling as a means of cooking requires a container, and has been practiced at least since the 10th millennium BC with the introduction of pottery. McGee, 784. 

=====Cooking equipment=====
A stainless steel frying pan
A traditional asado (barbecue)

There are many different types of equipment used for cooking.

Ovens are mostly hollow devices that get very hot (up to 500 F) and are used for baking or roasting and offer a dry-heat cooking method. Different cuisines will use different types of ovens; for example, Indian culture uses a Tandoor oven, which is a cylindrical clay oven which operates at a single high temperature. Davidson, 782783 Western kitchens use variable temperature convection ovens, conventional ovens, toaster ovens, or non-radiant heat ovens like the microwave oven. Classic Italian cuisine includes the use of a brick oven containing burning wood. Ovens may be wood-fired, coal-fired, gas, electric, or oil-fired. McGee, 539,784. 

Various types of cook-tops are used as well. They carry the same variations of fuel types as the ovens mentioned above. Cook-tops are used to heat vessels placed on top of the heat source, such as a saut pan, sauce pot, frying pan, or pressure cooker. These pieces of equipment can use either a moist or dry cooking method and include methods such as steaming, simmering, boiling, and poaching for moist methods, while the dry methods include sauting, pan frying, and deep-frying. McGee, 771791 

In addition, many cultures use grills for cooking. A grill operates with a radiant heat source from below, usually covered with a metal grid and sometimes a cover. An open pit barbecue in the American south is one example along with the American style outdoor grill fueled by wood, liquid propane, or charcoal along with soaked wood chips for smoking. Davidson, 356. A Mexican style of barbecue is called barbacoa, which involves the cooking of meats such as whole sheep over an open fire. In Argentina, an asado (Spanish for "grilled") is prepared on a grill held over an open pit or fire made upon the ground, on which a whole animal or smaller cuts are grilled. Asado Argentina 

====Raw food preparation====
Many types of fish ready to be eaten, including salmon and tuna.

Certain cultures highlight animal and vegetable foods in their raw state. Salads consisting of raw vegetables or fruits are common in many cuisines. Sashimi in Japanese cuisine consists of raw sliced fish or other meat, and sushi often incorporates raw fish or seafood. Steak tartare and salmon tartare are dishes made from diced or ground raw beef or salmon, mixed with various ingredients and served with baguettes, brioche, or frites. Davidson, 786787. In Italy, carpaccio is a dish of very thinly sliced raw beef, drizzled with a vinaigrette made with olive oil. Robuchon, 224. The health food movement known as raw foodism promotes a mostly vegan diet of raw fruits, vegetables, and grains prepared in various ways, including juicing, food dehydration, sprouting, and other methods of preparation that do not heat the food above 118 F. Davidson, 656 An example of a raw meat dish is ceviche, a Latin American dish made with raw meat that is "cooked" from the highly acidic citric juice from lemons and limes along with other aromatics such as garlic.

===Restaurants===
Allyn House restaurant menu (March 5, 1859)
 McDonald's restaurant, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia
Tom's Restaurant, a restaurant in New York City

Restaurants employ trained chefs who prepare food, and trained waitstaff to serve the customers. The term restaurant is credited to the French from the 19th century, as it relates to the restorative nature of the bouillons that were once served in them. However, the concept pre-dates the naming of these establishments, as evidence suggests commercial food preparation may have existed during the age of the city of Pompeii, and urban sales of prepared foods may have existed in China during the Song Dynasty. The coffee shops or cafs of 17th century Europe may also be considered an early version of the restaurant. Davidson, 660661. In 2005, the population of the United States spent $496 billion for out-of-home dining. Expenditures by type of out-of-home dining were as follows: 40% in full-service restaurants, 37.2% in limited service restaurants (fast food), 6.6% in schools or colleges, 5.4% in bars and vending machines, 4.7% in hotels and motels, 4.0% in recreational places, and 2.2% in others, which includes military bases. United States Department of Agriculture 

===Food manufacturing===
Packaged household food items

Packaged foods are manufactured outside the home for purchase. This can be as simple as a butcher preparing meat, or as complex as a modern international food industry. Early food processing techniques were limited by available food preservation, packaging, and transportation. This mainly involved salting, curing, curdling, drying, pickling, fermenting, and smoking. Aguilera, 13. Food manufacturing arose during the industrial revolution in the 19th century. Miguel, 3. This development took advantage of new mass markets and emerging new technology, such as milling, preservation, packaging and labeling, and transportation. It brought the advantages of pre-prepared time-saving food to the bulk of ordinary people who did not employ domestic servants. Jango-Cohen 

At the start of the 21st century, a two-tier structure has arisen, with a few international food processing giants controlling a wide range of well-known food brands. There also exists a wide array of small local or national food processing companies. Hannaford Advanced technologies have also come to change food manufacture. Computer-based control systems, sophisticated processing and packaging methods, and logistics and distribution advances can enhance product quality, improve food safety, and reduce costs. 

==Commercial trade==
Food imports in 2005

===International exports and imports===
The World Bank reported that the European Union was the top food importer in 2005, followed at a distance by the USA and Japan. Food is now traded and marketed on a global basis. The variety and availability of food is no longer restricted by the diversity of locally grown food or the limitations of the local growing season. The Economic Research Service of the USDA Between 1961 and 1999, there was a 400% increase in worldwide food exports. Regmi Some countries are now economically dependent on food exports, which in some cases account for over 80% of all exports. CIA World Factbook 

In 1994, over 100 countries became signatories to the Uruguay Round of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade in a dramatic increase in trade liberalization. This included an agreement to reduce subsidies paid to farmers, underpinned by the WTO enforcement of agricultural subsidy, tariffs, import quotas, and settlement of trade disputes that cannot be bilaterally resolved. World Trade Organization, The Uruguay Round Where trade barriers are raised on the disputed grounds of public health and safety, the WTO refer the dispute to the Codex Alimentarius Commission, which was founded in 1962 by the United Nations Food and Agriculture Organization and the World Health Organization. Trade liberalization has greatly affected world food trade. Van den Bossche 

===Marketing and retailing===
Packaged food aisles of supermarket in Portland, Oregon, United States of America

Food marketing brings together the producer and the consumer. It is the chain of activities that brings food from "farm gate to plate". Wansink, Marketing Nutrition, 5013. The marketing of even a single food product can be a complicated process involving many producers and companies. For example, fifty-six companies are involved in making one can of chicken noodle soup. These businesses include not only chicken and vegetable processors but also the companies that transport the ingredients and those who print labels and manufacture cans. Smith, 5013. The food marketing system is the largest direct and indirect non-government employer in the United States.

In the pre-modern era, the sale of surplus food took place once a week when farmers took their wares on market day into the local village marketplace. Here food was sold to grocers for sale in their local shops for purchase by local consumers. With the onset of industrialization and the development of the food processing industry, a wider range of food could be sold and distributed in distant locations. Typically early grocery shops would be counter-based shops, in which purchasers told the shop-keeper what they wanted, so that the shop-keeper could get it for them. Benson 

In the 20th century, supermarkets were born. Supermarkets brought with them a self service approach to shopping using shopping carts, and were able to offer quality food at lower cost through economies of scale and reduced staffing costs. In the latter part of the 20th century, this has been further revolutionized by the development of vast warehouse-sized, out-of-town supermarkets, selling a wide range of food from around the world. Humphery 

Unlike food processors, food retailing is a two-tier market in which a small number of very large companies control a large proportion of supermarkets. The supermarket giants wield great purchasing power over farmers and processors, and strong influence over consumers. Nevertheless, less than 10% of consumer spending on food goes to farmers, with larger percentages going to advertising, transportation, and intermediate corporations. Magdoff, Fred (Ed.) "he farmer's share of the food dollar (after paying for input costs) has steadily declined from about 40 percent in 1910 to less than 10 percent in 1990." 

===Prices===
Some essential food products including bread, rice and pasta

It was reported on March 24, 2008, that consumers worldwide faced rising food prices. Reasons for this development include changes in the weather and dramatic changes in the global economy, including higher oil prices, lower food reserves, and growing consumer demand in China and India. In the long term, prices are expected to stabilize. Farmers will grow more grain for both fuel and food and eventually bring prices down. Already this is happening with wheat, Reuters GMA News with more crops to be planted in the United States, Canada, and Europe in 2009. However, the Food and Agriculture Organization projects that consumers still have to deal with more expensive food until at least 2018. 

Food, meat, dairy, cereals, vegetable oil, and sugar price indices, deflated using the World Bank Manufactures Unit Value Index (MUV). 
It is rare for the spikes to hit all major foods in most countries at once. Food prices rose 4% in the United States in 2007, the highest increase since 1990, and are expected to climb as much again in 2008. As of December 2007, 37 countries faced food crises, and 20 had imposed some sort of food-price controls. In China, the price of pork jumped 58% in 2007. In the 1980s and 1990s, farm subsidies and support programs allowed major grain exporting countries to hold large surpluses, which could be tapped during food shortages to keep prices down. However, new trade policies have made agricultural production much more responsive to market demands, putting global food reserves at their lowest since 1983. "Food prices rising across the world", CNN. 24 March 2008 

Food prices are rising, wealthier Asian consumers are westernizing their diets, and farmers and nations of the third world are struggling to keep up the pace. The past five years have seen rapid growth in the contribution of Asian nations to the global fluid and powdered milk manufacturing industry, which in 2008 accounted for more than 30% of production, while China alone accounts for more than 10% of both production and consumption in the global fruit and vegetable processing and preserving industry. The trend is similarly evident in industries such as soft drink and bottled water manufacturing, as well as global cocoa, chocolate, and sugar confectionery manufacturing, forecast to grow by 5.7% and 10.0% respectively during 2008 in response to soaring demand in Chinese and Southeast Asian markets. May 2008, Global Trends:  Food Production and Consumption: The China Effect, IBISWorld 

Rising food prices over recent years have been linked with social unrest around the world, including rioting in Bangladesh and Mexico, and the Arab Spring.

In 2013 Overseas Development Institute researchers showed that rice has more than doubled in price since 2000, rising by 120% in real terms. This was as a result of shifts in trade policy and restocking by major producers. More fundamental drivers of increased prices are the higher costs of fertiliser, diesel and labour. Parts of Asia see rural wages rise with potential large benefits for the 1.3 billion (2008 estimate) of Asia's poor in reducing the poverty they face. However, this negatively impacts more vulnerable groups who don't share in the economic boom, especially in Asian and African coastal cities. The researchers said the threat means social-protection policies are needed to guard against price shocks. The research proposed that in the longer run, the rises present opportunities to export for Western African farmers with high potential for rice production to replace imports with domestic production. Steve Wiggins and Sharada Keats, August 2013, The end of cheap rice: a cause for celebration? ODI Briefings 82, http://www.odi.org.uk/publications/7687-end-cheap-rice-prices-rural-labour-wages 

===As investment===
Institutions such as hedge funds, pension funds and investment banks like Barclays Capital, Goldman Sachs and Morgan Stanley have been instrumental in pushing up prices in the last five years, with investment in food commodities rising from $65bn to $126bn (41bn to 79bn) between 2007 and 2012, contributing to 30-year highs. This has caused price fluctuations which are not strongly related to the actual supply of food, according to the United Nations. Financial institutions now make up 61% of all investment in wheat futures. According to Olivier De Schutter, the UN special rapporteur on food, there was a rush by institutions to enter the food market following George W Bush's Commodities Futures Modernization Act of 2000. De Schutter told the Independent in March 2012: "What we are seeing now is that these financial markets have developed massively with the arrival of these new financial investors, who are purely interested in the short-term monetary gain and are not really interested in the physical thing  they never actually buy the ton of wheat or maize; they only buy a promise to buy or to sell. The result of this financialisation of the commodities market is that the prices of the products respond increasingly to a purely speculative logic. This explains why in very short periods of time we see prices spiking or bubbles exploding, because prices are less and less determined by the real match between supply and demand." In 2011, 450 economists from around the world called on the G20 to regulate the commodities market more. 

Some experts have said that speculation has merely aggravated other factors, such as climate change, competition with bio-fuels and overall rising demand. However, some such as Jayati Ghosh, professor of economics at Jawaharlal Nehru University in New Delhi, have pointed out that prices have increased irrespective of supply and demand issues: Ghosh points to world wheat prices, which doubled in the period from June to December 2010, despite there being no fall in global supply. 

==Famine and hunger==
Food deprivation leads to malnutrition and ultimately starvation. This is often connected with famine, which involves the absence of food in entire communities. This can have a devastating and widespread effect on human health and mortality. Rationing is sometimes used to distribute food in times of shortage, most notably during times of war. 

Starvation is a significant international problem. Approximately 815 million people are undernourished, and over 16,000 children die per day from hunger-related causes. World Health Organization Food deprivation is regarded as a deficit need in Maslow's hierarchy of needs and is measured using famine scales. Howe, 353372 

===Food aid===

Food aid can benefit people suffering from a shortage of food. It can be used to improve peoples' lives in the short term, so that a society can increase its standard of living to the point that food aid is no longer required. World Food Programme Conversely, badly managed food aid can create problems by disrupting local markets, depressing crop prices, and discouraging food production. Sometimes a cycle of food aid dependence can develop. Shah Its provision, or threatened withdrawal, is sometimes used as a political tool to influence the policies of the destination country, a strategy known as food politics. Sometimes, food aid provisions will require certain types of food be purchased from certain sellers, and food aid can be misused to enhance the markets of donor countries. Kripke International efforts to distribute food to the neediest countries are often coordinated by the World Food Programme. United Nations World Food program 

==Safety==

Salmonella bacteria is a common cause of foodborne illness, particularly in undercooked chicken and chicken eggs
Hazard Analysis and Critical Control Points (HACCP) Flowchart

Foodborne illness, commonly called "food poisoning", is caused by bacteria, toxins, viruses, parasites, and prions. Roughly 7 million people die of food poisoning each year, with about 10 times as many suffering from a non-fatal version. National Institute of Health, MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia The two most common factors leading to cases of bacterial foodborne illness are cross-contamination of ready-to-eat food from other uncooked foods and improper temperature control. Less commonly, acute adverse reactions can also occur if chemical contamination of food occurs, for example from improper storage, or use of non-food grade soaps and disinfectants. Food can also be adulterated by a very wide range of articles (known as "foreign bodies") during farming, manufacture, cooking, packaging, distribution, or sale. These foreign bodies can include pests or their droppings, hairs, cigarette butts, wood chips, and all manner of other contaminants. It is possible for certain types of food to become contaminated if stored or presented in an unsafe container, such as a ceramic pot with lead-based glaze. 

Food poisoning has been recognized as a disease since as early as Hippocrates. Hippocrates, On Acute Diseases. The sale of rancid, contaminated, or adulterated food was commonplace until the introduction of hygiene, refrigeration, and vermin controls in the 19th century. Discovery of techniques for killing bacteria using heat, and other microbiological studies by scientists such as Louis Pasteur, contributed to the modern sanitation standards that are ubiquitous in developed nations today. This was further underpinned by the work of Justus von Liebig, which led to the development of modern food storage and food preservation methods. Magner, 243498 In more recent years, a greater understanding of the causes of food-borne illnesses has led to the development of more systematic approaches such as the Hazard Analysis and Critical Control Points (HACCP), which can identify and eliminate many risks. USDA 

Recommended measures for ensuring food safety include maintaining a clean preparation area with foods of different types kept separate, ensuring an adequate cooking temperature, and refrigerating foods promptly after cooking. Check Your Steps | FoodSafety.gov 

Foods that spoil easily, such as meats, dairy, and seafood, must be prepared a certain way to avoid contaminating the people for whom they are prepared. As such, the general rule of thumb is that cold foods (such as dairy products) should be kept cold and hot foods (such as soup) should be kept hot until storage. Cold meats, such as chicken, that are to be cooked should not be placed at room temperature for thawing, at the risk of dangerous bacterial growth, such as Salmonella or E. coli. 

===Allergies===

Some people have allergies or sensitivities to foods which are not problematic to most people. This occurs when a person's immune system mistakes a certain food protein for a harmful foreign agent and attacks it. About 2% of adults and 8% of children have a food allergy. National Institute of Health The amount of the food substance required to provoke a reaction in a particularly susceptible individual can be quite small. In some instances, traces of food in the air, too minute to be perceived through smell, have been known to provoke lethal reactions in extremely sensitive individuals. Common food allergens are gluten, corn, shellfish (mollusks), peanuts, and soy. Allergens frequently produce symptoms such as diarrhea, rashes, bloating, vomiting, and regurgitation. The digestive complaints usually develop within half an hour of ingesting the allergen. 

Rarely, food allergies can lead to a medical emergency, such as anaphylactic shock, hypotension (low blood pressure), and loss of consciousness. An allergen associated with this type of reaction is peanut, although latex products can induce similar reactions. Initial treatment is with epinephrine (adrenaline), often carried by known patients in the form of an Epi-pen or Twinject. About Epipen, Epipen.com About Twinject, Twinject.com 

===Other health issues===
Human diet was estimated to cause perhaps around 35% of cancers in a human epidemiological analysis by Richard Doll and Richard Peto in 1981. These cancer may be caused by carcinogens that are present in food naturally or as contaminants. Food contaminated with fungal growth may contain mycotoxins such as aflatoxins which may be found in contaminated corn and peanuts. Other carcinogens identified in food include heterocyclic amines generated in meat when cooked at high temperature, polyaromatic hydrocarbons in charred meat and smoked fish, and nitrosamines generated from nitrites used as food preservatives in cured meat such as bacon. 

Anticarcinogens that may help prevent cancer can also be found in many food especially fruits and vegetable. Antioxidants are important groups of compounds that may help remove potentially harmful chemicals. It is however often difficult to identify the specific components in diet that serve to increase or decrease cancer risk since many food, such as beef steak and broccoli, contain low concentrations of both carcinogens and anticarcinogens. 

==Diet==
kcal his.png|thumb|300px|Changes of Food Supply (by energy) FAO [http://faostat3.fao.org/faostat-gateway/go/to/download/FB/FB/E FAOSTAT These are supplied energy, intake energy are about 60-80% of supply. Other area (Yr 2010) FAO Food Security 
* Africa, sub-Sahara - 2170 kcal/capita/day
* N.E. and N. Africa - 3120 kcal/capita/day
* South Asia - 2450 kcal/capita/day
* East Asia - 3040 kcal/capita/day
* Latin America / Caribbean - 2950 kcal/capita/day
* Developed countries - 3470 kcal/capita/day]]

===Cultural and religious diets===
Dietary habits are the habitual decisions a person or culture makes when choosing what foods to eat. Wansink, Many cultures hold some food preferences and some food taboos. Dietary choices can also define cultures and play a role in religion. For example, only kosher foods are permitted by Judaism, halal foods by Islam, and in Hinduism beef is restricted. Simoons In addition, the dietary choices of different countries or regions have different characteristics. This is highly related to a culture's cuisine.

===Diet deficiencies===

Dietary habits play a significant role in the health and mortality of all humans. Imbalances between the consumed fuels and expended energy results in either starvation or excessive reserves of adipose tissue, known as body fat. Nicklas Poor intake of various vitamins and minerals can lead to diseases that can have far-reaching effects on health. For instance, 30% of the world's population either has, or is at risk for developing, iodine deficiency. Merson, 245 It is estimated that at least 3 million children are blind due to vitamin A deficiency. Merson, 231. Vitamin C deficiency results in scurvy. Merson, 464. Calcium, Vitamin D, and phosphorus are inter-related; the consumption of each may affect the absorption of the others. Kwashiorkor and marasmus are childhood disorders caused by lack of dietary protein. Merson, 224. 

===Moral, ethical, and health-conscious diets===
Many individuals limit what foods they eat for reasons of morality, or other habit. For instance, vegetarians choose to forgo food from animal sources to varying degrees. Others choose a healthier diet, avoiding sugars or animal fats and increasing consumption of dietary fiber and antioxidants. Carpenter Obesity, a serious problem in the western world, leads to higher chances of developing heart disease, diabetes, and many other diseases. Merson, 266268. More recently, dietary habits have been influenced by the concerns that some people have about possible impacts on health or the environment from genetically modified food. Parekh, 187206. Further concerns about the impact of industrial farming (grains) on animal welfare, human health, and the environment are also having an effect on contemporary human dietary habits. This has led to the emergence of a movement with a preference for organic and local food. Schor 

==Nutrition and dietary problems==
MyPlate replaced MyPyramid as the USDA nutrition guide.
Between the extremes of optimal health and death from starvation or malnutrition, there is an array of disease states that can be caused or alleviated by changes in diet. Deficiencies, excesses, and imbalances in diet can produce negative impacts on health, which may lead to various health problems such as scurvy, obesity, or osteoporosis, diabetes, cardiovascular diseases as well as psychological and behavioral problems. The science of nutrition attempts to understand how and why specific dietary aspects influence health.

Nutrients in food are grouped into several categories. Macronutrients are fat, protein, and carbohydrates. Micronutrients are the minerals and vitamins. Additionally, food contains water and dietary fiber.

As previously discussed, the body is designed by natural selection to enjoy sweet and fattening foods for evolutionary diets, ideal for hunters and gatherers. Thus, sweet and fattening foods in nature are typically rare and are very pleasurable to eat. In modern times, with advanced technology, enjoyable foods are easily available to consumers. Unfortunately, this promotes obesity in adults and children alike.

==Legal definition==
Some countries list a legal definition of food, often referring them with the word foodstuff. These countries list food as any item that is to be processed, partially processed, or unprocessed for consumption. The listing of items included as food include any substance intended to be, or reasonably expected to be, ingested by humans. In addition to these foodstuffs, drink, chewing gum, water, or other items processed into said food items are part of the legal definition of food. Items not included in the legal definition of food include animal feed, live animals (unless being prepared for sale in a market), plants prior to harvesting, medicinal products, cosmetics, tobacco and tobacco products, narcotic or psychotropic substances, and residues and contaminants. United Kingdom Office of Public Sector Information 

==Types of food==

* Comfort food
* Fast food
* Junk food
* Natural food
* Organic food
* Slow food
* Whole food

==See also==

* Bulk foods
* Beverages
* Food and Bioprocess Technology
* of foods]
* Food engineering
* Food science
* Food security
* List of foods
* Lists of prepared foods
* Non-food crop
* Nutrition facts label
* Optimal foraging theory
* Outline of cooking
* Outline of nutrition
* Packaging and labeling

==Notes==

==References==

* Aguilera, Jose Miguel and David W. Stanley. Microstructural Principles of Food Processing and Engineering. Springer, 1999. ISBN 0-8342-1256-0.
* Asado Argentina. About Asado Argentina. Retrieved from http://www.asadoargentina.com/about-asado-argentina/ on 2007-05-28.
* Campbell, Bernard Grant. Human Evolution: An Introduction to Man's Adaptations. Aldine Transaction: 1998. ISBN 0-202-02042-8.
* Carpenter, Ruth Ann; Finley, Carrie E. Healthy Eating Every Day. Human Kinetics, 2005. ISBN 0-7360-5186-4.
* Davidson, Alan. The Oxford Companion to Food. 2nd ed. UK: Oxford University Press, 2006.
* Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations. The State of Food Insecurity in the World 2005. . Retrieved from http://www.fao.org/docrep/008/a0200e/a0200e00.htm on 2006-09-29.
* Hannaford, Steve. Oligopoly Watch: Top 20 world food companies. Retrieved from http://www.oligopolywatch.com/2005/10/06.html on 2006-09-23.
* Howe, P. and S. Devereux. Famine Intensity and Magnitude Scales: A Proposal for an Instrumental Definition of Famine. 2004.
* Humphery, Kim. Shelf Life: Supermarkets and the Changing Cultures of Consumption. Cambridge University Press, 1998. ISBN 0-521-62630-7.
* Jango-Cohen, Judith. The History Of Food. Twenty-First Century Books, 2005. ISBN 0-8225-2484-8.
* Jurgens, Marshall H. Animal Feeding and Nutrition. Kendall Hunt, 2001. ISBN 0-7872-7839-4.
* Kripke, Gawain. Food aid or hidden dumping?. Oxfam International, March 2005. Retrieved from http://www.oxfam.org/en/policy/briefingpapers/bp71_food_aid_240305 on 2007-05-26.
* Lawrie, Stephen; R A Lawrie. Lawrie's Meat Science. Woodhead Publishing: 1998. ISBN 1-85573-395-1.
* Magdoff, Fred; Foster, John Bellamy; and Buttel, Frederick H. Hungry for Profit: The Agribusiness Threat to Farmers, Food, and the Environment. September 2000. ISBN 1-58367-016-5.
* Mason, John. Sustainable Agriculture. Landlinks Press: 2003. ISBN 0-643-06876-7.
* Merson, Michael H.; Black, Robert E.; Mills, Anne J. International Public Health: Disease, Programs, Systems, and Policies. Jones and Bartlett Publishers, 2005.
* McGee, Harold. On Food and Cooking: The Science and Lore of the Kitchen. New York: Simon and Schuster, 2004. ISBN 0-684-80001-2.
* Mead, Margaret. The Changing Significance of Food. In Carole Counihan and Penny Van Esterik (Ed.), Food and Culture: A Reader. UK: Routledge, 1997. ISBN 0-415-91710-7.
* Messer, Ellen; Derose, Laurie Fields and Sara Millman. Who's Hungry? and How Do We Know?: Food Shortage, Poverty, and Deprivation. United Nations University Press, 1998. ISBN 92-808-0985-7.
* National Institute of Health. Food poisoning. MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia F. May 11, 2006. Retrieved from http://www.niaid.nih.gov/publications/pdf/foodallergy.pdf on 2006-09-29.
* Nicklas, Barbara J. Endurance Exercise and Adipose Tissue. CRC Press, 2002. ISBN 0-8493-0460-1.
* Parekh, Sarad R. The Gmo Handbook: Genetically Modified Animals, Microbes, and Plants in Biotechnology. Humana Press,2004. ISBN 1-58829-307-6.
* Regmi, Anita (editor).Changing Structure of Global Food Consumption and Trade. Market and Trade Economics Division, Economic Research Service, USDA, May 30, 2001. stock #ERSWRS01-1.
* Schor, Juliet; Taylor, Betsy (editors). Sustainable Planet: Roadmaps for the Twenty-First Century. Beacon Press, 2003. ISBN 0-8070-0455-3.
* Shah, Anup. Food Dumping (Aid) Maintains Poverty. Causes of Poverty. Retrieved from http://www.globalissues.org/TradeRelated/Poverty/FoodDumping.asp on 2006-09-29.
* Simoons, Frederick J. Eat Not This Flesh: Food Avoidances from Prehistory to the Present. ISBN 0-299-14250-7.
* Smith, Andrew (Editor). Food Marketing, in Oxford Encyclopedia of American Food and Drink, New York: Oxford University Press, 2007.
* The Economic Research Service of the USDA. Global Food Markets: Briefing Rooms. Retrieved from http://www.ers.usda.gov/Briefing/ on 2006-09-29.
* United Kingdom Office of Public Sector Information. Food Safety Act 1990 (c. 16). Retrieved from http://www.opsi.gov.uk/acts/acts1990/Ukpga_19900016_en_2.htm#mdiv1 on 2006-11-08.
* United States Department of Agriculture, USDA Economic Research Service: The Economics of Food, Farming, Natural Resources, and Rural America. "Briefing Rooms, Food CPI, Prices and Expenditures: Food Expenditure Tables". Retrieved from http://www.ers.usda.gov/briefing/CPIFoodAndExpenditures/Data/ on 2007-06-06.
* Van den Bossche, Peter. The Law and Policy of the bosanac Trade Organization: Text, Cases and Materials. UK: Cambridge University Press, 2005. ISBN 0-521-82290-4.
* World Food Programme. Breaking out of the Poverty Trap: How We Use Food Aid. Retrieved from http://www.wfp.org/food_aid/introduction/index.asp?section=12&sub_section=1 on 2006-09-29.
* World Health Organization. WHO Global Database on Child Growth and Malnutrition. Retrieved from http://www.who.int/nutgrowthdb/en/ on 2006-09-29.
* World Trade Organization. The Uruguay Round. Retrieved from http://www.wto.org/trade_resources/history/wto/urug_round.htm on 2006-09-29.

==Further reading==
* Collingham, E. M.: The Taste of War: World War Two and the Battle for Food (2011)
* Katz, Solomon: The Encyclopedia of Food and Culture, (Scribner, 2003)
* Marion Nestle: Food Politics: How the Food Industry Influences Nutrition and Health, University Presses of California, revised and expanded edition 2007, ISBN 0-520-25403-1
* Mobbs, Michael: Sustainable Food Sydney: NewSouth Publishing, 2012. ISBN 9781920705541

==External links==

* Food Marketing, FAO
* Food Timeline
*Wikibooks Cookbook

 
 


[[Floating Point]]

Floating Point is an album by John McLaughlin, released in 2008 through the record label Abstract Logix. The album reached number fourteen on Billboards Top Jazz Albums chart. 

==Track listing==
# "Abbaji (For Alla Rakha)" (McLaughlin)  9:01
# "Raju" (McLaughlin)  8:21
# "Maharina" (McLaughlin)  6:09
# "Off the One" (McLaughlin)  6:55
# "The Voice" (McLaughlin)  9:19
# "Inside Out" (McLaughlin)  8:30
# "1 4 U" (McLaughlin)  7:07
# "Five Peace Band" (McLaughlin)  7:06

==Personnel==
* John McLaughlin: guitar synthesizer, guitar (2, 4, 6, 8)
* Hadrien Feraud: bass guitar
* Louis Banks: keyboards
* Ranjit Barot: drums
* Sivamani: percussion, konokol (6)
* George Brooks: soprano saxophone (1)
* Debashish Bhattacharya: Hindustani slide guitar (2)
* Shashank: bamboo flute (4)
* Shankar Mahadevan: voice (5)
* U Rajesh: electric mandolin (6)
* Naveen Kumar: bamboo flute (7)
* Niladri Kumar: sitar (8)

==Reception==

Michael G. Nastos of Allmusic calls the album "a surprisingly fine effort, ebbing and flowing from track to track, with McLaughlin's high-level musicianship shining through, same as it ever was." 
John Kelman in All About Jazz wrote "One of the most fluent, evocative and powerful albums in a career filled with high points"
and concludes "McLaughlin's Indian friends may not have jazz in their blood the way it is in the guitarist's, but by approaching unmistakably western-informed music with an eastern mindset, they make Floating Point an album that, in McLaughlin's lengthy discography, is one of his most successful fusion records". 

==References==



[[Fantasy sport]]

A fantasy sport (also known as rotisserie, roto, or owner simulation) is a game where participants act as owners to build a team that competes against other fantasy owners based on the statistics generated by the real individual players or teams of a professional sport also see daily fantasy sports. Probably the most common variant converts statistical performance into points that are compiled and totaled according to a roster selected by a manager that makes up a fantasy team. These point systems are typically simple enough to be manually calculated by a "league commissioner." More complex variants use computer modeling of actual games based on statistical input generated by professional sports. In fantasy sports there is the ability to trade, cut, and sign players, like a real sports owner.

==Size of hobby==

It's estimated by the Fantasy Sports Trade Association that 32 million people age 12 and above in the U.S. and Canada played fantasy sports in 2010. Participation has grown over 60 percent the past four years with 19 percent of males in the U.S. playing fantasy sports. A prior study by the FSTA showed 19.4 million people age 12 and above in the U.S. and Canada played fantasy sports in 2006 and 34.5 million people had ever played fantasy sports. A 2006 study showed 22 percent of U.S. adult males 18 to 49 years old, with Internet access, play fantasy sports. Fantasy Sports is estimated to have a $3$4 Billion annual economic impact across the sports industry. 

The hobby has also moved beyond the U.S. with fantasy leagues for soccer, cricket and other sports. For example, according to a 2008 study by Ipsos, the number of British fantasy sports players aged 1664 is estimated to range between 5.5 and 7.5 million.
Of those, 80 percent of these players participate in fantasy soccer. 

==History==

===Early history - pre-"rotisserie"===

The concept of picking players and running a contest based on their year-to-date stats has been around since shortly after World War II, Wilfred Winkenbach devised fantasy golf in the latter part of the 1950s, in which each player selected a team of professional golfers and the person with the lowest combined total of strokes at the end of the tournament would win. Golf is a simple fantasy game to administer and keep tabs on, since you are concerned only with the scores of your team members without anything else to complicate it. But it was never organized into a widespread hobby or formal business.

In 1960, Harvard University sociologist William Gamson started the "Baseball Seminar" where colleagues would form rosters that earned points on the players' final standings in batting average, RBI, ERA and wins. Alan Schwarz: The Numbers Game : Baseball's Lifelong Fascination with Statistics Thomas Dunne Books p. 175, ISBN 0-312-32222-4 Gamson later brought the idea with him to the University of Michigan where some professors played the game. One professor playing the game was Bob Sklar, who taught an American Studies seminar which included Daniel Okrent, who learned of the game his professor played. At around the same time a league from Glassboro State College also formed a similar baseball league and had its first draft in 1976. 

While those two leagues focused on baseball, it may be football that produced the first version of the hobby.
The Greater Oakland Professional Pigskin Prognosticators League began in the early 1960s with eight teams. George Blanda was the first player taken in the first draft in 1963.1963 draft results

===Modern founding - "La Rotisserie"===

The landmark development in fantasy sports came with the development of Rotisserie League Baseball in 1980 (although research suggests a team of players from Southern New Jersey have been running the same style league since 1976 making them the first Rotisserie players). Magazine writer/editor Daniel Okrent is credited with inventing it, the name coming from the New York City restaurant La Rotisserie Francaise where he and some friends used to meet and play. The game's innovation was that "owners" in a Rotisserie league would draft teams from the list of active Major League Baseball players and would follow their statistics during the ongoing season to compile their scores. In other words, rather than using statistics for seasons whose outcomes were already known, the owners would have to make similar predictions about players' playing time, health, and expected performance that real baseball managers must make.

Because Okrent was a member of the media, other journalists, especially sports journalists, were introduced to the game. Many early players were introduced to the game by these sports journalists, especially during the 1981 Major League Baseball strike; with little else to write about, many baseball writers wrote columns about Rotisserie league.
A July 8, 1980 New York Times Article titled "What George Steinbrenner is to the American League, Lee Eisenberg is to the Rotisseries League" set off a media storm that led to stories about the league on CBS TV and other publications. 

In March 1981, Dan Okrent wrote an essay about the Rotisserie League for Inside Sports called "The Year George Foster Wasn't Worth $36." 
The article included the rules of the game. Founders of the original Rotisserie league published a guide book starting in 1984.
In 1982, Ballantine published the first widely available Bill James Abstract, which helped fuel fantasy baseball interest.
Fantasy fans often used James' statistical tools and analysis as a way to improve their teams. Michael Lewis: Moneyball: the art of winning an unfair game W. W. Norton, New York c2003., ISBN 0-393-05765-8 
James was not a fantasy player and barely acknowledged fantasy baseball in his annual Abstract, but fantasy baseball interest is credited with his strong sales. 

In 1988, Peter Olenoski and Joseph Kikosicki formed the Managerial Baseball League "The Reality of the Fantasy" which they pioneered the first 5x5 league by accounting for Runs and Strikeouts. They went on to develop their own statistical program since there were no fantasy statistic companies that could accommodate up to 16 teams. What made their Managerial Baseball League so unique is that they paralleled their rosters just like MLB with 9 position players (one at each position and any extra player on the bench), 5 starting pitchers, 3 starting relievers, and 8 players on their bench - the reality being that every player on their roster did not get to play.

Soon the hobby spread to other sports as well and by 1988, USA Today estimated that five hundred thousand people were playing. The EMSBL (East Meadow Strat-o-Matic Baseball League), founded in 1972 started its 41st consecutive year of play in May 2012 and is believed to be the oldest continuously playing fantasy baseball league in the world. With the expansion of the Managerial Baseball League to 18 teams/owners in 1995, it is believed to be the most complex fantasy baseball league with up to 720 players selected after the September expansion to 40-man rosters.

===Early analysts/businesses===

In the few years after Okrent helped popularize fantasy baseball, a host of experts and businesses emerged to service the growing hobby. Okrent, based on discussions with colleagues at USA Today, credits Rotisserie league baseball with much of USA Today's early success, since the paper provided much more detailed box scores than most competitors and eventually even created a special paper, Baseball Weekly, that almost exclusively contained statistics and box scores.

Among the first high-profile experts were John Benson, Alex Patton and Ron Shandler.
Benson became perhaps the most famous name in the business in the late 1980s, publishing his first book in 1989 and developing one of the first draft-software simulation programs. He had a 900 number at $2.50 per minute. 

Patton published his first book ('Patton's 1989 Fantasy Baseball League Price Guide ") in 1989 and his dollar values were included in USA Today Baseball Weekly's fantasy annual throughout the 1990s.

Ron Shandler published his "Baseball SuperSTATS" book in November 1986. At first the book wasn't meant for fantasy baseball fans, but rather as a book of Sabrmetric analysis.

But it wasn't just baseball that saw new businesses and growth. Fantasy Football Index became the first annual fantasy football guide in 1987. Fantasy Sports Magazine debuted in 1989 as the first regular publication covering more than one fantasy sport.
Fantasy Football Weekly was launched in 1992 (later becoming Fanball.com) and had $2 million in revenue by 1999. A large number of companies emerged to calculate the stats for fantasy leagues and primarily send results via fax.

In 1993, USA Today included a weekly columnist on fantasy baseball, John Hunt, and he became perhaps the most visible writer in the industry before the rise of the Internet. Hunt started the first high-profile experts league, the League of Alternate Baseball Reality which first included notables as Peter Gammons, Keith Olbermann and Bill James. 

The hobby continued to grow with 1 million to 3 million playing from 1991 to 1994. 

===Internet boom===

The seminal moment for the growth of fantasy sports was the rise of the Internet in the mid-1990s. The new technology lowered the barrier to entry to the hobby as stats could quickly be compiled online and news and information became readily available.

In early October 1995, what would become a popular fantasy hockey website was released by Molson Breweries. It was part of the company's "I am Online" strategy and centred on its "I am Canadian" advertising campaign; it would focus on music, entertainment and hockey. The website allowed visitors to register accounts and participate in hockey leagues of nine teams in which the visitor would be the general manager for one of those teams. The general manager would draft a team from a pool of NHL players, and could later negotiate trades with other teams in the league. Disputes would be arbitrated by a commissioner by email. The site included daily updates of NHL statistics, and also featured content from the Hockey Hall of Fame. On 24 May 1996, Molson Breweries won the International Digital Media Award for best website of 1995. 

While several fantasy businesses had migrated to the internet in the mid-1990s, the watershed era for online fantasy sports was in 1997 when two web sites made their debut that forever changed the fantasy sports industry: Commissioner.com and RotoNews.com.

Commissioner.com launched on January 1, 1997 and first offered a fantasy baseball commissioner service that changed the nature of fantasy sports with real-time stats, league message boards, daily updated box scores and other featuresall for $300 per league.
Commissioner.com was sold to SportsLine late in 1999 for $31 million in cash and stock in a watershed moment for the fantasy industry. The sale proved fantasy sports had grown from a mere hobby to big business. By 2003, Commissioner.com helped SportsLine generate $11 million from fantasy revenue. Commissioner.com is now the fantasy sports engine behind the CBSSports.com fantasy area (after SportsLine was sold to CBS in 2004).

RotoNews.com also launched in January 1997 and published its first player note on February 16, 1997.
RotoNews revolutionized how fantasy sports information was presented on the web with the innovation of the "player note" which were snippets of information every time a player got hurt, traded, benched or had a news event that impacted his fantasy value - all search-able in a real-time database. 
Most sites today follow how RotoNews had a "news" and "analysis" element to each player update. Within two years RotoNews had become one of the top ten most trafficked sports sites on the web, according to Media Metrix, ranking higher than such sites as NBA.com. RotoNews.com was sold to Broadband Sports in 1999 and later survived as RotoWire.com.

It wasn't long before the larger media players got involved. Yahoo.com added fantasy sports in 1999 and offered most of its games for free - a largely new business model for fantasy sports. 
A trade group for the industry, the Fantasy Sports Trade Association was formed in 1998.

Other entries during this era included Fanball.com, launched in 1999 by the parent company of Fantasy Football Weekly. 

The first survey of the fantasy sports market in the U.S. in 1999 showed 29.6 million people age 18 and older played fantasy games. However, that figure was reduced in later years when it was determined the survey also included people who play NCAA bracket pools, which are not exactly fantasy sports (where you pick individual players). 

===Dotcom era===

While fantasy sports were fueled by the dot-com boom of the Internet, there was a turbulent period when many of the high-flying Internet companies of the era crashed in 2001.
Fanball.com went bankrupt in 2001 (later to re-emerge in 2001). RotoNews.com's parent company, Broadband Sports, went belly up in 2001. The company would re-emerge as RotoWire.com.

There were also wide variations on business models. RotoNews.com launched the Web's first free commissioner service in 1998, quickly becoming the largest league management service. 
Yahoo.com became the first major media company to offer games for free in 1999. Due to the rising competition, Commissioner.com, which had charged as much as $300, offered its commissioner services for free starting with football in 2000.

Two years later the trend reversed. Sportsline moved back to a pay model for commissioner services (which it largely still has today).
TheHuddle.com, a free site since 1997, started to charge for information. 
RotoWire.com moved from a free model to a pay model in 2001 as well. 

Despite the economic instability, fantasy sports started to become a mainstream hobby. In 2002, the NFL found that average male surveyed, for example, spent 6.6 hours a week watching the NFL on TV; fantasy players surveyed said they watched 8.4 hours of NFL per week. 
"This is the first time we've been able to demonstrate specifically that fantasy play drives TV viewing," said Chris Russo, the NFL's senior vice president. The NFL began running promotional television ads for fantasy football featuring current players for the first time. Previously fantasy sports had largely been seen in a negative light by the major sports leagues.

Due to the growing popularity of season long fantasy sport leagues, a new platform, daily fantasy sports, emerged with great success. Websites such as Draftkings, Fanduel and Draftstreet have offered up to one million dollar prizes for one day contests thanks to its growing userbase and popularity.

Fantasy sports continued to grow with a 2003 Fantasy Sports Trade Association survey showing 15 million people playing fantasy football and spending about $150 a year on average, making it a $1.5 billion industry. 

===New fantasy game genres===
With the growth of the industry, fantasy has branched out to include non-sports related games focused on politics, sales, celebrity gossip, movies, and reality TV. 

Notable games in these new categories include:
* Fantasy F1
* Fantasy Congress
* Fantasy Mogul
* Daily Fantasy Sports
* Fantasy YouTube
* Fantasy Cricket
* Fantasy Cricket Leagues Online

Additionally, new types of fantasy sports games have continued to evolve. In particular, starting in 2006 a number of operators offered daily draft games where players can draft, play and win (or lose) within a single day. A few of the existing players in the fantasy cricket domain in India are offering a Cricket Stock Exchange, which is an online trading game working on the principles of Stock Exchange. It is still unclear whether these types of games will see mainstream adoption. 

==Legal issues==

===STATS, Inc. vs. NBA===

In 1996, STATS, Inc., a major statistical provider to fantasy sports companies, won a court case, along with Motorola, on appeal against the NBA in which the NBA was trying to stop STATS from distributing in game score information via a special wireless device created by Motorola. The victory played a large part in defending other cases where sports leagues have tried to suppress live in-game information from their events being distributed by other outlets. NBA Lawsuit - AOL.com The victory also accelerated the market for real-time statistics which were largely fueled by the growth of the fantasy sports industry. Alan Schwarz: The Numbers Game : Baseball's Lifelong Fascination with Statistics Thomas Dunne Books p. 192, ISBN 0-312-32222-4 

===CDM vs. MLBAM===

The development of fantasy sports produced tension between fantasy sports companies and professional leagues and players associations over the rights to player profiles and statistics. The players associations of the major sports leagues believed that fantasy games using player names were subject to licensing due to the right of publicity of the players involved. Since the player names were being used as a group, the players had assigned their publicity rights to the players association who then signed licensing deals. During the 1980s and 1990s many companies signed licensing deals with the player associations, but some companies did not. The issue came to a head with the lawsuit of Major League Baseball Advanced Media (MLBAM), MLB's Internet company, vs. St. Louis-based CBC Distribution and Marketing Inc., the parent company of CDM Sports. When CBC was denied a new licensing agreement with MLBAM (they had acquired the rights from the baseball players' association) for its fantasy baseball game, CBC filed suit.

CBC argued that intellectual property laws and so-called "right of publicity" laws don't apply to the statistics used in fantasy sports. The FSTA filed an amicus curiae in support of CBC, also arguing that if MLBAM won the lawsuit it would have a dramatic impact on the industry, which was largely ignored by the major sports leagues for years while a number of smaller entrepreneurs grew it into a multi-billion dollar industry, and a ruling could allow the MLBAM to have a monopoly over the industry.

"This will be a defining moment in the fantasy sports industry," said Charlie Wiegert, executive vice president of CBC. "The other leagues are all watching this case. If MLB prevailed, it just would have been a matter of time before they followed up. Their player unions are just waiting for the opportunity." 

CBC won the lawsuit as U.S. District Court Judge Mary Ann Medler ruled that statistics are part of the public domain and can be used at no cost by fantasy companies.

"The names and playing records of major-league baseball players as used in CBC's fantasy games are not copyrightable," Medler wrote. "Therefore, federal copyright law does not pre-empt the players' claimed right of publicity." 

The 8th Circuit Court of Appeals upheld the decision in October 2007. "It would be strange law that a person would not have a First Amendment right to use information that is available to everyone," a three-judge panel said in its ruling. 

The U.S. Supreme Court upheld the 8th Circuit Court's decision by declining to hear the case in June 2008. 

===Unlawful Internet Gambling Enforcement Act of 2006===

The Unlawful Internet Gambling Enforcement Act of 2006, which was an amendment to the larger and unrelated SAFE Port Act, included "carve out" language that clarified the legality of fantasy sports. It was signed into law on October 13, 2006 by President George W. Bush. The act makes transactions from banks or similar institutions to online gambling sites illegal, with the notable exceptions of fantasy sports, online lotteries and horse/harness racing.

The bill specifically exempts fantasy sports games, educational games, or any online contest that "has an outcome that reflects the relative knowledge of the participants, or their skill at physical reaction or physical manipulation (but not chance), and, in the case of a fantasy or simulation sports game, has an outcome that is determined predominantly by accumulated statistical results of sporting events, including any non-participant's individual performances in such sporting events..." 

However, all prizing must be determined in advance of the competition and can not be influenced by the fees or number of participants. Fantasy sports are considered gambling and therefore illegal if the competition does not meet this rule: "prizes and awards offered to winning participants are established and made known to the participants in advance of the game or contest and their value is not determined by the number of participants or the amount of any fees paid by those participants." 

==Popular sports==
* Fantasy baseball
* Fantasy cricket
* Fantasy football (American)
* Fantasy football (Australian rules football)
* Fantasy football (Association)
* Fantasy basketball
* Fantasy golf
* Fantasy hockey
* Fantasy Auto Racing
* Fantasy League of Legends
* Fantasy Rugby league
* Fantasy Rugby union
* Fantasy Sports stock simulations
* Fantasy professional wrestling
* Fantasy Congress
* Fantasy Surfing
* Daily Fantasy Sports
* Fantasy F1
* Fantasy MMA

==Picking teams instead of players==
One way to play fantasy sports is to have each person pick teams from a league instead of players. There is a predetermined number of rounds and there is a predetermined number for how many times each team gets picked. When a person takes a turn, the player picks exactly one team and then it is the next person's turn to pick. Players may pick a team more than once, as long as that team is still available at least once.

An example of this type of fantasy league is using the 30 teams in Major League Baseball and having 12 players. Each person gets 10 teams total, counting repeats as many times as they happen. Each team gets picked exactly 4 times (12 players  10 teams per player = 120 and 30 teams  4 picks per team = 120). This calculation shows that there will be 120 total picks after exactly 10 rounds.

Each individual's score is determined by adding up the total number of regular season and postseason wins by the teams that they picked. If a team was picked more than once, that team's number of wins gets added into the calculation the number of times that the team was picked.

Once the postseason starts, players are awarded points based on their teams that made it to the postseason. Predetermined numbers of points are set to give to people based on the spots in the postseason that their teams had to begin the postseason with: the best record in the league, the second-best division winner in the league, the third-best division winner in the league, the first wild card spot, and the second wild card spot. Predetermined points are also given out based on the postseason results, such as League Championship Series losing teams, the World Series losing team, and the World Series winning team.

Once all points are added up for everyone, the final rankings are based on point totals, going from highest to lowest. (Predetermined tiebreakers would have to be set to avoid ties for any place.)

==Associations==
The Fantasy Sports Trade Association was formed in 1999 to represent the growing industry. The Fantasy Sports Writers Association was formed in 2004 to represent the growing numbers of journalists covering fantasy sports exclusively. The Fantasy Sports Association was formed in 2006.

==Montana Lottery to offer Fantasy Sports Wagering==
In autumn 2008, the Montana Lottery, one of only four U.S. states to legalize sports betting, began offering fantasy sports wagering for the first time.

==See also==
* Sports management video games

==References==

==External links==
* 

 

[[Forward pass]]

An American football quarterbackJevan Snead of the 2006 Texas Longhorns football teamin the "pocket" and preparing to pass.

In several forms of football a forward pass is a throwing of the ball in the direction that the offensive team is trying to move, towards the defensive team's goal line. The forward pass is one of the main distinguishers between gridiron football (American football and Canadian football) in which the play is legal and widespread, and rugby football (union and league) from which the North American games evolved, in which the play is illegal.

In some football codes, such as association football (soccer), the kicked forward pass is used so ubiquitously that it is not thought of as a distinct kind of play at all. In these sports, the concept of offside is used to regulate who can be in front of the play or be nearest to the goal. However, this has not always been the case. Some earlier incarnations of football allowed unlimited forward passing, while others had strict offside rules similar to rugby. 

The development of the forward pass in American football shows how the game has evolved from its rugby roots into the distinctive game it is today. Illegal and experimental forward passes had been attempted as early as 1876, but the first legal forward pass in American football took place in 1906, after a change in rules. Another change in rules occurred on January 18, 1951, which established that no center, tackle, or guard could receive a forward pass. Today, the only linemen who can receive a forward pass are the ends. Current rules regulate who may throw and who may receive a forward pass, and under what circumstances, as well as how the defensive team may try to prevent a pass from being completed. The primary pass thrower is the quarterback, and statistical analysis is used to determine a quarterback's success rate at passing in various situations, as well as a team's overall success at the "passing game."

==American and Canadian football==
UCLA quarterback Kevin Craft throws a pass during an October 2008 game against the California Golden Bears.
In American and Canadian football, a forward passusually referred to simply as a passconsists of one offensive player throwing the football towards another downfield in the direction of the opponent's goal line. This is permitted only once during a scrimmage down by the offensive team before team possession has changed, provided the pass is thrown from in or behind the neutral zone. An illegal forward pass incurs a five-yard penalty and the loss of a down, although it may be legally intercepted by the defense and advanced.

If an eligible receiver on the passing team legally catches the ball, the pass is completed and the receiver may attempt to advance the ball. If an opposing player legally catches the ball (all defensive players are eligible receivers) it is an interception. That player's team immediately gains possession of the ball and he may attempt to advance the ball toward his opponent's goal. If no player is able to legally catch the ball it is an incomplete pass and the ball becomes dead the moment it touches the ground. It will then be returned to the original line of scrimmage for the next down. If any player interferes with an eligible receiver's ability to catch the ball it is pass interference which draws a penalty of varying degree (largely depending upon the particular league's rules). 

The person passing the ball must be a member of the offensive team, and the recipient of the forward pass must be an eligible receiver and must touch the passed ball before any ineligible player. 

The moment that a forward pass begins is important to the game. The pass begins the moment the passer's arm begins to move forward. If the passer drops the ball before this moment it is a fumble and therefore a loose ball. In this case anybody can gain possession of the ball before or after it touches the ground. If the passer drops the ball while his arm is moving forward it is an incomplete pass (unless someone catches the ball before it hits the ground in which case it is a completed pass or an interception). 

The quarterback generally either starts a few paces behind the line of scrimmage or drops back a few paces as the ball is snapped. This places him in an area called the "pocket", which is a protective region formed by the offensive blockers up front and between the tackles on each side. A quarterback who runs out of this pocket is said to be scrambling. Under NFL and NCAA rules, once the quarterback moves out of the pocket, and there is no good option for a forward pass, the ball may be legally thrown away to prevent a sack. NFHS (high school) rules do not allow for a passer to intentionally throw an incomplete forward pass to save loss of yardage or conserve time, except for a spike to conserve time after a hand to hand snap. If he throws the ball away while still in the pocket then a foul called "intentional grounding" is assessed. In Canadian football the passer must simply throw the ball across the line of scrimmagewhether he is inside or outside of the "pocket"to avoid the foul of "intentionally grounding". 

If a forward pass is caught near a sideline or endline it is a complete pass (or an interception) only if a receiver catches the ball in bounds. For a pass to be ruled complete in-bounds, depending on the rules either one or two feet must touch the ground within the field boundaries, after the ball is first grasped. In the NFL the receiver must touch the ground with both feet, but in most other codesCFL, NCAA and high schoolone foot in bounds is enough.

Common to all gridiron codes is the notion of controla receiver must demonstrate control of the ball in order to be ruled in possession of it, while still in bounds, as defined by his code. If the receiver catches the ball but the official determines that he was still "bobbling" it prior to the end of the play, then the pass will be ruled incomplete.

===History===
====Early illegal and experimental passes====
The forward pass had been attempted at least 30 years before the play was actually made legal. Passes "had been carried out successfully but illegally several times, including the 1876 YalePrinceton game in which Yales Walter Camp threw forward to teammate Oliver Thompson as he was being tackled. Princeton's protest, one account said, went for naught when the referee 'tossed a coin to make his decision and allowed the touchdown to stand' ". Gregorian, Vahe, "100 years of Forward Passing; SLU Was the Pioneer", St. Louis Post-Dispatch, September 4, 2006 

The University of North Carolina used the forward pass in an 1895 game against the University of Georgia. However, the play was still illegal at the time. Bob Quincy stakes Carolina's claim in his 1973 book They Made the Bell Tower Chime:

John Heisman, namesake of the Heisman Trophy, wrote 30 years later that, indeed, the Tar Heels had given birth to the forward pass against the Bulldogs (UGA). It was conceived to break a scoreless deadlock and give UNC a 60 win. The Carolinians were in a punting situation and a Georgia rush seemed destined to block the ball. The punter, with an impromptu dash to his right, tossed the ball and it was caught by George Stephens, who ran 70 yards for a touchdown.

In a 1905 experimental game, Washburn University and Fairmount College (what would become Wichita State) used the pass before new rules allowing the play were approved in early 1906. 
, p. 128 Credit for the first pass goes to Fairmount's Bill Davis, who completed a pass to Art Solter. 

====Rules changed in 1906 to allow the forward pass====
1905 had been a bloody year on the gridiron; the Chicago Tribune reported 18 players had been killed and 159 seriously injured that season. Jeffrey, Terence, "One hundred years of the forward pass", CNSNews, August 30, 2006 There were moves to outlaw the game, but President Theodore Roosevelt personally intervened and demanded that the rules of the game be reformed. In a meeting of more than 60 schools in late 1905, the commitment was made to make the game safer. This meeting was the first step toward the establishment of what would become the NCAA and was followed by several sessions to work out "the new rules." 

The final meeting of the Rules Committee tasked with reshaping the game was held on April 6, 1906, at which time the forward pass officially became a legal play. The New York Times reported in September 1906 on the rationale for the changes: "The main efforts of the football reformers have been to 'open up the game'that is to provide for the natural elimination of the so-called mass plays and bring about a game in which speed and real skill shall supersede so far as possible mere brute strength and force of weight." However the Times also reflected widespread skepticism as to whether the forward pass could be effectively integrated into the game: "There has been no team that has proved that the forward pass is anything but a doubtful, dangerous play to be used only in the last extremity." The forward pass was not allowed in Canadian football until 1929. http://www.cfl.ca/page/his_timeline_1920 

====First legal pass====
Eddie Cochems, "Father of the Forward Pass", 19071906 St. Louis Post-Dispatch drawing of Brad Robinson, who threw the first legal forward pass
Most sources credit St. Louis University's Bradbury Robinson from Bellevue, Ohio with throwing the first legal forward pass. On September 5, 1906, in a game against Carroll College, Robinson's first attempt at a forward pass fell incomplete and resulted in a turnover under the 1906 rules. Courtesy of the National Football Foundation, "This week in college football history", The Phanatic Magazine, August 31, 2007 In the same game, Robinson later completed a 20-yard touchdown pass to Jack Schneider. The 1906 St. Louis University team was coached by Eddie Cochems. Football authority and College Football Hall of Fame coach David M. Nelson wrote that "E. B. Cochems is to forward passing what the Wright brothers are to aviation and Thomas Edison is to the electric light." 

While St. Louis University completed the first legal forward pass in the first half of September, this accomplishment was in part because most schools did not begin their football schedule until early October. 

In 1952, football coaching legend Amos Alonzo Stagg discounted accounts crediting any particular coach with being the innovator of the forward pass. Stagg noted that he had Walter Eckersall working on pass plays and saw Pomeroy Sinnock of Illinois throw many passes in 1906. Stagg summed up his view as follows: "I have seen statements giving credit to certain people originating the forward pass. The fact is that all coaches were working on it. The first season, 1906, I personally had sixty-four different forward pass patterns." In 1954, Stagg disputed Cochems' claim to have invented the forward pass:"Eddie Cochems, who coached at St. Louis University in 1906, also claimed to have invented the pass as we know it today ... It isn't so, because after the forward pass was legalized in 1906, most of the schools commenced experimenting with it and nearly all used." 
Stagg asserted that, as far back as 1894, before the rules committee even considered the forward pass, one of his players used to throw the ball "like a baseball pitcher." On the other hand, Hall of Fame coach Gus Dorais told the United Press that "Eddie Cochems of the St. Louis University team of 19060708 deserves the full credit." Casserly, Hank, "Hank Casserly Says", The Capital Times, page 1, September 17, 1952 Writing in Collier's more than 20 years earlier, Dorais' Notre Dame teammate Knute Rockne acknowledged Cochems as the early leader in the use of the pass, observing, "One would have thought that so effective a play would have been instantly copied and become the vogue. The East, however, had not learned much or cared much about Midwest and Western football. Indeed, the East scarcely realized that football existed beyond the Alleghanies ..." Rockne, Knute K. "Beginning at End", Collier's, October 25, 1930 

In his history of the game, historian David Nelson concluded that the first forward passes were thrown on Christmas Day 1905 in a match between two small colleges in Kansas: "Although Cochems was the premier passing coach during the first year of the rule, the first forward passes were thrown at the end of the 1905 season in a game between Fairmount and Washburn colleges in Kansas." According to Nelson, Washburn completed three passes, and Fairmount completed two.

Once the 1906 season got underway, many programs began experimenting with the forward pass. On September 26, 1906, Villanova's game against the Carlisle Indians was billed as "the first real game of football under the new rules." In the first play from scrimmage after the opening kicks, Villanova completed a pass that "succeeded in gaining ten yards." Following the Villanova-Carlisle game, The New York Times described the new passing game this way:"The passing was more of the character of that familiar in basket ball than that which has hitherto characterized football. Apparently it is the intention of football coaches to try repeatedly these frequent long and risky passes. Well executed they are undoubtedly highly spectacular, but the risk of dropping the ball is so great as to make the practice extremely hazardous and its desirability doubtful." 

Another coach sometimes credited with popularizing the overhead spiral pass in 1906 is former Princeton All-American "Bosey" Reiter. Reiter claimed to have invented the overhead spiral pass while playing professional football as a player-coach for Connie Mack's Philadelphia Athletics of the original National Football League (1902). While playing for the Athletics, Reiter was a teammate of Hawley Pierce, a former star for the Carlisle Indian School. Pierce, a Native American, taught Reiter to throw an underhand spiral pass, but Reiter had short arms and was unable to throw for distance from an underhand delivery. Accordingly, Reiter began working on an overhand spiral pass. Reiter recalled trying to imitate the motion of a baseball catcher throwing to second base. After practice and experimentation, Reiter "discovered he could get greater distance and accuracy throwing that way." In 1906, Reiter was the head coach at Wesleyan University. In the opening game of the 1906 season against Yale, Reiter's quarterback Sammy Moore completed a forward pass to Irvin van Tassell for a thirty-yard gain. The New York Times called it "the prettiest play of the day," as Wesleyan's quarterback "deftly passed the ball past the whole Yale team to his mate Van Tassel." Van Tassel later described the historic play to the United Press:"I was the right halfback, and on this formation played one yard back of our right tackle. The quarterback, Sam Moore, took the ball from center and faded eight or 10 yards back of our line. Our two ends angled down the field toward the sidelines as a decoy, and I slipped through the strong side of our line straight down the center and past the secondary defense. The pass worked perfectly. However, the quarterback coming up fast nailed me as I caught it. This brought the ball well into Yale territory, about the 20-yard line." 
 
The football season opened for most schools during the first week of October, and the impact of the forward pass was immediate:
*On October 3, 1906, the Des Moines Daily News reported "probably the first use" of the "long forward pass" in the University of Missouri's 234 win over Kirksville Normal School. ("The game was probably the first use of the long forward pass, as originated by Coach Monlaw, and the general opinion after the game was that this play would be hard to stop.") 
*On October 4, 1906, Princeton opened its season with a 220 win over Stevens. Press accounts indicate that Princeton put the forward pass to good use, as "old-time football gave way to the new game." 
*On October 4, 1906, the Carlisle Indians beat Susquehanna University 400, as "the forward pass was used for a number of good gains." 
*On October 4, 1906, Harvard defeated Bowdoin 100 "in a hard-fought contest that was featured by a newfangled and daring forward pass that Crimson worked in the closing minutes of play." 
*On October 4, 1906, Williams College defeated the Massachusetts Agricultural College, scoring the game's only touchdown on a forward pass by Waters. 

Some publications credit Yale All-American Paul Veeder with the "first forward pass in a major game." Veeder threw a 20 to 30-yard completion in leading Yale past Harvard 60 before 32,000 fans in New Haven on November 24, 1906. ("1906The first forward pass in a major game20 yards from Yale's Paul Veeder to Clarence Alcottsets stage for only touchdown in 60 decision over unbeaten Crimson.") ("the first significant use of the forward pass in a major game, a 20-yard gain on a Paul Veeder-to-Clarence Alcoft pass in The Game of 1906") (identifying Veeder's 30-yard pass as one of the few significant forward passes thrown in the first season of the forward pass) However, that Yale/Harvard game was played three weeks after St. Louis completed 45 and 48-yard passes against Kansas before a crowd of 7,000 at Sportsman's Park. "St. Louis U. Scores 12 Points in First Half of Great Game with Kansas", St. Louis Star-Chronicle, November 3, 1906 Nelson, The Anatomy of a Game, p. 129 

====First passing offense====
Referee Hackett's analysis of St. Louis' passing game against Iowa, St. Louis Post-Dispatch, written by Ed Wray, November 30, 1906

The forward pass was a central feature of Cochems' offensive scheme in 1906 as his St. Louis University team compiled an undefeated 110 season in which they outscored opponents by a combined score 407 to 11. The highlight of the campaign was St. Louis' 310 win over Iowa. Cochems' team reportedly completed eight passes in ten attempts for four touchdowns. "The average flight distance of the passes was twenty yards." Nelson continues, "the last play demonstrated the dramatic effect that the forward pass was having on football. St. Louis was on Iowa's thirty-five-yard line with a few seconds to play. Timekeeper Walter McCormack walked onto the field to end the game when the ball was thrown twenty-five yards and caught on the dead run for a touchdown." 

The 1906 Iowa game was refereed by one of the top football officials in the country, West Point's Lt. Horatio B. McCormick, Bart E. (editor), The Wisconsin alumni magazine, Volume 28, Number 3, pages 108109, January 1927 "Stuffy" Hackett. He had officiated games involving the top Eastern powers that year. Hackett, who would become a member of the football rules committee in December 1907 American Gymnasia and Athletic Record, Volume IV, No. 5, Whole Number 41, Page 62, January 1908 and officiated games into the 1930s, Cornell Alumni News, Volume 36, No. 4, page 44, October 19, 1933 was quoted the next day in Ed Wray's Baseball Fever, Meet The Sports Writers, John Edward (J. Ed) Wray Post-Dispatch article: "It was the most perfect exhibition ... of the new rules ... that I have seen all season and much better than that of Yale and Harvard. St. Louis' style of pass differs entirely from that in use in the east. ... The St. Louis university players shoot the ball hard and accurately to the man who is to receive it ... The fast throw by St. Louis enables the receiving player to dodge the opposing players, and it struck me as being all but perfect."

"Cochems said that the poor Iowa showing resulted from its use of the old style play and its failure to effectively use the forward pass", Nelson writes. "Iowa did attempt two basketball-style forward passes." 
, p. 129 

"During the 1906 season threw a sixty-seven yard pass ... and ... Schneider tossed a sixty-five yarder. Considering the size, shape and weight of the ball, these were extraordinary passes." 
 
In 1907, after the first season of the forward pass, one football writer noted that, "with the single exception of Cochems, football teachers were groping in the dark." 

Because St. Louis was geographically isolated from both the dominating teams and the major sports media (newspapers) of the era ... all centered in and focused on the East ... Cochems' groundbreaking offensive strategy was not picked up by the major teams. Pass-oriented offenses would not be adopted by the Eastern football powers until the next decade.

But that does not mean that other teams in the Midwest did not pick it up. Arthur Schabinger, quarterback for the College of Emporia in Kansas, was reported to have regularly used the forward pass in 1910. Coach H. W. "Bill" Hargiss' "Presbies" are said to have featured the play in a 170 victory over Washburn University Kansas Sports Hall of Fame, Arthur Schabinger and in a 1070 destruction of Pittsburg State University. Pittsburg State (Kansas) Football Scores, 1910 

====Adoption by Notre Dame expands popularity====
Knute Rockne and Gus Dorais worked on the pass while lifeguarding on a Lake Erie beach at Cedar Point in Sandusky, Ohio, during the summer of 1913. That year, Jesse Harper, Notre Dame head coach, also showed how the pass could be used by a smaller team to beat a bigger one, first utilizing it to defeat rival Army. After it was used against a major school on a national stage in this game, the forward pass rapidly gained popularity. Cross, Harry, "Inventing the Forward Pass", November 1, 1913, reprinted in "This Day in Sports", The New York Times, November 1, 2004 

====First pass in a professional game====
The first forward pass in a professional football game may have been thrown in an Ohio League game played on October 25, 1906. The Ohio League, which traced its history to the 1890s, was the predecessor of today's NFL. According to Robert W. Peterson in his book Pigskin The Early Years of Pro Football, the "passer was George W. (Peggy) Parratt, probably the best quarterback of the era", who played for the Massillon, Ohio Tigers, one of pro football's first franchises. Massillon Tiger Football History Citing the Professional Football Researchers Association as his source, Peterson writes that "Parratt completed a short pass to end Dan Riley (real name, Dan Policowski)" in a game played at Massillon against a team from West Virginia. Since the Tigers "ran up a 61 to 0 score on the hapless Mountain Staters, the pass played no important part in the result." Peterson, Robert W., Pigskin The Early Years of Pro Football, pages 5253, 1997 

According to National Football League history, it legalized the forward pass from anywhere behind the line of scrimmage on February 25, 1933. Before that rule change, a forward pass had to be made from 5 or more yards behind the line of scrimmage.

Forward passes were first permitted in Canadian football in 1929, CFL.ca History, Timeline, 1920 but the tactic remained a minor part of the game for several years. Jack Jacobs of the Winnipeg Blue Bombers is recognized, not for inventing the forward pass, but for popularizing it in the Western Interprovincial Football Union, thus changing the Canadian game from a more run-dominated game to the passing game as seen today.

===Change in ball shape===
Specification of the size of the ball for the American game came in 1912, but it was still essentially a rugby ball. Increased use of the forward pass encouraged adoption of a narrower ball, starting with changes in the 1920s which enhanced rifled throwing and also spiral punting. See "Introduction: A Brief History of College Football" on the College Football Encyclopedia web site. This had the consequence of all but eliminating the drop kick from the American game.

==Rugby football==
In the two codes of rugby (union and league) a forward pass is against the rules. Normally this results in a scrum to the opposing team, on rare occasions a penalty may be awarded if the referee is of the belief that the ball was deliberately thrown forward. 

In both codes of rugby the direction of the pass is relative to the player making the pass and not the actual path relative to the ground. A forward pass occurs when the player passes the ball forward in relation to himself. See "The Australian Rugby League Laws Of The Game And Notes On The Laws" on the Australian Rugby League web site. In rugby league the video referee may not make judgements on whether a pass is forward. 

==See also==
*Glossary of American football
*History of American football
*Lateral pass
*Playing rugby league
*Hail Mary pass

==References==

===Additional sources===
* Boyles, Bob & Guido, Paul, 50 Years of College Football, 2007



[[Telecommunications in Fiji]]

Telecommunications in Fiji include radio, television, fixed and mobile telephones, and the Internet.

==Radio and television==

* Radio stations: 
** state-owned commercial company, Fiji Broadcasting Corporation, operates 6 radio stations - 2 public broadcasters and 4 commercial broadcasters with multiple repeaters; 5 radio stations with repeaters operated by Communications Fiji, Ltd; transmissions of multiple international broadcasters are available (2009); "Communications: Fiji", World Factbook, U.S. Central Intelligence Agency, 28 January 2014. Retrieved 13 February 2014. 
** 13 AM, 40 FM, and no shortwave stations (1998).
* Radios: 500,000 (1997).
* Television stations: 
** Fiji TV, a publicly traded company, operates a free-to-air channel as well as Sky Fiji and Sky Pacific multi-channel pay-TV services (2009); 
** 2 terrestrial stations (1998).
* Television sets: 21,000 (1997).

Radio is a key source of information, particularly on the outer islands. There are publicly and privately owned stations. State-owned Fiji Broadcasting Corporation operates Fijian-language Radio Fiji One, Hindi-language Radio Fiji Two, music-based Bula FM, Hindi station Mirchi FM, and music-based 2day FM. The BBC World Service broadcasts on 88.2 FM in the capital, Suva. "Fiji profile", BBC News, 16 September 2011. Retrieved 14 February 2014. 

===Media control===
Under the military government's Media Decree, the directors and 90 percent of the shareholders of locally based media must be citizens of, and permanently resident in, the country. The Fiji Media Industry Development Authority is responsible for enforcing these provisions. The authority has the power to investigate journalists and media outlets for alleged violations of the decree, including powers of search and seizure of equipment. 

A code of ethics contained in the Media Decree requires that all stories run by the media be balanced, with comment obtained from both sides where there is any disagreement on the facts. This requirement enables government departments and private businesses to prevent stories from being published by not responding to media questions, thus making it impossible for the media to fulfill the decrees requirement for comment from both sides. However, media sources report that if the story is positive toward the government, the balance requirement could be ignored without consequence. 

==Telephones==
Public payphone in Fiji, c. 2010

* Calling code: +679 
* International call prefix: 00 or 052 Dialing Procedures (International Prefix, National (Trunk) Prefix and National (Significant) Number) (in Accordance with ITY-T Recommendation E.164 (11/2010)), Annex to ITU Operational Bulletin No. 994-15.XII.2011, International Telecommunication Union (ITU, Geneva), 15 December 2011. Retrieved 2 January 2014. 
* Main lines: 
** 88,400 lines in use, 147th in the world (2012); 
** 112,500 lines in use (2005).
* Mobile cellular:
** 858,800 lines, 159th in the world (2012); 
** 315,000 lines (2007).
* Telephone system: modern local, interisland, and international (wire/radio integrated) public and special-purpose telephone, telegraph, and teleprinter facilities; regional radio communications center; telephone or radio telephone links to almost all inhabited islands; most towns and large villages have automatic telephone exchanges and direct dialing; combined fixed and mobile-cellular teledensity roughly 100 per 100 persons (2011). 
* Communications cables: Southern Cross Cable, links to the United States, Canada, New Zealand, and Australia; Vanuatu-Fiji Interchange Cable (2014); Tonga-Fiji cable (planned).
* Satellite earth station: 2 Inmarsat (Pacific Ocean) (2011). 

==Internet==

* Top-level domain: .fj 
* Internet users: 
** 300,326 users, 140th in the world; 33.7% of the population, 126th in the world (2012); Calculated using penetration rate and population data from "Countries and Areas Ranked by Population: 2012", Population data, International Programs, U.S. Census Bureau, retrieved 26 June 2013 "Percentage of Individuals using the Internet 20002012", International Telecommunications Union (Geneva), June 2013, retrieved 22 June 2013 
** 114,200 users, 157th in the world (2009). 
* Fixed broadband: 13,734 subscriptions, 142nd in the world; 1.5% of the population, 133rd in the world (2012). "Fixed (wired)-broadband subscriptions per 100 inhabitants 2012", Dynamic Report, ITU ITC EYE, International Telecommunication Union. Retrieved on 29 June 2013. 
* Wireless broadband: 96,277 subscriptions, 118th in the world; 10.8% of the population, 89th in the world (2012). "Active mobile-broadband subscriptions per 100 inhabitants 2012", Dynamic Report, ITU ITC EYE, International Telecommunication Union. Retrieved on 29 June 2013. 
* Internet hosts: 21,739 hosts, 115th in the world (2012). 
* IPv4: 134,656 addresses allocated, less than 0.05% of the world total, 151.3 addresses per 1000 people (2012). Select Formats, Country IP Blocks. Accessed on 2 April 2012. Note: Site is said to be updated daily. Population, The World Factbook, United States Central Intelligence Agency. Accessed on 2 April 2012. Note: Data are mostly for 1 July 2012. 
* Internet Service Providers: 5 ISPs (2010).

The Internet is widely available and used in and around urban centers, but its availability and use are minimal or nonexistent outside these areas.

===Internet censorship and surveillance===

There are no government restrictions on general public access to the Internet, but evidence suggests that the government monitors private e-mails of citizens as well as Internet traffic in an attempt to control antigovernment reports by anonymous bloggers. "Fiji", Country Reports on Human Rights Practices for 2012, Bureau of Democracy, Human Rights and Labor, U.S. Department of State, 27 March 2013. Retrieved 13 February 2014. 

The country has operated under a military-led government since 2006 and has had no constitution or functioning parliament since 2009. A series of decrees have been issued, including the Public Order Amendment Decree (POAD), the Media Decree, and the Crime Decree. 

By decree all telephone and Internet service users must register their personal details with telephone and Internet providers, including their name, birth date, home address, left thumbprint, and photographic identification. The decree imposes fines of up to F$100,000 ($56,721) on providers who continue to provide services to unregistered users and up to F$10,000 ($5,672) on users who do not update their registration information as required. Vodafone, one of two mobile telephone providers, also requires users to register their nationality, postal address, employment details, and both thumbprints. 

The POAD gives the government the power to detain persons on suspicion of "endangering public safety or the preservation of the peace"; defines terrorism as any act designed to advance a political, religious, or ideological cause that could "reasonably be regarded" as intended to compel a government to do or refrain from doing any act or to intimidate the public or a section thereof; and makes religious vilification and attempts to sabotage or undermine the economy offenses punishable by a maximum F$10,000 ($5,672) fine or five years imprisonment. The Media Decree prohibits "irresponsible reporting" and provides for government censorship of the media. The Crimes Decree includes criticism of the government in its definition of the crime of sedition, including statements made in other countries by any person, who can be prosecuted on return to Fiji. The government uses the threat of prosecution under these provisions to intimidate government critics and limit public criticism of the government. Journalists and media organizations practice varying degrees of self-censorship, with many reportedly fearing retribution if they criticize the government. 

In May 2007 it was reported that the military in Fiji had blocked access to blogs critical of the regime. 

In 2012 police investigated former University of the South Pacific (USP) professor Wadan Narsey, a prominent Fijian economist and long-time critic of the military government, for alleged sedition in writings published on his personal blog. 

The POAD permits military personnel to search persons and premises without a warrant from a court and to take photographs, fingerprints, and measurements of any person. Police and military officers may enter private premises to break up any meeting considered unlawful. 

==References==

* 

==External links==

* .fj Domain Name Registry, at The University of the South Pacific.

 
Fiji
Fiji



[[Transport in Fiji]]

== Railways ==
: Main article: Rail transport in Fiji.
Total: 597 km; 597 km 0.610-m gauge (1995)

Narrow gauge: Note: belongs to the government-owned Fiji Sugar Corporation The railway is not for passenger or public use.

== Waterways ==
203 km; 122 km navigable by motorized craft and 200-metric-ton barges

== Ports and harbors ==
Labasa, Lautoka, Levuka, Savusavu, Suva

== Merchant marine ==
Total: 6 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 11,870 GRT/
Ships by type: chemical tanker 2, passenger 1, petroleum tanker 1, roll-on/roll-off 1, specialized tanker 1 (1999 est.)

== Airports ==
In Nadi International Airport
: Main article: List of airports in Fiji.

Major airports include:
*Nadi International Airport
*Nausori International Airport
Total 25 (1999 est.)

=== Airports with paved runways ===
Total: 3
Over 3,047 m: 1
1,524 to 2,437 m: 1
914 to 1,523 m: 1 (1999 est.)

=== Airports with unpaved runways ===
Total: 22
914 to 1,523 m: 5
Under 914 m: 17 (1999 est.)

== References ==
* CIA World Factbook (c2002)
* Cane Train: The Sugar-cane Railways of Fiji by Peter Dyer & Peter Hodge (1988, New Zealand Railway and Locomotive Society Inc, Wellington) ISBN 0-908573-50-2 a revision of:
* Balloon Stacks and Sugar Cane by Peter Dyer & Peter Hodge (1961, New Zealand Railway and Locomotive Society Inc, Wellington)

== See also ==

*Fiji

 



[[Republic of Fiji Military Forces]]

Structure of the Military of Fiji
The Republic of Fiji Military Forces (RFMF) is the military force of the Pacific island nation of Fiji. With a total manpower of 3,500 active soldiers and 6,000 reservists, it is one of the smallest militaries in the world. However, most of its surrounding island nations have no militaries at all. The Ground Force is organized into six infantry and one engineer battalions, with approximately 6,000 reserves. There was formerly one "Zulu" company of counter-revolutionary specialists, which was deactivated in late 2000 due to a mutiny by some of its members.

The first two regular battalions of the Fiji Infantry Regiment are traditionally stationed overseas on peacekeeping duties; the 1st Battalion has been posted to Lebanon, Iraq, and East Timor under the command of the UN, while the 2nd Battalion is stationed in Sinai with the MFO. Peacekeepers income represents an important source of income for Fiji. The 3rd Battalion is stationed in the capital, Suva, and the remaining three are spread throughout the islands.

== Organization ==
*Commander-in-Chief - The President of the Republic serves as Commander-in-Chief of the Military Forces. 
*Commander RFMF - The Commander RFMF is of one-star rank. He is assisted by the Deputy Commander and the Chief of Staff, who are responsible for Strategic Command and Land Force Command. The current Commander is Brigadier Mosese Tikoitoga succeeding the previous Commander and current Head of Government Commodore Voreqe Bainimarama after fifteen years of service as Commander and a total of thirty nine years of active military service. 
**Strategic Command - Strategic Command is responsible for all of the long term and strategic concerns of the RFMF, including welfare, legal issues, sustainability issues etc.
**Land Force Command - Land Force Command is the operational organisation of the RFMF, and is responsible for all of the main units:
***HQ Land Force Commander Lieutenant Colonel Jone Kalouniwai 
***Naval Unit
***Fiji Infantry Regiment
****Regular Force
*****1st Battalion
*****2nd Battalion
*****3rd Battalion
****Territorial Force
*****4th Battalion
*****5th Battalion
*****7th/8th Battalion
***Fiji Engineer Regiment
***Logistic Support Unit
***Force Training Group

=== Equipment ===
* M16A2 rifle
* Daewoo K2 rifle
* CAR-15 carbine
* 4 x howitzer QF 25 pounder 87,6 mm (ceremonial)
* 12 x mortar F2 (L16) 81 mm Asia Pacific Defence Reporter 2006 Source Book 
* M60 Machine Gun
* grenade launcher

== The Fijian Navy ==
Fijian Naval Ensign 
Today, a 300-man strong Navy Unit RFMF, which on 25 July 2005 celebrated the thirtieth anniversary of its founding. It was formed in 1975 (Naval squadron Royal Fiji Military Forces), following the government's ratification of the United Nations Law of the Sea convention. The Navy is responsible for maritime needs in border control, such as watching over Fiji's exclusive economic zone and organizing task and rescue missions. It currently operates 9 patrol boats. Military aid is received from Australia, the People's Republic of China, and the United Kingdom (although the latter has suspended aid as a result of the 2006 military coup against the civilian government).

Speaking at 30th anniversary celebrations on 26 July 2006, Commander Bradley Bower said that the greatest challenge facing the navy of a maritime country like Fiji was to maintain sovereignty and the maritime environment, to acquire, restore, and replace equipment, and to train officers to keep pace with changing situations.

===Equipment===
Patrol boat class Dabur (Israeli boat No. 881)
Patrol boat class Pacific (Solomon Island Police boat RSIPV 03 Lata)3 Pacific class patrol boat (Australia, displacement 162 t, length 31,5 m, width 8,1 m, draught 1,8 m, power 2 x 1,050 kW, maximal speed 20 knots (37 km/h), crew 17 man, equipment machine guns 1 x 12,7 mm. These boat replace discharged Redwing-class minesweepers FNS Kula, Kikau and Kiro, gain 1975 - 1976 from the United States Navy.

*RFNS 201 Kula (May 1994)
*RFNS 202 Kikau (May 1995)
*RFNS 203 Kiro (October 1995)
2 patrol boat (USA, displacement 97 t, crew 11 man, equipment machine guns 1 x 12,7 mm)

*RFNS 101 Levuika (1987)
*RFNS 102 Lautoka (1987)
4 Dabur class patrol boat (Israel, displacement 39 t, crew 9 man, equipment 2 x cannon 20 mm, 2 x machine guns 7,62)

*RFNS 301 Vai (1991)
*RFNS 302 Ogo (1991)
*RFNS 303 Saku (1991)
*RFNS 304 Saqa (1991)

== The Fiji Air Wing ==
The Air Wing of the Republic of Fiji Military Forces was founded in 1987, had a base at the airport in Nausori, but was abolished in 1997. Yehonatan Shimon Frenel writes that '..the ..Air Wing was formed after the 1987 coup, when the French provided two helicopters as part of its military aid package.' Frenkel goes on to say that the air wing was disbanded after both helicopters crashed and after subsequent revelations of huge debts incurred as a result of the aircraft.

The two helicopters were:
* 1 transport helicopter Eurocopter AS 365N2 Dauphin 2 - matriculation marker DQ-FGD - in service from 1989 to 1994.
* 1 transport helicopter Aerospatiale AS 355F-2 Twin Squirrel - matriculation marker DQ-FGH - in service from 1991 to 1997.

Helicopter AS-365 N2 Dauphin crashed off the coast of the main island in July 1994, a smaller helicopter AS-355F-2 continued in service until mid-1997 and in 1999 was sold to France.

== Rank insignia ==
Rank designation based on the British tradition. 

== Political intervention ==
Fiji's Military has a history of political intervention. In 1987, soldiers were responsible for two military coups, and in 2000, the Military organized a countercoup to quash George Speight's civilian coup. Since 2000, the Military has had a sometimes tense relationship with the Qarase government, and has strongly opposed its plans to establish a Commission with the power to compensate victims and pardon perpetrators of the coup. Among other objections, the Military claims that its integrity and discipline would be undermined if soldiers who coup of 2000:Mutinies|mutinied] in the 2000 upheaval were to be pardoned.

On 4 August 2005, Opposition Leader Mahendra Chaudhry called for more Indo-Fijians, who presently comprise less than one percent of the Military personnel, to be recruited. (Specifically, as of October 2007, Fiji's military had 3527 full-time members, of whom only 15 were Indo-Fijians. ) This would help guarantee political stability, he considered. He also spoke against government plans to downsize the military. Military spokesman Lieutenant Colonel Orisi Rabukawaqa responded the next day by saying that the Military was not an ethnic Fijian body, that it stood to serve the entire nation, and that there was no colour bar in its recruitment or promotion. He said that many Indo-Fijians had been reluctant to commit themselves to a Military career because of the slow progress of promotion, often preferring to be discharged and to use their record as a stepping stone to a successful career in some other field. Nevertheless, he appreciated the Indo-Fijian contribution to the Military, and noted the success of Lieutenant Colonel Mohammed Aziz, the head of the Military's legal unit who was a pivotal figure in the court martial of soldiers who mutinied in 2000. Ironically the rate of promotion of indigenous Fijian officers had been very rapid after the 1987 coup, and subsequent expansion of the Republic of Fiji Military Forces.

On 26 August 2005, the government announced plans to study ways to reduce the size of the military. Military engineers would be transferred to the Regional Development Ministry, said Home Affair Minister Josefa Vosanibola, and the reduction of the Military forces would coincide with an increase in the numbers of the police force.

On 26 September 2005, Rabukawaqa revealed that the Military had decided to curtail certain operations in order to stay within its budget. The cuts would affect maritime patrols, search and rescue operations, training and exercises, School Cadet training, and the deployment of Military engineers to rural areas. These cuts would be made to ensure that activities accorded a higher priority, such as peacekeeping operations in the Sinai Peninsula and Iraq, officer cadet training with the New Zealand Defence Forces, and the prosecution of soldiers charged with mutiny, would not be affected, Rabukawaqa said.

The next day, Lesi Korovavala, Chief Executive Officer of the Ministry of Home Affairs, told the Fiji Village news service that the Military had undertaken the reductions on its own initiative, in consultation with the department, an explanation corroborated by Lieutenant Colonel Rabukawaqa.

On 5 December 2006, the Fijian army staged a third coup d'tat. On February 7, 2008, the head of the RFMF and post-coup interim Prime Minister Voreqe Bainimarama stated: "Qarase does not understand the role of the Military and as such is misinforming the nation. f there are practices and policies which have potential to undermine the national security and territorial integrity of Fiji, the RFMF has every right under the Constitution to intervene." In August 2009, with Bainimarama still controlling the government as prime minister and the constitution abrogated, Ratu Epeli Nailatikau a former military commander was appointed acting president on the retirement of Iloilo.

==Commanders since 1971==
*Brigadier D. J. Aitken (1971  1974)
*Colonel Paul Manueli (1974  1979)
*Colonel Ian Thorpe (1979  1982)
*Colonel Epeli Nailatikau (1982  1987)
*Major General Sitiveni Rabuka (1987  1992)
*Brigadier Epeli Ganilau (1992  1999)
*Commodore Frank Bainimarama (1999  2014)
*Brigadier Mosese Tikoitoga (2014  Present)

==See also==
*List of militaries by country

==Notes==

==References==
* 
* 

==External links==
*Official RFMF website

 
Fiji
Fiji
Fiji
Fiji

[[Foreign relations of Fiji]]

Fiji has experienced many coups recently, in 1987, 2000, and 2006. Fiji has been suspended various times from the Commonwealth of Nations, a grouping of mostly former British colonies. It was readmitted to the Commonwealth in December 2001, following the parliamentary election held to restore democracy in September that year, and is currently suspended again after the 2006 coup. Other Pacific Island governments have generally been sympathetic to Fiji's internal political problems and have declined to take public positions.

Fiji became the 127th member of the United Nations on 13 October 1970, and participates actively in the organization. Fiji's contributions to UN peacekeeping are unique for a nation of its size. A nation with a population of less than one million, it maintains nearly 1,000 soldiers overseas in UN peacekeeping missions, mainly in the Middle East.

Since independence, Fiji has been a leader in the South Pacific region, and has played a leading role in the formation of the South Pacific Forum. Fiji has championed causes of common interest to Pacific Island countries.

As of 2005, Fiji has become embroiled in a number of disagreements with other countries, including Australia, China, New Zealand, the United States, and Vanuatu.

The country's foreign relations and diplomatic missions are maintained by its Ministry of Foreign Affairs and International Cooperation.

==Pacific Ocean countries==
=== Australia ===

On 13 April, 2005, Fiji's prime minister, Laisenia Qarase, rejected criticism from Australia and some other countries over the prosecution and imprisonment of two foreigners charged with committing homosexual acts, which are illegal in Fiji, and said that other countries needed to respect Fiji's independence. Qarase said that as member of the United Nations, Fiji was as entitled as any other country to make its own laws as it saw fit.

The Australian Government took a more measured position than its New Zealand counterpart over the controversial Reconciliation, Tolerance, and Unity Bill being debated in the Fijian Parliament. Susan Boyd, a former Australian High Commissioner to Fiji, strongly criticized the legislation, but Foreign Minister Alexander Downer said that it is an "internal matter" and that Australia does not want to get involved. He did, however, condemn recent threats from the military commander, Commodore Frank Bainimarama, to declare martial law and arrest members of the present government if the bill is passed. The Australian High Commission in Suva told Bainimarama that his threats are not "the proper role for the military in a democracy."

Australian Foreign Minister Alexander Downer visited Fiji for two days of talks, from 28 to 30 September, 2005. Downer met government ministers and officials, Opposition Leader Mahendra Chaudhry, and military commander Commodore Frank Bainimarama. The talks covered the controversial Unity Bill, as well as the future of Fiji's preferential trade access to the Australian market, which the Fijian Government regards as a priority. Downer said that he intended to elaborate further on Australian Prime Minister John Howard's promise of a seven-year extension of the SPARTECATCF scheme, which assists Fiji's textile, clothing, and footwear industry.

Foreign Minister Tavola expressed grave concern on 7 February, 2006, about a proposed regional trade agreement (RTA) between Australia and China, saying that Fiji's exports to Australia would be unable to compete with Chinese products. For that reason, Fiji was persisting in its efforts to persuade Australia to renew the South Pacific Regional Trade and Economic Cooperation  Textile Clothing Footwear (SPARTECATCF) scheme, to improve the competitiveness of Fijian exports, the Fiji Live news service reported. Fiji Live 7 February 2006 

The Fiji Times reported on 14 September, 2006, that Prime Ministers Qarase and Howard had discussed possible Australian assistance for the reform of Fiji's sugar industry, with Howard reported receptive to giving aid. Qarase said that he had asked Australia to provide two or three experts to help with the establishment of the proposed Fiji Research Sugar Institute. Fiji Times 14 September 2006 

Regarding the coup, Australia's foreign minister at the time, Alexander Downer, said that the military were "slowly trying to take control" and pressured the PM to resign. It was reported that in 2006 Fiji's Prime Minister Qarase asked Australia's Prime Minister John Howard for military assistance should a coup take place, but Howard declined.

===2009 events; coup and diplomatic rift===

On 3 November 2009 Fiji ordered the diplomatic envoys of Australia to leave Fiji within 24 hours. The expulsion of the diplomats followed accusations by leader of Fiji, Frank Bainimarama, that Australia and New Zealand were interfering in Fiji's internal affairs and "wage a negative campaign against the government and people of Fiji". In particular Bainimarama says that the two countries were exerting pressure on Sri Lankan judges, brought in by Bainimarama to replace the uncooperative local judiciary, not to travel to the country and refusing to grant them transit visas. The Australian Government denied this and stated that it only advised the judges that once they took up office in Fiji they would be subject to an existing travel ban in place against Fijian officials. Australia's senior diplomat in Fiji was also expelled in the 2006 coup. Fiji announced its withdrawal of their high commissioner from Australia. 

Australia and New Zealand responded on 4 November, 2009, expelling Fiji's diplomats from both those countries. Stephen Smith, Australian Foreign Minister, rejected any accusations of meddling in Fiji's affairs and said that he was "deeply disappointed" by Fiji's actions. The then Prime Minister Kevin Rudd said that he would maintain his tough stance against Fiji in order to prevent a "coup culture" spreading around the Pacific.

===China===

A diplomatic row with China erupted on 5 May, 2005, when President Chen Shui-bian of Taiwan arrived for a private visit and was welcomed at a private function at Suva's Sheraton Resort by Vice-President Ratu Joni Madraiwiwi, Ratu Ovini Bokini (Chairman of the Great Council of Chiefs), Senate President Taito Waqavakatoga and several other Senators and MPs, and several judges including Chief Justice Daniel Fatiaki. Foreign Minister Kaliopate Tavola asserted that those who attended the welcoming ceremony did so "of their own accord," not as government representatives, and that Prime Minister Qarase's presence in the same hotel where President Chen was staying was purely "coincidental." Chinese ambassador Cai Jin Biao rejected this explanation, and said that the visit was a violation of the One China Policy, to which Fiji had agreed when diplomatic relations were established in 1975, which would "sabotage relations between China and Fiji." He charged that Prime Minister Qarase and Foreign Minister Tavola had known of the upcoming visit for months. The embassy issued a further statement on 7 May, demanding that Fiji discontinue any effort to establish a dialogue with Taiwan.

The row escalated when, on 16 May, Health Minister Solomone Naivalu voted in support of Taiwan's bid to gain observer status at the World Health Assembly in Geneva. Naivalu had apparently done so on his own initiative, contrary to a government briefing, sparking a major public disagreement between himself and Foreign Minister Tavola. Jia Qinglin, chairman of the People's Political Consultative Conference (CPPCC), was dispatched to Fiji and met Prime Minister Qarase during a brief stopover on 2122 May, a move that Tavola said was not coincidental. He said that Fiji could not afford to lose China, and that the government would ensure that "careless incidences" like Naivalu's vote in Geneva would not recur. Naivalu responded by saying that his vote was nothing new: "We always support Taiwan to get observer status every year," he said.

On 10 December, 2005, the New Zealand Herald quoted Tavola as saying that Fiji would have to find a way to resolve a stand-off between the PRC and Taiwan, over membership of the Suva-based Council of South Pacific Tourism Organisation; China was resisting Taiwanese attempts to join the organization on an equal basis. "If China had its way it would not want Taiwan on that. So we have to resolve the situation amicably and are looking at how both countries can be represented there," Tavola said. 

In defence of the earlier incident over the Taiwanese President's visit, Tavola said that it was the Pacific way to welcome people. "Even when considering Taiwan as a province of China, he went on, the President of a province is a man of high profile, so when he comes there is an urge to extend hospitality." It did not signify any modification to Fiji's adherence to the One China policy, he had explained to the Chinese ambassador.

China has invested in a number of major projects in Fiji. These include the Suva sports stadium, built for the South Pacific Games of 2003.

On 14 December 2005, Fiji's military commander, Commodore Frank Bainimarama began an official visit to China, at the invitation of the People's Liberation Army. He reaffirmed Fiji's support for the One China policy.

It was announced on 24 January, 2006 that Chinese Premier Wen Jiabao would visit Fiji that April to open the China-Pacific Islands Countries Economic Development & Cooperation Forum Ministerial Conference 2006 at Sofitel Fiji Resort in Nadi, a conference of economic and trade ministers from Pacific Island countries. Six prime ministers from neighbouring countries are expected to participate, according to a Fiji Times report on 23 February. His visit to Fiji will be the first by a senior Chinese Government official.

In an interview with PACNEWS on 1 February, 2006, Jeremaia Waqanisau, Fiji's ambassador to Beijing, made a stinging attack on the efficiency of the Fijian civil service, saying that it negatively affected Fiji's ability to present itself to China. Cabinet ministers visited China without the Fijian embassy being informed, he complained. Certain civil servants were extremely passive in their dealings with China, he said. Another factor inhibiting Chinese investment was the instability caused by friction between the government and the military, he surmised, and the Fijian embassy in Beijing was continually engaged in damage control.

===New Zealand===

On 10 June 2005, Foreign Minister Tavola signed a "Memorandum of Understanding" with his New Zealand counterpart, Phil Goff, aimed at fostering cooperation in the fight against terrorism. Meanwhile, New Zealand's Prime Minister Helen Clark announced that New Zealand would double its annual aid to Fiji, from NZ$4 million to NZ$8 million. Much of this aid, the Fijian Government revealed, would be used for poverty alleviation and squatter resettlement.

New Zealand's Foreign Minister Winston Peters (who replaced Goff in late 2005) flew into Fiji on 8 February, 2006, for three days of talks with Fijian Government officials. He met Prime Minister Qarase, Finance Minister Ratu Jone Kubuabola, and military commander Commodore Frank Bainimarama on the first day of his visit; meetings with Foreign Minister Tavola and House of Representatives Speaker Ratu Epeli Nailatikau were held later. The meeting with Bainimarama attracted some media attention; Bainimarama said that the meeting had been approved by Prime Minister Qarase and that there was nothing underhanded about it. 

The talks are to cover such matters as the Pacific Plan and a cost-sharing agreement for a citizen education project, promoted by the United Nations Development Programme.

The New Zealand Minister of Foreign Affairs Winston Peters described the 2006 coup as a "creeping siege on democratic institutions". Helen Clark said that the Fijian constitution only allowed the president to request the dissolving of parliament if the prime minister no longer had the confidence of the parliament and that this was clearly not the case. The New Zealand Government has also stated those taking part in the coup will be banned from entry to New Zealand, and that military ties, aid and sporting contacts will be cut. Helen Clark has said in the NZ Herald that she would consider sanctions against Fiji. 

On 3 November, 2009, Fiji ordered the diplomatic envoys of New Zealand to leave Fiji within 24 hours. The expulsion of the diplomats followed accusations by leader of Fiji, Frank Bainimarama, that Australia and New Zealand were interfering in Fiji's internal affairs and attempting to "wage a negative campaign against the government and people of Fiji". In particular Bainimarama says that the two countries were exerting pressure on Sri Lankan judges, brought in by Bainimarama to replace the uncooperative local judiciary, not to travel to the country and refusing to grant them transit visas. New Zealand's top diplomat in Fiji at the time was Todd Cleaver. 

New Zealand returned the favour on 4 November when it expelled Fiji's acting head of mission, Kuliniasi Seru Savou, from the country. New Zealand's Foreign Minister Murray McCully said that "Diplomatic relations with Fiji are roughly the same they have been for the last couple of years unfortunately" and that "we have had our ups and downs and unfortunately today they are down". The event marked the third time that New Zealand's top diplomat in Fiji has been expelled since the 2006 coup. 

===Papua New Guinea===

Relations between Fiji and Papua New Guinea became strained in November 2005, in the wake of revelations that a number of Fijian citizens, possibly mercenaries, had entered Papua New Guinea illegally and were involved in arming and training a separatist militia on the island of Bougainville.

On a separate matter, PNG Trade and Industry Minister Paul Tiensten was quoted in Fiji Village on 21 February 2006 as saying that sanctions against Fiji were being considered, following a Fijian refusal of a PNG kava shipment and an earlier rejection of corned beef shipped from PNG.

===Solomon Islands===

Diplomatic relations are currently cordial, although the Solomon Islands government has aligned itself with other countries in the region to urge Fiji interim Prime Minister Voreqe Bainimarama to restore democracy in Fiji. Fiji and the Solomon Islands are both located in Melanesia, and are both members of the Melanesian Spearhead Group. They also participate in other regional organisations including the Pacific Islands Forum. In August 2008, it was announced that the Solomon Islands intended to open a High Commission in Suva, "Solomons considers High Commission in Suva", Radio Australia, 14 August 2008 and in December the government of Fiji announced that it had "formally endorsed the establishment of a Resident Diplomatic Mission in Suva by the Government of the Solomon Islands". "Cabinet approves Establishment of a Resident Mission of the Solomon Islands in Suva", Fiji government website, 2 December 2008 Fiji's High Commission to Papua New Guinea is accredited to the Solomon Islands.

===Tonga===

It was reported on 2 November 2005 that a territorial dispute was looming between Fiji and Tonga over a reef lying to the south of both countries. The people of Ono-i-Lau in the Lau Islands archipelago claim that Minerva Reef is part of their traditional fishing ground. Attorney General Qoriniasi Bale told the Lau Provincial Council that the government had a team of experts preparing a case to be taken to the United Nations International Seabed Authority, which is based in Jamaica. The reef has also been claimed by Tonga since 1972, and Tonga's Surveyor General, Tevita Malolo, told Radio New Zealand that Fiji had never contested Tonga's claim until now.

===Vanuatu===

* More on Wikinews.

On 11 March 2005, Vanuatu imposed a ban in biscuit imports, ostensibly to protect its own biscuit manufacturing industry, giving a monopoly on the business to the Espiritu Santo-based Wong Sze Sing store. The ban was the second in a year. Bread and breakfast cereals produced by Flour Mills of Fiji (FMF) were the worst-hit; the company claimed to be losing F$2 million annually.

Fiji retaliated on 13 June with a threat to impose a total commercial embargo on Vanuatu. Major income-earners for Vanuatu targeted by the Fijian government include Vanuatu kava, valued at almost US$3.2 million, and Air Vanuatu flights (US$8 million).

On 29 June, Foreign Minister Tavola said that Fiji was "running out of patience" and that he was writing to the government of Vanuatu in what he called a "final gesture of friendship."

On 27 July, Vanuatu's Trade Minister James Bule signed an order lifting the ban, effective from 22 July. No reason was given for the change of policy, but the Fiji Live news service reported that the decision averted a lawsuit from FMF and the threatened kava ban.

Fiji's Foreign Affairs chief executive officer, Isikeli Mataitoga, said that Fiji's policy of pursuing diplomatic channels in dealing with such disputes had been vindicated. "Whilst I agree that it can take a bit of time to see it through carefully, it nevertheless, demonstrates to our regional friends that we are principled in our approach to international relations and diplomacy," Mataitoga said.

There was another twist on 28 July, however, when FMF Chairman Hari Punja called the lifting of the ban a fabrication. He said that in place of the ban, the Vanuatu government had introduced a restrictive new quota system for imports which would make it "impossible" to export to Vanuatu. He called on the Fijian government to continue to pressure its Vanuatu counterparts.

Foreign Minister Tavola denounced the latest move of the Vanuatu government on 3 August, saying that it breached an agreement. On 9 August, he announced that the government had decided to go ahead with its threatened embargo against the importing of Vanuatu kava. On 16 August the Cabinet finalized the decision, banning all imports of Vanuatu kava for six months, after which the ban would be reviewed. On 18 August, Fiji Islands Revenue and Customs Authority chief executive Tevita Banuve said that importers would be given two weeks to clear their kava stock from the wharf. A special license would be granted only to clear the stock, he said. It would not be usable for importing more kava.

On 27 August, Tavola announced that following negotiations at the Melanesian Spearhead Group meeting in Papua New Guinea, he expected the Vanuatu government to lift the biscuit ban soon. If they did so, he said he would ask the Cabinet to lift the embargo against Vanuatu kava.

The Fiji Village news service reported on 11 October that Vanuatu's Trade Minister, James Bule, would visit Fiji on 25 October. The purpose of the visit would be to deliver his government's decision to lift the ban on Fijian biscuits, in return for Fiji lifting its ban on Vanuatu kava.

In return for Vanuatu's lifting of the biscuit ban on 25 October, the Fijian government announced on 7 December that it was lifting its kava ban for the sake of freer trade among the members of the Melanesian Spearhead Group (MSG).

On 22 December 2005, Vanuatu's Finance Minister Willie Rarua formally apologized to Fiji's Acting Foreign Minister, Pita Nacuva, for having imposed the ban.

==Rest of the world==

In January 2008, the Fiji Times Online reported that the government of Fiji had announced in a cabinet statement that it will establish full diplomatic relations with four nations: Iceland, Latvia, the Dominican Republic and Estonia. The establishment of relations had been requested by interim Minister for Foreign Affairs Ratu Epeli Nailatikau. 

 Country Formal Relations Began Notes 
 Brazil 2006 Fiji Live reported on 23 February 2006 that Fiji's United Nations ambassador Isikia Savua and his Brazilian counterpart Ronaldo Mota Sardenberg had recently signed a communiqu to establish diplomatic relations. Savua expressed the hope that Fiji's bio-fuels industry could benefit from Brazilian technology. 
 Cuba See Cuban-Pacific relations Fiji's ambassador to the United Nations, Berenado Vunibobo, stated in 2008 that his country could seek closer relations with Cuba, and in particular medical assistance, following a decline in Fiji's relations with New Zealand. Fiji's foreign minister Ratu Epeli Nailatikau took part in the first Cuba-Pacific Islands ministerial meeting in Havana in September 2008. \"Cuba-Pacific ministerial meeting underway in Havana\", ABC Radio Australia, 17 September 2008 
 European Union The European Union announced on 3 November 2005 that it would increase its assistance to Fijian schools from 2006 onwards. The assistance would cover infrastructure and building, as well as supplying schools with running water and telephone services. 
 Denmark Fiji is represented in Denmark, through its embassy in London, United Kingdom. Fiji Embassy in Denmark Denmark is represented in Fiji, through its embassy in Jakarta, Indonesia. Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Denmark: Fiji Denmark has one consulate in Suva, Fiji. 
 France See FijiFrance relations Relations between the France and Fiji are currently strained, due to France's condemnation of the 2006 Fijian coup d'tat. Previously, Franco-Fiji bilateral relations had primarily be centred on military cooperation, with France assisting Fiji in surveiling its maritime zone, and on development aid. French military assistance was suspended after the coup. French aid to Fiji includes the providing of equipment for poor and isolated areas, and assistance in the development of renewable energy. France also provides Fiji with translations into English of French scientific documents pertaining to the Pacific area. France promotes French culture and the French language in Fiji through the presence of the Alliance Franaise and by encouraging the teaching of French in schools and at the University of the South Pacific. The French embassy in Suva is accredited to Kiribati, Nauru, Tonga and Tuvalu. French Ministry of Foreign Affairs 
 India See India-Fiji relations Fiji's relationship with India is often seen by observers against the backdrop of the sometimes tense relations between its indigenous people and the 38 percent of the population who are of Indian descent. A major diplomatic event for Fiji in 2005 occurred from 8 to 15 October, when Prime Minister Laisenia Qarase and Foreign Minister Kaliopate Tavola made an official visit to India. 
 Israel Relations with Israel have generally been cordial, with Fiji usually taking positions sympathetic to Israel in United Nations resolutions. Relations were strained in July 2006, however, when three Israelis, who arrived in Fiji on the 13th, were arrested and deported. Amit Ronen, Eldar Avracohen, and Nimrod Lahav were detained in a jail cell at Nadi Airport for six hours and deported to Australia the next day, for alleged mistreatment of Palestinians by Israel. 3 Israelis evicted from paradise - Israel News, Ynetnews 
 Kosovo 13 February 2013 Fiji recognised the Republic of Kosovo on 19 November 2012 Fijis verbal note recognising Kosovo arrives, Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Kosovo, 2012-11-22 and established official diplomatic relations on 13 February 2013. The Republic of Kosovo establishes diplomatic relations with the Republic of Fiji, Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Kosovo, 2013-02-13 
 Malaysia 1977 See FijiMalaysia relations Both countries are formerly part of the British Empire and has a long standing relations due to many Fijian soldiers served in Peninsular Malaysia during the Malayan Emergency from 1952 to 1956. 
 Pakistan See FijiPakistan relations 
 South Korea 1970 See Fiji  South Korea relations The Republic of the Fiji Islands and the Republic of Korea established official diplomatic relations in 1970, when Fiji became independent. \"Political relations\", ROK embassy in Fiji There is a South Korean embassy in Suva Address of the South Korean embassy in Suva and a Fijian embassy in Seoul. Address of the Fijian embassy in Seoul Relations between the two countries are currently friendly, and are being strengthened at the initiative of the Fijian authorities. 
 South Africa 2006 Foreign Minister Kaliopate Tavola announced on 15 February 2006 that South Africa would be the first African country to establish a diplomatic mission in Fiji. Diplomatic relations would open up new opportunities for trade and investment, Tavola said. On 27 February, it was announced that South Africa would be opening a High Commission in Fiji. 
 United Kingdom Foreign Minister Tavola expressed concern on 11 July about moves by the British government to reduce its presence in the Pacific region. \"We were not happy with that and on occasions, informed them of the folly of their decision to downsize their presence in the Pacific,\" Tavola said. Britain has already closed its consulate in Kiribati and subsequently closed its missions in Tonga 2005 and Vanuatu in 2006. Britain has also withdrawn from the Secretariat of the Pacific Community, a regional organization of which it was a founding member and a major donor. Tavola said the British withdrawal could create a power vacuum which others could exploit. A new Cold War era could come to the Pacific region, he said, with rivalries between China and Taiwan, as well as between China and Japan. 
 United States See Fiji-United States relations Before the 2006 coup, the US government was highly critical of Fiji, causing tensions between the two countries. Relations are currently poor, due to the United States' opposition to Fiji's unelected government, after the 2006 Fijian coup d'tat in December 2006. 
 United Arab Emirates 18 March 2010 \"UAE and Fiji establish diplomatic relations\" wam.ae 18 March 2010 Link accessed 21 March 2010 
 Azerbaijan 19 March 2010 \"Azerbaijan, Fiji establish diplomatic relations\" news.az 18 March 2010 Link accessed 21 March 2010 
 
 Turkey 17 November 1975 \"Trkiye-Fiji Siyasi likileri\" test.mfa.gov.tr 2011 Link accessed 5 December 2011 

== Fijian missions abroad ==

Fiji maintains direct diplomatic or consular relations with countries with historical, cultural, or trading ties to Fiji; Ambassadors stationed in such countries are often accredited to neighbouring countries. Fiji maintains embassies in Belgium (taking care of Fiji's relations with the entire European Union), China, Japan, South Korea, and the United States; and High Commissions in Australia, India, Malaysia, Papua New Guinea, and New Zealand (in keeping with the Commonwealth practice of calling missions in fellow-commonwealth countries High Commissions rather than Embassies). Fiji also has a Permanent Mission to the United Nations.

== Foreign reaction to Fijian legislation ==

Australia and New Zealand have both expressed concern over legislation currently before the Fijian Parliament (as of June 2005), which proposes to establish a Reconciliation and Unity Commission, with the power (subject to presidential approval) to compensate victims and pardon persons convicted of crimes related to the coup d'tat which deposed the elected government in 2000.

On 30 August 2005, the then Commonwealth Secretary-General Don McKinnon called on the Fijian government to ensure that the legislation reflected the views of its citizens. He emphasized, however, that the Commonwealth did not have a position on the bill.

== Fiji and international organizations ==

Fiji plays an active role in numerous international bodies. The South Pacific Forum was largely the brainchild of Ratu Sir Kamisese Mara, Fiji's first Prime Minister. The country has been an outspoken participant many international forums.

=== Commonwealth of Nations ===

Fiji has been a member of the Commonwealth of Nations since it gained its independence in 1970. It was not a member of the Commonwealth between 1987 and 1997 as a result of a republican coup d'tat, and was suspended just three years after rejoining between 2000 to 2001 after a military coup, and is currently suspended after the 2006 coup. Despite being suspended, Fiji does remain a Commonwealth republic.

=== Oceania Customs Organisation ===

On 1 September 2005, it was announced that the Oceania Customs Organization would relocate to Fiji in 2006. Though located in Fiji, it would be totally independent of the Fijian government and of the Fiji Islands Revenue and Customs Authority (FIRCA), Finance Minister Ratu Jone Kubuabola said, and for the first three years of its presence in Fiji, its secretariat would be financed by the New Zealand government.

=== World Trade Organization ===

Speaking at the 18th Fiji-Australia Business Forum in Sydney on 17 October 2005, Prime Minister Qarase strongly criticized the World Trade Organization, saying that its policies were unfair to small countries like Fiji. "WTO is trying to impose equality of trade in an unequal world," he said, "but for developing countries like Fiji there is no level playing field, just a slippery slope." It would be a long time before Fiji's economy could compete on equal terms with that of more developed nations, he considered.

=== International Labour Organization ===

On 10 January 2006, the Fijian government criticized the International Labour Organization for what it said was the organization's unfair treatment of the Fiji Islands Congress of Trade Unions (FICTU). Labour Minister Kenneth Zinck said the government had received a complaint from FICTU about the ILO's discrimination against it in favour of the rival Fiji Trades Union Congress.

== Diplomatic initiatives ==

Speaking at the 6th Session of the Permanent Forum on Indigenous Issues in New York City on 23 May 2005, Isikia Savua, Fiji's Permanent Representative (Ambassador) to the United Nations, called for equal recognition of individual and collective rights in national and international policies. He said that Fiji had embodied both concepts in its Constitution, through such provisions as communal voting (giving each elector to vote for two members of the House of Representatives, one from his or her own ethnic group, and the other from any ethnic group).

On 1 September 2005, Prime Minister Qarase announced his intention to ask his Australian counterpart, John Howard, for more favourable market access for Pacific Island products. He called on Australia and New Zealand to revise the rules of origin under the SPARTECA trade agreement, and reduce the figure from 50 percent to 35 percent, thereby allowing Fiji to export a higher percentage of garments made elsewhere to Australian and New Zealand markets.

On 28 October 2005, Prime Minister Qarase criticized Australia and New Zealand for refusing to grant temporary work permits to Pacific Islanders. He said the two countries were acting unfairly in assuming that such permits would encourage illegal immigration. The Prime Minister claimed that in the absence of such work permits, Pacific Islanders visiting Australia and New Zealand often undertook illegal employment anyway.

== See also ==

* List of diplomatic missions in Fiji
* List of diplomatic missions of Fiji

== References ==

 


[[Goal line (gridiron football)]]

The Kansas City Chiefs (red) and the Pittsburgh Steelers (black) line up for a play on the goal line.
The goal line is the chalked or painted line dividing the end zone from the field of play in American football and Canadian football. It is the line that must be crossed in order to score a touchdown

If any part of the ball reaches any part of the imaginary vertical plane transected by this line while in-bounds and in possession of a player whose team is striving toward that end of the field, this is considered a touchdown and scores six points for the team whose player has advanced the ball to, or recovered the ball in, this position. This is in contrast with other sports like Association football and ice hockey, which require the puck or ball to pass completely over the goal line to count as a score.

If any member of the offensive team is downed while in possession of the ball behind his own team's goal line, this is called a safety and scores two points for the defensive team.

If, during the course of play, a loose ball travels past the goal line and is recovered within the end zone, then it is a touchdown if recovered by the kicking team, or a touchback if recovered and downed by the receiving team.

In the event of a kick recovered in one's own end zone, the entirety of the ball must pass the goal line in order for the ball to be considered in the field of play, and not a touchback.

==See also==
*American football/Glossary



[[Tackle (football move)]]

A Rugby League tackle during a National Rugby League Match Between the Manly Sea Eagles and the Cronulla Sharks
Most forms of football have a move known as a tackle. The primary purposes of tackling are to dispossess an opponent of the ball, to stop the player from gaining ground towards goal or to stop them from carrying out what they intend.

The word is used in some contact variations of football to describe the act of physically holding or wrestling a player to the ground. In others, it simply describes one or more methods of contesting for possession of the ball. It can therefore be used as both a defensive or attacking move.

== Name origin ==
In Middle Dutch, the verb tacken meant to grab or to handle. By the 14th century, this had come to be used for the equipment used for fishing, referring to the rod and reel, etc., and also for that used in sailing, referring to rigging, equipment, or gear used on ships. By the 18th century, a similar use was applied to harnesses or equipment used with horses. Modern use in football comes from the earlier sport of rugby, where the word was used in the 19th century.

==American and Canadian football==
College football game: Navy quarterback Kaipo-Noa Kaheaku-Enhada is tackled by Massachusetts defensive back James Ihedigbo, No. 7, and linebacker Charles Walker, No. 11.
In American football and Canadian football, to tackle is to physically interfere with the forward progress of a player in possession of the ball, such that his forward progress ceases and is not resumed, or such that he is caused to touch some part of his body to the ground other than his feet or hands, or such that he is forced to go out of bounds. In any such case, the ball becomes dead, the down is over, and play ceases until the beginning of the next play. A tackle is known as a quarterback sack when the quarterback is tackled behind the line of scrimmage while attempting to throw a pass. A tackle for loss indicates a tackle that causes a loss of yardage for the opposing running back or wide receiver. When a player who does not have the ball is taken down it is generally referred to as a block.

Tacklers are not required to wrap their arms around the ball carrier before bringing him to the ground; in fact, the ball carrier is often "tackled" by the defender taking a running start and hitting the ball carrier to knock them to the ground. Tackles can also be made by grabbing the ball carrier's jersey and pulling him to the ground. As mentioned above, the referee can declare that a play is dead if the ballcarrier's forward progress has been stopped, even if no actual "tackle" has occurred.

There are some restrictions on tackles and blocks. At no time may a defensive player tackle an offensive player by grabbing the facemask of a football helmet; doing so incurs a 15-yard penalty and the victimized team is awarded a new set of downs. Although spear tackles are allowed in gridiron football, a player may not use his helmet to tackle an opponent as the technique can cause serious injury to both players (more often the tackler, due to the force of reaction on the tackler, which is apt to be beyond the limit that the neck can handle) and also warrants a 15-yard penalty as well as a fresh set of downs if committed by the defending team; this is known as "spearing the player." A similar penalty is assessed to any player attempting to make contact with his helmet against another opponent's helmet, which is known as a helmet-to-helmet collision. Grabbing a ball carrier by the pads behind his neck and pulling him down is known as a "horse collar," a method which has been made illegal at all levels of American football.

It is also illegal to tackle a player who has thrown a forward pass (generally a quarterback) after he has released the ball; doing so is called "roughing the passer" and incurs a 15-yard penalty and a fresh set of downs for the team with the ball. However, in the NFL a player can continue forward for one step, which means that often a player who is committed to attacking the quarterback will still make a tackle. Place kickers and punters are afforded an even greater protection from being tackled. Once the play is ruled complete no contact is permitted; a player who makes contact with an opponent after the play is charged with "unnecessary roughness" and his team is assessed a 15-yard penalty. Blocks that occur in the back of the legs and below the knees, initiated below the waist, or clotheslines are also generally prohibited and players who use them are subject to much more severe penalties than other illegal tackles. However a player who plays on the line can block below the knees (cut block) as long the block is within five yards of the line and the player they block is in front of them and not engaged by another blocker (chop block).

Tackle is also the name of player positions of interior linemen on both the offensive and defensive teams. Usually there is a left and right tackle on each team, though sometimes on defense there is only a single "nose tackle."

== Association football ==
A tackle in Association football

In association football, a player tackles an opponent by taking control of the ball from them. This is achieved by using either leg to wrest possession from the opponent, or sliding in on the grass to knock the ball away. The target of the tackle must always be the ball, otherwise it may be deemed as illegal by the referee, especially if the player makes contact with his opponent before the ball, or makes unfair contact with the player after playing the ball. If the tackle comes from the front or the side and succeeds in touching the ball first a player may still be penalised if the tackle endangers an opponent. FIFA Laws of the Game Tackling with both legs is illegal. Although tackles from behind were formerly illegal, tackles can now be legally made from any direction, so long as contact with the ball is made and the tackle is not excessively dangerous. http://www.fifa.com/mm/document/affederation/federation/lotg_en_55753.pdf (Law 12) This explicitly includes "scissoring" (tackling with legs apart, so as to trap the opponent's leg or legs in between), which is likely to be punished with a straight ejection (red card), as it poses a high risk of severe knee injury to the player being tackled. If a tackle is deemed legal, then play continues.

Tackling with studs up is considered dangerous, although it is not always punished.

== Australian rules football ==
A British Bulldog player is chased down and tackled by a Nauru Chief opponent as he tries to get a kick away.

As there is no offside rule in Australian rules football, players can be tackled from any direction, and often blindsided. For this reason, the sport allows shepherding methods for teammates to be able to protect the ball carrier.

The variety of different ways to contest possession in Australian rules has led to first time observers of the game regarding it as having "no rules" or as some Australians unfamiliar with the game colloquially term it "Rafferty's Rules". Despite these stereotypes, however, there are actually quite strict rules governing tackling.

In Australian rules football, the move commonly described as a "tackle" is similar to in rugby and involves wrapping, holding or wrestling a player who has possession of the ball to the ground.

Tackling in Australian Rules is unique in that if tackled player does not dispose of the ball having had opportunity to do so (called the holding the ball rule), or concedes a penalty in the tackle (i.e. tries to throw the ball when he was only allowed to "handball" or kick it) the tackler is rewarded with a free kick. This is only paid if the player tackling does not either deliberately or unintentionally hold the ball to their opponents body.

A tackle must make contact below the shoulders and above the knees, and a player is able to be thrown to the ground, so long as the tackle is not reckless. There are also rules outlawing pushing in the back making tackling more difficult.

Players wear little to no padding to cushion the impact of tackles, however mouthguards are essential for keeping teeth. As there is no offside rule in Australian rules, tackling is more often when chasing a player down rather than frequent on head on contact.

=== Types of tackles in Australian rules ===
There are many types of tackles in Australian rules football:
* perfect tackle  when a player lays a tackle on an opponent that has had prior opportunity to dispose of the ball and in the process makes it impossible for their opponent to dispose of the ball. For example if a tackler pins an opponent's arm, then the opponent cannot possibly handball, and if they pin both arms, then it is nearly impossible to legally execute a kick. A player is almost always rewarded for a perfect tackle (except in the case of a slam tackle  see below).
* gang tackle  when the player in possession is tackled by more than one opponent at the same time.
* high tackle  any tackle which infringes on the opponent's neck or head. This includes any tackle which slips above the A/C joint. This is illegal and the penalty is a free kick.
* grass cutter tackle - When a defending player tackles an attacking player around the ankles, making movement impossible for the attacker.
** coathanger  slang for high contact to the head, usually by a stiff arm, which causes a player to land flat on their back. It is often accidental due to the high pace of the game. The penalty may be a free kick if deemed accidental or a reportable offence which may result in suspension.
* diving tackle  when a player leaves the ground in attempting to tackle
* slinging  a player slung to the ground in a tackle (although in the AFL these days, if a player loses possession of the ball while they are being thrown, the tackler will often get penalised for "holding the man".)
* broken tackle  when a player is able to break free of a tackle
* spear tackle  also known as a dangerous throw, it is a reportable offence and may result in suspension.
* push in the back  Any tackle which forces the player forward, into the ground, or both, from behind. This is an illegal tackle and the penalty is a free kick.
* bump or hip and shoulder tackle is a legal Aussie rules tactic for both dispossession of the player with the ball and also impeding players involved in a contest but not in possession of the ball. The difference between a bump and a tackle is that arms are not used in a bump, which must be made side-on using the hip and or shoulder. Not all bumping is legal, however. Aggressive head on bumping or "charging" of a player with the ball is often described as "rough play" and is a reportable offence, this is particularly so if a player is deemed to have their head down over the ball in an attempt to picking it up off the ground when the bump is applied or contact is made above the shoulders. Standing ground against an oncoming player, however, is legal.
* slam tackle  relatively new term for a tackle which results in an opponent's head being deliberately slammed to the ground. It is often associated with the pinning of the arms of an opponent so that they cannot cushion the impact of their head on the ground. Although tolerated in days gone by in recent years, in 2009, the AFL branded this a dangerous type of tackle. Incidents in the professional AFL involving Byron Pickett and Darren Milburn have come under particular scrutiny. AFL not so tackle happy after Darren Milburn's tackle last season by Bruce Matthews. , 2009 
* wing tackle or Chicken wing tackle  when one arm is pinned in a tackle. After sustaining severe damage from this type of tackle during the 2009 AFL season, Brent Harvey called for this type of tackle to be banned. http://www.news.com.au/heraldsun/sport/afl/story/0,26576,25402009-19742,00.html 

=== Other tackling methods ===
Although the term "tackle" is used in Australian Rules to exclusively describe wrapping, holding or wrestling a player in possession, there are also several other ways of contesting possession in Australian rules that other sports would describe as a "tackle" and that also involve a degree of contact.

Other defensive actions are generally categorised as one percenters.
Colliding with other players whilst trying to catch or mark the ball is part of the game, however tackling a player jumping in the air to catch a ball is strictly not allowed. Bumping a player who is jumping to catch the ball is not allowed unless the player is deemed to have intentions to contest for possession or have "eyes for the ball". The defensive tactic of punching away (commonly known as spoiling) from a player is allowed. Smothering, which involves using the arms or body to get in the way of an opponent's kick as it leaves their boot, and is similar to a charge down in rugby football.

== Gaelic football ==
Gaelic football defines tackling as wresting the ball from an opponent's hands. Bumping is allowed on the player with the ball, but a player cannot be grabbed.

== International rules football ==
International rules football is a hybrid game between Australian rules football and Gaelic football.
Tackling in International Rules is subject to similar rules as Australian rules football, but with some subtle differences. Tackling is only allowed as low as the waist, whereas it is allowed down to the knees in Aussie Rules. One handed tackling has been banned in International Rules since the 2008 International Rules Series.

==Rugby league==

A tackle in rugby league
In rugby league the ball-carrier only may be tackled by any number of defenders from any direction. The initial contact in the tackle must be made below the ball carrier's neck or it will be deemed a high tackle and penalised. A tackle in rugby league is completed when any of the following occurs:
*The attacking player's ball-carrying arm comes into contact with the ground while still held by a defender.
*Although still on his feet, the attacking player's forward momentum has ceased while still held by a defender.
*The referee calls "Held".
Once the tackle is completed the ball-carrier must be allowed to get to his feet to 'play-the-ball'. Spear tackles are illegal in rugby league, with most tackles in which the defender is lifted 'above the horizontal' bringing about penalties in the modern game. A 2012 New Zealand study found that over 659 tackles are made per game in professional rugby league. Of all the rugby league positions, second-row forward averages the most tackles. 

==Rugby union==
A diving tackle in rugby union
In rugby union, a player must be brought to ground for a tackle to be completed. The tackled player must release the ball, but the ball is not dead and a ruck forms to contest possession of it. If the ball carrier is not brought to the ground a maul will usually form.

==Other uses==
Other non-football games that feature tackling or similar concepts include British bulldogs, hurling, hockey and shinty.

==Allowable tackle types==
 

Some illegal tackle moves result in a penalty play, however others may be "reportable" offences - that is, the option exists for an official to penalise a player's conduct individually rather than during the game refer it to a tribunal for deferred penalty.

 sliding tackle spear tackle dump tackle body tackle ankle tap diving tackle bumping/blocking shoulder charge steal/intercept ball Chicken wing other 
 
 Spoil, Shepherd, Smother 
 
 
 No grappling around the neck Charge down 
 Charge down 

==Controversial techniques==
* spear tackle (dangerous throw)  (illegal in both rugby codes and Australian rules)
* high tackle (illegal head-high tackle)  rugby league and Australian rules (see also coathanger)
* grapple tackle  a controversial rugby league tackling technique similar to a chokehold.
* chicken wing tackle  banned in rugby league
* horse-collar tackle  banned in gridiron football by the NFL, the NCAA, and the CFL. This tackle involves the defender reaching his hand inside the ball carrier's collar, grabbing the collar (and usually, the collar of the shoulder pads), and pulling player straight down or backwards and down. The tackle has the potential to cause severe injuries to the tackled player's neck, legs and ankles. It is considered an "equipment tackle", meaning the protective equipment used by the players is what is used to make the tackle (similarly, a face-mask tackle is considered an "equipment tackle"). The horse-collar was made infamous by former Dallas Cowboys free safety Roy Williams (now with the Cincinnati Bengals) when he performed it on former Philadelphia Eagles wide receiver Terrell Owens.

==References==



[[Play from scrimmage]]

A play from scrimmage is the activity of the games of Canadian football and American football during which one team tries to advance the ball, get a first down, or to score, and the other team tries to stop them or take the ball away. Once a play is over, and before the next play starts, the football is considered dead. A game of American football (or Canadian Football) consists of many (about 120-150) such plays.

==Specifications==
The term is also used to denote a specific plan of action, or its execution, under a particular set of circumstances faced by either team. Shields, Patricia and Rangarajan, Nandhini. 2013. A Playbook for Research Methods: Integrating Conceptual Frameworks and Project Management Stillwater, OK: New Forums Press, p. 1. For instance, the offensive team may be faced with one or two downs left in a possession and still ten or more yards to go to earn a new set of downs. In this instance, they may decide to employ a forward pass. Well in advance of the particular game, a number of different kinds of forward pass plays will have been planned out and practiced by the team. They will be designated by obscure words, letters and/or numbers so that the name of a play does not reveal its exact execution to outsiders. The team's coach, or perhaps the quarterback, will choose one of the pre-planned forward passing strategies, and tell the team, during the huddle which one has been chosen. Because of planning and practice, each player will know what his role in the play is to be, and how to execute it. This will be the offensive play.

Conversely, the defensive team will know that the offense has to cover a good deal of ground in a single play, will expect a forward pass, and will know from earlier study something of the propensities of the offense they face. The defensive captain is likely to call out a specific formation or defensive play, to anticipate and counteract the expected action by the offense.

==The play==
The play will begin with the snap of the ball (typically but not exclusively to the quarterback), and it will end when the effort by the offensive squad to advance the ball has either succeeded in scoring, or has been frustrated by the ball being downed before the aim of the offensive play is accomplished, or by the defensive squad having managed to come into possession of the ball without first downing it. In the event of change of possession during a play, the team newly in possession of the ball may try to advance it toward their opponent's goal, which the team formerly in possession will naturally resist. Change of possession during a routine play may occur by interception or by fumble.

Change of possession may also occur in other ways. A change of possession can occur "on downs", if the offensive team fails to achieve a first down or a touchdown in four attempts. Another way is through a change of possession play, when the offensive team, having surmised the unlikelihood of scoring or achieving a first down within four attempts, kicks the ball away in what is known as a punt. Kickoffs and field goal attempts are not considered true change of possession plays.

==References==

==See also==
*Glossary of American football



[[Football player]]

An association football player

A football player or footballer is a sportsperson who plays one of the different types of football. The main types of football that are played are association football, American football, Canadian football, Australian rules football, Gaelic football, rugby league, and rugby union.

It has been estimated that there are 250 million association football players in the world, football  Britannica Online Encyclopedia. Britannica.com (1970-04-21). Retrieved on 2011-11-05. and many play the other forms of football.

==Career==
Arild Stavrum, a retired football player who post-retirement has worked as a football manager and novelist
Jean-Pierre Papin has described football as a "universal language". http://www.cafebabel.co.uk/article/20539/jean-pierre-papin-football-is-a-universal-language.html Football players across the world and at almost any level may regularly attract large crowds of spectators, and players are the focal points of widespread social phenomena such as association football culture.

Football players generally begin as amateurs and the best players progress to become professional players. Normally they start at a youth team (any local team) and from there, based on skill and talent, scouts offer contracts. Once signed, some learn to play better football and some advance to the senior or professional teams.

===Wages===
Wages in some top leagues may be very high compared to other jobs. Players in the Premier League earn average wages of about $1 million. http://www.sportingintelligence.com/2011/01/20/from-20-to-33868-per-week-a-quick-history-of-english-footballs-top-flight-wages-200101/ However, only a fraction of professional football players play at this level. Wages may be much more moderate in other divisions and leagues, and a significant amount of players are semi-professional.

===Post-retirement===
A minority of retired football players continue working full-time within football, for instance as football managers. A 1979 study reported that former first-team ballplayers were over-represented as top ranking executives in their companies and had greater income mobility than second teamers and reserves. College Football and Social Mobility: A Case Study of Notre Dame Football Players. Allen L. Sack and Robert Thiel. Sociology of Education Vol. 52, No. 1 (Jan., 1979), pp. 60-66 However, some experience chronic health issues, see below.

==Skills==

==Psychological aspects of performance==

Football players perform more poorly when playing for a visiting team than a home team. This is called home advantage. In science, causes for this phenomenon have been proposed but never confirmed, making the reasons for this behaviour an "unsolved puzzle". Home Advantage in Football: A Current Review of an Unsolved Puzzle 

Research shows that association football players that take less than 200ms after the referee blows their whistle for a penalty kick are significantly more likely to miss scoring than those that take over a second. ResearchBlogging.orgJordet, G., Hartman, E., & Sigmundstad, E. (2009). Temporal links to performing under pressure in international Association Football penalty shootouts Psychology of Sport and Exercise, 10 (6), 621627 . Bps-research-digest.blogspot.com (2009-09-10). Retrieved on 2011-11-05. 

==Health issues==
Peter Crouch, an example of a "lean and muscular" association football player
Reggie White, an example of an American football player who suffered a premature death. Health effects of American football are under current scientific scrutiny.
Heading of the ball in association football increases the incidence of chronic brain damage
An Irish 2002 study of association and Gaelic football players characterised players as "lean and muscular with a reasonably high level of capacity in all areas of physical performance". The Journal of Sports Medicine and Physical Fitness &#91;2002, 42(2):239-242&#93; Anthropometric and fitness profiles of elite players in two football codes The opposite is the case for American football, where obesity could be the cause of grave health problems. http://www.sptimes.com/2006/01/29/Sports/A_huge_problem.shtml 

A 2000 study documented injuries sustained by Czech football players at all levels: doi: 10.1177/28.suppl_5.S-58 Am J Sports Med September 2000 vol. 28 no. suppl 5 S-58-S-68 

Although levels of depression and pain in retired football players are on par with the societal average, Med Sci Sports Exerc. 2007;39(4):599-605 Depression and Pain in Retired Professional Football Players some players suffer from post-retirement chronic injuries. Head injuries are a particular concern.

===Life expectancy===

The average life expectancy or lifespan of an American football NFL player has been reported to be extremely low, only 53 to 59 years depending on playing position. http://www.seattlepi.com/news/article/New-NFL-goal-A-longer-life-1272886.php However, a 2012 study reported that retired NFL players have a lower death rate than men in the general population. http://usatoday30.usatoday.com/sports/football/nfl/story/2012-05-08/Study-shows-NFL-players-live-longer/54847564/1 An oft-cited life expectancy of 58 years has been claimed by Sports Illustrated to be based on a myth. http://sportsillustrated.cnn.com/vault/article/magazine/MAG1198483/ According to a 2007 study, which also claims that little supporting data is available, retired American football players had "long and fulfilling careers with no apparent long-term detrimental effects on physical or mental health scores despite a high prevalence of arthritis". Am J Sports Med October 2007 vol. 35 no. 10 1674-1679 The Health Status of Retired American Football Players One explanation is that "life expectancy" is ambiguous: it may in some contexts refer to the expected age of death of a player, and in other contexts to the expected remaining number of life years.

As for association football, a 2011 German study found that German national team players live 1.9 years shorter than the general male population. http://www.oliverkuss.de/science/publications/Kuss_Longevity_of_Soccer_Players_An_Investigation_of_all_German_Internationals_from_1908-2006.pdf http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/j.1600-0838.2010.01269.x/abstract?deniedAccessCustomisedMessage=&userIsAuthenticated=false 

A 1983 study of rugby players found that the life expectancy of All Blacks is the same as for the general population. http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/6578423 

===Head===
American football players are prone to head injuries such as concussion. In later life, this increases the risk of dementia Association between Recurrent Concussion and Late-Life Cogni... Neurosurgery 57(4) (2005) and Alzheimers Ritter, Jim. (2011-07-18) Research: Football players may be more vulnerable to Alzheimer's | Loyola University Health System. Loyolahealth.org. Retrieved on 2011-11-05. 
Professional American football players self-reporting concussions are at greater risk for having depressive episodes later in life compared with those retired players self-reporting no concussions. doi: 10.1177/0363546512456193 Am J Sports Med October 2012 vol. 40 no. 10 2206-2212 Nine-Year Risk of Depression Diagnosis Increases With Increasing Self-Reported Concussions in Retired Professional Football Players http://www.cbc.ca/sports/football/story/2008/11/19/fifthestate-headgames.html 

Probably due to the repeated trauma associated with heading balls, professional association football has been suggested to increase the incidence of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. Brain (2005) 128 (3): 472-476. doi: 10.1093/brain/awh373 In a 1987 study of former Norwegian association football national team players, one third of the players were found to have central cerebral atrophy, i.e. brain damage. Neuroradiology March 1989, Volume 31, Issue 1, pp 44-48 Brain damage in former association football players A 1999 study connected soccer to chronic traumatic head injury (CTHI): JAMA. 1999;282(10):971-973. doi:10.1001/jama.282.10.971 Neuropsychological Impairment in Amateur Soccer Players (free access) 

===Knee===
Anterior cruciate ligaments are particularly vulnerable in most types of football due to injuries that can be sustained during tackles.

===Hip===
An increased incidence of osteoarthritis in the hip joint has been found in retired football players. Actaorthop. scand. 51,925-927,1980 

===Muscles===
A 2012 study of association football injuries found that 19% of all injuries were muscle injuries, of which 54% affected the thigh muscles. Injuries 2012, pp 871-875 Thigh Muscle Injuries in Professional Football Players: A Seven Year Follow-Up of the UEFA Injury Study 

===Sleep and psychological functioning===
In a 2009 study, association football was found to be associated with favourable sleep patterns and psychological functioning in adolescent male football players. doi: 10.1177/1359105309342602 J Health Psychol November 2009 vol. 14 no. 8 1144-1155 Football Is Good for Your Sleep Favorable Sleep Patterns and Psychological Functioning of Adolescent Male Intense Football Players Compared to Controls 

The rate of suicide among NFL vets has been found to be 59% lower than in the general population. http://sportsillustrated.cnn.com/vault/article/magazine/MAG1198483/ 

===FIFA response===
In 2012, FIFA released a paper intended to identify key risk factors for association football players. Br J Sports Med 2012;46:11-17 doi:10.1136/bjsports-2011-090634 Risk management: FIFA's approach for protecting the health of football players 

==Lists of players==
*Lists of association football players
*List of American football players
*
*List of footballers (Gaelic football)
*of rugby league footballers]

==References==

==See also==
*Sports unions



[[Friedrich Nietzsche]]

Friedrich Wilhelm Nietzsche ( or ; ; 15 October 1844  25 August 1900) was a German philologist, philosopher, cultural critic, poet and composer. He wrote several critical texts on religion, morality, contemporary culture, philosophy and science, displaying a fondness for metaphor, irony and aphorism.

Nietzsche's key ideas include the Apollonian/Dionysian dichotomy, perspectivism, the Will to Power, the "death of God", the bermensch and eternal recurrence. One of the key tenets of his philosophy is the concept of "life-affirmation," which embraces the realities of the world in which we live over the idea of a world beyond. It further champions the creative powers of the individual to strive beyond social, cultural, and moral contexts. Wicks, R. (Summer 2011) "Friedrich Nietzsche". The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy, Edward N. Zalta (ed.). Retrieved on: 2011-10-06. His radical questioning of the value and objectivity of truth has been the focus of extensive commentary, and his influence remains substantial, particularly in the continental philosophical schools of existentialism, postmodernism, and post-structuralism. His ideas of individual overcoming and transcendence beyond structure and context have had a profound impact on late-twentieth and early-twenty-first century thinkers, who have used these concepts as points of departure in the development of their philosophies. Marianne Constable, Genealogy and Jurisprudence: Nietzsche, Nihilism, and the Social Scientification of Law, Law & Social Inquiry 19, no. 3 (July 1, 1994): 551590. Raymond A. Belliotti, Jesus Or Nietzsche: How Should We Live Our Lives? (Rodopi, 2013), 195-201 
 
Nietzsche began his career as a classical philologista scholar of Greek and Roman textual criticismbefore turning to philosophy. In 1869, at age twenty-four, he was appointed to the Chair of Classical Philology at the University of Basel, the youngest individual to have held this position. He resigned in the summer of 1879 due to health problems that plagued him most of his life. Brobjer, Thomas. "Nietzsche's philosophical context: an intellectual biography", p. 42. University of Illinois Press, 2008. In 1889, at age forty-four, he suffered a collapse and a complete loss of his mental faculties. The breakdown was later ascribed to atypical general paresis due to tertiary syphilis, but this diagnosis has come into question. Re-examination of Nietzsche's medical evaluation papers show that he almost certainly died of brain cancer. Robert Matthews (4 May 2003), "'Madness' of Nietzsche was cancer not syphilis", The Telegraph. Nietzsche lived his remaining years in the care of his mother until her death in 1897, after which he fell under the care of his sister Elisabeth Frster-Nietzsche until his death in 1900.

As his caretaker, his sister assumed the roles of curator and editor of Nietzsche's manuscripts. Frster-Nietzsche was married to a prominent German nationalist and antisemite, Bernhard Frster, and reworked Nietzsche's unpublished writings to fit her own ideology, often in ways contrary to Nietzsche's stated opinions, which were strongly and explicitly opposed to antisemitism and nationalism (see Nietzsche's criticism of antisemitism and nationalism). Through Frster-Nietzsche's editions, Nietzsche's name became associated with German militarism and Nazism, although later twentieth-century scholars have counteracted this conception of his ideas.

==Life==

===Youth (184469)===

Born on 15 October 1844, Nietzsche grew up in the small town of Rcken, near Leipzig, in the Prussian Province of Saxony. He was named after King Frederick William IV of Prussia, who turned forty-nine on the day of Nietzsche's birth. (Nietzsche later dropped his middle name "Wilhelm".) Nietzsche's parents, Carl Ludwig Nietzsche (181349), a Lutheran pastor and former teacher, and Franziska Oehler (182697), married in 1843, the year before their son's birth. They had two other children: a daughter, Elisabeth Frster-Nietzsche, born in 1846, and a second son, Ludwig Joseph, born in 1848. Nietzsche's father died from a brain ailment in 1849; Ludwig Joseph died the next year, at age two. The family then moved to Naumburg, where they lived with Nietzsche's maternal grandmother and his father's two unmarried sisters. After the death of Nietzsche's grandmother in 1856, the family moved into their own house, now a museum and Nietzsche study center.

Nietzsche in 1861
Nietzsche attended a boys' school and then, later, a private school, where he became friends with Gustav Krug, Rudolf Wagner, and Wilhelm Pinder, all of whom came from highly respected families.

In 1854, he began to attend Domgymnasium in Naumburg but since he showed particular talents in music and language, the internationally-recognized Schulpforta admitted him as a pupil. He transferred and studied there from 1858 to 1864, becoming friends with Paul Deussen and Carl von Gersdorff. He also found time to work on poems and musical compositions. At Schulpforta, Nietzsche received an important grounding in languagesGreek, Latin, Hebrew, and Frenchso as to be able to read important primary sources; Krell, David Farrell, and Donald L. Bates. The Good European: Nietzsche's work sites in word and image. University of Chicago Press, 1997. he also experienced for the first time being away from his family life in a small-town conservative environment. His end-of-semester exams in March 1864 showed a 1 in Religion and German; a 2a in Greek and Latin; a 2b in French, History, and Physics; and a "lackluster" 3 in Hebrew and Mathematics.

While at Pforta, Nietzsche had a penchant for pursuing subjects that were considered unbecoming. He became acquainted with the work of the then almost-unknown poet Friedrich Hlderlin, calling him "my favorite poet" and composing an essay in which he said that the mad poet raised consciousness to "the most sublime ideality". Hayman, Ronald. Nietzsche: A Critical Life, p. 42. Oxford University Press, 1980. The teacher who corrected the essay gave it a good mark but commented that Nietzsche should concern himself in the future with healthier, more lucid, and more "German" writers. Additionally, he became acquainted with Ernst Ortlepp, an eccentric, blasphemous, and often drunken poet who was found dead in a ditch weeks after meeting the young Nietzsche but who may have introduced Nietzsche to the music and writing of Richard Wagner. Kohler, Joachim. Nietzsche & Wagner: A Lesson in Subjugation, p. 17. Yale University Press, 1998. Perhaps under Ortlepp's influence, he and a student named Richter returned to school drunk and encountered a teacher, resulting in Nietzsche's demotion from first in his class and the end of his status as a prefect. Hollingdale, R.J. Nietzche: The Man and his Philosophy, p. 21. Cambridge University Press, 1999. 

Nietzsche, 1864
After graduation in 1864, Nietzsche commenced studies in theology and classical philology at the University of Bonn. For a short time he and Deussen became members of the Burschenschaft Frankonia. After one semester (and to the anger of his mother) he stopped his theological studies and lost his faith. As early as his 1862 essay "Fate and History", Nietzsche had argued that historical research had discredited the central teachings of Christianity, but David Strauss's Life of Jesus also seems to have had a profound effect on the young man. In 1865, at the age of 20, Nietzsche wrote to his sister Elisabeth, who was deeply religious, a letter regarding his loss of faith. This letter ended with a following sentence:
"Hence the ways of men part: if you wish to strive for peace of soul and pleasure, then believe; if you wish to be a devotee of truth, then inquire..." 

Schopenhauer's philosophy strongly influenced Nietzsche's earliest philosophical thought.
Nietzsche subsequently concentrated on studying philology under Professor Friedrich Wilhelm Ritschl, whom he followed to the University of Leipzig the next year. There, he became close friends with his fellow student Erwin Rohde. Nietzsche's first philological publications appeared soon after.

In 1865, Nietzsche thoroughly studied the works of Arthur Schopenhauer. He owed the awakening of his philosophical interest to reading Schopenhauer's The World as Will and Representation and later admitted that Schopenhauer was one of the few thinkers whom he respected, dedicating to him the essay "Schopenhauer as Educator" in the Untimely Meditations.

In 1866, he read Friedrich Albert Lange's History of Materialism. Lange's descriptions of Kant's anti-materialistic philosophy, the rise of European Materialism, Europe's increased concern with science, Charles Darwin's theory of evolution, and the general rebellion against tradition and authority intrigued Nietzsche greatly. The cultural environment encouraged him to expand his horizons beyond philology and continue his study of philosophy, although Nietzsche would ultimately argue the impossibility of an evolutionary explanation of the human aesthetic sense. Charles H. Pence (2011), "Nietzsche's Aesthetic Critique of Darwin", University of Notre Dame, Academia.edu 

In 1867, Nietzsche signed up for one year of voluntary service with the Prussian artillery division in Naumburg. He was regarded as one of the finest riders among his fellow recruits, and his officers predicted that he would soon reach the rank of captain. However, in March 1868, while jumping into the saddle of his horse, Nietzsche struck his chest against the pommel and tore two muscles in his left side, leaving him exhausted and unable to walk for months. Hayman, Ronald. Nietzsche: A Critical Life, p. 93. Oxford University Press (New York), 1980. Nietzsche, Friedrich. Letter to Karl Von Gersdorff. June 1868. Consequently Nietzsche turned his attention to his studies again, completing them and meeting with Richard Wagner for the first time later that year. 

===Professor at Basel (186978)===

Mid-October 1871. From left: Erwin Rohde, Karl von Gersdorff, Nietzsche.
In part because of Ritschl's support, Nietzsche received a remarkable offer to become professor of classical philology at the University of Basel in Switzerland. He was only 24 years old and had neither completed his doctorate nor received a teaching certificate. Despite the fact that the offer came at a time when he was considering giving up philology for science, he accepted. To this day, Nietzsche is still among the youngest of the tenured Classics professors on record. Before moving to Basel, Nietzsche renounced his Prussian citizenship: for the rest of his life he remained officially stateless. Hecker, Hellmuth: "Nietzsches Staatsangehrigkeit als Rechtsfrage", Neue Juristische Wochenschrift, Jg. 40, 1987, nr. 23, pp. 138891. His, Eduard: "Friedrich Nietzsches Heimatlosigkeit", Basler Zeitschrift fr Geschichte und Altertumskunde, vol. 40, 1941, p. 15986. Note that some authors (among them Deussen and Montinari) mistakenly claim that Nietzsche became a Swiss citizen. 

Nevertheless, Nietzsche served in the Prussian forces during the Franco-Prussian War (18701871) as a medical orderly. In his short time in the military, he experienced much and witnessed the traumatic effects of battle. He also contracted diphtheria and dysentery. Walter Kaufmann speculates that he might also have contracted syphilis along with his other infections at this time. . On returning to Basel in 1870, Nietzsche observed the establishment of the German Empire and Otto von Bismarck's subsequent policies as an outsider and with a degree of skepticism regarding their genuineness. His inaugural lecture at the university was "Homer and Classical Philology". Nietzsche also met Franz Overbeck, a professor of theology who remained his friend throughout his life. Afrikan Spir, a little-known Russian philosopher responsible for the 1873 Thought and Reality, and Nietzsche's colleague the famed historian Jacob Burckhardt, whose lectures Nietzsche frequently attended, began to exercise significant influence on him during this time. Green, M.S. Nietzsche and the Transcendental Tradition. University of Illinois Press, 2002. 

Nietzsche had already met Richard Wagner in Leipzig in 1868 and later Wagner's wife, Cosima. Nietzsche admired both greatly and, during his time at Basel, he frequently visited Wagner's house in Tribschen in Lucerne. The Wagners brought Nietzsche into their most intimate circle and enjoyed the attention he gave to the beginning of the Bayreuth Festival. In 1870, he gave Cosima Wagner the manuscript of "The Genesis of the Tragic Idea" as a birthday gift. In 1872, Nietzsche published his first book, The Birth of Tragedy. However, his colleagues within his field, including Ritschl, expressed little enthusiasm for the work, in which Nietzsche eschewed the classical philologic method in favor of a more speculative approach. In his polemic Philology of the Future, Ulrich von Wilamowitz-Moellendorff dampened the book's reception and increased its notoriety. In response, Rohde (then a professor in Kiel) and Wagner came to Nietzsche's defense. Nietzsche remarked freely about the isolation he felt within the philological community and attempted unsuccessfully to transfer to a position in philosophy at Basel instead.

Nietzsche in c. 1872.
In 1873, Nietzsche began to accumulate notes that would be posthumously published as Philosophy in the Tragic Age of the Greeks. Between 1873 and 1876, he published four separate long essays: "David Strauss: the Confessor and the Writer", "On the Use and Abuse of History for Life", "Schopenhauer as Educator" and "Richard Wagner in Bayreuth". These four later appeared in a collected edition under the title Untimely Meditations. The essays shared the orientation of a cultural critique, challenging the developing German culture along lines suggested by Schopenhauer and Wagner. During this time, in the circle of the Wagners, Nietzsche met Malwida von Meysenbug and Hans von Blow, and also began a friendship with Paul Re, who in 1876 influenced him into dismissing the pessimism in his early writings. However, he was deeply disappointed by the Bayreuth Festival of 1876, where the banality of the shows and baseness of the public repelled him. He was also alienated by Wagner's championing of "German culture", which Nietzsche felt a contradiction in terms, as well as by Wagner's celebration of his fame among the German public. All this contributed to Nietzsche's subsequent decision to distance himself from Wagner.

With the publication in 1878 of Human, All Too Human (a book of aphorisms ranging from metaphysics to morality to religion to gender studies), a new style of Nietzsche's work became clear, highly influenced by Afrikan Spir's Thought and Reality Safranski, Rdiger (trans. Shelley Frisch). Nietzsche: A Philosophical Biography, p. 161. W. W. Norton & Company, 2003.

"This work had long been consigned to oblivion, but it had a lasting impact on Nietzsche. Section 18 of Human, All Too Human cited Spir, not by name, but by presenting a 'proposition by an outstanding logician' (2,38; HH I 18)." and reacting against the pessimistic philosophy of Wagner and Schopenhauer. Nietzsche's friendship with Deussen and Rohde cooled as well. In 1879, after a significant decline in health, Nietzsche had to resign his position at Basel. (Since his childhood, various disruptive illnesses had plagued him, including moments of shortsightedness that left him nearly blind, migraine headaches, and violent indigestion. The 1868 riding accident and diseases in 1870 may have aggravated these persistent conditions, which continued to affect him through his years at Basel, forcing him to take longer and longer holidays until regular work became impractical.

===Independent philosopher (187988)===

Living off his pension from Basel and aid from friends, Nietzsche travelled frequently to find climates more conducive to his health and lived until 1889 as an independent author in different cities. He spent many summers in Sils Maria near St. Moritz in Switzerland. He spent his winters in the Italian cities of Genoa, Rapallo, and Turin and the French city of Nice. In 1881, when France occupied Tunisia, he planned to travel to Tunis to view Europe from the outside but later abandoned that idea, probably for health reasons. ; republished on HyperNietzsche. Nietzsche occasionally returned to Naumburg to visit his family, and, especially during this time, he and his sister had repeated periods of conflict and reconciliation.

While in Genoa, Nietzsche's failing eyesight prompted him to explore the use of typewriters as a means of continuing to write. He is known to have tried using the Hansen Writing Ball, a contemporary typewriter device. In the end, a past student of his, Heinrich Kselitz or Peter Gast, became a sort of private secretary to Nietzsche. In 1876, Gast transcribed the crabbed, nearly illegible handwriting of Nietzsche for the first time with Richard Wagner in Bayreuth. He subsequently transcribed and proofread the galleys for almost all of Nietzsche's work from then on. On at least one occasion on February 23, 1880, the usually broke Gast received 200 marks from their mutual friend, Paul Re. Gast was one of the very few friends Nietzsche allowed to criticize him. In responding most enthusiastically to Zarathustra, Gast did feel it necessary to point out that what were described as "superfluous" people were in fact quite necessary. He went on to list the number of people Epicurus, for example, had to rely on even to supply his simple diet of goat cheese.

To the end of his life, Gast and Overbeck remained consistently faithful friends. Malwida von Meysenbug remained like a motherly patron even outside the Wagner circle. Soon Nietzsche made contact with the music-critic Carl Fuchs. Nietzsche stood at the beginning of his most productive period. Beginning with Human, All Too Human in 1878, Nietzsche would publish one book or major section of a book each year until 1888, his last year of writing; that year, he completed five.

Lou Salom, Paul Re and Nietzsche, 1882.
In 1882, Nietzsche published the first part of The Gay Science. That year he also met Lou Andreas Salom, through Malwida von Meysenbug and Paul Re. Nietzsche and Salom spent the summer together in Tautenburg in Thuringia, often with Nietzsche's sister Elisabeth as a chaperone. Nietzsche, however, regarded Salom less as an equal partner than as a gifted student. Salom reports that he asked her to marry him and that she refused, though the reliability of her reports of events has come into question. Nietzsche's relationship with Re and Salom broke up in the winter of 188283, partially because of intrigues conducted by Elisabeth. Amidst renewed bouts of illness, living in near-isolation after a falling out with his mother and sister regarding Salom, Nietzsche fled to Rapallo. Here he wrote the first part of Thus Spoke Zarathustra in only ten days.

By 1882 Nietzsche was taking huge doses of opium but was still having trouble sleeping. In 1883, while staying in Nice, he was writing out his own prescriptions for the sedative chloral hydrate, signing them "Dr. Nietzsche".

After severing his philosophical ties with Schopenhauer (who was long dead and never met Nietzsche) and his social ties with Wagner, Nietzsche had few remaining friends. Now, with the new style of Zarathustra, his work became even more alienating and the market received it only to the degree required by politeness. Nietzsche recognized this and maintained his solitude, though he often complained about it. His books remained largely unsold. In 1885, he printed only 40 copies of the fourth part of Zarathustra and distributed only a fraction of these among close friends, including Helene von Druskowitz.

In 1883 he tried and failed to obtain a lecturing post at the University of Leipzig. It was made clear to him that, in view of the attitude towards Christianity and the concept of God expressed in Zarathustra, he had become effectively unemployable by any German university. The subsequent "feelings of revenge and resentment" embittered him: "And hence my rage since I have grasped in the broadest possible sense what wretched means (the depreciation of my good name, my character, and my aims) suffice to take from me the trust of, and therewith the possibility of obtaining, pupils." Nietzsche, Friedrich. Letter to Peter Gast. August 1883. 

In 1886 Nietzsche broke with his publisher Ernst Schmeitzner, disgusted by his antisemitic opinions. Nietzsche saw his own writings as "completely buried and unexhumeable in this anti-Semitic dump" of Schmeitznerassociating the publisher with a movement that should be "utterly rejected with cold contempt by every sensible mind". He then printed Beyond Good and Evil at his own expense. He also acquired the publication rights for his earlier works and over the next year issued second editions of The Birth of Tragedy, Human, All Too Human, Daybreak, and The Gay Science with new prefaces placing the body of his work in a more coherent perspective. Thereafter, he saw his work as completed for a time and hoped that soon a readership would develop. In fact, interest in Nietzsche's thought did increase at this time, if rather slowly and hardly perceptibly to him. During these years Nietzsche met Meta von Salis, Carl Spitteler, and Gottfried Keller.

In 1886, his sister Elisabeth also married the antisemite Bernhard Frster and travelled to Paraguay to found Nueva Germania, a "Germanic" colonya plan to which Nietzsche responded with mocking laughter. Through correspondence, Nietzsche's relationship with Elisabeth continued through cycles of conflict and reconciliation, but they met again only after his collapse. He continued to have frequent and painful attacks of illness, which made prolonged work impossible.

In 1887 Nietzsche wrote the polemic "On the Genealogy of Morals". During the same year Nietzsche encountered the work of Fyodor Dostoevsky, to whom he felt an immediate kinship. Nietzsche, Friedrich. Letter to Peter Gast. March 1887. He also exchanged letters with Hippolyte Taine and Georg Brandes. Brandes, who had started to teach the philosophy of Sren Kierkegaard in the 1870s, wrote to Nietzsche asking him to read Kierkegaard, to which Nietzsche replied that he would come to Copenhagen and read Kierkegaard with him. However, before fulfilling this promise, he slipped too far into illness. In the beginning of 1888, Brandes delivered in Copenhagen one of the first lectures on Nietzsche's philosophy.

Although Nietzsche had previous announced at the end of "On The Genealogy of Morals" a new work with the title The Will to Power: Attempt at a Revaluation of All Values, he eventually seems to have abandoned this particular approach and instead used some of the draft passages to compose Twilight of the Idols and The Antichrist in 1888. translated as ; and 

His health seemed to improve, and he spent the summer in high spirits. In the fall of 1888, his writings and letters began to reveal a higher estimation of his own status and "fate". He overestimated the increasing response to his writings, especially to the recent polemic, "The Case of Wagner". On his 44th birthday, after completing Twilight of the Idols and The Antichrist, he decided to write the autobiography Ecce Homo. In the preface to this workwhich suggests Nietzsche was well aware of the interpretive difficulties his work would generatehe declares, "Hear me! For I am such and such a person. Above all, do not mistake me for someone else". In December, Nietzsche began a correspondence with August Strindberg and thought that, short of an international breakthrough, he would attempt to buy back his older writings from the publisher and have them translated into other European languages. Moreover, he planned the publication of the compilation Nietzsche Contra Wagner and of the poems that made up his collection Dionysian Dithyrambs.

===Mental breakdown and death (18891900)===

Drawing by Hans Olde from the photographic series, The Ill Nietzsche, mid-1899.

On 3 January 1889, Nietzsche suffered a mental collapse. Two policemen approached him after he caused a public disturbance in the streets of Turin. What happened remains unknown, but an often-repeated tale from shortly after his death states that Nietzsche witnessed the flogging of a horse at the other end of the Piazza Carlo Alberto, ran to the horse, threw his arms up around its neck to protect it, and then collapsed to the ground. Anacleto Verrecchia, "Nietzsche's Breakdown in Turin," in Nietzsche in Italy, ed. Thomas Harrison (Stanford University: ANMA Libri, 1988) 105-12 

In the following few days, Nietzsche sent short writingsknown as the Wahnbriefe ("Madness Letters")to a number of friends including Cosima Wagner and Jacob Burckhardt. Most of them were signed "Dionysos", though some were also signed "der Gekreuzigte" or "the crucified one". To his former colleague Burckhardt, Nietzsche wrote: "I have had Caiaphas put in fetters. Also, last year I was crucified by the German doctors in a very drawn-out manner. Wilhelm, Bismarck, and all anti-Semites abolished." Additionally, he commanded the German emperor to go to Rome to be shot and summoned the European powers to take military action against Germany. Zweig, Stefan (1939) Master Builders , The Struggle with the Daimon, Viking Press, p. 524. 

The house Nietzsche stayed in while in Turin (background, right), as seen from across Piazza Carlo Alberto, where he is said to have had his breakdown. To the left is the rear faade of the Palazzo Carignano.
On 6 January 1889, Burckhardt showed the letter he had received from Nietzsche to Overbeck. The following day Overbeck received a similar letter and decided that Nietzsche's friends had to bring him back to Basel. Overbeck travelled to Turin and brought Nietzsche to a psychiatric clinic in Basel. By that time Nietzsche appeared fully in the grip of a serious mental illness, and his mother Franziska decided to transfer him to a clinic in Jena under the direction of Otto Binswanger. From November 1889 to February 1890, the art historian Julius Langbehn attempted to cure Nietzsche, claiming that the methods of the medical doctors were ineffective in treating Nietzsche's condition. Langbehn assumed progressively greater control of Nietzsche until his secretiveness discredited him. In March 1890, Franziska removed Nietzsche from the clinic and, in May 1890, brought him to her home in Naumburg. During this process Overbeck and Gast contemplated what to do with Nietzsche's unpublished works. In January 1889 (date seems out of order), they proceeded with the planned release of Twilight of the Idols, by that time already printed and bound. In February, they ordered a fifty-copy private edition of Nietzsche contra Wagner, but the publisher C. G. Naumann secretly printed one hundred. Overbeck and Gast decided to withhold publishing The Antichrist and Ecce Homo because of their more radical content. Nietzsche's reception and recognition enjoyed their first surge.

In 1893, Nietzsche's sister Elisabeth returned from Nueva Germania in Paraguay following the suicide of her husband. She read and studied Nietzsche's works and, piece by piece, took control of them and their publication. Overbeck eventually suffered dismissal and Gast finally co-operated. After the death of Franziska in 1897, Nietzsche lived in Weimar, where Elisabeth cared for him and allowed visitors, including Rudolf Steiner (who in 1895 had written one of the first books praising Nietzsche), to meet her uncommunicative brother. Elisabeth at one point went so far as to employ Steiner as a tutor to help her to understand her brother's philosophy. Steiner abandoned the attempt after only a few months, declaring that it was impossible to teach her anything about philosophy. 

Peter Gast would "correct" Nietzsche's writings after the philosopher's breakdown and did so without his approval, an action severely criticized by modern scholars.
Nietzsche's mental illness was originally diagnosed as tertiary syphilis, in accordance with a prevailing medical paradigm of the time. Although most commentators regard his breakdown as unrelated to his philosophy, Georges Bataille dropped dark hints ("Man incarnate' must also go mad") Bataille, Georges & Annette Michelson. "Nietzsche's Madness", October, Vol. 36, Georges Bataille: Writings on Laughter, Sacrifice, Nietzsche, Un-Knowing. (Spring, 1986), pp. 4245. and Ren Girard's postmortem psychoanalysis posits a worshipful rivalry with Richard Wagner. Ren Girard, Superman in the Underground: Strategies of MadnessNietzsche, Wagner, and Dostoevsky, MLN, Vol. 91, No. 6, Comparative Literature. (December, 1976), pp. 116185. Nietzsche had previously written, "all superior men who were irresistibly drawn to throw off the yoke of any kind of morality and to frame new laws had, if they were not actually mad, no alternative but to make themselves or pretend to be mad" (Daybreak,14). The diagnosis of syphilis has since been challenged and a diagnosis of "manic-depressive illness with periodic psychosis followed by vascular dementia" was put forward by Cybulska prior to Schain's study. Leonard Sax suggested the slow growth of a right-sided retro-orbital meningioma as an explanation of Nietzsche's dementia; Leonard Sax, "What was the cause of Nietzsche's dementia?" Journal of Medical Biography 2003; 11: 47-54. Orth and Trimble postulated frontotemporal dementia while other researchers have proposed a hereditary stroke disorder called CADASIL. Robert Wicks, Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy, First published Fri May 30, 1997; substantive revision Fri Apr 29, 2011, Friedrich Nietzsche, Accessed Jan. 19, 2014, "...some maintain that he suffered from CADASIL syndrome, a heriditary stroke disorder...." 

In 1898 and 1899 Nietzsche suffered at least two strokes which partially paralyzed him, leaving him unable to speak or walk. He likely suffered from clinical hemiparesis/hemiplegia on the left side of his body by 1899. After contracting pneumonia in mid-August 1900, he had another stroke during the night of 2425 August and died at about noon on 25 August. Concurring reports in Elisabeth Frster-Nietzsche's biography (1904) and a letter by Mathilde Schenk-Nietzsche to Meta von Salis, August 30, 1900, quoted in Janz (1981) p. 221. Cf. Volz (1990), p. 251. Elisabeth had him buried beside his father at the church in Rcken bei Ltzen. His friend and secretary Gast gave his funeral oration, proclaiming: "Holy be your name to all future generations!" Nietzsche had written in Ecce Homo (at that point still unpublished) of his fear that one day his name would be regarded as "holy".

Elisabeth Frster-Nietzsche compiled The Will to Power from Nietzsche's unpublished notebooks and published it posthumously. Because his sister arranged the book based on her own conflation of several of Nietzsche's early outlines and took great liberties with the material, the scholarly consensus has been that it does not reflect Nietzsche's intent. (For example, Elisabeth removed aphorism 35 of The Antichrist, where Nietzsche rewrote a passage of the Bible.) Indeed, Mazzino Montinari, the editor of Nietzsche's Nachlass, called it a forgery. Montinari, Mazzino. The 'Will to Power' Does Not Exist. 

===Citizenship, nationality, ethnicity===
General commentators and Nietzsche scholars, whether emphasizing his cultural background or his language, overwhelmingly label Nietzsche as a "German philosopher". Others do not assign him a national category. Germany had not yet been unified into a nation-state but Nietzsche was born a citizen of Prussia, which was then part of the German Confederation. His birthplace, Rcken, is in the modern German state of Saxony-Anhalt. When he accepted his post at Basel, Nietzsche applied for the annulment of his Prussian citizenship. The official response confirming the revocation of his citizenship came in a document dated April 17, 1869, and for the rest of his life he remained officially stateless.

Nietzsche believed that his ancestors were Polish. Nietzsche himself subscribed to this story toward the end of his life. He wrote in 1888, "My ancestors were Polish noblemen (Nietzky); the type seems to have been well preserved despite three generations of German mothers." At one point Nietzsche becomes even more adamant about his Polish identity. "I am a pure-blooded Polish nobleman, without a single drop of bad blood, certainly not German blood." Nietzsche Contra Democracy by Fredrick Appel Cornell University Press 1998, page 114 On yet another occasion Nietzsche stated "Germany is a great nation only because its people have so much Polish blood in their veins I am proud of my Polish descent." Nietzsche believed his name might have been Germanized, in one letter claiming, "I was taught to ascribe the origin of my blood and name to Polish noblemen who were called Nitzky and left their home and nobleness about a hundred years ago, finally yielding to unbearable suppression: they were Protestants." Letter to Heinrich von Stein, December 1882, KGB III 1, Nr. 342, p. 287; KGW V 2, p. 579; KSA 9 p. 681 

Most scholars dispute Nietzsche's account of his family's origins. Hans von Mller debunked the genealogy put forward by Nietzsche's sister in favor of a Polish noble heritage. von Mller, "Nietzsches Vorfahren", reprinted Nietzsche-Studien 31 (2002): 25375. Max Oehler, the curator of the Nietzsche Archive at Weimar, argued that all of Nietzsche's ancestors bore German names, even the wives' families. Oehler claims that Nietzsche came from a long line of German Lutheran clergymen on both sides of his family, and modern scholars regard the claim of Nietzsche's Polish ancestry as a "pure invention". Colli and Montinari, the editors of Nietzsche's assembled letters, gloss Nietzsche's claims as a "mistaken belief" and "without foundation." Letter to Heinrich von Stein, December 1882, KGB III 7.1 p. 313. Letter to Georg Brandes, 10. 4. 1888, KGB III 7.3/1 p. 293. The name Nietzsche itself is not a Polish name, but an exceptionally common one throughout central Germany, in this and cognate forms (such as Nitsche and Nitzke). The name derives from the forename Nikolaus, abbreviated to Nick; assimilated with the Slavic Nitz, it first became Nitsche and then Nietzsche. 

It is not known why Nietzsche wanted to be thought of as Polish nobility. According to biographer R. J. Hollingdale, Nietzsche's propagation of the Polish ancestry myth may have been part of the latter's "campaign against Germany". 

===Relationships and sexuality===
Despite a proposal to Lou Salom, Nietzsche never married. The Nietzsche scholar Joachim Khler has attempted to explain Nietzsche's life history and philosophy by claiming that Nietzsche was a homosexual. Khler argues that Nietzsche's syphilis, which is "usually considered to be the product of his encounter with a prostitute in a brothel in Cologne or Leipzig, is equally likely, it is now held, to have been contracted in a male brothel in Genoa". Khler also suggests Nietzsche may have had a romantic relationship as well as a friendship with Paul Re. Khler's views have not found wide acceptance among Nietzsche scholars and commentators. In The Journal of Modern History, Allan Megill argues that "Khler does establish that the claim that Nietzsche was a man in confrontation with homosexual desire cannot simply be dismissed" but notes that "the evidence is very weak" and argues that Khler may be projecting twentieth-century understandings of sexuality on nineteenth-century notions of friendship. Other scholars have argued that Khler's sexuality-based interpretation is not helpful in understanding Nietzsche's philosophy. 

==Philosophy==
Friedrich Nietzsche in 1869.

Nietzsche is known for his use of poetry and prose (sometimes together in poetic prose style) in his writings. An excellent example is his iconic phrase "God is dead", in . This, combined with the fact that he disdained any kind of system, has made several aspects of his philosophy seemingly lacking coherent meaning or being paradoxical. Because of Nietzsche's evocative style and his often outrageous claims, his philosophy generates passionate reactions running from love to disgust. His works remain controversial, due to varying interpretations and misinterpretations of his work. In Western philosophy tradition, Nietzsche's writings are the unique case of free revolutionary thought that is revolutionary in its structure and problems but isn't tied to any revolutionary project at all. 

In Daybreak Nietzsche begins his "Campaign against Morality". He calls himself an "immoralist" and harshly criticizes the prominent moral philosophies of his day: Christianity, Kantianism, and utilitarianism. Nietzsche is also known for being very critical of the Western belief in egalitarianism and rationality. Nietzsche's concept "God is dead" applies to the doctrines of Christendom, though not to all other faiths: he claimed that Buddhism is a successful religion that he compliments for fostering critical thought. Still, Nietzsche saw his philosophy as a counter-movement to nihilism through appreciation of art:

Nietzsche claimed that the Christian faith as practised was not a proper representation of Jesus' teachings, as it forced people merely to believe in the way of Jesus but not to act as Jesus did, in particular his example of refusing to judge people, something that Christians had constantly done the opposite of. He condemned institutionalized Christianity for emphasizing a morality of pity (Mitleid), which assumes an inherent illness in society:

In Ecce Homo Nietzsche called the establishment of moral systems based on a dichotomy of good and evil a "calamitous error", and wished to initiate a re-evaluation of the values of the Judeo-Christian world. He indicates his desire to bring about a new, more naturalistic source of value in the vital impulses of life itself. While Nietzsche attacked the principles of Judaism, he was not antisemitic: in his work On the Genealogy of Morality, he explicitly condemns antisemitism, and pointed out that his attack on Judaism was not an attack on Jews as a people but specifically an attack upon the ancient Jewish priesthood whom he claims antisemitic Christians paradoxically based their views upon.

===The "slave revolt" in morals===

In Beyond Good And Evil and On the Genealogy of Morality, Nietzsche's genealogical account of the development of modern moral systems occupies central place. For Nietzsche, a fundamental shift took place from thinking in terms of "good" and "bad" toward "good" and "evil."

The initial form of morality was set by a warrior aristocracy and other ruling castes of ancient civilizations. Aristocratic values of "good" and "bad" coincided with and reflected their relationship to lower castes such as slaves. Nietzsche presents this "master morality" as the original system of moralityperhaps best associated with Homeric Greece. To be "good" was to be happy and to have the things related to happiness: wealth, strength, health, power, etc. To be "bad" was to be like the slaves over which the aristocracy ruled, poor, weak, sick, pathetican object of pity or disgust rather than hatred.

"Slave morality" comes about as a reaction to master-morality. Here, value emerges from the contrast between good and evil: good being associated with other-worldliness, charity, piety, restraint, meekness, and submission; and evil seen as worldly, cruel, selfish, wealthy, and aggressive. Nietzsche sees slave morality as pessimistic and fearful, values for them serving only to ease the existence for those who suffer from the very same thing. He associates slave-morality with the Jewish and Christian traditions, in a way that slave-morality is born out of the ressentiment of slaves. Nietzsche argued that the idea of equality allowed slaves to overcome their own condition without hating themselves. And by denying the inherent inequality of people (such as success, strength, beauty or intelligence), slaves acquired a method of escape, namely by generating new values on the basis of rejecting something that was seen as a perceived source of frustration. It was used to overcome the slave's own sense of inferiority before the (better-off) masters. It does so by making out slave weakness to be a matter of choice, by, e.g., relabeling it as "meekness." The "good man" of master morality is precisely the "evil man" of slave morality, while the "bad man" is recast as the "good man."

Nietzsche sees the slave-morality as a source of the nihilism that has overtaken Europe. Modern Europe and Christianity exist in a hypocritical state due to a tension between master and slave morality, both values contradictorily determining, to varying degrees, the values of most Europeans (who are motley). Nietzsche calls for exceptional people to no longer be ashamed of their uniqueness in the face of a supposed morality-for-all, which he deems to be harmful to the flourishing of exceptional people. He cautions, however, that morality, per se, is not bad; it is good for the masses, and should be left to them. Exceptional people, on the other hand, should follow their own "inner law." A favorite motto of Nietzsche, taken from Pindar, reads: "Become what you are."

A long standing assumption about Nietzsche is that he preferred master over slave morality. However, the Nietzsche scholar Walter Kaufmann rejected this interpretation, writing that Nietzsche's analyses of these two types of morality were only used in a descriptive and historic sense, they were not meant for any kind of acceptance or glorifications. 

===Death of God and nihilism===

The statement God is dead, occurring in several of Nietzsche's works (notably in The Gay Science), has become one of his best-known remarks. On the basis of it, most commentators regard Nietzsche as an atheist; others (such as Kaufmann) suggest that this statement reflects a more subtle understanding of divinity. Recent developments in modern science and the increasing secularization of European society had effectively 'killed' the Abrahamic God, who had served as the basis for meaning and value in the West for more than a thousand years. The death of God may lead beyond bare perspectivism to outright nihilism, the belief that nothing has any inherent importance and that life lacks purpose. Here he states that the Christian moral doctrine provides people with intrinsic value, belief in God (which justifies the evil in the world) and a basis for objective knowledge. In this sense, in constructing a world where objective knowledge is possible, Christianity is an antidote to a primal form of nihilismthe despair of meaninglessness. As Heidegger put the problem, "If God as the suprasensory ground and goal of all reality is dead, if the suprasensory world of the ideas has suffered the loss of its obligatory and above it its vitalizing and upbuilding power, then nothing more remains to which man can cling and by which he can orient himself."

One such reaction to the loss of meaning is what Nietzsche calls 'passive nihilism', which he recognises in the pessimistic philosophy of Schopenhauer. Schopenhauer's doctrine, which Nietzsche also refers to as Western Buddhism, advocates a separating oneself of will and desires in order to reduce suffering. Nietzsche characterises this ascetic attitude as a "will to nothingness", whereby life turns away from itself, as there is nothing of value to be found in the world. This moving away of all value in the world is characteristic of the nihilist, although in this, the nihilist appears to be inconsistent: This "will to nothingness" is still a willing of some sort, because it is exactly as a pessimist that Schopenhauer clings to life. See F. Nietzsche, On the Genealogy of Morals, III:7 

Nietzsche approaches the problem of nihilism as a deeply personal one, stating that this problem of the modern world is a problem that has "become conscious" in him. F. Nietzsche, KSA 12:7 Furthermore, he emphasises both the danger of nihilism and the possibilities it offers, as seen in his statement that "I praise, I do not reproach, arrival. I believe it is one of the greatest crises, a moment of the deepest self-reflection of humanity. Whether man recovers from it, whether he becomes master of this crisis, is a question of his strength!" Friedrich Nietzsche, Complete Works Vol. 13. According to Nietzsche, it is only when nihilism is overcome that a culture can have a true foundation upon which to thrive. He wished to hasten its coming only so that he could also hasten its ultimate departure. Heidegger interprets the death of God with what he explains as the death of metaphysics. He concludes that metaphysics has reached its potential and that the ultimate fate and downfall of metaphysics was proclaimed with the statement God is dead.

===Apollonian and Dionysian===

The Apollonian and Dionysian is a philosophical concept, or dichotomy, based on certain features of ancient Greek mythology: Apollo and Dionysus. While the concept is famously related to The Birth of Tragedy, poet Hlderlin spoke of them before, and Winckelmann talked of Bacchus. One year before the publication of The Birth of Tragedy, Nietzsche wrote a fragment titled "On Music and Words". In it he asserted the Schopenhauerian judgment that music is a primary expression of the essence of everything. Secondarily derivative are lyrical poetry and drama, which represent mere phenomenal appearances of objects. In this way, tragedy is born from music.

Nietzsche found in classical Athenian tragedy an art form that transcended the pessimism found in the so-called wisdom of Silenus. The Greek spectators, by looking into the abyss of human suffering depicted by characters on stage, passionately and joyously affirmed life, finding it worth living. A main theme in The Birth of Tragedy was that the fusion of Dionysian and Apollonian "Kunsttrieben" ("artistic impulses") forms dramatic arts, or tragedies. He goes on to argue that this fusion has not been achieved since the ancient Greek tragedians. Apollo represents harmony, progress, clarity and logic, whereas Dionysus represents disorder, intoxication, emotion and ecstasy. Nietzsche used these two forces because, for him, the world of mind and order on one side, and passion and chaos on the other formed principles that were fundamental to the Greek culture. Apollonian side being a dreaming state, full of illusions; and Dionysian being the state of intoxication, representing the liberations of instinct and dissolution of boundaries. In this mold, man appears as the satyr. He is the horror of the annihilation of the principle of individuality and at the same time someone who delights in its destruction. Both of these principles are meant to represent cognitive states that appear through art as the power of nature in man. 

The relationship between the Apollonian and Dionysian juxtapositions is apparent, in the interplay of tragedy: the tragic hero of the drama, the main protagonist, struggles to make order (in the Apollonian sense) of his unjust and chaotic (Dionysian) fate, though he dies unfulfilled in the end. Elaborating on the conception of Hamlet as an intellectual who cannot make up his mind, and therefore is a living antithesis to the man of action, Nietzsche argues that a Dionysian figure possesses knowledge to realize that his actions cannot change the eternal balance of things, and it disgusts him enough not to be able to make any act at all. Hamlet falls under this category  he has glimpsed the supernatural reality through the Ghost, he has gained true knowledge and knows that no action of his has the power to change this. For the audience of such drama, this tragedy allows them to sense an underlying essence, what Nietzsche called the Primordial Unity, which revives Dionysian nature. He describes this primordial unity as the increase of strength, experience of fullness and plenitude bestowed by frenzy. Frenzy acts as an intoxication, and is crucial for the physiological condition that enables making of any art. Stimulated by this state, person's artistic will is enhanced:

"In this state one enriches everything out of one's own fullness: whatever one sees, whatever wills is seen swelled, taut, strong, overloaded with strength. A man in this state transforms things until they mirror his poweruntil they are reflections of his perfection. This having to transform into perfection isart."

Nietzsche is adamant that the works of Aeschylus and Sophocles represent the apex of artistic creation, the true realization of tragedy; it is with Euripides, he states, that tragedy begins its "Untergang" (literally "going under", meaning decline, deterioration, downfall, death, etc.). Nietzsche objects to Euripides' use of Socratic rationalism and morality in his tragedies, claiming that the infusion of ethics and reason robs tragedy of its foundation, namely the fragile balance of the Dionysian and Apollonian. Socrates emphasized reason to such a degree that he diffused the value of myth and suffering to human knowledge. Plato continued with this path in his dialogues and modern world eventually inherited reason at the expense of artistic impulses that could be found only in the Apollonian and Dionysus dichotomy. This leads to his conclusion that European culture from the time of Socrates had always been only Apollonian and thus decadent and unhealthy. He notes that whenever Apollonian culture dominates, the Dionysian lacks the structure to make a coherent art, and when Dionysian dominates, the Apollonian lacks the necessary passion. Only the beautiful middle, the interplay of these two forces, brought together as an art represented real Greek tragedy. 

An example of the impact of this idea can be seen in the book Patterns of Culture, where anthropologist Ruth Benedict uses Nietzschean opposites of "Apollonian" and "Dionysian" as the stimulus for her thoughts about Native American cultures. Carl Jung has written extensively on the dichotomy in Psychological Types. Michel Foucault has commented that his book Madness and Civilization should be read "under the sun of the great Nietzschean inquiry". Here Foucault references Nietzsche's description of the birth and death of tragedy and his explanation that the subsequent tragedy of the Western world was the refusal of tragic and, with that, refusal of the sacred. Painter Mark Rothko was influenced by Nietzsche's view of tragedy, which were presented in The Birth of Tragedy.

===Perspectivism===

Nietzsche claimed the death of God would eventually lead to the loss of any universal perspective on things, and along with it any coherent sense of objective truth. Nietzsche himself rejected the idea of objective reality arguing that knowledge is contingent and conditional, relative to various fluid perspectives or interests. This leads to constant reassessment of rules (i.e., those of philosophy, the scientific method, etc.) according to the circumstances of individual perspectives. Schacht, Richard, Nietzsche, p 61. This view has acquired the name perspectivism.

In Thus Spoke Zarathustra, Nietzsche proclaims that a table of values hangs above every great people. He points out that what is common among different peoples is the act of esteeming, of creating values, even if the values are different from one people to the next. Nietzsche asserts that what made people great was not the content of their beliefs, but the act of valuing. Thus the values a community strives to articulate are not as important as the collective will to see those values come to pass. The willing is more essential than the intrinsic worth of the goal itself, according to Nietzsche. "A thousand goals have there been so far," says Zarathustra, "for there are a thousand peoples. Only the yoke for the thousand necks is still lacking: the one goal is lacking. Humanity still has no goal." Hence, the title of the aphorism, "On The Thousand And One Goals". The idea that one value-system is no more worthy than the next, although it may not be directly ascribed to Nietzsche, has become a common premise in modern social science. Max Weber and Martin Heidegger absorbed it and made it their own. It shaped their philosophical and cultural endeavor, as well as their political understanding. Weber for example, relies on Nietzsche's perspectivism by maintaining that objectivity is still possiblebut only after a particular perspective, value, or end has been established. 

Among his critique of traditional philosophy of Kant, Descartes and Plato in Beyond Good and Evil, Nietzsche attacked thing in itself and cogito ergo sum (I think, therefore I am) as unfalsifiable beliefs based on naive acceptance of previous notions and fallacies. Philosopher Alasdair MacIntyre puts Nietzsche in a high place in the history of philosophy. While criticizing nihilism and Nietzsche together as a sign of general decay, he still commends him for recognizing psychological motives behind Kant and Hume's moral philosophy: 

For it was Nietzsche's historic achievement to understand more clearly than any other philosopher...not only that what purported to be appeals of objectivity were in fact expressions of subjective will, but also the nature of the problems that this posed for philosophy. 

===Will to power===

A basic element in Nietzsche's philosophical outlook is the will to power (der Wille zur Macht), which provides a basis for understanding human behaviormore so than competing explanations, such as the ones based on pressure for adaptation or survival. As such, according to Nietzsche, the drive for conservation appears as the major motivator of human or animal behavior only in exceptions, as the general condition of life is not one of emergency, of 'struggle for existence'. More often than not, self-conservation is but a consequence of a creature's will to exert its strength on the outside world.

In presenting his theory of human behavior, Nietzsche also addressed, and attacked, concepts from philosophies popularly embraced in his days, such as Schopenhauer's notion of an aimless will or that of utilitarianism. Utilitarians claim that what moves people is mainly the desire to be happy, to accumulate pleasure in their lives. But such a conception of happiness Nietzsche rejected as something limited to, and characteristic of, the bourgeois lifestyle of the English society, Brian Leiter, Routledge guide to Nietzsche on morality, p. 121 and instead put forth the idea that happiness is not an aim per seit is instead a consequence of a successful pursuit of one's aims, of the overcoming of hurdles to one's actionsin other words, of the fulfillment of the will.

Related to his theory of the will to power, is his speculation, which he did not deem final, regarding the reality of the physical world, including inorganic matterthat, like man's affections and impulses, the material world is also set by the dynamics of a form of the will to power. At the core of his theory is a rejection of atomismthe idea that matter is composed of stable, indivisible units (atoms). Instead, he seems to have accepted the conclusions of Ruer Bokovi, who explained the qualities of matter as a result of an interplay of forces. Nietzsche comments in many notes about matter being a hypothesis drawn from the metaphysics of substance: G. Whitlock, "Roger Boscovich, Benedict de Spinoza and Friedrich Nietzsche: The Untold Story", Nietzsche-Studien 25, 1996 p 207. One study of Nietzsche defines his fully developed concept of the will to power as "the element from which derive both the quantitative difference of related forces and the quality that devolves into each force in this relation" revealing the will to power as "the principle of the synthesis of forces." Of such forces Nietzsche said they could perhaps be viewed as a primitive form of the will. Likewise he rejected as a mere interpretation the view that the movement of bodies is ruled by inexorable laws of nature, positing instead that movement was governed by the power relations between bodies and forces. Other scholars disagree that Nietzsche considered the material world to be a form of the will to power. Nietzsche thoroughly criticized metaphysics, and by including the will to power in the material world, he would simply be setting up a new metaphysics. Other than aphorism 36 in Beyond Good and Evil, where he raised a question regarding will to power as being in the material world, it was only in his notes (unpublished by himself), where he wrote about a metaphysical will to power. Nietzsche directed his landlord to burn those notes in 1888 when he left Sils Maria for the last time. http://muse.jhu.edu/journals/nie/summary/v031/31.1leddy.html 

===Eternal return===

Eternal return (also known as "eternal recurrence") is a concept which posits that the universe has been recurring, and will continue to recur, in a self-similar form an infinite number of times across infinite time or space. It is a purely physical concept, involving no supernatural reincarnation, but the return of beings in the same bodies. The idea of eternal return occurs in a parable in Section 341 of The Gay Science, and also in the chapter "Of the Vision and the Riddle" in Thus Spoke Zarathustra, among other places. Nietzsche contemplates the idea as potentially "horrifying and paralyzing", and says that its burden is the "heaviest weight" imaginable ("das schwerste Gewicht"). The wish for the eternal return of all events would mark the ultimate affirmation of life, a reaction to Schopenhauer's praise of denying the willtolive. To comprehend eternal recurrence in his thought, and to not merely come to peace with it but to embrace it, requires amor fati, "love of fate". 

Alexander Nehamas writes in Nietzsche: Life as Literature of three ways of seeing the eternal recurrence: "(A) My life will recur in exactly identical fashion." This expresses a totally fatalistic approach to the idea. "(B) My life may recur in exactly identical fashion." This second view conditionally asserts cosmology, but fails to capture what Nietzsche refers to in The Gay Science, 341. Finally, "(C) If my life were to recur, then it could recur only in identical fashion." Nehamas shows that this interpretation exists totally independently of physics and does not presuppose the truth of cosmology. Nehamas draws the conclusion that if individuals constitute themselves through their actions, then they can only maintain themselves in their current state by living in a recurrence of past actions (Nehamas 153). Nietzsche's thought is the negation of the idea of a history of salvation. 

===bermensch===

Another concept important to an understanding of Nietzsche's thought is the bermensch (translated variously as "overman", "superman", or "super-human"). Developing the idea of nihilism, Nietzsche wrote Thus Spoke Zarathustra, therein introducing the concept of a value-creating bermensch, not as a project, but as an anti-project, the absence of any project. According to Lampert, "the death of God must be followed by a long twilight of piety and nihilism (II. 19; III. 8). ... Zarathustra's gift of the overman is given to a mankind not aware of the problem to which the overman is the solution." Zarathustra presents the overman as the creator of new values, and he appears as a solution to the problem of the death of God and nihilism. The overman does not follow morality of common people since it favors mediocrity but instead rises above the notion of good and evil and above the herd. In this way Zarathustra proclaims his ultimate goal as the journey towards the state of overman. He wants a kind of spiritual evolution of self-awareness and overcoming of traditional views on morality and justice that stem from the superstition beliefs still deeply rooted or related to the notion of God and Christianity. 

While interpretations of Nietzsche's overman vary wildly, here is one of his quotations from Thus Spoke Zarathustra (Prologue, 34):

Zarathustra contrasts the overman with the last man of egalitarian modernity (most obvious example being democracy), an alternative goal which humanity might set for itself. The last man is possible only by mankind's having bred an apathetic creature who has no great passion or commitment, who is unable to dream, who merely earns his living and keeps warm. This concept appears only in Thus Spoke Zarathustra, and is presented as a condition that would render the creation of the overman impossible. 

Some have suggested that the notion of eternal return is related to the overman since willing the eternal return of the same is a necessary step if the overman is to create new values, untainted by the spirit of gravity or asceticism. Values involve a rank-ordering of things, and so are inseparable from approval and disapproval; yet it was dissatisfaction that prompted men to seek refuge in other-worldliness and embrace other-worldly values. It could seem that the overman, in being devoted to any values at all, would necessarily fail to create values that did not share some bit of asceticism. Willing the eternal recurrence is presented as accepting the existence of the low while still recognizing it as the low, and thus as overcoming the spirit of gravity or asceticism. One must have the strength of the overman in order to will the eternal recurrence of the same; that is, only the overman will have the strength to fully accept all of his past life, including his failures and misdeeds, and to truly will their eternal return. This action nearly kills Zarathustra, for example, and most human beings cannot avoid other-worldliness because they really are sick, not because of any choice they made.

==Reading and influence==
The residence of Nietzsche's last three years, along with archive in Weimar, Germany, which holds many of Nietzsche's papers.

As a philologist, Nietzsche had a thorough knowledge of Greek philosophy. He read Immanuel Kant, Plato, John Stuart Mill, Arthur Schopenhauer and African Spir, Brobjer, Thomas. Nietzsche's Reading and Private Library, 18851889. Published in Journal of History of Ideas. Accessed via JSTOR on May 18, 2007. who became his main opponents in his philosophy, and later Spinoza, whom he saw as his "precursor" in many respects Letter to Franz Overbeck, July 30, 1881 but as a personification of the "ascetic ideal" in others. However, Nietzsche referred to Kant as a "moral fanatic", Plato as "boring", Mill as a "blockhead", and of Spinoza he said: "How much of personal timidity and vulnerability does this masquerade of a sickly recluse betray?".

Nietzsche's philosophy, while highly innovative and revolutionary, was indebted to many predecessors. While at Basel, Nietzsche offered lecture courses on the "Pre-Platonic Philosophers" for several years, and the text of this lecture series has been characterized as a "lost link" in the development of his thought. "In it concepts such as the will to power, the eternal return of the same, the overman, gay science, self-overcoming and so on receive rough, unnamed formulations and are linked to specific pre-Platonics, especially Heraclitus, who emerges as a pre-Platonic Nietzsche." The pre-Socratic Greek thinker Heraclitus was known for the rejection of the concept of being as a constant and eternal principle of universe, and his embrace of "flux" and incessant change. His symbolism of the world as "child play" marked by amoral spontaneity and lack of definite rules was appreciated by Nietzsche. From his Heraclitean sympathy, Nietzsche was also a vociferous detractor of Parmenides, who opposed Heraclitus and believed all world is a single Being with no change at all.

In his Egotism in German Philosophy, Santayana claimed that Nietzsche's whole philosophy was a reaction to Schopenhauer. Santayana wrote that Nietzsche's work was "an emendation of that of Schopenhauer. The will to live would become the will to dominate; pessimism founded on reflection would become optimism founded on courage; the suspense of the will in contemplation would yield to a more biological account of intelligence and taste; finally in the place of pity and asceticism (Schopenhauer's two principles of morals) Nietzsche would set up the duty of asserting the will at all costs and being cruelly but beautifully strong. These points of difference from Schopenhauer cover the whole philosophy of Nietzsche."

Nietzsche expressed admiration for 17th-century French moralists such as La Rochefoucauld, Jean de La Bruyre and Vauvenargues, Brendan Donnellan, "Nietzsche and La Rochefoucauld" in The German Quarterly, Vol. 52, No. 3 (May, 1979), pp. 30318 as well as for Stendhal. The organicism of Paul Bourget influenced Nietzsche, Johan Grzelczyk, "Fr et Nietzsche : au sujet de la dcadence", HyperNietzsche, 2005-11-01 . Grzelczyk quotes Jacques Le Rider, Nietzsche en France. De la fin du XIXe sicle au temps prsent, Paris, PUF, 1999, pp. 89 as did that of Rudolf Virchow and Alfred Espinas. Johan Grzelczyk, "Fr et Nietzsche : au sujet de la dcadence", HyperNietzsche, 2005-11-01 . Grzelczyk quotes B. Wahrig-Schmidt, "Irgendwie, jedenfalls physiologisch. Friedrich Nietzsche, Alexandre Herzen (fils) und Charles Fr 1888" in Nietzsche Studien, Band 17, Berlin: Walter de Gruyter, 1988, p. 439 Nietzsche wrote in a letter in 1867 that he was trying to improve his German style of writing with the help of Lessing, Lichtenberg and Schopenhauer. It was probably Lichtenberg (along with Paul Re) whose aphoristic style of writing contributed to Nietzsche's own use of aphorism instead of an essay. Nietzsche early learned of Darwinism through Friedrich Albert Lange. Note sur Nietzsche et Lange : le retour ternel , Albert Fouille, Revue philosophique de la France et de l'tranger. An. 34. Paris 1909. T. 67, S. 51925 (on French Wikisource) Hippolyte Taine influenced Nietzsche's view on Rousseau and Napoleon. Notably, he also read some of the posthumous works of Charles Baudelaire, Mazzino Montinari, "La Volont de puissance" n'existe pas, ditions de l'clat, 1996, 13 Tolstoy's My Religion, Ernest Renan's Life of Jesus and Fyodor Dostoyevsky's Demons. Nietzsche called Dostoevsky "the only psychologist from whom I have anything to learn." Harold Bloom has often claimed that the essays of Ralph Waldo Emerson had a profound and favourable influence on Nietzsche. While Nietzsche never mentions Max Stirner, the similarities in their ideas have prompted a minority of interpreters to suggest a relationship between the two. K Lwith, From Hegel To Nietzsche, New York, 1964, p 187. S Taylor, Left Wing Nietzscheans, The Politics of German Expressionism 19101920, p 144, 1990, Walter de Gruyter, Berlin/New York. G Deleuze, Nietzsche and Philosophy (transl. Hugh Tomlinson), 2006, pp 15354. RC Solomon & KM Higgins, The Age of German Idealism, p 300, Routledge, 1993. RA Samek, The Meta Phenomenon, p 70, New York, 1981. T Goyens, Beer and Revolution: The German Anarchist Movement In New York City, p 197, Illinois, 2007. In 1861 Nietzsche wrote an enthusiastic essay on his "favorite poet", Friedrich Hlderlin, mostly forgotten at that time. He also expressed deep appreciation for Adalbert Stifter's Indian Summer, Lord Byron's Manfred and Mark Twain's The Adventures of Tom Sawyer. 

==Reception==

Portrait of Friedrich Nietzsche by Edvard Munch, 1906.
Nietzsche's works did not reach a wide readership during his active writing career. However, in 1888 the influential Danish critic Georg Brandes aroused considerable excitement about Nietzsche through a series of lectures he gave at the University of Copenhagen. In the years after Nietzsche's death in 1900, his works became better known, and readers have responded to them in complex and sometimes controversial ways. See 1910 article from the Encyclopaedia Britannica Many Germans eventually discovered his appeals for greater individualism and personality development in Thus Spoke Zarathustra, but responded to them divergently. He had some following among left-wing Germans in the 1890s; in 18941895 German conservatives wanted to ban his work as subversive. During the late 19th century Nietzsche's ideas were commonly associated with anarchist movements and appear to have had influence within them, particularly in France and the United States. O. Ewald, "German Philosophy in 1907", in The Philosophical Review, Vol. 17, No. 4, July, 1908, pp. 40026. T. A. Riley, "Anti-Statism in German Literature, as Exemplified by the Work of John Henry Mackay", in PMLA, Vol. 62, No. 3, September, 1947, pp. 82843. C. E. Forth, "Nietzsche, Decadence, and Regeneration in France, 18911895", in Journal of the History of Ideas, Vol. 54, No. 1, January, 1993, pp. 97117. H. L. Mencken produced the first book on Nietzsche in English in 1907, The Philosophy of Friedrich Nietzsche, and in 1910, a book of translated paragraphs from Nietzsche, increasing knowledge of his philosophy in the United States. Nietzsche is known today as a precursor to expressionism, existentialism, and postmodernism. 

W. B. Yeats and Arthur Symons described Nietzsche as the intellectual heir to William Blake. Symons went on to compare the ideas of the two thinkers in The Symbolist Movement in Literature while Yeats tried to raise awareness of Nietzsche in Ireland. A similar notion was espoused by W. H. Auden who wrote of Nietzsche in his New Year Letter (released in 1941 in The Double Man): "O masterly debunker of our liberal fallacies all your life you stormed, like your English forerunner Blake". Nietzsche made an impact on composers during the 1890s. Writer on music Donald Mitchell notes that Gustav Mahler was "attracted to the poetic fire of Zarathustra, but repelled by the intellectual core of its writings." He also quotes Gustav himself, and adds that he was influenced by Nietzsche's conception and affirmative approach to nature, which Mahler presented in Third Symphony using Zarathustra's roundelay. Frederick Delius has produced a piece of choral music A Mass of Life based on a text of Thus Spoke Zarathustra, while Richard Strauss (who also based his Also sprach Zarathustra on the same book), was only interested in finishing "another chapter of symphonic autobiography". Famous writers and poets influenced by Nietzsche include Andr Gide, August Strindberg, Robinson Jeffers, Po Baroja, D. H. Lawrence, Edith Sdergran and Yukio Mishima.

Nietzsche was an early influence on the poetry of Rainer Maria Rilke. Knut Hamsun counted Nietzsche, along with Strindberg and Dostoyevsky as one of his primary influences. Author Jack London wrote that he was more stimulated by Nietzsche than by any other writer. Critics have suggested that the character of David Grief in A Son of the Sun was based on Nietzsche. Nietzsche's influence on Muhammad Iqbal is most evidenced in Asrar-i-Khudi (The Secrets of the Self). Wallace Stevens was another reader of Nietzsche and elements of Nietzsche's philosophy were found throughout Harmonium. Olaf Stapledon was influenced by the idea of bermensch and it is central theme in his books Odd John and Sirius. In Russia, Nietzsche has influenced Russian symbolism and figures such as Dmitry Merezhkovsky, Andrei Bely, Vyacheslav Ivanovich Ivanov and Alexander Scriabin have all incorporated or discussed parts of Nietzsche philosophy in their works. Thomas Mann's novel Death in Venice shows a use of Apollonian and Dionysian, and in Doctor Faustus Nietzsche was a central source for the character of Adrian Leverkhn. Hermann Hesse, similarly, in his Narcissus and Goldmund presents two main characters in the sense of Apollonian and Dionysian as the two opposite yet intertwined spirits. Painter Giovanni Segantini was fascinated by Thus Spake Zarathustra, and he drew an illustration for the first Italian translation of the book.

By World War I, Nietzsche had acquired a reputation as an inspiration for both right-wing German militarism and leftist politics. German soldiers received copies of Thus Spoke Zarathustra as gifts during World War I. The Dreyfus Affair provides a contrasting example of his reception: the French antisemitic Right labelled the Jewish and Leftist intellectuals who defended Alfred Dreyfus as "Nietzscheans". Schrift, A.D. (1995). Nietzsche's French Legacy: A Genealogy of Poststructuralism. Routledge. ISBN 0-415-91147-8. Nietzsche had a distinct appeal for many Zionist thinkers around the start of the 20th century most notable being Ahad Ha'am, Hillel Zeitlin, Micha Josef Berdyczewski, A. D. Gordon and Martin Buber who went so far as to extoll Nietzsche as a "creator" and "emissary of life". Chaim Weizmann was a great admirer of Nietzsche; the first president of Israel sent Nietzsche's books to his wife, adding a comment in a letter that "This was the best and finest thing I can send to you". Israel Eldad, the ideological chief of the Stern Group that fought the British in Palestine in the 1940s, wrote about Nietzsche in his underground newspaper and later translated most of Nietzsche's books into Hebrew. Zev Golan, God, Man and Nietzsche, iUniverse, 2007, p 169: "It would be most useful if our youth climbed, even if only briefly, to Zarathustra's heights..." Eugene O'Neill remarked that Zarathustra influenced him more that any other book he ever read. He also shared Nietzsche's view of tragedy. Plays The Great God Brown and Lazarus Laughed are an example of Nietzsche's influence on O'Neill. Nietzsche's influence on the works of Frankfurt School philosophers Max Horkheimer and Theodor W. Adorno can be seen in the popular Dialectic of Enlightenment. Adorno summed up Nietzsche's philosophy as expressing the "humane in a world in which humanity has become a sham". 

Nietzsche's growing prominence suffered a severe setback when his works became closely associated with Adolf Hitler and the German Reich. Many political leaders of the twentieth century were at least superficially familiar with Nietzsche's ideas, although it is not always possible to determine whether they actually read his work. Hitler, for example, probably never read Nietzsche and, if he did, his reading was not extensive, Weaver Santaniello, Nietzsche, God, and the Jews, SUNY Press, 1994, p 41: "Hitler probably never read a word of Nietzsche". Berel Lang, Post-Holocaust: Interpretation, Misinterpretation, and the Claims of History, Indiana University Press, 2005, p 162: "Arguably, Hitler himself never read a word of Nietzsche; certainly, if he did read him, it was not extensively". : "To be sure, it is almost certain that Hitler either never read Nietzsche directly or read very little." Andrew C. Janos, East Central Europe in the Modern World, Stanford University Press, 2002, p 184: "By all indications, Hitler never read Nietzsche. Neither Mein Kampf nor Hitler's Table Talk (Tischgesprache) mentions his name. Nietzschean ideas reached him through the filter of Alfred Rosenberg's Myth of the Twentieth Century, and, more simply, through what was coffeehouse Quatsch in Vienna and Munich. This at least is the impression he gives in his published conversations with Dietrich Eckart." although he was a frequent visitor to the Nietzsche museum in Weimar and did use expressions of Nietzsche's, such as "lords of the earth" in Mein Kampf. William L. Shirer, The Rise and Fall of the Third Reich, a History of Nazi Germany, Touchstone, 1959, pp 10001 The Nazis made selective use of Nietzsche's philosophy. Mussolini, Simonetta Falasca-Zamponi, Fascist Spectacle: The Aesthetics of Power in Mussolini's Italy, University of California Press, 2000, p 44: "In 1908 he presented his conception of the superman's role in modern society in a writing on Nietzsche titled "The Philosophy of Force." Philip Morgan, Fascism in Europe, 19191945, Routledge, 2003, p 21: "We know that Mussolini had read Nietzsche" Charles de Gaulle J. L. Gaddis, P. H. Gordon, E. R. May, J. Rosenberg, Cold War Statesmen Confront the Bomb, Oxford University Press, 1999, p 217: "The son of a history teacher, de Gaulle read voraciously as a boy and young manJacques Bainville, Henri Bergson, Friederich Nietzsche, Maurice Barresand was steeped in conservative French historical and philosophical traditions." and Huey P. Newton read Nietzsche. Richard Nixon read Nietzsche with "curious interest," and his book Beyond Peace might have taken its title from Nietzsche's book Beyond Good and Evil which Nixon read beforehand. Bertrand Russell wrote that Nietzsche had exerted great influence on philosophers and on people of literary and artistic culture, but warned that the attempt to put Nietzsche's philosophy of aristocracy into practice could only be done by an organization similar to the Fascist or the Nazi party. 

A decade after World War II, there was a revival of Nietzsche's philosophical writings thanks to exhaustive translations and analyses by Walter Kaufmann and R.J. Hollingdale. Others, well known philosophers in their own right, wrote commentaries on Nietzsche's philosophy, including Martin Heidegger, who produced a four-volume study and Lev Shestov who wrote a book called Dostoyevski, Tolstoy and Nietzsche where he portrays Nietzsche and Dostoyevski as the "thinkers of tragedy". Georg Simmel compares Nietzsche's importance to ethics to that of Copernicus for cosmology. Sociologist Ferdinand Tnnies read Nietzsche avidly from his early life, and later frequently discussed many of his concepts in his own works. Nietzsche has influenced philosophers such as Martin Heidegger, Jean-Paul Sartre, Oswald Spengler, George Grant, Emil Cioran, Albert Camus, Ayn Rand, Jacques Derrida, Leo Strauss, Max Scheler, Michel Foucault and Bernard Williams. Camus described Nietzsche as "the only artist to have derived the extreme consequences of an aesthetics of the absurd". Paul Ricur called Nietzsche one of the masters of the "school of suspicion", alongside Karl Marx and Sigmund Freud. 

Aspects of Nietzsche's philosophy, especially his ideas of the self and his relation to society, also run through much of late-twentieth and early twenty-first century thought. Raymond A. Belliotti, Jesus Or Nietzsche: How Should We Live Our Lives? (Rodopi, 2013). Ronald A. Kuipers, Turning Memory into Prophecy: Roberto Unger and Paul Ricoeur on the Human Condition Between Past and Future, The Heythrop Journal (2011): 1-10. His deepening of the romantic-heroic tradition of the nineteenth century, for example, as expressed in the ideal of the "grand striver" appears in the work of thinkers from Cornelius Castoriadis to Roberto Mangabeira Unger. Richard Rorty, Unger, Castoriadis, and the Romance of a National Future, Northwestern University Law Review 82 (1988 1987): 39. For Nietzsche this grand striver overcomes obstacles, engages in epic struggles, pursues new goals, embraces recurrent novelty, and transcends existing structures and contexts. No social or cultural construct can contain this idealized individual. Raymond A. Belliotti, Jesus Or Nietzsche: How Should We Live Our Lives? (Rodopi, 2013), 195. Inspired by this ideal, Unger elevates it to a philosophy of human nature, removing Nietzsche's formulations from the application to only a few higher beings and re-grounding them in the fundamental characteristics of our humanity so that each individual is embodied with this striving and context overcoming aspirations. Rather than identifying a few exemplary individuals, Unger makes it central to human personality and the basis of our moral and political action. Raymond A. Belliotti, Jesus Or Nietzsche: How Should We Live Our Lives? (Rodopi, 2013), 200-201. From here, Unger goes on to articulate a social vision of institutions of a social, political, and economic structure that will not entrap us or hold us back, but rather are open to transformation and will become an expression of our will. Political and social arrangements, for Unger, should be open to constant revision rather than the concrete givens expressed by the thinkers of the nineteenth and twentieth centuries. Marianne Constable, Genealogy and Jurisprudence: Nietzsche, Nihilism, and the Social Scientification of Law, Law & Social Inquiry 19, no. 3 (July 1, 1994): 580-585 Cass Sunstein, Routine and Revolution, in Critique and Construction: A Symposium on Roberto Ungers Politics, ed. Robin W Lovin and Michael J Perry (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1990), 46. 

==Works==
The Nietzsche Stone, near Surlej, the inspiration for Thus Spoke Zarathustra

* Die Geburt der Tragdie aus dem Geiste der Musik (1872)
* ber Wahrheit und Lge im auermoralischen Sinn (1873) inedita
* Die Philosophie im tragischen Zeitalter der Griechen (1873) inedita
* Unzeitgemsse Betrachtungen (18731876)
* Vom Nutzen und Nachteil der Historie fr das Leben (1874)
* Menschliches, Allzumenschliches (18781879)
* Morgenrte. Gedanken ber die moralischen Vorurteile (1881)
* Idyllen aus Messina (1882)
* Die frhliche Wissenschaft (18821887)
* Also sprach Zarathustra (18831885)
* Jenseits von Gut und Bse (1886)
* Zur Genealogie der Moral (1887)
* Der Fall Wagner (1888)
* Gtzen-Dmmerung, oder, Wie man mit dem Hammer philosophiert (1888)
* Dionysos-Dithyramben (1888)
* Der Antichrist (1888)
* Ecce Homo (1888)
* Nietzsche contra Wagner (1888)
* Der Wille zur Macht (1901) posthumous

==See also==

* Existentialism
* God is Dead
* Lou Andreas Salom
* bermensch
* Eternal Return
* Apollo and Dionysus
* Continental philosophy
* Richard Wagner
* Antichrist
* Genealogy (philosophy)
* Herd Instinct
* The Ascent of Man
* Human, All Too Human
* When Nietzsche Wept
* Anarchism and Friedrich Nietzsche

==References==

==Further reading==

* 
* Babich, Babette E. (1994) Nietzsche's Philosophy of Science, Albany: State University of New York Press.
* 
*
* Breitschmid, Markus, Der bauende Geist. Friedrich Nietzsche und die Architektur. Lucerne: Quart Verlag, 2001, ISBN 3-907631-23-4
* Breitschmid, Markus, Nietzsche's Denkraum. Zurich: Edition Didacta, 2006, Hardcover Edition: ISBN 978-3-033-01206-6; Paperback Edition: ISBN 978-3-033-01148-9
* 
* Corriero, Emilio Carlo, Nietzsche oltre l'abisso. Declinazioni italiane della 'morte di Dio, Marco Valerio, Torino, 2007
* 
* 
* .
* .
* .
* 
* Kopi, Mario, S Nietzscheom o Europi, Jesenski i Turk, Zagreb, 2001 ISBN 978-953-222-016-2
*
*Magnus and Higgins, "Nietzsche's works and their themes", in The Cambridge Companion to Nietzsche, Magnus and Higgins (ed.), University of Cambridge Press, 1996, pp. 2158. ISBN 0-521-36767-0
* O'Flaherty, James C., Sellner, Timothy F., Helm, Robert M., "Studies in Nietzsche and the Classical Tradition" (University of North Carolina Press) 1979 ISBN 0-8078-8085-X
* O'Flaherty, James C., Sellner, Timothy F., Helm, Robert M., "Studies in Nietzsche and the Judaeo-Christian Tradition" (University of North Carolina Press) 1985 ISBN 0-8078-8104-X
* Owen, David. Nietzsche, Politics & Modernity (London: Sage Publications, 1995).
*Porter, James I. "Nietzsche and the Philology of the Future" (Stanford University Press, 2000). ISBN 0-8047-3698-7
* .
* Ratner-Rosenhagen, Jennifer (2011), American Nietzsche: A History of an Icon and His Ideas. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
* .
* .
* .
* .
* Seung, T.K. Nietzsche's Epic of the Soul: Thus Spoke Zarathustra. Lanham, Maryland: Lexington Books, 2005. ISBN 0-7391-1130-2
*
* .
*
* Young, Julian. Friedrich Nietzsche: A Philosophical Biography (Cambridge University Press; 2010) 649 pp.
* .

==External links==

*Nietzsche Source: Digital version of the German critical edition of the complete works and Digital facsimile edition of the entire Nietzsche estate
*
**
*
*Audio link Pronunciation (English and German) for Friedrich Nietzsche
*
*
*
*Lexido: Searchable Database index of Public Domain editions of all Nietzsche's major works
*
*
* Timeline of German Philosophers
*Walter Kaufmann 1960 Prof. Nietzsche and the Crisis in Philosophy Audio
*
*Brian Leiter's Nietzsche Blog: News, polls, and discussion about Nietzsche and current events in Nietzsche scholarship from Brian Leiter (University of Chicago).
*BBC (1999). "Beyond Good and Evil". Human, All Too Human.

 


