[[Brown bear]]

The brown bear (Ursus arctos) is a large bear distributed across much of northern Eurasia and North America. Adult bears generally weigh between 100 and. Its largest subspecies, the Kodiak bear, rivals the polar bear as the largest member of the bear family (Overview page) and as the largest land-based predator. 
There are several recognized subspecies within the brown bear species. In North America, two types of the subspecies Ursus arctos horribilis are generally recognizedthe coastal brown bear and the inland grizzly bear; these two types broadly define the range of sizes of all brown bear subspecies. An adult grizzly living inland in Yukon may weigh as little as 80 kg, while an adult coastal brown bear in nearby coastal Alaska living on a steady, nutritious diet of spawning salmon may weigh as much as 680 kg. The exact number of overall brown subspecies remains in debate.

While the brown bear's range has shrunk and it has faced local extinctions, it remains listed as a least concern species by the IUCN with a total population of approximately 200,000. As of 2012, this and the American black bear are the only bear species not classified as threatened by the IUCN. However, the Californian, North African (Atlas bear), and Mexican subspecies were hunted to extinction in the nineteenth and twentieth centuries, and many of the southern Asian subspecies are highly endangered. The smallest subspecies, the Himalayan brown bear, is critically endangered, occupying only 2% of its former range and threatened by uncontrolled poaching for its parts. Himalayan brown bears now critically endangered 01-06-2014 The Marsican brown bear in central Italy is believed to have a population of just 30 to 40 bears.

The brown bear's principal range includes parts of Russia, India, China, Canada, the United States (mostly Alaska), and the Carpathian region (especially Romania), The brown bear is recognized as a national and state animal in several European countries. It is the most widely distributed of all bears.

==Naming and etymology==
The brown bear is sometimes referred to as the bruin, from Middle English. This name originated in the fable, History of Reynard the Fox, translated by William Caxton, from Middle Dutch bruun or bruyn, meaning brown (the color). American Heritage Dictionary of the English Language: Fourth Edition. 2000. During the Old West, the grizzly was termed "Old Ephraim" and sometimes as "Moccasin Joe". Hunting the Grisly and other Sketches. FullTextArchive.com. Retrieved 2011-09-15. 
The scientific name of the brown bear, Ursus arctos, comes from the Latin "ursus", meaning "bear", Liddell, Henry George and Scott, Robert. "Ursus." A Latin Dictionary. Perseus Digital Library. and  "arctos", from the Greek word for bear. Liddell, Henry George and Scott, Robert."Arktos." A Greek-English Lexicon. Perseus Digital Library. 

==Taxonomy and evolution==
Brown bears are thought to have evolved from Ursus etruscus. The oldest fossils occur in China from about 0.5 million years ago. They entered Europe about 250,000 years ago, and North Africa shortly after. Brown bear remains from the Pleistocene period are common in the British Isles, where it is thought they outcompeted cave bears. The species entered Alaska 100,000 years ago, though they did not move south until 13,000 years ago. It is thought brown bears were unable to migrate south until the extinction of the much larger Arctodus simus. Several paleontologists suggest the possibility of two separate brown bear migrations: grizzlies are thought to stem from narrow-skulled bears which migrated from northern Siberia to central Alaska and the rest of the continent, while Kodiak bears descend from broad-skulled bears from Kamchatka, which colonized the Alaskan peninsula. Brown bear fossils discovered in Ontario, Ohio, Kentucky and Labrador show the species occurred farther east than indicated in historic records. Bruce McLellan and David C. Reiner (1994). A Review of bear evolution Int. Conf. Bear Res. and Manage. 9(1):8596 

===Subspecies===
There is little agreement on classification of brown bears. Some systems have proposed as many as 90 subspecies, while recent DNA analysis has identified as few as five clades. DNA analysis recently revealed that the identified subspecies of brown bears, both Eurasian and North American, are genetically quite homogeneous, and that their genetic phylogeography does not correspond to their traditional taxonomy. As of 2005, 16 living subspecies have been recognized. Ursus arctos, ITIS The subspecies have been listed as follows:

===Eurasian===

 Subspecies name Image Distribution Description/Comments 
 Ursus arctos arctos  Eurasian brown bear 140 px Europe, Caucasus, Siberia (except the east) and Mongolia A predominantly dark colored (rarely light colored), moderately sized subspecies with dark claws, the Eurasian browns occurring in Siberia are larger than their European counterparts, as they are hunted less. Where found in Europe, primarily a forest creature 
 Ursus arctos beringianus  Kamchatka brown bear (or Far Eastern brown bear) 140 px Kamchatka Peninsula and Paramushir Island This is a very large, dark colored form. Light colored forms are encountered less than in European-Siberian subspecies. The claws are dark; it is thought to be the ancestor of the Kodiak bear U. a. middendorffi. and Peninsular brown bears U. a. gyas of Alaska. 
 Ursus arctos collaris  East Siberian brown bear 140 px East Siberia from the Yenisei River to the Altai Mountains, also found in northern Mongolia A predominantly dark form, it is intermediate in size between U. a. arctos and U. a. beringianus, with a proportionately larger skull. 
 Ursus arctos crowtheri  Atlas bear (extinct) 140 px Habitat while still extant was the Atlas Mountains and adjacent areas in North Africa, from Morocco to Libya. Last surviving bear is thought to have been killed by hunters in 1890. 
 Ursus arctos isabellinus  Himalayan brown bear 140 px Nepal, Pakistan, and Northern India Has a reddish-brown or sandy coat color and large ears, this bear is smaller than most other brown bears found on the Asian continent. Prefers high altitude forest and alpine meadow. Critically Endangered. 
 Ursus arctos lasiotus  Ussuri brown bear (or Amur brown bear, black grizzly or horse bear) 140 px Russia: Southern Kuril Islands, Sakhalin, Maritime territory, and the Ussuri/Amur river region south of the Stanovoy Range, China: Heilongjiang, Japan: Hokkaid This bear is thought to be the ancestor of U. a. horribilis. 
 Ursus arctos marsicanus  Marsican brown bear 140 px Marsica, central Italy There are an estimated 30 to 40 bears remaining in the Marsica area. This is an unrecognized subspecies that is considered to be a member of the nominate subspecies. 
 Ursus arctos pruinosus  Tibetan blue bear 140 px Tibetan plateau an isolated sub-population lives in the Gobi Desert. This is a moderately sized subspecies with long and shaggy fur. Both dark and light variants are encountered, with intermediate colors predominating. The fur around the neck is light, and forms a \"collar\". The skull is distinguished its relatively flattened choanae, an arch-like curve of the molar row and large teeth. 
 Ursus arctos syriacus  Syrian brown bear 140 px The trans-Caucasus, Syria, Iraq, Turkey (Asia Minor), Iran, Afghanistan, Pakistan, western Himalayas and the Pamir-Alai and Tien Shan mountains, probable historical presence in Israel The Syrian is a light colored, moderate to small-sized subspecies with light claws. Recently, however, it was shown that this form, at least matrilineally, is not monophyletic and belongs to Ursus arctos arctos. 

===North American===

 Subspecies name Image Distribution Description/Comments 
 Ursus arctos alascensis Ursus arctos alascensis. Mammal Species of the World. Bucknell University.  Alaska brown bear Coastal Alaska 
 Ursus arctos californicus  California grizzly (extinct) 140 px California The last known bear was shot in California in 1922. 
 Ursus arctos dalli - Dall Island brown bear Dall Island 
 Ursus arctos gyas  Peninsular brown bear 140 px Alaska Peninsula Considered by some biologists to be same subspecies as U. a. middendorffi. Burt. Henry W. A Field Guide to the Mammals. Pg. 42. 
 Ursus arctos horribilis  Grizzly bear 140 px Northern and Western Canada, Alaska, and the northwestern United States, historically existed in Great Plains Grizzlies are identified by a medium to dark brown coat with gray or blond \"grizzled\" tips on the fur. Smaller than coastal bears, a large male grizzly can weigh up to 364 kg in inland areas, with bears in the Yukon region weighing as little as 80 kg. Coastal bears may be nearly twice a mountain grizzly's weight. Highly adaptable: it can live in montane pine forests, temperate rainforest, semi-arid scrubland, and shortgrass prairie. 
 Ursus arctos middendorffi  Kodiak bear 140 px Kodiak, Afognak, Shuyak Islands (Alaska) This is the largest subspecies of brown bear, with other coastal brown bears potentially reaching nearly as large. 
 Ursus arctos nelsoni  Mexican grizzly bear (extinct) 140 px Formerly northern Mexico, including Chihuahua, Coahuila, and Sonora, southwestern United States including southern ranges of Texas, Arizona, and New Mexico This bear is believed extinct due to cattle ranching in both the United States and Mexico. Distinct in its ability to survive arid conditions, it could live in both montane pine forests of Mexico and canyonlands of Sonoran Desert. 
 Ursus arctos sitkensis Admiralty Island, Baranof Island, and Chichagof Island the ABC Islands of Alaska. Appearing to be more closely related to the polar bear than to other brown bears, this species is called \"clade I\" by Waits, and others, and is part of the subspecies identified as U. a. sitkensis, by Hall and as U. a. dalli by Kurtn. 
 Ursus arctos stikeenensis Northwestern British Columbia Around the Stikine River. Considered by some biologists to be same subspecies as U. a. horribilis. 
 Ursus arctos ugavaesis  Ungava brown bear (extinct) Ungava Peninsula, Quebec Inhabited the forests of northern Quebec. The species was hunted by Indians and early settlers, and the last one was killed in c. 1913. Busch, Robert H. The Grizzly Almanac. New York, 2000, pg 122. 

===Hybrids===

A grizzlypolar bear hybrid (known as a pizzly bear or grolar bear) is a rare ursid hybrid resulting from a union of a brown bear and a polar bear. It has occurred both in captivity and in the wild. In 2006, the occurrence of this hybrid in nature was confirmed by testing the DNA of a strange-looking bear that had been shot in the Canadian arctic. Previously, the hybrid had been produced in zoos, and was considered a "cryptid" (a hypothesized animal for which there is no scientific proof of existence in the wild).

=== Formerly considered subspecies ===

 Former Subspecies Name Image Distribution Description 
 Ursus arctos pyrenaicus  Iberian brown bear, sometimes called Cantabrian brown bear, now considered Ursus arctos arctos  European brown bear See photographs in Eroski article (in Spanish, also available in Catalan, Basque and Galician) and in Fauna Ibrica. Oso pardo ibrico (Ursus arctos pyrenaicus), in Spanish Iberian Peninsula, primarily the Cantabrian Mountains and hills in Galicia, and the Pyrenees Until recently, this bear was considered a separate subspecies. Today, it is considered to belong to the U. arctos arctos subspecies. Scientific evidence based on DNA studies would furthermore indicate the European brown bear can be divided into two distinct lineages. \"There is a clear division into two main mitochondrial lineages in modern European brown bear populations. These populations are divided into those carrying an eastern lineage (clade IIIa, Leonard et al. 2000), which is composed of Russian, northern Scandinavian and eastern European populations, and those carrying a western lineage (clade I, Leonard et al. 2000), which is composed of two subgroups, one believed to originate from the Iberian Peninsula, including southern Scandinavian bears and the Pyreneean populations; and the other from the ItalianBalkan peninsulas (Taberlet et al. 1994; see however Kohn et al. 1995). In addition, based on the subfossil record in northwestern Moldova and mitochondrial DNA data from modern populations, a Carpathian refuge has also been proposed (Sommer & Benecke 2005; Saarma et al. 2007).\" The brown bear is the largest animal on the Iberian Peninsula, although one of the smallest of the brown bears, weigh between 130 and as adults. Their fur varies from a pale cream color to dark brown, but always with a distinctively darker, nearly black tone at the paws and a yellowish tinge at the tip of each hair. The brown bear population is considered endangered in Spain. The brown bear population in the Pyrenees stems mostly from bears reintroduced from Slovenia, with one or two remaining original males. Cuntos osos hay y dnde viven. Fundacin Oso Pardo  distribution maps and population from 2008 (in Spanish) DEPANA  detailed distribution maps and census information from 2009 (in Catalan). The Cantabrian Brown Bear Ursus arctos arctos. picos-accommodation.co.uk. 

==Physical description==
Brown bear claws are longer and less curved than those of black bears
Brown bear skull
Brown bears have long, thick fur, with a moderately long mane at the back of the neck. In India, brown bears can be reddish with silver tips, while in China, brown bears are bicolored with a yellow-brown or whitish cape across the shoulders. North American grizzlies can be dark brown (almost black) to cream (almost white) or yellowish brown. Black hairs usually have white tips. The winter fur is very thick and long, especially in northern subspecies, and can reach at the withers. The winter hairs are thin, yet rough to the touch. The summer fur is much shorter and sparser, and its length and density varies geographically. 

Brown bears have very large and curved claws, those present on the forelimbs being longer than those on the hind limbs. They may reach and sometimes along the curve. Heptner, "Sirenia and carnivora (Sea cows; Wolves and Bears)", They are generally dark with a light tip, with some forms having completely light claws. Brown bear claws are longer and straighter than those of American black bears. Bear Anatomy and Physiology from Gary Brown's The Great Bear Almanac, Lyons & Burford, Publishers, 1993 The claws are blunt, while those of a black bear are sharp. Due to their claw structure, in addition to their excessive weight, adult brown bears cannot climb trees as can both species of black bear. The paws of the brown bear are quite large. The rear feet of adult bears have been found to typically measure 21 to long, with huge Kodiak bears having measured up to 46 cm along their rear foot. 

Adults have massive, heavily built concave skulls, which are large in proportion to the body. The forehead is high and rises steeply. The projections of the skull are well developed when compared to those of Asian black bears: the latter have sagittal crests not exceeding more than 1920% of the total length of the skull, while the former have sagittal crests comprising up to 4041% of the skull's length. Skull projections are more weakly developed in females than in males. The braincase is relatively small and elongated. There is a great deal of geographical variation in the skull, and presents itself chiefly in dimensions. Grizzlies, for example, tend to have flatter profiles than European and coastal American brown bears. Skull lengths of Russian bears tend to be for males, and for females. The width of the zygomatic arches in males is , and in females. Brown bears have very strong teeth: the incisors are relatively big and the canine teeth are large, the lower ones being strongly curved. The first three molars of the upper jaw are underdeveloped and single crowned with one root. The second upper molar is smaller than the others, and is usually absent in adults. It is usually lost at an early age, leaving no trace of the alveolus in the jaw. The first three molars of the lower jaw are very weak, and are often lost at an early age. Although they have powerful jaws, brown bear jaws are incapable of breaking large bones with the ease of spotted hyenas. 

===Body size===
The Brown Bear is the most variably sized of extant bear species. The dimensions of brown bears fluctuate very greatly according to sex, age, individual, geographic location, and season. The normal range of physical dimensions for a brown bear is a head-and-body length of 1.4 to and a shoulder height of 70 to. Males are invariably larger than females, typically weighing around 30% more in most races. The tail is relatively short, ranging from 6 to in length. Brown bear. zoo.org 

Young of the year typically weigh 2 -, while yearlings typically weigh 9 -. 

Generally speaking, brown bears weigh the least when they emerge from hibernation in the spring and then reach peak weights when preparing for hibernation in the fall (when they often gorge on large food stuffs). Some subspecies show considerable variation. Whereas Eurasian brown bear (U. a. arctos) and grizzly bears (U. a. horribilis) from Northern Europe, Yellowstone National Park or interior Alaska seasonally weigh on average between 115 and, bears from the Yukon Delta, interior British Columbia, Jasper National Park and southern Europe can weigh from 55 to on average. Bears from the Syrian (U. a. syriacus) and the Gobi Desert (U. a. gobiensis) subspecies are around the same mass as the smaller Eurasian brown and grizzly bears and can exceptionally measure as small as 1 m in head-and-body length. On the other end of the scale among interior brown bears, exceptional grizzly, Eurasian brown bears and East Siberian brown bears (U. a. collaris) have been weighed up to 680 kg, 481 kg and 600 kg, respectively. Due to the lack of genetic variation within subspecies, the environmental conditions in a given area likely plays the largest part in such weight variations. Interior brown bears are generally smaller than is often perceived, being around the same weight as an average African lion at an estimate average of 180 kg in males and 135 kg in females. The largest inland brown bear subspecies appears to be the Ussuri brown bear (U. a. lasiotus), likely the ancestor of the modern-day American grizzly, which can obtain sizes comparable to those of the coastal bears as described below. 

The brown bears found in coastal regions of Alaska and far eastern Russia are the largest. The largest subspecies is the Kodiak bear (U. a. middendorffi), followed closely by the Kamchatka brown bear (U. a. beringianus), although bears from other coastal regions of eastern Asia and western North America can be comparably large. In these areas, the female averages from 181.4 to and the male averages from 272 to. The heaviest verified Kodiak bear weighed about 748 kg (1,650 lb). Busch, Robert H. The Grizzly Almanac. New York, 2000, Lyons Press. ISBN 1-59228-320-9. It is not unusual for Kodiak bear males to weigh up to 680 kg in fall with some specimens attaining 780 kg or more. Such huge males can stand over 3 m tall while on their hind legs and loom 1.5 m high at the shoulder. The heaviest recorded brown bear weighed over 1150 kg. Furthermore, a maximum weight of 1500 kg for the Kodiak bear was published. 

==Distribution and habitat==
Brown bear at Brooks Falls
Brown bears were once native to much of Asia, the Atlas Mountains of Africa, Europe, and North America, but are now extinct in some areas, and their populations have greatly decreased in other areas. There are approximately 200,000 brown bears left in the world. The largest populations are in Russia with 120,000, the United States with 32,500, and Canada with around 25,000. About 95% of the brown bear population in the United States is in Alaska, though in the lower 48 states, they are repopulating slowly but steadily along the Rockies and the western Great Plains. Although many people hold the belief some brown bears may be present in Mexico and the Atlas Mountains of Morocco, both are almost certainly extinct. The last Mexican grizzly bear was shot in 1960. In Europe, there are 14,000 brown bears in ten fragmented populations, from Spain (estimated at only 2025 animals in the Pyrenees in 2010, in a range shared between France, Spain and Andorra, and some 210 animals in Asturias, Cantabria, Galicia and Len, in the Picos de Europa and adjacent areas in 2013 in the west, to Russia in the east, and from Sweden and Finland in the north to Romania (40005000), Bulgaria (9001200), Slovakia (with about 600800 animals), Slovenia (500700 animals) and Greece (with about 200 animals) in the south. They are extinct in the British Isles, extremely threatened in France and Spain, and in trouble over most of Central Europe. The Carpathian brown bear population of Romania is the largest in Europe outside Russia, estimated at 4,500 to 5,000 bears, although declining alarmingly due to overhunting. There is also a smaller brown bear population in the Carpathian Mountains in Ukraine (estimated at about 200 in 2005), Slovakia and Poland (estimated at about 100 in 2009 in the latter country). The total Carpathian population is estimated at about 8,000. Northern Europe is home to a large bear population, with an estimated 2,500 (range 2,3502,900) in Sweden, about 1,600 in Finland, about 700 in Estonia and 70 in Norway. Another large and relatively stable population of brown bears in Europe, consisting of 2,5003,000 individuals, is the Dinaric-Pindos (Balkans) population, with contiguous distribution in northeast Italy, Slovenia, Croatia, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Serbia, Montenegro, Macedonia, Albania, Bulgaria and Greece. Bear Online Information System for Europe. Kora.ch. Retrieved 2011-09-15. 

Brown bears live in Alaska, east through the Yukon and Northwest Territories, south through British Columbia and through the western half of Alberta. The Alaskan population is estimated at a healthy 32,000 individuals. Small populations exist in the Greater Yellowstone Ecosystem of northwest Wyoming (with about 600 animals), the Northern Continental Divide Ecosystem of northwest Montana (with about 750 animals), the Cabinet-Yaak Ecosystem of northwest Montana and northeast Idaho (with about 3040 animals), the Selkirk Ecosystem of northeast Washington and northwest Idaho (with about 4050 animals), and the North Cascades Ecosystem of northcentral Washington (with about 510 animals). These five ecosystems combine for a total of roughly 1,470 wild grizzlies still persisting in the contiguous United States. Unfortunately, these populations are isolated from each other, inhibiting any genetic flow between ecosystems. This poses one of the greatest threats to the future survival of the grizzly bear in the contiguous United States.

In Asia, brown bears are found primarily throughout Russia, thence more spottily southwest to parts of the Middle East, to as far south as southwestern Iran, and to the southeast in a small area of Northeast China, Western China, and parts of North Korea, Pakistan, Afghanistan and India. They can also be found on the Japanese island of Hokkaid, which holds the largest number of non-Russian brown bears in eastern Asia with about 2,0003,000 animals. Carnivores of the World by Dr. Luke Hunter. Princeton University Press (2011), ISBN 9780691152288 

The population of brown bears in the Pyrenees mountain range between France and Spain is extremely low, estimated at 14 to 18, with a shortage of females. Their rarity in this area has led biologists to release bears, mostly female, from Slovenia in spring 2006 to reduce the imbalance and preserve the species' presence in the area. The bears were released despite protests from French farmers. A small population of brown bears (Ursus arctos marsicanus) still lives in central Italy (Apennine Mountains, Abruzzo and Latium), with no more than 70 individuals, protected by strong laws, but endangered by the human presence in the area.

In Arctic areas, the potential habitat of the brown bear is increasing. The warming of that region has allowed the species to move farther north into what was once exclusively the domain of the polar bear. In non-Arctic areas, habitat loss is blamed as the leading cause of endangerment, followed by hunting.

This species inhabits the broadest range of habitats of any living bear species. 
They seem to have no altitudinal preferences and have been recorded from sea-level to an elevation of 5000 m (the latter in the Himalayas). In most of their range, brown bears generally seems to prefer semiopen country, with a scattering of vegetation that can allow them a resting spot during the day. However, they have been recorded as inhabiting every variety of northern temperate forest known to occur. North American brown bears, or grizzly bears, generally seem to prefer open or semi-open landscapes, with the species once having been common on the Great Plains and continues to occur in sizeable numbers in tundra and coastal estuaries and islands. Variable numbers still occur in prairie areas of the northern Rocky Mountains (mostly in Canada but some in the contiguous United States). In western Eurasia, they inhabit mostly mountainous woodlands, in ranges such as the Alps, the Pyrenees and the Caucasus, though they may have been driven into more wooded, precipitous habitats due to the prior extensive persecution of the species in some regions. Desolate parts of northern and eastern Europe, like large patches of Scandinavia and the Carpathian Mountains, have always been quite heavily forested and have maintained relatively stable populations of bears, indicating that the brown bears here are well-adapted to forest-dwelling. In Central Asia, human disturbances are minimal as this area has a harsher environment and is more sparsely populated. In this part of the world, bears may be found in steppe, alpine meadows and even desert edge. In Siberia, the species seems well-adapted to living in denser pine forests. Eastern Russian forests hold arguably the largest number of brown bears in the world outside of possibly Alaska and northeastern Canada. It is thought the Eurasian bears which colonized America were tundra-adapted and the species is sometimes found around sub-Arctic ice fields. This is indicated by brown bears in the Chukotka Peninsula on the Asian side of Bering Strait, which are the only Asian brown bears to live year-round in lowland tundra like their North American cousins. 

==Behavior==
Although the brown bear is primarily nocturnal, it is frequently seen in morning and early evening hours. In summer through autumn, it can double its weight, gaining up to of fat, on which it relies to make it through winter, when it becomes very lethargic. Although they are not full hibernators and can be woken easily, both sexes like to den in a protected spot, such as a cave, crevice, or hollow log, during the winter months. Brown bears are mostly solitary, although they may gather in large numbers at major food sources (e.g., moth colonies, open garbage dumps or rivers holding spawning salmon) and form social hierarchies based on age and size. Adult male bears are particularly aggressive and are avoided by adolescent and subadult males. Female bears with cubs rival adult males in aggression, and are more intolerant of other bears than single females. Young adolescent males tend to be least aggressive, and have been observed in nonantagonistic interactions with each other. Dominance between bears is asserted by making a frontal orientation, showing off canines, muzzle twisting and neck stretching to which a subordinate will respond with a lateral orientation, by turning away and dropping the head and by sitting or lying down. Stonorov, Derek and Stokes, Allen W. (1972) "Social Behavior of the Alaska Brown Bear" Panel 4: Bear Behaviour During combat, bears use their paws to strike their opponents in the chest or shoulders and bite the head or neck. In his Great Bear Almanac, Gary Brown lists 11 different sounds bears produce in 9 different contexts. Sounds expressing anger or aggravation include growls, roars, woofs, champs and smacks, while sounds expressing nervousness or pain include woofs, grunts, and bawls. Sows will bleat or hum when communicating with their cubs. 

===Home ranges===
Brown bears usually occur over vast home ranges, however they are not highly territorial. Several adult bears often roam freely over the same vicinity without issue unless rights to a fertile female or food sources are being contested. Males always cover more area than females each year and will try to mate with as many females as they can (although females are not monogamous either). In areas where food is abundant and concentrated, such as coastal Alaska, home ranges for females are up to 24 km2 and for males are up to 89 km2. Similarly, in British Columbia, bears of the two sexes travel relatively compact home ranges of 115 km2 and 318 km2. In Yellowstone National Park, home ranges for females are up to 281 km2 and up to 874 km2 for males. In the central Arctic of Canada, where food sources are quite sparse, home ranges range up to 2434 km2 in females and 8171 km2 in males. 

===Reproduction===
The mating season is from mid-May to early July. Being serially monogamous, brown bears remain with the same mate from several days to a couple of weeks. Types of Bears  Information on Specific Bear Species (2009) Females mature sexually between the age of 4 and 8 years of age, while males first mate about a year later on average, when they are large and strong enough to successfully compete with other males for mating rights. 
Pair of mating brown bears, at htri Zoo in htri, Finland Males, however, take no part in raising their cubs  parenting is left entirely to the females.

Through the process of delayed implantation, a female's fertilized egg divides and floats freely in the uterus for six months. During winter dormancy, the fetus attaches to the uterine wall. The cubs are born eight weeks later, while the mother sleeps. If the mother does not gain enough weight to survive through the winter, the embryo does not implant and is reabsorbed into the body. The average litter has one to four cubs, usually two. There have been cases of bears with as many as six cubs. There are records of females sometimes adopting stray cubs or even trading cubs when they emerge from hibernation. Older females tend to give birth to larger litters. The size of a litter also depends on factors such as geographic location and food supply. At birth, the cubs are blind, toothless, hairless, and weigh less than . They feed on their mother's milk until spring or even early summer, depending on climate conditions. At this time, the cubs weigh and have developed enough to follow her and begin to forage for solid food.

Cubs remain with their mother from two to four years (exceptionally to 4 and a half years), during which time they learn survival techniques, such as which foods have the highest nutritional value and where to obtain them; how to hunt, fish, and defend themselves; and where to den. The cubs learn by following and imitating their mother's actions during the period they are with her. Brown bears practice infanticide. An adult male bear may kill the cubs of another bear either to make the female sexually receptive or simply for consumption. Cubs flee up a tree when they see a strange male bear, and the mother often successfully defends them, even though the male may be twice as heavy as she.

===Longevity===
The brown bear is naturally a long-living animal. Wild females have been known to be able to reproduce at as old as 28 years of age, the oldest known age for reproduction in the wild of any ursid. Males commonly can live to 25 years, with the oldest female having been 37 years old. The species can live to 48 years of age in captivity. Annual mortality for bears of any age is estimated at around 10% in most protected areas. However, in hunted populations, an estimated average mortality rate of 38% is given. Around 13% to 44% of cubs die within their first year. Beyond predation by other large predators (rarely by gray wolf packs or Siberian tigers) and brown bears, starvation and accidents claim a few cubs. Even in populations living in protected areas without legal, non-governmental hunting, though, humans are still the leading cause of mortality for brown bears. The largest number of legally hunting on the species occurs in Canada, Finland, Russia, Slovakia and Alaska. 

===Dietary habits===
Brown bear feeding on salmon
The Brown Bear is one of the most omnivorous animals in the world and has been recorded as consuming the greatest variety of foods of any bear. Throughout life, this species is regularly curious about the potential of eating virtually any organism or object that they encounter. Food that is both abundant and easily accessed or caught is preferred. Their jaw structure has evolved to fit their dietary habits. Their diet varies enormously throughout their differing areas based on opportunity.

Despite their reputation, most brown bears are not highly carnivorous, as they derive up to 90% of their dietary food energy from vegetable matter. They often feed on a variety of plant life, including berries, grasses, flowers, acorns and pine cones as well as fungi such as mushrooms. Among all bears, brown bears are uniquely equipped to dig for tough foods such as roots and shoots. They use their long, strong claws to dig out earth to reach the roots and their powerful jaws to bite through them. In spring, winter-provided carrion, grasses, shoots, sedges and forbs are the dietary mainstays for brown bears internationally. Fruits, including berries, become increasingly important during summer and early autumn. Roots and bulbs become critical in autumn for some inland bear populations if fruit crops are poor. They will also commonly consume animal matter, which in summer and autumn may regularly be in the form of insects, larvae and grubs, including beehives. Bears in Yellowstone eat an enormous number of moths during the summer, sometimes as many as 40,000 army cutworm moths in a single day, and may derive up to half of their annual food energy from these insects. Brown bears living near coastal regions will regularly eat crabs and clams. In Alaska, bears along the beaches of estuaries regularly dig through the sand for clams. This species may eat birds and their eggs, including almost entirely ground- or rock-nesting species. The diet may be supplemented by rodents or similar smallish mammals, including marmots, ground squirrels, mice, rats, lemmings and voles. With particular regularity, bears in Denali National Park will wait at burrows of Arctic ground squirrels hoping to pick off a few of the 1 kg rodents. 

In the Kamchatka peninsula and several parts of coastal Alaska, brown bears feed mostly on spawning salmon, whose nutrition and abundance explain the enormous size of the bears in these areas. The fishing techniques of bears are well-documented. They often congregate around falls when the salmon are forced to breach the water, at which point the bears will try to catch the fish in mid-air (often with their mouths). They will also wade into shallow waters, hoping to pin a slippery salmon with their claws. While they may eat almost all the parts of the fish, bears at the peak of spawning, when there is usually a glut of fish to feed on, may eat only the most nutrious parts of the salmon (including the eggs and head) and then indifferently leave the rest of the carcass to scavengers, which can include red foxes, bald eagles, common ravens and gulls. Despite their normally solitary habits, Brown bears will gather rather closely in numbers at good spawning sites. The largest and most powerful males claim the most fruitful fishing spots and bears (especially males) will sometimes fight over the rights to a prime fishing spot. 

Beyond the regular predation of salmon, most brown bears are not particularly active predators. While perhaps a majority of bears of the species will charge at large prey at one point in their lives and most eat carrion, many predation attempts start with the bear clumsily and half-heartedly pursuing the prey and end with the prey escaping alive. On the other hand, some brown bears are quite self-assured predators who habitually pursue and catch large prey items. Such bears are usually taught how to hunt by their mothers from an early age. Large mammals preyed on can include various deer species such as elk, red deer, axis deer, European roe deer, Siberian roe deer, fallow deer, mule deer, white tailed deer, moose and caribou. Bovids are also regular prey including various sheep, goats, antelope, bison and muskoxen, as are wild boars. When brown bears attack these large animals, they usually target young or infirm ones, as they are easier to catch. Typically when hunting (especially with young prey), the bear pins its prey to the ground and then immediately tears and eats it alive. It will also bite or swipe some prey in order to stun it enough to knock it over for consumption. To pick out young or infirm individuals, bears will charge at herds so the slower-moving and more vulnerable individuals will be made apparent. Brown bears may also ambush young animals by finding them via scent. When emerging from hibernation, brown bears, whose broad paws allow them to walk over most ice and snow, may pursue large prey such as moose whose hooves cannot support them on encrusted snow. Similarly, predatory attacks on large prey sometimes occur at riverbeds, when it is more difficult for the prey specimen to run away due to muddy or slippery soil. On rare occasions, while confronting fully-grown, dangerous prey, bears kill them by hitting with their powerful forearms, which can break the necks and backs of large creatures such as adult moose and adult bison. They also feed on carrion, and use their size to intimidate other predators, such as wolves, cougars, tigers, and black bears from their kills. Carrion is especially important in the early spring (when the bears are emerging from hibernation), much of it comprised by winter-killed big game. Cannibalism is not unheard of, though predation is not normally believed to be the primary motivation when brown bears attack each other. 

When forced to live in close proximity with humans and their domesticated animals, bears may potentially predate any type of domestic animal. Among these, domestic cattle are sometimes exploited as prey. Cattle are bitten on the neck, back or head and then the abdominal cavity is opened for eating. Plants and fruit farmed by humans are readily consumed as well, including corn, wheat, sorghum, melons and any form of berries. They will also feed at domestic bee farms, readily consuming both honey and the contents of the honey bee colony. Human foods and trash or refuse is eaten when possible. When an open garbage dump was kept in Yellowstone, brown bears were one of the most voracious and regular scavengers. The dump was closed after both brown and American black bears came to associate humans with food and lost their natural fear of them. 

===Interspecific predatory relationships===

Brown bear being followed by a wolf
Taxidermy exhibit portraying a brown bear fighting a Siberian tiger, Vladivostok Museum
Brown bears often use their large size for intimidation when a kill or a territory is in dispute with another large predator and they are normally dominant in such interactions. Sometimes, the conflict will escalate to the point of violence, but usually threat displays are sufficient, since most animals try to avoid potential bodily harm. However, the massive strength and size of the brown bear will usually result in its winning violent conflicts, even against wolf packs and Siberian tigers. In situations where the interspecies conflict turns deadly, brown bears may also eat the competitor, despite it not being the primary reason for attack.

Brown bears regularly intimidate wolves away from their kills. In Yellowstone National Park, brown bears pirate wolf kills so often, Yellowstone's Wolf Project director Doug Smith wrote, "It's not a matter of if the bears will come calling after a kill, but when." Despite the high animosity between the two species, most confrontations at kill sites or large carcasses end without bloodshed on either side. Though conflict over carcasses is common, on rare occasions the two predators tolerate each other on the same kill. To date, there is a single case of fully-grown wolves being killed by a grizzly bear. PDF. Given the opportunity, however, both species will prey on the other's cubs. Conclusively, the individual power of the bear against the collective strength of the wolf pack usually results in a long battle for kills or domination. In some areas, the brown bear also regularly displaces cougars from their kills. Cougars kill small bear cubs on rare occasions, and there have been reports of bears killing fully-grown cougars. ADW: Ursus arctos: Information. Arlis.org. Retrieved 2012-08-09. Hornocker, M., and S. Negri (Eds.). (2009). Cougar: ecology and conservation. University of Chicago Press. Chicago, IL, ISBN 0226353443. Other accounts, told primarily from the 19th and early 20th centuries, tell of cougars and bears engaging in prolonged combat and ending with both combatants fatally wounded. Brown bears are known to handle lions well when the two species interact in circuses. A Kodiak bear in the 1920s reportedly killed a man-eating African lion "so quickly the big audience hardly knew how it was done." An earlier account from the 1890s tells of a 700 lb grizzly bear and a 550 lb African lion engaging in a bloody, prolonged fight in a bullring and ending with the latter badly injured. 

Smaller carnivorous animals, including coyotes, wolverines, lynxes and any other sympatric carnivores or raptorial birds, are dominated by Brown bears and generally avoid direct interactions with them, unless attempting to steal scraps of food. However, wolverines have been persistent enough to fend off a grizzly bear as much as ten times their weight off a kill. There is one record of a golden eagle predating a Brown bear cub. 

Large herbivores, such as moose, buffalo, and muskox may have an intolerance of brown bears due to their possible threat to calves; moose regularly charge grizzly bears in their calf's defense. Bison have been known to fatally injure lone grizzly bears in battles, and even a mountain goat was observed to do so with its horns. 

Adult bears are generally immune to predatory attacks except from other bears. Some bears emerging from hibernation seek out tigers in order to steal their kills. Indeed, Russian researchers have identified "satellite bears" who "follow tigers over extensive periods of time, sequentially usurping kills"; these bears were observed tracking tigers in spring snow and regularly usurped their kills. In the Russian Far East, brown bears along with smaller Asiatic black bears constitute 58% of the diet of Siberian tigers. In particular, the brown bear's input is estimated to be 1.01.5% in one source. Mazak, Vratislav (2004) Der Tiger. Nachdruck der 3. Auflage von 1983. Westarp Wissenschaften Hohenwarsleben, ISBN 3-89432-759-6 However, another source states that such attacks are rare and do not have any actual significance because Siberian tigers are almost extinct. Siberian tigers most typically attack brown bears in the winter in the hibernaculum Heptner, pp. 6701 or in the late autumn and early spring, and when ungulate populations decrease. Tigers typically attack bears by surprise when hunting them and are believed to forgo attacks if the bear is aware of their presence. Adult bears, generally smaller ones, are sometimes vulnerable to tiger attacks and have been killed in their dens in winter, with the tiger taking advantage of the bear's hibernating condition. There are also records of bears killing tiger, Heptner, p. 177 either in self-defense, or in disputes over kills or for consumption. Kerley, Linda; Goodrich, John, and Miquelle, Dale. "Bears and tigers in the Far East" International Bear News. 5 (2): p. 4. Seryodkin, I. V., J. M. Goodrich, A. V. Kostyrya, B. O. Schleyer, E. N. Smirnov, L. L. Kerley, and D. G. Miquelle. 2005. Relationship between tigers, brown bears, and Himalayan black bears. pp. 156163 in D. G. Miquelle, E. N. Smirnov, and J. M. Goodrich (eds.), Tigers of Sikhote-Alin Zapovednik: Ecology and Conservation. Vladivostok, Russia: PSP. Heptner 

Brown bears usually dominate other bear species in areas where they coexist. Due to their smaller size, American black bears are at a competitive disadvantage to brown bears in open, unforested areas. Although displacement of black bears by brown bears has been documented, actual interspecific killing of black bears by brown bears has only occasionally been reported. Confrontation is mostly avoided due to the black bear's diurnal habits and preference for heavily forested areas, as opposed to the brown bear's largely nocturnal habits and preference for open spaces. Brown bears may also kill Asian black bears, though the latter species probably largely avoids conflicts with the Brown bear due to similar habits and habitat preferences to the American Black species. They will eat the fruit dropped by the Asian black bear from trees, as they themselves are too large and cumbersome to climb. The Intellectual observer: review of natural history, microscopic research, and recreative science, Groombridge, 1865 Improbably, in the Himalayas Brown bears are reportedly intimidated by Asian black bears in confrontations. Adams, Andrew Leith Wanderings of a naturalist in India: the western Himalayas, and Cashmere, Edmonston and Douglas, 1867 

There has been a recent increase in interactions between brown bears and polar bears, theorized to be caused by climate change. Brown bears have been seen moving increasingly northward into territories formerly claimed by polar bears. Brown bears tend to dominate polar bears in disputes over carcasses, Dough O'Hara Polar bears, grizzlies increasingly gather on North Slope. Anchorage Daily News. April 24, 2005 and dead polar bear cubs have been found in brown bear dens. 

==Relationship with humans==
Front paw imprint
Rear paw imprint

===Conflicts between bears and humans===
Bears become attracted to human-created food sources, such as garbage dumps, litter bins, and dumpsters; they venture into human dwellings or barns in search of food as humans encroach into bear habitats. In the U.S., bears sometimes kill and eat farm animals. When bears come to associate human activity with a "food reward", they are likely to continue to become emboldened; the likelihood of human-bear encounters increases, as they may return to the same location despite relocation. The saying "a fed bear is a dead bear" has come into use to popularize the idea that allowing bears to scavenge human garbage, such as trash cans and campers' backpacks, pet food, or other food sources that draw the bear into contact with humans, can result in a bear's death.

Relocation of the bear has been used to separate the bear from the human environment, but it does not address the problem of the bear's newly learned association of humans with food or the environmental situations which created the human-habituated bear. "Placing a bear in habitat used by other bears may lead to competition and social conflict, and result in the injury or death of the less dominant bear." 

Yellowstone National Park, a reserve located in the western United States, contains prime habitat for the grizzly bear (Ursus arctos horribilis), and due to the enormous number of visitors, human-bear encounters are common. The scenic beauty of the area has led to an influx of people moving into the area. In addition, because there are so many bear relocations to the same remote areas of Yellowstone, and because male bears tend to dominate the center of the relocation zone, female bears tend to be pushed to the boundaries of the region and beyond. As a result, a large proportion of repeat offenders, bears that are killed for public safety, are females. This creates a further depressive effect on an already endangered species. The grizzly bear is officially described as "threatened" in the U.S. Though the problem is most significant with regard to grizzlies, these issues affect the other types of brown bears as well.

In Europe, part of the problem lies with shepherds; over the past two centuries, many sheep and goat herders have gradually abandoned the more traditional practice of using dogs to guard flocks, which have concurrently grown larger. Typically, they allow the herds to graze freely over sizeable tracts of land. As bears reclaim parts of their range, they may eat livestock. In some cases, the shepherds shoot the bear, thinking their livelihood is under threat. Many are now better informed about the ample compensation available, and will make a claim when they lose livestock to a bear.

It is likely that humans caused extinction of bear populations and fragmentation of their habitats since prehistorical time. It is, for instance, shown that bear populations from the Greater Caucasus and the Lesser Caucasus Mountains, separated by the densely populated Transcaucasian Depression, have been matrilineally isolated since the early Holocene era, i.e., after permanent human settlements appeared throughout the area 

===Relationship with Native Americans===
Gorgonia, a Native American (Mescalero Apache) man. He holds a bear pelt and wears moccasin boots, a breechcloth, kilt, and vest.
Native American tribes sympatric with brown bears often viewed them with a mixture of awe and fear. North American brown bears were so feared by the natives, that they were rarely hunted, especially alone. When natives hunted grizzlies, the expedition was conducted with the same preparation and ceremoniality as intertribal warfare, and was never done except with a company of 410 warriors. The tribe members who dealt the killing blow were highly esteemed among their compatriots. Californian natives actively avoided prime bear habitat, and would not allow their young men to hunt alone, for fear of bear attacks. During the Spanish colonial period, some tribes, instead of hunting grizzlies themselves, would seek aid from European colonists to deal with problem bears. Many authors in the American west wrote of natives or voyagers with lacerated faces and missing noses or eyes due to attacks from grizzlies. Geist, Valerius (1989) "Did Large Predators keep Humans out of North America?", pp. 282294 in Juliet Clutton-Brock (ed.) The Walking larder: patterns of domestication, pastoralism, and predation, Unwin Hyman, ISBN 0044450133. 

Sleeping Bear Dunes is named after a Native American legend, where a female bear and her cub swam across Lake Michigan. Exhausted from their journey, the bears rested on the shoreline and fell sound asleep. Over the years, the sand covered them up, creating a huge sand dune.

Many Native American tribes both respected and feared the brown bear, even thinking of it as a god. Native American Animal Symbols  The Bear. Support-native-american-art.com (2004-01-22). Retrieved 2011-09-15. One tale tells of how the black bear was a creation of the Great Spirit, while the grizzly was created by the Evil Spirit. Folklore and Legends of the North American Indian compiled by Joshua B Lippincott, published by Abela Publishing Ltd, 2009, ISBN 0-9560584-6-9 In Kwakiutl mythology, black and brown bears became enemies when Grizzly Bear Woman killed Black Bear Woman for being lazy. Black Bear Woman's children, in turn, killed Grizzly Bear Woman's own cubs. Averkieva, Julia P. and Sherman, Mark A. (1992) Kwakiutl String Figures UBC Press, ISBN 0-7748-0432-7 

===Bear encounters===
There are an average of two fatal attacks by bears per year in North America. Herrero, Stephen (2002) Bear Attacks: Their Causes and Avoidance, revised edition, Lyons Press, ISBN 158574557X. In Scandinavia, there are only four known cases since 1902 of bear encounters which have resulted in death. The two most common causes for bear attack are surprise and curiosity. Some types of bears, such as polar bears, are more likely to attack humans when searching for food, while American black bears are much less likely to attack.

The Alaska Science Center ranks the following as the most likely reasons for bear attacks: 
# Surprise
# Curiosity
# Invaded personal space (this includes a mother bear protecting her young)
# Predatory intent
# Hunting wounded
# Carcass defense
# Provoked charge

Aggressive behavior in brown bears is favored by numerous selection variables. Unlike the smaller black bears, adult brown bears are too large and have improperly shaped claws to escape danger by climbing trees, so they respond to danger by standing their ground and warding off their attackers. Increased aggressiveness also assists female brown bears in better ensuring the survival of their young to reproductive age. Why are grizzly bears more aggressive than our black bears?. Digital Collegian. April 27, 2004 Mothers defending cubs are the most prone to attacking, being responsible for 70% of brown bear-caused human fatalities in North America. Rogers, Lynn L. How Dangerous are Black Bears. bear.org 

===Attacks on humans===
Drum or barrel trap used to safely relocate bears; currently parked adjacent to a building in Grand Teton National Park in Wyoming, United States
Brown bears seldom attack humans on sight, and usually avoid people. They are, however, unpredictable in temperament, and may attack if they are surprised or feel threatened. Herrero, Stepehen (1985) Bear Attacks: Their Causes and Avoidance, Hurtig Publishers Ltd./ Edmonton Sows with cubs account for the majority of injuries and fatalities in North America. Habituated or food-conditioned bears can also be dangerous, as their long-term exposure to humans causes them to lose their natural shyness, and, in some cases, to associate humans with food. Small parties of one or two people are more often attacked than large groups, with only one known case of an attack on a group of six or more. In that instance, it is thought that due to surprise, the bear may not have recognized the size of the group. Alaska bear attack: NOLS kids did a 'phenomenal job', Craig Medred, Alaska Dispatch, 26 July 2011 In the majority of attacks resulting in injury, brown bears precede the attack with a growl or huffing sound, In contrast to injuries caused by American black bears, which are usually minor, brown bear attacks tend to result in serious injury and, in some cases, death. Brown bears seem to confront humans as they would when fighting other bears: they rise up on their hind legs, and attempt to "disarm" their victims by biting and holding on to the lower jaw to avoid being bitten in turn. Due to the bears' enormous physical strength, even a single bite or swipe can be deadly, as in tigers, with some human victims having had their heads completely crushed by a bear bite. '&#39;The living animals of the world; a popular natural history with one thousand illustrations'&#39; Volume 1: Mammals, by Cornish, C. J. (Charles John), 18581906; Selous, Frederick Courteney, 18511917; Johnston, Harry Hamilton, Sir, 18581927; Maxwell, Herbert, Sir, published by New York, Dodd, Mead and Company. Archive.org. Retrieved 2011-09-15. Most attacks occur in the months of July, August, and September, the time when the number of outdoor recreationalists, such as hikers or hunters, is higher. People who assert their presence through noises tend to be less vulnerable, as they alert bears to their presence. In direct confrontations, people who run are statistically more likely to be attacked than those who stand their ground. Violent encounters with brown bears usually last only a few minutes, though they can be prolonged if the victims fight back. 

Attacks on humans are considered extremely rare in the former Soviet Union, though exceptions exist in districts where they are not pursued by hunters. Siberian bears, for example, tend to be much bolder toward humans than their shyer, more persecuted European counterparts. In 2008, a platinum mining compound in the Olyotorsky district of northern Kamchatka was besieged by a group of 30 bears, who killed two guards and prevented workers from leaving their homes. Bears besiege Russian mine after killing guards. The Times. 24 July 2008 Ten people a year are killed by brown bears in Russia. In Scandinavia, only three fatal attacks were recorded in the 20th century. 

In Japan, a large brown bear nicknamed "Kesagake" (, "kesa-style slasher") made history for causing the worst bear attack in Japanese history at Tomamae, Hokkaid during numerous encounters during December, 1915. It killed seven people (including one pregnant woman) and wounded three others (with possibly another three previous fatalities to its credit) before being gunned down after a large-scale beast-hunt. Today, there is still a shrine at Rokusensawa (), where the event took place, in memory of the victims of the incident.

Within Yellowstone National Park, injuries caused by grizzly attacks in developed areas averaged approximately one per year during the 1930s through to the 1950s, though it increased to four per year during the 1960s. They then decreased to one injury every two years during the 1970s. Between 1980 and 2002, there have been only two human injuries caused by grizzly bears in a developed area. Though grizzly attacks were rare in the backcountry before 1970, the number of attacks increased to an average of approximately one per year during the 1970s, 1980s, and 1990s. Bear Caused Human Injuries and Deaths In Yellowstone National Park. Yellowstone-bearman.com (2000-01-01). Retrieved 2011-09-15. 

===History of defense from bears===
A study by US and Canadian researchers has found pepper spray to be more effective at stopping aggressive bear behavior than guns, working in 92% of studied incidents versus 67% for guns. Carrying pepper spray is highly recommended by many authorities when traveling in bear country; however, carrying two means of deterrent, one of which is a large caliber gun, is also advised. Solid shotgun slugs, or three buckshot rounds, or a pistol of .44 caliber or more is suggested if a heavy hunting rifle is not available. Guns remain a viable, last resort option to be used in defense of life from aggressive bears. Too often, people do not carry a proper caliber weapon to neutralize the bear. According to the Alaska Science Center, a 12 gauge shotgun with slugs has been the most effective weapon. There have been fewer injuries as a result of only carrying lethal loads in the shotgun, as opposed to deterrent rounds. State of Alaska Defense of Life or Property (DLP) laws require one to report the kill to authorities, and salvage the hide, skull, and claws. 

Campers are often told to wear bright colored red ribbons and bells, and carry whistles to ward off bears. They are told to look for grizzly scat in camping areas, and be careful to carry the bells and whistles in those areas. Grizzly scat is difficult to differentiate from black bear scat, as diet is in a constant state of flux depending on the availability of seasonal food items. If a bear is killed near camp, the bear's carcass must be adequately disposed of, including entrails and blood, if possible. Failure to move the carcass has often resulted in it attracting other bears and further exacerbating a bad situation. Moving camps immediately is another recommended method.

A page at the State of Alaska Department of Natural Resources website offers information about how to "select a gun that will stop a bear (12-gauge shotgun or .300 mag rifle)." This information is helpful for people venturing into "bear country", regardless of state or country,

===Culture===
"The Story of the Three Bears", illustration from Childhood's Favorites and Fairy Stories
Brown bears often figure into the literature of Europe and North America, in particular that which is written for children. "The Brown Bear of Norway" is a Scottish fairy tale telling the adventures of a girl who married a prince magically turned into a bear, and who managed to get him back into a human form by the force of her love and after many trials and difficulties. With "Goldilocks and the Three Bears", a story from England, the three bears are usually depicted as brown bears. In German speaking countries, children are often told the fairytale of Snow White and Rose Red; the handsome prince in this tale has been transfigured into a brown bear. In the United States, parents often read their preschool age children the book Brown Bear, Brown Bear, What Do You See? to teach them their colors and how they are associated with different animals.

The Russian bear is a common national personification for Russia (as well as the former Soviet Union). The brown bear is also Finland's national animal.

Berni is a brown bear mascot of German football club Bayern Munich
The Bundesliga club Bayern Munich has a brown bear mascot named Berni.

The National Football League (NFL) franchise in Chicago, Illinois, is named the Bears. In this context, no differentiation between black and brown bears is needed.

The school mascot for George Fox University, Brown University, the University of California, Los Angeles, the University of California, Berkeley, the University of California, Riverside, and the University of Alberta is the brown bear.

The coat of arms of Madrid depicts a bear reaching up into a madroo or strawberry tree (Arbutus unedo) to eat some of its fruit, whereas the Swiss city of Bern's coat of arms also depicts a bear and the city's name is popularly thought to derive from the German word for bear.

In the town of Prats de Moll, in Vallespir, southern France, a "bear festival" (festa de l's) is celebrated annually at the beginning of spring, in which the locals dress up as bears, cover themselves with soot or coal and oil, and "attack" the onlookers, attempting to get everyone dirty. The festival ends with the ball de l'os (bear dance).

The grizzly bear is the state animal of Montana. The California golden bear is the state animal of California. Both animals are sub-species of the brown bear.

==Legal status==
* The grizzly bear, sometimes called the silvertip bear, is listed as threatened in the contiguous United States. It is slowly repopulating in areas where it was previously extirpated, though it is still vulnerable.
* The California golden bear (Ursus arctos californicus ) disappeared from the state of California in 1922, when the last one was shot in Tulare County. It is the official state animal. 
* The Mexican grizzly bear is listed as an endangered species, but it may be extinct.
* In Canada, it is listed as vulnerable in Alberta, British Columbia, Northwest Territories, and Yukon Territory. Prairie populations of grizzly bear are listed as extirpated in Alberta, Manitoba, and Saskatchewan.
* The brown bear is a European Protected Species, given protection throughout the European Union.
* The brown bear is the national animal of Finland.
* The brown bear is depicted on the reverse of the Croatian 5 kuna coin, minted since 1993.

==See also==
* European brown bear
* Cantabrian brown bear
* Environmental Centre ARCTUROS
* List of fatal bear attacks in North America
* Sankebetsu brown bear incident
* Kodiak bear
* Grizzly bear
* Country Bear Jamboree (A Disney attraction)

==References==

==Bibliography==
* 

==External links==

* Brown Bear profile from National Geographic
* Bear Hunting Altered Genetics More Than Ice Age Isolation
* Ancient Fossil Offers New Clues To Brown Bears Past

Bear Brown

Bear Brown
Bear Brown



[[BCS theory]]

BCS theory is the first microscopic theory of superconductivity since its discovery in 1911. The theory describes superconductivity as a microscopic effect caused by a condensation of Cooper pairs into a boson-like state. The theory is also used in nuclear physics to describe the pairing interaction between nucleons in an atomic nucleus. It was proposed by John Bardeen, Leon Neil Cooper, and John Robert Schrieffer ("BCS") in 1957; they received the Nobel prize in physics for this theory in 1972.

==History==
Rapid progress in understanding superconductivity gained momentum in the mid-1950s. It began with the 1948 paper, "On the Problem of the Molecular Theory of Superconductivity", where Fritz London proposed that the phenomenological London equations may be consequences of the coherence of a quantum state. In 1953, Brian Pippard, motivated by penetration experiments, proposed that this would modify the London equations via a new scale parameter called the coherence length. John Bardeen then argued in the 1955 paper, "Theory of the Meissner Effect in Superconductors", that such a modification naturally occurs in a theory with an energy gap. The key ingredient was Leon Neil Cooper's calculation of the bound states of electrons subject to an attractive force in his 1956 paper, "Bound Electron Pairs in a Degenerate Fermi Gas". 

In 1957 Bardeen and Cooper assembled these ingredients and constructed such a theory, the BCS theory, with Robert Schrieffer. The theory was first published in April 1957 in the letter, "Microscopic theory of superconductivity". The demonstration that the phase transition is second order, that it reproduces the Meissner effect and the calculations of specific heats and penetration depths appeared in the December 1957 article, "Theory of superconductivity". They received the Nobel Prize in Physics in 1972 for this theory. The 1950 Landau-Ginzburg theory of superconductivity is not cited in either of the BCS papers.

In 1986, high-temperature superconductivity was discovered (i.e. superconductivity at temperatures considerably above the previous limit of about 30 K; up to about 130 K). It is believed that BCS theory alone cannot explain this phenomenon and that other effects are at play. These effects are still not yet fully understood; it is possible that they even control superconductivity at low temperatures for some materials.

==Overview==
At sufficiently low temperatures, electrons near the Fermi surface become unstable against the formation of Cooper pairs. Cooper showed such binding will occur in the presence of an attractive potential, no matter how weak. In conventional superconductors, an attraction is generally attributed to an electron-lattice interaction. The BCS theory, however, requires only that the potential be attractive, regardless of its origin. In the BCS framework, superconductivity is a macroscopic effect which results from the condensation of Cooper pairs. These have some bosonic properties, while bosons, at sufficiently low temperature, can form a large BoseEinstein condensate. Superconductivity was simultaneously explained by Nikolay Bogolyubov, by means of the so-called Bogoliubov transformations.

In many superconductors, the attractive interaction between electrons (necessary for pairing) is brought about indirectly by the interaction between the electrons and the vibrating crystal lattice (the phonons). Roughly speaking the picture is the following:

:An electron moving through a conductor will attract nearby positive charges in the lattice. This deformation of the lattice causes another electron, with opposite spin, to move into the region of higher positive charge density. The two electrons then become correlated. Because there are a lot of such electron pairs in a superconductor, these pairs overlap very strongly and form a highly collective condensate. In this "condensed" state, the breaking of one pair will change the energy of the entire condensate - not just a single electron, or a single pair. Thus, the energy required to break any single pair is related to the energy required to break all of the pairs (or more than just two electrons). Because the pairing increases this energy barrier, kicks from oscillating atoms in the conductor (which are small at sufficiently low temperatures) are not enough to affect the condensate as a whole, or any individual "member pair" within the condensate. Thus the electrons stay paired together and resist all kicks, and the electron flow as a whole (the current through the superconductor) will not experience resistance. Thus, the collective behavior of the condensate is a crucial ingredient necessary for superconductivity.

===More details===
BCS theory starts from the assumption that there is some attraction between electrons, which can overcome the Coulomb repulsion. In most materials (in low temperature superconductors), this attraction is brought about indirectly by the coupling of electrons to the crystal lattice (as explained above). However, the results of BCS theory do not depend on the origin of the attractive interaction. For instance, Cooper pairs have been observed in ultracold gases of fermions where a homogeneous magnetic field has been tuned to their Feshbach resonance. The original results of BCS (discussed below) described an s-wave superconducting state, which is the rule among low-temperature superconductors but is not realized in many unconventional superconductors such as the d-wave high-temperature superconductors.
Extensions of BCS theory exist to describe these other cases, although they are insufficient to completely describe the observed features of high-temperature superconductivity.

BCS is able to give an approximation for the quantum-mechanical many-body state of the
system of (attractively interacting) electrons inside the metal. This state is
now known as the BCS state. In the normal state of a metal, electrons move independently, whereas in the BCS state, they are bound into Cooper pairs by the attractive interaction.
The BCS formalism is based on the reduced potential for the electrons attraction.
Within this potential, a variational ansatz for the wave function is proposed. This ansatz
was later shown to be exact in the dense limit of pairs. Note that the continuous crossover between the dilute and dense regimes of attracting pairs of fermions is still an open problem, which now attracts a lot of attention within the field of ultracold gases.

=== Underlying evidence ===
The hyperphysics website pages at Georgia State University summarize some key background to BCS theory as follows: http://hyperphysics.phy-astr.gsu.edu/hbase/solids/bcs.html 

:* Evidence of a band gap at the Fermi level (described as "a key piece in the puzzle") - the existence of a critical temperature and critical magnetic field implied a band gap, and suggested a phase transition, but single electrons are forbidden from condensing to the same energy level by the Pauli exclusion principle. The site comments that "a drastic change in conductivity demanded a drastic change in electron behavior". Conceivably, pairs of electrons might perhaps act like bosons instead, which are bound by different condensate rules and do not have the same limitation. 
:*Isotope effect on the critical temperature, suggesting lattice interactions.
:* An exponential rise in heat capacity near the critical temperature for some superconductors - An exponential increase in heat capacity near the critical temperature also suggests an energy bandgap for the superconducting material. As superconducting vanadium is warmed toward its critical temperature, its heat capacity increases massively in a very few degrees; this suggests an energy gap being bridged by thermal energy.
:* The lessening of the measured energy gap towards the critical temperature - this suggests a type of situation where some kind of binding energy exists but it is gradually weakened as the critical temperature is approached. A binding energy suggests two or more particles or other entities that are bound together in the superconducting state. This helped to support the idea of bound particles - specifically electron pairs - and together with the above helped to paint a general picture of paired electrons and their lattice interactions.

==Successes of the BCS theory==
BCS derived several important theoretical predictions that are independent of the details of the interaction, since the quantitative predictions mentioned below hold for any sufficiently weak attraction between the electrons and this last condition is fulfilled for many low temperature superconductors - the so-called weak-coupling case. These have been confirmed in numerous experiments:
* The electrons are bound into Cooper pairs, and these pairs are correlated due to the Pauli exclusion principle for the electrons, from which they are constructed. Therefore, in order to break a pair, one has to change energies of all other pairs. This means there is an energy gap for single-particle excitation, unlike in the normal metal (where the state of an electron can be changed by adding an arbitrarily small amount of energy). This energy gap is highest at low temperatures but vanishes at the transition temperature when superconductivity ceases to exist. The BCS theory gives an expression that shows how the gap grows with the strength of the attractive interaction and the (normal phase) single particle density of states at the Fermi level. Furthermore, it describes how the density of states is changed on entering the superconducting state, where there are no electronic states any more at the Fermi level. The energy gap is most directly observed in tunneling experiments Ivar Giaever - Nobel Lecture. Nobelprize.org. Retrieved 16 Dec 2010. http://nobelprize.org/nobel_prizes/physics/laureates/1973/giaever-lecture.html and in reflection of microwaves from superconductors.
* BCS theory predicts the dependence of the value of the energy gap &Delta; at temperature T on the critical temperature Tc. The ratio between the value of the energy gap at zero temperature and the value of the superconducting transition temperature (expressed in energy units) takes the universal value 
:: 
:independent of material. Near the critical temperature the relation asymptotes to 
::
:which is of the form suggested the previous year by M. J. Buckingham 
 based on the fact that the superconducting phase transition is second order, that the superconducting phase has a mass gap and on Blevins, Gordy and Fairbank's experimental results the previous year on the absorption of millimeter waves by superconducting tin.
* Due to the energy gap, the specific heat of the superconductor is suppressed strongly (exponentially) at low temperatures, there being no thermal excitations left. However, before reaching the transition temperature, the specific heat of the superconductor becomes even higher than that of the normal conductor (measured immediately above the transition) and the ratio of these two values is found to be universally given by 2.5.
* BCS theory correctly predicts the Meissner effect, i.e. the expulsion of a magnetic field from the superconductor and the variation of the penetration depth (the extent of the screening currents flowing below the metal's surface) with temperature. This had been demonstrated experimentally by Walther Meissner and Robert Ochsenfeld in their 1933 article Ein neuer Effekt bei Eintritt der Supraleitfhigkeit.
* It also describes the variation of the critical magnetic field (above which the superconductor can no longer expel the field but becomes normal conducting) with temperature. BCS theory relates the value of the critical field at zero temperature to the value of the transition temperature and the density of states at the Fermi level.
* In its simplest form, BCS gives the superconducting transition temperature Tcin terms of the electron-phonon coupling potential V and the Debye cutoff energy ED: 
::
:where N(0) is the electronic density of states at the Fermi level. For more details, see Cooper pairs.
* The BCS theory reproduces the isotope effect, which is the experimental observation that for a given superconducting material, the critical temperature is inversely proportional to the mass of the isotope used in the material. The isotope effect was reported by two groups on 24 March 1950, who discovered it independently working with different mercury isotopes, although a few days before publication they learned of each other's results at the ONR conference in Atlanta. The two groups are Emanuel Maxwell, who published his results in Isotope Effect in the Superconductivity of Mercury and C. A. Reynolds, B. Serin, W. H. Wright, and L. B. Nesbitt who published their results 10 pages later in Superconductivity of Isotopes of Mercury. The choice of isotope ordinarily has little effect on the electrical properties of a material, but does affect the frequency of lattice vibrations. This effect suggests that superconductivity is related to vibrations of the lattice. This is incorporated into BCS theory, where lattice vibrations yield the binding energy of electrons in a Cooper pair.

==See also==
* Magnesium diboride, considered a BCS superconductor
* Quasiparticle

==References==

The BCS Papers:
* L. N. Cooper, "Bound Electron Pairs in a Degenerate Fermi Gas", Phys. Rev 104, 1189 - 1190 (1956).
* J. Bardeen, L. N. Cooper, and J. R. Schrieffer, "Microscopic Theory of Superconductivity", Phys. Rev. 106, 162 - 164 (1957).
* J. Bardeen, L. N. Cooper, and J. R. Schrieffer, "Theory of Superconductivity", Phys. Rev. 108, 1175 (1957).

==Further reading==
* John Robert Schrieffer, Theory of Superconductivity, (1964), ISBN 0-7382-0120-0
* Michael Tinkham, Introduction to Superconductivity, ISBN 0-486-43503-2
* Pierre-Gilles de Gennes, Superconductivity of Metals and Alloys, ISBN 0-7382-0101-4.
* 

==External links==
* ScienceDaily: Physicist Discovers Exotic Superconductivity (University of Arizona) August 17, 2006
* Hyperphysics page on BCS 
* BCS History 
* Dance Analogy of BCS theory as explained by Bob Schrieffer (audio recording)



[[Biathlon]]

Biathlon is a winter sport that combines cross-country skiing and rifle shooting. A variant is summer biathlon, which combines cross-country running with rifle shooting. 

==History==

This sport has its origins in an exercise for Norwegian people, as an alternative training for the military.
One of the world's first known ski clubs, the Trysil Rifle and Ski Club, was formed in Norway in 1861 to promote national defense at the local level.

Called military patrol, the combination of skiing and shooting was contested at the Winter Olympic Games in 1924, and then demonstrated in 1928, 1936, and 1948, but did not regain Olympic recognition then, as the small number of competing countries disagreed on the rules. During the mid-1950s, however, biathlon was introduced into the Soviet and Swedish winter sport circuits and was widely enjoyed by the public. This newfound popularity aided the effort of having biathlon gain entry into the Winter Olympics.

The first World Championship in biathlon was held in 1958 in Austria, and in 1960 the sport was finally included in the Olympic Games. At Albertville in 1992, women were first allowed in Olympic biathlon.

The competitions from 1958 to 1965 used high-power centerfire cartridges, such as the .30-06 Springfield and the 7.62x51mm NATO, before the .22 Long Rifle rimfire cartridge was standardized in 1978. The ammunition was carried in a belt worn around the competitor's waist. The sole event was the men's 20 km individual, encompassing four separate ranges and firing distances of 100 m, 150 m, 200 m, and 250 m. The target distance was reduced to 150 m with the addition of the relay in 1966. The shooting range was further reduced to 50 m in 1978 with the mechanical targets making their debut at the 1980 Winter Olympics in Lake Placid.

==Governing body==
In 1948, the Union Internationale de Pentathlon Moderne et Biathlon (UIPMB) was founded, to standardise the rules for biathlon and modern pentathlon. In 1993, the biathlon branch of the UIPMB created the International Biathlon Union (IBU), which officially separated from the UIPMB in 1998.

Presidents of the UIPMB/IBU:
* 19471949: Tom Wiborn (Sweden)
* 19491960: Gustaf Dyrssen (Sweden)
* 19601988: Sven Thofelt, (Sweden)
* 19881992: Igor Novikov (USSR/Russia)
* Since 1992: Anders Besseberg (Norway)

==Championships==
The following articles list mr international biathlon events and medalists. Contrary to the Olympics and World Championships (BWCH), the World Cup (BWC) is an entire winter season of (mostly) weekly races, where the medalists are those with the highest sums of World Cup points at the end of the season.
* Biathlon at the Winter Olympics
* Biathlon World Championships
* Biathlon World Cup
* Biathlon Junior World Championships

==Rules and equipment==

 

The complete rules of biathlon are given in the official IBU rule books. IBU rule books 

===Basic concepts===

A biathlon competition consists of a race in which contestants ski around a cross-country trail system, and where the total distance is broken up by either two or four shooting rounds, half in prone position, the other half standing. Depending on the shooting performance, extra distance or time is added to the contestant's total running distance/time. As in most races, the contestant with the shortest total time wins.

For each shooting round, the biathlete must hit five targets; each missed target must be "atoned for" in one of three ways, depending on the competition format:
* by skiing around a 150 m penalty loop, typically taking 2030 seconds for top-level biathletes to complete (running time depending on weather/snow conditions),
* by having one minute added to a skier's total time, or
* by having to use an "extra cartridge" (placed at the shooting range) to finish off the target; only three such "extras" are available for each round, and a penalty loop must be made for each of the targets left standing.

In order to keep track of the contestants' progress and relative standing throughout a race, split times (intermediate times) are taken at several points along the skiing track and upon finishing each shooting round. The large display screens commonly set up at biathlon arenas, as well as the information graphics shown as part of the TV picture, will typically list the split time of the fastest contestant at each intermediate point and the times and time differences to the closest runners-up.

===Skiing details===
All cross-country skiing techniques are permitted in biathlon, which means that the free technique is usually the preferred one, being the fastest. No equipment other than skis and ski poles may be used to move along the track. Minimum ski length is the height of the skier less 4 cm. The rifle has to be carried by the skier during the race at all times.

===Shooting details===
The biathlete carries a small bore rifle, which weighs at least 3.5 kg, excluding ammunition and magazines. The rifles use .22 LR ammunition and are bolt action or Fortner (straight-pull bolt) action.

The target range shooting distance is 50 m. There are five circular targets to be hit in each shooting round. When shooting in the prone position the target diameter is 45 mm; when shooting in the standing position the target diameter is 115 mm. On all modern biathlon ranges, the targets are self-indicating, in that they flip from black to white when hit, giving the biathlete as well as the spectators instant visual feedback for each shot fired.

==Competition format==

===Individual===
The 20 km individual race (15 km for women) is the oldest biathlon event; the distance is skied over five laps. The biathlete shoots four times at any shooting lane, Even in English-speaking countries such as Canada and the United States each country may use different terms for the same thing in biathlon. For example: Stage (USA) vs. Bout (Canada), Shooting Point (USA) vs. Shooting Lane (Canada) in the order of prone, standing, prone, standing, totaling 20 targets. For each missed target a fixed penalty time, usually one minute, is added to the skiing time of the biathlete. Competitors' starts are staggered, normally by 30 seconds.

===Sprint===
The sprint is 10 km for men and 7.5 km for women; the distance is skied over three laps. The biathlete shoots twice at any shooting lane, once prone and once standing, for a total of 10 shots. For each miss, a penalty loop of 150 m must be skied before the race can be continued. As in the individual competition, the biathletes start in intervals.

===Pursuit===
Olympic gold medalists Olga Zaitseva and Andrea Henkel at the World Cup pursuit race in Oberhof, 2013.

In a pursuit, biathletes' starts are separated by their time differences from a previous race, To be precise; the pursuit competition start intervals are determined by common rounding to the nearest whole second of the biathletes' time differences from the previous race the amount of time each biathlete lagged after the winner to the finish line. most commonly a sprint. The contestant crossing the finish line first is the winner. The distance is 12.5 km for men and 10 km for women, skied over five laps; there are four shooting bouts (two prone, two standing, in that order), and each miss means a penalty loop of 150 m. To prevent awkward and/or dangerous crowding of the skiing loops, and overcapacity at the shooting range, World Cup Pursuits are held with only the 60 top ranking biathletes after the preceding race. The biathletes shoot on a first-come, first-served basis at the lane corresponding to the position they arrived for all shooting bouts.

===Mass start===
In the mass start, all biathletes start at the same time and the first across the finish line wins. In this 15 km for men or 12.5 km for women competition, the distance is skied over five laps; there are four bouts of shooting (two prone, two standing, in that order) with the first shooting bout being at the lane corresponding to the competitor's bib number (Bib #10 shoots at lane #10 regardless of position in race), with the rest of the shooting bouts being on a first-come, first-served basis (If a competitor arrives at the lane in fifth place, they shoot at lane 5). As in sprint and pursuit, competitors must ski one 150 m penalty loop for each miss. Here again, to avoid unwanted congestion, World Cup Mass starts are held with only the 30 top ranking athletes on the start line (half that of the Pursuit as here all contestants start simultaneously).

===Relay===
The relay teams consist of four biathletes, who each ski 7.5 km (men) or 6 km (women), each leg skied over three laps, with two shooting rounds; one prone, one standing. For every round of five targets there are eight bullets available, though the last three can only be single-loaded manually one at a time from spare round holders or bullets deposited by the competitor into trays or onto the mat at the firing line. If after eight bullets there are still misses, one 150 m (490 ft) penalty loop must be taken for each missed target remaining. The first-leg participants start all at the same time, and as in cross-country skiing relays, every athlete of a team must touch the team's next-leg participant to perform a valid changeover. On the first shooting stage of the first leg, the participant must shoot in the lane corresponding to their bib number (Bib #10 shoots at lane #10 regardless of position in race), then for the remainder of the relay, the relay team shoots on a first-come, first-served basis (arrive at the range in fifth place, shoot at lane 5).

===Mixed relay===
The most recent addition to the number of biathlon competition variants, the mixed relay is similar to the ordinary relay but the teams are composed of two women and two men. Legs 1 and 2 are done by the women, legs 3 and 4 by the men. The women's legs are 6 km and men's legs are 7.5 km as in ordinary relay competitions.

===Team (obsolete)===
A team consists of four biathletes, but unlike the relay competition, all team members start at the same time. Two athletes must shoot in the prone shooting round, the other two in the standing round. In case of a miss, the two non-shooting biathletes must ski a penalty loop of 150 m (490 ft). The skiers must enter the shooting area together, and must also finish within 15 seconds of each other; otherwise a time penalty of one minute is added to the total time. Since 2004, this race format has been obsolete at the World Cup level.

==Broadcasting==
Biathlon events are broadcast most regularly where the sport enjoys its greatest popularity, namely Germany (ARD, ZDF), Austria (ORF), Norway (NRK), Finland (YLE), Estonia (ETV), Latvia (LTV), Croatia (HRT), Poland (TVP), Sweden (SVT), Russia (Russia 2, Channel One), Belarus (TVR), Slovenia (RTV), Bosnia and Herzegovina (BHRT), Bulgaria (BNT), and South Korea (KBS); it is broadcast on European-wide Eurosport, which also broadcasts to the Asia-Pacific region. World Cup races are streamed (without commentary) via the IBU website. Startseite - www.biathlonworld.com 

The broadcast distribution being one indicator, the constellation of a sport's main sponsors usually gives a similar, and correlated, indication of popularity: for biathlon, these are the Germany-based companies E.ON Ruhrgas (energy), Krombacher (beer), and Viessmann (boilers and other heating systems).
United States biathlete Jeremy Teela at the 2002 Winter Olympics.

==Biathlon records and statistics==
Biathlon records, rules, news, videos, and statistics for many years back are available at the IBU (International Biathlon Union) web site Biathlonworld.Com

==Biathlon variants==
Two common variations on traditional winter biathlon are summer biathlon, where skiing is replaced by a cross-country run, and archery biathlon (ski archery), where the rifle is replaced by a recurve bow.

There have also been summer competitions in roller-ski biathlon, mountain bike biathlon, orienteering biathlon, and run archery. Primitive Biathlon uses snowshoes and muzzleloaders.

The Boy Scouts of America offers a Bikeathlon variant at their national Scout jamboree that mixes BMX biking with air rifle shooting at biathlon type targets. :: Crosman: Summer House - Bikathalon:: 

Cadets Canada also offers biathlon to cadets across Canada, with three stages: zones, provincial, and national. Zone competitions are occasionally, due to lack of snow in some southern areas, held as summer biathlon. A .22LR caliber rifle is used at all levels. Races are shorter than world class events. National Cadet Biathlon Championship - 2007 - Championnat national de biathlon des cadets 

The World Police and Fire Games offer a summer variant which combines cross-country running with service pistol shooting.

The Russian Military runs tank biathlon competitions.

==See also==
* Biathlon World Cup
* Biathlon World Championships
* List of Olympic medalists in biathlon
* Paralympic biathlon

Biathlon's two sports disciplines:
* Skiing and skiing topics
* Rifle shooting sports

Other multi-discipline sports (otherwise unrelated to biathlon):
* Duathlon
* Nordic Combined
* Triathlon
* Pentathlon
* Modern pentathlon
* Heptathlon
* Decathlon
* Chess boxing
* Omnium (track cycling)

==Notes==

==External links==

* Biathlonworld.Com  A cooperation between IBU and EBU; with race results/statistics, TV schedules, live competition results, and so on.
* Belarussian Biathlon Union 
* Russian Biathlon Union 
* Russian Biathlon Union 
* Biathlon Canada
* U.S. Biathlon Association
* U.S. Archery Biathlon
* History of Biathlon
* Veltins Biathlon World Team Challenge
* Biathlon on OLN TV
* Biathlon on DVD
* Biathlon Russia
* Biathlon Ukraine 
* Biathlon Ukraine 
* BiathlonFrance.com
* Biathlon history 
* Popular Norwegian site 

 



[[Bubble and squeak]]

Bubble and squeak topped with poached egg

Bubble and squeak is a traditional English dish made with the shallow-fried leftover vegetables from a roast dinner. The main ingredients are potato and cabbage, but carrots, peas, Brussels sprouts, or any other leftover vegetables can be added. The chopped vegetables (and cold chopped meat if used) are fried in a pan together with mashed potatoes or crushed roast potatoes until the mixture is well-cooked and brown on the sides. The dish is so named because it makes bubbling and squeaking sounds during the cooking process. It is often served with cold meat from the Sunday roast, and pickles or brown sauce, or as an accompaniment to a full English breakfast.

The meat was traditionally added to the bubble and squeak itself, although nowadays it is more commonly made without meat. The earliest known recipe was by Maria Rundell in 1806. Rundell, Maria Eliza Ketelby (1808). Bubble and Squeak. In A new system of domestic cookery:Third edition. p. 42. Google Book Search. Retrieved on January 6, 2011. 

The name bubble and squeak is used primarily in England (for Scotland and Ireland Scottish Recipes: Rumbledethumps Recipe see 'Similar dishes'), and it may also be understood in parts of some other Commonwealth countries and the United States. Hearty Luncheon and Supper Dishes Reading Eagle, Jul 17, 1913 Forbes Lifestyle, Wine and Food Forbes, Nov 17, 2004 

Bubble and squeak was a popular dish during World War II, as it was an easy way of using leftovers during a period when most foods were subject to rationing. In more recent times, prepared frozen and tinned versions have become available.

Bubble and squeak is also Cockney rhyming slang for Greek.

The company mascots of UK based gadget insurance company Protect Your Bubble are named after bubble and squeak.

==Similar dishes==
* Panackelty, from North East England
* Colcannon, from Ireland
* Bauernfrhstck, from Germany and Austria
* Rumbledethumps, stovies and clapshot from Scotland
* Pyttipanna, Pyttipanne & Pyttipannu  Swedish, Norwegian and Finnish "small pieces in pan"
* Biksemad, from Denmark
* Trinxat, from the La Cerdanya region of Catalonia, northeast Spain, and Andorra
* Roupa Velha (Portuguese for "old clothes"), from Portugal, often made from leftovers from Cozido  Portuguesa. In Spain it is called Ropa Vieja and is made from the remains of the Cocido
* Stamppot, from the Netherlands
* Stoemp from Belgium
* Hash, from the United States
* Calentado, from Colombia
* Also see hash browns and potato cake entries

==References==

==External links==



[[Buddy Holly]]

Charles Hardin Holley (September 7, 1936  February 3, 1959), known professionally as Buddy Holly, was an American musician and singer-songwriter and a pioneer of rock and roll. Although his success lasted only a year and a half before his death in an airplane crash, Holly is described by critic Bruce Eder as "the single most influential creative force in early rock and roll." His works and innovations inspired and influenced contemporary and later musicians, notably the Beatles, Elvis Costello, the Rolling Stones, and Bob Dylan, and exerted a profound influence on popular music. NPR article: "Buddy Holly: 50 Years After The Music Died". In 2004, Rolling Stone magazine ranked Holly number 13 on its list of the 100 greatest artists of all time. 

==Early life==
Charles Hardin Holley was born on September 7, 1936, in Lubbock, Texas, to Lawrence Odell and Ella Pauline (Drake) Holley. In Philip Norman's biography, it is stated that his mother's family claimed to be descended from the English navigator Francis Drake.

Holly was always called "Buddy" by his family. The youngest of three siblings, his older brothers Larry and Travis taught him to play a variety of instruments, including the guitar, four-string banjo and lap steel guitar. At the age of five, Holly's young voice and exuberance won him a talent contest singing a then-popular song, "Have You Ever Gone Sailing (Down the River of Memories)." History of Rock & Roll. By Thomas E. Larson. Kendall/Hunt Publishing Company, Dubuque, Iowa. Copyright 2004. Page 43 In 1949, while still retaining his youthful soprano voice, he recorded a bluesy solo rendering of Hank Snow's "My Two Timin' Woman" on a wire recorder borrowed by a friend who worked in a music shop. 

In 1952, he met Bob Montgomery at Hutchinson Junior High School. They shared an interest in music, and teamed up as "Buddy and Bob". Initially influenced by bluegrass, they sang harmony duets at local clubs and high school talent shows. The duo performed on a local radio station KDAV Sunday broadcast that made them a top local act. Hutchinson Junior High School now has a mural honoring Holly, and Lubbock High School, where he sang in the school choir, also honors the musician. 

==Career==
===The Crickets===

thumb
Holly saw Elvis Presley sing in Lubbock in 1955, and began to incorporate a rockabilly style, similar to the Sun Records sound, which had a strong rhythm acoustic and slap bass. On October 15, 1955, Holly, along with Bob Montgomery and Larry Welborn, opened the bill for Presley in Lubbock, catching the eye of a Nashville talent scout. Holly's transition to rock continued when he opened for Bill Haley & His Comets at a local show organized by Eddie Crandall, the manager for Marty Robbins. 

Decca Records signed him to a contract in February 1956, following this performance, misspelling his name as "Holly". He thereafter adopted the misspelled name for his professional career. Holly formed his own band, later to be called The Crickets, consisting of Holly (lead guitar and vocals), Niki Sullivan (guitar), Joe B. Mauldin (bass), and Jerry Allison (drums). They went to Nashville for three recording sessions with producer Owen Bradley. Holly, however, chafed under a restrictive atmosphere that allowed him little input during the sessions. Among the tracks he recorded was an early version of "That'll Be The Day", which took its title from a line delivered repeatedly by John Wayne's character, Ethan Edwards, in the 1956 film The Searchers. This initial version of the song was played slower and about four steps higher than the later hit version. Decca released two Holly singles, "Blue Days, Black Nights" and "Modern Don Juan", that failed to make an impression. On January 22, 1957, Decca informed Holly his contract would not be renewed, insisting, however, that he could not record the same songs for anyone else for five years. Holly recorded his February 28, 1957 phone call with Decca, and the recording has survived: Buddy Holly On Line One. 

Norman Petty Recording Studios.
Holly then hired Norman Petty as manager, and the band began recording at Petty's studios in Clovis, New Mexico. Petty contacted music publishers and labels, and Brunswick Records, a subsidiary of Decca, signed the Crickets on March 19, 1957. Holly signed as a solo artist with another Decca subsidiary, Coral Records. This put him in the unusual position of having two recording contracts at the same time. 

On May 27, 1957, "That'll Be The Day" was released as a single, credited to the Crickets to try to bypass Decca's claimed legal rights. When the song became a hit, Decca decided not to press its claim. "That'll Be the Day" topped the Billboard US "Best Sellers in Stores" chart on September 23, and was No. 1 on the UK Singles Chart for three weeks in November. The Crickets performed "That'll Be the Day" and "Peggy Sue" on The Ed Sullivan Show on December 1, 1957 (followed by "Oh, Boy!" on Sunday, January 26, 1958). They also sang "Peggy Sue" on The Arthur Murray Party on December 29 and were given a polite introduction by Kathryn Murray. The kinescopes of these programs are the only record of their 1957 television appearances.

Buddy Holly appeared on American Bandstand hosted by Dick Clark on ABC twice, on August 26, 1957 and October 28, 1958 as well as Clark's primetime TV series Saturday Night Beechnut Show on October 25, 1958. 

Buddy Holly and the Crickets in their first Ed Sullivan Show appearance, on December 1.
Holly helped win over an all-black audience to rock and roll/rockabilly when the Crickets were booked at New York's Apollo Theater for August 1622, 1957. Unlike the immediate acceptance shown in the 1978 movie The Buddy Holly Story, it actually took several performances for the audience to warm up to him. In August 1957, the Crickets were the only white performers on a national tour including black neighborhood theaters. 

As Holly was signed both as a solo artist and a member of the Crickets, two debut albums were released: The "Chirping" Crickets on November 27, 1957 and Buddy Holly on February 20, 1958. All Music Guide to Country, Vladimir Bogdanov, Chris Woodstra, Stephen Thomas Erlewine, Backbeat Books, 2003, ISBN 0-87930-760-9 p 353. His singles "Peggy Sue" and "Oh Boy!", with backing vocals later dubbed on by The Picks, reached the top ten of United States and United Kingdom charts. Buddy Holly and the Crickets toured Australia in January 1958 and the UK in March. Their third and final album, That'll Be the Day, was put together from early recordings and was released in April.

Buddy Holly on the set of The Ed Sullivan Show with Ed Sullivan, Sunday, January 26, 1958.
In the liner notes to Buddy Holly: The Definitive Collection, Billy Altman notes that "Peggy Sue" was originally written as "Cindy Lou" (after Holly's niece), but Holly changed it prior to recording as a tip of the hat to Crickets drummer Jerry Allison's girlfriend, Peggy Sue Gerron. Allison wanted the song to be named after Gerron to make up for a recent fight. The two later married.

Holly wrote "True Love Ways" about his relationship with his wife, Maria Elena. The song was recorded on October 21, 1958 at Decca's Pythian Temple with Maria in attendance. Dick Jacob, Coral-Brunswick's new head of Artists and Repertoire, served as both producer and conductor of the song's 18-piece orchestra that included members of the New York Symphony Orchestra, NBC Television's house orchestra and Abraham "Boomie" Richman, formerly of Benny Goodman's band. 

===Holly in New York===
In June 1958, Holly met Maria Elena Santiago, a receptionist for Murray Deutch, an executive for New York publisher Peer-Southern Music. Norman, Philip (1996) Buddy Holly: The Definitive Biography of Buddy Holly, Macmillan: London Holly managed to have Santiago invited to a luncheon at Howard Johnson's, thanks to Deutch's secretary, Jo Harper. He asked her to have dinner with him that night at P. J. Clarke's. Holly proposed marriage to her on their very first date. "While we were having dinner, he got up and came back with his hands behind his back. He brought out a red rose and said, 'This is for you. Would you marry me?' Within the beautiful red rose, there was a ring. I melted." Holly went to her guardian's house the next morning and Maria came running at him and jumped into his arms, which was a sign to him that it was a "yes". 

They married in Lubbock on August 15, 1958, less than two months later. On what would have been their 50th wedding anniversary, she told the Lubbock Avalanche-Journal: I'd never had a boyfriend in my life. I'd never been on a date before. But when I saw Buddy, it was like magic. We had something special: love at first sight. It was like we were made for each other. He came into my life when I needed him, and I came into his. The newlyweds honeymooned in Acapulco. Maria Elena traveled on tours, doing everything from the laundry to equipment setup to ensuring the group got paid. However, many fans became aware of his marriage only after his death. 

The ambitious Holly became increasingly interested in the New York music/recording/publishing scene, while his bandmates wanted to go back home to Lubbock. As a result, the group split up in late 1958. The Hollys settled in Apartment 4H of the Brevoort Apartments located at 11 Fifth Avenue in Greenwich Village. Here he recorded the series of acoustic songs, including "Crying, Waiting, Hoping" and "What to Do," known as the "Apartment Tapes," which were released after his death. 

The Hollys frequented many of New York's music venues, including The Village Gate, Blue Note, Village Vanguard, and Johnny Johnson's. Maria Elena reported Buddy was keen to learn fingerstyle flamenco guitar, and would often visit her aunt's home to play the piano there. He wanted to develop collaborations between soul singers and rock 'n' roll, hoping to make an album with Ray Charles and gospel legend Mahalia Jackson. He also had ambitions to work in film, like Elvis Presley and Eddie Cochran, and registered for acting classes with Lee Strasburg's Actors Studio, where the likes of Marlon Brando and James Dean had trained. 

According to Billy Altman's liner notes to the Geffen/Universal compilation, Buddy Holly: The Definitive Collection, in addition to "True Love Ways", during the October 1958 sessions at Decca's Pythian Temple, Holly also recorded two other songs, "It Doesn't Matter Anymore" and "Raining In My Heart." The songs were firsts for Holly, not only in the use of orchestral backing players, but also the tracks were his first stereo recordings. They were also to be his last formal recording studio sessions.

Although Holly had already begun to become disillusioned with Norman Petty before meeting Maria Elena, it was through her and her aunt Provi, the head of Latin American music at Peer-Southern, that he began to fully realize what was going on with his manager, who was paying the band's royalties into his own company's account. Holly was having trouble getting his royalties from Petty, so he hired the noted lawyer Harold Orenstein at the recommendation of his friends the Everly Brothers, who had engaged Orenstein following disputes with their own manager, Wesley Rose. Yet, with the money still being withheld by Petty and with rent due, Buddy was forced to go back on the road. 

==Death==

Signpost near the Clear Lake crash site

Holly was offered a spot in the Winter Dance Party, a three-week tour across the Midwest opening on January 23, 1959, by the GAC agency, with other notable performers such as Dion and the Belmonts, Ritchie Valens, and J. P. "The Big Bopper" Richardson. He assembled a backing band consisting of Tommy Allsup (guitar), Waylon Jennings (bass) and Carl Bunch (drums), and billed them as The Crickets.

Following a performance on the tour at the Surf Ballroom in Clear Lake, Iowa on February 2, 1959, Holly chartered a small airplane to take him and two others nearby Mason City to Moorhead, Minnesota, the next stop on the tour. The charter's pilot, Roger Peterson, took off in a snowstorm even though he was not qualified to fly by instruments only. Following take off in the early morning hours of February 3, Holly, along with Ritchie Valens, J. P. "The Big Bopper" Richardson, and the pilot, were all killed when the plane crashed shortly after takeoff. Rock performer, archivist and music historian, Harry Hepcat, wrote in his article about Buddy Holly, "Although the plane came down only five miles northwest of the airport, no one saw or heard the crash. The bodies lay in the blowing snow through the night...... February indeed made us shiver, but it was more than the cold of February that third day of the month in 1959. It was the shiver of a greater, sometimes senseless, reality invading our sheltered, partying, teenaged life of the 50's." 

Bandmate Waylon Jennings had given up his seat on the ill-fated flight, causing Holly to jokingly tell Jennings, "I hope your ol' bus freezes up!" Jennings shot back facetiously, "Well, I hope your ol' plane crashes!" Reportedly, it was a statement that would haunt Jennings for decades. VH1's Behind the Music "The Day the Music Died" interview with Waylon Jennings 

Holly's headstone in the City of Lubbock Cemetery

Holly's funeral was held on February 7, 1959, at the Tabernacle Baptist Church in Lubbock. Lubbock Avalanche-Journal, Morning Edition, February 7, 1959, Section 1, Page 3 The service was officiated by Ben D. Johnson, who had presided at the Hollys' wedding just months earlier. The pallbearers were Jerry Allison, Joe B. Mauldin, Niki Sullivan, Bob Montgomery, Sonny Curtis and Phil Everly. Waylon Jennings was unable to attend due to his commitment to the still-touring Winter Dance Party. Holly's body was interred in the City of Lubbock Cemetery in the eastern part of the city. His headstone carries the correct spelling of his surname (Holley) and a carving of his Fender Stratocaster guitar.

Holly's wife, Mara Elena Holly, was pregnant at the time of the crash. She miscarried the day after learning of his death, reportedly due to psychological trauma. Because of this incident, authorities found it necessary, in the months following, to implement a policy against announcing victims' names until after families had first been informed. Mara Elena Holly did not attend the funeral, and has never visited the gravesite. She later told the Avalanche-Journal:

In a way, I blame myself. I was not feeling well when he left. I was two weeks pregnant, and I wanted Buddy to stay with me, but he had scheduled that tour. It was the only time I wasn't with him. And I blame myself because I know that, if only I had gone along, Buddy never would have gotten into that airplane. 

The first song to commemorate the musicians was "Three Stars" by Tommy Dee. This song was recorded just one day after the disaster occurred. Twelve years later, in 1971, Don McLean released his single, "American Pie, to commemorate Buddy Holly's death and further accentuate the loss of the United States' innocence. Don McLean's song began the reference to the tragedy as "The Day the Music Died".

==Influence==
Holly set the template for the standard rock and roll band: two guitars, bass, and drums. He was one of the first in the genre to write, produce, and perform his own songs.

Holly managed to bridge the racial divide that marked music in America. Along with Elvis and others, Holly made rock and roll, with its roots in rockabilly country music and blues-inspired rhythm and blues music, more popular among a broad white audience. From listening to their recordings, one had difficulty determining if the Crickets, the name of Buddy's band, were white or black singers. Holly indeed sometimes played with black musicians Little Richard and Chuck Berry, and incorporated the Bo Diddley beat in several songs. The Crickets were only the second white rock group to tour Great Britain. 

Holly was also famous for his distinctive, black-framed eyeglasses, which have since become a lasting part of his iconic image. As a result, countless other musicians (Hank Marvin, John Lennon, Elton John and Elvis Costello) were inspired to wear their own glasses during their performances. Initially, Holly was hesitant to wear his glasses on-stage, out of fear that they would contrast with his "rebellious" image. But since Holly had very poor vision (his visual acuity was allegedly 20/800) and contact lenses weren't as prevalent in the 1950s, Holly was left with little choice but to wear his glasses. 

Contrary to popular belief, teenagers John Lennon and Paul McCartney did not attend a Holly concert, although they watched his television appearance on Sunday Night at the London Palladium. Ian Whitcomb once said "Buddy Holly and the Crickets had the most influence on the Beatles." Lennon and McCartney later cited Holly as a primary influence. (Their bug-themed band's name, The Beatles, was chosen partly in homage to Holly's Crickets.) During breaks of The Beatles first appearance on The Ed Sullivan Show on February 9, 1964, CBS coordinator Vic Calandra talked with Paul McCartney and John Lennon. Lennon asked him if he was working on the show in 1957 when one of their favorite groups was a guest. "They were huge fans of Buddy Holly and the Crickets and John asked me, 'Buddy Holly, was this the stage he was on?' I said, 'Yeah, in fact, I held cue cards for them.' And he said, 'Oh, my God.' It was quite an experience." "Remembering The Beatles on 'Ed Sullivan,' from the performers and crew who were there February 9, 2014. Sunday, February 9, 2014, 11:10 by Virginia Rohan, The Record. 

The Beatles did a cover version of "Words of Love" that was a close reproduction of Holly's version, released on late 1964's Beatles for Sale (in the U.S., in June 1965 on Beatles VI). During the January 1969 sessions for the Let It Be album, the Beatles played a slow impromptu version of "Mailman, Bring Me No More Blues"  although not written by Holly, it was popularized by him  with Lennon mimicking Holly's vocal style; the recording was eventually released in the mid-1990s on Anthology 3. Also, Holly's "That'll Be the Day", which had been covered by The Quarrymen was released on Anthology 1. In addition, John Lennon recorded a cover version of "Peggy Sue" on his 1975 album Rock 'n' Roll. McCartney owns the publishing rights to Holly's song catalogue. 

A 17-year-old Bob Dylan attended the January 31, 1959 show, two nights before Holly's death. Dylan referred to this in his 1998 Grammy acceptance speech for his Time Out of Mind being named Album of the Year:

Keith Richards attended one of Holly's performances, where he heard "Not Fade Away" for the first time. The Rolling Stones had an early hit covering the song.

The launch of Bobby Vee's successful musical career resulted from Holly's death, when he was selected to replace Holly on the tour that continued after the plane crash. Holly's profound influence on Vee's singing style can be heard in such songs as "Rubber Ball" (the flip side of which was a cover of Holly's "Everyday") and "Run to Him."

Holly influenced many other singers during and after a career that lasted barely two years. Keith Richards once said Holly had "an influence on everybody." Dave Riser, "The Music Never Died: How Buddy Holly Changed Music Forever" (paper presented at the 87th annual meeting of the West Texas Historical Association, Fort Worth, Texas, February 27, 2010). In an August 24, 1978, Rolling Stone interview, Bruce Springsteen told Dave Marsh, "I play Buddy Holly every night before I go on; that keeps me honest." 

The Grateful Dead performed "Not Fade Away" 530 times over the course of their career, making it their seventh most-performed song. The song also appears on eight of their official live recording releases.

Various rock and roll histories have asserted the singing group The Hollies were named in homage to Buddy Holly. According to the band's website, although the group admired Holly (and years later produced an album covering some of his songs), their name was inspired primarily by the sprigs of holly in evidence around Christmas of 1962. 

Don McLean's popular 1971 ballad "American Pie" is inspired by Holly and the day of the plane crash. The American Pie album is dedicated to Holly.

On September 7, 1994 (Holly's 58th birthday), Weezer released their single "Buddy Holly".

==Discography==

===Studio albums===

* The "Chirping" Crickets (1957)
* Buddy Holly (1958)
* That'll Be the Day (1958)

Buddy Holly released three albums in his lifetime. However, he recorded so prolifically that Coral Records was able to release brand-new albums and singles for 10 years after his death, although the technical quality was mixed, some being studio quality and others home recordings.

Buddy Holly continued to be promoted and sold as an "active" artist, and his records had a loyal following, especially in Europe. The demand for unissued Holly material was so great that Norman Petty resorted to overdubbing whatever he could find: alternate takes of studio recordings, originally rejected masters, "Crying, Waiting, Hoping" and the other five 1959 tracks (adding new surf-guitar arrangements), and even Holly's amateur demos from 1954 (where the low-fidelity vocals are often muffled behind the new orchestrations). The last new Buddy Holly album was Giant (featuring the single "Love Is Strange"), issued in 1969. Between the 195960 overdubs produced by Jack Hansen (with vocal backings imitating the Crickets' sound), the 1960s overdubs produced by Petty, various alternate takes, and Holly's undubbed originals, collectors can often choose from multiple versions of the same song. There are also many different versions of Holly's "Greatest Hits" as well as covers/compilation albums of Buddy's songs performed by various artists.

==Film and musical depictions==
Holly's life story inspired a Hollywood biographical film, The Buddy Holly Story (1978). Star Gary Busey received a nomination for the Academy Award for Best Actor for his portrayal of Holly. The movie was widely criticized by the rock community and Holly's friends and family for its inaccuracies. This led Paul McCartney to produce and host his own documentary about Holly in 1985, titled The Real Buddy Holly Story. This video includes interviews with Keith Richards, Phil and Don Everly, Sonny Curtis, Jerry Allison, Holly's family, and McCartney himself, among others.

In 1987, Marshall Crenshaw portrayed Buddy Holly in the movie La Bamba. He is featured performing at the Surf Ballroom and boarding the doomed airplane with Ritchie Valens and The Big Bopper. Crenshaw's version of "Crying, Waiting, Hoping" is featured on the La Bamba original motion picture soundtrack.

Buddy  The Buddy Holly Story, the jukebox musical depicting his life, is credited as being the first of its kind, spawning a breed of jukebox shows, including the likes of Mamma Mia! and We Will Rock You. Buddy  as it is abbreviated on occasion  is still running in the UK after 22 years, with a UK tour that went out in February 2011.

Holly was depicted in the Quantum Leap episode entitled "How the Tess Was Won" although his identity isn't revealed until the very end of the episode. According to this episode, Dr. Sam Beckett (Scott Bakula) influences Buddy Holly to change the lyrics from "piggy, suey" to "Peggy Sue", thus setting up Holly's future hit song.

There are also a number of acts both in the US (Johnny Rogers, John Mueller) and UK (Marc Robinson, Spencer J etc.) who specialize in performing Holly's songs.

In 2010, Guy Kent portrayed a modern-day interpretation of Holly in the independent film The Day the Music Died. The film has yet to be theatrically released.

==Lubbock==
The Buddy Holly Center, a museum located in Lubbock

Holly was based in Lubbock, Texas, as his career took off between 1956 and 1958. In 1980, Grant Speed sculpted a statue of Holly playing his Fender guitar. This statue is the centerpiece of Lubbock's Walk of Fame, which honors notable people who contributed to Lubbock's musical history. Other memorials to Buddy Holly include a street named in his honor and The Buddy Holly Center, which contains a museum of Holly memorabilia as well as a Fine Arts Gallery. The Center is located on Crickets Avenue, one street over from Buddy Holly Avenue, in what used to be the Fort Worth and Denver South Plains Railway Depot. 

In 2010, Grant Speed's statue was taken down for refurbishment, and construction began on a new Walk of Fame. On May 9, 2011, the City of Lubbock held a ribbon-cutting ceremony for the Buddy and Maria Elena Holly Plaza, the new home of the statue and the Walk of Fame. The plaza is across the street from the museum.

==Hollywood Walk of Fame==
On September 7, 2011 (what would have been Holly's 75th birthday), he received his star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame posthumously. His widow, Maria Elena Santiago, attended, as did Phil Everly, Peter Asher, Priscilla Presley and actor Gary Busey, who played Holly in The Buddy Holly Story. 

==In popular culture==
* In the animated TV series Pearlie, Buddy Holly is parodied Buggy Holly.
* In an episode of The Young Ones, Mike 'The Cool Person' discovered Holly hanging upside-down from the ceiling of his new bedroom, despite the episode being aired 24 years after his death. Holly performed a song about his new insect diet called Coo-Coo Daddy Longlegs before dying when his supports snapped and he fell head-first through the floor.
* Buddy Holly's song True Love Ways (the version featuring The Picks) was used in Panda Cheese's Never Say No to Panda television commercials, created for Egyptian company Arab Dairy. The commercials became viral on YouTube and also revived True Love Ways' popularity. Even today, most of the comments on True Love Ways videos refer to the Panda Cheese ad.

==See also==

* Buddy Holly Is Alive and Well on Ganymede  comedic science fiction novel
*  tribute album and broadcast

==References==

==Further reading==

* Amburn, Ellis (1996). Buddy Holly: A Biography. St. Martin's Press. ISBN 978-0-312-14557-6.
* Bustard, Anne (2005). Buddy: The Story of Buddy Holly. Simon & Schuster. ISBN 978-1-4223-9302-4.
* Comentale, Edward P. (2013). Chapter Five. Sweet Air: Modernism, Regionalism, and American Popular Song. University of Illinois Press. ISBN 978-0-252-07892-7.
* Dawson, Jim; Leigh, Spencer (1996). Memories of Buddy Holly. Big Nickel Publications. ISBN 978-0-936433-20-2.
* Gerron, Peggy Sue (2008). Whatever Happened to Peggy Sue?. Togi Entertainment. ISBN 978-0-9800085-0-0.
* Goldrosen, John; Beecher, John (1996). Remembering Buddy: The Definitive Biography. New York: Da Capo Press. ISBN 0-306-80715-7.
* Goldrosen, John (1975). Buddy Holly: His Life and Music. Popular Press. ISBN 0-85947-018-0
* Gribbin, John (2009). Not Fade Away: The Life and Music of Buddy Holly. London: Icon Books. ISBN 978-1-84831-034-6
* Dave Laing, Professor. Buddy Holly (Icons of Pop Music). Indiana University Press. ISBN 0-253-22168-4.
* Lehmer, Larry (1997). The Day the Music Died: The Last Tour of Buddy Holly, the Big Bopper, and Ritchie Valens. Schirmer Trade Books. ISBN 0-02-864741-6 or 978-0028647418.
* Mann, Alan (1996). The A-Z of Buddy Holly. Aurum Press (2nd edition). ISBN 1-85410-433-0 or 978-1854104335.
* McFadden, Hugh (2005). Elegy for Charles Hardin Holley, in Elegies & Epiphanies. Belfast: Lagan Press.
* Moore, Gary E. (2011). "Hey Buddy: In Pursuit of Buddy Holly, My New Buddy John, and My Lost Decade of Music". Savas Beatie. ISBN 978-1-932-71497-5
* Norman, Philip (1996). "Rave On: The Biography of Buddy Holly" or "Buddy: The Biography of Buddy Holly" (1997), ISBN 0-684-83560-6 or ISBN 0-330-35223-7.
* Peer, Elizabeth and Ralph II (1972). Buddy Holly: A Biography in Words, Photographs and Music Australia: Peer International. ASIN B000W24DZO.
* Peters, Richard (1990). The Legend That Is Buddy Holly. Barnes & Noble Books. ISBN 0-285-63005-9 or 978-0285630055.
* Rabin, Stanton (2009). OH BOY! The Life and Music of Rock 'n' Roll Pioneer Buddy Holly. Van Winkle Publishing (Kindle). ASIN B0010QBLLG.
* Tobler, John (1979). The Buddy Holly Story. Beaufort Books.
* VH1's Behind the Music "The Day the Music Died" interview with Waylon Jennings

==External links==

* Buddy Holly news archives at the Lubbock Avalanche-Journal
* Buddy Holly and the Crickets.com
* Buddy Holly Lives.info
* 
* 
* 
* Buddy Holly  sessions and cover songs
* Telegraph article on the last songs written by Buddy Holly
* 'The Day the Music Died' at The Death of Rock: The Archive
* The Texas Experience  John Connally Presents Buddy Holly, from the Texas Archive of the Moving Image

 



[[Brewing]]

A 16th-century brewery

Brewing is the production of beer through steeping a starch source (commonly cereal grains) in water and then fermenting with yeast. It is done in a brewery by a brewer, and the brewing industry is part of most western economies. Brewing has taken place since around the 6th millennium BC, and archaeological evidence suggests that this technique was used in most emerging civilizations including ancient Egypt and Mesopotamia. Hartman, L. F. and Oppenheim, A. L., (1950) Supplement to the Journal of the American Oriental Society, 10. Retrieved 2013-09-20. 

The basic ingredients of beer are water; a starch source, such as malted barley, which is able to be fermented (converted into alcohol); a brewer's yeast to induce fermentation; and a flavouring, such as hops. A secondary starch source (an adjunct) may be used, such as maize (corn), rice or sugar. Less widely used starch sources include millet, sorghum and cassava root in Africa, potato in Brazil, and agave in Mexico, among others. The amount of each starch source in a beer recipe is collectively called the grain bill.

There are several steps in the brewing process, which include malting, milling, mashing, lautering, boiling, fermenting, conditioning, filtering, and packaging. There are three main fermentation methods, warm, cool and wild or spontaneous. Fermentation may take place in open or closed vessels. There may be a secondary fermentation that can take place in the brewery, in the cask, or in the bottle.

Brewing specifically includes the process of steeping, such as in making tea, sake, and soy sauce. Technically, wine, cider and mead are not brewed but rather vinified, as there is no steeping process involving solids.

==History==

Research indicates that brewing has taken place since around the 6th millennium BC, and archaeological evidence suggests that this technique was used in most emerging civilizations including ancient Egypt and Mesopotamia. Descriptions of various beer recipes can be found in cuneiform (the oldest known writing) from ancient Mesopotamia. In Mesopotamia the brewer's craft was the only profession which derived social sanction and divine protection from female deities/goddesses, specifically: Ninkasi, who covered the production of beer, Siris, who was used in a metonymic way to refer to beer, and Siduri, who covered the enjoyment of beer. 

==Ingredients==
Malted barley before roasting

The basic ingredients of beer are water; a starch source, such as malted barley, able to be fermented (converted into alcohol); a brewer's yeast to produce the fermentation; and a flavouring, such as hops, alabev.com The Ingredients of Beer. Retrieved 29 September 2008 to offset the sweetness of the malt. A mixture of starch sources may be used, with a secondary starch source, such as maize (corn), rice, or sugar, often being termed an adjunct, especially when used as a lower-cost substitute for malted barley. beer-brewing.com Ted Goldammer, The Brewers Handbook, Chapter 6  Beer Adjuncts, Apex Pub (1 January 2000), ISBN 0-9675212-0-3. Retrieved 29 September 2008 Less widely used starch sources include millet, sorghum, and cassava root in Africa, potato in Brazil, and agave in Mexico, among others. BeerHunter.com Michael Jackson, A good beer is a thorny problem down Mexico way, What's Brewing, 1 October 1997. Retrieved 29 September 2008 The amount of each starch source in a beer recipe is collectively called the grain bill.

;Water
Beer is composed mostly of water. Regions have water with different mineral components; as a result, different regions were originally better suited to making certain types of beer, thus giving them a regional character. For example, Dublin has hard water well suited to making stout, such as Guinness; while Pilsen has soft water well suited to making pale lager, such as Pilsner Urquell. The waters of Burton in England contain gypsum, which benefits making pale ale to such a degree that brewers of pale ales will add gypsum to the local water in a process known as Burtonisation. Michael Jackson, BeerHunter, 19 October 1991, Brewing a good glass of water. Retrieved 13 September 2008 

;Starch source

The starch source in a beer provides the fermentable material and is a key determinant of the strength and flavour of the beer. The most common starch source used in beer is malted grain. Grain is malted by soaking it in water, allowing it to begin germination, and then drying the partially germinated grain in a kiln. Malting grain produces enzymes that will allow conversion from starches in the grain into fermentable sugars during the mash process. Wikisource 1911 Encyclopdia Britannica/Brewing/Chemistry. Retrieved 29 September 2008 Different roasting times and temperatures are used to produce different colours of malt from the same grain. Darker malts will produce darker beers. Farm-direct Oz, Barley Malt, 6 February 2002. Retrieved 29 September 2008 

Nearly all beer includes barley malt as the majority of the starch. This is because of its fibrous husk, which is important not only in the sparging stage of brewing (in which water is washed over the mashed barley grains to form the wort) but also as a rich source of amylase, a digestive enzyme that facilitates conversion of starch into sugars. Other malted and unmalted grains (including wheat, rice, oats, and rye, and, less frequently, corn and sorghum) may be used. In recent years, a few brewers have produced gluten-free beer made with sorghum with no barley malt for people that cannot digest gluten-containing grains like wheat, barley, and rye. 

;Hops

Hop cone in a Hallertau, Germany, hop yard

Hops are the female flower clusters or seed cones of the hop vine Humulus lupulus, which are used as a flavouring and preservative agent in nearly all beer made today. Hops had been used for medicinal and food flavouring purposes since Roman times; by the 7th century in Carolingian monasteries in what is now Germany, beer was being made with hops, though it isn't until the thirteenth century that widespread cultivation of hops for use in beer is recorded. Before the thirteenth century, beer was flavoured with plants such as yarrow, wild rosemary, and bog myrtle, and other ingredients such as juniper berries, aniseed and ginger, which would be combined into a mixture known as gruit and used as hops are now used; between the thirteenth and the sixteenth century, during which hops took over as the dominant flavouring, beer flavoured with gruit was known as ale, while beer flavoured with hops was known as beer. Some beers today, such as Fraoch by the Scottish Heather Ales company and Cervoise Lancelot by the French Brasserie-Lancelot company, use plants other than hops for flavouring. 

Hops contain several characteristics that brewers desire in beer: they contribute a bitterness that balances the sweetness of the malt; they provide floral, citrus, and herbal aromas and flavours; they have an antibiotic effect that favours the activity of brewer's yeast over less desirable microorganisms; and they aid in "head retention", the length of time that a foamy head will last. The acidity of hops is a preservative. PDQ Guides, Hops: Clever Use For a Useless Plan. Retrieved 13 September 2008 , A better control of beer properties by predicting acidity of hop iso--acids, Blanco Carlos A.; Rojas Antonio; Caballero Pedro A.; Ronda Felicidad; Gomez Manuel; Caballero. Retrieved 13 September 2008 Flavouring beer is the sole major commercial use of hops. A. H. Burgess, Hops: Botany, Cultivation and Utilization, Leonard Hill (1964), ISBN 0-471-12350-1 

;Yeast

Yeast is the microorganism that is responsible for fermentation in beer. Yeast metabolises the sugars extracted from grains, which produces alcohol and carbon dioxide, and thereby turns wort into beer. In addition to fermenting the beer, yeast influences the character and flavour. Ostergaard, S., Olsson, L., Nielsen, J., Metabolic Engineering of Saccharomyces cerevisiae, Microbiol. Mol. Biol. Rev. 2000 64: 3450 
The dominant types of yeast used to make beer are Saccharomyces cerevisiae, known as ale yeast, and Saccharomyces uvarum, known as lager yeast; Brettanomyces ferments lambics, and Torulaspora delbrueckii ferments Bavarian weissbier. Web.mst.edu David Horwitz, Torulaspora delbrueckii. Retrieved 30 September 2008 Before the role of yeast in fermentation was understood, fermentation involved wild or airborne yeasts, and a few styles such as lambics still use this method today. Emil Christian Hansen, a Danish biochemist employed by the Carlsberg Laboratory, developed pure yeast cultures which were introduced into the Carlsberg brewery in 1883, and pure yeast strains are now the main fermenting source used worldwide. 

;Clarifying agent

Some brewers add one or more clarifying agents to beer, which typically precipitate (collect as a solid) out of the beer along with protein solids and are found only in trace amounts in the finished product. This process makes the beer appear bright and clean, rather than the cloudy appearance of ethnic and older styles of beer such as wheat beers. 

Examples of clarifying agents include isinglass, obtained from swimbladders of fish; Irish moss, a seaweed; kappa carrageenan, from the seaweed Kappaphycus cottonii; Polyclar (artificial); and gelatin. EFSA Opinion of the Scientific Panel on Dietetic Products, Nutrition and Allergies, 23 August 2007. Retrieved 29 September 2008 If a beer is marked "suitable for Vegans", it was generally clarified either with seaweed or with artificial agents, Food.gov.uk Draft Guidance on the Use of the Terms Vegetarian and Vegan in Food
Labelling: Consultation Responses pp71, 5 October 2005. Retrieved 29 September 2008 although the "Fast Cask" method invented by Marston's in 2009 may provide another method. 

==Brewing process==

There are several steps in the brewing process, which may include malting, mashing, lautering, boiling, fermenting, conditioning, filtering, and packaging. 

Malting is the process where barley grain is made ready for brewing. Malting is broken down into three steps in order to help to release the starches in the barley. First, during steeping, the grain is added to a vat with water and allowed to soak for approximately 40 hours. During germination, the grain is spread out on the floor of the germination room for around 5 days. The final part of malting is kilning when the malt goes through a very high temperature drying in a kiln; with gradual temperature increase over several hours. When kilning is complete, the grains are now termed malt, and they will be milled or crushed to break apart the kernels and expose the cotyledon, which contains the majority of the carbohydrates and sugars; this makes it easier to extract the sugars during mashing. 

Mashing converts the starches released during the malting stage into sugars that can be fermented. The milled grain is mixed with hot water in a large vessel known as a mash tun. In this vessel, the grain and water are mixed together to create a cereal mash. During the mash, naturally occurring enzymes present in the malt convert the starches (long chain carbohydrates) in the grain into smaller molecules or simple sugars (mono-, di-, and tri-saccharides). This "conversion" is called saccharification. The result of the mashing process is a sugar rich liquid or "wort", which is then strained through the bottom of the mash tun in a process known as lautering. Prior to lautering, the mash temperature may be raised to about 75  (known as a mashout) to deactivate enzymes. Additional water may be sprinkled on the grains to extract additional sugars (a process known as sparging). 

The wort is moved into a large tank known as a "copper" or kettle where it is boiled with hops and sometimes other ingredients such as herbs or sugars. This stage is where many chemical and technical reactions take place, and where important decisions about the flavour, colour, and aroma of the beer are made. The boiling process serves to terminate enzymatic processes, precipitate proteins, isomerize hop resins, and concentrate and sterilize the wort. Hops add flavour, aroma and bitterness to the beer. At the end of the boil, the hopped wort settles to clarify in a vessel called a "whirlpool", where the more solid particles in the wort are separated out. 

After the whirlpool, the wort then begins the process of cooling. This is when the wort is transferred rapidly from the whirlpool or brew kettle to a heat exchanger to be cooled. The heat exchanger consists of tubing inside a tub of cold water. It is very important to quickly cool the wort to a level where yeast can be added safely as yeast is unable to grow in high temperatures. After the wort goes through the heat exchanger, the cooled wort goes into a fermentation tank. A type of yeast is selected and added, or "pitched", to the fermentation tank. When the yeast is added to the wort, the fermenting process begins, where the sugars turn into alcohol, carbon dioxide and other components. When the fermentation is complete the brewer may rack the beer into a new tank, called a conditioning tank. Conditioning of the beer is the process in which the beer ages, the flavour becomes smoother, and flavours that are unwanted dissipate. After conditioning for a week to several months, the beer may be filtered and force carbonated for bottling, or fined in the cask. 

==Mashing==

A mash tun at the Bass Museum in Burton-upon-Trent

Mashing is the process of combining a mix of milled grain (typically malted barley with supplementary grains such as corn, sorghum, rye or wheat), known as the "grain bill", and water, known as "liquor", and heating this mixture in a vessel called a "mash tun". Mashing is a form of steeping, and defines the act of brewing, such as with making tea, sake, and soy sauce. Technically, wine, cider and mead are not brewed but rather vinified, as there is no steeping process involving solids. Mashing allows the enzymes in the malt to break down the starch in the grain into sugars, typically maltose to create a malty liquid called wort. There are two main methods  infusion mashing, in which the grains are heated in one vessel; and decoction mashing, in which a proportion of the grains are boiled and then returned to the mash, raising the temperature. Mashing involves pauses at certain temperatures (notably 45 C, 62 C and 73 C), and takes place in a "mash tun"  an insulated brewing vessel with a false bottom. "Abdijbieren. Geestrijk erfgoed" by Jef Van den Steen The end product of mashing is called a "mash".

Mashing usually takes 1 to 2 hours, and during this time the various temperature rests activate different enzymes depending upon the type of malt being used, its modification level, and the intention of the brewer. The activity of these enzymes convert the starches of the grains to dextrins and then to fermentable sugars such as maltose. A mash rest from 49 - activates various proteases, which break down proteins that might otherwise cause the beer to be hazy. This rest is generally used only with undermodified (i.e. undermalted) malts which are decreasingly popular in Germany and the Czech Republic, or non-malted grains such as corn and rice, which are widely used in North American beers. A mash rest at 60 C activates -glucanase, which breaks down gummy -glucans in the mash, making the sugars flow out more freely later in the process. In the modern mashing process, commercial fungal based -glucanase may be added as a supplement. Finally, a mash rest temperature of 65 - is used to convert the starches in the malt to sugar, which is then usable by the yeast later in the brewing process. Doing the latter rest at the lower end of the range favours -amylase enzymes, producing more low-order sugars like maltotriose, maltose, and glucose which are more fermentable by the yeast. This in turn creates a beer lower in body and higher in alcohol. A rest closer to the higher end of the range favours -amylase enzymes, creating more higher-order sugars and dextrins which are less fermentable by the yeast, so a fuller-bodied beer with less alcohol is the result. Duration and pH variances also affect the sugar composition of the resulting wort. Kunze, Wolfgang (2004) "Technology Brewing and Malting" VLB Berlin, ISBN 3-921690-49-8 pp. 214218 

===Lautering===

Lautering is the separation of the wort (the liquid containing the sugar extracted during mashing) from the grains. This is done either in a mash tun outfitted with a false bottom, in a lauter tun, or in a mash filter. Most separation processes have two stages: first wort run-off, during which the extract is separated in an undiluted state from the spent grains, and sparging, in which extract which remains with the grains is rinsed off with hot water. The lauter tun is a tank with holes in the bottom small enough to hold back the large bits of grist and hulls. The bed of grist that settles on it is the actual filter. Some lauter tuns have provision for rotating rakes or knives to cut into the bed of grist to maintain good flow. The knives can be turned so they push the grain, a feature used to drive the spent grain out of the vessel. Goldhammer, T. (2008) The Brewer's Handbook, 2nd edition, Apex, ISBN 978-0-9675212-3-7 pp 181 ff. The mash filter is a plate-and-frame filter. The empty frames contain the mash, including the spent grains, and have a capacity of around one hectoliter. The plates contain a support structure for the filter cloth. The plates, frames, and filter cloths are arranged in a carrier frame like so: frame, cloth, plate, cloth, with plates at each end of the structure. Newer mash filters have bladders that can press the liquid out of the grains between spargings. The grain does not act like a filtration medium in a mash filter. 

==Boiling==

After mashing, the beer wort is boiled with hops (and other flavourings if used) in a large tank known as a "copper" or brew kettle  though historically the mash vessel was used and is still in some small breweries. The boiling process is where chemical and technical reactions take place, including sterilization of the wort to remove unwanted bacteria, releasing of hop flavours, bitterness and aroma compounds through isomerization, stopping of enzymatic processes, precipitation of proteins, and concentration of the wort. Finally, the vapours produced during the boil volatilise off-flavours, including dimethyl sulfide precursors. The boil is conducted so that it is even and intense  a continuous "rolling boil". The boil on average lasts between 45 and 90 minutes, depending on its intensity, the hop addition schedule, and volume of water the brewer expects to evaporate. At the end of the boil, solid particles in the hopped wort are separated out, usually in a vessel called a "whirlpool". 

===Brew kettle or copper===
Brew kettles at Coors Brewing Company

Copper is the traditional material for the boiling vessel, because copper transfers heat quickly and evenly, and because the bubbles produced during boiling, and which would act as an insulator against the heat, do not cling to the surface of copper, so the wort is heated in a consistent manner. The simplest boil kettles are direct-fired, with a burner underneath. These can produce a vigorous and favourable boil, but are also apt to scorch the wort where the flame touches the kettle, causing caramelisation and making cleanup difficult. Most breweries use a steam-fired kettle, which uses steam jackets in the kettle to boil the wort. Breweries usually have a boiling unit either inside or outside of the kettle, usually a tall, thin cylinder with vertical tubes, called a calandria, through which wort is pumped. 

===Whirlpool===
At the end of the boil, solid particles in the hopped wort are separated out, usually in a vessel called a "whirlpool" or "settling tank". The whirlpool was devised by the Molson Brewery in 1960 to utilise the so-called tea leaf paradox to force the denser solids known as "trub" (coagulated proteins, vegetable matter from hops) into a cone in the centre of the whirlpool tank. Whirlpool systems vary: smaller breweries tend to use the brew kettle, larger breweries use a separate tank, and design will differ, with tank floors either flat, sloped, conical or with a cup in the centre. The principle in all is that by swirling the wort the centrifugal forces will push the trub into a cone at the centre of the bottom of the tank, where it can be easily removed. 

===Hopback===

A hopback is a sealed chamber that is inserted in between the brewing kettle and counter-flow wort chiller. Hops are added to the chamber, the hot wort from the kettle is run through it, and then immediately cooled in the wort chiller before entering the fermentation chamber. It facilitates maximum retention of volatile hop aroma compounds that would normally be driven off when the hops contact the hot wort. Because it is a sealed chamber, the volatile hop compounds are trapped in the hot wort, and then the wort is immediately cooled, which keeps the volatile compounds in solution. In the United Kingdom, it is common practice to use a hopback to clear the green wort (green wort is wort to which yeast has not yet been added). This device has the same effect as, but operates in a completely different manner than, a whirlpool. The two devices are often confused but are in function, quite different. While a whirlpool functions through the use of centrifugal forces, a hopback uses a layer of fresh hop flowers in a confined space to act as a filter bed to remove trub (pronounced tr-oo-b, tr-uh-b in the UK). Furthermore, while a whirlpool is useful only for the removal of pelleted hops (as flowers do not tend to separate as easily), in general hopbacks are used only for the removal of whole flower hops (as the particles left by pellets tend to make it through the hopback). 

===Wort cooling===
After the whirlpool, the wort must be brought down to fermentation temperatures (2026Celsius) before yeast is added. In modern breweries this is achieved through a plate heat exchanger. A plate heat exchanger has many ridged plates, which form two separate paths. The wort is pumped into the heat exchanger, and goes through every other gap between the plates. The cooling medium, usually water, goes through the other gaps. The ridges in the plates ensure turbulent flow. A good heat exchanger can drop 95 C wort to 20 C while warming the cooling medium from about 10 C to 80 C. The last few plates often use a cooling medium which can be cooled to below the freezing point, which allows a finer control over the wort-out temperature, and also enables cooling to around 10 C. After cooling, oxygen is often dissolved into the wort to revitalize the yeast and aid its reproduction.

While boiling, it is useful to recover some of the energy used to boil the wort. On its way out of the brewery, the steam created during the boil is passed over a coil through which unheated water flows. By adjusting the rate of flow, the output temperature of the water can be controlled. This is also often done using a plate heat exchanger. The water is then stored for later use in the next mash, in equipment cleaning, or wherever necessary. Kunze, Wolfgang (2004) "Technology Brewing and Malting" VLB Berlin, ISBN 3-921690-49-8, p.302 

Another common method of energy recovery takes place during the wort cooling. When cold water is used to cool the wort in a heat exchanger, the water is significantly warmed. In an efficient brewery, cold water is passed through the heat exchanger at a rate set to maximize the water's temperature upon exiting. This now-hot water is then stored in a hot water tank. 

==Fermenting ==

Modern fermentation tanks
Fermentation in brewing is the conversion of carbohydrates to alcohols and carbon dioxide or organic acids using yeasts, bacteria, or a combination thereof, under anaerobic conditions. A more restricted definition of fermentation is the chemical conversion of sugars into ethanol. The science of fermentation is known as zymurgy.

After the wort is cooled and aerated  usually with sterile air  yeast is added to it, and it begins to ferment. It is during this stage that sugars won from the malt are metabolized into alcohol and carbon dioxide, and the product can be called beer for the first time. Fermentation happens in tanks which come in all sorts of forms, from enormous cylindro-conical vessels, through open stone vessels, to wooden vats.

Most breweries today use cylindro-conical vessels, or CCVs, which have a conical bottom and a cylindrical top. The cone's aperture is typically around 60, an angle that will allow the yeast to flow towards the cone's apex, but is not so steep as to take up too much vertical space. CCVs can handle both fermenting and conditioning in the same tank. At the end of fermentation, the yeast and other solids which have fallen to the cone's apex can be simply flushed out of a port at the apex.

Open fermentation vessels are also used, often for show in brewpubs, and in Europe in wheat beer fermentation. These vessels have no tops, which makes harvesting top-fermenting yeasts very easy. The open tops of the vessels make the risk of infection greater, but with proper cleaning procedures and careful protocol about who enters fermentation chambers, the risk can be well controlled.

Fermentation tanks are typically made of stainless steel. If they are simple cylindrical tanks with beveled ends, they are arranged vertically, as opposed to conditioning tanks which are usually laid out horizontally. Only a very few breweries still use wooden vats for fermentation as wood is difficult to keep clean and infection-free and must be repitched more or less yearly.

===Fermentation methods===

Beer fermenting
There are three main fermentation methods, warm, cool and wild or spontaneous. Fermentation may take place in open or closed vessels. There may be a secondary fermentation which can take place in the brewery, in the cask or in the bottle.

Brewing yeasts are traditionally classed as "top-cropping" (or "top-fermenting") and "bottom-cropping" (or "bottom-fermenting"). This distinction was introduced by the Dane Emil Christian Hansen. Yeast were termed top or bottom cropping because, in traditional brewing, yeast was collected from the top or bottom of the fermenting wort to be reused for the next brew. This terminology is somewhat inappropriate in the modern era; after the widespread application of brewing mycology it was discovered that the two separate collecting methods involved two different yeast species that favoured different temperature regimes, namely Saccharomyces cerevisiae in top-cropping at warmer temperatures and Saccharomyces pastorianus in bottom-cropping at cooler temperatures. As brewing methods changed in the 20th century, cylindro-conical fermenting vessels became the norm and the collection of yeast for both Saccharomyces species is done from the bottom of the fermenter, thus the method of collection no longer implies a species association. There are a few remaining breweries who collect yeast in the top-cropping method, such as Samuel Smiths brewery in Yorkshire, Marstons in Staffordshire and several German hefeweizen producers. 

For both types, yeast is fully distributed through the beer while it is fermenting, and both equally flocculate (clump together and precipitate to the bottom of the vessel) when fermentation is finished. By no means do all top-cropping yeasts demonstrate this behaviour, but it features strongly in many English yeasts that may also exhibit chain forming (the failure of budded cells to break from the mother cell), which is in the technical sense different from true flocculation. The most common top-cropping brewer's yeast, Saccharomyces cerevisiae, is the same species as the common baking yeast. However, baking and brewing yeasts typically belong to different strains, cultivated to favour different characteristics: Baking yeast strains are more aggressive, in order to carbonate dough in the shortest amount of time; brewing yeast strains act slower, but tend to produce fewer off-flavours and tolerate higher alcohol concentrations (with some strains, up to 22%).. Modern quantitative genomics has revealed the complexity of Saccharomyces species to the extent that yeasts involved in beer and wine production commonly involve hybrids of so-called pure species. As such, the yeasts involved in what has been typically called top-cropping or top-fermenting ale may be both Saccharomyces cerevisiae and complex hybrids of Saccharomyces cerevisiae and Saccharomyces kudriavzevii. Three notable ales, Chimay, Orval and Westmalle, are fermented with these hybrid strains, which are identical to wine yeasts from Switzerland. Gonzlez, Sara S., Eladio Barrio, and Amparo Querol. "Molecular characterization of new natural hybrids of Saccharomyces cerevisiae and S. kudriavzevii in brewing." Applied and environmental microbiology 74.8 (2008): 23142320. 

To ensure purity of strain, a "clean" sample of brewing yeast is sometimes stored, either dried or refrigerated in a laboratory. Yeast physiology and biotechnology, page 140, Graeme M. Walker Microbiology of fermented foods, Volume 1 Brian J. B. Wood After a certain number of fermentation cycles, a full scale propagation is produced from this laboratory sample. Typically, it is grown up in about three or four stages using sterile brewing wort and oxygen.

====Warm fermentation====
In general, yeasts such as Saccharomyces cerevisiae are fermented at warm temperatures between 15 and, occasionally as high as 24 C, while the yeast used by Brasserie Dupont for saison ferments even higher at 29 to. Farmhouse Ales: Culture and Craftsmanship in the European Tradition, pages 168173, Phil Markowski, Brewers Publications (2004), ISBN 0-937381-84-5 They generally form a foam on the surface of the fermenting beer, as during the fermentation process its hydrophobic surface causes the flocs to adhere to CO2 and rise; because of this, they are often referred to as "top-cropping" or "top-fermenting"  though this distinction is less clear in modern brewing with the use of cylindro-conical tanks. Generally, warm-fermented beers are ready to drink within three weeks after the beginning of fermentation, although some brewers will condition them for several months.

====Cool fermentation====

Lager is beer that has been cool fermented at around 10 C, compared to typical warm fermentation temperatures of 18 C. It is then stored for 30 days or longer close to the freezing point, and during this storage sulphur components developed during fermentation dissipate.

Though it is the cool fermentation that defines lager, the main technical difference with lager yeast is its ability to process raffinose (a trisaccharide composed of the sugars galactose, fructose, and glucose), which means that all sugars are fermented, resulting in a well attenuated beer; warm-fermenting yeast only cleaves and ferments the fructose portion of raffinose, leaving melibiose, which it cannot further cleave into two monosaccharides due to its lack of melibiose, so ale remains sweeter with a lower conversion of sugar into alcohol. Raffinose is a minor dry component of Carlsberg barley, but once malted is practically nonexistent. See Table 4.16 

While the nature of yeast was not fully understood until Emil Hansen of the Carlsberg brewery in Denmark isolated a single yeast cell in the late 1800s, brewers in Bavaria had for centuries been selecting cold-fermenting lager yeasts by storing ("lagern") their beers in cold alpine caves. The process of natural selection meant that the wild yeasts that were most cold tolerant would be the ones that would remain actively fermenting in the beer that was stored in the caves. Some of these Bavarian yeasts were brought back to the Carlsberg brewery around the time that Hansen did his famous work.

Today, lagers represent the vast majority of beers produced. Examples include Budweiser Budvar, Birra Moretti, Stella Artois, Red Stripe, and Singha. Some lager-style beers market themselves as Pilsner, which originated in Pilsen, Czech Republic (Plze in Czech). However, Pilsners are brewed with 100% barley malt and aggressive hop bitterness, flavor, and aroma.

Lager yeast normally ferments at a temperature of approximately 5 C. Lager yeast can be fermented at a higher temperature normally used for top-fermenting yeast, and this application is often used in a beer style known as California Common or colloquially as "steam beer". Saccharomyces pastorianus is used in the brewing of lager.

====Spontaneous fermentation====

Lambic beers are historically brewed in Brussels and the nearby Pajottenland region of Belgium. They are fermented in oak barrels after being inoculated with wild yeast and bacteria while cooling in a Koelschip. Wild yeast and bacteria ferment the wort in the oak barrels. The beers fermented from yeast and bacteria in the Brussels area are called Lambic beers. These bacteria add a sour flavour to the beer. Of the many styles of beer very few use bacteria, most are fermented with yeast alone and bacterial contamination is avoided.

However, with the advent of yeast banks and the National Collection of Yeast Cultures, brewing these beers  albeit not through spontaneous fermentation  is possible anywhere. Specific bacteria cultures are also available to reproduce certain styles.

Brettanomyces is a genus of yeast important in brewing lambic, a beer produced not by the deliberate addition of brewer's yeasts, but by spontaneous fermentation with wild yeasts and bacteria. 

Taking inspiration from Belgium-style brews, American microbreweries produce beer with microorganisms other than Saccharomyces, usually Brettanomyces. These fall in the broad category of American wild ale.

==Conditioning==
After an initial or primary fermentation, beer is conditioned, matured or aged, in one of several ways, which can take from 2 to 4 weeks, several months, or several years, depending on the brewer's intention for the beer. The beer is usually transferred into a second container, so that it is no longer exposed to the dead yeast and other debris (also known as "trub") that have settled to the bottom of the primary fermenter. This prevents the formation of unwanted flavours and harmful compounds such as acetylaldehydes. 

;Krusening
Krusening is a conditioning method in which fermenting wort is added to the finished beer. The active yeast will restart fermentation in the finished beer, and so introduce fresh carbon dioxide; the conditioning tank will be then sealed so that the carbon dioxide is dissolved into the beer producing a lively "condition" or level of carbonation. The krusening method may also be used to condition bottled beer. 

;Lagering
Lagers are stored at near freezing temperatures for 16 months while still on the yeast. Briggs, D.E.; Boulton, C.A.; Brookes, P. A.; and Stevens, R. Brewing, 2004, CRC. ISBN 0-8493-2547-1 p. 5. The process of storing, or conditioning, or maturing, or aging a beer at a low temperate for a long period is called "lagering", and while it is associated with lagers, the process may also be done with ales, with the same results  that of cleaning up various chemicals, acids and compounds. 

;Secondary fermentation
During secondary fermentation, most of the remaining yeast will settle to the bottom of the second fermenter, yielding a less hazy product. 

;Bottle fermentation
Some beers undergo a fermentation in the bottle, giving natural carbonation. This may be a second or third fermentation. They are bottled with a viable yeast population in suspension. If there is no residual fermentable sugar left, sugar and/or wort may be added in a process known as priming. The resulting fermentation generates CO2 that is trapped in the bottle, remaining in solution and providing natural carbonation. Bottle-conditioned beers may be either filled unfiltered direct from the fermentation or conditioning tank, or filtered and then reseeded with yeast. 

;Cask conditioning

Cask ale or cask-conditioned beer is unfiltered and unpasteurised beer that is conditioned (including secondary fermentation) and served from a cask, either pumped up from a cellar via a beer engine (hand pump), or from a tap by gravity. Sometimes a cask breather is used to keep the beer fresh by allowing carbon dioxide to replace oxygen as the beer is drawn off the cask. The term "real ale" as used by the Campaign for Real Ale (CAMRA) refers to beer "served without the use of extraneous carbon dioxide", which would disallow the use of a cask breather. 

==Filtering==

A mixture of diatomaceous earth and yeast after filtering.

Filtering the beer stabilizes the flavour, and gives beer its polished shine and brilliance. Not all beer is filtered. When tax determination is required by local laws, it is typically done at this stage in a calibrated tank.

Filters come in many types. Many are in the form of sheets or "candles". Others use a fine powder such as diatomaceous earth, also called kieselguhr. The powder is added to the beer and recirculated past screens to form a filtration bed.

Filters range from rough filters that remove much of the yeast and any solids (e.g., hops, grain particles) left in the beer, to filters tight enough to strain colour and body from the beer. Filtration ratings are divided into rough, fine, and sterile. Rough filtration leaves some cloudiness in the beer, but it is noticeably clearer than unfiltered beer. Fine filtration removes almost all cloudiness. Sterile filtration removes almost all microorganisms.

;Sheet (pad) filters
These filters use sheets that allow only particles smaller than a given size to pass through. The sheets are placed into a filtering frame, sanitized(with boiling water, for example) and then used to filter the beer. The sheets can be flushed if the filter becomes blocked. The sheets are usually disposable and are replaced between filtration sessions. Often the sheets contain powdered filtration media to aid in filtration.

Pre-made filters have two sides. One with loose holes, and the other with tight holes. Flow goes from the side with loose holes to the side with the tight holes, with the intent that large particles get stuck in the large holes while leaving enough room around the particles and filter medium for smaller particles to go through and get stuck in tighter holes.

Sheets are sold in nominal ratings, and typically 90% of particles larger than the nominal rating are caught by the sheet.
;Kieselguhr filters
 
Filters that use a powder medium are considerably more complicated to operate, but can filter much more beer before regeneration. Common media include diatomaceous earth and perlite.

==Packaging==

Packaging is putting the beer into the containers in which it will leave the brewery. Typically, this means putting the beer into bottles, aluminium cans and kegs/casks, but it may include putting the beer into bulk tanks for high-volume customers.

==Brewing methods==

There are several additional brewing methods, such as barrel aging, double dropping, and Yorkshire Square.

==By-products==
Brewing by-products are "spent grain" and the sediment (or "dregs") from the filtration process which may be dried and resold as "brewers dried yeast" for poultry feed, or made into yeast extract.

;Yeast extract
Yeast extract is used in brands such as Vegemite and Marmite. The process of turning the yeast sediment into edible yeast extract was discovered by a German scientist Justus Liebig. 

;Spent grain
Spent grain

Brewer's spent grain (also called spent grain, brewer's grain or draff) consists of the residue of malt and grain which remains in the mash-kettle after the mashing and lautering process. It consists primarily of grain husks, pericarp, and fragments of endosperm. As it mainly consists of carbohydrates and proteins, and is readily consumed by animals, spent grain is used in animal feed. Spent grains can also be used as fertilizer, whole grains in bread, as well as in the production of biogas. Spent grain is also an ideal medium for growing mushrooms, such as shiitake, and already some breweries are either growing their own mushrooms or supplying spent grain to mushroom farms. Spent grains can be used in the production of red bricks, to improve the open porosity and reduce thermal conductivity of the ceramic mass. Ferraz et al., Spent brewery grains for improvement of thermal insulation of ceramic bricks. Journal of Materials in Civil Engineering. DOI: 10.1061/(ASCE)MT.1943-5533.0000729 

==Brewing industry==
The brewing industry is a global business, consisting of several dominant multinational companies and many thousands of smaller producers known as microbreweries or regional breweries depending on size and region. More than 133 billion liters (35 billion gallons) are sold per yearproducing total global revenues of $294.5 billion (147.7 billion) as of 2006. SABMiller became the largest brewing company in the world when it acquired Royal Grolsch, brewer of Dutch premium beer brand Grolsch. 
InBev was the second-largest beer-producing company in the world and Anheuser-Busch held the third spot, but after the acquisition of Anheuser-Busch by InBev, the new Anheuser-Busch InBev company is currently the largest brewer in the world. 

Brewing at home is subject to regulation and prohibition in many countries. Restrictions on homebrewing were lifted in the UK in 1963, Australia followed suit in 1972, and the USA in 1978, though individual states were allowed to pass their own laws limiting production. Papazian The Complete Joy of Homebrewing (3rd Edition), ISBN 0-06-053105-3 

==References==

;Bibliography
* Bamforth, Charles W.; "Food, Fermentation and Micro-organisms", Wiley-Blackwell, 2005, ISBN 0-632-05987-7
* Briggs, Dennis E., et al.; "Malting and Brewing Science", Aspen Publishers, 1982, ISBN 0-8342-1684-1
* Ensminger, Audrey; "Foods & Nutrition Encyclopedia", CRC Press, 1994, ISBN 0-8493-8980-1
* Esslinger, Hans Michael; "Handbook of Brewing: Processes, Technology, Markets", Wiley-VCH, 2009, ISBN 3-527-31674-4
* Hornsey, Ian Spencer; "Brewing", Royal Society of Chemistry, 1999, ISBN 0-85404-568-6
* Hui, Yiu H.; "Food Biotechnology", Wiley-IEEE, 1994, ISBN 0-471-18570-1
* Hui, Yiu H.; "Food Processing: Principles and Applications", Wiley-Blackwell, year= 2004, ISBN978-0-8138-1942-6
* Lea, Andrew Geoffrey Howard; "Fermented Beverage Production" 2nd ed., Kluwer Academic/Plenum Publishers, 2003, ISBN 0-306-47706-8
* McFarland, Ben; World's Best Beers, Sterling Publishing, 2009, ISBN 978-1-4027-6694-7
* Priest, Fergus G.; "Handbook of Brewing", |publisher=CRC Press, 2006, ISBN 0-8247-2657-X
* Rabin, Dan; "The Dictionary of Beer and Brewing, Taylor & Francis, 1998, ISBN 1-57958-078-5
* Stevens, Roger, et al.; "Brewing: Science and Practice", Woodhead Publishing, 2004, ISBN 0-8493-2547-1
* Unger, Richard W.; "Beer in the Middle Ages and the Renaissance", University of Pennsylvania Press, 2004, ISBN 0-8122-3795-1

==External links==

* An overview of the microbiology behind beer brewing from the Science Creative Quarterly
* Hyfoma on beer brewing
* A pictorial overview of the brewing process at the Heriot-Watt University Pilot Brewery

 



[[Benz]]

Benz may refer to

== People ==
*Bertha Benz (18491944), German marketing entrepreneur who was the first to drive an automobile for a long distance, wife of Karl Benz
*Derek Benz (b. 1971), American author of fantasy fiction for children
*Julie Benz (b. 1972), American actress
*Kafi Benz (b. 1941), American entrepreneur
*Karl Benz (18481929), German engineer, inventor, and entrepreneur who built the first patented automobile in 1885
*Maria Benz (19061946), the birth name of Nusch luard, German-born model who married Paul luard
*Walter Benz (b. 1931), German mathematician known for his work on geometric planes 

==People who adopted the name Benz as a pseudonym==
*Nicky Benz, pseudonym for Nick Berk (b. 1980), American wrestler
*Nikki Benz, pseudonym for Alla Montchak (b. 1981), Canadian actress and director
*Spragga Benz, pseudonym for Carlton Grant (b. 1969), Jamaican deejay and musician

== Other ==
* Municipalities in Mecklenburg-Vorpommern, Germany
** Benz, Nordwestmecklenburg
** Benz, Ostvorpommern or Benz (Usedom)
*Benz (group), British band
*benz (unit), for velocity
*Benz plane, a geometrical object
*Benz series, a series of paintings and drawings created by Lyonel Feininger
* Abbreviated form of Benzo, a functional group in chemistry

== See also ==
* Automotive brands:
** Benz & Cie.
** Benz Shne
** Daimler-Benz
** Mercedes-Benz



[[Breast reconstruction]]

Result of breast reconstruction after mastectomy. Nipple missing, and cicatrix (scar) is prominent.
Breast reconstruction is the rebuilding of a breast, usually in women. It involves using autologous tissue or prosthetic material to construct a natural-looking breast. Often this includes the reformation of a natural-looking areola and nipple. This procedure involves the use of implants or relocated flaps of the patient's own tissue.

==Overview==
The primary part of the procedure can often be carried out immediately following the mastectomy. As with many other surgeries, patients with significant medical comorbidities (high blood pressure, obesity, diabetes) and smokers are higher-risk candidates. Surgeons may choose to perform delayed reconstruction to decrease this risk. The infection rate may be higher with primary reconstruction (done at the same time as mastectomy), but there are psychologic and financial benefits to having a single primary reconstruction. Patients expected to receive radiation therapy as part of their adjuvant treatment are also commonly considered for delayed autologous reconstruction due to significantly higher complication rates with tissue expander-implant techniques in those patients.

Breast reconstruction is a large undertaking that usually takes multiple operations. Sometimes these follow-up surgeries are spread out over weeks or months. If an implant is used, the individual runs the same risks and complications as those who use them for breast augmentation but has higher rates of capsular contracture (tightening or hardening of the scar tissue around the implant) and revisional surgeries.

Outcomes based research on quality of life improvements and psychosocial benefits associated with breast reconstruction Harcourt, DM, Rumsey, NJ, Ambler, NR, et al. The psychological effect of mastectomy with or without breast reconstruction: a prospective, multicenter study. Plast Reconstr Surg 2003; 111:1060. PMID 12621175 Brandberg, Y, Malm, M, Blomqvist, L. A prospective and randomized study, "SVEA," comparing effects of three methods for delayed breast reconstruction on quality of life, patient-defined problem areas of life, and cosmetic result. Plast Reconstr Surg 2000; 105:66. PMID 10626972 served as the stimulus in the United States for the 1998 Women's Health and Cancer Rights Act, which mandated health care payer coverage for breast and nipple reconstruction, contralateral procedures to achieve symmetry, and treatment for the sequelae of mastectomy. This was followed in 2001 by additional legislation imposing penalties on noncompliant insurers. Similar provisions for coverage exist in most countries worldwide through national health care programs.

==Techniques==
There are many methods for breast reconstruction. The two most common are:
* Tissue Expander - Breast implants This is the most common technique used worldwide. The surgeon inserts a tissue expander, a temporary silastic implant, beneath a pocket under the pectoralis major muscle of the chest wall. The pectoral muscles may be released along its inferior edge to allow a larger, more supple pocket for the expander at the expense of thinner lower pole soft tissue coverage. The use of acellular human or animal dermal grafts have been described as an onlay patch to increase coverage of the implant when the pectoral muscle is released, which purports to improve both functional and aesthtic outcomes of implant-expander breast reconstruction. Breuing KH, Warren SM. Immediate bilateral breast reconstruction with implants and inferolateral AlloDerm slings. Ann Plast Surg. 2005 Sep;55(3):232-9. PMID 16106158 Salzberg CA. Nonexpansive immediate breast reconstruction using human acellular tissue matrix graft (AlloDerm). Ann Plast Surg. 2006 Jul;57(1):1-5. PMID 16799299 
** In a process that can take weeks to months, saline solution is injected to progressively expand the overlaying tissue. Once the expander has reached an acceptable size, it may be removed and replaced with a more permanent implant. Reconstruction of the areola and nipple are usually performed in a separate operation after the skin has stretched to its final size.
* Flap reconstruction The second most common procedure uses tissue from other parts of the patient's body, such as the back, buttocks, thigh or abdomen. This procedure may be performed by leaving the donor tissue connected to the original site to retain its blood supply (the vessels are tunnelled beneath the skin surface to the new site) or it may be cut off and new blood supply may be connected.
** The latissimus dorsi muscle flap is the donor tissue available on the back. It is a large flat muscle which can be employed without significant loss of function. It can be moved into the breast defect while still attached to its blood supply under the arm pit (axilla). A latissimus flap is usually used to recruit soft-tissue coverage over an underlying implant. Enough volume can be recruited occasionally to reconstruct small breasts without an implant.
** Abdominal flaps The abdominal flap for breast reconstruction is the TRAM flap (Transverse Rectus Abdominis Myocutaneous flap) or its technically distinct variants of microvascular "perforator flaps" like the DIEP/SIEP flaps. In a TRAM procedure, a portion of the abdomen tissue group, including skin, adipose tissues, minor muscles and connective tissues, is taken from the patient's abdomen and transplanted onto the breast site. Both TRAM and DIEP/SIEP use the abdominal tissue between the umbilicus and the pubis. The DIEP flap and free-TRAM flap require advanced microsurgical technique and are less common as a result. Both can provide enough tissue to reconstruct large breasts. These procedures are preferred by some breast cancer patients because they result in an abdominoplasty (tummy tuck), and allow the breast to be reconstructed with one's own tissues instead of a foreign implant. TRAM flap procedures may weaken the abdominal wall and torso strength, but are tolerated well in most patients. To prevent muscle weakness and incisional hernias, the portion of abdominal wall exposed by reflection of the rectus abdominis muscle may be strengthened by a piece of surgical mesh placed over the defect and sutured in place. Perforator techniques such as the DIEP (deep inferior epigastric perforator) flap and SIEA (superficial inferior epigastric artery) flap require precise dissection of small perforating vessels through the rectus muscle, and purport the advantage of less weakening of the abdominal wall, though rectus abdominus muscle function may still be compromised. Other total autologous tissue breast reconstruction donor sites include the buttocks (superior or inferior gluteal artery perforator flaps (SGAP or IGAP)). The purpose of perforator flaps (DIEP, SIEA, SGAP, IGAP) is to provide sufficient skin and fat for an aesthetic reconstruction while minimizing morbidity from harvesting the underlying muscles. See free flap breast reconstruction for more information.
** Mold-assisted reconstruction Made using laser scanning and 3D printing, a patient-specific silicone mold can be used as an aid during surgery. It is used as a guide for orienting and shaping the flap to improve accuracy and symmetry. Ferry Melchels et al. 2011 Biofabrication 3 034114 

 The TRAM Flap Procedure 
 none none none 
 Identification of the target and donor sites Raising the flap and transposing it to the target site The result of the reconstruction 

==Other considerations==
To restore the appearance of the breast with surgical reconstruction, there are a few options regarding the nipple and areola.
*A nipple prosthesis can be used to restore the appearance of the reconstructed breast. Impressions can be made and photographs can be used to accurately replace the nipple lost with some types of mastectomies. This can be instrumental in restoring the psychological well-being of the breast cancer survivor. The same process can be used to replicate the remaining nipple in cases of a single mastectomy. Ideally, a prosthesis is made around the time of the mastectomy and it can be used just weeks after the surgery. 
*Nipple reconstruction is usually delayed until after the breast mound reconstruction is completed so that the positioning can be planned precisely. There are several methods of reconstructing the nipple-areolar complex, including:
:* Nipple-Areolar Composite Graft (Sharing) - if the contralateral breast has not been reconstructed and the nipple and areolar are sufficiently large, tissue may be harvested and used to recreate the nipple-areolar complex on the reconstructed side.
:* Local Tissue Flaps - a nipple may be created by raising a small flap in the target area and producing a raised mound of skin. To create an areola, a circular incision may be made around the new nipple and sutured back again. The nipple and areolar region may then be tattooed to produce a realistic colour match with the contralateral breast.
:* Local Tissue Flaps With Use of AlloDerm - as above, a nipple may be created by raising a small flap in the target area and producing a raised mound of skin. AlloDerm (cadaveric dermis) can then be inserted into the core of the new nipple acting like a "strut" which may help maintain the projection of the nipple for a longer period of time. The nipple and areolar region may then be tattooed later. There are however some important issues in relation to NAC Tattooing that should be considered prior to opting for tattooing, such as the choice of pigments and equipment used for the procedure. A. Darby. 3D Nipple Tattooing a New Service? (inc revisions). CosmeticTattoo.org Educational Articles 24/10/2013 

One of the challenges in breast reconstruction is to match the reconstructed breast to the mature breast on the other side (often fairly 'ptotic' - droopy.) This often requires a lift (mastopexy), reduction, or augmentation of the other breast.

==Follow-up and recovery==
Recovery from implant-based reconstruction is generally faster than with flap-based reconstructions, but both take at least three to six weeks of recovery and both require follow-up surgeries in order to construct a new areola and nipple. All recipients of these operations should refrain from strenuous sports, overhead lifting, and sexual activity during the recovery period. TRAM flap patients can show abdominal-muscle weakness on electromyogram (EMG) studies, but clinically most patients who have undergone unilateral breast reconstruction (reconstruction of one breast only) return to normal activities after recovery.

Patients who have undergone bilateral breast reconstruction with TRAM flaps (i.e. reconstruction of both breasts) require sacrifice of both rectus muscles and tend to have permanent abdominal strength loss. For this reason, many plastic surgeons now frown upon bilateral breast reconstruction with TRAM flaps. This also explains the significant patient interest in perforator flap techniques such as the DIEP flap which preserves abdominal muscle function long-term. These patients tend to return to full activity after several weeks without permanent limitations.

There is little information about upper body exercise post-mastectomy. Issues such as simple mastectomy, mastectomy with reconstruction, and mastectomy with lymph node excision and reconstruction all factor into limitations to amount and extent of upper body exercise. Generally, cardiac exercise (treadmill, walking, etc.) are approved for rehabilitation post-surgery and for weight control.

Women who have undergone breast reconstruction must still be followed for local or regional recurrence of their cancer with manual exams of the breast/chest wall and axilla.

The most effective relief from breast reconstruction is hilotherapy, a therapy that provides relief from hematoma, pain, and swelling post-surgery without the dangers of frostbite and skin necrosis.

==See also==
* Breast implant
* Breast lift
* Breast reduction plasty
* Free flap breast reconstruction
* Nipple prosthesis

==Additional images==

File:Blausen 0138 BreastReconstruction Expander.png|Breast Reconstruction using a Tissue Expander
File:Blausen 0139 BreastReconstruction Prosthesis.png|Breast Reconstruction using a Prosthesis
File:Blausen 0140 BreastReconstruction TRAM.png|Autologous Tissue Breast Reconstruction (TRAM)
File:Blausen 0141 BreastReconstruction TRAM PostOp.png|Post-Operative Autologous Tissue Breast Reconstruction (TRAM)
 
==References==

==External links==
* Breast Reconstruction Following Breast Removal from the American Society of Plastic Surgeons
* National Cancer Institute breast cancer page
* US Dept. of Labor - Women's Health & Cancer Rights Act of 1998
* Plastic Surgery Stirs a Debate



[[Bob Diamond]]

Bob Diamond may refer to:

==People==
*Bob Diamond (banker), an American banker
*Bobby Diamond, California lawyer who was a child star and young-adult actor of the 1950s and '60s
*Bobby Dimond, Australian rugby league footballer of the 1940s and '50s

==Fictional characters==
*Bob Diamond (comics), a Marvel Comics character
*Bob Diamond, an advocate in the movie Defending Your Life



[[Brooklyn Historic Railway Association]]

Cars under wire on Red Hook

The Brooklyn Historic Railway Association's (BHRA) shop, trolley barn and offices are located in Red Hook, Brooklyn, New York, on the historic Beard Street Piers (circa 1870). BHRA had a fleet of 16 trolleys (15 PCC trolleys and a leased 1897 trolley car from Oslo, Norway). 

The BHRA's origin began with the rediscovery of the Cobble Hill Tunnel by Bob Diamond in 1980. BHRA was formed in 1982 to restore the historic tunnel. The Atlantic Avenue Tunnel (constructed in 1844) is the world's oldest subway tunnel. BHRA successfully filed and received designation for the tunnel on the National Register of Historic Places.

Restoration of one of Brooklyn's trolley/light rail routes, in Red Hook, was hampered due to the New York City Department of Transportation (DOT) withdrawing its support from the project. Construction was stopped on a 7-block extension to the line due to the removal and scrapping of rails, ties, and other items of railroad equipment by the DOT, which were stored on land that was slated for the Fairway supermarket project.

, BHRA was ordered to remove and fill in all trolley tracks on public streets by the DOT. The DOT revoked consent for the project to proceed or exist on city streets. Shortly thereafter, BHRA completely ceased operation. Most of the PCC trolleys were removed from Brooklyn. Only the trolleys that are on the Beard Street Pier itself remain. Plans call for moving the remaining four trolleys to the Atlantic Avenue tunnel, as soon as it becomes practical.

The BHRA ran organized tours of the Cobble Hill Tunnel from time to time, but all tours are currently suspended.

In 2014, the New York Times published an article that sparked renewed interest in the light rail line. Brooklyn to Queens, but not by Subway By MICHAEL KIMMELMAN, NYTimes 2014 April 21 

==See also==
*Cobble Hill Tunnel

==References==

==External links==
*Forgotten New York
*Brooklyn Historic Railway Association



[[-Lactam]]

A -lactam (beta-lactam) ring is a four-membered lactam. (A lactam is a cyclic amide). It is named as such because the nitrogen atom is attached to the -carbon relative to the carbonyl. The simplest -lactam possible is 2-azetidinone.

==Clinical significance==
Penicillin core structure.
The -lactam ring is part of the core structure of several antibiotic families, the principal ones being the penicillins, cephalosporins, carbapenems, and monobactams, which are, therefore, also called -Lactam antibiotics. Nearly all of these antibiotics work by inhibiting bacterial cell wall biosynthesis. This has a lethal effect on bacteria. Bacteria do, however, contain within their populations, in smaller quantities, bacteria that are resistant against -lactam antibiotics. They do this by expressing one of many -lactamase genes. More than 1,000 different -lactamase enzymes have been documented in various species of bacteria. Ehmann, David E. et al. (2012). "Avibactam is a covalent, reversible, non--lactam -lactamase inhibitor." PNAS. 109(29):11663-11668. These enzymes vary widely in their chemical structure and catalytic efficiencies. When bacterial populations have these resistant subgroups, treatment with -lactam can result in the resistant strain becoming more prevalent and therefore more virulent.

==History==
The first synthetic -lactam was prepared by Hermann Staudinger in 1907 by reaction of the Schiff base of aniline and benzaldehyde with diphenylketene H. Staudinger, Justus Liebigs Ann. Chem. 1907, 356, 51  123. in a cycloaddition:
:

Up to 1970, most -lactam research was concerned with the penicillin and cephalosporin groups, but since then a wide variety of structures have been described. 

==Nomenclature==

-Lactams are classified according to their core ring structures. 
*-Lactams fused to saturated five-membered rings:
**-Lactams containing thiazolidine rings are named penams.
**-Lactams containing pyrrolidine rings are named carbapenams.
**-Lactams fused to oxazolidine rings are named oxapenams or clavams.
*-Lactams fused to unsaturated five-membered rings:
**-Lactams containing 2,3-dihydrothiazole rings are named penems.
**-Lactams containing 2,3-dihydro-1H-pyrrole rings are named carbapenems.
*-Lactams fused to unsaturated six-membered rings:
**-Lactams containing 3,6-dihydro-2H-1,3-thiazine rings are named cephems.
**-Lactams containing 1,2,3,4-tetrahydropyridine rings are named carbacephems.
**-Lactams containing 3,6-dihydro-2H-1,3-oxazine rings are named oxacephems.
*-Lactams not fused to any other ring are named monobactams.

By convention, the bicyclic -lactams are numbered starting with the position occupied by sulfur in the penams and cephems, regardless of which atom it is in a given class. That is, position 1 is always adjacent to the -carbon of -lactam ring. The numbering continues clockwise from position one until the -carbon of -lactam is reached, at which point numbering continues counterclockwise around the lactam ring to number the remaining to carbons. For example, the nitrogen atom of all bicyclic -lactams fused to five-membered rings is labelled position 4, as it is in penams, while in cephems, the nitrogen is position 5.

The numbering of monolactams follows that of the IUPAC; the nitrogen atom is position 1, the carbonyl carbon is 2, the -carbon is 3, and the -carbon 4.

==Reactivity==
Due to ring strain, -lactams are more reactive to hydrolysis conditions than are linear amides or larger lactams. This strain is further increased by fusion to a second ring, as found in most -lactam antibiotics. This trend is due to the amide character of the -lactam being reduced by the aplanarity of the system. The nitrogen atom of an ideal amide is sp2-hybridized due to resonance, and sp2-hybridized atoms have trigonal planar bond geometry. As a pyramidal bond geometry is forced upon the nitrogen atom by the ring strain, the resonance of the amide bond is reduced, and the carbonyl becomes more ketone-like. Nobel laureate Woodward described a parameter h as a measure of the height of the trigonal pyramid defined by the nitrogen (as the apex) and its three adjacent atoms. h corresponds to the strength of the -lactam bond with lower numbers (more planar; more like ideal amides) being stronger and less reactive. Woodward, R.B. (1980) "Penems and related substances." Phil Trans Royal Soc Chem B 289(1036), 239&ndash;50. Monobactams have h values between 0.05 and 0.10 angstroms (). Cephems have h values in of 0.20&ndash;0.25 . Penams have values in the range 0.40&ndash;0.50 , while carbapenems and clavams have values of 0.50&ndash;0.60 , being the most reactive of the -lactams toward hydrolysis. Nangia, A.; Biradha, K.; Desiraju, G.R. (1996) "Correlation of biological activity in -lactam antibiotics with Woodward and Cohen structural parameters: A Cambridge database study." J Chem Soc, Perkin Trans 2 (5), 943&ndash;53. 

==Other applications==
A new study has suggested that -lactams can undergo ring-opening polymerization to form amide bonds, to become nylon-3 polymers. The backbones of these polymers are identical to peptides, which offer them biofunctionality. A recent study has showed that these nylon-3 polymers can either mimic host defense peptides or act as signals to stimulate 3T3 stem cell function.

Antiproliferative agents that target tubulin with -lactams in their structure have also been reported. 

==See also==
* Azetidine
* Lactam
* Lactone

==References==

==External links==
* Synthesis of -lactams



[[Bishopric of Brandenburg]]

The Bishopric of Brandenburg was a Roman Catholic diocese established by Otto the Great in 948, including the territory between the Elbe on the west, the Oder on the east, and the Schwarze Elster on the south, and taking in the Uckermark to the north. Its seat was Brandenburg upon Havel. It was a state of the Holy Roman Empire for some time, probably starting at 1161/1165, but never managed to gain control over a significant territory, being overshadowed by the Margraviate of Brandenburg, which was originally seated in the same city. Chapter and cathedral, surrounded by further ecclesiastical institutions, were located on Dominsel (cathedral island), which formed a prince-episcopal immunity district, distinct from the city of Brandenburg. Only in 1929 the - meanwhile former - immunity district was incorporated into the city itself.

==History==
The Cathedral of Ss. Peter and Paul in Brandenburg upon Havel, nineteenth century. The diocese was originally a suffragan of Mainz, but in 968 it came under the archiepiscopal jurisdiction of Magdeburg. The Lutician uprising of 983 practically annihilated it; bishops continued to be named, but they were merely titular, until the downfall of the Wends in the twelfth century and the German eastward settlement in the diocesan region revived the bishopric.

Bishop Wigers (113860) was the first of a series of bishops of the Premonstratensian Order, which chose the occupants of the see until 1447; in that year a bull of Nicholas V gave the right of nomination to the elector of Brandenburg, with whom the bishops stood in a close feudal relation.

The Castle of Ziesar (Burg Ziesar), now a museum also showing the history of the Prince-Bishopric of Brandenburg. As rulers of imperial immediacy, regnant in a, however, dispersed territory partitioned into the four bailiwicks () of Brandenburg/Havel, Ketzin, Teltow and Ziesar, the prince-bishops resided in their fortress in Ziesar. The last actual bishop was Matthias von Jagow (d. 1544), who took the side of the Reformation, married, and in every way furthered the undertakings of Elector Joachim II.

There were two more nominal bishops, but on the petition of the latter of these, the electoral prince John George, the secularisation of the bishopric was undertaken and finally accomplished, in spite of legal proceedings to reassert the imperial immediacy of the prince-bishopric within the Empire and so to likewise preserve the diocese, which dragged on into the seventeenth century.

==Bishops of Brandenburg==
* 949968: Dietmar
* 968980: Dodilo
* 9801004: Volkmar
* 9921018: Wigo
* 10221032: Luizo
* 1032-1048: Rudolf
* 10481051: Dankwart
* 10681080: Dietrich I
* 10801092: Volkmar II
* 11001122: Hartbert
* 11241137: Ludolf
* 11371138: Landbert
* 11381160: Wiggar
* 11601173: Wilman
* 11731179: Sigfried I
* 11791190: Baldran
* 11901192: Alexius
* 11921205: Norbert
* 12051216: Baldwin
* 12161220: Siegfried II
* 12211222: Ludolf von Schanebeck, claimant, but not enthroned
* 12211222: Wichmann von Arnstein, counter-claimant, also not enthroned
* 12221241: Gernot
* 12411251: Rutger von Ammendorf
* 12511261: Otto von Mehringen
* 12611278: Heinrich I von Osthenen (or Ostheeren)
* 12781287: Gebhard
* 12871290: Heidenreich
* 12901291: Richard, refused the appointment
* 12911296: Dietrich, not enthroned
* 12961302: Vollrad von Krempa
* 13031316: Friedrich von Pltzkau
* 13161324: Johann I von Tuchen
* 13241327: Heinrich II Count of Barby, not enthroned
* 13271347: Ludwig Schenk von Reindorf (or Neuendorf)
* 13471365: Dietrich II Kothe
* 13661393: Dietrich III von der Schulenburg
* 13931406: Heinrich III von Bodendiek (or Bodendieck)
* 14061414: Henning von Bredow
* 1414: Friedrich von Grafeneck, Prince-Bishop of Augsburg
* 14151420: Johann von Waldow, Bishop of Lebus
* 1420: Friedrich von Grafeneck, again
* 14211459: Stephan Bodecker
* 14591472: Dietrich IV von Stechow
* 14721485: Arnold von Burgsdorff
* 14851507: Joachim I von Bredow
* 15071520: Hieronymus Schulz (or Scultetus), later Bishop of Havelberg
* 15201526: Dietrich V von Hardenberg, Lutheran
* 15261544: Matthias von Jagow, Lutheran
* 15441546: Sede vacante
* 15461560: Joachim II of Mnsterberg-Oels
* 1560-1569/71: John George, Elector of Brandenburg, Regent (Verweser)
* 1569/71: Joachim Frederick, Elector of Brandenburg

== See also ==
* List of Former Roman Catholic dioceses of Germany

==References==
* 

Brandenburg Diocese
Brandenburg Bishopric
Brandenburg
Brandenburg Diocese
Brandenburg



[[BASE jumping]]

BASE jumping, also sometimes written as B.A.S.E. jumping, is an activity where participants jump from fixed objects and use a parachute to break their fall. "BASE" is an acronym that stands for four categories of fixed objects from which one can jump: building, antenna, span, and Earth (cliff). 
BASE jumping from a cliff in a wingsuit. 
In the USA, BASE jumping is currently regarded by many as a fringe extreme sport or stunt. the online "BASE Fatality List" records 230 deaths for BASE jumping since April 1981. 

==History==
The acronym "B.A.S.E." (now more commonly "BASE") was coined by filmmaker Carl Boenish, his wife Jean Boenish, Phil Smith, and Phil Mayfield. Carl Boenish was the catalyst behind modern BASE jumping, and in 1978, he filmed the first BASE jumps to be made using ram-air parachutes and the freefall tracking technique (from El Capitan, in Yosemite National Park). While BASE jumps had been made prior to that time, the El Capitan activity was the effective birth of what is now called BASE jumping.

BASE numbers are awarded to those who have made at least one jump from each of the four categories (buildings, antennas, spans and earth). When Phil Smith and Phil Mayfield jumped together from a Houston skyscraper on 18 January 1981, they became the first to attain the exclusive BASE numbers (BASE #1 and #2, respectively), having already jumped from an antenna, spans, and earthen objects. Jean and Carl Boenish qualified for BASE numbers 3 and 4 soon after. A separate "award" was soon enacted for Night BASE jumping when Mayfield completed each category at night, becoming Night BASE #1, with Smith qualifying a few weeks later.

During the early eighties, nearly all BASE jumps were made using standard skydiving equipment, including two parachutes (main and reserve), and deployment components. Later on, specialized equipment and techniques were developed specifically for the unique needs of BASE jumping.

Jumpers from a cliff
Upon completing a jump from all of the four object categories, a jumper may choose to apply for a "BASE number", which are awarded sequentially. BASE #1 was awarded to Phil Smith of Houston, Texas in 1981. The 1000th application for a BASE number was filed in March 2005 and BASE #1000 was awarded to Matt Moilanen of Kalamazoo, Michigan. , over 1,700 BASE numbers have been issued. 

BASE jumping is often featured in action movies. The 2002 Vin Diesel film xXx includes a scene where Diesel's character catapults himself off the Foresthill Bridge in an open-topped car, landing safely as the car crashes on the ground. In the movie , includes the scene in which the main characters jump with wing suits from the IFC Tower in Hong Kong and fly over the Bank of China, finally opening their parachutes to land on a moving freighter. The stunt was done live, with no special effects, by base jumpers Martin Rosn and Per Eriksson, members of the Swedish "Team Bautasten". The scene was filmed by air-to-air camera man Mikael Nordqvist from the same team. Since the 1976 Mount Asgard jump featured in the pre-credits sequence to The Spy Who Loved Me, James Bond movies have featured several BASE jumps, including one from the Eiffel Tower in 1985's A View to a Kill, the Rock of Gibraltar in 1987's The Living Daylights, and in Die Another Day, 2002, Pierce Brosnan as James Bond jumps from a melting iceberg. Of the James Bond jumps only the Mt Asgard and Eiffel Tower jumps were filmed live; the rest were special effects. And in 2005's "Batman Begins", Bruce Wayne uses BASE jumping as inspiration for his memory cloth cape. A series of BASE jumps are featured in the video for a remix of M83's "Lower Your Eyelids to Die With the Sun". 

Guinness World Records first listed a BASE jumping record with Carl Boenish's 1984 leap from Trollveggen (Troll Wall) in Norway. It was described as the highest BASE jump. Here meaning "greatest vertical descent," not "highest starting elevation." (The jump was made two days before Boenish's death at the same site.) This record category is still in the Guinness book and is currently held by Australians Glenn Singleman and Heather Swan with a jump from Meru Peak in northern India at a starting elevation of 6604 m. On July 8, 2006 Captain Daniel G. Schilling set the Guinness World Record for the most BASE jumps in a twenty-four hour period. Schilling jumped off the Perrine Bridge in Twin Falls, Idaho a record 201 times.

BASE competitions have been held since the early 1980s, with accurate landings or free fall aerobatics used as the judging criteria. Recent years have seen a formal competition held at the 452 m high Petronas Towers in Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia, judged on landing accuracy.

In 2010 North west Norway celebrated with a world record with 53 Base jumpers jumping from a cliff.

===Timeline of notable jumps===
* In 1912, Franz Reichelt, tailor, jumped from the first deck of the Eiffel Tower testing his invention, the coat parachute. He died. It was his first ever attempt with the parachute and both the authorities and the spectators believed he intended to test it using a dummy. 
* In 1913, tefan Bani jumped from a 12 m building in order to demonstrate his new parachute to the U. S. Patent Office and military. Subsequently this design became standard equipment for U.S. pilots during the World War I.
* In 1913, a Russian student Vladimir Ossovski ( ), from the Saint-Petersburg Conservatory, jumped from the 53-meter high bridge over the river Seine in Rouen (France), using the parachute RK-1, invented a year before that by Gleb Kotelnikov (18721944). Ossovski planned to jump from the Eiffel Tower too, but the Parisian authorities did not allow it. Russian edition of GEO magazine, issue 11, November 2006, GEO 
* In 1965, Erich Felbermayr from Wels jumped from the Kleine Zinne / Cima piccola di Lavaredo in the Dolomites. Erich Felbermayr, eine Legende (in German) 
* In 1966, Michael Pelkey and Brian Schubert jumped from the cliff "El Capitan" in Yosemite Valley. 
* On January 31, 1972, Rick Sylvester skied off Yosemite Valley's El Capitan cliff, making the first skiBASE jump (only he termed it a "ski/parachute jump" since the acronym BASE had yet to be coined), falling approximately halfway down, about 1500', before deploying his Thunderbow chute. He did this twice more, approximately two weeks later and a year later.
* On 9 November 1975, the first person to parachute off the CN Tower in Toronto, Canada, was Bill Eustace, a member of the tower's construction crew. He was fired. 
* In 1975, Owen J. Quinn, a jobless man, parachuted from the south tower of the World Trade Center to publicize the plight of the unemployed. 
* In 1976 Rick Sylvester skied off Canada's Mount Asgard for the ski chase sequence of the James Bond movie The Spy Who Loved Me, giving the wider world its first look at BASE jumping. Chic Scott, Pushing the Limits: The Story of Canadian Mountaineering, Calgary: Rocky Mountain Books, 2000, ISBN 0-921102-59-3, p. 298. 
* On February 22, 1982, Wayne Allwood, an Australian skydiving accuracy champion, parachuted from a helicopter over the Sydney CBD and landed on the small top area of Sydney's Centrepoint Tower, approximately 300 m above the ground. Upon landing, Allwood discarded and secured his parachute, then used a full-sized reserve parachute to BASE jump into Hyde Park below. Video footage is also included in the Australian Base Associations' 2001 video compilation, Fistful of F-111.
* In 1987 Steve Dines (Australian) BASE 157 Made the first jump from the top of the Sydney Harbour Bridge.
* In 1990 Russell Powell (British) BASE 230 illegally jumped from the Whispering Gallery inside St Paul's Cathedral London. It was the lowest indoor BASE Jump in the world at 31.1 m. "Xtreme Sports Photography" (Xtreme Series) RotoVision (publisher) Simon Fraser (Author), ISBN 2-88046-755-1, Chapter on Photographing BASE Jumping by Doug Blane. October 2004 
* In 1990 Australian Mark Scott BASE# 165 / OZ BASE # 13 / SA BASE #1 made the first BASE Jump off London's Canary Wharf Tower 4 days before the topping out ceremony. "
* On August 26, 1992 Nic Feteris and Glenn Singleman (two Australians) made a BASE jump from an altitude of 20,600 feet (6286 meters) jump off Great Trango Towers Pakistan. It was the world's highest BASE jump off the earth at the time.
*In 2000, Hannes Arch and Ueli Gegenschatz were the first to dare a BASE jump from the imposing 1800-metre high north face of the Eiger.
*In 2005, Karina Hollekim became the first woman to perform a ski-BASE.
* In April 2008, Herv Le Gallou and David McDonnell infiltrated Burj Khalifa, and jumped off a balcony on the 155th floor. They evaded arrest following their successful jump. However, on a second attempt two days later, Le Gallou was caught and subsequently detained in Dubai for three months. 

 

Video documentary about the jump from the Burj Dubai tower.
 
* In 2009, three women29 year old Australian Livia Dickie, 28-year-old Venezuelan Ana Isabel Dao, and 32-year-old Norwegian Anniken Binz Falling Angels | Anniken Binz | Blogs | Cooler - snow, surf, life & style base jumped from Angel Falls, the highest waterfall in the world. Ana Isabel Dao was the first Venezuelan woman to jump off Angel Falls. 
* On 8 January 2010, Nasr Al Niyadi and Omar Al Hegelan broke the then current world record for the highest building BASE jump after they leapt from a crane suspended platform attached to the Burj Khalifa's 160th floor at 672 m. Highest base jump-Nasr Al Niyadi and Omar Al Hegelan sets world record. Retrieved 2010-01-09. 
* On 5 May 2013, Russian Valery Rozov, 48, jumped off Mt. Everests north face from a height of 7220 m. Using a specially-developed wing suit, he flew to the Rongbuk glacier breaking the world record for highest base jump. 
* In September 2013, 3 men jumped off the then-under-construction One World Trade Center in New York City. Footage of their jump was recorded using headcams and can be seen on YouTube. https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=nz7sxt9xeJE#t=51 In March 2014 the 3 jumpers and one accomplice on the ground were arrested after turning themselves in. http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-2588211/Three-men-base-jumped-World-Trade-Center-hand-police-helmet-cam-video.html 
* On April 21, 2014, Fred Fugen and Vince Reffet (both from France) broke the Guinness World Record for Highest BASE Jump From A Building with a jump of 828 m (2,716 ft 6 in). They performed the jump off the Burj Khalifa tower in Dubai, UAE. 
* On May 27, 2014, Whisper became the world's first Wingsuit BASE jumping dog. Video: When Dogs Fly  Dean Potter Takes His Dog Whisper BASE Jumping National Geographic. 

However, these and other sporadic incidents were one-time experiments, not the systematic pursuit of a new form of parachuting. After 1978, the filmed jumps from El Capitan were repeated, not as a publicity exercise or as a movie stunt, but as a true recreational activity. It was this that popularised BASE jumping more widely among parachutists. Carl Boenish continued to publish films and informational magazines on BASE jumping until his death in 1984 after a BASE-jump off of the Troll Wall. By this time, the concept had spread among skydivers worldwide, with hundreds of participants making fixed-object jumps.

==Comparison with skydiving==
BASE jumping from antenna tower
BASE Jumping from Sapphire Tower, Istanbul.

BASE jumping grew out of skydiving. BASE jumps are generally made from much lower altitudes than skydives, and a BASE jump takes place close to the object serving as the jump platform. Because BASE jumps generally entail slower airspeeds than typical skydives (due to the limited altitude), a BASE jumper does not always reach terminal velocity. Because higher airspeeds enable jumpers more aerodynamic control of their bodies, as well as more positive and quick parachute openings, the longer the delay, the better. BASE jumping is significantly more dangerous than similar sports such as skydiving from aircraft. 

Skydivers use the air flow to stabilize their position, allowing the parachute to deploy cleanly. BASE jumpers, falling at lower speeds, have less aerodynamic control, and may tumble. The attitude of the body at the moment of jumping determines the stability of flight in the first few seconds, before sufficient airspeed has built up to enable aerodynamic stability. On low BASE jumps, parachute deployment takes place during this early phase of flight, so if a poor "launch" leads into a tumble, the jumper may not be able to correct this before the opening. If the parachute is deployed while the jumper is tumbling, there is a high risk of entanglement or malfunction. The jumper may also not be facing the right direction. Such an off-heading opening is not as problematic in skydiving, but an off-heading opening that results in object strike has caused many serious injuries and deaths in BASE jumping.

At an altitude of 600m (2,000 feet), having been in free-fall for at least 300m (1,000 feet), the jumper is falling at approximately 55 m/s (190 km/h, 120 mph), and is approximately 10.9 seconds from the ground. Most BASE jumps are made from less than 600m (2,000 feet). For example, a BASE jump from a 150m (500 foot) object is about 5.6 seconds from the ground if the jumper remains in free fall. On a BASE jump, the parachute must open at about half the airspeed of a similar skydive, and more quickly (in a shorter distance fallen). Standard skydiving parachute systems are not designed for this situation, so BASE jumpers often use specially designed harnesses and parachute containers, with extra large pilot chutes, and many jump with only one parachute, since there would be little time to utilize a reserve parachute. If modified, by removing the bag and slider, stowing the lines in a tail pocket, and fitting a large pilot chute, standard skydiving gear can be used for lower BASE jumps, but is then prone to kinds of malfunction that are rare in normal skydiving (such as "line-overs" and broken lines).

Another risk is that most BASE jumping venues have very small areas in which to land. A beginner skydiver, after parachute deployment, may have a three minute or more parachute ride to the ground. A BASE jump from 150m (500 foot) will have a parachute ride of only 10 to 15 seconds.

One way to make a parachute open very quickly is to use a static line or direct bag. These devices form an attachment between the parachute and the jump platform, which stretches out the parachute and suspension lines as the jumper falls, before separating and allowing the parachute to inflate. This method enables the very lowest jumps (below 60m / 200 ft) to be made, although most BASE jumpers are more motivated to make higher jumps involving free fall. This method is similar to the paratrooper's deployment system, also called a PCA (Pilot Chute Assist).

==Legal issues==

The legal issues are that a BASE jumper must consider concern permissions to use the object from which the jump is initiated and the area used for landing.

Surreptitious BASE jumps are often made from tall buildings and antenna towers. Many such BASE jumps must be covert because the owners of these objects are generally reluctant to allow their object to be used as a platform. While BASE jumping itself is generally not illegal, making events such as the "Go Fast Games" at the Royal Gorge Bridge possible, the covert nature of accessing objects usually necessitates trespassing on an object. Jumpers who are caught can expect to be charged with trespassing, as well as having charges like breaking and entering, reckless endangerment, vandalism, or other such charges pressed against them. Other people accompanying the jumper, such as ground crew, may also face charges. In some jurisdictions it may be permissible to use land until specifically told not to. Perrine Bridge in Twin Falls, Idaho, is an example of a man-made structure in the United States where BASE jumping is allowed year-round without a permit.

A BASE jumper leaving the Perrine Bridge in Idaho
Once a year, on the third Saturday in October ("Bridge Day"), permission to BASE jump has explicitly been granted at the New River Gorge Bridge in Fayetteville, West Virginia. The New River Gorge Bridge deck is 876 feet (297 m) above the river. This annual event attracts about 450 BASE jumpers and nearly 200,000 spectators. 1,100 jumps may occur during the six hours that it is legal provided good conditions. For many skydivers who would like to try BASE jumping, this bridge will be the only fixed object from which they ever jump. On 21 October 2006, veteran BASE jumper Brian Lee Schubert of Alta Loma, California died while jumping from the New River Gorge Bridge during Bridge Day activities because his parachute opened late; he plummeted to his death in the waters below. Jumps continued after the recovery of his body. He and his friend Michael Pelkey were the first to make a BASE jump from El Capitan in Yosemite National Park in 1966.

The National Park Service (NPS) has the authority to ban specific activities in US National Parks and has done so for BASE jumping. The authority comes from 36 CFR 2.17(3), which prohibits, "Delivering or retrieving a person or object by parachute, helicopter, or other airborne means, except in emergencies involving public safety or serious property loss, or pursuant to the terms and conditions of a permit." Under that Regulation, BASE is not banned, but is allowable if a permit is issued by the Superintendent, which means that a mechanism to allow BASE in National Parks was always in place. However, National Park Service Management Policies have stated that BASE "is not an appropriate public use activity within national park areas ..." (2001 Management Policy 8.2.2.7.) This policy bans air delivery but includes a proposal to replace the language that bans it with a different text. The fate and effects of this proposal are unknown.

During the early days of BASE jumping, the NPS issued permits that authorized jumps from El Capitan. This program ran for three months in 1980 and then collapsed amid allegations of abuse by unauthorized jumpers. The NPS has since vigorously enforced the ban, charging jumpers with "aerial delivery into a National Park". Although one jumper drowned in the Merced River while being chased by Park Rangers intent on arresting him, illegal jumps continue in Yosemite at a rate estimated at a few hundred per year, often at night or dawn. El Capitan, Half Dome and Glacier Point have been used as jump sites.

Other US public land, including land controlled by the Bureau of Land Management, does not ban air delivery, and there are numerous jumpable objects on BLM land.

The legal position is different at other sites and in other countries. For example, in Norway's Lysefjord (from the mountain Kjerag), BASE jumpers are made welcome. Many sites in the European Alps, near Chamonix and on the Eiger, are also open to jumpers. Some other Norwegian places, like the Troll Wall, are banned because of dangerous rescue missions in the past. In Austria, jumping from mountain cliffs is generally allowed, whereas the use of bridges (such as the Europabruecke near Innsbruck, Tirol) or dams is generally prohibited. Australia has some of the toughest stances on BASE jumping: it specifically bans BASE jumping from certain objects, such as the Sydney Harbor Bridge.

==Fatalities==
BASE jumping as of 2006 has an overall fatality rate estimated at about one fatality per sixty participants. A study of 20,850 BASE jumps from the same site (the Kjerag Massif in Norway) reported 9 fatalities over the 11-year period from 1995 to 2005, or 1 in every 2,317 jumps. However, at that site, 1 in every 254 jumps over that period resulted in a nonfatal accident. BASE jumping is one of the most dangerous recreational activities in the world, with a fatality and injury rate 43 times higher than parachuting from a plane. 

 the 'BASE Fatality List' maintained by Blincmagazine.com records 230 deaths for BASE jumping since April 1981. 

==References==

==Further reading==
* "The Great Book of BASE". BirdBrain Publishing. July, 2010.
* "The Ground's the Limit". Texas Monthly. December 1981.
* "BASE Fatality Statistics". BLiNC Magazine. July 2011.

==External links==

*Parachuting from fixed objects: descriptive study of 106 fatal events in BASE jumping 19812006
*Luigi Cani base jumps off a cliff
* A Sport to Die For ESPN, Michael Abrams
* First Dog Ever To BaseJump



[[Beauty]]

Rayonnant rose window in Notre Dame de Paris. In Gothic architecture, light was considered the most beautiful revelation of God.

Beauty is a characteristic of a person, animal, place, object, or idea that provides a perceptual experience of pleasure or satisfaction. Beauty is studied as part of aesthetics, sociology, social psychology, and culture. An "ideal beauty" is an entity which is admired, or possesses features widely attributed to beauty in a particular culture, for perfection.

The experience of "beauty" often involves an interpretation of some entity as being in balance and harmony with nature, which may lead to feelings of attraction and emotional well-being. Because this can be a subjective experience, it is often said that "beauty is in the eye of the beholder." 

There is evidence that perceptions of beauty are evolutionarily determined, that things, aspects of people and landscapes considered beautiful are typically found in situations likely to give enhanced survival of the perceiving human's genes. The Oxford Handbook for Aesthetics Denis Dutton: A Darwinian theory of beauty | Video on TED.com 

== Etymology ==
The classical Greek noun for "beauty" was , kallos, and the adjective for "beautiful" was , kalos. The Koine Greek word for beautiful was , hraios, Matthew 23:27, Acts 3:10, Flavius Josephus, 12.65 an adjective etymologically coming from the word , hra, meaning "hour". In Koine Greek, beauty was thus associated with "being of one's hour". Euripides, Alcestis 515. Thus, a ripe fruit (of its time) was considered beautiful, whereas a young woman trying to appear older or an older woman trying to appear younger would not be considered beautiful. In Attic Greek, hraios had many meanings, including "youthful" and "ripe old age". 

== Historical view of beauty ==
Florence Cathedral and dome. Since the Renaissance in Europe, harmony, symmetry and correct proportions are considered essential elements of universal beauty.
There is evidence that a preference for beautiful faces emerges early in child development, and that the standards of attractiveness are similar across different genders and cultures. A study published in 2008 suggests that symmetry is also important because it suggests the absence of genetic or acquired defects. Highfield, Roger. "Why beauty is an advert for good genes". The Telegraph. Retrieved February 13, 2012 

Although style and fashion vary widely, cross-cultural research has found a variety of commonalities in people's perception of beauty. The earliest Western theory of beauty can be found in the works of early Greek philosophers from the pre-Socratic period, such as Pythagoras. The Pythagorean school saw a strong connection between mathematics and beauty. In particular, they noted that objects proportioned according to the golden ratio seemed more attractive. Seife, Charles (2000). Zro: the biography of a dangerous idea. Penguin. ISBN 0-14-029647-6. p. 32 Ancient Greek architecture is based on this view of symmetry and proportion.

Plato considered beauty to be the Idea (Form) above all other Ideas. Phaedrus Aristotle saw a relationship between the beautiful (to kalon) and virtue, arguing that "Virtue aims at the beautiful." Nicomachean Ethics 

Classical philosophy and sculptures of men and women produced according to the Greek philosophers' tenets of ideal human beauty were rediscovered in Renaissance Europe, leading to a re-adoption of what became known as a "classical ideal". In terms of female human beauty, a woman whose appearance conforms to these tenets is still called a "classical beauty" or said to possess a "classical beauty", whilst the foundations laid by Greek and Roman artists have also supplied the standard for male beauty in western civilization. During the Gothic era, the classical aesthetical canon of beauty was rejected as sinful. Later, the Renaissance and Humanism rejected this view, and considered beauty as a product of rational order and harmony of proportions. Renaissance artists and architect (such as Giorgio Vasari in his "lives of artists") criticised the Gothic period as irrational and barbarian. This point of view over Gothic art lasted until Romanticism, in the 19th century.

The Birth of Venus, by Sandro Botticelli. The goddess Venus is the classical personification of beauty.

The Age of Reason saw a rise in an interest in beauty as a philosophical subject. For example, Scottish philosopher Francis Hutcheson argued that beauty is "unity in variety and variety in unity". An Inquiry Into the Original of Our Ideas of Beauty and Virtue; In Two Treatises The Romantic poets, too, became highly concerned with the nature of beauty, with John Keats arguing in "Ode on a Grecian Urn" that

: Beauty is truth, truth beauty, that is all.
: Ye know on earth, and all ye need to know.

In the Romantic period, Edmund Burke postulated a difference between beauty in its classical meaning and the sublime. The concept of the sublime, as explicated by Burke and Kant, suggested viewing Gothic art and architecture, though not in accordance with the classical standard of beauty, as sublime.

The 20th century saw an increasing rejection of beauty by artists and philosophers alike, culminating in postmodernism's anti-aesthetics. The Anti-Aesthetic: Essays on Postmodern Culture by Hal Foster This is despite beauty being a central concern of one of postmodernism's main influences, Friedrich Nietzsche, who argued that the Will to Power was the Will to Beauty. The Will to Power 

In the aftermath of postmodernism's rejection of beauty, thinkers have returned to beauty as an important value. American analytic philosopher Guy Sircello proposed his New Theory of Beauty as an effort to reaffirm the status of beauty as an important philosophical concept. A New Theory of Beauty. Princeton Essays on the Arts, 1. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1975. Love and Beauty. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1989. Elaine Scarry also argues that beauty is related to justice. On Beauty and Being Just 

==Human beauty==
Grace Kelly in Rear Window

The characterization of a person as beautiful, whether on an individual basis or by community consensus, is often based on some combination of inner beauty, which includes psychological factors such as personality, intelligence, grace, politeness, charisma, integrity, congruence and elegance, and outer beauty (i.e. physical attractiveness) which includes physical attributes which are valued on an aesthetic basis.

Standards of beauty have changed over time, based on changing cultural values. Historically, paintings show a wide range of different standards for beauty. However, humans who are relatively young, with smooth skin, well-proportioned bodies, and regular features, have traditionally been considered the most beautiful throughout history.

A strong indicator of physical beauty is "averageness", or "koinophilia". When images of human faces are averaged together to form a composite image, they become progressively closer to the "ideal" image and are perceived as more attractive. This was first noticed in 1883, when Francis Galton, cousin of Charles Darwin, overlaid photographic composite images of the faces of vegetarians and criminals to see if there was a typical facial appearance for each. When doing this, he noticed that the composite images were more attractive compared to any of the individual images.

Fresco of a Roman woman from Pompeii, c. 50 AD

Researchers have replicated the result under more controlled conditions and found that the computer generated, mathematical average of a series of faces is rated more favorably than individual faces. Evolutionarily, it makes logical sense that sexual creatures should be attracted to mates who possess predominantly common or average features. 

A feature of beautiful women that has been explored by researchers is a waisthip ratio of approximately 0.70. Physiologists have shown that women with hourglass figures are more fertile than other women due to higher levels of certain female hormones, a fact that may subconsciously condition males choosing mates. 

People are influenced by the images they see in the media to determine what is or is not beautiful. Some feminists and doctors have suggested that the very thin models featured in magazines promote eating disorders, and others have argued that the predominance of white women featured in movies and advertising leads to a Eurocentric concept of beauty, feelings of inferiority in women of color, and internalized racism. 

The black is beautiful cultural movement sought to dispel this notion. 

The concept of beauty in men is known as 'bishnen' in Japan. Bishnen refers to males with distinctly feminine features, physical characteristics establishing the standard of beauty in Japan and typically exhibited in their pop culture idols. A multi-billion-dollar industry of Japanese Aesthetic Salons exists for this reason.

==Effects on society==
Chinese Jade ornament with flower design, Jin Dynasty (11151234 AD), Shanghai Museum

Beauty presents a standard of comparison, and it can cause resentment and dissatisfaction when not achieved. People who do not fit the "beauty ideal" may be ostracized within their communities. The television sitcom Ugly Betty portrays the life of a girl faced with hardships due to society's unwelcoming attitudes toward those they deem unattractive. However, a person may also be targeted for harassment because of their beauty. In Malna, a strikingly beautiful Italian woman is forced into poverty by the women of the community who refuse to give her work for fear that she may "woo" their husbands. The documentary Beauty in the Eyes of the Beheld explores both the societal blessings and curses of female beauty through interviews of women considered beautiful.

Researchers have found that good looking students get higher grades from their teachers than students with an ordinary appearance. Some studies using mock criminal trials have shown that physically attractive "defendants" are less likely to be convictedand if convicted are likely to receive lighter sentencesthan less attractive ones (although the opposite effect was observed when the alleged crime was swindling, perhaps because jurors perceived the defendant's attractiveness as facilitating the crime). Amina A Memon, Aldert Vrij, Ray Bull (2003). Psychology and Law: Truthfulness, Accuracy and Credibility. John Wiley & Sons. pp. 4647. ISBN 047086835X Studies among teens and young adults, such as those of psychiatrist and self-help author, Eva Ritvo, show that skin conditions have a profound effect on social behavior and opportunity. 

How much money a person earns may also be influenced by physical beauty. One study found that people low in physical attractiveness earn 5 to 10 percent less than ordinary looking people, who in turn earn 3 to 8 percent less than those who are considered good looking. Lorenz, K. (2005). "Do pretty people earn more?" CNN News, Time Warner. In the market for loans, the least attractive people are less likely to get approvals, although they are less likely to default. In the marriage market, women's looks are at a premium, but men's looks do not matter much. 

Conversely, being very unattractive increases the individuals propensity for criminal activity for a number of crimes ranging from burglary to theft to selling illicit drugs. 

Discrimination against others based on their appearance is known as lookism. Gough, L. (2011). C. Northcote Parkinson's Parkinson's law. Oxford, U.K: Infinite Ideas Ltd. p. 36. ISBN 1283147378 

St. Augustine said of beauty "Beauty is indeed a good gift of God; but that the good may not think it a great good, God dispenses it even to the wicked." City of God Book 15 Chapter 22 

==Ugliness==
Ugliness is a property of a person or thing that is unpleasant to look upon and results in a highly unfavorable evaluation. To be ugly is to be aesthetically unattractive, repulsive, or offensive. Webster's New World College Dictionary, 3rd edition, 1995. 

People who appear ugly to others suffer well-documented discrimination, earning 10 to 15 percent less per year than similar workers, and are less likely to be hired for almost any job, but lack legal recourse to fight discrimination. 

For some people, ugliness is a central aspect of their persona. Jean-Paul Sartre had a lazy eye and a bloated, asymmetrical face, and he attributed many of his philosophical ideas to his lifelong struggle to come to terms with his self-described ugliness. Socrates also used his ugliness as a philosophical touch point, concluding that philosophy can save us from our outward ugliness. Famous in his own time for his perceived ugliness, Abraham Lincoln was described by a contemporary: "to say that he is ugly is nothing; to add that his figure is grotesque, is to convey no adequate impression." However, his looks proved to be an asset in his personal and political relationships, as his law partner William Herndon wrote, "He was not a pretty man by any means, nor was he an ugly one; he was a homely man, careless of his looks, plain-looking and plain-acting. He had no pomp, display, or dignity, so-called. He appeared simple in his carriage and bearing. He was a sad-looking man; his melancholy dripped from him as he walked. His apparent gloom impressed his friends, and created sympathy for himone means of his great success." 

==See also==
* Adornment
* Beauty pageant
* Glamour (presentation)
* Processing fluency theory of aesthetic pleasure
* Body modification

==References==

==External links==

*
*
* BBC Radio 4's In Our Time programme on Beauty (requires RealAudio)
* Dictionary of the History of Ideas: Theories of Beauty to the Mid-Nineteenth Century
* beautycheck.de/english Regensburg University  Characteristics of beautiful faces
* Eli Siegel's "Is Beauty the Making One of Opposites?"



[[Brownian motion]]

This is a simulation of the Brownian motion of a big particle (dust particle) that collides with a large set of smaller particles (molecules of a gas) which move with different velocities in different random directions.
This is a simulation of the Brownian motion of 5 particles (yellow) that collide with a large set of 800 particles. The yellow particles leave 5 blue trails of random motion and one of them has a red velocity vector.
right
Three different views of Brownian motion, with 32 steps, 256 steps, and 2048 steps denoted by progressively lighter colors
A single realisation of three-dimensional Brownian motion for times 0  t  2
Brownian motion or pedesis (from "leaping") is the random motion of particles suspended in a fluid (a liquid or a gas) resulting from their collision with the quick atoms or molecules in the gas or liquid. The term "Brownian motion" can also refer to the mathematical model used to describe such random movements, which is often called a particle theory. 

This transport phenomenon is named after the botanist Robert Brown. In 1827, while looking through a microscope at particles found in pollen grains in water, he noted that the particles moved through the water but was not able to determine the mechanisms that caused this motion. Atoms and molecules had long been theorized as the constituents of matter, and many decades later, Albert Einstein published a paper in 1905 that explained in precise detail how the motion that Brown had observed was a result of the pollen being moved by individual water molecules. This explanation of Brownian motion served as definitive confirmation that atoms and molecules actually exist, and was further verified experimentally by Jean Perrin in 1908. Perrin was awarded the Nobel Prize in Physics in 1926 "for his work on the discontinuous structure of matter" (Einstein had received the award five years earlier "for his services to theoretical physics" with specific citation of different research). The direction of the force of atomic bombardment is constantly changing, and at different times the particle is hit more on one side than another, leading to the seemingly random nature of the motion.

The mathematical model of Brownian motion has numerous real-world applications. For instance, Stock market fluctuations are often cited, although Benoit Mandelbrot rejected its applicability to stock price movements in part because these are discontinuous. 

Brownian motion is among the simplest of the continuous-time stochastic (or probabilistic) processes, and it is a limit of both simpler and more complicated stochastic processes (see random walk and Donsker's theorem). This universality is closely related to the universality of the normal distribution. In both cases, it is often mathematical convenience rather than the accuracy of the models that motivates their use. 

==History==
from the book of Jean Baptiste Perrin, Les Atomes, three tracings of the motion of colloidal particles of radius 0.53 m, as seen under the microscope, are displayed. Successive positions every 30 seconds are joined by straight line segments (the mesh size is 3.2 m). Perrin, 1914, [http://www.archive.org/stream/atomsper00perruoft#page/115/mode/1up p. 115 ]]

The Roman Lucretius's scientific poem "On the Nature of Things" (c. 60 BC) has a remarkable description of Brownian motion of dust particles. He uses this as a proof of the existence of atoms:

"Observe what happens when sunbeams are admitted into a building and shed light on its shadowy places. You will see a multitude of tiny particles mingling in a multitude of ways... their dancing is an actual indication of underlying movements of matter that are hidden from our sight... It originates with the atoms which move of themselves spontaneously. Then those small compound bodies that are least removed from the impetus of the atoms are set in motion by the impact of their invisible blows and in turn cannon against slightly larger bodies. So the movement mounts up from the atoms and gradually emerges to the level of our senses, so that those bodies are in motion that we see in sunbeams, moved by blows that remain invisible."

Although the mingling motion of dust particles is caused largely by air currents, the glittering, tumbling motion of small dust particles is, indeed, caused chiefly by true Brownian dynamics.

Jan Ingenhousz had described the irregular motion of coal dust particles on the surface of alcohol in 1785  nevertheless the discovery is often credited to the botanist Robert Brown in 1827. Brown was studying pollen grains of the plant Clarkia pulchella suspended in water under a microscope when he observed minute particles, ejected by the pollen grains, executing a jittery motion. By repeating the experiment with particles of inorganic matter he was able to rule out that the motion was life-related, although its origin was yet to be explained.

The first person to describe the mathematics behind Brownian motion was Thorvald N. Thiele in a paper on the method of least squares published in 1880. This was followed independently by Louis Bachelier in 1900 in his PhD thesis "The theory of speculation", in which he presented a stochastic analysis of the stock and option markets. Albert Einstein (in one of his 1905 papers) and Marian Smoluchowski (1906) brought the solution of the problem to the attention of physicists, and presented it as a way to indirectly confirm the existence of atoms and molecules. Their equations describing Brownian motion were subsequently verified by the experimental work of Jean Baptiste Perrin in 1908.

==Einstein's theory==
There are two parts to Einstein's theory: the first part consists in the formulation of a diffusion equation for Brownian particles, in which the diffusion coefficient is related to the mean squared displacement of a Brownian particle, while the second part consists in relating the diffusion coefficient to measurable physical quantities. In this way Einstein was able to determine the size of atoms, and how many atoms there are in a mole, or the molecular weight in grams, of a gas. In accordance to Avogadro's law this volume is the same for all ideal gases, which is 22.414 liters at standard temperature and pressure. The number of atoms contained in this volume is referred to as Avogadro's number, and the determination of this number is tantamount to the knowledge of the mass of an atom since the latter is obtained by dividing the mass of a mole of the gas by Avogadro's number.

The characteristic bell-shaped curves of the diffusion of Brownian particles. The distribution begins as a Dirac delta function, indicating that all the particles are located at the origin at time t=0, and for increasing times they become flatter and flatter until the distribution becomes uniform in the asymptotic time limit.

The first part of Einstein's argument was to determine how far a Brownian particle travels in a given time interval. Classical mechanics is unable to determine this distance because of the enormous number of bombardments a Brownian particle will undergo, roughly of the order of 1021 collisions per second. Thus Einstein was led to consider the collective motion of Brownian particles. He showed that if (x, t) is the density of Brownian particles at point x at time t, then  satisfies the diffusion equation:

:

where D is the mass diffusivity.

Assuming that all the particles start from the origin at the initial time t=0, the diffusion equation has the solution

:

This expression allowed Einstein to calculate the moments directly. The first moment is seen to vanish, meaning that the Brownian particle is equally likely to move to the left as it is to move to the right. The second moment is, however, non-vanishing, being given by

:

This expresses the mean squared displacement in terms of the time elapsed and the diffusivity. From this expression Einstein argued that the displacement of a Brownian particle is not proportional to the elapsed time, but rather to its square root. A. Einstein, Investigations of the Theory of Brownian Movement (Dover, 1956). His argument is based on a conceptual switch from the "ensemble" of Brownian particles to the "single" Brownian particle: we can speak of the relative number of particles at a single instant just as well as of the time it takes a Brownian particle to reach a given point. 

The second part of Einstein's theory relates the diffusion constant to physically measurable quantities, such as the mean squared displacement of a particle in a given time interval. This result enables the experimental determination of Avogadro's number and therefore the size of molecules. Einstein analyzed a dynamic equilibrium being established between opposing forces. The beauty of his argument is that the final result does not depend upon which forces are involved in setting up the dynamic equilibrium.

In his original treatment, Einstein considered an osmotic pressure experiment, but the same conclusion can be reached in other ways.

Consider, for instance, particles suspended in a viscous fluid in a gravitational field. Gravity tends to make the particles settle, whereas diffusion acts to homogenize them, driving them into regions of smaller concentration. Under the action of gravity, a particle acquires a downward speed of v = mg, where m is the mass of the particle, g is the acceleration due to gravity, and  is the particle's mobility in the fluid. George Stokes had shown that the mobility for a spherical particle with radius r is , where  is the dynamic viscosity of the fluid. In a state of dynamic equilibrium, the particles are distributed according to the barometric distribution

:

where 0 is the difference in density of particles separated by a height difference of h, kB is Boltzmann's constant (namely, the ratio of the universal gas constant, R, to Avogadro's number, N), and T is the absolute temperature. It is Avogadro's number that is to be determined.

The equilibrium distribution for particles of gamboge shows the tendency for granules to move to regions of lower concentration when affected by gravity.
Dynamic equilibrium is established because the more that particles are pulled down by gravity, the greater is the tendency for the particles to migrate to regions of lower concentration. The flux is given by Fick's law,

:

where J = v. Introducing the formula for , we find that

:

In a state of dynamical equilibrium, this speed must also be equal to v = mg. Notice that both expressions for v are proportional to mg, reflecting how the derivation is independent of the type of forces considered. Equating these two expressions yields a formula for the diffusivity:

:

Here the first equality follows from the first part of Einstein's theory, the third equality follows from the definition of Boltzmann's constant as kB = R / N, and the fourth equality follows from Stokes' formula for the mobility. By measuring the mean squared displacement over a time interval along with the universal gas constant R, the temperature T, the viscosity , and the particle radius r, Avogadro's number N can be determined.

The type of dynamical equilibrium proposed by Einstein was not new. It had been pointed out previously by J. J. Thomson "Electricity and Matter" (Yale University Press, New Haven, 1904), pp 80-83 in his series of lectures at Yale University in May 1903 that the dynamic equilibrium between the velocity generated by a concentration gradient given by Fick's law and the velocity due to the variation of the partial pressure caused when ions are set in motion "gives us a method of determining Avogadro's Constant which is independent of any hypothesis as to the shape or size of molecules, or of the way in which they act upon each other". 

An identical expression to Einstein's formula for the diffusion coefficient was also found by Walther Nernst in 1888 Zeit. Phys. Chem. 9 (1888) 613. in which he expressed the diffusion coefficient as the ratio of the osmotic pressure to the ratio of the frictional force and the velocity to which it gives rise. The former was equated to the law of van 't Hoff while the latter was given by Stokes's law. He writes for the diffusion coefficient k, where is the osmotic pressure and k is the ratio of the frictional force to the molecular viscosity which he assumes is given by Stokes's formula for the viscosity. Introducing the ideal gas law per unit volume for the osmotic pressure, the formula becomes identical to that of Einstein's. Leveugle, J. (2004). La Relativite', Poincar' et Einstein, Planck, Hilbert Paris: L'Harmattan p. 181. The use of Stokes's law in Nernst's case, as well as in Einstein and Smoluchowski, is not strictly applicable since it does not apply to the case where the radius of the sphere is small in comparison with the mean free path. Townsend, J.E.S. (1915). "Electricity in Gases". Oxford: Clarendon Press. p. 254. 

At first the predictions of Einstein's formula were seemingly refuted by a series of experiments by Svedberg in 1906 and 1907, which gave displacements of the particles as 4 to 6 times the predicted value, and by Henri in 1908 who found displacements 3 times greater than Einstein's formula predicted. See P. Clark 1976, p. 97 But Einstein's predictions were finally confirmed in a series of experiments carried out by Chaudesaigues in 1908 and Perrin in 1909. The confirmation of Einstein's theory constituted empirical progress for the kinetic theory of heat. In essence, Einstein showed that the motion can be predicted directly from the kinetic model of thermal equilibrium. The importance of the theory lay in the fact that it confirmed the kinetic theory's account of the second law of thermodynamics as being an essentially statistical law. See P. Clark 1976 for this whole paragraph 

==Intuitive metaphor==
Consider a large balloon of 10 metres in diameter. Imagine this large balloon in a football stadium. The balloon is so large that it lies on top of many members of the crowd. Because they are excited, these fans hit the balloon at different times and in different directions with the motions being completely random. In the end, the balloon is pushed in random directions, so it should not move on average. Consider now the force exerted at a certain time. We might have 20 supporters pushing right, and 21 other supporters pushing left, where each supporter is exerting equivalent amounts of force. In this case, the forces exerted towards the left and the right are imbalanced in favor of the left; the balloon will move slightly to the left. This type of imbalance exists at all times, and it causes random motion of the balloon. If we look at this situation from far above, so that we cannot see the supporters, we see the large balloon as a small object animated by erratic movement.

 
 Brownian motion model of the trajectory of a particle of dye in water. 

Consider the particles emitted by Brown's pollen grain moving randomly in water: we know that a water molecule is about 0.1 by 0.2 nm in size, whereas the particles which Brown observed were of the order of a few micrometres in size (these are not to be confused with the actual pollen particle which is about 100 micrometres). So a particle from the pollen may be likened to the balloon, and the water molecules to the fans, except that in this case the balloon is surrounded by fans. The Brownian motion of a particle in a liquid is thus due to the instantaneous imbalance in the combined forces exerted by collisions of the particle with the much smaller liquid molecules (which are in random thermal motion) surrounding it.

An animation of the Brownian motion concept is available as a Java applet.

==Theory==

===Smoluchowski model===
Smoluchowski's theory of Brownian motion starts from the same premise as that of Einstein and derives the same probability distribution (x, t) for the displacement of a Brownian particle along the x in time t. He therefore gets the same expression for the mean squared displacement: . However, when he relates it to a particle of mass m moving at a velocity u which is the result of a frictional force governed by Stokes's law, he finds
:
where  is the viscosity coefficient, and a is the radius of the particle. Associating the kinetic energy with the thermal energy RT/N, the expression for the mean squared displacement is 64/27 times that found by Einstein. The fraction 27/64 was commented on by Arnold Sommerfeld in his necrology on Smoluchowski: "The numerical coefficient of Einstein, which differs from Smoluchowski by 27/64 can only be put in doubt." 

Smoluchowski attempts to answer the question of why a Brownian particle should be displaced by bombardments of smaller particles when the probabilities for striking it in the forward and rear directions are equal. In order to do so, he uses, unknowingly, the ballot theorem, first proved by W.A. Whitworth in 1878. The ballot theorem states that if a candidate A scores m votes and candidate B scores nm that the probability throughout the counting that A will have more votes than B is

:

no matter how large the total number of votes n may be. In other words, if one candidate has an edge on the other candidate he will tend to keep that edge even though there is nothing favoring either candidate on a ballot extraction.

If the probability of m gains and nm losses follows a binomial distribution,

:

with equal a priori probabilities of 1/2, the mean total gain is

:
If n is large enough so that Stirling's approximation can be used in the form
:
then the expected total gain will be
:
showing that it increases as the square root of the total population.

Suppose that a Brownian particle of mass M is surrounded by lighter particles of mass m which are traveling at a speed u. Then, reasons Smoluchowski, in any collision between a surrounding and Brownian particles, the velocity transmitted to the latter will be mu/M. This ratio is of the order of 107 cm/s. But we also have to take into consideration that in a gas there will be more than 1016 collisions in a second, and even greater in a liquid where we expect that there will be 1020 collision in one second. Some of these collisions will tend to accelerate the Brownian particle; others will tend to decelerate it. If there is a mean excess of one kind of collision or the other to be of the order of 108 to 1010 collisions in one second, then velocity of the Brownian particle may be anywhere between 10 to 1000 cm/s. Thus, even though there are equal probabilities for forward and backward collisions there will be a net tendency to keep the Brownian particle in motion, just as the ballot theorem predicts.

These orders of magnitude are not exact because they don't take into consideration the velocity of the Brownian particle, U, which depends on the collisions that tend to accelerate and decelerate it. The larger U is, the greater will be the collisions that will retard it so that the velocity of a Brownian particle can never increase without limit. Could a such a process occur, it would be tantamount to a perpetual motion of the second type. And since equipartition of energy applies, the kinetic energy of the Brownian particle, , will be equal, on the average, to the kinetic energy of the surrounding fluid particle, .

In 1906 Smoluchowski published a one-dimensional model to describe a particle undergoing Brownian motion. The model assumes collisions with M m where M is the test particle's mass and m the mass of one of the individual particles composing the fluid. It is assumed that the particle collisions are confined to one dimension and that it is equally probable for the test particle to be hit from the left as from the right. It is also assumed that every collision always imparts the same magnitude of V. If NR is the number of collisions from the right and NL the number of collisions from the left then after N collisions the particle's velocity will have changed by V(2NRN). The multiplicity is then simply given by:

:

and the total number of possible states is given by 2N. Therefore the probability of the particle being hit from the right NR times is:

:

As a result of its simplicity, Smoluchowski's 1D model can only qualitatively describe Brownian motion. For a realistic particle undergoing Brownian motion in a fluid many of the assumptions cannot be made. For example, the assumption that on average there occurs an equal number of collisions from the right as from the left falls apart once the particle is in motion. Also, there would be a distribution of different possible Vs instead of always just one in a realistic situation.

==Modeling using differential equations==
The equations governing Brownian motion relate slightly differently to each of the two definitions of Brownian motion given at the start of this article.

===Mathematics===

An animated example of a Brownian motion-like random walk on a torus. In the scaling limit, random walk approaches the Wiener process according to Donsker's theorem.
In mathematics, Brownian motion is described by the Wiener process; a continuous-time stochastic process named in honor of Norbert Wiener. It is one of the best known Lvy processes (cdlg stochastic processes with stationary independent increments) and occurs frequently in pure and applied mathematics, economics and physics.

The Wiener process Wt is characterised by four facts:
#W0 = 0
#Wt is almost surely continuous
#Wt has independent increments 
# (for ).
 denotes the normal distribution with expected value  and variance 2. The condition that it has independent increments means that if then and are independent random variables.

An alternative characterisation of the Wiener process is the so-called Lvy characterisation that says that the Wiener process is an almost surely continuous martingale with W0 = 0 and quadratic variation .

A third characterisation is that the Wiener process has a spectral representation as a sine series whose coefficients are independent random variables. This representation can be obtained using the Karhunen&ndash;Love theorem.

The Wiener process can be constructed as the scaling limit of a random walk, or other discrete-time stochastic processes with stationary independent increments. This is known as Donsker's theorem. Like the random walk, the Wiener process is recurrent in one or two dimensions (meaning that it returns almost surely to any fixed neighborhood of the origin infinitely often) whereas it is not recurrent in dimensions three and higher. Unlike the random walk, it is scale invariant.

The time evolution of the position of the Brownian particle itself can be described approximately by a Langevin equation, an equation which involves a random force field representing the effect of the thermal fluctuations of the solvent on the Brownian particle. On long timescales, the mathematical Brownian motion is well described by a Langevin equation. On small timescales, inertial effects are prevalent in the Langevin equation. However the mathematical Brownian motion is exempt of such inertial effects. Note that inertial effects have to be considered in the Langevin equation, otherwise the equation becomes singular. so that simply removing the inertia term from this equation would not yield an exact description, but rather a singular behavior in which the particle doesn't move at all.

===Physics===
The diffusion equation yields an approximation of the time evolution of the probability density function associated to the position of the particle going under a Brownian movement under the physical definition. The approximation is valid on short timescales.

The time evolution of the position of the Brownian particle itself is best described using Langevin equation, an equation which involves a random force field representing the effect of the thermal fluctuations of the solvent on the particle.

The displacement of a particle undergoing Brownian motion is obtained by solving the diffusion equation under appropriate boundary conditions and finding the rms of the solution. This shows that the displacement varies as the square root of the time (not linearly), which explains why previous experimental results concerning the velocity of Brownian particles gave nonsensical results. A linear time dependence was incorrectly assumed.

At very short time scales, however, the motion of a particle is dominated by its inertia and its displacement will be linearly dependent on time: x = vt. So the instantaneous velocity of the Brownian motion can be measured as v = x/t, when t << , where  is the momentum relaxation time. In 2010, the instantaneous velocity of a Brownian particle (a glass microsphere trapped in air with an optical tweezer) was measured successfully. The velocity data verified the Maxwell-Boltzmann velocity distribution, and the equipartition theorem for a Brownian particle.
 
The Brownian motion can be modeled by a random walk. 
 Random walks in porous media or fractals are anomalous. 
 

In the general case, Brownian motion is a non-Markov random process and described by stochastic integral equations. 

==Lvy characterisation==
The French mathematician Paul Lvy proved the following theorem, which gives a necessary and sufficient condition for a continuous Rn-valued stochastic process X to actually be n-dimensional Brownian motion. Hence, Lvy's condition can actually be used as an alternative definition of Brownian motion.

Let X = (X1, ..., X'n) be a continuous stochastic process on a probability space (, , P) taking values in Rn. Then the following are equivalent:

# X is a Brownian motion with respect to P, i.e., the law of X with respect to P is the same as the law of an n-dimensional Brownian motion, i.e., the push-forward measure X(P) is classical Wiener measure on C0(+); Rn).
# both
## X is a martingale with respect to P (and its own natural filtration); and
## for all 1  i, j  n, X'i(t)X'j(t) &minus;'ij't is a martingale with respect to P (and its own natural filtration), where 'ij denotes the Kronecker delta.

==Riemannian manifold==
motion on a 2-sphere

The infinitesimal generator (and hence characteristic operator) of a Brownian motion on Rn is easily calculated to be , where  denotes the Laplace operator. This observation is useful in defining Brownian motion on an m-dimensional Riemannian manifold (M, g): a Brownian motion on M is defined to be a diffusion on M whose characteristic operator in local coordinates x'i, 1  i  m, is given by LB, where LB is the LaplaceBeltrami operator given in local coordinates by

:

where = &minus;1 in the sense of the inverse of a square matrix.

==Gravitational motion==
In stellar dynamics, a massive body (star, black hole, etc.) can experience Brownian motion as it responds to gravitational forces from surrounding stars. The rms velocity V of the massive object, of mass M, is related to the rms velocity of the background stars by
:
where is the mass of the background stars. The gravitational force from the massive object causes nearby stars to move faster than they otherwise would, increasing both and V. The Brownian velocity of Sgr A*, the supermassive black hole at the center of the Milky Way galaxy, is predicted from this formula to be less than 1 km s1. 

==Narrow escape==
The Narrow escape problem is a ubiquitous problem in biology, biophysics and cellular biology which has the following formulation: a Brownian particle (ion, molecule, or protein) is confined to a bounded domain (a compartment or a cell) by a reflecting boundary, except for a small window through which it can escape. The narrow escape problem is that of calculating the mean escape time. This time diverges as the window shrinks, thus rendering the calculation a singular perturbation problem.

==See also==

* Brownian bridge: a Brownian motion that is required to "bridge" specified values at specified times
* Brownian covariance
* Brownian dynamics
* Brownian motion of sol particles
* Brownian motor
* Brownian noise (Martin Gardner proposed this name for sound generated with random intervals. It is a pun on Brownian motion and white noise.)
* Brownian ratchet
* Brownian surface
* Brownian tree
* Rotational Brownian motion
* Complex system
* Diffusion equation
* Geometric Brownian motion
* It diffusion: a generalisation of Brownian motion
* Langevin equation
* Lvy arcsine law
* Local time (mathematics)
* Marangoni effect
* Mark G. Raizen
* Nanoparticle tracking analysis
* Narrow escape problem
* Osmosis
* Random walk
* SchrammLoewner evolution
* Single particle tracking
* Surface diffusion: a type of constrained Brownian motion.
* Tyndall effect: physical chemistry phenomenon where particles are involved; used to differentiate between the different types of mixtures.
* Ultramicroscope

==References==

* Lester Eli Dubins & Gideon Schwarz (1965). On Continuous Martingales. Proceedings of the National Academy of Science.

==Further reading==
* Brown, Robert (1828). "A brief account of microscopical observations made in the months of June, July and August, 1827, on the particles contained in the pollen of plants; and on the general existence of active molecules in organic and inorganic bodies." Phil. Mag. 4, 161173. (PDF version of original paper including a subsequent defense by Brown of his original observations, Additional remarks on active molecules.)
* 
* Clark, P. (1976). 'Atomism versus thermodynamics' in Method and appraisal in the physical sciences, Colin Howson (ed.). Cambridge University Press.
* Cohen, Ruben D. (1986). "Self Similarity in Brownian Motion and Other Ergodic Phenomena", Journal of Chemical Education 63, pp. 933934.
* 
* 
* 
* Lucretius, 'On The Nature of Things.', translated by William Ellery Leonard. (on-line version, from Project Gutenberg. See the heading 'Atomic Motions'; this translation differs slightly from the one quoted).
* Nelson, Edward, Dynamical Theories of Brownian Motion (1967). (PDF version of this out-of-print book, from the author's webpage.)
* 
* Perrin, J. (1909). "Mouvement brownien et ralit molculaire" movement and molecular reality. Ann. Chim. Phys. 8ime srie 18, 5114.
** See also Perrin's book "Les Atomes" (1914).
* 
* 
* Theile, T. N.
** Danish version: "Om Anvendelse af mindste Kvadraters Methode i nogle Tilflde, hvor en Komplikation af visse Slags uensartede tilfldige Fejlkilder giver Fejlene en systematisk Karakter".
** French version: "Sur la compensation de quelques erreurs quasi-systmatiques par la mthodes de moindre carrs" published simultaneously in Vidensk. Selsk. Skr. 5. Rk., naturvid. og mat. Afd., 12:381408, 1880.

==External links==

* Brownian motion java simulation
* Brownian motion to simulate stock prices in Excel (YouTube video)
* A single-molecule brownian motion diffusion simulator
* Article for the school-going child
* Einstein on Brownian Motion
* Brownian Motion, "Diverse and Undulating"
* Discusses history, botany and physics of Brown's original observations, with videos
* "Einstein's prediction finally witnessed one century later" : a test to observe the velocity of Brownian motion
* "Caf math : brownian motion (Part 1)" : A blog article describing brownian motion (definition, symmetries, simulation)
* "Finite different algorithm to simulate the Brownian motion of a particle" 



[[Barcelona]]

Barcelona (, , ) is the capital city of the autonomous community of Catalonia in Spain and the country's 2nd largest city, with a population of 1.6 million within its administrative limits.

Its urban area extends beyond the administrative city limits with a population of around 4.5 million people, being the sixth-most populous urban area in the European Union after Paris, London, the Ruhr, Madrid and Milan. About five million United Nations  Department of Economic and Social Affairs: World Urbanization Prospects (2007 revision), Table A.12 Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development: Competitive Cities in the Global Economy, OECD Territorial Reviews, (OECD Publishing, 2006), Table 1.1 "Population by sex and age groups on 1 January" - Eurostat, 2012 mbit Metropolit. Srie temporal (catalan) Europe: metropolitan areas - World Gazetteer, 2012 people live in the Barcelona metropolitan area. It is the largest metropolis on the Mediterranean Sea, located on the coast between the mouths of the rivers Llobregat and Bess, and bounded to the west by the Serra de Collserola mountain range, the tallest peak of which is 512 m high.

Founded as a Roman city, in the Middle Ages Barcelona became the capital of the County of Barcelona. After merging with the Kingdom of Aragon, Barcelona continued to be an important city in the Crown of Aragon. Besieged several times during its history, Barcelona has a rich cultural heritage and is today an important cultural centre and a major tourist destination. Particularly renowned are the architectural works of Antoni Gaud and Llus Domnech i Montaner, which have been designated UNESCO World Heritage Sites. The headquarters of the Union for the Mediterranean is located in Barcelona. The city is known for hosting the 1992 Summer Olympics as well as world-class conferences and expositions and also many international sport tournaments.

Barcelona is one of the world's leading tourist, economic, trade fair/exhibitions and cultural-sports centres, and its influence in commerce, education, entertainment, media, fashion, science, and the arts all contribute to its status as one of the world's major global cities. It is a major cultural and economic centre in southwestern Europe (Iberian Peninsula), 24th in the world (before Zrich, after Frankfurt) and a financial centre (Diagonal Mar and Gran Via). In 2008 it was the fourth most economically powerful city by GDP in the European Union and 35th in the world with GDP amounting to 177 billion. In 2012 Barcelona had a GDP of $170 billion; it is lagging Spain on both employment and GDP per capita change. In 2009 the city was ranked Europe's third and one of the world's most successful as a city brand. In the same year the city was ranked Europe's fourth best city for business and fastest improving European city, with growth improved by 17% per year, but it has since been in a full recession with declines in both employment and GDP per capita, with some recent signs of the beginning of an economic recovery. Barcelona is a transport hub with the Port of Barcelona being one of Europe's principal seaports and busiest European passenger port, an international airport, BarcelonaEl Prat Airport, which handles above 35 million passengers per year, an extensive motorway network and a high-speed rail line with a link to France and the rest of Europe. 

==Names==
The name Barcelona comes from the ancient Iberian Phoenician Barkeno, attested in an ancient coin inscription in Iberian script as Barkeno in Levantine Iberian script, Emerita: Revista de Lingstica y Filologa clasica 11 (1943), p.468 in ancient Greek sources as , Barkinn; Ptolemy, ii. 6.  8 and in Latin as Barcino, Barcilonum Rufus Festus Avienus Ora Maritima et Barcilonum amoena sedes ditium. v514 and Barcenona. 

During the Middle Ages, the city was variously known as Barchinona, Baralona, Barchelonaa, and Barchenona.

Some sources say that the city may have been named after the Carthaginian general Hamilcar Barca, who was supposed to have founded the city in the 3rd century BC. 

Barcelona's name is sometimes abbreviated as 'Barna'. Nowadays, foreign people sometimes mistakenly refer to Barcelona as 'Bara', the popular name of the F.C. Barcelona sports club. Some people (mainly in Spanish/Catalan) also use 'BCN', often written 'Bcn', which actually corresponds to the IATA airport code of the Barcelona-El Prat Airport. The city is also referred to as the "ciudad condal" in Spanish and "ciutat comtal" in Catalan, owing to its past as the seat of the Count of Barcelona.

==History==

A marble plaque in the Museu d'Histria de la Ciutat de Barcelona, dated from around 110-130 AD and dedicated to the Roman colony of Barcino
The founding of Barcelona is the subject of two different legends. The first attributes the founding of the city to the mythological Hercules. The second legend attributes the foundation of the city directly to the historical Carthaginian Hamilcar Barca, father of Hannibal, who named the city Barcino after his family in the 3rd century BC. Oros. vii. 143; Miano, Diccion. vol. i. p. 391; Auson. Epist. xxiv. 68, 69, Punica Barcino. 

In about 15 BC, the Romans redrew the town as a castrum (Roman military camp) centred on the "Mons Taber", a little hill near the contemporary city hall (Plaa de Sant Jaume). Under the Romans, it was a colony with the surname of Faventia, Plin. iii. 3. s. 4 or, in full, Colonia Faventia Julia Augusta Pia Barcino Inscr. ap. Gruter, p. 426, nos. 5, 6. or Colonia Julia Augusta Faventia Paterna Barcino. Pomponius Mela ii. 6 mentions it among the small towns of the district, probably as it was eclipsed by its neighbour Tarraco (modern Tarragona), but it may be gathered from later writers that it gradually grew in wealth and consequence, favoured as it was with a beautiful situation and an excellent harbour. Avien. Ora Maritima. 520: "Et Barcilonum amoena sedes ditium." It enjoyed immunity from imperial burdens. Paul. Dig. 1. tit. 15, de Cens. The city minted its own coins; some from the era of Galba survive.
Basilica of La Merc (Mare de Du de la Merc)
Important Roman vestiges are displayed in Plaa del Rei underground, as a part of the Barcelona City History Museum MUHBA; the typically Roman grid plan is still visible today in the layout of the historical centre, the Barri Gtic ("Gothic Quarter"). Some remaining fragments of the Roman walls have been incorporated into the cathedral. The cathedral, also known as the Basilica La Seu, is said to have been founded in 343. The city was conquered by the Visigoths in the early 5th century, becoming for a few years the capital of all Hispania. After being conquered by the Arabs in the early 8th century, it was conquered in 801 by Charlemagne's son Louis, who made Barcelona the seat of the Carolingian "Hispanic March" (Marca Hispanica), a buffer zone ruled by the Count of Barcelona.

The Counts of Barcelona became increasingly independent and expanded their territory to include all of Catalonia. In 1137, Aragon and the County of Barcelona merged in dynastic union El Tall dels Temps, 14. (Palma de) Mallorca: El Tall, 1996. by the marriage of Ramon Berenguer IV and Petronilla of Aragon, their titles finally borne by only one person when their son Alfonso II of Aragon ascended to the throne in 1162. His territories were later to be known as the Crown of Aragon, which conquered many overseas possessions and ruled the western Mediterranean Sea with outlying territories in Naples and Sicily and as far as Athens in the 13th century. The forging of a dynastic link between the Crowns of Aragon and Castile marked the beginning of Barcelona's decline. The Bank of Barcelona, probably the oldest public bank in Europe, was established by the city magistrates in 1401. It originated from necessities of the state, as did the Bank of Venice (1402) and the Bank of Genoa (1407). The Bankers magazine, volume 11, page 595, J. Smith Homans Jr., New York 1857. 

Barcelona in 1563
The marriage of Ferdinand II of Aragon and Isabella I of Castile in 1469 united the two royal lines. Madrid became the centre of political power whilst the colonisation of the Americas reduced the financial importance (at least in relative terms) of Mediterranean trade. Barcelona had always been the stronghold of Catalan separatism and was the center of the Catalan Revolt (164052) against Philip IV of Spain. The great plague of 16501654 halved the city's population. Chapter 15: A History of Spain and Portugal, Stanley G. Payne 

The fortress at Montjuc, most southerly point from which measurements were made when calculating the meridional definition of the metre
In the 18th century, a fortress was built at Montjuc that overlooked the harbour. In 1794, this fortress was used by the French astronomer Pierre Franois Andr Mchain for observations relating to a survey stretching to Dunkirk that provided the official basis of the measurement of a metre. The definitive metre bar, manufactured from platinum, was presented to the French legislative assembly on 22 June 1799. The Napoleonic wars left the province ravaged, but the postwar period saw the start of industrialization.

During the Spanish Civil War, the city, and Catalonia in general, were resolutely Republican. Many enterprises and public services were "collectivised" by the CNT and UGT unions. As the power of the Republican government and the Generalitat diminished, much of the city was under the effective control of anarchist groups. The anarchists lost control of the city to their own allies, the Communists and official government troops, after the street fighting of the Barcelona May Days. The fall of the city on 26 January 1939 caused a mass exodus of civilians who fled to the French border. The resistance of Barcelona to Franco's coup d'tat was to have lasting effects after the defeat of the Republican government. The autonomous institutions of Catalonia were abolished, Decree of 5 April 1938. and the use of the Catalan language in public life was suppressed. Barcelona remained the second largest city in Spain, at the heart of a region which was relatively industrialised and prosperous, despite the devastation of the civil war. The result was a large-scale immigration from poorer regions of Spain (particularly Andalusia, Murcia and Galicia), which in turn led to rapid urbanisation. Barcelona hosted the Olympic Games in 1992, which helped revitalise the city. "Barcelona (Spain)". Encyclopdia Britannica. 

==Geography==

===Location===
Barcelona from high altitude
Barcelona is located on the northeast coast of the Iberian Peninsula, facing the Mediterranean Sea, on a plain approximately 5 km wide limited by the mountain range of Collserola, the Llobregat river to the southwest and the Bess river to the north. This plain covers an area of 170 km2, of which 101 km are occupied by the city itself. It is 120 km south of the Pyrenees and the Catalan border with France.

Tibidabo, 512 m high, offers striking views over the city and is topped by the 288.4 m Torre de Collserola, a telecommunications tower that is visible from most of the city. Barcelona is peppered with small hills, most of them urbanised, that gave their name to the neighbourhoods built upon them, such as Carmel (267 m), Putxet (181 m) and Rovira (261 m). The escarpment of Montjuc (173 m), situated to the southeast, overlooks the harbour and is topped by Montjuc castle, a fortress built in the 1718th centuries to control the city as a replacement for the Ciutadella. Today, the fortress is a museum and Montjuc is home to several sporting and cultural venues, as well as Barcelona's biggest park and gardens.

The city borders on the municipalities of Santa Coloma de Gramenet and Sant Adri de Bess to the north; the Mediterranean Sea to the east; El Prat de Llobregat and L'Hospitalet de Llobregat to the south; and Sant Feliu de Llobregat, Sant Just Desvern, Esplugues de Llobregat, Sant Cugat del Valls, and Montcada i Reixac to the west.

===Climate===

Barcelona has a Mediterranean climate (Kppen climate classification: Csa), with mild, humid winters and warm, dry summers.

Its average annual temperature is 20 C during the day and 11 C at night. The average annual temperature of the sea is about 18 C. In the coldest month  January, the temperature typically ranges from 7 to during the day, 2 to at night and the average sea temperature is 13 C. In the warmest month  August, the typical temperature ranges from 25 to during the day, about 20 C at night and the average sea temperature is 25 C. Generally  the summer / "holiday" season lasts about six months, from May to October. Two months  April and November  are transitional; sometimes the temperature exceeds 20 C, with an average temperature of 17 - during the day and 8 - at night. December, January and February are the coldest months, with average temperatures around 14 C during the day and 5 C at night. Large fluctuations in temperature are rare, particularly in the summer months.

Barcelona averages several rainy days per month ( 1 mm), and annual average relative humidity is 72%, ranging from 69% in July to 75% in October. Sunshine duration is 2,524 hours per year, from 138 (average 4.5 hours of sunshine a day) in December to 310 (average 10 hours of sunshine a day) in July. 

==Main sights==
Sagrada Famlia church, Gaudi's masterpiece
The Barri Gtic (Catalan for "Gothic Quarter") is the centre of the old city of Barcelona. Many of the buildings date from medieval times, some from as far back as the Roman settlement of Barcelona. Catalan modernista architecture (related to the movement known as Art Nouveau in the rest of Europe), developed between 1885 and 1950 and left an important legacy in Barcelona. Several of these buildings are World Heritage Sites. Especially remarkable is the work of architect Antoni Gaud, which can be seen throughout the city. His best-known work is the immense but still unfinished church of the Sagrada Famlia, which has been under construction since 1882, and is still financed by private donations. As of 2007, completion is planned for 2026.

Barcelona was also home to Mies van der Rohe's Barcelona Pavilion. Designed in 1929 for the International Exposition for Germany, it is an iconic building that came to symbolize modern architecture as the embodiment of van der Rohe's aphorisms "less is more" and "God is in the details." The Barcelona pavilion was intended as a temporary structure, and was torn down in 1930 less than a year after it was constructed. A modern re-creation by Spanish architects now stands in Barcelona, however, constructed in 1986.

Barcelona won the 1999 RIBA Royal Gold Medal for its architecture, the first (and as of 2012, only) time that the winner has been a city, and not an individual architect.

Plaa Reial

===World Heritage Sites===
Barcelona is the home of many points of interest declared World Heritage Sites by UNESCO: The seventh element of Place World Heritage "Works of Antoni Gaud" is the Crypt in Colnia Gell, which is located at Santa Coloma de Cervell. 

 150px 150px 150px 150px 
 Name Park Gell Palau Gell Casa Mil Casa Vicens 
 Code, year 320-001, 1984 320-002, 1984 320-003, 1984 320-004, 2005 
 Coordinates 

 150px 150px 150px 150px 
 Name Faade of the Nativity and crypt of the Sagrada Familia Casa Batll Palau de la Msica Catalana Hospital de Sant Pau 
 Code, year 320-005, 2005 320-006, 2005 804-001, 1997 804-002, 1997 
 Coordinates 

===Historic buildings and monuments===

Barcelona Cathedral
* Minor basilica of Sagrada Famlia, the international symbol of Barcelona
* Palau de la Msica Catalana and Hospital de Sant Pau, designed by Llus Domnech i Montaner, included in the UNESCO Heritage List in 1997.
* Works by Antoni Gaud, including Park Gell, Palau Gell, Casa Mil (La Pedrera), Casa Vicens, Sagrada Famlia (Nativity faade and crypt), Casa Batll, Crypt in Colonia Gell. The first three works were inscribed as a World Heritage Site in 1984. The other four were added as extensions to the site in 2005.
* The Cathedral of the Holy Cross and St. Eulalia (Gothic)
* Gothic basilica of Santa Maria del Mar
* Gothic basilica of Santa Maria del Pi
* Romanesque church of Sant Pau del Camp
* Palau Reial Major, medieval residence of the sovereign Counts of Barcelona, later Kings of Aragon
* The Royal Shipyard (gothic)
* Monastery of Pedralbes (gothic)
* The Columbus Monument
* The Arc de Triomf, a triumphal arch built for entrance to 1888 Barcelona Universal Exposition.
* Expiatory church of the Sacred Heart of Jesus on the summit of Tibidabo.

===Museums===

The National Museum of Art of Catalonia.
Barcelona has a great number of museums, which cover different areas and eras. The National Museum of Art of Catalonia possesses a well-known collection of Romanesque art while the Barcelona Museum of Contemporary Art focuses on post-1945 Catalan and Spanish art. The Fundaci Joan Mir, Picasso Museum and Fundaci Antoni Tpies hold important collections of these world-renowned artists, as well as Can Framis Museum, focused on post 1960 Catalan Art owned by Fundaci Vila Casas.
Several museums cover the fields of history and archeology, like the Barcelona City History Museum (MUHBA), the Museum of the History of Catalonia, the Archeology Museum of Catalonia, the Barcelona Maritime Museum and the private-owned Egyptian Museum. The Erotic museum of Barcelona is among the most peculiar ones, while Cosmocaixa is a science museum that received the European Museum of the Year Award in 2006.

===Parks===
Park Gell (Parc Gell)
Barcelona contains sixty-eight municipal parks, of which twelve are historic parks, five are thematic (botanical) parks, forty-five are urban parks and six are forest parks. They range from vest-pocket parks to large recreation areas. The urban parks alone cover 10% of the city (549.7 ha). The total park surface grows about 10 ha per year, with a proportion of 18.1 m2 of park area per inhabitant. 

Of Barcelona's parks, Montjuc is the largest, with 203 ha located on the mountain of the same name. It is followed by Parc de la Ciutadella (which occupies the site of the old military citadel and which houses the Parliament building, the Barcelona Zoo and several museums); 31 ha including the zoo), the Guinard Park (19 ha), Park Gell (designed by Antoni Gaud; 17.2 ha), Oreneta Castle Park (also 17.2 ha), Diagonal Mar Park (13.3 ha, inaugurated in 2002), Nou Barris Central Park (13.2 ha), Can Drag Sports Park and Poblenou Park (both 11.9 ha), the Labyrinth Park (9.10 ha), named after the garden maze it contains. There are also several smaller parks, for example, the Parc de les Aiges (2 ha). A part of the Collserolla Park is also within the city limits. PortAventura, one of the largest amusement parks in Europe with 3,000,000 visitors per year, is located one hour's drive from Barcelona. The Global Attractions Attendance Report  Themed Entertainment Association, 2009 Also, within the city lies Tibidabo Amusement Park, a smaller amusement park, with the Muntanya Russa amusement ride.

===Beaches===
The Barceloneta beach
Barcelona beach was listed as number one in a list of the top ten city beaches in the world according to National Geographic and Discovery Channel. Movie "Worlds Best Beaches", Discovery Channel 2005 Barcelona contains seven beaches, totalling 4.5 km (2.8 mi) of coastline. Sant Sebasti, Barceloneta and Somorrostro beaches, both 1100 m in length, are the largest, oldest and the most-frequented beaches in Barcelona. The Olympic Harbour separates them from the other city beaches: Nova Icria, Bogatell, Mar Bella, Nova Mar Bella and Llevant. These beaches (ranging from 400 to 640 m/1,300 to 2,100 ft) were opened as a result of the city restructuring to host the 1992 Summer Olympics, when a great number of industrial buildings were demolished. At present, the beach sand is artificially replenished given that storms regularly remove large quantities of material. The 2004 Universal Forum of Cultures left the city a large concrete bathing zone on the eastmost part of the city's coastline.
Beaches of Barcelona

==Demographics==
Demographic evolution, 19002007, according to the Spanish Instituto Nacional de Estadstica
According to Barcelona's City Council, Barcelona's population as of 1 June 2006 was
1,673,075 people, on a land area of 101.4 km2. It is the main component of an administrative area of Greater Barcelona, with a population of 3,218,071 in an area of 636 km (density 5,060 hab/km). The population of the urban area was 4,223,000. It is the central nucleus of the Barcelona metropolitan area, which relies on a population of 5,083,000. United Nations Department of Economic and Social Affairs, World Urbanization Prospects (2009 revision), (United Nations, 2010), Table A.12. Data for 2007. 

The population density of Barcelona was 15779 PD/km2, with Eixample being the most populated district. 62% of the inhabitants were born in Catalonia, with a 23.5% coming from the rest of Spain. Of the 17.4% from other countries, a proportion which has more than quadrupled since 2001 when it was 3.9%, the majority come from (in order) Pakistan, Italy, China, Ecuador, Bolivia, and Morocco. http://barcelonacatalonia.cat/b/wp-content/uploads/2012/12/datasheet-2012-angles.pdf The city also has the largest Jewish community in Spain, with an estimated 3,500 Jews living in the city. 

As an official language, Spanish is understood almost universally in Barcelona. In addition, 95% of the population understand Catalonia's own native Catalan language, while 74.6% can speak it, 75% can read it, and 47.1% can write it, thanks to the language immersion educational system. While most of the population state they are Roman Catholic (208 churches), there are also a number of other groups, including Evangelical (71 locations, mostly professed by Roma), Jehovah's Witnesses (21 Kingdom Halls) and Buddhists (13 locations), a number of Muslims due to immigration, and Eastern Orthodox. 

Forum Park in Barcelona
In 1900, Barcelona had a population of 533,000 people, which grew steadily but slowly until 1950, when it started absorbing a high number of people from other less-industrialized parts of Spain. Barcelona's population peaked in 1979 with 1,906,998 people, and fell throughout the 1980s and 1990s as more people sought a higher quality of life in outlying cities in the Barcelona Metropolitan Area. After bottoming out in 2000 with 1,496,266 people, the city's population began to rise again as younger people started to return, causing a great increase in housing prices. 

===Population density===
Note: This text is entirely based on the municipal statistical database provided by the city council.

Barcelona is one of the most densely populated cities in Europe. For the year 2008 the city council calculated the population to 1,628,090 living in the 102.2 km2 sized municipality, giving the city an average population density of 15,926 inhabitants per square kilometre.

In the case of Barcelona though, the land distribution is extremely uneven. Half of the municipality or 50.2 km2, all of it located on the municipal edge is made up of the ten least densely populated neighbourhoods containing less than 10% of the city's population, the uninhabited Zona Franca industrial area and Montjuc forest park. Leaving the remaining 90% or slightly below 1.5 million inhabitants living on the remaining 52 km2 at an average density close to 28,500 inhabitants per square kilometre.

Of the 73 neighbourhoods in the city, 45 had a population density above 20,000 inhabitants per square kilometre with a combined population of 1,313,424 inhabitants living on 38.6 km2 at an average density of 33,987 inhabitants per square km. The 30 most densely populated neighbourhoods accounted for 57.5% of the city population occupying only 22,7% of the municipality, or in other words, 936,406 people living at an average density of 40,322 inhabitants per square kilometre. The city's highest density is found at and around the neighbourhood of la Sagrada Famlia where four of the city's most densely populated neighbourhoods are located side by side, all with a population density above 50,000 inhabitants per square kilometre.

==Economy==

===General information===

The Barcelona metropolitan area comprises over 66% of the people in one of the richest regions in Europe  Catalonia, with a GDP per capita amounting to 28,400 (16% more than the EU average). The Barcelona metropolitan area had a GDP amounting to $177 billion, equivalent to $34,821 in per capita terms (44% more than the EU average) making it the 4th economically powerful city by GDP in the European Union and 35th in the world in 2009. Barcelona city had a very high GDP of 80,894 per head in 2004, according to Eurostat. Urban Audit  CityProfiles: Barcelona  Eurostat, 2004 Furthermore, Barcelona was Europe's fourth best business city and fastest improving European city, with growth improved by 17% per year as of 2009. 

Barcelona is the 14th most "livable city" in the world according to lifestyle magazine Monocle. Similarly, according to Innovation Analysts 2thinknow, Barcelona occupies 13th place in the world on Innovation Cities Global Index. 

Barcelona has a long-standing mercantile tradition. Less well known is that the region was one of the earliest to begin industrialization in continental Europe, beginning with textile-related works from the mid-1780s but really gathering momentum in the mid-19th century, when it became a major centre for the production of textiles and machinery. Since then, manufacturing has played a large role in its history.

Borsa de Barcelona (Barcelona Stock Exchange) is the main stock exchange in the northeastern part of the Iberian Peninsula.

Barcelona was recognised as the Southern European City of the Future for 2014/15, based on its economic potential, by FDi Magazine in their bi-annual rankings. 

===Trade fair and exhibitions===
World Trade Center Barcelona
Drawing upon its tradition of creative art and craftsmanship, Barcelona is known for its award-winning industrial design. It also has several congress halls, notably Fira de Barcelona  the second largest trade fair and exhibition centre in Europe, Fira de Barcelona that host a quickly growing number of national and international events each year (at present above 50). The total exhibition floor space of Fira de Barcelona venues is 405,000 m2, not counting Gran Via center on the Plaza de Europa. However, the Eurozone crisis and deep cuts in business travel affected the Council's positioning of the city as a convention centre.

An important business centre, the World Trade Center Barcelona, is located in Barcelona's Port Vell harbour.

The city is known for hosting well as world-class conferences and expositions, including the 1888 Exposicin Universal de Barcelona, the 1929 Barcelona International Exposition (Expo 1929), the 2004 Universal Forum of Cultures and the 2004 World Urban Forum.

===Tourism===
Barcelona is the 10th-most-visited city in the world and the third most visited in Europe after London and Paris, with several million tourists every year. With its Rambles, Barcelona is ranked the most popular city to visit in Spain. 

Barcelona as internationally renowned a tourist destination, with numerous recreational areas, one of the best beaches in the world, Movie "Worlds Best Beaches", Discovery Channel 2005 mild and warm climate, historical monuments, including eight UNESCO World Heritage Sites, many good-quality hotels, and developed tourist infrastructure.

===Manufacturing sector===

Industry generates 21% of the total gross domestic product (GDP) of Catalonia, "Valor afegit brut a preus bsics. Base 2000 Per sectors (%)" (en: "Gross value added at basic prices. Base by sector (%)) - Idescat, 2008 with the energy, chemical and metallurgy industries accounting for 47% of industrial production. "Valor afegit brut. Indstria per branques d'activitat (%)" (en: "Gross Value Added. Branches of industry (%)") - Idescat, 2008 The Barcelona metropolitan area had 67% of the total number of industrial establishments in Catalonia as of 1997. Els recursos econmics i l'economia: La indstria i els sectors afins 

Barcelona has long been an important European automobile manufacturing centre. Formerly there were automobile factories of AFA, Abadal, Actividades Industriales, Alvarez, America, Arts de Arcos, Balandrs, Baradat-Esteve, Biscter, J. Castro, Cla, David, Delfn, Daz y Grill, Ebro trucks, Edis, Elizalde, Automviles Espaa, Eucort, Fenix, Fbrica Hispano, Auto Academia Garriga, Fbrica Espaola de Automviles Hebe, Hispano-Suiza, Huracn Motors, Talleres Hereter, Junior SL, Kapi, La Cuadra, M.A., Automviles Matas, Motores y Motos, Nacional Custals, National Pescara, Nacional RG, Nacional Rubi, Nacional Sitjes, Automviles Nike, Orix, Otro Ford, Partia, Pegaso, PTV, Ricart, Ricart-Espaa, Industrias Salvador, Siata Espaola, Stevenson, Romagosa y Compaa, Garaje Storm, Talleres Hereter, Trimak, Automviles Victoria, Manufacturas Mecnicas Aleu. "Die groe Automobil-Enzyklopdie" - Harald H. Linz, Halwart Schrader, BLV, Munich 1986, ISBN 978-3-405-12974-3 "The Beaulieu Encyclopedia of the Automobile" - Nick Georgano, Fitzroy Dearborn Publishers, Chicago 2001, ISBN 978-1-57958-293-7 

Today, the headquarters and a large factory of SEAT (the largest Spanish automobile manufacturer) are in one of its suburbs. There is also a Nissan factory in the logistics and industrial area of the city. The factory of Derbi, a large manufacturer of motorcycles, scooters and mopeds, also lies near the city. 

As in other modern cities, the manufacturing sector has long since been overtaken by the services sector, though it remains very important. The region's leading industries are textiles, chemical, pharmaceutical, motor, electronic, printing, logistics, publishing, telecommunications and information technology services.

===Fashion===
The Brandery fashion show
The traditional importance of textiles is reflected in Barcelona's drive to become a major fashion centre. There have been many attempts to launch Barcelona as a fashion capital, notably Gaudi Home.

Beginning in the summer of 2000, the city hosted the prestigious Bread & Butter urban fashion fair until 2009, when its organisers announced that it would be returning to Berlin. This was a hard blow for the city as the fair brought 100 m to the city in just three days. 

Since 2009, The Brandery, an urban fashion show, has been held in Barcelona twice a year. In 2012, Barcelona was named as the third most important fashion capital according to the Global Language Monitors annual ranking of the world's top fifty fashion capitals. The Top Global Fashion Capitals for 2012  The Global Language Monitor, 2012 

==Government and administrative divisions==

Palau de la Generalitat de Catalunya
As the capital of the autonomous community of Catalonia, Barcelona is the seat of the Catalan government, known as the Generalitat de Catalunya; of particular note are the executive branch, the parliament, and the Supreme Court of Catalonia. The city is also the capital of the Province of Barcelona and the Barcelons comarca (district).

Barcelona is governed by a city council formed by 41 city councillors, elected for a four-year term by universal suffrage. As one of the two biggest cities in Spain, Barcelona is subject to a special law articulated through the Carta Municipal (Municipal Law). A first version of this law was passed in 1960 and amended later, but the current version was approved in March 2006. According to this law, Barcelona's city council is organized in two levels: a political one, with elected city councillors, and one executive, which administrates the programs and executes the decisions taken on the political level. This law also gives the local government a special relationship with the central government and it also gives the mayor wider prerogatives by the means of municipal executive commissions. It expands the powers of the city council in areas like telecommunications, city traffic, road safety and public safety. It also gives a special economic regime to the city's treasury and it gives the council a veto in matters that will be decided by the central government, but that will need a favourable report from the council. 
The City Hall of Barcelona
The Comissi de Govern (Government Commission) is the executive branch, formed by 24 councillors, led by the Mayor, with 5 lieutenant-mayors and 17 city councillors, each in charge of an area of government, and 5 non-elected councillors. The plenary, formed by the 41 city councillors, has advisory, planning, regulatory, and fiscal executive functions. 
The six Commissions del Consell Municipal (City council commissions) have executive and controlling functions in the field of their jurisdiction. They are composed by a number of councillors proportional to the number of councillors each political party has in the plenary. The city council has jurisdiction in the fields of city planning, transportation, municipal taxes, public highways security through the Gurdia Urbana (the municipal police), city maintenance, gardens, parks and environment, facilities (like schools, nurseries, sports centres, libraries, and so on), culture, sports, youth and social welfare. Some of these competencies are not exclusive, but shared with the Generalitat de Catalunya or the central Spanish government.

Gothic Gallery in the Palau de la Generalitat
The executive branch is led by a Chief Municipal Executive Officer which answers to the Mayor. It is made up of departments which are legally part of the city council and by separate legal entities of two tipes: autonomous public departments and public enterprises. 

The seat of the city council is on the Plaa de Sant Jaume, opposite the seat of Generalitat de Catalunya. Since the coming of the Spanish democracy, Barcelona had been governed by the PSC, first with an absolute majority and later in coalition with ERC and ICV. After the May 2007 election, the ERC did not renew the coalition agreement and the PSC governed in a minority coalition with ICV as the junior partner.

After 32 years, on 22 May 2011, CiU gained a plurality of seats at the municipal election, gaining 15 seats to the PSC's 11. The PP hold 8 seats, ICV 5 and ERC 2.
The Sal de Cent, in the city hall of Barcelona.

===Districts===
Districts of Barcelona

Since 1987, the city has been divided into 10 administrative districts (districtes in Catalan, distritos in Spanish):
* Ciutat Vella
* Eixample
* Sants-Montjuc
* Les Corts
* Sarri-Sant Gervasi
* Grcia
* Horta-Guinard
* Nou Barris
* Sant Andreu
* Sant Mart

The districts are based mostly on historical divisions, and several are former towns annexed by the city of Barcelona in the 18th and 19th centuries that still maintain their own distinct character. Each district has its own council led by a city councillor. The composition of each district council depends on the number of votes each political party had in that district, so a district can be led by a councillor from a different party than the executive council.

==Education==

Main hall of the University of Barcelona
Barcelona has a well-developed higher education system of public universities. Most prominent among these is the University of Barcelona (established in 1450), a world-renowned research and teaching institution with campuses around the city. Barcelona is also home to the Polytechnic University of Catalonia, and the newer Pompeu Fabra University, and, in the private sector the EADA Business School founded in 1957, became the first Barcelona institution to run manager training programmes for the business community. IESE Business School, as well as the largest private educational institution, the Ramon Llull University, which encompasses internationally prestigious schools and institutes such as the ESADE Business School. The Autonomous University of Barcelona, another public university, is located in Bellaterra, a town in the Metropolitan Area. The Open University of Catalonia, a private Internet-centered open university, is also based in Barcelona.
Historic building of the University of Barcelona, entrance vestibule
The city has a network of public schools, from nurseries to high schools, under the responsibility of a consortium led by city council (though the curriculum is the responsibility of the Generalitat de Catalunya). There are also many private schools, some of them Roman Catholic. Most such schools receive a public subsidy on a per-student basis, are subject to inspection by the public authorities, and are required to follow the same curricular guidelines as public schools, though they charge tuition. Known as escoles concertades, they are distinct from schools whose funding is entirely private (escoles privades).

The language of instruction at public schools and escoles concertades is Catalan, as stipulated by the 2009 Catalan Education Act. Spanish may be used as a language of instruction by teachers of Spanish literature or language, and foreign languages by teachers of those languages. An experimental partial immersion programme adopted by some schools allows for the teaching of a foreign language (English, generally) across the curriculum, though this is limited to a maximum of 30% of the school day. No public school or escola concertada in Barcelona may offer 50% or full immersion programmes in a foreign language, nor does any public school or escola concertada offer International Baccalaureate programmes.

==Culture==

Palau de la Msica Catalana
Barcelona's cultural roots go back 2000 years. To a greater extent than the rest of Catalonia, where Catalonia's native Catalan is more dominant, Barcelona is a bilingual city: Catalan and Spanish are both official languages and widely spoken. The Catalan spoken in Barcelona, Central Catalan, is the one closest to standard Catalan. Since the arrival of democracy, the Catalan culture (very much repressed during the dictatorship of Franco) has been promoted, both by recovering works from the past and by stimulating the creation of new works. Barcelona is designated as a world-class city by the Globalization and World Cities Study Group and Network. 

===Entertainment and performing arts===

The Liceu opera house
Barcelona has many venues for live music and theatre, including the world-renowned Gran Teatre del Liceu opera house, the Teatre Nacional de Catalunya, the Teatre Lliure and the Palau de la Msica Catalana concert hall. Barcelona also is home to the Barcelona and Catalonia National Symphonic Orchestra (Orquestra Simfnica de Barcelona i Nacional de Catalunya, usually known as OBC), the largest symphonic orchestra in Catalonia. In 1999, the OBC inaugurated its new venue in the brand-new Auditorium (l'Auditori). It performs around 75 concerts per season and its current director is Eiji Oue. 
The major thoroughfare of Las Ramblas is home to mime artists and street performers.
Yearly two major pop music festivals take place in the city, the Snar Festival and the Primavera Sound Festival. The city also has a thriving alternative music scene, with groups such as The Pinker Tones receiving international attention. 

===Media===
El Peridico de Catalunya, La Vanguardia and Ara are Barcelona's three major daily newspapers (the first two with Catalan and Spanish editions, Ara only in Catalan) while Sport and El Mundo Deportivo (both in Spanish) are the city's two major sports daily newspapers, published by the same companies. The city is also served by a number of smaller publications such as Ara and El Punt Avui (in Catalan), by nation-wide newspapers with special Barcelona editions like El Pais and El Mundo (both in Spanish), and by several free newspapers like 20 minutos and Qu (all bilingual).

Barcelona oldest and main online newspaper VilaWeb is the oldest one also in Europe (with Catalan and English editions)

Several major FM stations include Catalunya Rdio, RAC 1, RAC 105 and Cadena SER. Barcelona also has a local TV stations, BTV, owned by city council. The headquarters of Televisi de Catalunya, Catalonia's public network, are located in Sant Joan Desp, in Barcelona's metropolitan area.

===Sports===

Estadi Olmpic de Montjuc (Barcelona Olympic Stadium) built for the 1936 Summer Olympics named People's Olympiad, main stadium of 1992 Summer Olympics.
The Camp Nou, the largest stadium in Europe.
Barcelona has a long sporting tradition and hosted the highly successful 1992 Summer Olympics as well as several matches during the 1982 FIFA World Cup (at the two stadiums). It has also hosted, among others, about 30 sports events of international significance. Also, the city aspires to organize the 2022 Winter Olympics. The opening, closing, medal ceremonies and indoor sports would be held in Barcelona, while outdoor sports would be held in ski resorts in the Pyrenees, mainly La Molina. 

FC Barcelona is a sports club best known worldwide for its football team, one of the largest in the world and second richest football club in the world. Football Money League  Deloitte, 2011 It has 62 of national (likewise 41 runners-up) and 15 continental (likewise 10 runners-up) trophies, including four of the UEFA Champions League (likewise 3 runners-up and actually champion) and two of the FIFA Club World Cup (likewise 1 runners-up and actually champion). Also, it is the only men's club in the world to accomplish a sextuple. FC Barcelona also has teams in FC Barcelona Regal (basketball), FC Barcelona Handbol (the handball), FC Barcelona Hoquei (roller hockey), FC Barcelona Ice Hockey (ice hockey), FC Barcelona Futsal (futsal) and FC Barcelona Rugby (rugby union), all of them winners of the highest country or/and European competitions. The club's museum is the second most visited in Catalonia. Twice a season, FC Barcelona and cross-town rivals RCD Espanyol contest in the local derby in La Liga, while its basketball section has its own local derby in Liga ACB with nearby Joventut Badalona. Barcelona also has other clubs in lower categories, like CE Europa and UE Sant Andreu.

Palau Sant Jordi (St. George's sporting arena) and Montjuc Communications TowerBarcelona has two UEFA elite stadiums: FC Barcelona's Camp Nou, the largest stadium in Europe with a capacity of 100,000 and the publicly owned Estadi Olmpic Llus Companys, with a capacity of 55,000; used for the 1992 Olympics. Also, the city has several smaller stadiums such as Mini Estadi, with a capacity of 15,000 and Camp Municipal Narcs Sala, Nou Sardenya with a capacity of 7,000. In the suburbs of Barcelona there is a third UEFA elite stadium  Estadi Cornell-El Prat, with a capacity of 40,000. Also, except Palau Sant Jordi (St. George's sporting arena), with a capacity of 12,00024,000 (depending on use), city has two other larger sporting and concert arena: Palau Blaugrana, with a capacity of 7,500 and Palau dels Esports de Barcelona.
Circuit de Catalunya/Circuit de Barcelona, race track of Formula 1 and MotoGP on the suburb of Barcelona. Barcelona was also the host city for the 2013 World Aquatics Championships. Which were held at the Palau San Jordi. http://www.bcn2013.com 

Several road running competitions are organized year-round in Barcelona: the Barcelona Marathon every March with over 10,000 participants in 2010, the Cursa de Bombers in April, the Cursa de El Corte Ingls in May (with about 60,000 participants each year), the Cursa de la Merc, the Cursa Jean Bouin, the Milla Sagrada Famlia and the San Silvestre. The Open Seat God, a 50-year-old ATP World Tour 500 Series tennis tournament, is held annually in the facilities of the Real Club de Tenis Barcelona (Barcelona Royal Tennis Club). Also, each Christmas, a swimming race across the port is organized. Near Barcelona, in Montmel, the 107,000 capacity Circuit de Catalunya / Circuit de Barcelona racetrack hosts the Formula One World Championship, Formula One Spanish Grand Prix, Catalan motorcycle Grand Prix, Spanish GT Championship and GP2 Series. Skateboarding and bicycling are also very popular in Barcelona. In the city and the metropolitan area, there are tens of km of bicycle paths.

Top sport clubs in Barcelona:

 Club League Sport Venue Established Capacity 
 FC Barcelona Primera Divisin Football Camp Nou 1899 100,000 
 RCD Espanyol To 2009, home stadium of club is Estadi Olmpic Llus Companys in Barcelona, today is Estadi Cornell-El Prat lies in suburb of Barcelona, in El Prat de Llobregat. Primera Divisin Football Estadi Cornell-El Prat 1900 40,500 
 CE Europa Tercera Divisin Football Nou Sardenya 1907 7,000 
 FC Barcelona Bsquet Primera Divisin Basketball Palau Blaugrana 1926 7,585 
 FC Barcelona Handbol Primera Divisin Handball Palau Blaugrana 1942 7,585 
 FC Barcelona Ice Hockey Primera Divisin Ice hockey Palau de Gel 1972 1,256 
 FC Barcelona Hoquei Primera Divisin Roller hockey Palau Blaugrana 1942 7,585 
 FC Barcelona Futsal Primera Divisin Futsal Palau Blaugrana 1986 7,585 
 FC Barcelona Rugby Primera Divisin Rugby union CDMVdHT 1924 no data 
 Barcelona Dragons World League American football Estadi Olmpic Llus Companys 1991 (withheld) 56,000 
 Barcelona Bfals Primera Divisin American football Camp Municipal Narcs Sala 1987 6,550 

==Transport==

===Airports===
Aerial view of the Barcelona Airport.
Barcelona is served by Barcelona-El Prat Airport, about 17 km from the centre of Barcelona. It is the second-largest airport in Spain, and the largest on the Mediterranean coast, which handles above 35 million passengers per year and annual upward trend. Informes Anuales - 2012 - AENA It is a main hub for Vueling Airlines and Ryanair, and also a focus for Iberia and Air Europa. The airport mainly serves domestic and European destinations, but some airlines offer destinations in Latin America, Asia and the United States. The airport is connected to the city by highway, commuter train (Barcelona Airport railway station) and scheduled bus service. A new terminal (T1) has been built, and entered service on 17 June 2009.

Some low-cost airlines, such as Transavia.com and Ryanair, also use Girona-Costa Brava Airport, about 90 km to the north, Reus Airport, 77 km to the south, or Lleida-Alguaire Airport, about 150 km to the west, of the city. Sabadell Airport is a smaller airport in the nearby town of Sabadell, devoted to pilot training, aerotaxi and private flights.

===Seaport===
Port of Barcelona
The Port of Barcelona has a 2000-year old history and a great contemporary commercial importance. It is Europe's ninth largest container port, with a trade volume of 1.72 million TEU's in 2013. Port of Barcelona traffic statistics 2013 - Port de Barcelona, 2014 The port is managed by the Port Authority of Barcelona. Its 10 km2 are divided into three zones: Port Vell (the old port), the commercial port and the logistics port (Barcelona Free Port). The port is undergoing an enlargement that will double its size thanks to diverting the mouth of the Llobregat river 2 km (1 mi) to the south. 

The Barcelona harbour is the leading European cruiser port and a most important Mediterranean tournaround base. In 2013, 3,6 million of pleasure cruises passengers used services of the Port of Barcelona. 
The Port Vell in winter
The Port Vell area also houses the Maremagnum (a commercial mall), a multiplex cinema, the IMAX Port Vell and Europe's largest aquarium  Aquarium Barcelona, containing 8,000 fish and 11 sharks contained in 22 basins filled with 4 million litres of sea water. The Maremagnum, being situated in a designated tourist zone, is the only commercial mall in the city that can open on Sundays and public holidays.

===Railway===
Siemens Velaro designed for speeds of 310 km/h at Barcelona-Sants AVE station.
Barcelona is a major hub for RENFE, the Spanish state railway network. The city's main Inter-city rail station is Barcelona-Sants station, whilst Estaci de Frana terminus serves a secondary role handling suburban, regional and medium distance services. Freight services operate to local industries and to the Port of Barcelona.

RENFE's AVE high-speed rail system, which is designed for speeds of 310 km/h, was extended from Madrid to Barcelona in 2008 in the form of the MadridBarcelona high-speed rail line. A shared RENFE-SNCF high-speed rail connecting Barcelona and France (Paris, Marseilles and Toulouse, through LGV PerpignanFigueres) was launched in 2013. Both these lines serve Barcelona Sants terminal station. 

Besides RENFE's services, other rail services in the Barcelona area are operated by the Ferrocarrils de la Generalitat de Catalunya (FGC), owned by the Catalonian government. The FGC operates largely commuter rail services, but also carries freight to the Port of Barcelona, as well as a number of rack railways and funiculars, and three of the lines of the Barcelona Metro (see local public transport below). Other suburban services are operated by Rodalies de Catalunya over RENFE tracks.

===Roads and highways===
B-20 motorway in Barcelona.
Barcelona lies on three international routes, including European route E15 that follows the Mediterranean coast, European route E90 to Madrid and Lisbon, and European route E09 to Paris. It is also served by a comprehensive network of motorways and highways throughout the metropolitan area, including A-2, A-7/AP-7, C-16, C-17, C-31, C-32, C-33, C-60.

The city is circled by three half ring roads or bypasses, Ronda de Dalt (B-20) (on the mountain side), Ronda del Litoral (B-10) (along the coast) and Ronda del Mig (separated into two parts: Travessera de Dalt in the north and the Gran Via de Carles III), two partially covered fast highways with several exits that bypass the city.

The city's main arteries include Diagonal Avenue, which crosses it diagonally, Meridiana Avenue which leads to Glries and connects with Diagonal Avenue and Gran Via de les Corts Catalanes, which crosses the city from east to west, passing through its centre. The famous boulevard of La Rambla, whilst no longer an important vehicular route, remains an important pedestrian route.

The Estaci del Nord (Northern Station), a former railway station which was renovated for the 1992 Olympic Games, now serves as the terminus for long-distance and regional bus services.

===Local public transport===
Barcelona Metro
Barcelona is served by a comprehensive local public transport network that includes a metro, a bus network, two separate modern tram networks, a separate historic tram line, and several funiculars and aerial cable cars. Most of these networks and lines form a coordinated fare system, administered by the Autoritat del Transport Metropolit (ATM), although they are operated by a number of different bodies.

The, largely underground, Barcelona Metro network comprises eleven lines, identified by an "L" followed by the line number as well as by individual colours. Eight of these lines are operated on dedicated track by the Transports Metropolitans de Barcelona (TMB), whilst three lines are operated by the Ferrocarrils de la Generalitat de Catalunya (FGC) and share tracks with that company's commuter lines.

Barcelona Tram
Another company, TRAMMET, operates the city's two modern tram networks, known as Trambaix and Trambess. The historic tram line, the Tramvia Blau, connects the metro (L7, operated by FGC) to the Funicular del Tibidabo (operated by TMB). The Funicular de Tibidabo climbs the Tibidabo hill, as does the Funicular de Vallvidrera (FGC). The Funicular de Montjuc (TMB) climbs the Montjuc hill. The city has two aerial cable cars: the Montjuc Cable Car (to the Montjuc castle) and the Port Vell Aerial Tramway that runs via Torre Jaume I and Torre Sant Sebasti over the port.

Buses in Barcelona are a major form of public transport, with extensive local, interurban and night bus networks. Most local services are operated by the TMB, although some other services are operated by a number of private companies, albeit still within the ATM fare structure. A separate private bus line, known as Aerobs, links the airport with the city centre, with its own fare structure.

Barcelona taxi
Barcelona has a metered taxi fleet governed by the Institut Metropolit del Taxi (Metropolitan Taxi Institute), composed of more than 10,000 cars. Most of the licences are in the hands of self-employed drivers. With their black and yellow livery, Barcelona's taxis are easily spotted, and can be caught from one of many taxi ranks, hailed on street, or called by telephone. L'Administraci i la gesti del Taxi de Barcelona 

On 22 March 2007, Barcelona's City Council started the Bicing service, a bicycle service understood as a public transport. Once the user has their user card, they can take a bicycle from any of the more than 400 stations spread around the city and use it anywhere the urban area of the city, and then leave it at another station. The service has been a success, with 50,000 subscribed users in three months. 

==International relations==

===Twin towns and sister cities===
Barcelona is twinned with the following cities:(in chronological order) 

 * Montpellier, France, 1963 * Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, 1972 * Monterrey, Mexico, 1977 * Boston, USA, 1983 * Busan, South Korea, 1983 List of Busan's sister cities, Busan Metropolitan City; , * Cologne, Germany, 1984 * Glasgow, Scotland, United Kingdom * Manchester, England, United Kingdom * St. Petersburg, Russia, 1984 * So Paulo, Brazil, 1985 Prefeitura. Sp  Descentralized Cooperation * Montevideo, Uruguay, 1985 * Seville, Spain * Tel Aviv, Israel, 1998 * San Francisco, USA, 2010 * Gdask, Poland, 1990 * Havana, Cuba, 1993 * Guayaquil, Ecuador * Kobe, Japan, 1993 * Antwerp, Belgium, 1997 * Istanbul, Turkey, 1997 * Gaza, Palestinian Territories, 1998 * Dublin, Ireland, 1998 * Athens, Greece, 1999 * Isfahan, Iran, 2000 * Sarajevo, Bosnia and Herzegovina, 2000 * Valparaso, Chile, 2001 * Shanghai, China, 2001 * Nicosia, Cyprus, 2004 * Dubai, United Arab Emirates, 2006 Twinning Cities Agreements UAE Official Website * Santa Cruz de la Sierra, Bolivia, 2008 * Cebu City, Philippines, 2009 * Thiruvananthapuram, India, 2010. * Ho Chi Minh City, Vietnam, 2009 

===Partnerships and Cooperations===
Other forms of cooperation and city friendship similar to the twin city programmes exist to many cities worldwide. 
* Turin, Italy 
* Shenzhen, China  (Friendly cities),  (Foreign Affairs Office), 2008-03-22. (Translation by Google Translate.)  (International Friendship Cities List), 2011-01-20. (Translation by Google Translate.)  (Friendly exchanges), 2011-09-13. (Translation by Google Translate.) 

==Other sights==

File:Barcelone_-_Santa_Maria_Del_Mar_-_Nef.jpg|Santa Maria del Mar church
File:050529 Barcelona 099.jpg|Santa Maria del Pi church
File:Spain.Barcelona.Porta.del.Angel.jpg|Portal de l'ngel
File:Museo Can Framis.jpg|Can Framis Museum
File:Jfader batto facade.jpg|Casa Batll
File:Observatori Fabra - Vista des del Tibidabo - 1.jpg|Fabra Observatory
File:Arc de Triomf Barcelona.jpg|The Arc de Triomf
File:Casavicens.jpg|Casa Vicens
File:Barcellona palazzo.jpg|Castell dels Tres Dragons
File:PlayaBacelonetta2.JPG|Hotel Arts (left) and Torre Mapfre (each 154 m in height) seen from Platja de la Barceloneta
File:Torre Agbar.jpg|Torre Agbar
File:Torre Collserola, Norman Foster.jpg|The Torre de Collserola on the Tibidabo is the tallest structure in Barcelona (288.4m).
File:Barcelona in Parc Gell.JPG|The view from Gaudi's Park Gell
File:Hospital de Sant Pau 01.jpg|Hospital de Sant Pau
File:Telefric del Port Barcelona.jpg|Port Vell Aerial Tramway
File:Gardens of Joan Brossa 1.jpg|Montjuc Cable Car
File:Spain.Barcelona.Colon.from.Maremagnum 1.jpg|Statue of Christopher Columbus
File:Hotel Vela (1).JPG|Hotel Vela
File:050529 Barcelona 027.jpg|La Monumental
File:Barcelona Edificio Coln.jpg|Coln building
File:Palau de musica 2.JPG|Palau de la Msica Catalana
File:Bcn 3530 Palauet Albeniz pp.jpg|Palauet d'Albniz
File:Tunnelaquarium 14-05-2009 15-54-09.JPG|Aquarium Barcelona
File:Font Mgica de Montjuc.jpg|Magic Fountain of Montjuc
File:Sagrado Corazn01.jpg|Sagrat Cor
File:Plaa Espanya.jpg|The Venetian Towers in Plaa d'Espanya
File:Catalunya Barcelona1 tango7174.jpg|Plaa de Catalunya
Barcelona-2007-rr-04.jpg|La Rambla, famous for its living statues
File:Barcelona - Carrer del Bisbe.jpg|Gothic Quarter
File:Cathedral of Santa Eulalia.jpg|Cathedral of Santa Eulalia

==See also==

* List of markets in Barcelona
* List of tallest buildings in Barcelona
* Mossos d'Esquadra
* Plans for Winter Olympics held in Barcelona

==References==

===Notes===

===Bibliography===
* 
* 
* Busquets, Joan. Barcelona: The Urban Evolution of a Compact City (Harvard UP, 2006) 468 pp.
* 
* Marshall, Tim, ed. Transforming Barcelona (Routledge, 2004), 267 pp.
* Ramon Resina, Joan. Barcelona's Vocation of Modernity: Rise and Decline of an Urban Image (Stanford UP, 2008). 272 pp.

==External links==

* Official website of Barcelona
* Official website of Barcelona in the Spain's national tourism portal
* Official website of BarcelonaEl Prat International Airport
* Official website of Barcelona's Metropolitan Transports
* Tourist Guide and Services to prepare your trip to Barcelona

 



[[Bandy]]

An international bandy game between Finland and Norway at the 2004 Women's World Championships in Lappeenranta

Bandy is a team winter sport played on ice, in which skaters use sticks to direct a ball into the opposing team's goal. 

The sport has common background with association football, ice hockey and field hockey. Like football, the game is played in halves of 45 minutes each, there are eleven players on each team, and the bandy field is about the same size as a football pitch. It is played on ice like ice hockey, but like field hockey, players use bowed sticks and a small ball.

If it is very cold or if it is snowing, the match can be broken into thirds of 30 minutes each.

A variant of bandy, rink bandy, is played to the same rules but on a field the size of an ice hockey rink and with fewer people on each team. Bandy is also the predecessor of floorball, which was invented when people started playing with bandy sticks and light balls when running on the floors of indoors gym halls.

==Games==
Match between Helenelunds IK and AIK at Sollentunavallen in Sweden in 2006
Bandy is played on ice, using a single round ball. Two teams of 11 players each compete to get the ball into the other team's goal using sticks, thereby scoring a goal. 

The game is designed to be played on a rectangle of ice that is the same size as a soccer field. Bandy also has other rules that are similar to soccer. Each team has 11 players, one of whom is a goalkeeper. The offside rule is also deployed. A goal cannot be scored from a stroke-in or goal throw, but unlike soccer, a goal cannot be scored directly from a stroke-off or corner stroke. All free strokes are direct and allow a goal to be scored without another player touching the ball.

The team that has scored more goals at the end of the game is the winner. If both teams have scored an equal number of goals, then, with some exceptions, the game is a draw.

The primary rule is that the players (other than the goalkeepers) may not intentionally touch the ball with their heads, hands or arms during play. Although players usually use their sticks to move the ball around, they may use any part of their bodies other than their heads, hands or arms and may use their skates in a limited manner. Heading the ball will result in a five-minute penalty.

In typical game play, players attempt to propel the ball toward their opponents' goal through individual control of the ball, such as by dribbling, passing the ball to a team-mate, and by taking shots at the goal, which is guarded by the opposing goalkeeper. Opposing players may try to regain control of the ball by intercepting a pass or through tackling the opponent who controls the ball. However, physical contact between opponents is limited. Bandy is generally a free-flowing game, with play stopping only when the ball has left the field of play, or when play is stopped by the referee. After a stoppage, play can recommence with a free stroke, a penalty shot or a corner stroke. If the ball has left the field along the sidelines, the referee must decide which team touched the ball last, and award a restart stroke to the opposing team, just like football's throw-in.

The rules do not specify any player positions other than goalkeeper, but a number of player specialisations have evolved. Broadly, these include three main categories: forwards, whose main task is to score goals; defenders, who specialise in preventing their opponents from scoring; and midfielders, who dispossess the opposition and keep possession of the ball to pass it to the forwards. Players in these positions are referred to as outfield players, to discern them from the single goalkeeper. These positions are further differentiated by which side of the field the player spends most time in. For example, there are central defenders, and left and right midfielders. The ten outfield players may be arranged in these positions in any combination (for example, there may be three defenders, five midfielders, and two forwards), and the number of players in each position determines the style of the team's play; more forwards and fewer defenders would create a more aggressive and offensive-minded game, while the reverse would create a slower, more defensive style of play. While players may spend most of the game in a specific position, there are few restrictions on player movement, and players can switch positions at any time. The layout of the players on the pitch is called the team's formation, and defining the team's formation and tactics is usually the prerogative of the team's manager(s).

==Rules==

===Overview===
There are eighteen rules in official play. The same rules are designed to apply to all levels of bandy, although certain modifications for groups such as juniors, seniors or women are permitted. The rules are often framed in broad terms, which allow flexibility in their application depending on the nature of the game. The rules can be found on the official website of the Federation of International Bandy. 

===Players and officials===
The making of a historic bandy ball, from the original cork on the left to the final ball painted red. To the far right is a modern bandy ball
The goalkeeper has no stick
Each team consists of a maximum of 11 players (excluding substitutes), one of whom must be the goalkeeper. A team of fewer than eight players may not start a game. Goalkeepers are the only players allowed to play the ball with their hands or arms, but they are only allowed to do so within the penalty area in front of their own goal. Though there are a variety of positions in which the outfield (non-goalkeeper) players are strategically placed by a coach, these positions are not defined or required by the rules of the game.

Any number of players may be replaced by substitutes during the course of the game. Substitutions can be performed without notifying the referee and can be performed while the ball is in play. However, if the substitute enters the ice before his teammate has left it, this will result in a five-minute ban. A team can bring at the most four substitutes to the game and one of these is likely to be an extra goalkeeper.

A game is officiated by a referee, the authority and enforcer of the rules, whose decisions are final. The referee may be assisted by one or two assistant referees.

===Equipment===
The basic equipment players are required to wear include a pair of skates, a helmet, a mouth guard and, in the case of the goalkeeper, a face guard. The teams must wear uniforms that make it easy to distinguish the two teams. The skates, sticks and any tape on the stick must be of another colour than the ball.

In addition to the aforementioned equipment, various protections are used to protect knees, elbows, genitals and throat. The pants and gloves may contain padding.

===The bandy stick===
A bandy stick and ball
The stick used in Bandy is a natural part of the sport. The stick should be made of an approved material such as wood or another similar material and it should not contain any metals or sharp parts which can hurt the surrounding players. The bandy stick should be crooked and the bend of the blade is split up into 5 different dimensions, where 1 has the smallest bend and 5 has the most. Bend 4 is the most common size in professional bandy. The bandy stick should not have similar colours to the ball, such as orange or pink; it should be no longer than 127 cm, and the breadth should not exceed 7 cm. 

===Field===

Standard field measurements
Swedish U17 player on a corner stroke.

The size of a bandy field is in the range 4050 - (45  by 90 ), about the same size as a football pitch and considerably larger than an ice hockey rink. Along the sidelines a 15 cm high border (vant, sarg, wand, wall) is placed to prevent the ball from leaving the ice. It should not be attached to the ice, to glide upon collisions, and should end 1  away from the corners.

Centered at each shortline is a 3.5 m wide and 2.1 m high goal cage and in front of the cage is a half-circular penalty area with a 17 m radius. A penalty spot is located 12 m in front of the goal and there are two free-stroke spots at the penalty area line, each surrounded by a 5 m circle.

A centre spot denotes the center of the field and a circle of radius 5 m is centered at it. A centre-line is drawn through the centre spot and parallel with the shortlines.

At each of the corners, a 1 m radius quarter-circle is drawn, and a dotted line is painted parallel to the shortline and 5 m away from it without extending into the penalty area. The dotted line can be replaced with a 0.5 m long line starting at the edge of the penalty area and extending towards the sideline, 5 m from the shortline.

===Duration and tie-breaking measures===
A standard adult bandy match consists of two periods of 45 minutes each, known as halves. Each half runs continuously, meaning that the clock is not stopped when the ball is out of play; the referee can, however, make allowance for time lost through significant stoppages as described below. There is usually a 15-minute "half-time" break between halves. The end of the match is known as full-time.

The referee is the official timekeeper for the match, and may make an allowance for time lost through substitutions, injured players requiring attention, or other stoppages. This added time is commonly referred to as stoppage time or injury time, and must be reported to the match secretary and the two captains. The referee alone signals the end of the match.

In league competitions games may end in a draw, but in some knockout competitions if a game is tied at the end of regulation time it may go into extra time, which consists of two further 15-minute periods. If the score is still tied after extra time, the game will be replayed. As an alternative, the extra two times 15-minutes may be played as "golden goal" which means that the first team that scores during the extra-time wins the game. If both extra periods are played without a scored goal, a penalty shootout will settle the game. The teams shoot five penalties each and if this doesn't settle the game, the teams shoot one more penalty each until one of them misses and the other scores.

===Ball in and out of play===
Under the rules, the two basic states of play during a game are ball in play and ball out of play. From the beginning of each playing period with a stroke-off (a set strike from the centre-spot by one team) until the end of the playing period, the ball is in play at all times, except when either the ball leaves the field of play, or play is stopped by the referee. When the ball becomes out of play, play is restarted by one of six restart methods depending on how it went out of play:

Elitserien 2007 in Sweden. A corner is about to be executed during the game Vsters SK-Edsbyns IF.

 Method Description 
 Stroke-off Following a goal by the opposing team, or to begin each period of play. 
 Goal-throw When the ball has wholly crossed the goal line without a goal having been scored and having last been touched by a member of the attacking team; awarded to the defending team. 
 Corner stroke When the ball has wholly crossed the goal line without a goal having been scored and having last been touched by a member of the defending team; awarded to attacking team. The defending team must locate themselves behind goal line and the attacking team must be situated outside the penalty area with everyone but the executor no closer to the shortline than 5 m. As soon as the corner is shot, the attackers may enter the penalty area and the defenders may rush to try to stop the ball. 
 Free-stroke Awarded to fouled team following certain listed offences, or to the opposing team upon a team causing the ball to leave the field over the side-line. 
 Penalty shot Awarded to the fouled team following a foul usually punishable by a free-shot but that has occurred within their opponent's penalty area. 
 Face-off Occurs when the referee has stopped play for any other reason (for example, a serious injury to a player, interference by an external party, or a ball becoming defective). This restart is uncommon in adult games. 

If the time runs out while a team is preparing for a free-stroke or penalty, the strike should still be made but it must go into the goal by one shot to count as a goal. Similarly, a goal made via a corner stroke should be allowed, but it must be executed using only one shot in addition to the strike needed to put the ball in play.

===Free-strokes and penalty shots===
Free-strokes can be awarded to a team if a player of the opposite team offends any rule, for example, by hitting with the stick against the opponent's stick or skates. Free-strokes can also be awarded upon incorrect execution of corner-strikes, free-strikes, goal-throws, and so on. or the use of incorrect equipment, such as a broken stick.

Rather than stopping play, the referee may allow play to continue when its continuation will benefit the team against which an offence has been committed. This is known as "playing an advantage". The referee may "call back" play and penalise the original offence if the anticipated advantage does not ensue within a short period of time, typically taken to be four to five seconds. Even if an offence is not penalised because the referee plays an advantage, the offender may still be sanctioned (see below) for any associated misconduct at the next stoppage of play.

If a defender violently attacks an opponent within the penalty area, a penalty shot is awarded. Certain other offences, when carried out within the penalty area, result in a penalty shot provided there is a goal situation. These offences include a defender holding or hooking an attacker, or blocking a goal situation with a lifted skate, thrown stick or glove and so on. Also, the defenders (with the exception of the goal-keeper) are not allowed to kneel or lay on the ice. The final offences that might mandate a penalty shot are those of hitting or blocking an opponent's stick or touching the ball with the hands, arms, stick or head above the shoulders. If any of these actions is carried out in a non-goal situation, they shall be awarded with a free-stroke from one of the free-stroke spots at the penalty area line. A penalty shot should always be accompanied by a 5 or 10 minutes penalty (see below). If the penalty results in a goal, the penalty should be considered personal meaning that a substitute can be sent in for the penalised player. This does not apply in the event of a red card (see below).

===Warnings and penalties===

A ten minutes penalty is indicated through the use of a blue card and can be caused by protesting or behaving incorrectly, attacking an opponent violently or stopping the ball incorrectly to get an advantage.

The third time a player receives a penalty, it will be a personal penalty meaning he or she will miss the remainder of the match. A substitute can enter the field after five or ten minutes. A full game penalty can be received upon using abusive language or directly attacking an opponent and means that the player can neither play nor be substituted for the remainder of the game. A match penalty is indicated through the use of a red card.

===Offside===
The offside rule effectively limits the ability of attacking players to remain forward (i.e. closer to the opponent's goal-line) of the ball, the second-to-last defending player (which can include the goalkeeper), and the half-way line. This rule is in effect just like that of association football.

==International==
Russia in the World Championships 2012

===World championships===
The Bandy World Championship for men were first held in 1957 and then every two years starting in 1961, and every year since 2003. Currently the record number of countries participating in the World Championships is 14. The participating countries vary from year to year. Finland won the 2004 world championship in Vsters. All other championships have been won by the Soviet Union, Russia, or Sweden.

In February 2004, Sweden won the first World Championship for women, hosted in Finland, without conceding a goal. The second women's World Championship were held in Roseville, Minnesota at the Guidant John Rose Minnesota Oval in the USA in 2006 and once again Sweden won, defeating Russia in the final (31).

===Olympic Games===
Although bandy was the demonstration sport at the VI Olympic Winter Games in 1952 (Oslo, Norway), and is IOC accepted, it has not become an official Olympic sport. Only three teams played bandy at the 1952 Winter Olympics: Finland, Norway and Sweden.

In 2010 it was reported that FIB president Boris Skrynnik believed bandy would be on the programme for the 2014 Winter Olympics in Sochi, but this did not happen.

===Asian Winter Games===
The final of the bandy tournament at Asian Winter Games between Kazakhstan and Mongolia
At the 2011 Asian Winter Games, open to members of the Olympic Council of Asia, bandy for men was included for the first time. With Japan as a new FIB member, the international federation is working towards including bandy also in the next games in Sapporo-Obihiro 2017. According to Boris Skrynnik, it is confirmed for inclusion. 

===Friendlies===
The national teams also meet for friendly games from time to time. Finland, Norway and Sweden usually play Russia in the Russian Government Cup. The USA and Canada meet for friendlies once a year. The central European teams Czech Republic, Germany, Hungary and the Netherlands met for a four nation competition in January 2014, an event which is intended to be recurrent.

===World Cup===
The World Championships should not be confused with the annual World Cup in Ljusdal, Sweden, which has been played annually sice the 1970s and is the biggest bandy tournament for elite level club teams. It was played indoors in Sandviken from 2009 to 2011 because Ljusdal has no indoor arena. It is planned to be in Ljusdal again once an indoor arena has been built. World Cup matches are played day and night, and the tournament is played in four days in late October. The winner in 2008 was Edsbyns IF, the dominant team in Swedish bandy, who had won five straight Swedish championships. As of 2013, the winners have all been Russian teams since 2010.

Since 2007, there is also a Bandy World Cup Women for women's teams. 

===Champions Cup===
Another club tournament is the Champions Cup. It is a pre-season tournament held in Edsbyn, Sweden and features clubs from Russia and Sweden.

===International federation===
World map showing the 32 members of the Federation of International Bandy
Federation of International Bandy, fully recognised by the IOC

The Federation of International Bandy (FIB) has 32 members (2014). Formed in 1955, the name was changed from International Bandy Federation in 2001 after the International Olympic Committee approved it as a so-called "recognized sport"; the abbreviation "IBF" was already used by another recognized sports federation. In 2004, FIB was fully accepted by IOC.

FIB is now a member of Association of IOC Recognised International Sports Federations.

===Winter Universiade===
The 2017 Winter Universiade will be held in Almaty with bandy as a demonstration sport. In Krasnoyarsk 2019 bandy might be one of the sports.     3 . rusbandy.ru. 9 December 2013 If so, it will possibly be played in an indoor arena.       7  . rusbandy.ru. 10 December 2013 

===European Championship===
The only European Bandy Championship was held in the Swiss town of Davos in 1913 with England victorious. 

==Varieties==
Rink bandy is a variety played on an ice hockey-size rink. It was in the programme of the 2012 European Company Sports Games. 
Some FIB countries don't have a large ice surface and only play rink bandy at home, in fact most of the World Championships Group B participants.

==History==
Russian monastery records dating back to the 10th to 11th centuries record games which may be ancestors of bandy. A game that could be recognized as essentially modern bandy was played in Russia by the early 18th century, although the rules used differed from those that were invented in England at a much later date. Throughout modern times, Russia has kept a top position in the bandy area: as one of the founding nations of the International Federation in 1955, and as fielding the most successful team in the World Championships. Russians see themselves as the creators of the sport, which is reflected by the unofficial title for bandy, "Russian hockey" ( ).

The first match, which later has been dubbed the original bandy match, was a match held at The Crystal Palace in London in 1875. However, at the time, the game was called "hockey on the ice", probably as it was considered an ice variant of field hockey.

The name "bandy" comes from Britain, which has played an important role in the development of the sport. Bando, a game played in Wales in ancient times, is similar to bandy. It was played throughout the country in varying forms and is still to be found in some areas. The earliest example of the Welsh-language term bando occurs in a dictionary by John Walters published in 177094. The game became particularly popular in the Cynffig-Margam district of the Vale of Glamorgan where wide stretches of sandy beaches afforded ample room for play. As a winter sport, British bandy originated in the Fens of East Anglia where large expanses of ice formed on flooded meadows or shallow washes in cold winters, and skating was a tradition. Members of the Bury Fen Bandy Club 

 published rules of the game in 1882, and introduced it into other countries. The first international match took place in 1891 between Bury Fen and the then Haarlemsche Hockey & Bandy Club from the Netherlands (a club which after a couple of club fusions now is named HC Bloemendaal). The same year, the National Bandy Association was started in England. 

The first ever national bandy league was started in Sweden in 1902. Bandy was played at the Nordic Games in 1905 and between Swedish, Finnish and Russian teams in 1907. A European championship was held in 1913 with eight countries participating. 

 national federations exist in several nations, including Afghanistan, Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Belarus, Canada, Czech Republic, China, England, Estonia, Finland, Germany, Hungary, India, Ireland, Italy, Japan, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Latvia, Lithuania, Mongolia, the Netherlands, Norway, Poland, Russia, Serbia, Somalia, Sweden, Switzerland, Ukraine, and the United States. 

===Historical relationship with football and ice hockey===
Bandy as a precursor to ice hockey 
has had some influence on hockey's development and history  mainly in European and former Soviet countries. While modern ice hockey was created in Canada, a game more similar to bandy was played initially, after British soldiers introduced the game in the 19th century. At the same time that modern ice-hockey rules were formalized in North America, bandy rules were formulated in Europe. A cross between English and Russian rules developed, with the football-inspired English rules dominant, together with the Russian low border along most of the two sidelines.

Before Canadians introduced ice hockey into Europe in the late 19th century, "hockey" was another name for bandy, Nordisk Familjebok 10 Hassle-Infektera, Frlagshuset Norden AB, Malm 1952, "Hockey", column 386 and still is in parts of Russia and Kazakhstan.

With football and bandy being dominant sports in parts of Europe, it was common for sports clubs to have both popular bandy and football sections, with athletes playing both sports but during different times of the year. Two examples are English Nottingham Forest Football and Bandy Club (today known just as Nottingham Forest F.C.) and Norwegian Strmsgodset IF, with the latter still having an active bandy section.

During all of the 20th century, bandy remained alongside ice hockey in some European countries, especially in Sweden, Finland, and Norway. Nordisk Familjebok 2 Asura-Bidz, Frlagshuset Norden AB, Malm 1951, "Bandy", columns 324326 Ice hockey became more popular than bandy in most of Europe mostly because hockey became an Olympic sport, but bandy did not. Athletes in Europe who had played bandy, switched to ice hockey in the 1920s to be able to compete in the Olympics. E.g. in the Netherlands, see The smaller ice fields needed for ice hockey also made the ice hockey rinks easier to maintain, especially in countries with short winters. On the other hand, ice hockey was not played at all in the Soviet Union until the 1950s. Bandy players in Russia started to play hockey to compete internationally, when the Soviet Union wanted to compete with the west. The typical European style of ice hockey, with flowing and less physical play, represents a heritage of bandy. 

==Names of the sport==
The sports English name comes from the verb "to bandy," from the Middle French bander ("to strike back and forth"), and originally referred to a 17th-century Irish game similar to field hockey. The curved stick was also called a "bandy." 

Old names for bandy are hockey on the ice or hockey on ice. Since the mid-20th century the term bandy is usually preferred to prevent confusion with ice hockey.

The sport is known as bandy in many languages though there are a few notable exceptions. In Russian bandy is called "Russian hockey" ( ) or more frequently "hockey with a ball" (x  ) while ice hockey is called "hockey with a puck" (x  ) or more frequently just "hockey". In Belarussian, Ukrainian and Bulgarian it is also called "hockey with a ball" (  o,   ' and    respectively). In Kazakh bandy is known as "ball hockey" ( ). In Finnish the two sports are distinguished as "ice ball" (jpallo) and "ice puck" (jkiekko). In Estonian and Hungarian, bandy is also called "ice ball" (jpall and jglabda, respectively), although in Hungarian it is more often called "bandy" nowadays.

==Countries==

===England===
Historical English team
Bury Fen
The first recorded games of bandy on ice took place in The Fens during the great frost of 18131814, although it is probable that the game had been played there in the previous century. Bury Fen Bandy Club from Bluntisham-cum-Earith, near St Ives, was the most successful team, remaining unbeaten until the winter of 18901891. Charles G Tebbutt of the Bury Fen bandy club was responsible for the first published rules of bandy in 1882, and also for introducing the game into the Netherlands and Sweden, as well as elsewhere in England where it became popular with cricket, rowing and hockey clubs. Tebbutt's home-made bandy stick can be seen in the Norris Museum in St Ives.

England won the European Bandy Championships in 1913, but that turned out to be the grand finale, and bandy is now virtually unknown in England. In March 2004, Norwegian ex-player Edgar Malman invited two big clubs to play a rink bandy exhibition game in Streatham, London. Russian
Champions and World Cup Winner Vodnik met Swedish Champions Edsbyns IF in a match that ended 1010. In 2010 England became a Federation of International Bandy member. The federation is based in Cambridgeshire, the historical heartland. 

Activities on the ice are just about to be started up in London. 

===Finland===
A match in Finland
Bandy was introduced to Finland from Russia in the 1890s. Finland has been playing bandy friendlies against Sweden, Norway and Estonia since its independence in 1917.

The first Finnish national championships were held in 1908 and was the first national Finnish championship held in any team sport. National champions have been named every year except for three years in the first half of the 20th Century when Finland was at war. The top national league is called Bandyliiga and is semi-professional. The best players often go fully professional by being recruited by clubs in Sweden or Russia.

===India===
India has a national bandy team. Bandy Federation of India takes care of bandy in India. Its headquarters is in Mandi in Himachal Pradesh. Bandy is generally played in northern India where there is generally snow and ice. India is one of 6 countries in Asia and in total 28 to be a member of Federation of International Bandy. BFI planned to send a team to the tournament in Astana-Almaty 2011, but ultimately did not.

===Kazakhstan===
thumb
Bandy has a long history in many parts of the country and it used to be one of the most popular sports in Soviet times. However, after independence it suffered a rapid decline in popularity and only remained in Oral, where the country's only professional club Akzhayik is located. They are competing in the Russian second division. Recently bandy has started to gain popularity again outside of Oral. The former capital Almaty has in recent years hosted both the Asian Winter Games (with bandy on the program) as well as the Bandy World Championship in which Kazakhstan finished 3rd. Plans are made to reinvigorate the bandy section of the club Dynamo Almaty, who won the Soviet Championships in 1977 and 1990 as well as the European Cup in 1978. The Asian Bandy Federation also has its headquarters in Almaty. Since a few years the state is supporting bandy.

===Norway===
Celebrating the bronze medal in WCS 2007
Bandy was introduced to Norway in the 1910s. The Swedes contributed largely, and clubs sprang up around the capital of Oslo. Oslo, including neighbouring towns, is still today the region where bandy enjoys most popularity in Norway.

In 1912 the Norwegians played their first National Championship, which was played annually up to 1940. During WWII, illegal bandy was played in hidden places in forests, on ponds and lakes. In 1943, 44 and 45, illegal championships were held. In 1946 legal play resumed and still goes on. After WWII the number of teams rose, as well as attendance which regularly were in the thousands, but mild winters in the 1970s and 80s shrunk the league, and in 2003 only 5 clubs (teams) fought out the 1st division with low attendance numbers and little media coverage.

In recent years, the number of artificially frozen pitches have increased in Norway, and more sports clubs have reinvigorated their bandy sections with new men's and youth teams. Because of this, as well as an increase of Swedish players in Norway, the competitiveness of the game has risen, especially in the first division Eliteserien. The adult men's game in Norway today consists of Eliteserien with 8 teams, as well as 3 lower divisions. Bandy in Norway has also started to spread geographically, and while the sport is more popular than ice hockey in and around the capital Oslo, some clubs in apart locations in the 3rd division only have access to hockey rinks and therefor play rink bandy for home games. Compared to the past, attendance is still fairly low, but important Eliteserien matches can attract around 1000 spectators.

===Russia===
Trud Arkhangelsk.jpg|thumb|Trud stadium [http://www.rusbandy.ru/stadium/10/  , . rusbandy.r in Arkhangelsk]]
In Russia bandy is known as hockey with a ball or simply Russian hockey. A similar game became popular among the Russian nobility in the early 1700s, with the imperial court of Peter the Great playing a predecessor of modern bandy on Saint Petersburg's frozen Neva river. Russians played this game using ordinary footwear, with sticks made out of juniper wood, only later were skates introduced. It was only in the second half of the 19th century that bandy became popular among the masses throughout the Russian Empire. Traditionally the Russians used a longer skate blade than other nations, giving them the advantage of skating faster. However, they would find it more difficult to turn quickly. A bandy skate has a longer blade than a hockey skate, and the "Russian skate" even longer.

When the Federation of International Bandy was formed in 1955, with the Soviet Union as one of its founding members, the Russians largely adopted the international rules of the game developed in England in the 19th century, with one notable exception. The other countries adopted the border.

Bandy is considered a national sport in Russia. 

The Russian Bandy Super League is played every year and the winner in the final becomes Russian champion.

===Sweden===
After the 2010 final at Studenternas Idrottsplats in Uppsala, Sweden
Bandy was introduced to Sweden in 1895. The Swedish royal family, barons and diplomats were the first players. Swedish championships for men have been played annually since 1907. In the 1920s students played the game and it became a largely middle class sport. After Slottsbrons IF won the Swedish championship in 1934 it became popular amongst workers in the smaller industrial towns and villages. Bandy remains the main sport in many of these places.

Bandy in Sweden is famous for its "culture"  both playing bandy and being a spectator requires great fortitude and dedication. A "bandy briefcase" ("bandyportflj" in Swedish) is the classic accessory for spectating  it is typically made of brown leather, well worn and contain a warm drink in a thermos and/or a bottle of liquor. 
Bandy is most often played at outdoor arenas during winter time, so the need for spectators to carry flask or thermoses of 'warming' liquid like Glgg is a natural effect.

A notable tradition is "Annandagsbandy", bandy on Boxing Day, which formerly marked the start of the bandy season and always draw bigger crowds than usual. Matches traditionally begin at 1:15 pm. 

The final match for the Swedish Championship is played every year on the third Sunday of March. From 1991 to 2012, it was played at Studenternas Idrottsplats in Uppsala, at times drawing crowds in excess of 20,000. The reason for why the play-off match was set in Uppsala is because of IFK Uppsala and its success in the beginning of the 20th century. IFK Uppsala won 11 titles in the Swedish Championships between 1907 and 1920.

From 2013 the final is played indoors in Friends Arena, the new national stadium for football with retractable roof with a capacity of 50 000.

===United States===

Bandy has been played in the United States since around 1980. The activity is mainly centred to Minnesota even if a fan interest also exist in other states. The bandy clubs in the US only have teams but the interest is stable and even if some clubs folds after only some years, other clubs have been around from the start and have a steady following. The United States national bandy team has taken part in the Bandy World Championships since 1985 and is also regularly playing friendlies against Canada.

United States bandy championships have been played annually since the early 1980s, but the league is still not widely followed by sports media in the country.

===National Bandy Federations===

*Afghanistan  Bandy Federation of Afghanistan
*Argentina  Argentine Bandy Union
*Armenia  Armenian National Federation of Bandy
*Australia  Australian Bandy League
*Belarus      a (Belarusian Bandy Federation)
*Canada  Canada Bandy 
*People's Republic of China  Chinese Ice Hockey Association
*Estonia  Eesti Jpalliliit 
*Finland  Finland's Bandy Association 
*Hungary  Hungarian Bandy Federation 
*India  Bandy Federation of India
*Ireland  Bandy Federation of Ireland
*Italy  Federazione Italiana Bandy
*Japan  Japan Bandy Federation 
*Kazakhstan  Kazakhstan Bandy Federation
*Kyrgyzstan  Bandy Federation of Kyrgyzstan
*Latvia  Latvijas Bendija Federcija 
*Lithuania  Lithuanian Bandy Association
*Mongolia  Bandy Federation of Mongolia
*Netherlands  Nederlandse Roller Sport and Bandy Bond 
*Norway  Norges Bandyforbund 
*Poland  Bandy Federation of Poland
*Russia       (All Russian Bandy Federation) 
*Serbia  Bandy Federation of Serbia
*Somalia  Somali National Bandy Association 
*Sweden  Svenska Bandyfrbundet 
*Switzerland  Federation of Swiss Bandy
*Ukraine  a    '  - (Ukrainian Bandy and Rinkbandy Federation) 
*United States  American Bandy Association 

==References==

==Bibliography==
*The Earl of Suffolk and Berkshire Hedley Park and Aflalo, F.G. Bandy (includes definition and rules), pp. 71  72, 1897. published by Lawrence & Bullen, Ltd., 16 Henrietta St., Covent Garden, London.

==External links==

*  History and rules of Bandy.
*
*Federation of International Bandy
*Bandysidan links  One of the most extensive link directories about bandy
* Klein, Jeff Z. "It's Not Hockey, It's Bandy," The New York Times, Friday, 29 January 2010.
* Goalwire statistics for bandy

 



[[Bob Frankston]]

Bob Frankston, 2012

Robert (Bob) M. Frankston (born June 14, 1949 in Brooklyn, New York) is the co-creator with Dan Bricklin of the VisiCalc spreadsheet program and the co-founder of Software Arts, the company that developed it.

Frankston graduated in 1966 from Stuyvesant High School in New York City and in 1970 from M.I.T.

Frankston has received numerous honors and awards for his work:

* Fellow of the Association for Computing Machinery (1994) "for the invention of VisiCalc, a new metaphor for data manipulation that galvanized the personal computing industry"
* MIT William L. Stewart Award for co-founding the M.I.T. Student Information Processing Board.
* The Association for Computing Machinery Software System Award (1985)
* The MIT LCS Industrial Achievement Award
* The Washington Award (2001) from the Western Society of Engineers (with Bricklin)
* In 2004, he was made a Fellow of the Computer History Museum "for advancing the utility of personal computers by developing the VisiCalc electronic spreadsheet." 

In recent years, Frankston has been an outspoken advocate for reducing the role of telecommunications companies in the evolution of the internet, particularly with respect to broadband and mobile communications. Bob Frankston. The 2 Trillion Dollar Mistake. Presentation at Emerging Communications Conference 2008. He coined the term "Regulatorium" to describe what he considers collusion between telecommunication companies and their regulators that prevents change. 

==References==

==External links==

*Bob Frankston's site/blog
*Biographical article from Smart Computing
*



[[Man Booker Prize]]

The Man Booker Prize for Fiction is a literary prize awarded each year for the best original novel, written in the English language, by a citizen of the Commonwealth of Nations, the Republic of Ireland, or Zimbabwe. Beginning in 2014, it will consider authors from anywhere in the world, as long as their work is in English and published in the UK. The winner of the Man Booker Prize is generally assured of international renown and success; therefore, the prize is of great significance for the book trade. 

The Booker Prize is greeted with great anticipation and fanfare. It is also a mark of distinction for authors to be selected for inclusion in the shortlist or even to be nominated for the "longlist".

The 2013 winner, announced on 15 October, was The Luminaries by Canadian-born New Zealand author Eleanor Catton.

==History and administration==
The prize was originally known as the Booker-McConnell Prize, after the company Booker-McConnell began sponsoring the event in 1968; it became commonly known as the "Booker Prize" or simply "the Booker." When administration of the prize was transferred to the Booker Prize Foundation in 2002, the title sponsor became the investment company Man Group, which opted to retain "Booker" as part of the official title of the prize. The foundation is an independent registered charity funded by the entire profits of Booker Prize Trading Ltd, of which it is the sole shareholder. The prize money awarded with the Booker Prize was originally 21,000, and was subsequently raised to 50,000 in 2002 under the sponsorship of the Man Group, making it one of the world's richest literary prizes.

In 1970 Bernice Rubens became the first woman to win the Man Booker Prize, for The Elected Member. James Kidd, "A Brief History of The Man Booker Prize". The rules of the Booker changed in 1971; previously, it had been awarded retrospectively to books published prior to the year in which the award was given. In 1971 the year of eligibility was changed to the same as the year of the award; in effect, this meant that books published in 1970 were not considered for the Booker in either year. The Booker Prize Foundation announced in January 2010 the creation of a special award called the "Lost Man Booker Prize," with the winner chosen from a longlist of 22 novels published in 1970. 

Alice Munro has a unique place in Booker Prize history; The Beggar Maid is the only short story collection to have been shortlisted. (It was shortlisted in 1980.) 

Before 2001, each year's longlist of nominees was not publicly revealed. 

John Sutherland, who was a judge for the 1999 prize, has said, 

===Controversies===
In 1972, the winning writer John Berger, known for his Marxist worldview, protested during his acceptance speech against Booker McConnell. He blamed Booker's 130 years of sugar production in the Caribbean for the region's modern poverty. "John Berger on the Booker Prize (1972)", YouTube. Berger donated half of his 5,000 prize to the British Black Panther movement, because they had a socialist and revolutionary perspective in agreement with his own. p. 11. Speech by John Berger on accepting the Booker Prize for Fiction at the Caf Royal in London on 23 November 1972. 

In 1980, Anthony Burgess, writer of Earthly Powers, refused to attend the ceremony unless it was confirmed to him in advance whether he had won. His was one of two books considered likely to win, the other being Rites of Passage by William Golding. The judges decided only 30 minutes before the ceremony, giving the prize to Golding. Both novels had been seen as favourites to win leading up to the prize and the dramatic "literary battle" between two senior writers made front page news. p. 1. 

1983's judging produced a draw between J. M. Coetzee's Life & Times of Michael K and Salman Rushdie's Shame, leaving chair of judges Fay Weldon to choose between the two. According to Stephen Moss in The Guardian, "Her arm was bent and she chose Rushdie" only to change her mind as the result was being phoned through. 

In 1993, two of the judges threatened to walk out when Trainspotting appeared on the longlist; Irvine Welsh's novel was pulled from the shortlist to satisfy them. The novel would later receive critical acclaim, and is now considered Welsh's masterpiece. 

The award has been criticised for the types of books it covers. In 1981, nominee John Banville wrote a letter to The Guardian requesting that the prize be given to him so that he could use the money to buy every copy of the longlisted books in Ireland and donate them to libraries, "thus ensuring that the books not only are bought but also read  surely a unique occurrence." "A novel way of striking a 12,000 Booker Prize bargain", The Guardian, 14 October 1981, p. 14. 

In 1994, journalist Richard Gott described the prize as "a significant and dangerous iceberg in the sea of British culture that serves as a symbol of its current malaise." p. 22. 

In 1997, the decision to award Arundhati Roy's The God of Small Things proved controversial. Carmen Callil, chair of the previous year's Booker judges, called it an "execrable" book and was seen on television saying it shouldn't even have been on the shortlist. Booker Prize chairman Martyn Goff said Roy won because nobody objected, following the rejection by the judges of Bernard MacLaverty's shortlisted book due to their dismissal of him as "a wonderful short-story writer and that Grace Notes was three short stories strung together." 

In 2001, A. L. Kennedy, who was a judge in 1996, called the prize "a pile of crooked nonsense" with the winner determined by "who knows who, who's sleeping with who, who's selling drugs to who, who's married to who, whose turn it is". 

In the mid-2000s, the Booker Prize was passed around between Ireland and India, giving the impression that the literatures of these countries were more fashionable than ever. "Outsider" John Banville began this trend in 2005 when his novel The Sea was selected, a decision greeted with shock and derision in England's famed London literary circle. Boyd Tonkin, literary editor of The Independent, famously condemned it as "possibly the most perverse decision in the history of the award" and rival novelist Tibor Fischer poured scorn on Banville's victory. Kiran Desai of India won in 2006. Anne Enright's 2007 victory came about due to a jury badly split over Ian McEwan's novel On Chesil Beach. The following year it was India's turn again, with Aravind Adiga narrowly defeating Enright's fellow Irishman Sebastian Barry. 

===Expansion to include authors regardless of country of origin===

On 18 September 2013 the media announced that future Man Booker Prize awards would consider authors from anywhere in the world, so long as their work was in English and published in the UK. Will Gompertz, "Global expansion for Booker Prize", BBC News, 18 September 2013. This change proved controversial in literary circles. Former winner AS Byatt and former judge John Mullan said the prize risked diluting its identity, whereas former judge AL Kennedy welcomed the change. 

==Judging==
The selection process for the winner of the prize commences with the formation of an advisory committee which includes a writer, two publishers, a literary agent, a bookseller, a librarian, and a chairperson appointed by the Booker Prize Foundation. The advisory committee then selects the judging panel, the membership of which changes each year, although on rare occasions a judge may be selected a second time. Judges are selected from amongst leading literary critics, writers, academics and leading public figures.

The winner is usually announced at a ceremony in London's Guildhall, usually in early October.

==Winners==

In 1993 to mark the 25th anniversary it was decided to choose a Booker of Bookers Prize. Three previous judges of the award, Malcolm Bradbury, David Holloway and W. L. Webb, met and chose Salman Rushdie's Midnight's Children (the 1981 winner) as "the best novel out of all the winners." 

A similar prize known as The Best of the Booker was awarded in 2008 to celebrate the 40th anniversary of the prize. A shortlist of six winners was chosen and the decision was left to a public vote. The winner was again Midnight's Children. 

 Year Author Title Genre(s) Nationality 
 1969 P. H. Newby Something to Answer For Novel 
 1970 Bernice Rubens The Elected Member Novel 
 1970 (retrospective award) J. G. Farrell Troubles Novel 
 1971 V. S. Naipaul In a Free State Short story 
 1972 John Berger G. Experimental novel 
 1973 J. G. Farrell The Siege of Krishnapur Novel 
 1974 Nadine Gordimer The Conservationist Novel South Africa 
 Stanley Middleton Holiday Novel 
 1975 Ruth Prawer Jhabvala Heat and Dust Historical novel 
 1976 David Storey Saville Novel 
 1977 Paul Scott Staying On Novel 
 1978 Iris Murdoch The Sea, the Sea Philosophical novel 
 1979 Penelope Fitzgerald Offshore Novel 
 1980 William Golding Rites of Passage Novel 
 1981 Salman Rushdie Midnight's Children Magical realism 
 1982 Thomas Keneally Schindler's Ark Biographical novel 
 1983 J. M. Coetzee Life & Times of Michael K Novel South Africa 
 1984 Anita Brookner Hotel du Lac Novel 
 1985 Keri Hulme The Bone People Mystery novel 
 1986 Kingsley Amis The Old Devils Comic novel 
 1987 Penelope Lively Moon Tiger Novel 
 1988 Peter Carey Oscar and Lucinda Novel 
 1989 Kazuo Ishiguro The Remains of the Day Historical novel 
 1990 A. S. Byatt Possession Historical novel 
 1991 Ben Okri The Famished Road Magic realism 
 1992 Michael Ondaatje The English Patient Historiographic metafiction 
 Barry Unsworth Sacred Hunger Historical novel 
 1993 Roddy Doyle Paddy Clarke Ha Ha Ha Novel 
 1994 James Kelman How Late It Was, How Late Stream of consciousness 
 1995 Pat Barker The Ghost Road War novel 
 1996 Graham Swift Last Orders Novel 
 1997 Arundhati Roy The God of Small Things Novel 
 1998 Ian McEwan Amsterdam Novel 
 1999 J. M. Coetzee Disgrace Novel 
 2000 Margaret Atwood The Blind Assassin Historical novel 
 2001 Peter Carey True History of the Kelly Gang Historical novel 
 2002 Yann Martel Life of Pi Fantasy and adventure novel 
 2003 DBC Pierre Vernon God Little Black comedy 
 2004 Alan Hollinghurst The Line of Beauty Historical novel 
 2005 John Banville The Sea Novel 
 2006 Kiran Desai The Inheritance of Loss Novel 
 2007 Anne Enright The Gathering Novel 
 2008 Aravind Adiga The White Tiger Novel 
 2009 Hilary Mantel Wolf Hall Historical novel 
 2010 Howard Jacobson The Finkler Question Comic novel 
 2011 Julian Barnes The Sense of an Ending Novel 
 2012 Hilary Mantel Bring Up the Bodies Historical novel 
 2013 Eleanor Catton The Luminaries Historical novel 
 

==Related awards==
A separate prize for which any living writer in the world may qualify, the Man Booker International Prize, was inaugurated in 2005 and is awarded biennially. A Russian version of the Booker Prize was created in 1992 called the Booker-Open Russia Literary Prize, also known as the Russian Booker Prize. In 2007, Man Group plc established the Man Asian Literary Prize, an annual literary award given to the best novel by an Asian writer, either written in English or translated into English, and published in the previous calendar year.

==Cheltenham Booker Prize==
As part of The Times Literature Festival in Cheltenham, a Booker event is held on the last Saturday of the festival. Four guest speakers/judges debate a shortlist of four books from a given year from before the introduction of the Booker prize, and a winner is chosen. Unlike the real Man Booker, writers from outside the Commonwealth are also considered. In 2008, the winner for 1948 was Alan Paton's Cry, the Beloved Country, beating Norman Mailer's The Naked and the Dead, Graham Greene's The Heart of the Matter and Evelyn Waugh's The Loved One.

==See also==
* List of British literary awards
* List of literary awards
* The Commonwealth Writers Prize
* The Costa Book Awards
* The Prix Goncourt
* Governor General's Awards
* The Scotiabank Giller Prize
* The Miles Franklin Award
* Russian Booker Prize
* The Samuel Johnson Prize (non-fiction)

==References==

==Further reading==
* Lee, Hermione (1981). The Booker Prize: Matters of judgment. Times Literary Supplement, Reprinted 22 October 2008

==External links==

* Official website
* The Booker Prize Archive at Oxford Brookes University
* A primer on the Man Booker Prize and critical review of literature
* Man Booker Prize 2013 Longlist announced 23 July 2013, updated with Shortlist 10 September 2013

 

 

[[Book of Joel]]

The Book of Joel is part of the Hebrew Bible. Joel is part of a group of twelve prophetic books known as the Twelve Minor Prophets. (The term indicates the short length of the text in relation to the longer prophetic texts known as the Major Prophets).

== Content ==

After a superscription ascribing the prophecy to Joel (son of Pethuel), the book may be broken down into the following sections:
* Lament over a great locust plague and a severe drought (1:12:17)
** The effects of these events on agriculture, farmers, and on the supply of agricultural offerings for the Temple in Jerusalem, interspersed with a call to national lament. (1:120)
** A more apocalyptic passage comparing the locusts to an army, and revealing that they are Gods army. (2:111)
** A call to national repentance in the face of God's judgment. (2:1217)
* Promise of future blessings (2:1832)
** Banishment of the locusts and restoration of agricultural productivity as a divine response to national penitence. (2:1827)
** Future prophetic gifts to all Gods people, and the safety of Gods people in the face of cosmic cataclysm. (2:2832)
* Coming judgment on Gods (Israels) enemies and the vindication of Israel. (3:121)

== Historical context ==
The Prophet Joel as imagined by Michelangelo (Fresco, Sistine Chapel Ceiling, 15081512)

As there are no explicit references in the book to datable persons or events, scholars have assigned a wide range of dates to the book. The main positions are: Outlined by Allen (pp. 1925), who himself favours the third position. 
* Ninth century BC, particularly in the reign of Joash  a position especially popular among nineteenth-century scholars (making Joel one of the earliest writing prophets)
* c.630587 BC, in the last decades of the kingdom of Judah (contemporary with Jeremiah, Ezekiel, Habakkuk)
* c.520500 BC, contemporary with the return of the exiles and the careers of Zechariah and Haggai.
* The decades around 400 BC, during the Persian period (making him one of the latest writing prophets)

Evidence produced for these positions are allusions in the book to the wider world, similarities with other prophets, and linguistic details. Other commentators, such as John Calvin, Cited in Allen, p.19, although Calvin did lean toward a later dating attach no great importance to the precise dating.

== History of interpretation ==

The preservation of the book of Joel indicates that it was accorded special status by its contemporaries as the word of the Lord (1:1). Its history as part of the Jewish and Christian canons followed that of the entire scroll of the Minor Prophets.

The Masoretic text places Joel between Hosea and Amos (the order inherited by the Tanakh and Old Testament), while the Septuagint order is HoseaAmosMicahJoelObadiahJonah. The Hebrew text of Joel seems to have suffered little from scribal transmission, but is at a few points supplemented by the Septuagint, Syriac, and Vulgate versions, or by conjectural emendation. Allen 36 
While the book purports to describe a plague of locusts, some ancient Jewish opinion saw the locusts as allegorical interpretations of Israel's enemies. Targum at 2:25; also margin of LXX manuscript Q, mid-6th century AD This allegorical interpretation was applied to the church by many church fathers. Calvin took a literal interpretation of ch.1, but allegorical view of chapter 2, a position echoed by some modern interpreters. Most modern interpreters, however, see Joel speaking of a literal locust plague given a prophetic/ apocalyptic interpretation. See Allen 2931 

The traditional ascription of the whole book to the prophet Joel was challenged in the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries by a theory of a three stage process of composition: 1:12:27 were from the hand of Joel, and dealt with a contemporary issue; 2:283:21 were ascribed to a continuator with an apocalyptic outlook. Mentions in the first half of the book to the day of the Lord were also ascribed to this continuator. 3:48 could be seen as even later. Details of exact ascriptions differed between scholars.

This splitting of the books composition began to be challenged in the mid-twentieth century, with scholars defending the unity of the book, the plausibility of the prophet combining a contemporary and apocalyptic outlook, and later additions by the prophet. The authenticity of 3:48 has presented more challenges, although a number of scholars still defend it. See Allen 2529 for details and arguments. 

== Biblical quotes and allusions ==
There are many parallels of language between Joel and other Old Testament prophets. They may represent Joels literary use of other prophets, or vice versa.

In the New Testament, his prophecy of the outpouring of Gods Holy Spirit upon all people was notably quoted by the apostle Peter in his Pentecost sermon ().

The table below represents some of the more explicit quotes and allusions between specific passages in Joel and passages from the Old and New Testaments. 

Russian icon of the prophet Joel (Iconostasis of Kizhi monastery, c.17001725)

 Joel Old Testament New Testament 1:6, 2:210 Revelation 9:3, 79 1:15 Isaiah 13:6Ezekiel 30:23 2:1 Zephaniah 1:1416 2:12 Amos 5:18, 20 2:11 Malachi 3:2 2:27 Isaiah 45:5Ezekiel 36:11 2:2832 Acts 2:1621 2:31 Malachi 4:5 2:32 Obadiah 17 Romans 10:13 3:10 Isaiah 2:4Micah 4:3 3:16 Amos 1:2 3:17 Obadiah 17 3:18 Amos 9:13 

== References ==

== Recent works on Joel ==
See also works on the Minor Prophets as a whole.
* Achtemeier, Elizabeth. Minor Prophets I. New International Biblical Commentary. (Hendrickson, 1999)
* Ahlstrm, Gsta W. Joel and the Temple Cult of Jerusalem. Supplements to Vetus Testamentum 21. (Brill, 1971)
* Allen, Leslie C. The Books of Joel, Obadiah, Jonah & Micah. New International Commentary on the Old Testament. (Eerdmans, 1976)
* Anders, Max E. & Butler, Trent C. HoseaMicah. Holman Old Testament Commentary. (B&H Publishing, 2005)
* Assis, Elie. Joel: A Prophet Between Calamity and Hope (LHBOTS, 581), New York: Bloomsbury, 2013 
* Baker, David W. Joel, Obadiah, Malachi. NIV Application Commentary. (Zondervan, 2006)
* Barton, John. Joel & Obadiah: a Commentary. Old Testament Library. (Westminster John Knox, 2001)
* Birch, Bruce C. Hosea, Joel & Amos. Westminster Bible Companion. (Westminster John Knox, 1997)
* Busenitz, Irvin A. Commentary on Joel and Obadiah. Mentor Commentary. (Mentor, 2003)
* Calvin, John. Joel, Amos, Obadiah. Calvins Bible Commentaries. (Forgotten Books, 2007)
* Coggins, Richard. Joel and Amos. New Century Bible Commentary. (Sheffield Academic Press, 2000)
* Crenshaw, James L. Joel: a New Translation with Introduction and Commentary. The Anchor Bible. (Yale University Press, 1995)
* Finley, Thomas J. Joel, Amos, Obadiah: an Exegetical Commentary. (Biblical Studies Press, 2003)
* Garrett, Duane A. Hosea, Joel. The New American Commentary. (B&H Publishing, 1997)
* Hubbard, David Allen. Joel and Amos: an Introduction and Commentary. Tyndale Old Testament Commentary. (Inter-Varsity Press, 1990)
* Limburg, James. HoseaMicah. Interpretation  a Bible Commentary for Teaching & Preaching. (Westminster John Knox, 1988)
* Mason, Rex. Zephaniah, Habakkuk, Joel. Old Testament Guides. (JSOT Press, 1994)
* McQueen, Larry R.M. Joel and the Spirit: the Cry of a Prophetic Hermeneutic. (CTP, 2009)
* Ogden, Graham S. & Deutsch, Richard R. A Promise of Hopea Call to Obedience: a Commentary on the Books of Joel & Malachi. International Theological Commentary (Eerdmans/ Hansel, 1987)
* Ogilvie, John Lloyd. Hosea, Joel, Amos, Obadiah, Jonah. Communicator's Commentary 20. (Word, 1990)
* Price, Walter K. The Prophet Joel and the Day of the Lord. (Moody, 1976)
* Prior, David. The Message of Joel, Micah, and Habakkuk : Listening to the Voice of God. The Bible Speaks Today. (Inter-Varsity Press, 1999)
* Pohlig, James N. An Exegetical Summary of Joel. (SIL International, 2003)
* Roberts, Matis (ed). Trei asar : The Twelve Prophets : a New Translation with a Commentary Anthologized from Talmudic, Midrashic, and Rabbinic Sources. Vol. 1: Hosea. Joel. Amos. Obadiah. (Mesorah, 1995)
* Robertson, O. Palmer. Prophet of the Coming Day of the Lord : the Message of Joel. Welwyn Commentary. (Evangelical Press, 1995)
* Simkins, Ronald. Yahweh's Activity in History and Nature in the Book of Joel. Ancient Near Eastern Texts & Studies 10 (E. Mellen Press, 1991)
* Simundson, Daniel J. HoseaMicah. Abingdon Old Testament Commentaries. (Abingdon, 2005)
* Stuart, Douglas. HoseaJonah. Word Biblical Commentary 31. (Word, 1987)
* Sweeney, Marvin A. The Twelve Prophets, Vol.1: HoseaJonah. Berit Olam  Studies in Hebrew Narrative & Poetry. (Liturgical Press, 2000)
* Wolff, Hans Walter. A Commentary on the Books of the Prophets Joel & Amos. Hermeneia  a Critical and Historical Commentary on the Bible. (Augsburg Fortress, 1977)

== External links ==

*Jewish Encyclopedia: Book of Joel
*Catholic Encyclopedia: Joel
*Jewish translations:
**Yoel  Joel (Judaica Press) translation Rashi's commentary at Chabad.org
*Christian translations:
**Online Bible at GospelHall.org (ESV)
**Joel at The Great Books (New Revised Standard Version)
**Joel at BibleGateway (New International Version and others)
**Joel at BlueLetter Bible (King James Version and others, plus commentaries)



[[Book of Hosea]]

The Book of Hosea is one of the books of the Hebrew Bible. It stands first in order among what are known as the twelve Minor Prophets.

== Background and content ==

Hosea () prophesied during a dark and melancholic era of Israel's history, the period of the Northern Kingdom's decline and fall in the 8th century BC. The apostasy of the people was rampant, having turned away from God in order to serve the calves of Jeroboam and Baal, a Canaanite god. Cook, Stephen L., Harper Collins Study Bible; New Revised Standard Version With the Apocryphal? Deuterocanonical Books Student Edition (San Francisco: Harper Collins Publishers, Meeks, Wayne A. ed., (1989), pg. 1193. 

During Hosea's lifetime, the kings of the Northern Kingdom, their aristocratic supporters, and the priests had led the people away from the Law of God, as given in the Pentateuch. Forsaking the worship of God, they worshiped other gods, especially Baal, the Canaanite fertility god. Other sins followed, including homicide, perjury, theft, and sexual sin. Hosea declares that unless they repent of these sins, God will allow their nation to be destroyed, and the people will be taken into captivity by Assyria, the greatest nation of the time.

The prophecy of Hosea centers around God's unending love towards a sinful Israel. In this text, God's agony is expressed over the betrayal of Israel. Stephen Cook asserts that the prophetic efforts of this book can be summed up in this passage "I have been the Lord your God ever since the land of Egypt; you know no God but me, and besides me there is no savior" () Hosea's job was to speak these words during a time when that had been essentially forgotten. 

== Summary ==

First, Hosea was directed by God to marry a promiscuous woman of ill-repute, and he did so. Marriage here is symbolic of the covenantal relationship between God and Israel. However, Israel has been unfaithful to God by following other gods and breaking the commandments which are the terms of the covenant, hence Israel is symbolized by a harlot who violates the obligations of marriage to her husband.

Second, Hosea and his wife, Gomer, have a son. God commands that the son be named Jezreel. This name refers to a valley in which much blood had been shed in Israel's history, especially by the kings of the Northern Kingdom. (See I Kings 21 and II Kings 9:2135). The naming of this son was to stand as a prophecy against the reigning house of the Northern Kingdom, that they would pay for that bloodshed. Jezreel's name means God Sows.

Third, the couple have a daughter. God commands that she be named Lo-ruhamah; Unloved, or, Pity or Pitied On to show Israel that, although God will still have pity on the Southern Kingdom, God will no longer have pity on the Northern Kingdom; its destruction is imminent. In the NIV translation, the omitting of the word 'him' leads to speculation as to whether Lo-Ruhamah was the daughter of Hosea or one of Gomer's lovers. James Mays, however, says that the failure to mention Hosea's paternity is "hardly an implication" of Gomer's adultery. 

Fourth, a son is born to Gomer. It is questionable whether this child was Hosea's, for God commands that his name be Lo-ammi; Not My People, or more simply, Not Mine. The child bore this name of shame to show that the Northern Kingdom would also be shamed, for its people would no longer be known as God's People. Also God says that "I am not your I am"; in other words, God changes His own name in connection with his current relationship with Israel.

===Outline===
A brief outline of the concepts presented in the Book of Hosea exist below
* Chapters 12; Account of Hosea's marriage with Gomer biographically which is a metaphor for the relationship with Yahweh and Israel.
* Chapter 3; Account of Hosea's marriage autobiographically. This is possibly a marriage to different women
* Chapters 414:9; Oracle judging Israel, Ephraim in particular, for not living up to the covenant.
No further breakdown of ideas is clear in 414:9 Coogan, Michael. A Brief Introduction to the Old Testament. Oxford University Press, 2009. pg 262263 
Following this, the prophecy is made that someday this will all be changed, that God will indeed have pity on Israel.

Chapter two describes a divorce. This divorce seems to be the end of the covenant between God and the Northern Kingdom. However, it is probable that this was again a symbolic act, in which Hosea divorced Gomer for infidelity, and used the occasion to preach the message of God's rejection of the Northern Kingdom. He ends this prophecy with the declaration that God will one day renew the covenant, and will take Israel back in love.

In Chapter three, at God's command, Hosea seeks out Gomer once more. Either she has sold herself into slavery for debt, or she is with a lover who demands money in order to give her up, because Hosea has to buy her back. He takes her home, but refrains from sexual intimacy with her for many days, to symbolize the fact that Israel will be without a king for many years, but that God will take Israel back, even at a cost to Himself.

Chapters 414 spell out the allegory at length. Chapters 13 speaks of Hosea's family, and the issues with Gomer. Chapters 410 contain a series of oracles, or prophetic sermons, showing exactly why God is rejecting the Northern Kingdom (what the grounds are for the divorce). Chapter 11 is God's lament over the necessity of giving up the Northern Kingdom, which is a large part of the people of Israel, whom God loves. God promises not to give them up entirely. Then, in Chapter 12, the prophet pleads for Israel's repentance. Chapter 13 foretells the destruction of the kingdom at the hands of Assyria, because there has been no repentance. In Chapter 14, the prophet urges Israel to seek forgiveness, and promises its restoration, while urging the utmost fidelity to God.

Matthew 2:13 cites Hosea's prophecy in that God would call His Son out of Egypt as foretelling the flight into Egypt and return to Israel of Joseph, Mary, and the infant Jesus Christ.

The capital of the Northern Kingdom fell in 722 BC. All the members of the upper classes and many of the ordinary people were taken captive and carried off to live as prisoners of war.

== Interpretation and context ==

While scholars suggest the marriage metaphor presented in Hosea describes the relationship between Israel and Yahweh, the metaphor itself remains controversial in its meaning and interpretation in modernity. This is particularly true among feminists. In Hosea 2, the woman in the marriage metaphor could be Hoseas wife Gomer, or could be referring to the nation of Israel, invoking the metaphor of Israel as God's bride. The woman is not portrayed in a positive light. This is reflected throughout the beginning of Hosea 2. I will strip her naked and expose her as in the day she was born (Hosea 2:3). Upon her children I will have no pity, because they are children of whoredom (Hosea 2:4). For she said, I will go after my lovers... (Hosea 2:5).

Biblical scholar Ehud Ben Zvi reminds readers of the socio-historical context in which Hosea was composed. In his article Observations on the marital metaphor of YHWH and Israel in its ancient Israelite context: general considerations and particular images in Hosea 1.2, Ben Zvi describes the role of the Gomer in the marriage metaphor as one of the central attributes of the ideological image of a human marriage that was shared by the male authorship and the primary and intended male readership as building blocks for their imagining of the relationship. Ben Zvi, Ehud. 2004. "Observations on the marital metaphor of YHWH and Israel in its ancient Israelite context: general considerations and particular images in Hosea 1.2." Journal for the Study of the Old Testament 28, no. 3: 363384. 

Tristanne J. Connolly makes a similar observation, stating that the husband-wife motif reflects marriage as it was understood at the time. Connolly, Tristanne J. 1998. "Metaphor and Abuse in Hosea." Feminist Theology no. 18: 58. Connolly also suggests that in context the marriage metaphor was necessary in that it truly exemplified the unequal interaction between Yahweh and the people Israel. Connolly, Tristanne J. 1998. "Metaphor and Abuse in Hosea." Feminist Theology no. 18: 60. Biblical scholar Michael D. Coogan describes the importance of understanding the covenant in relation to interpreting Hosea. According to Coogan, Hosea falls under a unique genre called covenant lawsuit where God accuses Israel of breaking their previously made agreement. Gods disappointment towards Israel is therefore expressed through the broken marriage covenant made between husband and wife. Coogan, Michael David Coogan, A Brief Introduction to the Old Testament: The Hebrew Bible in Its Context (New York: Oxford University Press, 2009), 265. 

== Contribution ==

Hosea is believed to be the first prophet to use marriage as a metaphor of the covenant between God and Israel, and he influenced latter prophets such as Jeremiah. He is among the first writing prophets, and the last chapter of Hosea has a format similar to wisdom literature.

== Notes ==

== External links ==

*Jewish translations:
** Hoshea  Hosea (Judaica Press) translation Rashi's commentary at Chabad.org

*Christian translations:
**Online Bible at GospelHall.org
** Hosea at The Great Books (New Revised Standard Version)
* Jewish Encyclopedia:Book of Hosea
* Isagogical Study of the Book of Hosea by: Paul R. Hanke
* Afrikaans Website: at http://www.hosea46.org



[[Book of Obadiah]]

The canonical Book of Obadiah is an oracle concerning the divine judgment of Edom and the restoration of Israel. Coogan, M.A Brief Introduction to the Old Testament: The Hebrew Bible in its Context. Oxford University Press, New York (2009) p. 315 The text consists of a single chapter, divided into 21 verses, making it the shortest book in the Hebrew Bible. Nelson's Compact Illustrated Bible Dictionary, Thomas Nelson Publishers, 1978, p. 191, ISBN 0-8407-5636-4 

In Judaism and Christianity, its authorship is attributed to a prophet who lived in the Assyrian Period and named himself in the first verse, Obadiah. His name means servant of Yehowah. 

In Christianity, the book of Obadiah is classified as a minor prophet of the Old Testament, due to its short length. 

In Judaism, Obadiah is considered a later prophet and this Masoretic Text is chronologically placed in the Tanakh under the section Nevi'im in the last category called The Twelve Prophets.

== Content ==

The book of Obadiah is based on a prophetic vision concerning the fall of Edom, a mountain dwelling nation whose Founding Father was Esau.
Obadiah describes an encounter with God who addresses Edoms arrogance and charges them for their violent actions against their brother nation, the House of Jacob.

The western half of ancient Edom is the Negev desert all the way to Eilat, all part of modern Israel. The eastern half is possessed by the Hashemite kingdom of Jordan. In the days of Obadiah, the Edomites lived along the cliffs and mountaintops of the arid land south of the Dead Sea, all the way to the Gulf of Aqaba on the Red Sea. There was very little in the way of arable land, so the Edomites made their living supporting (and controlling) the main caravan route between Egypt and Babylon that passed through their whole land.

Throughout most of the history of Judah, Edom was controlled absolutely from Jerusalem as a vassal state. 
Among the heathen great powers, Edom was held in low regard. Obadiah said that the high elevation of their dwelling place in the mountains of Seir had gone to their head, and they had puffed themselves up in pride. "Though you soar like the eagle and make your nest among the stars,from there I will bring you down," declares the Lord. (Obadiah 1:4, NIV)

In 597 BCE, Nebuchadnezzar II sacked Jerusalem, carted away the King of Judea and installed a puppet ruler. The Edomites helped the Babylonians loot the city. Obadiah, writing this prophesy around 590 BCE, suggests the Edomites should have remembered that blood was thicker than water. '"On the day you stood aloof while strangers carried off his wealth
and foreigners entered his gates and cast lots for Jerusalem, you were like one of them... You should not march through the gates of my people in the day of their disaster, nor gloat over them in their calamity in the day of their disaster, nor seize their wealth in the day of their disaster."' (Obadiah 1:11, 13 NIV)

Obadiah said in judgement God would wipe out the house of Esau forever, and not even a remnant would remain. The Edomites' land would be possessed by Egypt and they would cease to exist as a people. But the Day of the Lord was at hand for all nations, and someday the children of Israel would return from their exile and possess the land of Edom.

== Scholarly issues ==

===Dating Obadiah===
The date of composition is disputed and is difficult to determine due to the lack of personal information about Obadiah, his family, and his historical milieu. The date of composition must therefore be determined based on the prophecy itself. Edom is to be destroyed due to its lack of defense for its brother nation, Israel, when it was under attack. There are two major historical contexts within which the Edomites could have committed such an act. These are during 853  841 BC when Jerusalem was invaded by Philistines and Arabs during the reign of Jehoram (recorded in 2 Kings 8:2022 and 2 Chronicles 21:820 in the Christian Old Testament) and 605  586 BC when Jerusalem was attacked by King Nebuchadnezzer of Babylon, which led to the Babylonian exile of Israel (recorded in Psalm 137). The earlier period would place Obadiah as a contemporary of the prophet Elijah as reflected in 1 Kings, Chapter 18, Verses 116. In particular, 1 Kings 18:78 reads: As Obadiah was walking along, Elijah met him. Obadiah recognized him, bowed down to the ground, and said, Is it really you, my lord Elijah? Yes, he replied. Go tell your master, Elijah is here. (NIV)

The later date would place Obadiah as a contemporary of the prophet Jeremiah, both of whom were prophets in the respective time periods. The later period appears to be the scholarly consensus as Obadiah 19 parallels Jeremiah 49:722. The passage in Jeremiah dates from the fourth year of the reign of Jehoiakim (604 BC), and therefore Obadiah 1114 seems to refer to the destruction of Jerusalem by Nebuchadnezzer (586 BC). It is more likely that Obadiah and Jeremiah together were drawing on a common source presently unknown to us than Jeremiah drawing on previous writings of Obadiah as his source. There is also much material found in Obadiah 1021 which Jeremiah does not quote, and which, had he had it laid out before him, would have suited his purpose admirably. Despite everything, however, there are some who support both dates and even some who support dates other than the two major possibilities presented. Any date for the composition of Obadiah must be held tentatively.

===Contrast with Amos===
In verse eighteen, it says that once judgment has been carried out, There will be no survivors from the house of Esau (NIV). So, according to Obadiah there will not remain even a remnant after Edoms judgment; This is in contrast to Amos 9:12, where Amos refers to such a remnant, however, it is stated that their possession will be given to Israel. Some scholars have suggested that Amoss reference to Edom is symbolic of all nations who were once enemies of Israel and not meant to literally mean Edomites in the flesh. This is certainly the perspective of Luke as he recites the passage from Amos in Acts 15:17. Edom is symbolic of the remnant of men and Gentiles who will eventually bear Gods name. Moreover, Frederick A. Tatford in Prophet of Edoms Doom says that Obadiahs prophecy is fulfilled today as there is currently no trace of anyone who may be identified as a fleshly Edomite.

===Sepharad===

The identity of the land of Sepharad, mentioned only here in this verse in the Bible, , is currently unknown. It is also unknown whether or not Sepharad is a city, district or territory. The only clues for its possible existence are Persian inscriptions that refer to two places called "Saparda": one area in Media and another in Asia Minor, debated to be Sardis. Recent studies suggest that Sepharad may have been a coastal region of Spain from king Solomon's day.

== Scriptural parallels ==

The exact expression "the Day of the Lord, from Obadiah 1:15, has been used by other authors throughout the Old and New Testaments, as follows:

Old Testament:
* Isaiah 2, 13, 34, 58, Jeremiah 46:10, Lamentations 2:22, Ezekiel 13:5, Joel 1, 2, 3, Amos 5:18, 20, Zephaniah 1, 2, Zechariah 14:1, Malachi 4:5

New Testament:
* 1 Thessalonians 5:2, 2 Peter 3:10, Acts 2:20, 1 Corinthians 5:5, 2 Corinthians 1:14

For other parallels, compare Obadiah 1:18 with Jeremiah 49:716.

== American fundamentalist Protestant view ==

The overwhelming theme found in Obadiah is the destruction of enemies of Gods people. Unlike other prophets, Obadiah does not present a turn or burn message, simply a message of inevitable doom as a consequence of previous actions. A Christian with a knowledge of the New Testament of the Bible would say that although Gods grace and forgiveness abound in situations, there are consequences which result from bad decisions. Obadiah shows that judgment falls even within the family of God, as Israel and Edom descended from twin brothers, Jacob and Esau. His purpose was to make it known that according to his God, if members of the same family were to treat each other in the same manner as Edom treated the Israelites, they too may be subject to the wrath of God.

In relating to theme of Obadiah, it is important to underscore the punishment theme this book outlines against Edom. W.J. Deane and J.R. Thomson write this valid conclusion, The Book of Obadiah is occupied with one subject  the punishment of Edom for its cruel and unbrotherly love conduct towards Judah... Deane, W.J. & Thomson, J.R., The Book of Obadiah, The Pulpit Commentary, Vol. 14 Amos  Malachi. Eds. Spence, H.D.M. & Exell, Joseph S., Eerdmans: Grand Rapids (1981). p.1 One can link this idea of punishment to one of the major prophets Ezekiel who ...interprets the exile to Babylon and the destruction of Jerusalem as deserved punishments for the sins of those who themselves committed them. Coogan, M.A Brief Introduction to the Old Testament: The Hebrew Bible in its Context. Oxford University Press, New York (2009) p. 319 Verses 37 in Obadiah explain to the reader the reason for the punishment theme, Confidence in ones power, intelligence, allies, or the topographical features of ones territory is often mentioned as an attribute of those who foolishly confront the Lord and are consequently punished. Henshaw, R.A. (revised by Zvi, Ehud Ben), The HarperCollins Study Bible. Ed. Attridge, H.W., HarperOne; New York. p. 1230 Although destruction is vital to understanding Obadiah, it is of note to understand the destruction being a consequence of action.

== See also ==
* Teman 
* The lowland of Philistia 
* The fields of Ephraim 
* The fields of Samaria 
* The land of Gilead 

== References ==

== External links ==

* Masoretic text from Mechon Mamre

*Translations:
**Jewish translations:
*** Ovadiah (Judaica Press) translation Rashi's commentary from Chabad.org
**Christian translations:
***Online Bible at GospelHall.org (KJV ESV Darby BBE)
*** Obadiah at The Great Books (New Revised Standard Version)
*Commentary:
** Ovadiah (Judaica Press) translation Rashi's commentary from Chabad.org
** Obadiah, from John Gill's Exposition of the Entire Bible.
** Obadiah, from the United Church of God, an International Association Bible Reading Program  This Hebrew scholar provides extensive background information as well as verse-by-verse exposition]
** Kretzmann's Popular Commentary of the Bible (navigate to Obadiah using the menu on the left)
** Obadiah: The Lord Will Have His Day by Jonathan Kuske



[[Book of Jonah]]

The Book of Jonah (Hebrew) is one of the Minor Prophets in the Hebrew Bible. It tells the story of a Hebrew prophet named Jonah son of Amittai who is sent by God to prophesy the destruction of Nineveh but tries to escape the divine mission. II Kings 14:25 Set in the reign of Jeroboam II (786746 BC), it was probably written in the post-exilic period, sometime between the late 5th to early 4th century BC. Mercer Bible Dictionary, "Book of Jonah" The story has an interesting interpretive history (see below) and has become well-known through popular children's stories. In Judaism it is the Haftarah for the afternoon of Yom Kippur due to its story of God's willingness to forgive those who repent. United Jewish Communities (UJC), "Jonah's Path and the Message of Yom Kippur." 

== Narrative ==

Unlike the other Prophets, the book of Jonah is almost entirely narrative, with the exception of the psalm in chapter 2. The actual prophetic word against Nineveh is given only in passing through the narrative. As with any good narrative, the story of Jonah has a setting, characters, a plot, and themes. It also relies heavily on such literary devices as irony.

===Setting===
The story of Jonah is set against the backdrop of Ancient Israel in the 8th7th centuries BC, but deals with the religious and social issues of the late 6th4th centuries BC, coinciding with the views of latter chapters of the book of Isaiah (Third Isaiah), where Israel is given a prominent place in the expansion of God's kingdom to the Gentiles.

The Jonah mentioned in II Kings 14:25 lived during the reign of Jeroboam II (786746 BC) and was from the city of Gath-hepher. This city, modern el-Meshed, located only several miles from Nazareth in what would have been known as Israel in the post-exilic period (as distinct from the former southern kingdom, known as Judah).

Nineveh, where Jonah preached, was the capital of the ancient Assyrian empire, which fell to the Babylonians and the Medes in 612 BC. The book itself calls Nineveh a great city, referring to its size 3:3 + 4:11 and perhaps to its affluence as well. (The story of the citys deliverance from judgment may reflect an older tradition dating back to the 8th7th century BC) Assyria often opposed Israel and eventually took the Israelites captive in 722721 BC (see History of ancient Israel and Judah). The Assyrian oppression against the Israelites can be seen in the bitter prophecies of Nahum.

===Characters===
The story of Jonah is a drama between a passive man and an active God. Jonah, whose name literally means "dove," is introduced to the reader in the very first verse. The name is decisive. While many other prophets had heroic names (e.g., Isaiah means "God has saved"), Jonah's name carries with it an element of passivity.

Jonah's passive character is contrasted with the other main character: Yahweh. God's character is altogether active. While Jonah flees, God pursues. While Jonah falls, God lifts up. The character of God in the story is progressively revealed through the use of irony. In the first part of the book, God is depicted as relentless and wrathful; in the second part of the book, He is revealed to be truly loving and merciful.

The other characters of the story include the sailors in chapter 1 and the people of Nineveh in chapter 3. These characters are also contrasted to Jonah's passivity. While Jonah sleeps in the hull, the sailors pray and try to save the ship from the storm (1:46). While Jonah passively finds himself forced to act under the Divine Will, the people of Nineveh actively petition God to change his mind.

===Plot===
The plot centers on a conflict between Jonah and God. God calls Jonah to proclaim judgment to Nineveh, but Jonah resists and attempts to flee. He goes to Joppa and boards a ship bound for Tarshish. God calls up a great storm at sea, and the ship's crew cast Jonah overboard in an attempt to appease God. A great sea creature sent by God, swallows Jonah. For three days and three nights Jonah languishes inside the fish's belly. He says a prayer in which he repents for his disobedience and thanks God for His mercy. God speaks to the fish, which vomits out Jonah safely on dry land. After his rescue, Jonah obeys the call to prophesy against Nineveh, causing the people of the city to repent and God to forgive them. Jonah is furious, however, and angrily tells God that this is the reason he tried to flee from Him, as he knew Him to be a just and merciful God. He then beseeches God to kill him, a request which is denied when God causes a tree to grow over him, giving him shade. Initially grateful, Jonah's anger returns the next day, when God sends a worm to eat the plant, withering it, and he tells God that it would be better if he were dead. God then points out: "You are concerned about the bush, for which you did not labour and which you did not grow; it came into being in a night and perished in a night. And should I not be concerned about Nineveh, that great city, in which there are more than a hundred and twenty thousand people who do not know their right hand from their left, and also many animals? (NRSV)"

Ironically, the relentless God demonstrated in the first chapter becomes the merciful God in the last two chapters (see 3:10). Equally ironic, despite not wanting to go to Nineveh and follow God's calling, Jonah becomes one of the most effective prophets of God. As a result of his preaching, the entire population of Nineveh repents before the Lord and is spared destruction. The author indicates that the city "has more than a hundred and twenty thousand people who cannot tell their right hand from their left" (4:11a, NIV). While some commentators see this number (120,000) as a somewhat pejorative reference to ignorant or backward Ninevites, most commentators take it to refer to young infants, thus implying a population considerably larger than 120,000. Brynmor F. Price and Eugene A. Nida, A Handbook on the Book of Jonah, United Bible Societies 

== Interpretive history ==
Jonah preaching to the Ninevites, by Gustave Dor.
Jonah Cast Forth By The Whale, by Gustave Dor.

===Early Jewish interpretation===
The story of Jonah has numerous theological implications, and this has long been recognized. In early translations of the Hebrew Bible, Jewish translators tended to remove anthropomorphic imagery in order to prevent the reader from misunderstanding the ancient texts. This tendency is evidenced in both the Aramaic translations (e.g. the Targums) and the Greek translations (e.g. the Septuagint). As far as the Book of Jonah is concerned, Targum Jonah offers a good example of this.

====Targum Jonah====
In Jonah 1:6, the Masoretic Text (MT) reads, "...perhaps God will pay heed to us...." Targum Jonah translates this passage as: "...perhaps there will be mercy from the Lord upon us...." The captain's proposal is no longer an attempt to change the divine will; it is an attempt to appeal to divine mercy. Furthermore, in Jonah 3:9, the MT reads, "Who knows, God may turn and relent repent?" Targum Jonah translates this as, "Whoever knows that there are sins on his conscience let him repent of them and we will be pitied before the Lord." God does not change His mind; He shows pity.

====Dead Sea Scrolls====
Fragments of the book were found among the Dead Sea Scrolls (DSS) (4Q76 aka 4QMinorProphetsa, Col V-VI, frags. 2122; 4Q81 aka 4QMinorProphetsf, Col I and II; and 4Q82 aka 4QMinorProphetsg, Frags. 7691), most of which follows the Masoretic Text closely and with Mur XII reproducing a large portion of the text. David L. Washburn, A Catalog of Biblical Passages in the Dead Sea Scrolls (Brill, 2003), 146. As for the non-canonical writings, the majority of references to biblical texts were made by argumentum ad verecundiam. The Book of Jonah appears to have served less purpose in the Qumran community than other texts, as the writings make no references to it. James C. Vanderkam, The Dead Sea Scrolls Today (Grand Rapids, Mich: Eerdmans, 1994), 151 

===Early Christian interpretation===

====New Testament====
The earliest Christian interpretations of Jonah are found in the Gospel of Matthew (see and 16:14) and the Gospel of Luke (see Luke 11:2932). Both Matthew and Luke record a tradition of Jesus interpretation of the story of Jonah (notably, Matthew includes two very similar traditions in chapters 12 and 16). As with most Old Testament interpretations found in the New Testament, Jesus interpretation is primarily typological (see Typology (theology)). Jonah becomes a type for Jesus. Jonah spent three days in the belly of the fish; Jesus will spend three days in the grave. Here, Jesus plays on the imagery of Sheol found in Jonahs prayer. While Jonah metaphorically declared, Out of the belly of Sheol I cried, Jesus will literally be in the belly of Sheol. Finally, Jesus compares his generation to the people of Nineveh. Jesus fulfills his role as a type of Jonah, however his generation fails to fulfill its role as a type of Nineveh. Nineveh repented, but Jesus' generation, which has seen and heard one even greater than Jonah, fails to repent. Through his typological interpretation of the story of Jonah, Jesus has weighed his generation and found it wanting.

====Augustine of Hippo====
The debate over the credibility of the miracle of Jonah is not simply a modern one. The credibility of a human being surviving in the belly of a great fish has long been questioned. In c. 409 AD, Augustine of Hippo wrote to Deogratias concerning the challenge of some to the miracle recorded in the Book of Jonah. He writes:

Augustine responds that if one is to question one miracle, then one should question all miracles as well (section 31). Nevertheless, despite his apologetic, Augustine views the story of Jonah as a figure for Christ. For example, he writes: "As, therefore, Jonah passed from the ship to the belly of the whale, so Christ passed from the cross to the sepulchre, or into the abyss of death. And as Jonah suffered this for the sake of those who were endangered by the storm, so Christ suffered for the sake of those who are tossed on the waves of this world." Augustine credits his allegorical interpretation to the interpretation of Christ himself (Matt. 12:39,40), and he allows for other interpretations as long as they are in line with Christ's.

===Medieval commentary tradition===

====The Ordinary Gloss====
The Ordinary Gloss, or Glossa Ordinaria, was the most important Christian commentary on the Bible in the later Middle Ages. "The Gloss on Jonah relies almost exclusively on Jeromes commentary on Jonah (c. 396), so its Latin often has a tone of urbane classicism. But the Gloss also chops up, compresses, and rearranges Jerome with a carnivalesque glee and scholastic directness that renders the Latin authentically medieval." Ryan McDermott, trans., "The Ordinary Gloss on Jonah," PMLA 128.2 (2013): 42438. "The Ordinary Gloss on Jonah" has been translated into English and printed in a format that emulates the first printing of the Gloss. Ryan McDermott, trans., "The Ordinary Gloss on Jonah," PMLA 128.2 (2013): 42438. 

The relationship between Jonah and his fellow Jews is ambivalent, and complicated by the Gloss's tendency to read Jonah as an allegorical prefiguration of Jesus Christ. While some glosses in isolation seem crudely supersessionist (The foreskin believes while the circumcision remains unfaithful), the prevailing allegorical tendency is to attribute Jonahs recalcitrance to his abiding love for his own people and his insistence that Gods promises to Israel not be overridden by a lenient policy toward the Ninevites. For the glossator, Jonahs pro-Israel motivations correspond to Christs demurral in the Garden of Gethsemane (My Father, if it be possible, let this chalice pass from me 26:39) and the Gospel of Matthews and Pauls insistence that salvation is from the Jews (Jn. 4:22). While in the Gloss the plot of Jonah prefigures how God will extend salvation to the nations, it also makes abundantly clearas some medieval commentaries on the Gospel of John do notthat Jonah and Jesus are Jews, and that they make decisions of salvation-historical consequence as Jews.

== Jonah and the "big fish" ==

The Hebrew text of Jonah (1:17 in English translation), reads dag gadol (Hebrew:  ), which literally means "great fish." The Septuagint translates this into Greek as ketos megas, (Greek:  ), "huge fish"; in Greek mythology the term was closely associated with sea monsters. See http://www.theoi.com/Ther/Ketea.html for more information regarding Greek mythology and the Ketos Saint Jerome later translated the Greek phrase as piscis granda in his Latin Vulgate, and as cetus in . At some point, cetus became synonymous with whale (cf. cetyl alcohol, which is alcohol derived from whales). In his 1534 translation, William Tyndale translated the phrase in Jonah 2:1 as "greate fyshe," and he translated the word ketos (Greek) or cetus (Latin) in as "whale". Tyndale's translation was later followed by the translators of the King James Version of 1611 and has enjoyed general acceptance in English translations.

In the line 2:1 the book refers to the fish as dag gadol, "great fish", in the masculine. However, in the 2:2, it changes the gender to daga, meaning female fish. The verses therefore read: "And the lord provided a great fish (dag gadol, masculine) for Jonah, and it swallowed him, and Jonah sat in the belly of the fish (still male) for three days and nights; then, from the belly of the (daga, female) fish, Jonah began to pray." The peculiarity of this change of gender led the later rabbis to reason that this means Jonah was comfortable in the roomy male fish, so he didn't pray, but that God then transferred him to a smaller, female fish, in which the prophet was uncomfortable, so that he prayed.

== Jonah's prayer ==

Some biblical scholars believe Jonah's prayer () to be a later addition to the story (see source criticism for more information on how such conclusions are drawn). Despite questions of its source, the prayer carries out an important function in the narrative as a whole. The prayer is a psalm of thanksgiving, serving to interpret Jonah's swallowing by the fish as an act of Divine salvation. God has lifted Jonah out of Sheol and set him on the path to carry out His will. The story of descent (from Israel, to Tarshish, to the sea, to under the sea) becomes the story of ascent (from the belly of the fish, to land, to the city of Nineveh). Thus, the use of a psalm creates an important theological point. In the popular understanding of Jonah, the fish is interpreted to be the low point of the story. Yet even the fish is an instrument of God's sovereignty and salvation.

== Jonah and the gourd vine ==

The book closes abruptly () with an epistolary warning http://www.newadvent.org/cathen/08497b.htm based on the emblematic trope of a fast growing vine present in Persian narratives, and popularized in fables such as The Gourd and the Palm-tree during the Renaissance, for example by Andrea Alciato.

St. Jerome differed citing Peter W. Parshall, "Albrecht Drer's Saint Jerome in his Study: A Philological Reference," from The Art Bulletin 53 (September 1971), pp. 3035 at http://www.oberlin.edu/amam/DurerSt.Jerome.htm with St. Augustine in his Latin translation of the plant known in Hebrew as  (qqayn), using hedera (from the Greek, meaning "ivy") over the more common Latin cucurbita, "gourd", from which the English word gourd (Old French coorde, couhourde) is derived. The Renaissance humanist artist Albrecht Drer memorialized Jerome's decision to use an analogical type of Christ's "I am the Vine, you are the branches" in his woodcut Saint Jerome in His Study.

== Popular culture ==
* by Big Idea Productions, 2002
* The Book of Jonas (novel) by Stephen Dau, 2012

== References ==

== Further reading ==
*De La Torre, Miguel A., "Liberating Jonah: Toward a Biblical Ethics of Reconciliation," Orbis Books, 2007.

== External links ==
* An English translation of the most important medieval Christian commentary on Jonah, "The Ordinary Gloss on Jonah," PMLA 128.2 (2013): 42438.

Jonah


[[Book of Micah]]

The Book of Micah is a prophetic book in the TanakhOld Testament, and the sixth of the twelve minor prophets. Ben Zvi (2000), p.4 It records the sayings of Micah, Mikayahu, meaning "Who is like Yahweh?", Mays (1976), p.1 an 8th-century B.C. prophet from the village of Moresheth in Judah. Limburg (1988), p.160 The book has three major divisions, chapters 12, 35 and 67, each introduced by the word "Hear," with a pattern of alternating announcements of doom and expressions of hope within each division. Limburg (1988), p.159 Micah reproaches unjust leaders, defends the rights of the poor against the rich and powerful, and preaches social justice; King (1988), pp.2728 while looking forward to a world at peace centered on Zion under the leadership of a new Davidic monarch. Sweeney (2000), pp.341342 

While the book is relatively short it includes lament (1.816; 7.810), theophany (1.34), hymnic prayer of petition and confidence (7.1420), Coogan (2009), p.284 and the "covenant lawsuit" (6.18), a distinct genre in which Yahweh (God) sues Israel for breach of contract, that is, for violation of the Sinai covenant. Coogan (2009), p.265 

It has been noticed as remarkable that this book commences with the last words of another prophet with similar name, Micaiah the son of Imlah (1 Kings 22:28): Hearken, O people, every one of you. (the three Hebrew words are exactly the same as the beginning of Micah 1:2). Easton's Bible Dictionary  Book of Micah. 

== Content ==
Impalement of Judeans by Assyrian soldiers (Neo-Assyrian relief)

===Structure===
At the broadest level Micah can be divided into three roughly equal parts: King (1988), p.27 
*Judgment against the nations and their leaders 
* Restoration of Zion (chapters 45, probably exilic and post-exilic, together with the next section); Rogerson (2003), p.703 
*God's lawsuit against Israel and expression of hope (chapters 67).

Within this broad three-part structure are a series of alternating oracles of judgment and promises of restoration: Coogan (2009) 
*1.1 Superscription
*1.22.11 Oracles of judgment
*2.1213 Oracles of restoration
*3.112 Oracles of judgment
*4.15.15 Oracles of restoration
*6.17.6 Oracles of judgment
*7.720 Oracles of restoration

===Summary===
* The Heading (1:1): As is typical of prophetic books, an anonymous editor has supplied the name of the prophet, an indication of his time of activity, and an identification of his speech as the word of Yahweh, a generic term carrying a claim to prophetic legitimacy and authority. Ben Zvi (2000), p.13 Samaria and Jerusalem are given prominence as the foci of the prophets attention. Sweeney (2000), p.343 
* Judgment against Samaria (1:27): Drawing upon ancient traditions for depicting a theophany, the prophet depicts the coming of Yahweh to punish the city, whose sins are idolatry and the abuse of the poor. 
* Warnings to the cities of Judah (1:816): Samaria has fallen, Judah is next. Micah describes the destruction of the lesser towns of Judah (referring to the invasion of Judah by Sennacherib, 701 BC). For these passages of doom on the various cities, the device paronomasia is used. Paronomasia is a literary device which 'plays' on the sound of each word for literary effect. For example, the inhabitants of Beth-le-aphrah (house of dust) are told to roll yourselves in the dust. 1:14. Though most of the Paronomasia is lost in translation, it is the equivalent of Ashdod shall be but ashes, where the fate of the city matches its name. 
* Misuse of power denounced (2:15): Denounces those who appropriate the land and houses of others. The context may be simply the amassing wealth for its own sake, or could be connected with the militarisation of the region for the expected Assyrian attack. Rogerson (2003), p.704 
* Threats against the prophet (2:611): The prophet is warned not to prophesy. He answers that the rulers are harming God's people, and want to listen only to those who advocate the virtues of wine. 
* A later promise (2:1213): These verses assume that judgement has already fallen and Israel is already scattered abroad. 
* Judgment on wicked Zion (3:14): Israel's rulers are accused of gaining more wealth at the expense of the poor, by any means. The metaphor of flesh being torn illustrates the length to which the ruling classes and socialites would go to further increase their wealth. Prophets are corrupt, seeking personal gain. Jerusalem's rulers believe that God will always be with them, but God will be with his people, and Jerusalem will be destroyed. Rogerson (2003), pp.704705 
* Zion's future hope (4:15) This is a later passage, almost identical with Isaiah 2:24. Zion (meaning the Temple) will be rebuilt, but by God, and based not on violence and corruption but on the desire to learn God's laws and live in peace. Rogerson (2003), p.705 
* Further promises to Zion (4:67) This is another later passage, promising Zion that she will once more enjoy her former independence and power. 
* Deliverance from Distress in Babylon (4:95:1) The similarities to Isaiah 41:1516 and the references to Babylon suggest the period of this material, although it is unclear whether a period during or after the siege of 586 is meant. Despite their trials, God will not desert his people. 
* The promised ruler from Bethlehem (5:114): This passage is usually dated to the exile. Rogerson (2003), pp.705706 Although chapters 4:910 have said that there is "no king in Zion", these chapters predict the coming Messiah will emerge from Bethlehem, the traditional home of the Davidic monarchy, to restore Israel. Assyria will be stricken, and Israel's punishment will lead to the punishment of the nations. Sweeney (2000), p.387 
* A Covenant lawsuit (6:15): Yahweh accuses Israel (the people of Judah) of breaking the covenant through their lack of justice and honesty, after the pattern of the kings of Israel (northern kingdom) Sweeney (2000), p.395 
* Torah Liturgy (6:68): Micah speaks on behalf of the community asking what they should do in order to get back on God's good side. Micah then responds by that God requires only "to do justice, and to love mercy, and to walk humbly with your God." Thus declaring that the burnt offering of both animals and humans (which may have been practiced in Judah under Kings Ahaz and Manasseh) is not necessary for God. King (2006), pp.12461247 
* The City as a Cheat (6:916): The city is reprimanded for its dishonest trade practices.
* Lament (7:17): The first passage in the book in the first person: whether it comes from Micah himself is disputed. Honesty and decency have vanished, families are filled with strife. Rogerson (2003), p.707 
* A song of fallen Jerusalem (7:810): The first person voice continues, but now it is the city who speaks. She recognises that her destruction is deserved punishment from God. The recognition gives grounds for hope that God is still with her. 
* A prophecy of restoration (7:1113): Fallen Jerusalem is promised that she will be rebuilt and that her power will be greater than ever (a contrast with the vision of peace in 4:15). 
* A prayer for future prosperity (7:1417): The mood switches from a request for power to grateful astonishment at God's mercy. 

== Setting and composition ==
Assyrian warriors armed with slings from the palace of Sennacherib, 7th century BCE

===Setting===
Chapter 1:1 identifies the prophet as "Micah of Moresheth" (a town in southern Judah), and states that he lived during the reigns of Yehotam, Ahaz and Hezekiah, roughly 750700 BC. 

Micah's career corresponds to the period when, after a long period of peace, Israel, Judah, and the other nations of the region came under increasing pressure from the aggressive and rapidly expanding Assyrian empire. Between 734 and 727 Tiglath-Pileser III of Assyria conducted almost annual campaigns in Palestine, reducing Israel, Judah and the Philistine cities to vassalage, receiving tribute from Ammon, Moab and Edom, and absorbing Damascus (the kingdom of Aram) into the Assyrian empire. King (1988), pp.3133 On Tiglath-Pileser's death Israel rebelled, resulting in an Assyrian counter-attack and the destruction of the capital, Samaria, in 721 after a three-year siege. Micah 1:27 draws on this event: Samaria, says the prophet, has been destroyed by God because of its crimes of idolatry, oppression of the poor, and misuse of power. The Assyrian attacks on Israel (the northern kingdom) led to an influx of refugees into Judah, which would have increased social stresses, while at the same time the authorities in Jerusalem had to invest huge amounts in tribute and defense. 

When the Assyrians attacked Judah in 701 they did so via the Philistine coast and the Shephelah, the border region which included Micah's village of Moresheth, as well as Lachish, Judah's second largest city. This in turn forms the background to verses 1:816, in which Micah warns the towns of the coming disaster (Lachish is singled out for special mention, accused of the corrupt practices of both Samaria and Jerusalem). In verses 2:15 he denounces the appropriation of land and houses, which might simply be the greed of the wealthy and powerful, or possibly the result of the militarising of the area in preparation for the Assyrian attack. 

===Composition===
It is widely, though not universally, accepted by scholars that only chapters 13 contain material from the late 8th century prophet Micah. The latest material comes from the post-Exilic period after the Temple was rebuilt in 515 BC, so that the early 5th century BC seems to be the period when the book was completed. Mays (1976), p.21 The first stage was the collection and arrangement of some spoken sayings of the historical Micah (the material in chapters 13), in which the prophet attacks those who build estates through oppression and depicts the Assyrian invasion of Judah as Yahweh's punishment on the kingdom's corrupt rulers, including a prophecy that the Temple will be destroyed. Mays (1976), p.23 The prophecy was not fulfilled in Micah's time, but a hundred years later when Judah was facing a similar crisis with Babylon, and Micah's prophecies were reworked and expanded to reflect the new situation. Mays (1976), pp.2425 Still later, after Jerusalem did fall to the Babylonians, the book was revised and expanded further to reflect the circumstances of the late exilic and post-exilic community. Mays (1976), p.30 

== Themes ==

Micah addresses the future of Judah/Israel after the Babylonian exile. Like Isaiah, the book has a vision of the punishment of Israel and creation of a "remnant", followed by world peace centred on Zion under the leadership of a new Davidic monarch; the people should do justice, turn to Yahweh, and await the end of their punishment. However, whereas Isaiah sees Jacob/Israel joining "the nations" under Yahweh's rule, Micah looks forward to Israel ruling over the nations. Insofar as Micah appears to draw on and rework parts of Isaiah, it seems designed at least partly to provide a counterpoint to that book. 

== See also ==
* Zion

== References ==

== Bibliography ==
*

*

*

*

*

*

*

*

*

*

== Further reading ==
* Book of Micah. The Anchor Bible Dictionary. Vol. 4, Editor-in-Chief: Freedman, David N. Doubleday; New York, NY. 1992.
* Book of Micah. International Standard Bible Encyclopedia. General Editor: Bromley, G.W. William B. Erdmans Publishing Co.; Grand Rapids, MI. 1986.
* Holy Bible: The New Oxford Annotated Bible. Coogan; Oxford University Press, 2007.
* LaSor, William Sanford et al. Old Testament Survey: the Message, Form, and Background of the Old Testament. Grand Rapids: William B. Eerdmans, 1996.
* Hailey, Homer. (1973). A Commentary on the Minor Prophets. Grand Rapids: Baker Book House.
* Maxey, Al. THE MINOR PROPHETS: Micah. (n.d.). 20 Paragraphs. Retrieved October 4, 2005, from http://www.zianet.com/maxey/Proph11.htm
* McKeating, Henry. (1971). The Books of AMOS, HOSEA, AND MICAH. New York: the Syndics of the Cambridge University Press.
* Pusey, E. B. (1963). The Minor Prophets: A Commentary (Vol. II). Grand Rapids: Baker Book House.
* Wood, Joyce Rilett. (2000). Speech and action in Micahs prophecy. Catholic Biblical Quarterly, no. 4(62), 49 paragraphs. Retrieved September 30, 2005, from OCLC (FirstSearch) database http://newfirstsearch.oclc.org

== External links ==

*Jewish translations:
** Michah  Micah (Judaica Press) translation Rashi's commentary at Chabad.org
*Christian translations:
**Online Bible at GospelHall.org (ESV, KJV, Darby, American Standard Version, Bible in Basic English)
** BibleGateway.com (New International Version)
** Micah at The Great Books (New Revised Standard Version)



[[Book of Nahum]]

The Book of Nahum is the seventh book of the 12 minor prophets of the Hebrew Bible. It is attributed to the prophet Nahum, and was probably written in Jerusalem in the 7th century BC.

== Background ==

Nahum prophesied, according to some, in the beginning of the reign of Ahaz (740s BC). Others, however, think that his prophecies are to be referred to the latter half of the reign of Hezekiah (8th century BC). Probably the book was written in Jerusalem, where he witnessed the invasion of Sennacherib and the destruction of his host (2 Kings 19:35). And still others support the idea that the "book of vision" was written shortly before the fall of Nineveh at the hands of the Medes and Babylonians Michael D. Coogan, A Brief Introduction to the Old Testament, (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2009) 297298 (612 BC). This theory is evidenced by the fact that the oracles must be dated after the Assyrian destruction of Thebes in 663 BC as this event is mentioned in Nahum 3:8. Kent H. Richards, Nahum Introduction: The Harper Collins Study Bible, (New York: Harper Collins, 2006) 1250 

===Author===

Little is known about Nahums personal history. His name means "comforter," and he was from the town of Alqosh, (Nahum 1:1) which scholars have attempted to identify with several cities, including the modern `Alqush of Assyria and Capharnaum of northern Galilee. Nahum at The Catholic Encyclopedia He was a very nationalistic Hebrew, and lived amongst the Elkoshites in peace. One account suggests that his writings are a prophecy written in about 615 BC, just before the downfall of Assyria, while another account suggests that he wrote this passage as liturgy just after its downfall in 612 BC. Heaton, E. W., A Short Introduction To The Old Testament Prophets, p. 35, Oneworld Publications, P.O. Box 830, 21 Broadway, Rockport, NA 01966, ISBN 1-85168-114-0 Nahum at aboutbibleprophecy.com 

===Historical context===
Simplified plan of ancient Nineveh, showing city wall and location of gateways.
The subject of Nahum's prophecy is the approaching complete and final destruction of Nineveh, the capital of the great and at that time flourishing Assyrian empire. Assur-bani-pal was at the height of his glory. Nineveh was a city of vast extent, and was then the center of the civilization and commerce of the world, a "bloody city all full of lies and robbery" (Nahum 3:1), for it had robbed and plundered all the neighboring nations. It was strongly fortified on every side, bidding defiance to every enemy. One popular verse is 3:5, "Behold, I am against thee, saith YHWH of hosts, and I will uncover thy skirts upon thy face; and I will show the nations thy nakedness, and the kingdoms thy shame." This is very symbolic showing that Nineveh was known for being a city full of prostitutes.

Jonah had already uttered his message of warning, and Nahum was followed by Zephaniah, who also predicted (Zephaniah 2:415) the destruction of the city. 

Nineveh was destroyed apparently by fire around 625 BC, and the Assyrian empire came to an end, an event which changed the face of Asia.
Archaeological digs have uncovered the splendor of Nineveh in its zenith under Sennacherib (705681 BC), Esarhaddon (681669 BC), and Ashurbanipal (669633 BC). Massive walls were eight miles in circumference. Destruction of Judean Fortress Portrayed in Dramatic Eighth-Century B.C. Pictures at the Biblical Archaeology Review website It had a water aqueduct, palaces and a library with 20,000 clay tablets, including accounts of a creation in Enuma Elish and a flood in the Epic of Gilgamesh. Nineveh at www.saudiaramcoworld.com Creation Myths in The Ancient Near East at darkwing.uoregon.edu 
The Babylonian chronicle of the fall of Nineveh tells the story of the end of Nineveh. Naboplassar of Babylon joined forces with Cyaxares, king of the Medes, and laid siege for three months. Fall of Nineveh Chronicle at Livius  Articles on Ancient History 
Assyria lasted a few more years after the loss of its fortress, but attempts by Egyptian Pharaoh Neco II to rally the Assyrians failed due to opposition from king Josiah of Judah, The End of Judah at the Quartz Hill School of Theology website and it seemed to be all over by 609 BC. Assyria 1365-609 B.C. at The Metropolitan Museum of Art website 

== Overview ==

The book of Nahum consists of two parts: 

Chapter one shows the majesty and might of God the LORD in goodness and severity. See also 

Chapters two and three describe the fall of Nineveh in 612 BCE. Nineveh is compared to Thebes, the Egyptian city that Assyria itself had destroyed in 663 BCE. Nahum describes the siege and frenzied activity of Ninevehs troops as they try in vain to halt the invaders. Poetically, he becomes a participant in the battle, and with subtle irony, barks battle commands to the defenders. Nahum uses numerous similes and metaphors. Nineveh is ironically compared with a lion, in reference to the lion as an Assyrian symbol of power; Nineveh is the lion of strength that has a den full of dead prey but will become weak like the lion hiding in its den. It comes to conclusion with a taunt song and funeral dirge of the impending destruction of Nineveh and the "sleep" or death of the Assyrian people and demise of the once great Assyrian conqueror-rulers.

== Themes ==

===The fall of Nineveh===
Nahums prophecy carries a particular warning to the Ninevites of coming events, although he is partly in favor of the destruction. One might even say that the book of Nahum is "a celebration of the fall of Assyria." And this is not just a warning or speaking positively of the destruction of Ninevah, it is also a positive encouragement and "message of comfort for Israel, Judah, and others who had experienced the "endless cruelty" (3:19) of the Assyrians." The prophet Jonah shows us where God shows concern for the people of Nineveh, while Nahums writing testifies to his belief in the righteousness/justice of God Nahum at earlyjewishwritings.com and how God dealt with those Assyrians in punishment according to "their cruelty" (Nahum 3:19). The Assyrians had been used as God's "rod of anger, and the staff in their hand indignation." (Isaiah 10:5)

===The nature of God===
From its opening, Nahum shows God to be slow to anger but that He will by no means clear the guilty, but will bring his vengeance and wrath to pass. God is presented as a God who will punish evil but will protect those who trust in Him. The opening passage (Nahum 1:23) states: "God is jealous, and the LORD revengeth; the LORD revengeth, and is furious; the LORD will take vengeance on his adversaries, and he reserveth wrath for his enemies. The LORD is slow to anger, and great in power, and will not at all acquit the wicked". God is strong and will use means, but a mighty God doesn't need anyone else to carry out vengeance and wrath for him.

Nahum 1:3 (NIV) The LORD is slow to anger and Quick to love; the LORD will not leave the guilty unpunished.

Nahum 1:7 (NIV) The LORD is good, a refuge in times of trouble. He cares for those who trust in him

== Importance ==

God's judgement on Ninevah is "all because of the wanton lust of a harlot, alluring, the mistress of sorceries, who enslaved nations by her prostitution and peoples by her witchcraft." (Nahum 3:4 NIV). Sexual infidelity, according to the prophets, related to spiritual unfaithfulness. Centre Column Reference Bible, (Nashville: Thomas Nelson Publishers, 1994) 1262 For example: the land is guilty of the vilest adultery in departing from the LORD.(Hosea 1:2 NIV) The apostle John used a similar analogy in Revelation chapter 17.

== Discourse ==

The book was introduced in Calvin's Commentary as a complete and finished poem:

Nahum, taking words from Moses himself, have shown in a general way what sort of "Being God is". The Reformation theologian Calvin argued, Nahum painted God by which his nature must be seen, and "it is from that most memorable vision, when God appeared to Moses after the breaking of the tables." Calvin; Commentary on Jonah, Micah, Nahum http://onetenthblog.wordpress.com/readings/780-2/ 

Nahum's writings could be taken as prophecy or as history. One account suggests that his writings are a prophecy written in about 615 BC, just before the downfall of Assyria, while another account suggests that he wrote this passage as liturgy just after its downfall in 612 BC. 

The book could be seen as an allusion to the history as described by Moses; for the minor Prophets, in promising Gods assistance to his people, must often remind how God in a miraculous manner brought up the Jews from Egypt. Calvin's Commentary on Jonah, Micah, Nahum; Rev. John Owen, translator 

== References ==

== External links ==

* Jewish translations:
** Nachum  Nahum (Judaica Press) translation Rashi's commentary at Chabad.org

* Christian translations:
** Online Bible at GospelHall.org (ESV, KJV, Darby, American Standard Version, Bible in Basic English)
** BibleGateway
** Nahum  King James Version

* This article also contains a section on the Book of Nahum.



[[Book of Haggai]]

The Book of Haggai is a book of the Hebrew Bible or Tanakh, and has its place as the antepenultimate of the Minor Prophets. It is a short book, consisting of only two chapters. The historical setting dates around 520 BCE before the Temple has been rebuilt. Coogan, Michael D. "A Brief Introduction to the Old Testament." Oxford University Press, 2009. o. 346. 520 BCE falls between the start of the Persian empire in 539 BCE and 520 BCE a period that saw major kings such as Zerubbabel help lead the Jews in their return to the land.

== Authorship ==

The Book of Haggai is named after its presumed author, the prophet Haggai. There is no biographical information given about the prophet in the Book of Haggai, so we know no personal information about him. Haggai's name is derived from the Hebrew verbal root hgg, which means "to make a pilgrimage." W. Sibley Towner suggests that Haggai's name might come "from his single-minded effort to bring about the reconstruction of that destination of ancient Judean pilgrims, the Temple in Jerusalem." Towner, W. Sibley. The Harper Collins Study Bible. HarperCollins Publishers. 2006. p. 1265. 

== Date ==

The Book of Haggai was written in 520 BCE some 18 years after Cyrus had conquered Babylon and issued a decree in 538 BCE allowing the captive Jews to return to Judea. Cyrus saw the restoration of the temple as necessary for the restoration of the religious practices and a sense of peoplehood after a long exile.

== Synopsis ==

Haggai's message is filled with an urgency for the people to proceed with the rebuilding of the second Jerusalem temple. Haggai attributes a recent drought to the people's refusal to rebuild the temple, which he sees as key to Jerusalems glory. The book ends with the prediction of the downfall of kingdoms, with one Zerubbabel, governor of Judah, as the Lords chosen leader. The language here is not as finely wrought as in some other books of the minor prophets, yet the intent seems straightforward.

The first chapter contains the first address (211) and its effects (1215). 

The second chapter contains:
#The second prophecy (19), which was delivered a month after the first
#The third prophecy (1019), delivered two months and three days after the second; and
#The fourth prophecy (2023), delivered on the same day as the third

These discourses are referred to in Ezra 5:1 and 6:14. (Compare Haggai 2:7, 8 and 22)

Haggai reports that three weeks after his first prophecy, the rebuilding of the Temple began on September 7 521 BCE. "They came and began to work on the house of the LORD Almighty, their God, on the twenty-fourth day of the sixth month in the second year of King Darius.(Haggai 1:1415) and the Book of Ezra indicates that it was finished on February 25 516 BCE "The Temple was completed on the third day of the month Adar, in the sixth year of the reign of King Darius." (Ezra 6:15)

== Outline ==

#Divine Announcement: The Command to Rebuild the Temple ( )
##Introduction: Reluctant Rebuilders ( )
##Consider your ways: fruitless prosperity ( )
##Promise and Progress ( )
#Divine Announcement: The Coming Glory of the Temple ( )
##God will fulfill his promise ( ) Achtemeier, Paul J., and Roger S. Boraas. The HarperCollins Bible Dictionary. San Francisco, CA: HarperSanFrancisco, 1996. Print. 
##Future Splendor of the temple ( ) 
#Divine Announcement: Blessings for a Defiled People ( )
##Former Misery ( ) 
##Future Blessing ( ) 
#Divine Announcement: Zerubbabel Chosen as a Signet ( )

== References ==

== External links ==

*Jewish translations:
** Chaggai  Haggai (Judaica Press) translation Rashi's commentary at Chabad.org

*Christian translations:
**Online Bible at GospelHall.org (ESV, KJV, Darby, American Standard Version, Bible in Basic English)



[[Book of Malachi]]

Malachi (or Malachias, , Malai, Ml'akh) is the last book of the Neviim contained in the Tanakh, the last of the twelve minor prophets (canonically) and the final book of the Neviim. In the Christian ordering, the grouping of the Prophetic Books is the last section of the Old Testament, making Malachi the last book before the New Testament.

The book is commonly attributed to a prophet by the name of Malachi. Although the appellation Malachi has frequently been understood as a proper name, its Hebrew meaning is simply "My God's messenger" (or 'His messenger' in the Septuagint) and may not be the author's name at all. The sobriquet occurs in the superscription at 1:1 and in 3:1, although it is highly unlikely that the word refers to the same character in both of these references. Thus, there is substantial debate regarding the identity of the book's author. One of the Targums identifies Ezra (or Esdras) as the author of Malachi. St. Jerome suggests this may be because Ezra is seen as an intermediary between the prophets and the 'great synagogue'. There is, however, no historical evidence yet to support this claim.

Some scholars note affinities between Zechariah 914 and the book of Malachi. Zechariah 9, Zechariah 12, and Malachi 1 are all introduced as The word of Elohim. Many scholars argue that this collection originally consisted of three independent and anonymous prophecies, two of which were subsequently appended to the book of Zechariah (as what scholars refer to as Deutero-Zechariah) with the third becoming the book of Malachi. As a result, most scholars consider the book of Malachi to be the work of a single author who may or may not have been identified by the title Malachi. The present division of the oracles results in a total of twelve books of minor prophetsa number parallelling the sons of Jacob who became the heads of the twelve tribes of Israel. The Catholic Encyclopedia asserts that "We are no doubt in presence of an abbreviation of the name Ml'akhyah, that is Messenger of Elohim.

== Author ==

Nothing is known of the biography of the author of the book of Malachi, although it has been suggested that he may have been Levitical (which is curious, considering that Ezra was a priest). The books of Zechariah and Haggai were written during the lifetime of Ezra (see 5:1); perhaps this may explain the similarities in style. Although the Ezra theory is disputed, it remains the dominant authorship theory.

According to the editors of the 1897 Easton's Bible Dictionary, some scholars believe the name "Malachi" is not a proper noun but rather an abbreviation of "messenger of YHWH". Malachi at the Easton's Bible Dictionary This reading could be based on Malachi 3:1, "Behold, I will send my messenger...", if my messenger is taken literally as the name Malachi. Several scholars consider the book to be anonymous, with verse 1:1 being a later addition. Carl Heinrich Cornill states that Zechariah 914 and Malachi are anonymous and were therefore placed at the end of the Book of the Twelve. Wellhausen, Abraham Kuenen, and Wilhelm Gustav Hermann Nowack argue that Malachi 1:1 is a late addition, pointing to Zechariah 9:1 and 12:1. However, other scholars, including the editors of the Catholic Encyclopedia, argue that the grammatical evidence leads us to conclude that Malachi is in fact a name. 

Another interpretation of the authorship comes from the Septuagint superscription,    , which can be read as either "by the hand of his messenger" or as "by the hand of his angel". The "angel" reading found an echo among the ancient Leaders of the Church and ecclesiastical writers, and even gave rise to the "strangest fancies", especially among the disciples of Origen of Alexandria. A. VAN HOONACKER, "Malachias", The Original Catholic Encyclopedia, retrieved 12 February 2011. Prefaces to the Commentaries on the Minor Prophets., Jerome, 406: Origen and his followers believe that (according to his name) he was an angel. But we reject this view altogether, lest we be compelled to accept the doctrine of the fall of souls from heaven. 

== Period ==

There are very few historical details in the book of Malachi. The greatest clue as to its dating may lie in the fact that the Persian-era term for governor (peh) is used in 1:8. This points to a post-exilic date of composition both because of the use of the Persian period term and because Judah had a king before the exile. Since, in the same verse, the temple has been rebuilt, the book must also be later than 515 BC. Malachi was apparently known to the author of Ecclesiasticus early in the 2nd century BC. Because of the development of themes in the book of Malachi, most scholars assign it to a position between Haggai and Zechariah, slightly before Nehemiah came to Jerusalem in 445 BC.

== Aim ==

The book of Malachi was written to correct the lax religious and social behaviour of the Israelites  particularly the priests  in post-exilic Jerusalem. Although the prophets urged the people of Judah and Israel to see their exile as punishment for failing to uphold their covenant with Elohim, it was not long after they had been restored to the land and to Temple worship that the people's commitment to their God began, once again, to wane. It was in this context that the prophet commonly referred to as Malachi delivered his prophecy.

In 1:2, Malachi has the people of Israel question God's love for them. This introduction to the book illustrates the severity of the situation which Malachi addresses. The graveness of the situation is also indicated by the dialectical style with which Malachi confronts his audience. Malachi proceeds to accuse his audience of failing to respect God as God deserves. One way in which this disrespect is made manifest is through the substandard sacrifices which Malachi claims are being offered by the priests. While Elohim demands animals that are "without blemish" (Leviticus 1:3, NRSV), the priests, who were "to determine whether the animal was acceptable" (Mason 143), were offering blind, lame and sick animals for sacrifice because they thought nobody would notice.

In 2:10, Malachi addresses the issue of divorce. On this topic, Malachi deals with divorce both as a social problem ("Why then are we faithless to one another ... ?" 2:10) and as a religious problem ("Judah ... has married the daughter of a foreign god" 2:11). In contrast to the book of Ezra (or not  see section below), Malachi urges each to remain steadfast to the wife of his youth.

Malachi also criticizes his audience for questioning God's justice. He reminds them that God is just, exhorting them to be faithful as they await that justice. Malachi quickly goes on to point out that the people have not been faithful. In fact, the people are not giving God all that God deserves. Just as the priests have been offering unacceptable sacrifices, so the people have been neglecting to offer their full tithe to Elohim. The result of these shortcomings is that the people come to believe that no good comes out of serving God.

Malachi assures the faithful among his audience that in the eschaton, the differences between those who served God faithfully and those who did not will become clear. The book concludes by calling upon the teachings of Moses and by promising that Elijah will return prior to the Day of Elohim.

== Interpretations ==

The book of Malachi is divided into three chapters in the Hebrew Bible and the Greek Septuagint and four chapters in the Latin Vulgate. The fourth chapter in the Vulgate consists of the remainder of the third chapter starting at verse 3:19.

===Christianity===
The New Revised Standard Version of the Bible supplies headings for the book as follows:

 Verse/Chapter Headings in the NRSV Verse Reference Heading 1:1 (Superscription) 1:22:9 Israel Preferred to Edom 2:1017 The Covenant Profaned by Judah 3:17 The Coming Messenger 3:815 Do Not Rob God 4:15 (3:1924 in Hebrew) The Great Day of the Lord 

The majority of scholars consider the book to be made up of six distinct oracles. According to this scheme, the book of Malachi consists of a series of disputes between Yahweh and the various groups within the Israelite community. In the course of the book's three or four chapters, Yahweh is vindicated while those who do not adhere to the law of Moses are condemned. Some scholars have suggested that the book, as a whole, is structured along the lines of a judicial trial, a suzerain treaty or a covenantone of the major themes throughout the Hebrew Scriptures. Implicit in the prophet's condemnation of Israel's religious practices is a call to keep Yahweh's statutes.

The book of Malachi draws upon various themes found in other books of the Bible. Malachi appeals to the story of the rivalry between Jacob and Esau and of Yahweh's preference for Jacob contained in Book of Genesis 2528. Malachi reminds his audience that, as descendants of Jacob (Israel), they have been and continue to be favoured by God as God's chosen people. In the second dispute, Malachi draws upon the Levitical Code (e.g. Leviticus 1:3) in condemning the priest for offering unacceptable sacrifices.

In the third dispute (concerning divorce), the author of the book of Malachi likely intends his argument to be understood on two levels. Malachi appears to be attacking either the practice of divorcing Jewish wives in favour of foreign ones (a practice which Ezra vehemently condemns) or, alternatively, Malachi could be condemning the practice of divorcing foreign wives in favour of Jewish wives (a practice which Ezra promoted). Malachi appears adamant that nationality is not a valid reason to terminate a marriage, "For I hate divorce, says the Lord . . ." (2:16).

In many places throughout the Hebrew Scriptures  particularly the book of Hosea  Israel is figured as Yahweh's wife or bride. Malachi's discussion of divorce may also be understood to conform to this metaphor. Malachi could very well be urging his audience not to break faith with Yahweh (the God of Israel) by adopting new gods or idols. It is quite likely that, since the people of Judah were questioning Yahweh's love and justice (1:2, 2:17), they might be tempted to adopt foreign gods. William LaSor suggests that, because the restoration to the land of Judah had not resulted in anything like the prophesied splendor of the messianic age which had been prophesied, the people were becoming quite disillusioned with their religion.

Illustration of the coming of God's Messenger in 3:1, by Franciszek murko.

Indeed, the fourth dispute asserts that judgment is coming in the form of a messenger who "is like refiner's fire and like fullers' soap . . ." (3:2). Following this, the prophet provides another example of wrongdoing in the fifth dispute  that is, failing to offer full tithes. In this discussion, Malachi has Yahweh request the people to "Bring the full tithe . . . see if I will not open the windows of heaven for you and pour down on you an overflowing blessing" (3:10). This request offers the opportunity for the people to amend their ways. It also stresses that keeping the Lord's statutes will not only allow the people to avoid God's wrath, but will also lead to God's blessing. In the sixth dispute, the people of Israel illustrate the extent of their disillusionment. Malachi has them say "'It is vain to serve God . . . Now we count the arrogant happy; evildoers not only prosper, but when they put God to the test they escape'" (3:1415). Once again, Malachi has Yahweh assure the people that the wicked will be punished and the faithful will be rewarded.

In the light of what Malachi understands to be an imminent judgment, he exhorts his audience to "Remember the teaching of my servant Moses, that statutes and ordinances that I commanded him at Horeb for all Israel" (4:4; 3:22, MT). Before the Day of the Lord, Malachi declares that Elijah (who "ascended in a whirlwind into heaven . . . " 2 Kings 2:11) will return to earth in order that people might follow in God's ways.

Primarily because of its messianic promise, the book of Malachi is frequently referred to in the Christian New Testament. What follows is a brief comparison between the book of Malachi and the New Testament texts which refer to it (as suggested in Hill 8488).

 Use of the book of Malachi in the New Testament (NRSV) 
 Malachi New Testament 
 \"Yet I have loved Jacob but I have hated Esau\" (1:23) \"'I have loved Jacob, but I have hated Esau.'\" (Romans 9:13) 
 \"And if I am a master, where is the respect due me?\" (1:6) \"Why do you call me \"Lord, Lord,' and do not do what I tell you?\" (Luke 6:46) 
 \"the table of Jehovah\" (1:7,12) \"the table of the Lord\" (1 Corinthians 10:21) 
 \"For from the rising of the sun to its setting my name is great among the nations,\" (1:11) \"so that the name of our Lord Jesus may be glorified in you\" (2 Thessalonians 1:12) 
 \"Lord, who will not fear and glorify your name?\" (Revelation 15:4) 
 \"For the lips of a priest should guard knowledge, and people should seek instruction from his mouth, for he is the messenger of the Lord of hosts. But you have turned aside from the way; you have caused many to stumble by your instruction; you have corrupted the covenant of Levi, says the Lord of hosts,\" (2:78) \"therefore, do whatever they teach you and follow it; but do not do as they do, for they do not practice what they teach\" (Matthew 23:3) 
 \"Have we not all one father?\" (2:10) \"yet for us there is one God, the Father,\" (1 Corinthians 8:6) 
 \"See, I am sending my messenger to prepare the way before me,\" (3:1) \"See, I am sending my messenger ahead of you, who will prepare your way;\" (Mark 1:2) 
 \"See, I am sending my messenger ahead of you, who will prepare your way before you\" (Matthew 11:10, Luke 7:27) 
 \"But who can endure the day of his coming, and who can stand when he appears?\" (3:2) \"for the great day of their wrath has come, and who is able to stand?\" (Revelation 6:17) 
 \"and he will purify the descendants of Levi and refine them like gold and silver,\" (3:3) \"so that the genuineness of your faith . . . being more precious than gold that, though perishable, is tested by fire . . .\" (1 Peter 1:7) 
 \"against those who oppress the hired workers in their wages,\" (3:5) \"Listen! The wages of the laborers who mowed your fields, which you kept back by fraud,\" (James 5:4) 
 \"For I, Jehovah, change not;\" (3:6) \"Jesus Christ is the same yesterday and today and forever.\" (Hebrews 13:8) 
 \"Return to me, and I will return to you,\" (3:7) \"Draw near to God, and he will draw near to you\" (James 4:8) 
 \"But for you who revere my name the sun of righteousness shall rise,\" (4:2) \"By the tender mercy of our God, the dawn from on high will break upon us,\" (Luke 1:78) 
 \"Behold, I will send you Elijah the prophet before the great and terrible day of Jehovah come.\" (4:5) \"he is Elijah who is to come.\" (Matthew 11:14) 
 \"Elijah has already come,\" (Matthew 17:12) 
 \"Elijah has come,\" (Mark 9:13) 
 \"Behold, I will send you Elijah the prophet before the great and terrible day of Jehovah come. And he shall turn the heart of the fathers to the children, and the heart of the children to their fathers; lest I come and smite the earth with a curse.\" (4:56) \"With the spirit and power of Elijah he will go before him, to turn the hearts of parents to their children, and the disobedient to the wisdom of the righteous,\" (Luke 1:17) 

Although many Christians believe that the messianic prophecies of the book of Malachi have been fulfilled in the life, ministry, transfiguration, death and resurrection of Jesus of Nazareth, most Jews continue to await the coming of the prophet Elijah who will prepare the way for the Lord. The Latter-day Saints differ significantly in this regard.

== References ==

== Further reading ==

* New American Bible  http://www.usccb.org/nab/bible/malachi/malachi1.htm
* 21st Century KJV  http://www.biblegateway.com/passage/?search=Malachi+1&version=KJ21
* NIRV  http://www.biblegateway.com/passage/?search=Malachi+1&version=NIRV
* Malachi at Chabad.org  http://www.chabad.org/library/bible_cdo/aid/16219
* Easton's Bible Dictionary, 1897.
* Hill, Andrew E. Malachi: A New Translation with Introduction and Commentary. The Anchor Bible Volume 25D. Toronto: Doubleday, 1998.
* LaSor, William Sanford et al. Old Testament Survey: the Message, Form, and Background of the Old Testament. Grand Rapids: William B. Eerdmans, 1996.
* Mason, Rex. The Books of Haggai, Zechariah and Malachi. The Cambridge Bible Commentary on the New English Bible. New York, Cambridge University Press, 1977.
* Singer, Isidore & Adolf Guttmacher. "Book of Malachi." JewishEncyclopedia.com. 2002.
* Van Hoonacker, A. "Malachias (Malachi)." Catholic Encyclopedia. Transcribed by Thomas J. Bress. 2003.



[[Book of Zechariah]]

The Book of Zechariah, attributed to the prophet Zechariah, is included in the Twelve Minor Prophets in the Hebrew Bible and is the penultimate book of the Old Testament of the Christian Bible.

== Historical context ==

Zechariahs ministry took place during the reign of Darius the Great (), and was contemporary with Haggai in a post-exilic world after the fall of Jerusalem in 587/6 BC. Carol L. Meyers and Eric M. Meyers, Haggai, Zechariah 18: The Anchor Bible. Garden City, Doubleday and Company Inc., 1987. ISBN 978-0-385-14482-7. Page 183. Ezekiel and Jeremiah wrote prior to the fall of Jerusalem, while continuing to prophesy in the early exile period. Scholars believe Ezekiel, with his blending of ceremony and vision, heavily influenced the visionary works of Zechariah 18. Meyers, p. 30. Zechariah is specific about dating his writing (520518 BC). 

During the Exile many Jews were taken to Babylon, where the prophets told them to make their homes (), suggesting they would spend a long period of time there. Eventually freedom did come to many Israelites, when Cyrus the Great overtook the Babylonians in 539 BC. In 538 BC, the famous Edict of Cyrus was released, and the first return took place under Sheshbazzar. After the death of Cyrus in 530 BC, Darius consolidated power and took office in 522 BC. His system divided the different colonies of the empire into easily manageable districts overseen by governors. Zerubbabel comes into the story, appointed by Darius as governor over the district of Yehud Medinata. 

Under the reign of Darius, Zechariah also emerged, centering around the rebuilding of the Temple. Unlike the Babylonians, the Persian Empire went to great lengths to keep cordial relations between vassal and lord. The rebuilding of the Temple was encouraged by the leaders of the empire in hopes that it would strengthen the authorities in local contexts. This policy was good politics on the part of the Persians, and the Jews viewed it as a blessing from God. Meyers, pp. 312. 

== Prophet ==

His name means "Yahweh has remembered." Not much is known about Zechariahs life other than what may be inferred from the book. It has been speculated that his ancestor Iddo was the head of a priestly family who returned with Zerubbabel (), and that Zechariah may himself have been a priest as well as a prophet. This is supported by Zechariah's interest in the Temple and the priesthood, and from Iddo's preaching in the Books of Chronicles.

== Authorship ==

Some scholars accept the book as the writings of one individual. For example, George Livingstone Robinson's dissertation on chapters 914 Published in The American Journal of Semitic Languages and Literatures, Vol. 12, No. 1/2 (Oct 1895  Jan 1896), pp. 192. concluded that those chapters had their origin in the period between 518 and 516 BC and stand in close relation to chapters 18, having most probably been composed by Zechariah himself. However, most modern scholars believe the book of Zechariah was written by at least two different people. Coogan, M. A Brief Introduction to the Old Testament: The Hebrew Bible in its Context. (Oxford University Press: Oxford 2009), p. 346. 

Zechariah 18, sometimes referred to as First Zechariah, was written in the 6th century BC. Coogan, M. A Brief Introduction to the Old Testament: The Hebrew Bible in its Context. (Oxford University Press: Oxford 2009), p. 346. Zechariah 914, often called Second Zechariah, contains within the text no datable references to specific events or individuals but most scholars give the text a date in the fifth century BCE. Coogan, M. A Brief Introduction to the Old Testament: The Hebrew Bible in its Context. (Oxford University Press: Oxford 2009), p. 355. Second Zechariah, in the opinion of some scholars, appears to make use of the books of Isaiah, Jeremiah, and Ezekiel, the Deuteronomistic History, and the themes from First Zechariah. This has led some to believe that the writer(s) or editor(s) of Second Zechariah may have been a disciple of the prophet Zechariah. Meyers, Eric. "Zechariah Introduction." The New Interpreter's Study Bible. (Abingdon Press: Nashville, 2003), p. 1338. There are some scholars who go even further and divide Second Zechariah into Second Zechariah (911) and Third Zechariah (1214) since each begins with a heading oracle. Coogan, M. A Brief Introduction to the Old Testament: The Hebrew Bible in its Context. (Oxford University Press: Oxford 2009), p. 355. 

== Composition ==

The return from exile is the theological premise of the prophet's visions in chapters 16. Chapters 78 address the quality of life God wants his renewed people to enjoy, containing many encouraging promises to them. Chapters 914 comprise two "oracles" of the future. 
Zechariah's vision of the Four Horsemen of the Apocalypse(), engraving by Gustave Dor.

===Chapters 1 to 6===
The book begins with a preface (), which recalls the nation's history, for the purpose of presenting a solemn warning to the present generation. Then follows a series of eight visions (), succeeding one another in one night, which may be regarded as a symbolical history of Israel, intended to furnish consolation to the returned exiles and stir up hope in their minds. The symbolic action, the crowning of Joshua (), describes how the kingdoms of the world become the kingdom of God's Messiah.

===Chapters 7 and 8===
Chapters and , delivered two years later, are an answer to the question whether the days of mourning for the destruction of the city should be kept any longer, and an encouraging address to the people, assuring them of God's presence and blessing.

===Chapters 9 to 14===
This section consists of two "oracles" or "burdens": 
*The first oracle (ch. ) gives an outline of the course of God's providential dealings with his people down to the time of the coming of the Messiah.
*The second oracle (ch. ) points out the glories that await Israel in "the latter day", the final conflict and triumph of God's kingdom.

== Themes ==

The purpose of this book is not strictly historical but theological and pastoral. The main emphasis is that God is at work and plans to live again with His people in Jerusalem. He will save them from their enemies and cleanse them from sin. 

Zechariah's concern for purity is apparent in the temple, priesthood and all areas of life as the prophecy gradually eliminates the influence of the governor in favour of the high priest, and the sanctuary becomes ever more clearly the centre of messianic fulfillment. The prominence of prophecy is quite apparent in Zechariah, but it is also true that Zechariah (along with Haggai) allows prophecy to yield to the priesthood; this is particularly apparent in comparing Zechariah to "Third Isaiah" (chapters 5566 of the Book of Isaiah), whose author was active sometime after the first return from exile.

Most Christian commentators read the series of predictions in chapters 7 to 14 as Messianic prophecies, either directly or indirectly. Petterson, A. R., Behold Your King: The Hope for the House of David in the Book of Zechariah (LHBOTS 513; London: T&T Clark, 2009). These chapters helped the writers of the Gospels understand Jesus suffering, death and resurrection, which they quoted as they wrote of Jesus final days. For example, see allusion to Zechariah 9:9 in Matthew 21:5; also Zechariah 12:10 in John 19:37. These and other references between Zechariah and the New Testament are described in Much of the Book of Revelation, which narrates the denouement of history, is also colored by images in Zechariah.

===Apocalyptic literature===
Chapters 914 of the Book of Zechariah are an early example of apocalyptic literature. Although not as fully developed as the apocalyptic visions described in the Book of Daniel, the "oracles", as they are titled in Zechariah 914, contain apocalyptic elements. One theme these oracles contain is descriptions of the Day of the Lord, when "the Lord will go forth and fight against those nations as when he fights on a day of battle" (Zechariah 14:3). These chapters also contain "pessimism about the present, but optimism for the future based on the expectation of an ultimate divine victory and the subsequent transformation of the cosmos". Coogan, Michael D. A Brief Introduction to the Old Testament. New York: Oxford University Press, 2009. Pg. 353 

The final word in Zechariah proclaims that on the Day of the Lord "There will be no Canaanite in the house of the Lord of hosts on that day" (14:21), proclaiming the need for purity in the Temple, which would come when God judges at the end of time. The Revised Standard Version has this: "There will be no trader in the house of the Lord of hosts on that day." In the Masoretic Text it is: "and in that day there shall be no more a trafficker in the house of the Lord of hosts."

== Footnotes ==

==Sources==
* The Student Bible, NIV. Michigan: Zondervan Publishing House, 1992.
* D. Guthrie, (ed.) New Bible Commentary. New York: Eerdmans Publishing Company, 1970.
* Stephen G. Dempster, Dominion And Dynasty: A Theology Of The Hebrew Bible. Illinois: Intervarsity Press, 2003. ISBN 978-0-8308-2615-5
* Carroll Stuhlmueller, Haggai and Zechariah: Rebuilding With Hope. Edinburgh: The Handsel Press Ltd., 1988. ISBN 978-0-905312-75-0.
*

== External links ==

;Translations
* Zechariah (Judaica Press) translation Rashi's commentary at Chabad.org
*Online Bible at GospelHall.org (ESV, KJV, Darby, American Standard Version, Bible in Basic English)



[[Book of Zephaniah]]

The superscription of the Book of Zephaniah attributes its authorship to Zephaniah son of Cushi son of Gedaliah son of Amariah son of Hezekiah, in the days of King Josiah son of Amon of Judah (1:1, NRSV). All that is known of Zephaniah comes from the text. The superscription of the book is lengthier than most and contains two features. The name Cushi, Zephaniahs father, means Ethiopian. In a society where genealogy was considered extremely important because of God's covenant with Abraham and his descendants, the author may have felt compelled to establish his Hebrew lineage. 

The author of Zephaniah does not shrink from condemning the Cushites or Ethiopians. Chapter 2:12 contains a succinct but unequivocal message: You also, O Ethiopians, / Shall be killed by my sword. Some question whether the translation "You, also, O Ethiopians / Shall be killed by my sword" is a good translation, given that Ethiopia is a long way from Jerusalem.

As with many of the other prophets, there is no external evidence to directly associate composition of the book with a prophet by the name of Zephaniah. Some believe that much of the material does not date from the days of King Josiah (ca. 640609 BC), but is actually post-monarchic. Three general possibilities are
# that a person, possibly named Zephaniah, prophesied the words of the book of Zephaniah;
# the general message of a Josianic prophet is conveyed through the book of Zephaniah; or
# the name could have been employed, either during the monarchic or post-monarchic period, as a speaking voice, possibly for rhetorical purposes.
Although it is possible that a post-monarchic author assumed the persona of a monarchic prophet to add credibility to his message, there is no evidence to support such a claim.

The prophetic book of the Bible attributed to Zephaniah occurs ninth among the twelve minor prophets, preceded by Habakkuk and followed by Haggai. Zephaniah (or Tzfanya, Sophonias, , fanya, panyh) means 'YHWH conceals', or 'YHWH protects'.

== Date ==

If the superscription of the book of Zephaniah is a reliable indicator of the time that the bulk of the book was composed, then Zephaniah was a contemporary of the prophet Jeremiah (or Jeremias). King Josiah ruled over Judah from approximately 640609 BC. Some scholars believe that the picture of Jerusalem which Zephaniah gives indicates that he was active prior to the religious reforms of King Josiah which are described in 2 Kings 23. These reforms took place in 622 BC. Scholars also cite the reference to the officials and the kings sons . . . in 1:8 as evidence that the kingdom was still ruled by a regent for Josiah. The portrait of foreign nations in chapter 2 also indicates the late seventh century.

Probably the first prophet following the prophecies of Isaiah and the violent reign of Manasseh. Both Zephaniah and Jeremiah urged King Josiah to enact religious reforms, which he eventually did.

Other scholars have presented evidence pointing to a post-monarchic date (as late as 200 BC) based on language and theme, although the book might still have been based on an earlier composition.

== Purpose ==

There are two possible reasons for the creation of the book of Zephaniah. Either way, the primary purpose of the books composition was to alter the behaviour (particularly religious behaviour) of the authors contemporary Jerusalemites.

If the book of Zephaniah was largely composed during the monarchic period, the author of the book of Zephaniah attempts to accomplish this change in behaviour through the threat of future calamity for those who have turned back from following the Lord, / who have not sought the Lord or inquired of him (1:6). The author conceives of a date in the future  the great day of the Lord  when the Lord will judge all the people of the earth. This coming judgment will affect all of the nations, including the authors own nation of Judah where God is understood to reside. The threats made against Jerusalem, however, are much more specific than the oracles concerning foreign nations. This strengthened the belief that the Israelites, who understood themselves to be Gods chosen people, were even more culpable than other peoples for not living up to Gods statutes because they were to be a light unto the nations. The book concludes by extending a promise of deliverance to the remnant of Israel which remains. The fulfilment of this prophecy is commonly understood to have taken place when Judah was captured by the nation of Babylon and many of its inhabitants were exiled in an event known as the Babylonian captivity. 

If the book gained most of its present form in post-monarchic period, then the author likely intended to draw upon an understanding of the Babylonian captivity as a punishment from the Lord, urging his own contemporaries not to repeat the mistakes of the past. It is not known whether the religious syncretism, alluded to in chapter one (as in verse 5), was a significant issue in post-exilic Judah.

== Themes ==
Zephaniah addressing people (French bible, 16th century).

The book of Zephaniah consists of three chapters in the Hebrew Masoretic Text. In English versions, the book is also divided into three chapters. The New Revised Standard Version of the Bible supplies headings for the book as follows:

 Verse and chapter headings in the NRSV Verse reference Heading 1:1 (Superscription) 1:213 The Coming Judgment on Judah 1:1418 The Great Day of the Lord 2:115 Judgment on Israel's Enemies 3:17 The Wickedness of Jerusalem 3:813 Punishment and Conversion of the Nations 3:1420 Song of Joy 

It is important to note that there are a number of different sub-divisions in use for the text with no clear consensus.

Despite its relatively short length, the book of Zephaniah incorporates a number of common prophetic themes. Zephaniah includes one of the most vivid descriptions in the prophetic literature of Gods wrath. Yet, it is also unequivocal in its proclamation of a restoration for those who survive the Great Day of the Lord'.

The book of Zephaniah incorporates a good deal of phrases and terminology which are found in other books of the Bible. This suggests that the author of Zephaniah was familiar with and drew upon earlier Israelite religious tradition and also that later biblical writers regarded the book of Zephaniah as an authoritative (or at least respectable) work in the prophetic corpus.

The book of Zephaniah draws upon several themes from the Book of Genesis and reverses them. The opening verses of the book of Zephaniah are reminiscent both of the creation and of Noahs flood. Chapter 1:23 declare that I will sweep away everything / from the face of the earth says the Lord. / I will sweep away humans and animals; I will sweep away the birds of the air / and the fish of the sea. The order of the creatures to be destroyed in Zephaniah is the opposite of the order in which they are created in Genesis 1:2027. It is also worth noting that in both Noahs flood and Zephaniahs Day of the Lord, a remnant survives Gods wrath.

It is also not surprising that the book of Zephaniah bears marked similarities to the book of Deuteronomy and the Deuteronomistic history. Similarities might be expected to each of these works because the Deuteronomistic history covers an overlapping period of time and because the issues which are dealt with in the book of Zephaniah go straight to the heart of the covenant which is reaffirmed in the book of Deuteronomy before Israel enters into the Promised Land of Canaan. The first 34 of the Ten Commandments (or Ten Words, Decalogue) contained in Exodus 20:117 and Deuteronomy 5:122 directly concern Israels relationship with Yahweh. It is this integral component of the covenant between Yahweh and Israel which is threatened by the practices to which the author of the book of Zephaniah refers in 1:46. In this manner, Zephaniah invokes one of the most common themes, not only in prophetic literature, but in the whole of the Hebrew Scriptures.

Zephaniah also draws upon the emerging idea that Yahweh is quite different from the regional or tribal gods of the surrounding nations. Rather, Yahweh is beginning to be understood as the only God and the God who rules over all nations. It was an apparently unique belief in the ancient Middle East that a god could send a foreign nation to execute that gods judgment (as the Israelites believed Yahweh did with Babylon). In the book of Zephaniah, all nations are portrayed as being subject to Yahwehs divine judgment.

The book of Zephaniah also interacts with the prophetic tradition  both borrowing from and contributing to the corpus in terms of language and images.

== References ==

== Further reading ==
* Berlin, Adele. Zephaniah: A New Translation with Introduction and Commentary. The Anchor Bible Volume 25A. Toronto: Doubleday, 1994.
* Easton's Bible Dictionary, 1897.
* Transcribed by Thomas M. Barrett. 2003.
* Hirsch, Emil G. & Ira Maurice Price. "Zephaniah." JewishEncyclopedia.com. 2002.
* LaSor, William Sanford et al. Old Testament Survey: the Message, Form, and Background of the Old Testament. Grand Rapids: William B. Eerdmans, 1996.
* O. Palmer Robertson  The Books of Nahum, Habakkuk, and Zephaniah (New International Commentary on the Old Testament, 1990)
* Sweeney, Marvin A. Zephaniah: A Commentary. Ed. Paul D. Hanson. Minneapolis, Fortress Press, 2003.

== External links ==

* Zephaniah at JewishEncyclopedia.com

;Translations of the book of Zephaniah:

*Jewish translations:
** Tzefaniah  Zephaniah (Judaica Press) translation Rashi's commentary at Chabad.org

*Christian translations:
**Online Bible at GospelHall.org (ESV, KJV, Darby, American Standard Version, Bible in Basic English)
** Zephaniah at CrossWalk.com (various versions)
** Zephaniah at The Great Books (New Revised Standard Version)
** Zephaniah at Wikisource (Authorised King James Version)



[[Book of Habakkuk]]

The Book of Habakkuk is the eighth book of the 12 minor prophets of the Hebrew Bible. It is attributed to the prophet Habakkuk, and was probably composed in the late 7th century BC.

Of the three chapters in the book, the first two are a dialog between Yahweh and the prophet. The central message, that "the just shall live by his faith" (2:4), plays an important role in Christian thought. It is used in the Epistle to the , Epistle to the , and the Epistle to the as the starting point of the concept of faith. A copy of these chapters is included in the Habakkuk Commentary, found among the Dead Sea Scrolls. Chapter 3 may be an independent addition, now recognized as a liturgical piece, but was possibly written by the same author as chapters 1 and 2.

== Background ==

The prophet Habakkuk is generally believed to have written his book in the mid-to-late 7th century BC, not long before the Babylonians' siege and capture of Jerusalem.

===Author===

Habakkuk identifies himself as a prophet in the opening verse. Due to the liturgical nature of the book of Habakkuk, there have been some scholars who think that the author may have been a temple prophet. Temple prophets are described in 1 Chronicles 25:1 as using lyres, harps and cymbals. Some feel that this is echoed in Habakkuk 3:19b, and that Habakkuk may have been a Levite and singer in the Temple.

There is no biographical information on the prophet Habakkuk; in fact less is known about him than any other writer of the Bible. The only canonical information that exists comes from the book that is named for him. His name comes either from the Hebrew word  (khavak) meaning "embrace" or else from an Akkadian word hambakuku for a kind of plant.

Although his name does not appear in any other part of the Jewish Bible, Rabbinic tradition holds Habakkuk to be the Shunammite woman's son, who was restored to life by Elisha in 2 Kings 4:16. The prophet Habakkuk is also mentioned in the narrative of Bel and the Dragon, part of the deuterocanonical additions to Daniel in a late section of that book. In the superscription of the Old Greek version, Habakkuk is called the son of Joshua of the tribe of Levi. In this book Habakkuk is lifted by an angel to Babylon to provide Daniel with some food while he is in the lion's den.

===Historical context===
The Chaldean Empire around 600 BC.
It is unknown when Habakkuk lived and preached, but the reference to the rise and advance of the Chaldeans in 1:611 places him in the middle to last quarter of the 7th century BC. One possible period might be during the reign of Jehoiakim, from 609598 BC. The reasoning for this date is that during his reign that the Babylonians were growing in power. The Babylonians marched against Jerusalem in 598. Jehoiakim died while the Babylonians were marching towards Jerusalem and Jehoiakim's eighteen-year-old son Jehoiachin assumed the throne. Upon the Babylonians' arrival, Jehoiachin and his advisors surrendered Jerusalem after a short time. With the transition of rulers and the young age and inexperience of Jehoiachin, they were not able to stand against Chaldean forces. There is a sense of an intimate knowledge of the Babylonian brutality in 1:1217.

== Overview ==

The book of Habakkuk is a book of the Tanakh (the Old Testament) and stands eighth in a section known as the 12 Minor Prophets in the Masoretic and Greek texts. In the Masoretic listing, it follows Nahum and precedes Zephaniah, who are considered to be his contemporaries.

The book consists of three chapters and the book is neatly divided into three different genres:

* A discussion between God and Habakkuk
* An Oracle of Woe
* A Psalm

== Themes ==

The major theme of Habakkuk is trying to grow from a faith of perplexity and doubt to the height of absolute trust in God. Habakkuk addresses his concerns over the fact that God will use the evil Babylonian empire to execute judgment on Judah for their sins.

Habakkuk is unique among the prophets in that he openly questions the wisdom of God. In the first part of the first chapter, the Prophet sees the injustice among his people and asks why God does not take action. "1:2 Yahweh, how long will I cry, and you will not hear? I cry out to you Violence! and will you not save?"  World English Bible.

In the middle part of Chapter 1, God explains that he will send the Chaldeans to punish his people. 1:5 Look among the nations, watch, and wonder marvelously; for I am working a work in your days, which you will not believe though it is told you. 1:6 For, behold, I raise up the Chaldeans, that bitter and hasty nation, that march through the breadth of the earth, to possess dwelling places that are not theirs. (World English Bible)

One of the "Eighteen Emendations to the Hebrew Scriptures" appears at 1:12. (Actually there were more than eighteen.) According to the professional Jewish scribes, the Sopherim, the text of 1:12 was changed from "You do not die" to "We shall not die." The Sopherim considered it disrespectful of God to say "You do not die."

In the final part of the first chapter, the prophet expresses shock at God's choice of instrument for judgment. 1:13 You who have purer eyes than to see evil, and who cannot look on perversity, why do you tolerate those who deal treacherously, and keep silent when the wicked swallows up the man who is more righteous than he, (World English Bible )

In Chapter 2, he awaits God's response to his challenge. God explains that He will also judge the Chaldeans, and much more harshly. 2:8 Because you have plundered many nations, all the remnant of the peoples will plunder you, because of mens blood, and for the violence done to the land, to the city and to all who dwell in it. 2:9 Woe to him who gets an evil gain for his house, (World English Bible )

Finally, in Chapter 3, Habakkuk expresses his ultimate faith in God, even if he doesn't fully understand.
3:17 For though the fig tree doesnt flourish, nor fruit be in the vines; the labor of the olive fails, the fields yield no food; the flocks are cut off from the fold, and there is no herd in the stalls: 3:18 yet I will rejoice in Yahweh. I will be joyful in the God of my salvation! (World English Bible )

== Importance ==

The book of Habakkuk is accepted as canonical by adherents of the Jewish and Christian faiths. A commentary on the first two chapters of the book was found among the Dead Sea Scrolls at Qumran. Passages from Habakkuk are quoted by authors of the New Testament, and its message has inspired modern Christian hymn writers.

===Judaism===
The Book of Habakkuk is the eighth book of the Twelve Prophets of the Hebrew Bible, and this collection appears in all copies of texts of the Septuagint, the Ancient Greek translation of the Hebrew Bible completed by 132 BC. Likewise, the book of Sirach (or Ecclesiasticus), also written in the 2nd century BC, mentions "The Twelve Prophets".

A partial copy of Habakkuk itself is included in the Habakkuk Commentary, a pesher found among the original seven Dead Sea Scrolls discovered in 1947. The Commentary contains a copy of the first two chapters of Habakkuk, but not of the third chapter. The writer of the pesher draws a comparison between the Babylonian invasion of the original text and the Roman threat of the writer's own period. What is even more significant than the commentary in the pesher is the quoted text of Habakkuk itself. The divergences between the Hebrew text of the scroll and the standard Masoretic Text are startlingly minimal. The biggest differences are word order, small grammatical variations, addition or omission of conjunctions, and spelling variations, but these are small enough to not to damage the meaning of the text.

Some scholars suggest that Chapter 3 may be a later independent addition to the book, in part because it is not included among the Dead Sea Scrolls. However, this chapter does appear in all copies of the Septuagint, as well as in texts from as early as the 3rd century BC. This final chapter is a poetic praise of God, and has some similarities with texts found in the Book of Daniel. However, the fact that the third chapter is written in a different style, as a liturgical piece, does not necessarily mean that Habakkuk was not also its author. Its omission from the Dead Sea Scrolls is attributed to the inability of the Qumran sect to fit Habakkuk's theology with their own narrow viewpoint.

===Christianity===
Saint Paul Writing His Epistles, 16th-century painting.
The second half of is quoted by some of the earliest Christian writers. Although this passage is only three words in the original Hebrew, it is quoted three times in the New Testament. Paul the Apostle quotes this verse twice in his epistles: in Romans 1:17 and again in Galatians 3:11. In doing so, Paul extends Habakkuk's original concept of righteous living at the present time into a future life. The same verse is quoted in Hebrews 10:3738, where Habakkuk's vision is tied to Christ and used to comfort the church during a period of persecution. These three epistles are considered to be "the three great doctrinal books of the New Testament," and Habakkuk's statement concerning faith forms the backbone of each book.

Modern Christian hymns have been inspired by the words of the prophet Habakkuk. The Christian hymn "The Lord is in His Holy Temple", written in 1900 by William J. Kirkpatrick, is based on verse 2:20. The fourth verse of William Cowper's hymn "Sometimes a Light Surprises", written in 1779, quotes .

== Notes ==

== Citations ==

== References ==

* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 

== External links ==

;Historic manuscripts:
* The Commentary on Habakkuk Scroll, The Digital Dead Sea Scrolls, hosted by the Israel Museum, Jerusalem.

;Jewish translations:
* Chavakuk  Habakkuk (Judaica Press) translation Rashi's commentary at Chabad.org

;Christian translations:
*Online Bible at GospelHall.org (ESV, KJV, Darby, American Standard Version, Bible in Basic English)

===Further information===
* A Brief Introduction to The Prophecy of Habakkuk for Contemporary Readers (Christian Perspective)
* Introduction to the book of Habakkuk from the NIV Study Bible



[[Backward compatibility]]

In telecommunications and computing, a product or technology is backward or downward compatible if it can work with input generated by an older product or technology. If products designed for the new standard can receive, read, view or play older standards or formats, then the product is said to be backward-compatible; examples of such a standard include data formats and communication protocols. Modifications to a system that do not allow backward compatibility are sometimes called "breaking changes."

The reverse is forward compatibility, which implies that old devices allow (or are expected to allow) data formats generated by new (or future) devices, perhaps without supporting all new features. A standard supports forward compatibility if older product versions can receive, read, view, or play the new standard.

For example, the introduction of FM stereo transmission allowed backward compatibility since new FM radio receivers could receive monaural signals generated by old transmitters. It also allowed forward compatibility, since old monaural FM radio receivers could still receive a signal from a new transmitter.

In programming languages, backward compatibility refers to the ability of a compiler for version N of the language to accept programs or data that worked under version N - 1. Michael Kay, XSLT 2.0 Programmer's Reference, Wiley Default, 2004 ISBN 0-7645-6909-0, ISBN 978-0-7645-6909-8 By this definition, if previous versions (N - 1, N - 2, etc.) were also backward compatible, which is often the case, then, by induction, version N will also accept input that worked under any prior version after, and including, the latest one that was not backward compatible. However, in practice, features are often deprecated and support is dropped in a later release, which is yet thought of as backward compatible.

In other contexts, a product or a technology is said to be backward compatible when it is able to fully take the place of an older product, by inter-operating with products that were designed for the older product. [http://books.google.com/books?id=ZCPWYFoWaMIC&printsec=frontcover&dq=compatibility&hl=sv#PPA33,M1 ] 

A data format is also said to be backward compatible with its predecessor if every message or file that is valid under the old format is also valid, and retains its meaning, under the new. 

==Description==
Backward compatibility is a relationship between two components, rather than being an attribute of just one of them. More generally, a new component is said to be backward compatible if it provides all of the functionality of the old component.

Backward compatibility is the special case of compatibility in which the new component has a direct historical ancestral relationship with the old component. If this special relationship does not exist then it not usually spoken of as "backward" compatibility but is instead just "compatible"&mdash;a consistent interface allowing interoperability between components and products that were each developed separately.

In the case of a program that creates document files, a new version of that program ("v2") is said to be backward compatible with the old version of the program ("v1") when it can both read and write documents that work with v1. Everything that v1 could do must also be possible with v2, including saving documents that can be read by v1 (which is something that v1 could do).

If a newer software version cannot save files that can be read by the older version, it is not backward compatible with the older version, although it may provide an irreversible upgrade capability for the old files. This situation has often been used strategically by software vendors to force customers to purchase upgrades since, over time, the number of data files usable by an old version diminishes at a rate proportional to the number of other customers that have upgraded (assuming that all customers generate files at the same the average rate).

Levels of compatibility vary. In software, binary compatibility and source compatibility are distinguishable. Binary compatibility means that programs can work correctly with the new version of this library without requiring recompilation. Source compatibility requires recompilation but no changes to the source code.

Many platforms rely on emulation, the simulation of an older platform in software, to achieve backward compatibility.

==Bugwards compatible==
If a newer system is attempting to achieve integration with an older system which has known flaws (or "bugs"), then the new system may be referred to as bug-compatible or "bugwards-compatible". 

==Examples==
* The NTSC color broadcast system was engineered by RCA to be backward compatible with black-and-white NTSC television sets.
* Most DVD drives are able to play standard CDs.
* Most Blu-ray players can also play standard DVDs and CDs (although this feature is not compulsory in the Blu-ray standard).
* Numerous video game consoles are backward compatible and are able to play the games created for predecessor consoles:
** The Atari 7800 is backward compatible with almost all Atari 2600 games.
** Original versions of the Nintendo Wii are fully backwards compatible with all Nintendo GameCube games and most accessories but the Wii Family Edition eliminated backwards-compatibility to the GameCube.
** The Game Boy Color is backward compatible with all Game Boy cartridges.
** The Game Boy Advance line, except for the Game Boy Micro, is backward compatible with all Game Boy and Game Boy Color games.
** The Nintendo DS and the Nintendo DS Lite are backward compatible with all Game Boy Advance games.
** The Nintendo 3DS, the Nintendo 3DS XL and the Nintendo 2DS are backward compatible with most of the Nintendo DS and Nintendo DSi software. However, the 3DS and its predecessor the DSi lack the Game Boy Advance slot found on the DS and DS Lite, causing certain titles to lose functionality when played on the systems. The series is incompatible with the DSi and 3DS because of this.
** The Sega 32X is backward compatible with all Sega Genesis games and accessories.
** The Wii U is backward compatible with all Wii games and peripherals.
** The PlayStation 2 is backward compatible with most of the original PlayStation library.
** The Nintendo GameCube is backwards compatible with Game Boy, Game Boy Color, and Game Boy Advance games (if one bought a Game Boy Player).
** Initially, some PlayStation 3 (20GB, 1st-gen 60 and 80GB) launch models are backward compatible with most PlayStation and PlayStation 2 games. All subsequent PlayStation 3 models, such as the PlayStation 3 Super Slim model, support disc versions of PS1 titles but not PS2 titles. The exception to this is the Singstar range of games. The option to change discs in-game allows songs on PS2 games to be used. All versions of the PlayStation 3 support download versions of PS1 and PS2 titles. http://blog.us.playstation.com/2014/01/07/playstation-now-streaming-game-service-coming-this-summer/ 
** The Xbox 360 is backward compatible with some Xbox games via software emulation.
** Both the Atari 5200 and Sega Genesis have cartridge adapters to provide compatibility with Atari 2600 (Atari CX-55 Cartridge Adapter) and Sega Master System (Power Base Converter) games respectively.
* Microsoft Windows contains application compatibility shims to make the platform compatible with most software from earlier 32-bit and 16-bit versions (e.g. Civilization (circa 1991, designed for Windows 3.0) running on Windows Vista).
* The Intel versions of Mac OS X from versions 10.4 (Tiger) to 10.6 (Snow Leopard) have Rosetta, a binary translation program that allows applications meant for use on PowerPC Macs to run on Apple systems that use Intel processors. (Newer OS X versions, do not contain Rosetta and thus cannot run PowerPC applications.)
* Microsoft Word 2000 was backward compatible with Word 97 because it could read and write files in Word 97 format, with the understanding that features unique to Word 2000 would not appear in Word 97. At the same time, Microsoft Word, Excel, PowerPoint, Access and OneNote, both 2007 and 2010, are also backward compatible with their 97-2003 file formats and features in the same manner.
* Several computer operating systems have various methods of running software originally designed for older versions or other OSs:
** Windows NT and successors have various subsystems to run legacy applications. MS-DOS and Win16 subsystems (only on i386) can run some applications for those platforms, and it has an OS/2 subsystem for running CLI OS/2 applications.
** With the introduction of Windows 7 (Business, Ultimate, or Enterprise editions), Windows XP Mode enables full compatibility with older programs supported under Windows XP via Windows Virtual PC.
* The modern Nikon F-mount SLR camera lenses from the late 1970s - present (its design dates back to 1959) can function on the newer Nikon DSLR cameras with some limitations.
* Lenses for the Canon EF-mount, introduced with the company's EOS family of film SLRs in 1987 and used to this day on Canon full-frame and APS-H EOS DSLRs, can function fully on the company's APS-C DSLRs that use the Canon EF-S-mount (although their angle of view will be different on the smaller APS-C sensor).
* PCI Express 2.0 is backward compatible with PCI Express 1.1.
* Universal Serial Bus (USB) ports support devices intended for earlier versions of USB. For example, USB 3.0 ports support USB 2.0 and USB 1.1 devices.
* The IBM 7080 transistorized computer was backward compatible with all models of the IBM 705 vacuum tube computer.
* When Touch Tone dialing was introduced into the telephone system, the network continued to work with the existing rotary telephones, a situation that continues today.
* Telephones that used Pulse dialing were compatible with parts of the telephone network that did not yet work with tone dialing by mimicking the pulses generated by a rotary phone. Often such phones had a switch that would change them to use touch tone.

==See also==
*Format rot
*Forward compatibility
*Legacy system
*Software emulation
*Computer compatibility
*Shim

==References==

==External links==
*Why many versioning problems are caused by backwards compatibility issues.

 


[[Bacterial conjugation]]

Bacterial conjugation is the transfer of genetic material (plasmid) between bacterial cells by direct cell-to-cell contact or by a bridge-like connection between two cells. Discovered in 1946 by Joshua Lederberg and Edward Tatum, conjugation is a mechanism of horizontal gene transfer as are transformation and transduction although these two other mechanisms do not involve cell-to-cell contact. 

Bacterial conjugation is often regarded as the bacterial equivalent of sexual reproduction or mating since it involves the exchange of genetic material. During conjugation the donor cell provides a conjugative or mobilizable genetic element that is most often a plasmid or transposon. Most conjugative plasmids have systems ensuring that the recipient cell does not already contain a similar element.

The genetic information transferred is often beneficial to the recipient. Benefits may include antibiotic resistance, xenobiotic tolerance or the ability to use new metabolites. Such beneficial plasmids may be considered bacterial endosymbionts. Other elements, however, may be viewed as bacterial parasites and conjugation as a mechanism evolved by them to allow for their spread.

== Mechanism ==
Schematic drawing of bacterial conjugation. 

Conjugation diagram
1- Donor cell produces pilus. 2- Pilus attaches to recipient cell and brings the two cells together. 3- The mobile plasmid is nicked and a single strand of DNA is then transferred to the recipient cell. 4- Both cells synthesize a complementary strand to produce a double stranded circular plasmid and also reproduce pili; both cells are now viable donors.

The prototypical conjugative plasmid is the F-plasmid, or F-factor. The F-plasmid is an episome (a plasmid that can integrate itself into the bacterial chromosome by homologous recombination) with a length of about 100 kb. It carries its own origin of replication, the oriV, and an origin of transfer, or oriT. There can only be one copy of the F-plasmid in a given bacterium, either free or integrated, and bacteria that possess a copy are called F-positive or F-plus (denoted F+). Cells that lack F plasmids are called F-negative or F-minus (F-) and as such can function as recipient cells.

Among other genetic information the F-plasmid carries a tra and trb locus, which together are about 33 kb long and consist of about 40 genes. The tra locus includes the pilin gene and regulatory genes, which together form pili on the cell surface. The locus also includes the genes for the proteins that attach themselves to the surface of F- bacteria and initiate conjugation. Though there is some debate on the exact mechanism of conjugation it seems that the pili are not the structures through which DNA exchange occurs. This has been shown in experiments where the pilus are allowed to make contact, but then are denatured with SDS and yet DNA transformation still proceeds. Several proteins coded for in the tra or trb locus seem to open a channel between the bacteria and it is thought that the traD enzyme, located at the base of the pilus, initiates membrane fusion.

When conjugation is initiated by a signal the relaxase enzyme creates a nick in one of the strands of the conjugative plasmid at the oriT. Relaxase may work alone or in a complex of over a dozen proteins known collectively as a relaxosome. In the F-plasmid system the relaxase enzyme is called TraI and the relaxosome consists of TraI, TraY, TraM and the integrated host factor IHF. The nicked strand, or T-strand, is then unwound from the unbroken strand and transferred to the recipient cell in a 5'-terminus to 3'-terminus direction. The remaining strand is replicated either independent of conjugative action (vegetative replication beginning at the oriV) or in concert with conjugation (conjugative replication similar to the rolling circle replication of lambda phage). Conjugative replication may require a second nick before successful transfer can occur. A recent report claims to have inhibited conjugation with chemicals that mimic an intermediate step of this second nicking event. 

If the F-plasmid that is transferred has previously been integrated into the donors genome (producing an Hfr strain Frequency of Recombination") some of the donors chromosomal DNA may also be transferred with the plasmid DNA. The amount of chromosomal DNA that is transferred depends on how long the two conjugating bacteria remain in contact. In common laboratory strains of E. coli the transfer of the entire bacterial chromosome takes about 100 minutes. The transferred DNA can then be integrated into the recipient genome via homologous recombination.

A cell culture that contains in its population cells with non-integrated F-plasmids usually also contains a few cells that have accidentally integrated their plasmids. It is these cells that are responsible for the low-frequency chromosomal gene transfers that occur in such cultures. Some strains of bacteria with an integrated F-plasmid can be isolated and grown in pure culture. Because such strains transfer chromosomal genes very efficiently they are called Hfr (high frequency of recombination). The E. coli genome was originally mapped by interrupted mating experiments in which various Hfr cells in the process of conjugation were sheared from recipients after less than 100 minutes (initially using a Waring blender). The genes that were transferred were then investigated.

Since integration of the F-plasmid into the E. coli chromosome is a rare spontaneous occurrence, and since the numerous genes promoting DNA transfer are in the plasmid genome rather than in the bacterial genome, it has been argued that conjugative bacterial gene transfer is not an evolutionary adaptation of the bacterial host, nor is it likely ancestral to eukaryotic sex. Michod RE, Bernstein H, Nedelcu AM. (2008) Adaptive value of sex in microbial pathogens. Infect Genet Evol. 8(3): 267-285. doi: 10.1016/j.meegid.2008.01.002. PMID 18295550 http://www.hummingbirds.arizona.edu/Faculty/Michod/Downloads/IGE%20review%20sex.pdf 

==Inter-kingdom transfer==

Agrobacterium tumefaciens gall at the root of Carya illinoensis.
Bacteria related to the nitrogen fixing Rhizobia are an interesting case of inter-kingdom conjugation. For example, the tumor-inducing (Ti) plasmid of Agrobacterium and the root-tumor inducing (Ri) plasmid of A. rhizogenes contain genes that are capable of transferring to plant cells. The expression of these genes effectively transforms the plant cells into opine-producing factories. Opines are used by the bacteria as sources of nitrogen and energy. Infected cells form crown gall or root tumors, respectively. The Ti and Ri plasmids are thus endosymbionts of the bacteria, which are in turn endosymbionts (or parasites) of the infected plant.

The Ti and Ri plasmids can also be transferred between bacteria using a system (the tra, or transfer, operon) that is different and independent of the system used for inter-kingdom transfer (the vir, or virulence, operon). Such transfers create virulent strains from previously avirulent strains.

== Genetic engineering applications ==
Conjugation is a convenient means for transferring genetic material to a variety of targets. In laboratories, successful transfers have been reported from bacteria to yeast, plants, mammalian cells and isolated mammalian mitochondria. Conjugation has advantages over other forms of genetic transfer including minimal disruption of the target's cellular envelope and the ability to transfer relatively large amounts of genetic material (see the above discussion of E. coli chromosome transfer). In plant engineering, Agrobacterium-like conjugation complements other standard vehicles such as tobacco mosaic virus (TMV). While TMV is capable of infecting many plant families these are primarily herbaceous dicots. Agrobacterium-like conjugation is also primarily used for dicots, but monocot recipients are not uncommon.

==See also==
*Sexual conjugation in algae and ciliates
*Transfection
*Triparental mating

== References ==

==External links==
* Bacterial conjugation (a Flash animation)



[[Galjoen]]

The galjoen, black bream, or blackfish, Dichistius capensis, is a species of marine fish found only along the Atlantic coast of southern Africa from Angola to South Africa. It can be found around reefs at depths around10 m. This species can reach 80 cm in total length and a weight of 6.5 kg. This species is important to local commercial fisheries and is also popular as a game fish. 

It appears in particular to be partial to the white mussels residing in the sandy beaches and inlets of the rocky outcrops along the southern coast. It is the national fish of South Africa.

==References==



[[Blue crane]]

The Blue Crane (Anthropoides paradiseus), also known as the Stanley Crane and the Paradise Crane, is the national bird of South Africa.

==Description==
The Blue Crane is a tall, ground-dwelling bird, but is fairly small by the standards of the crane family. It is 100 - tall, with a wingspan of 180 - and weighs 3.6 -. Blue Crane at BirdLife International Data Zone Blue Crane listing at the Melbourne Museum website Blue Crane at oiseaux-birds.com Among standard measurements, the wing chord measures 51.4 -, the exposed culmen measures 8 - and the tarsus measures 20.5 -. This crane is pale blue-gray in colour becoming darker on the upper head, neck and nape. From the crown to the lores, the plumage is distinctly lighter, sometimes whitish. The bill is ochre to greyish, with a pink tinge. The long wingtip feathers which trail to the ground. The primaries are black to slate grey, with dark coverts and blackish on the secondaries. Unlike most cranes, it has a relatively large head and a proportionately thin neck. Juveniles are similar but slightly lighter, with tawny coloration on the head, and no long wing plumes.

==Habitat==
Blue Cranes are birds of the dry grassy uplands, usually the pastured grasses of hills, valleys, and plains with a few scattered trees. They prefer areas in the nesting season that have access to both upland and wetland areas, though they feed almost entirely in dry areas. They are altitudinal migrants, generally nesting in the lower grasslands of an elevation of around 1,300 to 2,000 m and moving down to lower altitudes for winter. Though historically found in areas of low human disturbance, the blue crane is currently thriving in the highly transformed agricultural areas of the Western Cape. This is the only portion of its range where the population is increasing, though they still face threats such as poisoning in the region.

==Movements and behaviour==
Of the 15 species of crane, the Blue Crane has the most restricted distribution of all. Even species with lower population numbers now (such as Siberian or Whooping Cranes) are found over a considerable range in their migratory movements. The Blue Crane is migratory, primarily altitudinal, but details are little known.

The Blue Crane is partially social, less so during the breeding season. There is a strict hierarchy in groups, with the larger adult males being dominant. They overlap in range with 3 other crane species but interactions with these species and other "large wader" type birds are not known. They are relentlessly aggressive to various other animals during the nesting season, attacking non-predatory species such as cattle, tortoises, plovers and even sparrows. Humans are also attacked if they approach a nest too closely, with the aggressive male having torn clothes and drawn blood in such cases.

==Feeding==
Blue Cranes feed from the ground and appear to rarely feed near wetland areas. Most of their diet is comprised by grasses and sedges, with many types fed on based on their proximity to the nests. They are also regularly insectivorous, feeding on numerous, sizeable insects such as grasshoppers. Small animals such as crabs, snails, frogs, small lizards and snakes may supplement the diet, with such protein-rich food often being broken down and fed to the young.

==Breeding==
Eggs of Blue Crane MHNT 
The breeding period is highly seasonal, with eggs being recorded between October and March. Pair-formation amongst groups often beings in October, beginning with both potential parents running in circles with each other. The male then engages in a "dance" flings various objects in the air and then jumps. Eventually, a female from the group and the male appear to "select" each other and both engage in the dance of throwing objects and jumping. After the dance, mating commences in around two weeks.

In a great majority of known nests, two eggs are laid (rarely 1 or 3). Both males are females will incubate, with the male often incubating at night and, during the day, defending the nest territory during the day while the female incubates. The incubation stage lasts around 30 days. The young are able to walk after two days and can swim well shortly thereafter. They are fed primarily by their mothers, who regurgitates food into the mouths. Depending on the growth rate of chicks, the fledging stage has been reported when the young are anywhere from 30 to 60 days old. The young continue to be tended to until the next breeding season, at which time they are chased off by their parents.

==Decline==
While it remains common in parts of its historic range, and approx. 26 000 individuals remain, it began a sudden population decline from around 1980 and is now classified as vulnerable.

In the last two decades, the Blue Crane has largely disappeared from the Eastern Cape, Lesotho, and Swaziland. The population in the northern Free State, Limpopo, Gauteng, Mpumalanga and North West Province has declined by up to 90%. The majority of the remaining population is in eastern and southern South Africa, with a small and separate population in the Etosha Pan of northern Namibia. Occasionally, isolated breeding pairs are found in five neighbouring countries.

The primary causes of the sudden decline of the Blue Crane are human population growth, the conversion of grasslands into commercial tree plantations, and poisoning: deliberate (to protect crops) or accidental (baits intended for other species, and as a side-effect of crop dusting).

The South African government has stepped up legal protection for the Blue Crane. Other conservation measures are focusing on research, habitat management, education, and recruiting the help of private landowners.

==Cultural references==
The Blue Crane is a bird very special to the amaXhosa, who call it indwe. When a man distinguished himself by deeds of valour, or any form of meritorious conduct, he was often decorated by a chief by being presented with the feathers of this bird. After a battle, the chief would organise a ceremony called ukundzabela  a ceremony for the heroes, at which feathers would be presented. Men so honoured  they wore the feathers sticking out of their hair  were known as men of ugaba (trouble)  the implication being that if trouble arose, these men would reinstate peace and order.

The Blue Crane is one of the species to which the Agreement on the Conservation of African-Eurasian Migratory Waterbirds (AEWA) applies.

== Media ==

File:Anthropoides_paradisea1.ogg|Anthropoides paradisea No. 1
File:Anthropoides_paradisea2.ogg|Anthropoides paradisea No. 2
File:Anthropoides_paradisea3.ogg|Anthropoides paradisea No. 3
File:Anthropoides paradiseus -Birmingham Nature Centre, Cannon Hill Park, England -head-8a.jpg|Close up of head

==References==

== External links ==

*BirdLife Species Factsheet
*Species text for Blue Crane in The Atlas of Southern African Birds
*International Crane Foundation's Blue Crane page
*Blue Crane videos, photos & sounds on the Internet Bird Collection
*Blue Crane (Anthropoides paradises) from Cranes of the World by Paul Johnsgard
*Are traditional healers contributing to the decline of Blue Cranes in Namibia?

Crane, Blue



[[Babrak Karmal]]

Babrak Karmal (, born Sultan Hussein; 6 January 1929  1 or 3 December 1996) was an Afghan politician and statesman during the Cold War. Karmal was born in Kamari and educated at Kabul University. When the People's Democratic Party of Afghanistan (PDPA) was formed, Karmal became one of its leading members, having been introduced to Marxism by Mir Akbar Khyber during his imprisonment for activities deemed too radical by the government. He eventually became the leader of the Parcham faction. When the PDPA split in 1967, the Parcham-faction established a Parcham PDPA, while their ideological nemeses, the Khalqs, established a Khalqist PDPA. Under Karmal's leadership, the Parchamite PDPA participated in Mohammad Daoud Khan's rise to power, and his subsequent regime. While relations were good at the beginning, Daoud began a major purge of leftist influence in the mid-1970s. This in turn led to the reformation of the PDPA in 1977. The PDPA took power in the 1978 Saur Revolution.

Karmal was appointed Deputy Chairman of the Revolutionary Council, synonymous with vice head of state, in the communist government. The Parchamite faction found itself under significant pressure by the Khalqists soon after taking power. In June 1978, a PDPA Central Committee meeting voted in favor of giving the Khalqist faction exclusive control over PDPA policy. This decision was followed by a failed Parchamite coup, after which Hafizullah Amin, a Khalqist, initiated a purge against the Parchamites. Karmal survived this purge but was exiled to Prague. Karmal remained in exile until December 1979, when the Soviet Union intervened in Afghanistan (with the consent of the Afghan government) to stabilize the country.

Karmal was promoted to Chairman of the Revolutionary Council and Chairman of the Council of Ministers on December 27, 1979. He remained in office until 1981, when he was succeeded by Sultan Ali Keshtmand. Throughout his term, Karmal worked to establish a support base for the PDPA by introducing several reforms. Among these were the Fundamental Principles of the Democratic Republic of Afghanistan, introducing a general amnesty for those people imprisoned during Nur Mohammad Taraki's and Amin's rule. He also replaced the Khalqist flag with a more traditional one. These policies failed to increase the PDPA's legitimacy in the eyes of the Afghan people.

These policy failures, and the stalemate that ensued after the Soviet intervention, led the Soviet leadership to become highly critical of Karmal's leadership. Under Mikhail Gorbachev, the Soviet Union deposed Karmal and replaced him with Mohammad Najibullah. Following his loss of power, he was again exiled, this time to Moscow. He was allowed to return to Afghanistan in 1991 by the Najibullah government. Back in Afghanistan he became an associate of Abdul Rashid Dostum, and helped remove the Najibullah government from power Not long after, in 1996, Karmal died from liver cancer.

==Early life and career==
Karmal was born Sultan Hussein on January 6, 1929, the second of five children. His father was Muhammad Hussein Hashem, a Major General in the Afghan Army and former governor of the province of Paktia. His family was one of the wealthier families in Kabul.

Karmal was born in Kamari, a village close to Kabul. He attended Nejat High School, a German-speaking school, graduated in 1948, and applied to enter the College of Law and Political Science of Kabul University. Karmal's application was turned down initially because of his Marxist student union activities. He studied at the College of Law and Political Science at Kabul University from 1951 to 1953. In 1953 Karmal was arrested for continuation of the same activities, but was released three years later in 1956 in an amnesty by Muhammad Daoud Khan. In 1957, Karmal found work as an English and German translator, before quitting and leaving for military training. Karmal eventually graduated from the College of Law and Political Science in 1960, and in 1961, he began working in the Compilation and Translation Department of the Ministry of Education. From 1961 to 1963 he worked in the Ministry of Planning.

===Communist politics===
Imprisoned from 1953 to 1956, Karmal befriended fellow inmate Mir Akbar Khyber, who introduced Karmal to Marxism. Karmal changed his name from Sultan Hussein to Babrak Karmal, which means "Comrade of the Workers'" in Pashtun, to disassociate himself from his bourgeoisie background. When he was released from prison, he continued his activities in the student union, and began to promote Marxism. Karmal spent the rest of the 1950s and the early 1960s becoming involved with Marxist organizations, of which there were at least four in Afghanistan at the time; two of the four were established by Karmal. When the 1964 Afghan Provisional Constitution, which legalised the establishment of new political entities, was introduced several prominent Marxists agreed to establish a communist political party. The People's Democratic Party of Afghanistan (PDPA, the Communist Party) was established in January 1965 in Nur Muhammad Taraki's home. Factionalism within the PDPA quickly became a problem; the party split into the Khalq led by Taraki alongside Hafizullah Amin, and the Parcham led by Karmal.

During the 1965 parliamentary election Karmal was one of four PDPA members elected to the lower house of parliament; the three others were Anahita Ratebzad, Nur Ahmed Nur and Fezanul Haq Fezan. No Khalqists were elected; however, Amin was 50 votes short of being elected. The Parchamite victory may be explained by the simple fact that Karmal could contribute financially to the PDPA electoral campaign. Karmal became a leading figure within the student movement in the 1960s, electing Mohammad Hashim Maiwandwal as Prime Minister after a student demonstration (called for by Karmal) concluded with three deaths under the former leadership.

In 1967, the PDPA unofficially split into two formal parties, one Khalqist and one Parchamist. The dissolution of the PDPA was initiated by the closing down of the Khalqist newspaper, Khalq. Karmal criticised the Khalq for being too communist, and believed that its leadership should have hidden its Marxist orientation instead of promoting it. According to the official version of events, the majority of the PDPA Central Committee rejected Karmal's criticism. The vote was a close one, and it is reported that Taraki expanded the Central Committee to win the vote; this plan resulted in eight of the new members becoming politically unaligned with and one switching to the Parchamite side. Karmal and half the PDPA Central Committee left the PDPA to establish a Parchamite-led PDPA. Officially the split was caused by ideological differences, but the party may have divided between the different leadership styles and plans of Taraki versus Karmal. Taraki wanted to model the party after Leninist norms while Karmal wanted to establish a democratic front. Other differences were socioeconomic. The majority of Khalqists came from rural areas; hence they were poorer, and were of Pashtun origin. The Parchamites were urban, richer, and spoke Dari more often than not. The Khalqists accused the Parchamites of having a connection with the monarchy, and because of it, referred to the Parchamite PDPA as the "Royal Communist Party". Both Karmal and Amin retained their seats in the lower house of parliament in the 1969 parliamentary election.

===The Daoud era===

Mohammed Daoud Khan, in collaboration with the Parchamite PDPA and radical military officers, overthrew the monarchy and instituted the Afghan Republic in 1973. After Daoud's seizure of power, an American embassy cable stated that the new government had established a Soviet-style Central Committee, in which Karmal and Mir Akbar Khyber were given leading positions. Most ministries were given to Parchamites; Hassan Sharq became Deputy Prime Minister, Major Faiz Mohammad became Minister of Internal Affairs and Nematullah Pazhwak became Minister of Education. The Parchamites took control over the ministries of finance, agriculture, communications and border affairs. The new government quickly suppressed the opposition, and secured their power base. At first, the National Front government between Daoud and the Parchamites seemed to work. By 1975, Daoud had strengthened his position by enhancing the executive, legislative and judicial powers of the Presidency. To the dismay of the Parchamites, all parties other than the National Revolutionary Party (NRP, established by Daoud) were made illegal.

Shortly after the ban on opposition to the NRP, Daoud began a massive purge of Parchamites in government. Mohammad lost his position as interior minister, Abdul Qadir Dagarwal was demoted, and Karmal was put under government surveillance. To mitigate Daoud's suddenly anti-communist directives, the Soviet Union reestablished the PDPA; Taraki was elected its General Secretary and Karmal, Second Secretary. While the Saur Revolution (literally the April Revolution) was planned for August, the assassination of Khyber led to a chain of events which ended with the communists seizing power. Karmal, when taking power in 1979, accused Amin of ordering the assassination of Khyber.

===TarakiAmin rule===
Taraki was appointed Chairman of the Presidium of the Revolutionary Council and Chairman of the Council of Ministers, retaining his post as PDPA general secretary. Taraki initially formed a government which consisted of both Khalqists and Parchamites; Karmal became Deputy Chairman of the Revolutionary Council, while Amin became Minister of Foreign Affairs and Deputy Chairman of the Council of Ministers.Mohammad Aslam Watanjar became Deputy Chairman of the Council of Ministers. The two Parchamites Abdul Qadir Dagarwal and Mohammad Rafi, became Minister of Defence and Minister of Public Works, respectively. The appointment of Amin, Karmal and Watanjar led to splits within the Council of Ministers: the Khalqists answered to Amin; Karmel led the civilian Parchamites; and the military officers (who were Parchamites) were answerable to Watanjar (a Khalqist). The first conflict arose when the Khalqists wanted to give PDPA Central Committee membership to military officers who had participated in the Saur Revolution; Karmal opposed such a move but was overruled. A PDPA Politburo meeting voted in favour of giving Central Committee membership to the officers.

On June 27, three months after the Saur Revolution, Amin outmaneuvered the Parchamites at a Central Committee meeting, giving the Khalqists exclusive right over formulating and deciding policy. A purge against the Parchamites was initiated by Amin and supported by Taraki on July 1, 1979. Karmal, fearing for his safety, went into hiding in one of his Soviet friends' homes. Karmal tried to contact Alexander Puzanov, the Soviet ambassador to Afghanistan, to talk about the situation. Puzanov refused, and revealed Karmal's location to Amin. It should be noted that the Soviets probably saved Karmal's life by sending him to the Socialist Republic of Czechoslovakia. In exile, Karmal established a network with the remaining Parchamites in government. A coup to overthrow Amin was planned for September 4, 1979. Its leading members in Afghanistan were Qadir and the Army Chief of Staff General Shahpur Ahmedzai. The coup was planned for the Festival of Eid, in anticipation of relaxed military vigilance. The conspiracy failed when the Afghan ambassador to India told the Afghan leadership about the plan. Another purge was initiated, and Parchamite ambassadors were recalled. Few returned to Afghanistan; Karmal and Mohammad Najibullah stayed in their respective countries.

Amin was informed of the Soviet decision to intervene in Afghanistan and was initially supportive, but was assassinated. Under the command of the Soviets, Karmal ascended to power. On December 27, 1979 Radio Kabul broadcast Karmal's pre-recorded speech to the Afghan people, saying: "Today the torture machine of Amin has been smashed, his accomplices  the primitive executioners, usurpers and murderers of tens of thousand of our fellow countrymen  fathers, mothers, sisters, brothers, sons and daughters, children and old people ..." Karmal was not in Kabul when the speech was broadcast; he was in Bagram, protected by the KGB.

That evening Yuri Andropov, the Chairman of the KGB, congratulated Karmal on his rise to the Chairmanship of the Presidium of the Revolutionary Council, some time before Karmal received an official appointment. Karmal returned to Kabul on December 28. He travelled alongside a Soviet military column. For the next few days Karmal lived in a villa on the outskirts of Kabul under the protection of the KGB. On January 1, 1980 Leonid Brezhnev, the General Secretary of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union, and Alexei Kosygin, the Soviet Chairman of the Council of Ministers, congratulated Karmal on his "election" as leader.

==Presidency==

===Domestic policies===

====The "Fundamental Principles" and amnesty====
When he came to power, Karmal promised an end to executions, the establishment of democratic institutions and free elections, the creation of a constitution, and legalization of alternative political parties. Prisoners incarcerated under the two previous governments would be freed in a general amnesty. He promised the creation of a coalition government which would not espouse socialism. At the same time, he told the Afghan people that he had negotiated with the Soviet Union to give economic, military and political assistance. The mistrust most Afghans felt towards the government was a problem for Karmal. Many still remembered he had said he would protect private capital in 1978a promise later proven to be a lie.

Karmal's three most important promises were the general amnesty of prisoners, the promulgation of the Fundamental Principles of the Democratic Republic of Afghanistan and the adoption of a new flag containing the traditional black, red and green (the flag of Taraki and Amin was red). His government granted concessions to religious leaders and the restoration of confiscated property. Some property, which was confiscated during earlier land reforms, was also partially restored. All these measures, with the exception of the general amnesty of prisoners, were introduced gradually. Of 2,700 prisoners, 2,600 were released from prison; 600 of these were Parchamites. The general amnesty was greatly publicized by the government. While the event was hailed with enthusiasm by some, many others greeted the event with disdain, since their loved ones or associates had died during earlier purges. Amin had planned to introduce a general amnesty on January 1, 1980, to coincide with the PDPA's sixteenth anniversary.

Work on the Fundamental Principles had started under Amin: it guaranteed democratic rights such as freedom of speech, the right to security and life, the right to peaceful association, the right to demonstrate and the right that "no one would be accused of crime but in accord with the provisions of law" and that the accused had the right to a fair trial. The Fundamental Principles envisaged a democratic state led by the PDPA, the only party then permitted by law. The Revolutionary Council, the organ of supreme power, would convene twice every year. The Revolutionary Council in turn elected a Presidium which would take decisions on behalf of the Revolutionary Council when it was not in session. The Presidium consisted mostly of PDPA Politburo members. The state would safeguard three kinds of property: state, cooperative and private property. The Fundamental Principles said that the state had the right to change the Afghan economy from an economy where man was exploited to an economy were man was free. Another clause stated that the state had the right to take "families, both parents and children, under its supervision." While it looked democratic at the outset, the Fundamental Principles was based on contradictions.

The Fundamental Principles led to the establishment of two important state organs: the Special Revolutionary Court, a specialized court for crimes against national security and territorial integrity, and the Institute for Legal and Scientific Research and Legislative Affairs, the supreme legislative organ of state, This body could amend and draft laws, and introduce regulations and decrees on behalf of the government. The introduction of more Soviet-style institutions led the Afghan people to distrust the communist government even more.

====Separation of power: KhalqParcham====
With Karmal's ascension to power, Parchamites began to "settle old scores". Revolutionary Troikas were created to arrest, sentence and execute people. Amin's guard were the first victims of the terror which ensued. Those commanders who had stayed loyal to Amin were arrested, filling the prisons. The Soviets protested, and Karmal replied, "As long as you keep my hands bound and do not let me deal with the Khalq faction there will be no unity in the PDPA and the government cannot become strong ... They tortured and killed us. They still hate us! They are the enemies of the party ..." Amin's daughter, along with her baby, was imprisoned for twelve years, until Mohammad Najibullah, then leader of the PDPA, released her. When Karmal took power, leading posts in the Party and Government bureaucracy were taken over by Parchamites. The Khalq faction was removed from power, and only technocrats, opportunists and individuals which the Soviets trusted would be appointed to the higher echelons of government. Khalqists remained in control of the Ministry of Interior, but Parchamites were given control over KHAD and the secret police. The Parchamites and the Khalqists controlled an equal share of the military. Two out of Karmal's three Council of Ministers deputy chairmen were Khalqists. Khalqists controlled the Ministry of Communications and the interior ministry. Parchamites, on the other hand, controlled the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and the Ministry of Defence. In addition to the changes in government, the Parchamites held clear majority in the PDPA Central Committee. Only one Khalqi, Saleh Mohammad Zeary, was a member of the PDPA Secretariat during Karmal's rule.

Over March 14 and 15, 1982 the PDPA held a party conference at the Kabul Polytechnic Institute instead of a party congress, since a party congress would have given the Khalq faction a majority and could have led to a Khalqist takeover of the PDPA. The rules of holding a party conference were different, and the Parchamites had a three-fifths majority. This infuriated several Khalqists; the threat of expulsion did not lessen their anger. The conference was not successful, but it was portrayed as such by the official media. The conference broke up after one and a half days of a 3-day long program, because of the inter-party struggle for power between the Khalqists and the Parchamites. A "program of action" was introduced, and party rules were given minor changes. As an explanation of the low party membership, the official media also made it seem hard to become a member of the party.

====PDPA base====

 Karmal cabinet (19791981) 
 Office Incumbent Took office Left office 
 Deputy Chairman of the Council of Ministers Assadullah Sarwari 28 December 1979 11 June 1981 
 Sultan Ali Keshtmand 28 December 1979 11 June 1981 
 Minister of Planning 28 December 1979 11 June 1981 
 Minister of National Defence Muhammad Rafie 28 December 1979 11 June 1981 
 Minister of Interior Sayed Mohammad Gulabzoy 28 December 1979 11 June 1981 
 Minister of Foreign Affairs Shah Muhammad Dost 28 December 1979 11 June 1981 
 Minister of Education Anahita Ratebzad 28 December 1979 11 June 1981 
 Minister of Finance Abdul Wakil 28 December 1979 11 June 1981 
 Minister of Transport Sherjan Mazduryar 28 December 1979 11 June 1981 
 Minister of Border and Tribes Faiz Muhammad 28 December 1979 14 September 1980 
 Minister of Trade Muhammad Khan Jalalar 28 December 1979 11 June 1981 
 Minister of Communications Muhammad Aslam Watanjar 10 January 1980 11 June 1981 
 Minister of Mines, Industries Muhammad Isma'il Danesh 10 January 1980 11 June 1981 
 Minister of Water, Power Raz Muhammad Paktin 10 January 1980 11 June 1981 
 Minister of Higher Education Guldad 10 January 1980 11 June 1981 
 Minister of Health Nazar Muhammad 10 January 1980 11 June 1981 
 Minister of Agriculture, Land Reform Fazl Rahim Mohmand 10 January 1980 11 June 1981 

When Karmal took power, he began expanding the support base of the PDPA. Karmal tried to persuade certain groups, which had been referred to class enemies of the revolution during Taraki and Amin's rule, to support the PDPA. Karmal appointed several non-communists to top positions. Between March and May 1980, 78 out of the 191 people appointed to government posts were not members of the PDPA. Karmal reintroduced the old Afghan custom of having an Islamic invocation every time the government issued a proclamation. In his first live speech to the Afghan people, Karmal called for the establishment of the National Fatherland Front (NFF); the NFF's founding congress was held in June 1981. Unfortunately for Karmal, his policies did not lead to a notable increase in support for his regime, and it did not help Karmal that most Afghans saw the Soviet intervention as an invasion.

By 1981, the government gave up on political solutions to the conflict. At the fifth PDPA Central Committee plenum in June, Karmal resigned from his Council of Ministers chairmanship and was replaced by Sultan Ali Keshtmand, while Nur Ahmad Nur was given a bigger role in the Revolutionary Council. This was seen as "base broadening". The previous weight given to non-PDPA members in top positions ceased to be an important matter in the media by June 1981. This was significant, considering that up to five members of the Revolutionary Council were non-PDPA members. By the end of 1981, the previous contenders, who had been heavily presented in the media, were all gone; two were given ambassadorships, two ceased to be active in politics, and one continued as an advisor to the government. The other three changed sides, and began to work for the opposition.

The national policy of reconciliation continued: in January 1984 the land reform introduced by Taraki and Amin was drastically modified, the limits of landholdings were increased to win the support of middle class peasants, the literacy programme was continued, and concessions to women were made. In 1985 the Loya Jirga was reconvened. The 1985 Loya Jirga was followed by a tribal jirga in September. In 1986 Abdul Rahim Hatef, a non-PDPA member, was elected to the NFF chairmanship. During the 198586 elections it was said that 60 percent of the elected officials were non-PDPA members. By the end of Karmal's rule, several non-PDPA members had high-level government positions.

====Civil war and military====

+Troop levels Soldiers As of 
 25,000 1980 
 2530,000 1981 
 2530,000 1982 
 40,000 1983 
 40,000 1984 
 3540,000 1985 

In March 1979, the military budget was 6.4 million US$, which was 8.3 percent of the government budget, but only 2.2 of gross national product. After the Soviet intervention, the defence budget increased to 208 million US$ in 1980, and 325 million US$ by 1981. In 1982 it was reported that the government spent around 22 percent of total expenditure.

When the political solution failed (see "PDPA base" section), the Afghan government and the Soviet military decided to solve the conflict militarily. The change from a political to a military solution did not come suddenly. It began in January 1981, as Karmal doubled wages for military personnel, issued several promotions, and decorated one general and thirteen colonels. The draft age was lowered, the obligatory length of arms duty was extended and the age for reservists was increased to thirty-five years of age. In June 1981, Assadullah Sarwari lost his seat in the PDPA Politburo, replaced by Mohammad Aslam Watanjar, a former tank commander and Minister of Communications, Major General Mohammad Rafi was madeMinister of Defence and Mohammad Najibullah appointed KHAD Chairman.

These measures were introduced due to the collapse of the army during the Soviet intervention. Before the invasion the army could field 100,000 troops, after the invasion only 25,000. Desertions were pandemic, and the recruitment campaigns for young people often drove them to the opposition. To better organize the military, seven military zones were established, each with its own Defence Council. The Defence Councils were established at the national, provincial and district level to empower the local PDPA. It is estimated that the Afghan government spent as much as 40 percent of government revenue on defense.

====Economy====

 Indicators 1980 1981 1982 1986 
 Expenditure Total (millions of afghanis) 31,692 40,751 42,112 88,700 
 Ordinary (in percent) 62 66 69 74 
 Development (in percent) 38 34 31 26 
 Sources of Finances Domestic revenue: excluding gas (in percent) 50 40 37 31 
 Sales of natural gas (in percent) 33 34 34 17 
 Foreign aid (in percent) 28 26 28 29 
 Rentier income (in percent) 61 59 62 48 
 Domestic borrowing (in percent) 11 1 0 23 

During the civil war and the ensuing Soviet war in Afghanistan, most of the country's infrastructure was destroyed. Normal patterns of economic activity were disrupted. The Gross national product (GNP) fell substantially during Karmal's rule because of the conflict; trade and transport was disrupted with loss of labor and capital. In 1981 the Afghan GDP stood at 154.3 billion Afghan afghanis, a drop from 159.7 billion in 1978. GNP per capita decreased from 7,370 in 1978 to 6,852 in 1981. The dominant form of economic activity was in the agricultural sector. Agriculture accounted for 63 percent of gross domestic product (GDP) in 1981; 56 percent of the labor force was working in agriculture in 1982. Industry accounted for 21 percent of GDP in 1982, and employed 10 percent of the labor force. All industrial enterprises were government-owned. The service sector, the smallest of the three, accounted for 10 percent of GDP in 1981, and employed an estimated one-third of the labour force. The balance of payments, which had grown in the pre-communist administration of Muhammad Daoud Khan, decreased, turning negative by 1982 at 70.3 million $US. The only economic activity which grew substantially during Karmal's rule was export and import. 

===Foreign policy===
Karmal observed in the spring of 1983 that without Soviet intervention, "It is unknown what the destiny of the Afghan Revolution would be ... We are realists and we clearly realize that in store for us yet lie trials and deprivations, losses and difficulties." Two weeks before this statement Sultan Ali Keshtmand, the Chairman of the Council of Ministers, lamented the fact that half the schools and three-quarters of communications had been destroyed since 1979. The Soviet Union rejected several Western-made peace plans, such as the Carrington Plan, since they did not take into consideration the PDPA government. Most Western peace plans had been made in collaboration with the Afghan opposition forces. At the 26th Congress of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union (CPSU) Leonid Brezhnev, the General Secretary of the CPSU Central Committee, stated;

The stance of the Pakistani government was clear, demanding complete Soviet withdrawal from Afghanistan and the establishment of a non-PDPA government. Karmal, summarizing his discussions with Iran and Pakistan, said "Iran and Pakistan have so far not opted for concrete and constructive positions." During Karmal's rule AfghanPakistani relations remained hostile; the Soviet intervention in Afghanistan was the catalyst for the hostile relationship. The increasing numbers of Afghan refugees in Pakistan challenged the PDPA's legitimacy to rule.

The Soviet Union threatened in 1985 that it would support the Baloch separatist movement in Pakistan if the Pakistani government continued to aid the mujahideen in Afghanistan. Karmal, problematically for the Soviets, did not want a Soviet withdrawal, and he hampered attempts to improve relations with Pakistan since the Pakistanti government had refused to recognise the PDPA government.

===Fall from power and succession===
Mikhail Gorbachev, then General Secretary of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union, said, "The main reason that there has been no national consolidation so far is that Comrade Karmal is hoping to continue sitting in Kabul with our help." Karmal's position became less secure when the Soviet leadership began blaming him for the failures in Afghanistan. Gorbachev, worried over the situation, told the Soviet Politburo "If we don't change approaches evacuate Afghanistan, we will be fighting there for another 20 or 30 years." It is not clear when the Soviet leadership began to campaign for Karmal's dismissal, but Andrei Gromyko discussed the possibility of Karmal's resignation with Javier Prez de Cullar, the Secretary-General of the United Nations in 1982. While it was Gorbachev who would dismiss Karmal, there may have been a consensus within the Soviet leadership in 1983 that Karmal should resign. Gorbachev's own plan was to replace Karmal with Mohammad Najibullah, who had joined the PDPA at its creation. Najibullah was thought highly of by Yuri Andropov, Boris Ponomarev and Dmitriy Ustinov, and negotiations for his succession may have started in 1983. Najibullah was not the Soviet leadership's only choice for Karmal's succession; a GRU report noted that the majority of the PDPA leadership would support Assadullah Sarwari's ascension to leadership. According to the GRU, Sarwari was a better candidate as he could balance between the Pashtuns, Tajiks and Uzbeks; Najibullah was a Pashtun nationalist. Another viable candidate was Abdul Qadir Dagarwal, who had been a participant in the Saur Revolution.

Najibullah was appointed to the PDPA Secretariat in November 1985. During Karmal's March 1986 visit to the Soviet Union, the Soviets tried to persuade Karmal that he was too ill to govern, and that he should resign. This backfired, as a Soviet doctor attending to Karmal told him he was in good health. Karmal asked to return home to Kabul, and said that he understood and would listen to the Soviet recommendations. Before leaving, Karmal promised he would step down as PDPA General Secretary. The Soviets did not trust him and sent Vladimir Kryuchkov, the head of intelligence in the KGB, into Afghanistan. At a meeting in Kabul, Karmal confessed his undying love for the Soviet Union, comparing his ardor to his Muslim faith. Kryuchkov, concluding that he could not persuade Karmal to resign, left the meeting. After Kryuchkov left the room, the Afghan defence minister and the state security minister visited Karmal's office, telling him that he had to resign from one of his posts. Understanding that his Soviet support had been eliminated, Karmal resigned from the office of the General Secretary at the 18th PDPA Central Committee plenum. He was succeeded in his post by Najibullah.

Karmal still had support within the party, and used his base to curb Najibullah's powers. He began spreading rumors that he would be reappointed General Secretary. Najibullah's power base was in the KHAD, the Afghan equivalent to the KGB, and not the party. Considering the fact that the Soviet Union had supported Karmal for over six years, the Soviet leadership wanted to ease him out of power gradually. Yuli Vorontsov, the Soviet ambassador to Afghanistan, told Najibullah to begin undermining Karmal's power slowly. Najibullah complained to the Soviet leadership that Karmal used most of his spare time looking for errors and "speaking against the National Reconciliation ". At a meeting of the Soviet Politburo on November 13, 1986 it was decided that Najibullah should remove Karmal; this motion was supported by Gromyko, Vorontsov, Eduard Shevardnadze, Anatoly Dobrynin and Viktor Chebrikov. A PDPA meeting in November relieved Karmal of his Revolutionary Council chairmanship, and exiled him to Moscow where he was given a state-owned apartment and a dacha. Karmal was succeeded as Revolutionary Council chairman by Haji Mohammad Chamkani, who was not a member of the PDPA.

==Later life and death==
For unknown reasons, Karmal was invited back to Kabul by Najibullah, and "for equally obscure reasons Karmal accepted." If Najibullah's plan was to strengthen his position within the Homeland Watan Party (the renamed PDPA) by appeasing the pro-Karmal Parchamites, he failed. Karmal's apartment became a center for opposition to Najibullah's government. When Najibullah was toppled in 1992, Karmal became the most powerful politician in Kabul through leadership of the Parcham. However, his negotiations with the rebels collapsed quickly, and on April 16, 1992 the rebels, led by Gulbuddin Hekmatyar, took Kabul. After the fall of Najibullah's government, Karmal was based in Hairatan. There, it is alleged, Karmal used most of his time either trying to establish a new party, or advising people to join the National Islamic Movement (NIM). Abdul Rashid Dostum, the leader of NIM, was a supporter of Karmal during his rule. It is unknown how much control Karmal had over Dostum, but there is little evidence that Karmal was in any commanding position. Karmal's influence over Dostum appeared indirect  some of his former associates supported Dostum. Those who spoke with Karmal during this period noted his lack of interest in politics. In early December 1996, Karmal died in Moscow's Central Clinical Hospital from liver cancer. The date of his death was reported by some sources as December 1 and by others as December 3. The Taliban summed up his rule as follows:
:" committed all kinds of crimes during his illegitimate rule ... God inflicted on him various kinds of hardship and pain. Eventually he died of cancer in a hospital belonging to his paymasters, the Russians." 

==Notes==

==References==

==Bibliography==

* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 

==External links==

* Biography of President Babrak Karmal

 
 

 
 

 
 



[[Buddhist philosophy]]

Buddhist philosophy is the elaboration and explanation of the delivered teachings of the Buddha as found in the Tripitaka and Agama. Its main concern is with explicating the dharmas constituting reality. A recurrent theme is the reification of concepts, and the subsequent return to the Buddhist middle way. David Kalupahana, Mulamadhyamakakarika of Nagarjuna. Motilal Banarsidass, 2006, page 1. 

Early Buddhism avoided speculative thought on metaphysics, phenomenology, ethics, and epistemology, Gunnar Skirbekk, Nils Gilje, A history of Western thought: from ancient Greece to the twentieth century. 7th edition published by Routledge, 2001, page 25. but was based instead on empirical evidence gained by the sense organs (ayatana). David Kalupahana, Causality: The Central Philosophy of Buddhism. The University Press of Hawaii, 1975, page 70. 

Nevertheless, Buddhist scholars have addressed ontological and metaphysical issues subsequently. Particular points of Buddhist philosophy have often been the subject of disputes between different schools of Buddhism. These elaborations and disputes gave rise to various schools in early Buddhism of Abhidhamma, and to the Mahayana traditions and schools of the prajnaparamita, Madhyamaka, buddha-nature and Yogacara.

==Indian background==
The historical Buddha lived during a time of spiritual and philosophical revival in Northern India when the overly ritualistic practices of the vedas came under rational scrutiny. 

As well as the Buddha's own teachings, new ethical and spiritual philosophies such as those of Mahavira became established during this period when alternatives to the mainstream religion arose in an atmosphere of freethought and renewed vitality in spiritual endeavour. This general cultural movement is today known as the Sramanic tradition and the epoch of new thought as the axial era. 

These heterodox groups held widely divergent opinions but were united by a critical attitude towards the established religion whose explanations they found unsatisfactory and whose animal sacrifices increasingly distasteful and irrelevant. In Greece, China and India there was a return to fundamental questions and a new interest in the question of how humans should live.

==Life and teachings of the Buddha==

===Biography===
According to the traditional accounts, Gautama, the future Buddha, born into a Vedic Kshatriya family, was a prince who grew up in an environment of luxury and opulence. He became convinced that sense-pleasures and wealth did not provide the satisfaction that human beings longed for deep within. He abandoned worldly life to live as a mendicant. He studied under a number of teachers, developing his insight into the problem of suffering. 

After his awakening he regarded himself as a physician rather than a philosopher. Whereas philosophers merely had views about things, he taught the Noble Eightfold Path which liberates from suffering.

===Philosophy===
The Buddha discouraged his followers from indulging in intellectual disputation for its own sake, which is fruitless, and distracting from true awakening. Nevertheless, the delivered sayings of the Buddha contain a philosophical component, in its teachings on the working of the mind, and its criticisms of the philosophies of his contemporaries.

According to the scriptures, during his lifetime the Buddha remained silent when asked several metaphysical questions. These regarded issues such as whether the universe is eternal or non-eternal (or whether it is finite or infinite), the unity or separation of the body and the self, the complete inexistence of a person after Nirvana and death, and others.

====Emphasis on awakening====
One explanation for this silence is that such questions distract from activity that is practical to realizing enlightenment MN 72 (Thanissaro, 1997). For further discussion of the context in which these statements was made, see Thanissaro (2004). and bring about the danger of substituting the experience of liberation by conceptual understanding of the doctrine or by religious faith.

====Attachments to the skandhas====
Another explanation is that both affirmative and negative positions regarding these questions are based on attachment to and misunderstanding of the aggregates and senses. That is, when one sees these things for what they are, the idea of forming positions on such metaphysical questions simply does not occur.

====Emptiness====
Another closely related explanation is that reality is devoid of sensory mediation and conception, or empty, and therefore language itself is a priori inadequate without direct experience. Gadjin M. Nagao, Madhyamika and Yogachara. Leslie S. Kawamura, translator, SUNY Press, Albany 1991, pp. 4041. 

Thus, the Buddha's silence does not indicate misology or disdain for philosophy. Rather, it indicates that he viewed the answers to these questions as not understandable by the unenlightened. Dependent arising provides a framework for analysis of reality that is not based on metaphysical assumptions regarding existence or non-existence, but instead on imagining direct cognition of phenomena as they are presented to the mind. This informs and supports the Buddhist approach to liberation from adventitious distortion and engaging in the Noble Eightfold Path.

The Buddha of the earliest Buddhists texts describes Dharma (in the sense of "truth") as "beyond reasoning" or "transcending logic", in the sense that reasoning is a subjectively introduced aspect of the way unenlightened humans perceive things, and the conceptual framework which underpins their cognitive process, rather than a feature of things as they really are. Going "beyond reasoning" means in this context penetrating the nature of reasoning from the inside, and removing the causes for experiencing any future stress as a result of it, rather than functioning outside of the system as a whole. Sue Hamilton, Early Buddhism. Routledge, 2000, page 135. 

==Early Buddhism==

===Basic teachings===
Certain basic teachings appear in many places throughout the early texts, so most scholars conclude that the Buddha must at least have taught these teachings: Mitchell, Buddhism, Oxford University Press, 2002, page 34 and table of contents 
* Three marks of existence
* Five aggregates
* Dependent arising
* Karma and rebirth
* The four noble truths
* The Noble Eightfold Path
* Nirvana

According to these scholars, there was something they variously call "earliest Buddhism", "original Buddhism" or "pre-canonical Buddhism". 

Some scholars disagree, and have proposed other theories. Skorupski, Buddhist Forum, vol I, Heritage, Delhi/SOAS, London, 1990, page 5; Journal of the International Association of Buddhist Studies, vol 21 (1998), part 1, pages 4, 11
 According to some scholars, the philosophical outlook of earliest Buddhism was primarily negative, in the sense that it focused on what doctrines to reject more than on what doctrines to accept. Only knowledge that is useful in achieving enlightenment is valued. According to this theory, the cycle of philosophical upheavals that in part drove the diversification of Buddhism into its many schools and sects only began once Buddhists began attempting to make explicit the implicit philosophy of the Buddha and the early suttas. 

Other scholars reject this theory. After the death of the Buddha, attempts were made to gather his teachings and transmit them in a commonly agreed form, first orally, then also in writing (the Tripiaka).

====Dukkha====
Dukkha, often translated as suffering, is the inherent unsatisfactoriness of life. This unsatisfactoriness drives our yearning for a better way of life, yet keeps us imprisoned in wordly existence and rebirth.

====Dependent origination====

The working of the rising and ceasing of suffering is explained by Pratitya-samutpada, dependent origination. It states that events are not predetermined, nor are they random. It rejects notions of direct causation, which are necessarily undergirded by a substantialist metaphysics. Instead, it posits the arising of events under certain conditions which are inextricable, such that the processes in question at no time, are considered to be entities.

Dependent origination posits that certain specific events, concepts, or realities are always dependent on other specific things. Craving, for example, is always dependent on, and caused by, emotion. Emotion is always dependent on contact with our surroundings. This chain of causation purports to show that the cessation of decay, death, and sorrow is indirectly dependent on the cessation of craving.

This concept leaves no room for the existence of everlasting, absolute entities. The world must be thought of in procedural terms, not in terms of things or substances. Gunnar Skirbekk, Nils Gilje, A history of Western thought: from ancient Greece to the twentieth century. 7th edition published by Routledge, 2001, page 26. Likewise,

====Anatta====
The Buddha asserted the non inherently existent concept of the ego, in opposition to the Upanishadic concept of an unchanging ultimate self. The Buddha held that attachment to the appearance of a permanent self in this world of change is the cause of suffering, and the main obstacle to liberation. The apparent ego is merely the result of identification with the temporary aggregates, the components of the individual human being's body and consciousness at any given moment in time.

===Ethics===

====Eightfold Path====
Although there are many ethical tenets in Buddhism that differ depending on whether one is a monk or a layman, and depending on individual schools, the Buddhist system of ethics can be summed up in the eightfold path:

The purpose of living an ethical life is to escape the suffering inherent in samsara. Skillful actions condition the mind in a positive way and lead to future happiness, while the opposite is true for unskillful actions. Ethical discipline also provides the mental stability and freedom to embark upon mental cultivation via meditation.

The part of the Noble Eightfold path that covers morality/ethics is right speech, right action and right livelihood. The other parts cover concentration and wisdom, with wisdom being covered by right view and right intention and the remaining three belonging to concentration.

====Precepts====
While the precepts for monks and nuns differ somewhat depending on which tradition one has ordained in (Tibetan, Thai Theravadan, etc.), the precepts for laymen and laywomen followers of the Buddha are the same. 

There are the five precepts that all followers of the Buddha must observe if they hope to be reborn as a human being. Eight precepts are practiced by anagarikas and lay-followers staying in temples. Ten precepts are followed by bhikkhus or other serious practitioners.

1.) Refrain from killing living things.

2.) Refrain from stealing.

3.) Refrain from unchastity (sensuality, sexuality, lust).

4.) Refrain from lying.

5.) Refrain from taking intoxicants.

6.) Refrain from taking food at inappropriate times (after noon).

7.) Refrain from singing, dancing, playing music or attending entertainment programs (performances).

8.) Refrain from wearing perfume, cosmetics andgarland(decorative accessories).

9.) Refrain from sitting on high chairs and sleeping on luxurious, soft beds.

10.) Refrain from accepting money.

===Textual authority===
Decisive in distinguishing Buddhism from what is commonly called Hinduism is the issue of epistemological justification. 

All schools of Indian logic recognize various sets of valid justifications for knowledge, or prama. Buddhism recognizes a set that is smaller than the others. For some schools of Hinduism and Buddhism the received textual tradition is an epistemological category equal to perception and inference (although this is not necessarily true for some other schools).

Thus, in the Hindu schools, if a claim was made that could not be substantiated by appeal to the textual canon, it would be considered as ridiculous as a claim that the sky was green and, conversely, a claim which could not be substantiated via conventional means might still be justified through textual reference, differentiating this from the epistemology of modern science. It must also be remembered that most Hindu schools do believe that logical inference and perception of the sense organs is the most effective means testing of a claim. The Nyaya school of Hinduism is one which highly believes in application of logic and reason more than canonical evidence.

==Early Buddhist schools==
The main early Buddhist philosophical schools are the Abhidharma schools, particularly Sarvstivda and Theravda.

===Sarvastivadin realism===
Early Buddhist philosophers and exegetes of the Sarvstivdins created a pluralist metaphysical and phenomenological system, in which all experiences of people, things and events can be broken down into smaller and smaller perceptual or perceptual-ontological units called "dharmas". 

Other schools incorporated some parts of this theory and criticized others. The Sautrntikas, another early school, and the Theravdins, now the only modern survivor of the early Buddhist schools, criticized the realist standpoint of the Sarvstivdins.

===Theravada===
Theravada promotes the concept of vibhajjavada (Pli, literally "Teaching of Analysis") to non-Buddhists. This doctrine says that insight must come from the aspirant's experience, critical investigation, and reasoning instead of by blind faith. As the Buddha said according to the canonical scriptures:

==Mahayana==
Mahayana often adopts a pragmatic concept of truth: Williams, Mahayana Buddhism, Routledge, 1989, p. 2 doctrines are regarded as conditionally "true" in the sense of being spiritually beneficial. In modern Chinese Buddhism, all doctrinal traditions are regarded as equally valid. Welch, Practice of Chinese Buddhism, Harvard, 1967, p. 395 

Main Mahayana philosophical schools and traditions include the prajnaparamita, Madhyamaka, Tathagatagarbha, Yogcra, Huayan, and Tiantai schools.

===Indian Mahayana===

====Prajnaparamita====
The Prajanaparamita-sutras emphasize the emptiness of the five skandhas. The Heart sutra, a text from the prajnaparamita-sutras, articulates this in the following saying in which the five skandhas are said to be "empty":

====Madhyamaka====

The Mahynist Ngrjuna, one of the most influential Buddhist thinkers, promoted classical Buddhist emphasis on phenomena and attacked Sarvstivda realism and Sautrntika nominalism in his magnum opus, The Fundamental Verses on the Middle Way (Mlamadhyamakakrik). Randall Collins, The Sociology of Philosophies: A Global Theory of Intellectual Change. Harvard University Press, 2000, pages 221-222. 

Nagarjuna asserted a direct connection between, even identity of, dependent origination, selflessness (anatta), and emptiness (nyat). He pointed out that implicit in the early Buddhist concept of dependent origination is the lack of any substantial being (anatta) underlying the participants in origination, so that they have no independent existence, a state identified as emptiness (nyat), or emptiness of a nature or essence (svabhva).

====Tathagatagarbha====

The tathgathagarbha sutras, in a departure from mainstream Buddhist language, insist that the potential for awakening is inherent to every sentient being. They marked a shift from a largely apophatic (negative) philosophical trend within Buddhism to a decidedly more cataphatic (positive) modus. 

Prior to the period of these scriptures, Mahyna metaphysics had been dominated by teachings on emptiness in the form of Madhyamaka philosophy. The language used by this approach is primarily negative, and the tathgatagarbha genre of sutras can be seen as an attempt to state orthodox Buddhist teachings of dependent origination using positive language instead, to prevent people from being turned away from Buddhism by a false impression of nihilism. 

In these sutras the perfection of the wisdom of not-self is stated to be the true self; the ultimate goal of the path is then characterized using a range of positive language that had been used previously in Indian philosophy by essentialist philosophers, but which was now transmuted into a new Buddhist vocabulary to describe a being who has successfully completed the Buddhist path. Sallie B. King (1997), The Doctrine of Buddha Nature is Impeccably Buddhist. In: Jamie Hubbard (ed.), Pruning the Bodhi Tree: The Storm Over Critical Buddhism, Univ of Hawaii Press 1997, pp. 174-192. ISBN 0824819497. 

The word "self" (atman) is used in a way idiosyncratic to these sutras; the "true self" is described as the perfection of the wisdom of not-self in the Buddha-Nature Treatise, for example. Language that had previously been used by essentialist non-Buddhist philosophers was now adopted, with new definitions, by Buddhists to promote orthodox teachings.

The tathgatagarbha does not, according to some scholars, represent a substantial self; rather, it is a positive language expression of emptiness and represents the potentiality to realize Buddhahood through Buddhist practices. In this interpretation, the intention of the teaching of tathgatagarbha is soteriological rather than theoretical. Sallie B. King (1997), The Doctrine of Buddha Nature is Impeccably Buddhist. In: Jamie Hubbard (ed.), Pruning the Bodhi Tree: The Storm Over Critical Buddhism, Univ of Hawaii Press 1997, pp. 174-192. ISBN 0824819497 Heng-Ching Shih, The Significance Of 'Tathagatagarbha' -- A Positive Expression Of 'Sunyata' 

The tathgathagarbha, the Theravda doctrine of bhavaga, and the Yogcra store consciousness were all identified at some point with the luminous mind of the Nikyas.

In the Mahayana Mahaparinirvana Sutra, the Buddha insists that while pondering upon Dharma is vital, one must then relinquish fixation on words and letters, as these are utterly divorced from liberation and the Buddha-nature.

====Yogacara====

The Yogacara-school tries to explain the arising of suffering by explaining the workings of our mind. It takes the concepts of the five skandhas and the six consciousnesses, to explain how manas creates vijnapti, concepts to which we cling.

===Chinese Buddhism===

====Tiantai and the Lotus School====

The schools of Buddhism that had existed in China prior to the emergence of the Tiantai are generally believed to represent direct transplantations from India, with little modification to their basic doctrines and methods. However, Tiantai grew and flourished as a natively Chinese Buddhist school under the 4th patriarch, Zhiyi, who developed a hierarchy Buddhist sutras that asserted the Lotus Sutra as the supreme teaching, as well as a system of meditation and practices around it.

====Huayan and Avatamsaka-sutra====

The Huayan developed the doctrine of "interpenetration" or "coalescence" (Wylie: zung-'jug; Sanskrit: yuganaddha), Neville, Robert C. (1987).New metaphysics for eternal experience, Journal of Chinese Philosophy 14, 357-370 http://rywiki.tsadra.org/index.php/zung_'jug based on the Avatasaka Stra, a Mahyna scripture. It holds that all phenomena (Sanskrit: dharmas) are intimately connected (and mutually arising). Two images are used to convey this idea. The first is known as Indra's net. The net is set with jewels which have the extraordinary property that they reflect all of the other jewels. The second image is that of the world text. This image portrays the world as consisting of an enormous text which is as large as the universe itself. The words of the text are composed of the phenomena that make up the world. However, every atom of the world contains the whole text within it. It is the work of a Buddha to let out the text so that beings can be liberated from suffering. The doctrine of interpenetration influenced the Japanese monk Kkai, who founded the Shingon school of Buddhism. Interpenetration and essence-function are mutually informing in the East Asian Buddhist traditions, especially the Korean Buddhist tradition.

In Tibetan Buddhism, it is iconographically represented by yab-yum.

===Tibetan Buddhism===
The Tibetan tantra entitled the "All-Creating King" (Kunjed Gyalpo Tantra) also emphasizes how Buddhist realization lies beyond the range of discursive/verbal thought and is ultimately mysterious. Samantabhadra, states there: 

Also later, the famous Indian Buddhist practitioner and teacher, mahasiddha Tilopa discouraged any intellectual activity in his six words of advice.

== Comparison with other philosophies ==

Baruch Spinoza, though he argued for the existence of a permanent reality, asserts that all phenomenal existence is transitory. In his opinion sorrow is conquered "by finding an object of knowledge which is not transient, not ephemeral, but is immutable, permanent, everlasting." The Buddha taught that the only thing which is eternal is Nirvana. David Hume, after a relentless analysis of the mind, concluded that consciousness consists of fleeting mental states. Hume's Bundle theory is a very similar concept to the Buddhist skandhas, though his skepticism about causation lead him to opposite conclusions in other areas. Arthur Schopenhauer's philosophy parallels Buddhism in his affirmation of asceticism and renunciation as a response to suffering and desire. 

Ludwig Wittgenstein's "language-game" closely parallel the warning that intellectual speculation or papaca is an impediment to understanding, as found in the Buddhist Parable of the Poison Arrow. Friedrich Nietzsche, although himself dismissive of Buddhism as yet another nihilism, had a similar impermanent view of the self. Heidegger's ideas on being and nothingness have been held by some to be similar to Buddhism today. God Is Dead: What Next 

An alternative approach to the comparison of Buddhist thought with Western philosophy is to use the concept of the Middle Way in Buddhism as a critical tool for the assessment of Western philosophies. In this way Western philosophies can be classified in Buddhist terms as eternalist or nihilist. In a Buddhist view all philosophies are considered non-essential views (ditthis) and not to be clung to. Robert Ellis A Buddhist theory of moral objectivity(Ph.D. thesis) 

==See also==

===Topics===
* Critical Buddhism
* God in Buddhism
* List of Buddhist terms and concepts
* List of Buddhist topics
* List of sutras
* Madhyamaka
* Mindstream
* Reality in Buddhism
* Tulpa

===Buddhist philosophers===
* Asanga
* Buddha
* Chandrakirti
* Dignaga
* Dharmakirti
* Dogen
* Fazang
* Honen
* Jinul
* Jizang
* Nagarjuna
* Vasubandhu
* Wonhyo

==Notes==

==References==

==Sources==

* Elas Capriles. The Four Schools of Buddhist Philosophy: Clear Discrimination of Views Pointing at the Definitive Meaning. The Four Philosophical Schools of the Sutrayana Traditionally Taught in Tibet with Reference to the Dzogchen Teachings. 
* William Edelglass and Jay Garfield, Buddhist Philosophy: Essential Readings, New York: Oxford University Press, 2009, ISBN 0-19-532817-5.
* 
* 
* Daniel Perdue: Debate in Tibetan Buddhism, Publisher : Snow Lion Publications, 1992, ISBN 0-937938-76-9, EAN 9780937938768

==External links==
* Buddhism in a Nutshell
* 2500 Years of Buddhism by Prof. P.Y. Bapat (1956) at archive.org

 



[[Billy Bob Thornton]]

Billy Bob Thornton (born August 4, 1955) is an American actor, screenwriter, director and musician.

Thornton made his first break with co-writing and starring in 1992 film One False Move and came to international attention after writing, directing, and starring in the highly acclaimed independent film Sling Blade (1996), for which he won an Academy Award for Best Adapted Screenplay and was nominated for an Academy Award for Best Actor. He appeared in several major film roles following Sling Blades success which brought him a bigger international recognition and critical acclaim including U Turn (1997), Primary Colors (1998), Armageddon (1998), A Simple Plan (1998) which earned him his third Oscar nomination, Monster's Ball (2001), Bandits (2001), The Man Who Wasn't There (2001), Bad Santa (2003), Intolerable Cruelty (2003), Love Actually (2003), Friday Night Lights (2004), The Alamo (2004), Eagle Eye (2008) and Faster (2010).

Thornton is cited as an anti-film star who approaches his roles like a character actor and rarely accept roles in blockbusters. He has been vocal about his disrespect for celebrity culture, choosing to keep his life out of the public eye. However, the attention of the media has proven unavoidable in certain cases, his marriage to Angelina Jolie being a notable example. Interview with Mark Polish, Michael Polish & Billy Bob Thornton - Combustible Celluloid As an influential actor, Thornton is known for his diversity, wide range and prolificacy, appearing in at least one film per year nearly every year since 1991. As a writer, Thornton has scripted variety of films, mainly with Tom Epperson which are usually set in Southern United States including A Family Thing (1996) and The Gift (2000). After Sling Blade, he has directed several other movies including Daddy and Them (2001), All the Pretty Horses (2001) and Jayne Mansfield's Car (2012).

He has received President's Award from Academy of Science Fiction, Fantasy & Horror Films, Special Achievement Award from National Board of Review and a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame. He was also nominated for an Emmy Award, four Golden Globes and three Screen Actors Guild Awards. In addition to film work, Thornton began a career as a singer-songwriter. He has released four solo albums and is the vocalist of a blues rock band The Boxmasters.

== Early life ==
Thornton was born on August 4, 1955 in Hot Springs, Arkansas, the son of Virginia Roberta (ne Faulkner), a psychic, and William Raymond "Billy Ray" Thornton (November 1929August 1974), a high school history teacher and basketball coach who died when Thornton was 18. Thornton was one of three brothers with Jimmy Don (April 1958October 1988) who died of a heart attack at 30, and John David (born 1969), who resides in California. Jimmy Don Thornton wrote a number of songs, two of which&mdash;"Island Avenue" and "Emily"&mdash;Thornton has recorded on his solo albums. During his childhood, Thornton lived in both Alpine, Arkansas, and Malvern, Arkansas. He was raised a Methodist, in an extended family in a shack that had neither electricity nor plumbing. Thornton graduated from high school in 1973. A good high school baseball player, he tried out for the Kansas City Royals, but was let go after an injury. After a short period laying asphalt for the Arkansas State Transportation Department, he attended Henderson State University to pursue studies in psychology, but he dropped out after two semesters.

In the mid-1980s, Thornton settled in Los Angeles, to pursue his career as an actor, with future writing partner Tom Epperson. Thornton initially had a difficult time succeeding as an actor, and worked in telemarketing, offshore wind farming, and fast food management between auditioning for acting jobs. He also played drums and sang with South African rock band Jack Hammer. While Thornton worked as a waiter for an industry event, he served film director and screenwriter Billy Wilder, who is famous for films such as Double Indemnity and Sunset Boulevard. Thornton struck up a conversation with Wilder, who advised Thornton to consider a career as a screenwriter. 

== Career ==

===Film===
Thornton's first screen role was in 1980s South of Reno, where he played a small role as a counter man in a restaurant. Thornton also made an appearance in a 1987 episode of Andy Griffith's popular show Matlock titled "The Photographer" as a pawn store clerk.
Another one of Thornton's early screen roles was as a cast member on the CBS sitcom Hearts Afire with John Ritter and Markie Post. His role as the villain in 1992's One False Move, which he also co-wrote, brought him to the attention of critics. He also had small roles in the early 1990s films Indecent Proposal, On Deadly Ground, Bound by Honor, Grey Knight, and Tombstone. Thornton put Wilder's advice to good use, and went on to write, direct and star in the independent film Sling Blade, which was released in 1996. The film, an expansion of a short film titled Some Folks Call It a Sling Blade, introduced the story of Karl Childers, a mentally handicapped man imprisoned for a gruesome and seemingly inexplicable murder. Sling Blade garnered international acclaim. Thornton's screenplay earned him an Academy Award for Best Adapted Screenplay, a Writers Guild of America Award, and an Edgar Award, while his performance received Oscar and Screen Actors Guild nominations for Best Actor. 

In 1998, he portrayed the James-Carville-like Richard Jemmons in Primary Colors. Thornton adapted the book All the Pretty Horses into a 2000 film with the same name, starring Matt Damon and Penlope Cruz. The negative experience (he was forced to cut more than an hour) led to his decision to never direct another film (a subsequent release, Daddy and Them, had been filmed earlier). Also in 2000, an early script which he and Tom Epperson wrote together was made into The Gift which starred Cate Blanchett, Hilary Swank, Keanu Reeves, Katie Holmes, Greg Kinnear, and Giovanni Ribisi. In 2000, he also appeared in Travis Tritt's music video for the song "Modern Day Bonnie and Clyde".

Thornton's screen persona has been described by the press as that of a "tattooed, hirsute man's man". He appeared in several major film roles following Sling Blade 's success, including 1998's Armageddon with Ben Affleck and Bruce Willis, and A Simple Plan. In 2001, he directed Daddy and Them, while also securing starring roles in three Hollywood pictures, Monster's Ball, Bandits and The Man Who Wasn't There, for which he received many awards. He played a malicious mall Santa Claus in 2003's Bad Santa, a black comedy that performed well at the box office and established Thornton as a leading comic actor, and in the same year, portrayed a womanizing President of the United States in the British romantic comedy Love Actually. Thornton has stated that, following Bad Santas success, audiences "like to watch play that kind of guy," and "they directors call up when they need an asshole. It's kinda that simple... you know how narrow the imagination in this business can be." In 2004 he played David Crockett in The Alamo.

He appeared in the comic film School for Scoundrels, which was released on September 29, 2006. In the film, he plays a self-help doctor; the role was written specifically for Thornton. More recent films include The Astronaut Farmer, a drama released on February 23, 2007, and the comedy, Mr. Woodcock, in which Thornton plays a sadistic gym teacher. In September 2008, Thornton starred in the big brother action movie Eagle Eye alongside Shia LaBeouf and Michelle Monaghan. Thornton has also expressed an interest in directing another film, possibly a period piece about cave explorer Floyd Collins, based on the book Trapped! The Story of Floyd Collins by Robert K. Murray and Roger Brucker. Thornton received a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame on October 7, 2004.

===Music===
Thornton at the South By Southwest music festival in 2008
During the late 1990s, Thornton, who has had a lifelong love for music, began a hobby as a singer-songwriter. He released a roots rock album titled Private Radio in 2001, and three more albums, The Edge of the World (2003), Hobo (2005) and Beautiful Door (2007). Thornton's manager, David Spero, helped his Edge of the World album get off the ground with a summer tour. Thornton was the singer of a blues rock band named Tres Hombres. Guitarist Billy Gibbons referred to the band as "The best little cover band in Texas", and Thornton bears a tattoo with the band's name on it. He performed the Warren Zevon song The Wind on the tribute album . Thornton recorded a cover of the Johnny Cash classic "Ring of Fire" for the Oxford American magazine's Southern Music CD in 2001.

On April 8, 2009, Thornton stopped cooperating with an interview while promoting a Canadian tour of his musical group The Boxmasters on CBC Radio One program Q. Thornton evaded questions and walked off the set early, after explaining he had insisted the interview was not to refer to his movie career. 

== Personal life ==

===Relationships and children===
Thornton at a San Francisco concert in 2007
Thornton has been married five times, with each marriage ending in divorce, and he has four children by three women. From 1978 to 1980, he was married to Melissa Lee Gatlin, with whom he had a daughter, Amanda. Thornton married actress Toni Lawrence in 1986; they separated the following year and divorced in 1988. From 1990 to 1992, he was married to actress Cynda Williams, whom he cast in his writing debut, One False Move (1992). In 1993, Thornton married Playboy model Pietra Dawn Cherniak, with whom he had two sons, Harry James and William; the marriage ended in 1997, with Cherniak accusing Thornton of spousal abuse. Hinckley, David. Billy Bob Thornton accused of stalking former sister-in-law. New York Daily News. May 21, 2008. Retrieved March 28, 2011. 

Thornton was engaged to be married to actress Laura Dern, whom he dated from 1997 to 1999, but in 2000, he married actress Angelina Jolie, with whom he starred in Pushing Tin (1999) and who is 20 years his junior. The marriage became known for the couple's eccentric displays of affection, which reportedly included wearing vials of each other's blood around their necks; Thornton later clarified that the "vials" were, instead, two small lockets, each containing only a single drop of blood. Thornton and Jolie announced the adoption of a child from Cambodia in March 2002, but it was later revealed that Jolie had adopted the child as a single parent. Smolowee, Jill. Marriage, Interrupted. People. August 5, 2002. Retrieved March 2, 2011. Stein, Ruthe. Billy Bob Thornton Likes Staying Put. "San Francisco Chronicle". April 26, 2009. Retrieved March 2, 2011. They separated in June 2002 and divorced the following year.

Since 2003, Thornton has been in a relationship with makeup effects crew member Connie Angland, with whom he has a daughter, Bella. The family resides in Los Angeles, California. Thornton has stated that he likely will not marry again, specifying that he believes marriage "doesn't work" for him. The Billy Bob Tapes: A Cave Full of Ghosts
B.B. Thornton. 2012. Virgin Digital 

=== Health issues ===
During his early years in Los Angeles, Thornton was admitted to a hospital and diagnosed with myocarditis, a heart condition brought on by malnutrition. Billy Bob Thornton Biography TheBiographyChannel.co.uk. Retrieved March 29, 2011. 

Thornton has obsessivecompulsive disorder. Various idiosyncratic behaviors have been well documented in interviews with Thornton; among these is a phobia of antique furniturea disorder shared by Dwight Yoakam's character Doyle Hargraves in the Thornton-penned Sling Blade, and by Thornton's own character in the 2001 film Bandits. Additionally, he has stated that he has a fear of certain types of silverware, a trait assumed by his character Hank Grotowski in 2001's Monster's Ball, in which Grotowski insists on a plastic spoon for his daily bowl of chocolate ice cream. In a 2004 interview with The Independent, Thornton explained: "It's just that I won't use real silver. You know, like the big, old, heavy-ass forks and knives, I can't do that. It's the same thing as the antique furniture. I just don't like old stuff. I'm creeped out by it, and I have no explanation why...I don't have a phobia about American antiques, it's mostly Frenchyou know, like the big, old, gold-carved chairs with the velvet cushions. The Louis XIV type. That's what creeps me out. I can spot the imitation antiques a mile off. They have a different vibe. Not as much dust." 

===Other===
A baseball fan, Thornton's favorite team is the St. Louis Cardinals. He has said that his childhood dream was to play for the Cardinals. He narrated The 2006 World Series Film, the year-end retrospective DVD chronicling the Cardinals' championship season. Thornton is also a professed fan of the Indianapolis Colts football team. 

Thornton is the cousin of professional wrestling legends Terry Funk and Dory Funk, Jr. Terry Funk: The Hardcore Legend. T Funk. 2005. Sports Pub 

== Filmography ==

 List of film appearances 
 Title Year Role Notes 
 Hunter's Blood 1986 Billy Bob 
 South of Reno 1988 Counterman 
 Going Overboard 1989 Dave 
 Chopper Chicks in Zombietown 1989 Tommy 
 The Dark Backward 1991 Patron at Sloppy's Uncredited 
 For the Boys 1991 Marine Sergeant, Korea 
 One False Move 1992 Ray Malcolm Also Writer 
 Tombstone 1993 Johnny Tyler 
 Blood in Blood Out 1993 Lightning 
 Indecent Proposal 1993 Day Tripper 
 The Killing Box 1993 Langston 
 Trouble Bound 1993 Coldface 
 On Deadly Ground 1994 Homer Carlton 
 Floundering 1994 Gun Clerk 
 Some Folks Call it a Sling Blade 1994 Karl Childers Short FilmAlso Writer 
 Dead Man 1995 Big George Drakoulious 
 1995 Roy 
 Sling Blade 1996 Karl Childers Also Writer/DirectorChicago Film Critics Association Award for Best ActorKansas City Film Critics Circle Award for Best ActorNominatedAcademy Award for Best ActorNominatedSatellite Award for Best Actor  Motion Picture DramaNominatedScreen Actors Guild Award for Outstanding Performance by a Male Actor in a Leading RoleNominatedScreen Actors Guild Award for Outstanding Performance by a Cast in a Motion Picture 
 Don't Look Back 1996 Marshall Also Writer 
 1996 Jack 
 1997 Troublemaker 
 U Turn 1997 Darrell 
 Princess Mononoke 1997 Jigo Voice Only (English Language Version) 
 1997 Himself NominatedGolden Raspberry Award for Worst Screen Combo (with any combination of two actors playing themselves) 
 1998 Jacob Mitchell Boston Society of Film Critics Award for Best Supporting ActorBroadcast Film Critics Association Award for Best Supporting ActorChicago Film Critics Association Award for Best Supporting ActorLos Angeles Film Critics Association Award for Best Supporting ActorOnline Film Critics Society Award for Best Supporting ActorSan Diego Film Critics Society Award for Best Supporting ActorNominatedAcademy Award for Best Supporting ActorNominatedSaturn Award for Best Supporting ActorNominatedGolden Globe Award for Best Supporting Actor  Motion PictureNominatedSatellite Award for Best Supporting Actor  Motion PictureNominatedScreen Actors Guild Award for Outstanding Performance by a Male Actor in a Supporting Role 
 Armageddon 1998 Dan Truman, NASA Administrator NominatedBlockbuster Entertainment Award for Favorite Supporting Actor - Sci-Fi 
 Homegrown 1998 Jack Marsden 
 Primary Colors 1998 Richard Jemmons Broadcast Film Critics Association Award for Best Supporting Actor 
 Pushing Tin 1999 Russell Bell 
 The Last Real Cowboys 2000 Tar 
 South of Heaven, West of Hell 2001 Brig. Smalls 
 Daddy and Them 2001 Claude Montgomery Also Writer/Director 
 Monster's Ball 2001 Hank Grotowski Florida Film Critics Circle Award for Best ActorNational Board of Review Award for Best ActorNominatedSatellite Award for Best Actor  Motion Picture Drama 
 Bandits 2001 Terry Lee Collins Florida Film Critics Circle Award for Best ActorNational Board of Review Award for Best ActorNominatedGolden Globe Award for Best Actor  Motion Picture Musical or ComedyNominatedPhoenix Film Critics Society Award for Best Supporting Actor 
 2001 Ed Crane Florida Film Critics Circle Award for Best ActorLondon Film Critics Circle Award for Best ActorNational Board of Review Award for Best ActorOnline Film Critics Society Award for Best ActorRussian Guild of Film Critics Award for Best Foreign ActorSoutheastern Film Critics Association Award for Best ActorNominatedAmerican Film Institute Award AFI Actor of the YearNominatedSaturn Award for Best ActorNominatedGolden Globe Award for Best Actor  Motion Picture DramaNominatedPhoenix Film Critics Society Award for Best Actor 
 Waking Up in Reno 2002 Lonnie Earl Dodd 
 2002 Sheriff Darl Hardwick 
 Bad Santa 2003 Willie T. Stokes NominatedGolden Globe Award for Best Actor  Motion Picture Musical or ComedyNominatedSatellite Award for Best Actor  Motion PictureNominatedTeen Choice Awards for Choice Movie Sleazebag 
 Love Actually 2003 President of the United States Washington D.C. Area Film Critics Association Award for Best EnsembleNominatedBroadcast Film Critics Association Award for Best Acting EnsembleNominatedPhoenix Film Critics Society Award for Best Cast 
 Intolerable Cruelty 2003 Howard D. Doyle 
 Levity 2003 Manuel Jordan 
 Friday Night Lights 2004 Gary Gaines 
 2004 Davy Crockett 
 Chrystal 2004 Joe 
 2005 Vic Cavanaugh 
 Bad News Bears 2005 Morris Buttermaker 
 School for Scoundrels 2006 Dr. P/Dennis Sherman 
 2007 Charles Farmer 
 Mr. Woodcock 2007 Jasper Woodcock 
 Eagle Eye 2008 Thomas Morgan 
 2009 William 
 My Run 2009 Narrator 
 2009 Patrick 
 Deadly Creatures 2009 George Struggs Computer GameVoice Only 
 Faster 2010 Cop 
 Nashville Rises 2011 Narrator 
 Puss in Boots 2011 Jack Voice Only 
 Jayne Mansfield's Car 2013 Skip Caldwell Also Writer/Director 
 The Baytown Outlaws 2013 Carlos 
 Parkland 2013 Forrest Sorrels 
 Fargo 2014 Lorne Malvo PendingCritics' Choice Television Award for Best Movie/Miniseries Actor 
 Endangered 2014 Post-production; also known as Red Machine 
 The Judge 2014 Dwight Dickman Post-production 
 London Fields 2014 Samson Young Post-production 
 Cut Bank 2014 Filming 
 Entourage 2015 (rumoured) Filming 
 Bad Santa 2 2016 Willie T. Stokes (rumoured) 

 Other screen credits 
 Title Year Role Notes 
 One False Move 1992 Writer NominatedIndependent Spirit Award for Best ScreenplayNominatedInternational Fantasy Film Award for Best Screenplay 
 Some Folks Call It a Sling Blade 1994 Writer 
 A Family Thing 1996 Writer NominatedHumanitas Prize 
 Sling Blade 1996 Director/Writer Academy Award for Best Writing (Adapted Screenplay)Edgar Allan Poe Award for Best Motion Picture ScreenplayNational Board of Review Award for Special Achievement in FilmmakingIndependent Spirit Award for Best First FeatureWriters Guild of America Award for Best Adapted ScreenplayNominatedSatellite Award for Best Original Screenplay 
 Don't Look Back 1996 Story and teleplay 
 All the Pretty Horses 2000 Director/Producer NominatedGrand Prix AwardNominatedSierra Award for Best Picture 
 2000 NominatedSaturn Award for Best Writing 
 Camouflage 2001 Story and screenplay as Reginald Perry 
 Daddy and Them 2001 Director/Writer 
 Jayne Mansfield's Car 2012 Director/Writer NominatedGolden Bear 

== Discography ==

===Solo===
*Private Radio (2001)
*The Edge of the World (2003)
*Hobo (2005)
*Beautiful Door (2007)

===The Boxmasters===
*The Boxmasters (Vanguard, 2008)
*Christmas Cheer (Vanguard, 2008)
*Modbilly (Vanguard, 2009)

== References ==

== Further reading ==
* 

== External links ==

* 
* Official site of Billy Bob Thornton
* 
* Six Degrees of Swampland, Billy Bob Thornton
* Swampland: GRITZ Billy Bob Thornton Interview 2008
* Alamo Sentry Interview with Thornton regarding his role as David Crockett.
* Billy Bob Thornton interview
* "Set For Launch: A Video Interview with the Makers of 'The Astronaut Farmer'"  eFilmCritic.com video interviews with Billy Bob Thornton, Virginia Madsen and the Polish Brothers
* Stumped? Interview
* Billy Bob Thornton: I Have 5,000 Favorites



[[The Big O]]

 is a Japanese animated television series created by designer Keiichi Sato and director Kazuyoshi Katayama, and written by Chiaki J. Konaka for Sunrise. The writing staff was assembled by the series' head writer, Chiaki J. Konaka who is known for his work in the Digimon season, Digimon Tamers.

The story takes place forty years after a mysterious occurrence causes the residents of Paradigm City to lose their memories. The series follows Roger Smith, Paradigm City's top Negotiator. He provides this much needed service with the help of a robot named R. Dorothy Wayneright and his butler Norman Burg. When the need arises, Roger calls upon Big O, a giant relic from the city's past.

The television series is designed as a tribute to Japanese and Western shows from the 1960s and 1970s. The series is done in the style of film noir and combines the feel of a detective show with the mecha genre of anime. The setpieces are reminiscent of tokusatsu productions of the 1950s and 1960s, particularly Toho's kaiju movies, and the score is an eclectic mix of styles and musical homages.

The Big O premiered October 13, 1999 on WOWOW satellite television. It finished its run on January 19, 2000. The English-language version premiered on Cartoon Network on April 2, 2001 and ended on April 18 2001. Originally a 26 episode series, low viewership in Japan cut it down to just the first 13. However, positive fan response internationally resulted in a second season consisting of the remaining 13 episodes and co-produced by Cartoon Network, Sunrise, and Bandai Visual. Season two premiered on Japan's SUN-TV on January 2, 2003, with the American premiere taking place seven months later. Following the 2012 closure of Bandai Entertainment, Sunrise announced at Otakon 2013, that Sentai Filmworks has rescued both seasons of The Big O, along with a handful of other former BEI titles. 

== Plot ==

=== Setting ===
An aerial shot of Paradigm City. The city is based on the island of Manhattan and is suggested to be New York City itself. The Big O Visual: Official Companion to "The Big-O" TV series (ISBN 4-575-29579-5), p. 39. 
The story of The Big O sets in a fictional city-state known as . The city is located on a sea coast and surrounded by a vast desert wasteland, the partially domed city is wholly controlled by the monopolistic Paradigm Corporation. Paradigm is known as , as forty years prior to the story, an unknown occurrence known only as takes place which destroys the world outside the city and leaves the survivors without any memories. In the final episodes of the series, the city is implied to have been an elaborate fabrication produced by an unknown power.

The city is characterized by severe class inequity; the higher-income population resides inside the more pleasant geodesic domes, with the remainder left in tenements outside. Androids coexist with the human inhabitants of Paradigm City; while their numbers are fairly low, and they're something of a rarity, there are enough of them that denizens of the city are not shocked by them and don't consider it particularly unusual to encounter one. 

Several episodes show inhabitants of Paradigm City practicing some shape or form of Christianity, as people congregate in meeting places with crucifixes prominently displayed. However, the practice appears to be based on custom rather than doctrine, which no one remembers. A cathedral is shown in ruins and forgotten, although some elderly people occasionally feel compelled to stand in front of it and sing scraps of hymns. It is revealed in episode 11 that almost no one remembers Christmas and its meaning save for Alex Rosewater.

A holiday is observed on December 25, but as a celebration to commemorate the founding of Paradigm City, known as "Heaven's Day." The inhabitants of the city still put up generic Christmas decorations like decorated Christmas trees and streamers, but they don't really know the underlying reason behind all of this. Alex Rosewater seems to be the series' only character with knowledge of pre-Event Christianity. Dastun at one point mentions that Rosewater had in his possession fragments of a "Book of Revelation", although neither Dastun nor Roger had previously heard of it. It is possible that Rosewater also has other fragments of The Bible, as Rosewater describes the real meaning of Heaven's Day as being "the day God's son was born."

===Story===
Forty years prior to the events of the series, disaster struck. The world was turned into a vast desert wasteland and the survivors were left without memories. The story takes place in Paradigm City, a corporate police state run by the Paradigm Corporation. The town is recognized for its geodesic domes, giant structures that house the richer citizens and segregate the poor.

The Big O deals with the nature of memories. A memory is a record stored in the brain of an organism, but in Paradigm City memories can mean much more. Note the series uses the spelling instead of . embody the lost knowledge of its residents, and can take the form of records from before the Event, forgotten artifacts from the previous era, or manifest themselves as recollection, hallucinations, and recurring dreams.

The first half of the series is episodic. Each Act revolves around different citizens of Paradigm dealing with the resurgence of lost Memories and how they manage to go on living without knowledge of what did or did not happen. The final episodes introduce elements that come into play during season two like the existence of people outside of Paradigm City, the nature of the Cataclysm that destroyed the world and the "Power of God wielded by the hand of man."

The second season takes an arc-based approach. Instead of self-contained stories like in season one, season two features a continuous storyline. The second season makes Alex Rosewater, CEO of the Paradigm Corporation, a direct antagonist to The Negotiator and introduces The Union, agents of a foreign power working within Paradigm.

====Ending====
The series ends with the awakening of another "Big" megadeus and the revelation that the world appears to be a simulated reality constructed in the form of a giant mechanical stage which was created by Angel. A climactic battle ensues between Big O and Big Fau, after which the city and everything surrounding it begins to be systematically erased by the new Big megadeus (an embodiment of Angel). The Big, referred to as "Big Venus" by Dorothy, walks towards Big O, erasing everything it passes, including Big Fau with Alex Rosewater. Roger delivers a final speech to Angel telling her to "let go of the past" whether it is real or not and focus only on the present and the future. In a TV Director's control room, the real Angel, who had been observing the fight through camera as well as reminding of herself of her other encounters with Roger on all of the screens surrounding her, watches as Roger tells her to 'live as a human being'. On the control panel is "Metropolis" (a book which had been featured prominently since the thirteenth episode and said to have been published by Gordon Rosewater, containing the information of what happened forty years ago (Which Gordon himself dismisses as 'a lie')) with angel wings illustrated on the cover and the author name 'Angel Rosewater' which suggests that Angel based the Rosewaters on her own family or herself. Angel sheds a tear then turns to see Roger, as he puts his hand on her shoulder reassuringly, and Dorothy who states Roger's profession "Roger the Negotiator" as she stands next to a promotional poster for 'The Big O' which suggests that the real Angel created the world of Paradigm City, first as a book then a TV show, as an outlet for an unknown past trauma she may had suffered. Big Venus finally reaches Big O and the two walk into each other, subsequently "resetting" the city. The screen is then blinded with a white flash then cuts to the first few scenes of the first episode, even including the opening text. New versions of Dorothy and Angel are then seen as they watch Roger drive down the street and begins to hesitantly speak the first lines of the series "My name is...Roger Smith. I perform a much needed job here...in the City of Amnesia." The ending title card "We have come to terms" appears, the credits roll and (like the final episode of the first season) there is no preview. This ending has been thoroughly debated, however, as many fans feel it was simply symbolism and that the true nature of the ending remains open to interpretation.

== Characters ==

;Roger Smith
Roger Smith is the series's protagonist. As a Negotiator, his job entails finding a resolution for the troubles of the City of Amnesia. He'd negotiate almost anything for anyone, but he is a professional and expects the parties involved to behave professionally. When memories betray the people and force them to reawaken monstrosities of the city's past, Roger's only option is to fight back with a monstrosity of his own, the black megadeus Big O. Roger is voiced by Mitsuru Miyamoto in Japanese and Steven Blum in English.

;R. Dorothy Wayneright
R. Dorothy Wayneright is Roger's assistant. Introduced in Act:01 as Dorothy Soldano, daughter of rich industrialist Miguel Soldano, she is later revealed to be an android constructed by him. Her actual "father" would be Timothy Wayneright, the man who commissioned her construction and father of the real and late Dorothy Wayneright. To show her gratitude, and as a form of payment for Roger's help, she decides to move in with him and help out Norman with the chores. Dorothy is voiced by Akiko Yajima in Japanese and Lia Sargent in English. The character's name is consistent with naming practices in the science fiction works of Isaac Asimov, the first initial "R" standing for "robot".

;Norman Burg
Norman Burg is Roger's butler. Forty years before the commencement of the story, Norman, like the rest of Paradigm, lost all memories from before that day, but he would not think twice before going once more unto the breach for his master. Resourceful and talented, he is also caretaker of the Big O. Norman's skills give him a purpose and a mission to accomplish for Roger. Norman is voiced by Motomu Kiyokawa in Japanese and Milton James and Alan Oppenheimer in English for seasons one and two respectively.

;Dan Dastun
Dan Dastun is the middle-aged Chief of the Military Police, introduced in Act:01. He is Roger's former commander and the Negotiator's contact in the police force. Roger describes him as "a hard-nosed cop is completely devoted to the force" and with "more pride in the Military Police than anything else." Dan is voiced by Tesshou Genda in Japanese and Peter Lurie in English.

;Angel
Angel is the beautiful woman Roger encounters throughout the series. Introduced in Act:03 as Casey Jenkins, investigator for Paradigm Power Management, then again in Act:04 as Patricia Lovejoy, secretary for the publisher of Paradigm Press. Angel's true identity is a mystery, her motives questionable and her allegiance to no one but herself. Angel is voiced by Emi Shinohara in Japanese and Wendee Lee in English.

== Production and release ==
Development of the retro-styled series began in 1996. Keiichi Sato came up with the concept of The Big O: a giant city-smashing robot, piloted by a man in black, in a Gotham-like environment. He later met up with Kazuyoshi Katayama, who had just finished directing Those Who Hunt Elves, and started work on the layouts and character designs. But when things "were about to really start moving," production on Katayama's Sentimental Journey began, putting plans on-hold. Meanwhile, Sato was heavily involved with his work on City Hunter. 

Sato admits it all started as "a gimmick for a toy" but the representatives at Bandai Hobby Division did not see the same potential. From there on, the dealings would be with Bandai Visual, but Sunrise still needed some safeguards and requested more robots be designed to increase prospective toy sales. In 1999, with the designs complete, Chiaki J. Konaka was brought on as head writer. Among other things, Konaka came up with the idea of "a town without memory" and his writing staff put together the outline for a 26-episodes series. 

The Big O premiered on 13 October 1999 on WOWOW. When the production staff was informed the series would be shortened to 13 episodes, the writers decided to end it with a cliffhanger, hoping the next 13 episodes would be picked up. In April 2001, The Big O premiered on Cartoon Network's Toonami lineup. In Canada, the English dub of both seasons aired as part of Anime Current, an Anime Television block, on pay-TV digital channel G4techTV Canada from March 30, 2007 to May 4, 2007.

;Second season
The series garnered positive fan response internationally that resulted in a second season co-produced by Cartoon Network, Sunrise, and Bandai Visual. Season two premiered on Japan's SUN-TV on January 2003, with the American premiere taking place seven months later as an Adult Swim exclusive. The second season would not be seen on Toonami until July 27, 2013, 10 years after it began airing on Adult Swim.

The second season was scripted by Chiaki Konaka with input from the American producers. Along with the 13 episodes of season two, Cartoon Network had an option for 26 additional episodes to be written by Konaka, but according to Jason DeMarco, executive producer for season two, the middling ratings and DVD sales in the United States and Japan made any further episodes impossible to be produced. 

=== Music ===
The Big O was scored by Geidai alumnus Toshihiko Sahashi. His composition is richly symphonic and classical, with a number of pieces delving into electronica and jazz. Chosen because of his "frightening amount of musical knowledge about TV dramas overseas," Sahashi integrates musical homages into the soundtrack. The background music draws from film noir, spy films and sci-fi television series like The Twilight Zone. The battle themes are reminiscent of Akira Ifukube's compositions for the Godzilla series. 

The first opening theme is the Queen-influenced "Big-O!". Composed, arranged and performed by Rui Nagai, the song resembles the theme to the Flash Gordon film. The second opening theme is "Respect," composed by Sahashi. The track is an homage to the music of Gerry Anderson's UFO, composed by Barry Gray. In 2007, Rui Nagai composed "Big-O! Show Must Go On," a 1960s hard rock piece, for Animax's reruns of the show. The closing theme is the slow love ballad "And Forever," written by Chie and composed by Ken Shima. The duet is performed by Robbie Danzie and Naoki Takao.

Along with Sahashi's original compositions, the soundtrack features Chopin's Prelude No. 15 and a jazz saxophone rendition of "Jingle Bells." The complete score was released in two volumes by Victor Entertainment.

=== Publications ===

The Big O was conceived as a media franchise. To this effect, Sunrise requested a manga be produced along with the animated series. The Big O manga started serialization in Kodansha's Magazine Z on July 1999, three months before the anime premiere. Authored by Hitoshi Ariga, the manga uses Keiichi Sato's concept designs in an all-new story. The series ended on October 2001. The issues were later collected in six volumes. The English version of the manga is published by Viz Media. 

In anticipation to the broadcast of the second season, a new manga series was published. , authored by Hitoshi Ariga. Lost Memory takes place between volumes five and six of the original manga. The issues were serialized in Magazine Z from November 2002 to September 2003 and were collected in two volumes. 

, a novel by Yuki Taniguchi, was released 16 July 2003 by Tokuma Shoten. 

== Design ==
The Big O is the brainchild of Keiichi Sato and Kazuyoshi Katayama, an homage to the shows they grew up with. The show references the works of the superhero shows produced by the Toei Company and "old school" super robots. The series is done in the style of film noir and pulp fiction and combines the feel of a detective show with the giant robot genre. 

=== Style ===
Film noir is a stylistic approach to genre films forged in Depression-era detective and gangster films and hard-boiled detective stories which were a staple of pulp fiction. Silver, A. & Ursini, J. "What is 'Noir'?" In Film Noir. Los Angeles, CA: Taschen Books. ISBN 3-8228-2261-2 The Big O shares much of its themes, diction, archetypes and visual iconography with film noirs of the 1940s like The Big Sleep (1946). 

The shadows of Venetian blinds cast upon the hero, a signature visual of film noir.
Low-key lighting schemes mark most noirs. The series incorporates the use of long dark shadows in the tradition of chiaroscuro and tenebrism. Film noir is also known for its use of odd angles, such as Roger's low shot introduction in the first episode. Noir cinematographers favoured this angle because it made characters almost rise from the ground, giving them dramatic girth and symbolic overtones. Other disorientating devices like dutch angles, mirror reflection and distorting shots are employed throughout the series. 

The characters of The Big O fit the noir and pulp fiction archetypes. Roger Smith is a protagonist in the mold of Chandler's Philip Marlowe or Hammett's Sam Spade. He is canny and cynical, a disillusioned cop-turned-negotiator whose job has more in common with detective-style work than negotiating. Big Ear is Roger's street informant and Dan Dastun is the friend on the police force. The recurring Beck is the imaginative thug compelled by delusions of grandeur while Angel fills the role of the femme fatale. Minor characters include crooked cops, corrupt business men and deranged scientists. 

Noir characters often wisecrack and speak in double entendres. The dialogue in the series is recognized for its witty, wry sense of humor. The characters come off as charming and exchange banter not often heard in anime series, as the dialogue has the tendency to be straightforward. The plot is moved along by Roger's voice-over narration, a device used in film noir to place the viewer in the mind of the protagonist so it can intimately experience the character's angst and partly identify with the narrator. 

The urban landscape, Paradigm City, is the perfect noir milieu. The tall buildings and giant domes create a sense of claustrophobia and paranoia characteristic of the style. The rural landscape, Ailesberry Farm, contrasts Paradigm City. Noir protagonists often look for sanctuary in such settings but, as seen in Act:23, they just as likely end up becoming a killing ground. The series score is representative of its setting. While no classic noir possesses a jazz score, the music could be heard in nightclubs within the films. Roger's recurring theme, a lone saxophone accompaniment to the protagonist's narration, best exemplifies the noir stylings of the series. 

Amnesia is a common plot device in film noir. Because most of these stories focused on a character proving his innocence, authors up the ante by making him an amnesiac, unable to prove his innocence even to himself. Rafferty, T. (2 November 2003) The Last Word in Alienation: I Just Don't Remember. The New York Times. The Big O goes further, by removing the memories of the whole population. The convoluted past is told through the use of flashbacks. In most noirs, the past is tangible and menacing. The characters are often trying to escape some trauma or crime tied to the Event, and confronting it becomes their only chance at redemption. 

=== Influences ===
Before The Big O, Sunrise Studios was a subcontractor for Warner Bros. Animation's , For detail on which episodes Sunrise worked on, see The World's Finest. one of the series' influences. 

Roger Smith is a pastiche of the Bruce Wayne persona and the Batman. The character design resembles Wayne, complete with slicked-back hair and double-breasted business suit. Like Bruce, Roger prides himself in being a rich playboy to the extent that one of his household's rules is only women may be let into his mansion without his permission. Like Batman, Roger Smith carries a no-gun policy, albeit more flexible. Unlike the personal motives of the Batman, Roger enforces this rule for "it's all part of being a gentleman." Among Roger's gadgetry is the Griffon, a large, black hi-tech sedan comparable to the Batmobile, a grappling cable that shoots out his wristwatch and the giant robot that Angel calls "Roger's alter ego." 

The Big Os cast of supporting characters includes Norman, Roger's faithful mechanically-inclined butler who fills the role of Alfred Pennyworth; R. Dorothy Wayneright, who plays the role of the sidekick; and Dan Dastun, a good honest cop who, like Jim Gordon, is both a friend to the hero and greatly respected by his comrades. 

The other major influence is Mitsuteru Yokoyama's Giant Robo. Before working on The Big O, Kazuyoshi Katayama and other animators worked with Yasuhiro Imagawa on . The feature, a "retro chic" homage to Yokoyama's career, took seven years to produce and suffered low sales and high running costs. Frustrated by the experience, Katayama and his staff put all their efforts into making "good" with The Big O. 

Like Giant Robo, the megadeuses of Big O are metal behemoths. The designs are strange and "more macho than practical," sporting big stovepipe arms and exposed rivets. Unlike the giants of other mecha series, the megadeuses do not exhibit ninja-like speed nor grace. Instead, the robots are armed with "old school" weaponry such as missiles, piston powered punches, machine guns and laser cannons. 

Katayama also cited Super Robot Red Baron and Super Robot Mach Baron among influences on the inspiration of The Big O. Believing that because Red Baron had such a low budget and the big fights always happened outside of a city setting, he wanted Big O to be the show he felt Red Baron could be with a bigger budget. He also spoke of how he first came up with designs for the robots first as if they were making designs to appeal to toy companies, rather than how Gundam was created with a toy company wanting an anime to represent their new product. Big O's large pumping chamber arms, for example, he felt would be cool gimmicks in a toy. 

== Media ==
;Companion book
The Big O Visual: The official companion to the TV series (ISBN 4-575-29579-5) was published by Futabasha in 2003. The book contains full-color artwork, character bios and concept art, mecha sketches, video/LD/DVD jacket illustrations, history on the making of The Big O, staff interviews, "Roger's Monologues" comic strip and the original script for the final episode of the series.

;Audio drama
"Walking Together On The Yellow Brick Road" was released by Victor Entertainment on 21 September 2000. The drama CD was written by series head writer Chiaki J. Konaka and featured the series' voice cast.

;Video games
The first season of Big O is featured in Super Robot Wars D for the Game Boy Advance. The series, including its second season is also featured in Super Robot Wars Z, released in 2008.

;Toys and model kits
Bandai released a non-scale model kit of Big O in 2000. Though it was an easy snap-together kit, it required painting, as all of the parts (except the clear orange crown and canopy) were molded in dark gray. The kit included springs that enabled the slide-action Side Piles on the forearms to simulate Big O's Sudden Impact maneuver. Also included was an unpainted Roger Smith figure.

PVC figures of Big O and Big Duo (Schwarzwald's Megadeus) were sold by Bandai America. Each came with non-poseable figures of Roger, Dorothy and Angel. Mini-figure sets were sold in Japan and America during the run of the second season. The characters included Big O (standard and attack modes), Roger, Dorothy & Norman, Griffon (Roger's car), Dorothy-1 (Big O's first opponent), Schwarzwald and Big Duo.

In 2009, Bandai released a plastic/diecast figure of the Big O under their Soul of Chogokin line. The figure has the same features as the model kit, but with added detail and accessories. Its design was closely supervised by original designer Keiichi Sato. HobbyLink Japan - Soul of Chogokin The Big O 

In 2011, Max Factory released action figures of Roger and Dorothy through their Figma toyline. Like most Figmas, they are very detailed, articulated and come with accessories and interchangeable faces. In the same year, Max Factory also released a 12-inch, diecast figure of Big O under their Max Gokin line. The figure contained most of the accessories as the Soul of Chogokin figure but also included some others that could be bought separately from the SOC figure, such as the Mobydick (hip) Anchors and Roger Smith's car: the Griffon. Like the Soul of Chogokin figure, its design was also supervised by Keiichi Sato. As well, in that same year, Max Factory released soft vinyl figures of Big Duo and Big Fau. These figures are high in detail but limited in articulation, such as the arms and legs being the only things to move. To date, this is the only action figure of Big Fau.

== Reception ==
The Big O premiered on 13 October 1999. The show was not a hit in its native Japan, rather it was reduced from an outlined 26 episodes to 13 episodes. Western audiences were more receptive and the series achieved the success its creators were looking for. In an interview with AnimePlay, Keiichi Sato said "This is exactly as we had planned", referring to the success overseas. 

Several words appear constantly in the English-language reviews; adjectives like "hip", "sleek," "stylish",
 "classy", and, above all, "cool" serve to describe the artwork, the concept, and the series itself. Reviewers have pointed out references and homages to various works of fiction, namely Batman, Giant Robo, the works of Isaac Asimov, Fritz Lang's Metropolis, James Bond, and Cowboy Bebop. But "while saying that may cause one to think the show is completely derivative", reads an article at Anime on DVD, "The Big O still manages to stand out as something original amongst the other numerous cookie-cutter anime shows." One reviewer cites the extensive homages as one of the series problems and calls to unoriginality on the creators part. 

The first season's reception was positive. Anime on DVD recommends it as an essential series. Chris Beveridge of the aforementioned site gave an A- to Vols. 1 and 2, and a B+ to Vols. 3 and 4. Mike Toole of Anime Jump gave it 4.5 (out of a possible 5) stars, while the review at the Anime Academy gave it a grade of 83, listing the series' high points as being "unique", the characters "interesting," and the action "nice." Reviewers, and fans alike, agree the season's downfall was the ending, or its lack thereof. The dangling plot threads frustrated the viewers and prompted Cartoon Network's involvement in the production of further episodes. 

The look and feel of the show received a big enhancement in the second season. This time around, the animation is "near OVA quality" and the artwork "far more lush and detailed." Also enhanced are the troubles of the first season. The giant robot battles still seem out of place to some, while others praise the "over-the-top-ness" of their execution. 

For some reviewers, the second season "doesn't quite match the first" addressing to "something" missing in these episodes. Andy Patrizio of IGN points out changes in Roger Smith's character, who "lost some of his cool and his very funny side in the second season." Like a repeat of season one, this season's ending is considered its downfall. Chris Beveridge of Anime on DVD wonders if this was head writer "Konaka's attempt to throw his hat into the ring for creating one of the most confusing and oblique endings of any series." Patrizio states "the creators watched The Truman Show and The Matrix a few times too many."

== References ==

http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Chiaki_J._Konaka#References. Wikipedia, www.wikipedia.org.

== External links ==

* 
* 
* 

 



[[BIOS]]

In IBM PC compatible computers, the Basic Input/Output System (BIOS), also known as System BIOS, ROM BIOS or PC BIOS (), is a de facto standard defining a firmware interface. The PC Guide - System BIOS The name originated from the Basic Input/Output System used in the CP/M operating system in 1975. The BIOS software is built into the PC, and is the first software run by a PC when powered on.

The fundamental purposes of the BIOS are to initialize and test the system hardware components, and to load a bootloader or an operating system from a mass memory device. The BIOS additionally provides an abstraction layer for the hardware, i.e. a consistent way for application programs and operating systems to interact with the keyboard, display, and other input/output devices. Variations in the system hardware are hidden by the BIOS from programs that use BIOS services instead of directly accessing the hardware. Modern operating systems ignore the abstraction layer provided by the BIOS and access the hardware components directly.

The BIOS of the original IBM PC/XT had no interactive user interface. Error messages were displayed on the screen, or coded series of sounds were generated to signal errors. Options on the PC and XT were set by switches and jumpers on the main board and on peripheral cards. Modern Wintel-compatible computers provide a setup routine, accessed at system power-up by a particular key sequence. The user can configure hardware options using the keyboard and video display.

BIOS software is stored on a non-volatile ROM chip on the motherboard. It is specifically designed to work with each particular model of computer, interfacing with various devices that make up the complementary chipset of the system. In modern computer systems, the BIOS contents are stored on a flash memory chip so that the contents can be rewritten without removing the chip from the motherboard. This allows BIOS software to be easily upgraded to add new features or fix bugs, but can make the computer vulnerable to BIOS rootkits.

MS-DOS (PC DOS), which was the dominant PC operating system from the early 1980s until the mid 1990s, relied on BIOS services for disk, keyboard, and text display functions. MS Windows NT, Linux, and other protected mode operating systems in general do not use it after loading.

BIOS technology is in transitional process toward the Unified Extensible Firmware Interface (UEFI) since 2010. 

==Terminology==
The term BIOS (Basic Input/Output System) was invented by Gary Kildall and first appeared in the CP/M operating system in 1975, describing the machine-specific part of CP/M loaded during boot time that interfaces directly with the hardware. (A CP/M machine usually has only a simple boot loader in its ROM.)

Versions of MS-DOS or PC DOS contain a file called variously "IO.SYS", "IBMBIO.COM", "IBMBIO.SYS", or "DRBIOS.SYS"; this file is known as the "DOS BIOS" (aka "DOS I/O System") and contains the lower-level hardware-specific part of the operating system. Together with the underlying hardware-specific, but operating system-independent "System BIOS", which resides in ROM, it represents the analogous to the "CP/M BIOS".

In other types of computers, the terms boot monitor, boot loader, and boot ROM are used instead. Some Sun and PowerPC-based computers use Open Firmware for this purpose.

With the introduction of PS/2 machines, IBM divided the System BIOS into real-mode and protected mode portions. The real-mode portion was meant to provide backward-compatibility with existing operating systems such as DOS, and therefore was named "CBIOS" (for Compatibility BIOS), whereas the "ABIOS" (for Advanced BIOS) provided new interfaces specifically suited for multitasking operating systems such as OS/2.

There are a few alternatives to the functionality of the "Legacy BIOS" in the x86 world: Extensible Firmware Interface, Open Firmware (used on the OLPC XO-1), and coreboot.

==The BIOS boot process==
When the x86 processor is reset, it loads its program counter with a fixed address near the top of the 1 megabyte real-mode address space. The address of the BIOS's memory is located such that it will be executed when the computer is first started up. A jump instruction then directs the processor to start executing code in the BIOS. If the system has just been powered up or the reset button was pressed ("cold boot"), the full power-on self-test (POST) is run. If Ctrl+Alt+Delete was initiated ("warm boot"), a special flag value is detected in Nonvolatile memory (NVRAM) and the BIOS does not run the POST. This saves the time otherwise used to detect and test all memory. The NVRAM is in the real-time clock (RTC).

The power-on self-test tests, identifies, and initializes system devices such as the CPU, RAM, interrupt and DMA controllers and other parts of the chipset, video display card, keyboard, hard disk drive, optical disc drive and other basic hardware. The BIOS then locates boot loader software held on a storage device designated as a 'boot device', such as a hard disk, a floppy disk, CD, or DVD, and loads and executes that software, giving it control of the PC. How StuffWorks: What BIOS Does. This process is known as booting, or booting up, which is short for "bootstrapping".

===Boot devices===
The BIOS selects candidate boot devices using information collected by POST and configuration information from EEPROM, CMOS RAM or, in the earliest PCs, DIP switches. Option ROMs may also influence or supplant the boot process defined by the motherboard BIOS ROM. The BIOS checks each device in order to see if it is bootable. For a disk drive or a device that logically emulates a disk drive, such as an USB Flash drive or perhaps a tape drive, to perform this check the BIOS attempts to load the first sector (boot sector) from the disk to memory address 0x0000:0x7C00. If the sector cannot be read (due to a missing or blank disk, or due to a hardware failure), the BIOS considers the disk unbootable and proceeds to check the next device. Some BIOSes will also check for the boot sector signature 0x55 0xAA in the last two bytes of the (512 byte long) sector, before accepting a boot sector. 
The BIOS proceeds to test each device sequentially until a bootable device is found, at which time the BIOS transfers control to the loaded sector with a jump instruction and certain register values to its first byte at address 0x0000:0x7C00 (1 KiB below the 32 KiB mark); see MBR invocation and VBR invocation.

Another device such as a network adapter attempts booting by a procedure that is defined by its option ROM (or the equivalent integrated into the motherboard BIOS ROM).

The behavior if the BIOS doesn't find a bootable device has varied as personal computers developed. The original IBM PC and XT had Microsoft Cassette BASIC in ROM, and if no bootable device was found, ROM BASIC was started. Therefore, barring a hardware failure, an original IBM PC or XT would never fail to boot, either into BASIC or from disk. One model of PC was available with no disk drive; a cassette recorder could be attached via the cassette port on the rear, for loading and saving BASIC programs to tape. Since few programs used BASIC in ROM, clone PC makers left it out; a computer that failed to boot from a disk would display "No ROM BASIC" and halt. Later computers would display a message like "No bootable disk found". Modern BIOSes may display nothing or may automatically enter the BIOS configuration utility when the boot process fails.

Historically, the BIOS would try to boot from a floppy drive first and a hard disk second. CD or DVD booting is an extension of this. With the El Torito optical media boot standard, the optical drive actually emulates a 3.5" high-density floppy disk to the BIOS for boot purposes. Optical disks are a special case, because their lowest level of data organization is typically a fairly high-level file system (e.g. ISO 9660 for CD-ROM). To read the "first sector" of a CD-ROM or DVD-ROM is not a simply defined operation. The complexity of the medium makes it difficult to write a useful boot program in one sector. Therefore, optical media booting uses the El Torito standard, which specifies a way for an optical disk to contain an image of a high-density ("1.44MB") floppy disk and for the drive to provide access to this disk image in a simple manner that emulates floppy disk drive operations. Therefore, CD-ROM drives boot as emulated floppy disk drives; the bootable virtual floppy disk can then contain software that provides access to the optical medium in its native format.

A little-known feature of the original IBM BIOS versions is that before beginning the normal boot process they would attempt to load a program through the keyboard port. This was intended for factory test or diagnostic purposes. This was of limited utility outside of factory or repair facilities. page 5-27 IBM Personal Computer Hardware Reference Library Technical Reference, 1984, publication number 6361459 

===BIOS extensions===
In the IBM PC and AT, peripheral cards such as hard-drive controllers and video display adapters had their own BIOS extension option ROMs, which provided additional functionality. Code in these extensions runs before the operating system is loaded from mass storage. These ROMs can test and initialize hardware, add BIOS services, or replace BIOS services with their own versions of those services. For example, a SCSI controller usually has a BIOS extension ROM that adds support for hard drives connected through that controller. Some video cards have extension ROMs that replace the video services of the motherboard BIOS with their own video services. BIOS extension ROMs gain total control of the machine, so they may never return control to the BIOS that invoked them. An extension ROM could in principle contain an entire operating system or an application program, or it could implement an entirely different boot process such as booting from a network. Operation of an IBM-compatible computer system can be completely changed by removing or inserting an adapter card (or a ROM chip).

A computer system can contain several BIOS firmware chips. The motherboard BIOS typically contains code to access hardware components necessary for bootstrapping the system, such as the keyboard, display, and storage. In addition, plug-in adapter cards such as SCSI, RAID, network interface cards, and video boards often include their own BIOS (e.g. Video BIOS), complementing or replacing the system BIOS code for the given component. Even devices built into the motherboard can behave in this way; their option ROMs can be stored as separate code on the main BIOS flash chip, and upgraded either in tandem with, or separately from, the main BIOS.

An add-in card requires an option ROM if it needs to be used before the operating system can be loaded (usually this means it is required in the bootstrapping process), and is not supported by the main BIOS.

After completing the POST, the motherboard BIOS scans for extension ROMs in an area of the "upper memory area" space and runs each ROM found, in order. To discover memory-mapped ISA option ROMs during the boot process, BIOS implementations scan real-mode address space from 0x0C0000 to 0x0F0000 on 2 KiB boundaries, looking for a ROM signature: 0x55 followed by 0xAA. In a valid expansion ROM, this signature is followed by a single byte indicating the number of 512-byte blocks it occupies in real memory. The next byte contains an offset describing the option ROM's entry point. A checksum of the specified number of 512-byte blocks is calculated, and if the ROM has a valid checksum the BIOS transfers control to the specified entry address. At this point, the expansion ROM code takes over, using BIOS services to register interrupt vectors for use by post-boot applications, to provide a user configuration interface, or to display diagnostic information.

There are many methods and utilities for examining the contents of various motherboard BIOS and expansion ROMs, such as Microsoft DEBUG or the Unix dd.

===Boot environment===
The environment for the boot program is very simple: the CPU is in real mode and the general-purpose and segment registers are undefined. All BIOS services are available, and the memory below address 0x000500 contains the interrupt vector table and the 256-byte BIOS data area, but the boot program must set up its own stack (or at least MS-DOS 6 acts like it must). All memory at and above address 0x000500 can be used by the boot program; it may even overwrite itself. The BIOS initializes a reserved block of system RAM with various parameters initialized during the POST. The interrupt vectors corresponding to the BIOS interrupts have been set to point at the appropriate entry points in the BIOS.

==Operating system services==
The BIOS ROM is customized to the particular manufacturer's hardware, allowing low-level services (such as reading a keystroke or writing a sector of data to diskette) to be provided in a standardized way to an operating system. For example, an IBM PC might have either a monochrome or a color display adapter (using different display memory addresses and hardware), but a single, standard, BIOS system call may be invoked to display a character at a specified position on the screen in text mode.

The BIOS provides a small library of basic input/output functions to operate peripherals (such as the keyboard, rudimentary text and graphics display functions and so forth). When using MS-DOS, BIOS services could be accessed by an application program (or by MS-DOS) by executing an INT 13H interrupt instruction to access disk sectors, or one of a number of other documented BIOS interrupt calls to access video display, keyboard, cassette, and other devices.

Operating systems and executive software, designed to supersede this basic firmware functionality, provide replacement software interfaces to applications. This began even in the 1980s under MS-DOS, when programmers observed that using the BIOS video services for graphics display was very slow. To increase the speed of screen output, many programs bypassed the BIOS and programmed the video display hardware directly. Since the AT-compatible BIOS ran in Intel real mode, operating systems on '286 and later processors required hardware device drivers compatible with protected mode operation to replace BIOS services. In modern personal computers the BIOS is used only during booting and initial loading of system software. Before the operating system's first graphical screen is displayed, input and output are typically handled through BIOS. A boot menu such as the textual menu of Windows that allows one to choose an operating system to boot or to boot into Safe Mode or to use the last known good configuration, is displayed and receives keyboard input through BIOS.

==BIOS components==

In Intel systems, the BIOS may contain components such as the Memory Reference Code (MRC), which is responsible for handling memory timings and related hardware settings. 

==Setup utility==
Historically, the BIOS in the IBM PC and XT had no built-in user interface. The BIOS versions in earlier PCs (XT-class) were not software configurable; instead, users set the options via DIP switches on the motherboard. Later computers, including all IBM-compatibles with 80286 CPUs, had a battery-backed nonvolatile BIOS memory (CMOS RAM chip) that held BIOS settings. These settings, such as video-adapter type, memory size, and hard-disk parameters, could only be configured by running a configuration program from a disk, not built into the ROM. A special "reference diskette" was inserted in an IBM AT to configure settings such as memory size.

Early BIOS versions did not have passwords or boot-device selection options. The BIOS was hard-coded to boot from the first floppy drive, or, if that failed, the first hard disk. Access control in early AT-class machines was by a physical keylock switch (which was not hard to defeat if the computer case could be opened). Anyone who could switch on the computer could boot it.

Later, 386-class computers started integrating the BIOS setup utility in the ROM itself, alongside with the BIOS code; the computers usually booted into the BIOS setup utility if a certain key or key combination is pressed, otherwise the actual BIOS code was booted.

Award BIOS setup utility on a standard PC

A modern BIOS setup utility has a menu-based user interface (UI) accessed by pressing a certain key on the keyboard when the PC starts. Usually the key is advertised for short time during the early startup, for example "Press F1 to enter CMOS setup". The actual key depends on specific hardware. In the BIOS setup utility, a user can:

* configure hardware
* set the system clock
* enable or disable system components
* select which devices are potential boot devices
* set various password prompts, such as a password for securing access to the BIOS user interface functions itself and preventing malicious users from booting the system from unauthorized peripheral devices

==Chips==
PhoenixBIOS D686. This BIOS chip is housed in a PLCC package in a socket.

The original IBM PC BIOS (and cassette BASIC) was stored on mask-programmed read-only memory (ROM) chips in sockets on the motherboard. ROMs could be replaced, but not altered, by users. To allow for updates, many compatible computers used re-programmable memory devices such as EEPROM and later flash memory devices. According to Robert Braver, the president of the BIOS manufacturer Micro Firmware, Flash BIOS chips became common around 1995 because the electrically erasable PROM (EEPROM) chips are cheaper and easier to program than standard ultraviolet erasable PROM (EPROM) chips. Flash chips are programmed (and re-programmed) in-circuit, while EPROM chips need to be removed from the motherboard for re-programming. "Decoding RAM & ROM." Smart Computing. June 1997. Volume 8, Issue 6. BIOS versions are upgraded to take advantage of newer versions of hardware and to correct bugs in previous revisions of BIOSes. "Upgrading Your Flash BIOS For Plug And Play." Smart Computing. March 1996. Volume 7, Issue 3. 

Beginning with the IBM AT, PCs supported a hardware clock settable through BIOS. It had a century bit which allowed for manually changing the century when the year 2000 happened. Most BIOS revisions created in 1995 and nearly all BIOS revisions in 1997 supported the year 2000 by setting the century bit automatically when the clock rolled past midnight, December 31, 1999. "Time To Check BIOS." Smart Computing. April 1999. Volume 7, Issue 4. 

The first flash chips were attached to the ISA bus. Starting in 1997, the BIOS flash moved to the LPC bus, a functional replacement for ISA, following a new standard implementation known as "firmware hub" (FWH). In 2006, the first systems supporting a Serial Peripheral Interface (SPI) appeared, and the BIOS flash memory moved again.

The size of the BIOS, and the capacities of the ROM, EEPROM and other media it may be stored on, has increased over time as new features have been added to the code; BIOS versions now exist with sizes up to 16 megabytes. Some modern motherboards are including even bigger NAND flash memory ICs on board which are capable of storing whole compact operating systems, such as some Linux distributions. For example, some ASUS motherboards included SplashTop Linux embedded into their NAND flash memory ICs. SplashTop's Instant-On Linux Desktop | Geek.com 

Another type of firmware chip was found on the IBM PC and early compatibles. In the PC and AT, the keyboard interface was controlled by a microcontroller with its own programmable memory. On the IBM AT, this was a 40 pin socketed device. Some manufacturers used an EPROM version of this chip which resembled an EPROM. In the AT, this controller was also assigned the A20 gate function to manage memory above the 1 megabyte range; occasionally an upgrade of this "keyboard BIOS" was necessary to take advantage of software that could use upper memory.

==Flashing the BIOS==
In modern PCs the BIOS is stored in rewritable memory, allowing the contents to be replaced or 'rewritten'. This rewriting of the contents is sometimes termed flashing. This can be done by a special program, usually provided by the system's manufacturer, or at POST, with a BIOS image in a hard drive or USB flash drive. A file containing such contents is sometimes termed 'a BIOS image'. A BIOS might be reflashed in order to upgrade to a newer version to fix bugs or provide improved performance or to support newer hardware, or a reflashing operation might be needed to fix a damaged BIOS.

==Overclocking==
Some BIOS chips allow overclocking, an action in which the CPU is adjusted to a higher clock rate than its factory preset. Overclocking may, however, seriously compromise system reliability in insufficiently cooled computers and generally shorten component lifespan. Overclocking, incorrectly performed, may also cause components to overheat so quickly that they destroy themselves.

==BIOS chip vulnerabilities==
An American Megatrends BIOS showing a Intel CPU uCode Loading Error after a failed attempt to upload microcode patches into the CPU.

EEPROM chips are advantageous because they could be easily updated by the user; hardware manufacturers frequently issue BIOS updates to upgrade their products, improve compatibility and remove bugs. However, this advantage had the risk that an improperly executed or aborted BIOS update could render the computer or device unusable. To avoid these situations, more recent BIOSes use a "boot block"; a portion of the BIOS which runs first and must be updated separately. This code verifies if the rest of the BIOS is intact (using hash checksums or other methods) before transferring control to it. If the boot block detects any corruption in the main BIOS, it will typically warn the user that a recovery process must be initiated by booting from removable media (floppy, CD or USB memory) so the user can try flashing the BIOS again. Some motherboards have a backup BIOS (sometimes referred to as DualBIOS boards) to recover from BIOS corruptions.

===Virus attacks===
There are at least four known BIOS attack viruses, two of which were for demonstration purposes. The first one found in the wild was Mebromi, targeting Chinese users.

The first BIOS virus was CIH, whose name matches the initials of its creator, Chen Ing Hau. CIH was also called the "Chernobyl Virus", because its payload date was 1999-04-26, the 13th anniversary of the Chernobyl accident.

CIH appeared in mid-1998 and became active in April 1999. It was able to erase flash ROM BIOS content. Often, infected computers could no longer boot, and people had to remove the flash ROM IC from the motherboard and reprogram it. CIH targeted the then-widespread Intel i430TX motherboard chipset and took advantage of the fact that the Windows 9x operating systems, also widespread at the time, allowed direct hardware access to all programs.

Detached BIOS Chip
Modern systems are not vulnerable to CIH because of a variety of chipsets being used which are incompatible with the Intel i430TX chipset, and also other flash ROM IC types. There is also extra protection from accidental BIOS rewrites in the form of boot blocks which are protected from accidental overwrite or dual and quad BIOS equipped systems which may, in the event of a crash, use a backup BIOS. Also, all modern operating systems such as FreeBSD, Linux, OS X, Windows NT-based Windows OS like Windows 2000, Windows XP and newer, do not allow user-mode programs to have direct hardware access. As a result, as of 2008, CIH has become essentially harmless, at worst causing annoyance by infecting executable files and from antivirus software. Other BIOS viruses remain possible, however; New BIOS Virus Withstands HDD Wipes, March 27, 2009 by Marcus Yam - Tom's Hardware US since most Windows home users without Windows Vista/7's UAC run all applications with administrative privileges, a modern CIH-like virus could in principle still gain access to hardware without first using an exploit. The operating system OpenBSD prevents all users from having this access and the grsecurity patch for the linux kernel also prevents this direct hardware access by default, the difference being an attacker requiring a much more difficult kernel level exploit or reboot of the machine.

The second BIOS virus was a technique presented by John Heasman, principal security consultant for UK-based Next-Generation Security Software. In 2006, at the Black Hat Security Conference, he showed how to elevate privileges and read physical memory, using malicious procedures that replaced normal ACPI functions stored in flash memory.

The third BIOS virus was a technique called "Persistent BIOS infection." It appeared in 2009 at the CanSecWest Security Conference in Vancouver, and at the SyScan Security Conference in Singapore. Researchers Anibal Sacco and Alfredo Ortega, from Core Security Technologies, demonstrated how to insert malicious code into the decompression routines in the BIOS, allowing for nearly full control of the PC at start-up, even before the operating system is booted.

The proof-of-concept does not exploit a flaw in the BIOS implementation, but only involves the normal BIOS flashing procedures. Thus, it requires physical access to the machine, or for the user to be root. Despite these requirements, Ortega underlined the profound implications of his and Sacco's discovery: We can patch a driver to drop a fully working rootkit. We even have a little code that can remove or disable antivirus. 

Mebromi is a trojan which targets computers with AwardBIOS, Microsoft Windows, and antivirus software from two Chinese companies: Rising Antivirus and Jiangmin KV Antivirus. 
 
 Mebromi installs a rootkit which infects the master boot record.

In a December 2013 interview with CBS 60 Minutes, Deborah Plunkett, Information Assurance Director for the US National Security Agency claimed that NSA analysts had uncovered and thwarted a possible BIOS attack by a foreign nation state. The attack on the world's computers could have allegedly "literally taken down the US economy." The segment further cites anonymous cyber security experts briefed on the operation as alleging the plot was conceived in China. A later article in The Guardian cast doubt on the likelihood of such a threat, quoting Berkeley computer-science researcher Nicholas Weaver, Matt Blaze, a computer and information sciences professor at the University of Pennsylvania, and cybersecurity expert Robert David Graham in an analysis of the NSA's claims. 

==BIOS Boot Specification==
If the expansion ROM wishes to change the way the system boots (such as from a network device or a SCSI adapter for which the BIOS has no driver code), it can use the BIOS Boot Specification (BBS) API to register its ability to do so. Once the expansion ROMs have registered using the BBS APIs, the user can select among the available boot options from within the BIOS's user interface. This is why most BBS compliant PC BIOS implementations will not allow the user to enter the BIOS's user interface until the expansion ROMs have finished executing and registering themselves with the BBS API. The specification can be downloaded from the ACPICA website. The official title is BIOS Boot Specification (Version 1.01, 11 January 1996) and is available here:
. BIOS Boot Specification (Version 1.01, 11 January 1996) 

==Changing role of the BIOS==

BIOS services are not used by modern multitasking GUI operating systems after they initially load, so the importance of the primary part of BIOS is greatly reduced from what it was initially. The limitations of the AT-compatible BIOS were its 16-bit processor mode, 1 MByte addressable space and reliance on PC AT hardware.

Some operating systems, for example MS-DOS, rely on the BIOS to carry out most input/output tasks within the PC. Smart Computing Article - What Is The BIOS? - Computing Basics July 1994  Vol.5 Issue 7 Because the BIOS still runs in 16-bit real mode, calling BIOS services directly is inefficient for protected-mode operating systems. A number of larger, more powerful servers and workstations use a platform-independent Open Firmware (IEEE-1275) based on the Forth programming language; it is included with Sun's SPARC computers, IBM's RS/6000 line, and other PowerPC systems such as the CHRP motherboards. Later x86-based personal computer operating systems, like Windows NT, use their own, native drivers; this makes it much easier to extend support to new hardware.

Later BIOS took on more complex functions, by way of interfaces such as ACPI; these functions include power management, hot swapping, thermal management.

As of 2011, the BIOS is being replaced by the more complex Extensible Firmware Interface (EFI) in many new machines.
EFI is a specification which replaces the runtime interface of the legacy BIOS. Initially written for the Itanium architecture, EFI is now available for x86 and x86-64 platforms; the specification development is driven by The Unified EFI Forum, an industry Special Interest Group. EFI booting has been supported in only Microsoft Windows versions supporting GPT, Windows and GPT FAQ the Linux kernel 2.6.1 and later, and Mac OS X on Intel-based Macs. Extensible Firmware Interface (EFI) and Unified EFI (UEFI) However, the distinction between BIOS and EFI is rarely made in terminology by the average computer user, making BIOS a catch-all term for both systems.

===SLIC===
Some BIOSes contain a "SLIC" (software licensing description table), a digital signature placed inside the BIOS by the manufacturer, for example Dell. (It is often casually called a BIOS tattoo or a tattooed BIOS.) This SLIC is inserted in the ACPI table and contains no active code.

Computer manufacturers that distribute OEM versions of Microsoft Windows and Microsoft application software can use the SLIC to authenticate licensing to the OEM Windows Installation disk and system recovery disc containing Windows software. Systems having a SLIC can be preactivated with an OEM product key, and they verify an XML formatted OEM certificate against the SLIC in the BIOS as a means of self-activating (see System Locked Preinstallation). If a user performs a fresh install of Windows, they will need to have possession of both the OEM key and the digital certificate for their SLIC in order to bypass activation; in practice this is extremely unlikely and hence the only real way this can be achieved is if the user performs a restore using a pre-customised image provided by the OEM. Cracks for non-genuine Windows distributions usually edit the SLIC or emulate it in order to bypass Windows activation.

===Reprogrammable microcode===
Intel processors have reprogrammable microcode since the P6 microarchitecture. The BIOS may contain patches to the processor code to allow errors in the initial processor code to be fixed, updating the processor microcode each time the system is powered up. Otherwise, an expensive processor swap would be required. Scott Mueller, Upgrading and repairing PCs 15th edition, Que Publishing, 2003 ISBN 0-7897-2974-1, pages 109-110 For example, the Pentium FDIV bug became an expensive fiasco for Intel that required a product recall because the original Pentium did not have patchable microcode.

==The BIOS business==
IBM published the entire listings of the BIOS for its original PC, PC XT, PC AT, and other contemporary PC models, in an appendix of the Technical Reference manual for each machine type. The effect of the publication of the BIOS listings is that anyone can see exactly what a definitive BIOS does and how it does it. Phoenix Technology was the first company to write a fully compatible and completely legal BIOS through clean-room reverse engineering.

New standards grafted onto the BIOS are usually without complete public documentation or any BIOS listings. As a result, it is not as easy to learn the intimate details about the many non-IBM additions to BIOS as about the core BIOS services.

Most PC motherboard suppliers license a BIOS "core" and toolkit from a commercial third-party, known as an "independent BIOS vendor" or IBV. The motherboard manufacturer then customizes this BIOS to suit its own hardware. For this reason, updated BIOSes are normally obtained directly from the motherboard manufacturer. Major BIOS vendors include American Megatrends (AMI), Insyde Software, Phoenix Technologies and Byosoft. Former vendors include Award Software and Microid Research which were acquired by Phoenix Technologies in 1998; Phoenix later phased out the Award Brand name. General Software, which was also acquired by Phoenix in 2007, sold BIOS for Intel processor based embedded systems.

The open source community increased their effort to develop a replacement for proprietary BIOSes and their future incarnations with an open sourced counterpart through the coreboot and OpenBIOS/Open Firmware projects. AMD provided product specifications for some chipsets, and Google is sponsoring the project. Motherboard manufacturer Tyan offers coreboot next to the standard BIOS with their Opteron line of motherboards. MSI and Gigabyte Technology have followed suit with the MSI K9ND MS-9282 and MSI K9SD MS-9185 resp. the M57SLI-S4 models.

===Comparison===

 Comparison of different BIOS implementations 
 AwardBIOS AMIBIOS Insyde SeaBIOS 
 License Proprietary Proprietary Proprietary LGPL v3 
 Maintained / developed 
 32-bit PCI BIOS calls 
 
 (1.2) (1.2) 
 
 Boot menu 
 Compression (LHA) (LHA) (RLE) (LZMA) 
 CMOS 
 (3.0) 
 
 Flash from ROM 
 Language Assembly Assembly Assembly C 
 (48) (48) (48) 
 MultiProcessor Specification 
 Option ROM 
 Password 
 
 Setup screen 
 (2.4) 
 Splash screen (PCX) (BMP, JPG) 
 USB booting 
 USB hub 
 USB keyboard 
 USB mouse 

==See also==

*Advanced Configuration and Power Interface (ACPI)
*Advanced Host Controller Interface (AHCI)
*ARCS
*coreboot, a project whose aim is to create a free and open source replacement for the BIOS
*e820h memory map
*Extended System Configuration Data
*Double boot
*Memtest86
*Open Firmware
*Plug and play
*System Management BIOS
*VESA BIOS Extensions
*Video BIOS
*XDK Debug BIOS for Xbox video game console
*Year 2000 problem

==Notes==
 
 The signature at offset +0x1FE in boot sectors is 0x55 0xAA, that is 0x55 at offset +0x1FE and 0xAA at offset +0x1FF. Since little-endian representation must be assumed in the context of IBM PC compatible machines, this can be written as 16-bit word 0xAA55 in programs for x86 processors (note the swapped order), whereas it would have to be written as 0x55AA in programs for other CPU architectures using a big-endian representation. Since this has been mixed up numerous times in books and even in original Microsoft reference documents, this article uses the offset-based byte-wise on-disk representation to avoid any possible misinterpretation. 
 

==References==

 
 
 
 
 
 
 

==Further reading==

*
*
*
*
*
*Ralf Brown's Interrupt List
*BIOS Disassembly Ninjutsu Uncovered, 1st edition (freely available book, PDF)

==External links==

*List of BIOS options
*How BIOS Works
*Persistent BIOS Infection - Phrack #66

===Specifications===
*Preventing BIOS Failures Using Intel Boot Block Flash Memory (December 1998)
*BIOS Boot Specification 1.01 (January 1996)
*Implementing a Plug and Play BIOS Using Intel's Boot Block Flash Memory (February 1995)

 



[[BoseEinstein condensate]]

A BoseEinstein condensate (BEC) is a state of matter of a dilute gas of bosons cooled to temperatures very close to absolute zero (that is, very near or , Table 2.4 page 43 ). Under such conditions, a large fraction of the bosons occupy the lowest quantum state, at which point quantum effects become apparent on a macroscopic scale. These effects are called macroscopic quantum phenomena.

Although later experiments have revealed complex interactions, this state of matter was first predicted, generally, in 192425 by Satyendra Nath Bose and Albert Einstein.

== History ==
Velocity-distribution data (3 views) for a gas of rubidium atoms, confirming the discovery of a new phase of matter, the BoseEinstein condensate. before the appearance of a BoseEinstein condensate. Center: just after the appearance of the condensate. further evaporation, leaving a sample of nearly pure condensate.

Bose first sent a paper to Einstein on the quantum statistics of light quanta (now called photons). Einstein was impressed, translated the paper himself from English to German and submitted it for Bose to the Zeitschrift fr Physik, which published it. (The Einstein manuscript, once believed to be lost, was found in a library at Leiden University in 2005. ). Einstein then extended Bose's ideas to material particles (or matter) in two other papers. The result of the efforts of Bose and Einstein is the concept of a Bose gas, governed by BoseEinstein statistics, which describes the statistical distribution of identical particles with integer spin, now known as bosons. Bosonic particles, which include the photon as well as atoms such as helium-4 (4He), are allowed to share quantum states with each other. Einstein proposed that cooling bosonic atoms to a very low temperature would cause them to fall (or "condense") into the lowest accessible quantum state, resulting in a new form of matter.

In 1938 Fritz London proposed BEC as a mechanism for superfluidity in 4He and superconductivity. London, F. Superfluids Vol.I and II, (reprinted New York: Dover 1964) 

In 1995 the first gaseous condensate was produced by Eric Cornell and Carl Wieman at the University of Colorado at Boulder NISTJILA lab, using a gas of rubidium atoms cooled to 170 nanokelvin (nK) (). For their achievements Cornell, Wieman, and Wolfgang Ketterle at MIT received the 2001 Nobel Prize in Physics. In November 2010 the first photon BEC was observed. In 2012, the theory of the photon BEC was developed. 

== Concept ==
This transition to BEC occurs below a critical temperature, which for a uniform three-dimensional gas consisting of non-interacting particles with no apparent internal degrees of freedom is given by:

:

where:

 is the critical temperature, 
 is the particle density, 
 is the mass per boson, 
 is the reduced Planck constant, 
 is the Boltzmann constant, and 
 is the Riemann zeta function; 

== Einstein's non-interacting model ==

Consider a collection of N noninteracting particles, which can each be in one of two quantum states, and . If the two states are equal in energy, each different configuration is equally likely.

If we can tell which particle is which, there are different configurations, since each particle can be in or independently. In almost all of the configurations, about half the particles are in and the other half in . The balance is a statistical effect: the number of configurations is largest when the particles are divided equally.

If the particles are indistinguishable, however, there are only N+1 different configurations. If there are K particles in state , there are particles in state . Whether any particular particle is in state or in state cannot be determined, so each value of K determines a unique quantum state for the whole system. If all these states are equally likely, there is no statistical spreading out; it is just as likely for all the particles to sit in as for the particles to be split half and half.

Suppose now that the energy of state is slightly greater than the energy of state by an amount E. At temperature T, a particle will have a lesser probability to be in state by exp(E/kT). In the distinguishable case, the particle distribution will be biased slightly towards state , and the distribution will be slightly different from half-and-half. But in the indistinguishable case, since there is no statistical pressure toward equal numbers, the most-likely outcome is that most of the particles will collapse into state .

In the distinguishable case, for large N, the fraction in state can be computed. It is the same as flipping a coin with probability proportional to p = exp(E/T) to land tails. The probability to land heads is , which is a smooth function of p, and thus of the energy.

In the indistinguishable case, each value of K is a single state, which has its own separate Boltzmann probability. So the probability distribution is exponential:

:

For large N, the normalization constant C is . The expected total number of particles not in the lowest energy state, in the limit that , is equal to . It does not grow when N is large; it just approaches a constant. This will be a negligible fraction of the total number of particles. So a collection of enough Bose particles in thermal equilibrium will mostly be in the ground state, with only a few in any excited state, no matter how small the energy difference.

Consider now a gas of particles, which can be in different momentum states labeled . If the number of particles is less than the number of thermally accessible states, for high temperatures and low densities, the particles will all be in different states. In this limit, the gas is classical. As the density increases or the temperature decreases, the number of accessible states per particle becomes smaller, and at some point, more particles will be forced into a single state than the maximum allowed for that state by statistical weighting. From this point on, any extra particle added will go into the ground state.

To calculate the transition temperature at any density, integrate, over all momentum states, the expression for maximum number of excited particles, :

:
:

When the integral is evaluated with the factors of k'B and restored by dimensional analysis, it gives the critical temperature formula of the preceding section. Therefore, this integral defines the critical temperature and particle number corresponding to the conditions of negligible chemical potential. In BoseEinstein statistics distribution,  is actually still nonzero for BECs; however,  is less than the ground state energy. Except when specifically talking about the ground state,  can consequently be approximated for most energy or momentum states as   0.

== Interacting models ==

=== Bogoliubov theory for weakly interacting Bose gas ===

=== GrossPitaevskii equation ===

In some simplest cases, the state of condensed particles can be described with a nonlinear Schrdinger equation, also known as Gross-Pitaevskii or Ginzburg-Landau equation. The validity of this approach is actually limited to the case of ultracold temperatures, which fits well for the most alkali atoms experiments.

This approach originates from the assumption that the state of the BEC can be described by the unique wavefunction of the condensate . For a system of this nature, is interpreted as the particle density, so the total number of atoms is 

Provided essentially all atoms are in the condensate (that is, have condensed to the ground state), and treating the bosons using mean field theory, the energy (E) associated with the state is:

:

Minimizing this energy with respect to infinitesimal variations in , and holding the number of atoms constant, yields the GrossPitaevski equation (GPE) (also a non-linear Schrdinger equation):

:

where:

 is the mass of the bosons, 
 is the external potential, 
 is representative of the inter-particle interactions. 

In the case of zero external potential, the dispersion law of interacting Bose-Einstein-condensed particles is given by so-called Bogoliubov spectrum (for ):

:

The Gross-Pitaevskii equation (GPE) provides a relatively good description of the behavior of atomic BEC's. However, GPE does not take into account the temperature dependence of dynamical variables, and is therefore valid only for .
It is not applicable for example for the condensates of excitons, magnons and photons, where the critical temperature is up to room one.

==== Weaknesses of GrossPitaevskii model ====
The GrossPitaevskii model of BEC is a physical approximation valid for certain classes of BEC's only. By construction, GPE uses the following simplifications: it assumes that interactions between condensate particles are of the contact two-body type and also it neglects anomalous contributions to self-energy. Beliaev, S. T. Zh. Eksp. Teor. Fiz. 34, 418432 (1958); ibid. 433446 Phys. JETP 3, 299 (1957). These assumptions are suitable mostly for the dilute three-dimensional condensates. If one relaxes any of these assumptions, the equation for the condensate wavefunction acquires the terms containing higher-order powers of the wavefunction. Moreover, for some physical systems the amount of such terms turns out to be infinite, therefore, the equation becomes essentially non-polynomial. The examples where this could happen are the BoseFermi composite condensates, effectively lower-dimensional condensates, and dense condensates and superfluid clusters and droplets. 

=== Other models ===
However, it is clear that in a general case the behaviour of Bose-Einstein condensate can be described by coupled evolution equations for condensate density, superfluid velocity and distribution function of elementary excitations. This problem was in 1977 by Peletminskii et al. in microscopical approach. The Peletminskii equations are valid for any finite temperatures below the critical point. Years after, in 1985, Kirkpatrick and Dorfman obtained similar equations using another microscopical approach. The Peletminskii equations also reproduce Khalatnikov hydrodynamical equations for superfluid as a limiting case.

== Superfluidity of BEC and Landau criterion ==

The phenomena of superfluidity of a Bose gas and superconductivity of a strongly-correlated Fermi gas (a gas of Cooper pairs) are tightly connected to Bose-Einstein condensation. Under corresponding conditions, below the temperature of phase transition, these phenomena were observed in helium-4 and different classes of superconductors. (In this sense, the superconductivity is often called simply as the superfluidity of Fermi gas).

In the simplest form, the origin of supefluidity can be seen from the weakly interacting bosons model.

== Experimental observation ==

=== Superfluid He-4 ===

In 1938, Pyotr Kapitsa, John Allen and Don Misener discovered that helium-4 became a new kind of fluid, now known as a superfluid, at temperatures less than 2.17 K (the lambda point). Superfluid helium has many unusual properties, including zero viscosity (the ability to flow without dissipating energy) and the existence of quantized vortices. It was quickly believed that the superfluidity was due to partial BoseEinstein condensation of the liquid. In fact, many of the properties of superfluid helium also appear in the gaseous BoseEinstein condensates created by Cornell, Wieman and Ketterle (see below). Superfluid helium-4 is a liquid rather than a gas, which means that the interactions between the atoms are relatively strong; the original theory of BoseEinstein condensation must be heavily modified in order to describe it. BoseEinstein condensation remains, however, fundamental to the superfluid properties of helium-4. Note that helium-3, consisting of fermions instead of bosons, also enters a superfluid phase at low temperature, which can be explained by the formation of bosonic Cooper pairs of two atoms each (see also fermionic condensate).

=== Atomic condensates ===

The first "pure" BoseEinstein condensate was created by Eric Cornell, Carl Wieman, and co-workers at JILA on 5 June 1995. They did this by cooling a dilute vapor consisting of approximately two thousand rubidium-87 atoms to below 170 nK using a combination of laser cooling (a technique that won its inventors Steven Chu, Claude Cohen-Tannoudji, and William D. Phillips the 1997 Nobel Prize in Physics) and magnetic evaporative cooling. About four months later, an independent effort led by Wolfgang Ketterle at MIT created a condensate made of sodium-23. Ketterle's condensate had about a hundred times more atoms, allowing him to obtain several important results such as the observation of quantum mechanical interference between two different condensates. Cornell, Wieman and Ketterle won the 2001 Nobel Prize in Physics for their achievements. A group led by Randall Hulet at Rice University announced the creation of a condensate of lithium atoms only one month following the JILA work. Lithium has attractive interactions which causes the condensate to be unstable and to collapse for all but a few atoms. Hulet and co-workers showed in a subsequent experiment that the condensate could be stabilized by the quantum pressure from trap confinement for up to about 1000 atoms.

The BoseEinstein condensation also applies to quasiparticles in solids. A magnon in an antiferromagnet carries spin 1 and thus obeys BoseEinstein statistics. The density of magnons is controlled by an external magnetic field, which plays the role of the magnon chemical potential. This technique provides access to a wide range of boson densities from the limit of a dilute Bose gas to that of a strongly interacting Bose liquid. A magnetic ordering observed at the point of condensation is the analog of superfluidity. In 1999 Bose condensation of magnons was demonstrated in the antiferromagnet Tl Cu Cl3. The condensation was observed at temperatures as large as 14 K. Such a high transition temperature (relative to that of atomic gases) is due to the greater density achievable with magnons and the smaller mass (roughly equal to the mass of an electron). In 2006, condensation of magnons in ferromagnets was even shown at room temperature, Magnon Bose Einstein Condensation made simple. Website of the "Westfhlische Wilhelms Universitt Mnster" Prof.Demokritov. Retrieved 25 June 2012. where the authors used pumping techniques.

==== Velocity-distribution data graph ====

In the image accompanying this article, the velocity-distribution data indicates the formation of a BoseEinstein condensate out of a gas of rubidium atoms. The false colors indicate the number of atoms at each velocity, with red being the fewest and white being the most. The areas appearing white and light blue are at the lowest velocities. The peak is not infinitely narrow because of the Heisenberg uncertainty principle: since the atoms are trapped in a particular region of space, their velocity distribution necessarily possesses a certain minimum width. This width is given by the curvature of the magnetic trapping potential in the given direction. More tightly confined directions have bigger widths in the ballistic velocity distribution. This anisotropy of the peak on the right is a purely quantum-mechanical effect and does not exist in the thermal distribution on the left. This graph served as the cover design for the 1999 textbook Thermal Physics by Ralph Baierlein. 

=== Quasiparticle condensation ===

== Peculiarities of a condensate ==

=== Vortices ===

As in many other systems, vortices can exist in BECs. These can be created, for example, by 'stirring' the condensate with lasers, or rotating the confining trap. The vortex created will be a quantum vortex. These phenomena are allowed for by the non-linear term in the GPE. As the vortices must have quantized angular momentum the wavefunction may have the form where and are as in the cylindrical coordinate system, and is the angular number. This is particularly likely for an axially symmetric (for instance, harmonic) confining potential, which is commonly used. The notion is easily generalized. To determine , the energy of must be minimized, according to the constraint . This is usually done computationally, however in a uniform medium the analytic form

:

where:

 is density far from the vortex, 
 
 is healing length of the condensate. 

demonstrates the correct behavior, and is a good approximation.

A singly charged vortex () is in the ground state, with its energy given by

:

where:

 is the farthest distance from the vortex considered. 

(To obtain an energy which is well defined it is necessary to include this boundary .)

For multiply charged vortices () the energy is approximated by

:

which is greater than that of singly charged vortices, indicating that these multiply charged vortices are unstable to decay. Research has, however, indicated they are metastable states, so may have relatively long lifetimes.

Closely related to the creation of vortices in BECs is the generation of so-called dark solitons in one-dimensional BECs. These topological objects feature a phase gradient across their nodal plane, which stabilizes their shape even in propagation and interaction. Although solitons carry no charge and are thus prone to decay, relatively long-lived dark solitons have been produced and studied extensively. 

=== Attractive interactions ===
The experiments led by Randall Hulet at Rice University from 1995 through 2000 showed that lithium condensates with attractive interactions could stably exist, but only up to a certain critical atom number. Beyond this critical number, the attraction overwhelmed the zero-point energy of the harmonic confining potential, causing the condensate to collapse in a burst reminiscent of a supernova explosion where an explosion is preceded by an implosion. By quench cooling the gas of lithium atoms, they observed the condensate to first grow, and subsequently collapse when the critical number was exceeded.

Further experimentation on attractive condensates was performed in 2000 by the JILA team, consisting of Cornell, Wieman and coworkers. They originally used rubidium-87, an isotope whose atoms naturally repel each other, making a more stable condensate. Their instrumentation now had better control over the condensate so experimentation was made on naturally attracting atoms of another rubidium isotope, rubidium-85 (having negative atomatom scattering length). Through a process called Feshbach resonance involving a sweep of the magnetic field causing spin flip collisions, they lowered the characteristic, discrete energies at which the rubidium atoms bond into molecules, making their Rb-85 atoms repulsive and creating a stable condensate. The reversible flip from attraction to repulsion stems from quantum interference among condensate atoms which behave as waves.

When the JILA team raised the magnetic field strength still further, the condensate suddenly reverted to attraction, imploded and shrank beyond detection, and then exploded, expelling off about two-thirds of its 10,000 or so atoms. About half of the atoms in the condensate seemed to have disappeared from the experiment altogether, not being seen either in the cold remnant or the expanding gas cloud. Carl Wieman explained that under current atomic theory this characteristic of BoseEinstein condensate could not be explained because the energy state of an atom near absolute zero should not be enough to cause an implosion; however, subsequent mean field theories have been proposed to explain it. The atoms that seem to have disappeared almost certainly still exist in some form, just not in a form that could be accounted for in that experiment. Most likely they formed molecules consisting of two bonded rubidium atoms. The energy gained by making this transition imparts a velocity sufficient for them to leave the trap without being detected.

== Current research ==

Compared to more commonly encountered states of matter, BoseEinstein condensates are extremely fragile. The slightest interaction with the outside world can be enough to warm them past the condensation threshold, eliminating their interesting properties and forming a normal gas. 

Nevertheless, they have proven useful in exploring a wide range of questions in fundamental physics, and the years since the initial discoveries by the JILA and MIT groups have seen an explosion in experimental and theoretical activity. Examples include experiments that have demonstrated interference between condensates due to waveparticle duality, the study of superfluidity and quantized vortices, the creation of bright matter wave solitons from Bose condensates confined to one dimension, and the slowing of light pulses to very low speeds using electromagnetically induced transparency. Vortices in BoseEinstein condensates are also currently the subject of analogue gravity research, studying the possibility of modeling black holes and their related phenomena in such environments in the lab. Experimenters have also realized "optical lattices", where the interference pattern from overlapping lasers provides a periodic potential for the condensate. These have been used to explore the transition between a superfluid and a Mott insulator, and may be useful in studying BoseEinstein condensation in fewer than three dimensions, for example the TonksGirardeau gas.

BoseEinstein condensates composed of a wide range of isotopes have been produced. 

Related experiments in cooling fermions rather than bosons to extremely low temperatures have created degenerate gases, where the atoms do not congregate in a single state due to the Pauli exclusion principle. To exhibit BoseEinstein condensation, the fermions must "pair up" to form compound particles (e.g. molecules or Cooper pairs) that are bosons. The first molecular BoseEinstein condensates were created in November 2003 by the groups of Rudolf Grimm at the University of Innsbruck, Deborah S. Jin at the University of Colorado at Boulder and Wolfgang Ketterle at MIT. Jin quickly went on to create the first fermionic condensate composed of Cooper pairs. 

In 1999, Danish physicist Lene Hau led a team from Harvard University which succeeded in slowing a beam of light to about 17 meters per second. She was able to achieve this by using a superfluid. Hau and her associates at Harvard University have since successfully made a group of condensate atoms recoil from a "light pulse" such that they recorded the light's phase and amplitude, which was recovered by a second nearby condensate, by what they term "slow-light-mediated atomic matter-wave amplification" using BoseEinstein condensates: details of the experiment are discussed in an article in the journal Nature, 8 February 2007. 

Researchers in the new field of atomtronics use the properties of BoseEinstein condensates when manipulating groups of identical cold atoms using lasers. Further, BoseEinstein condensates have been proposed by Emmanuel David Tannenbaum to be used in anti-stealth technology. 

=== Isotopes ===

The effect has mainly been observed on alkaline atoms which have nuclear properties particularly suitable for working with traps. As of 2012, using ultra-low temperatures of 107 K or below, BoseEinstein condensates had been obtained for a multitude of isotopes, mainly of alkaline, alkaline earth,
and lanthanoid atoms (7Li, 23Na, 39K, 41K, 85Rb, 87Rb, 133Cs, 52Cr, 40Ca, 84Sr, 86Sr, 88Sr, 174Yb, 164Dy, and 168Er ). Condensation research was finally successful even with hydrogen with the aid of special methods. In contrast, the superfluid state of the bosonic 4He at temperatures below 2.17 K is not a good example of BoseEinstein condensation, because the interaction between the 4He bosons is too strong. Only 8% of the atoms are in the single-particle ground state near zero temperature, rather than the 100% expected of a true BoseEinstein condensate.

The spin-statistics theorem of Wolfgang Pauli states that half-integer spins (in units of ) lead to fermionic behavior, e.g., the Pauli exclusion principle forbidding that more than two electrons possess the same energy, whereas integer spins lead to bosonic behavior, e.g., condensation of identical bosonic particles in a common ground state.

The bosonic, rather than fermionic, behavior of some of these alkaline gases appears odd at first sight, because their nuclei have half-integer total spin. The bosonic behavior arises from a subtle interplay of electronic and nuclear spins: at ultra-low temperatures and corresponding excitation energies, the half-integer total spin of the electronic shell and the half-integer total spin of the nucleus of the atom are coupled by a very weak hyperfine interaction. The total spin of the atom, arising from this coupling, is an integer value leading to the bosonic ultra-low temperature behavior of the atom. The chemistry of the systems at room temperature is determined by the electronic properties, which is essentially fermionic, since at room temperature, thermal excitations have typical energies much higher than the hyperfine values.

== See also ==

*Atom laser
*Atomic coherence
*BoseEinstein correlations
*
*Bose-Einstein condensation of excitons
*Electromagnetically induced transparency
*Fermionic condensate
*Gas in a box
*GrossPitaevskii equation
*Macroscopic quantum phenomena
*Macroscopic quantum self-trapping
*Slow light
*Superconductivity
*Superfluid film
*Superfluid helium-4
*Supersolid
*Tachyon condensation
*Timeline of low-temperature technology
*Super-heavy atom
*Wiener sausage

== References ==

== Further reading ==

*
*,
*
*
*
*
*
*.
*
*.
*
*
*
*
*.
*
*
*
*
*C. J. Pethick and H. Smith, BoseEinstein Condensation in Dilute Gases, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 2001.
*Lev P. Pitaevskii and S. Stringari, BoseEinstein Condensation, Clarendon Press, Oxford, 2003.
*Mackie M, Suominen KA, Javanainen J., "Mean-field theory of Feshbach-resonant interactions in 85Rb condensates." Phys Rev Lett. 2002 Oct 28;89(18):180403.

== External links ==
*BoseEinstein Condensation 2009 Conference BoseEinstein Condensation 2009  Frontiers in Quantum Gases
*BEC Homepage General introduction to BoseEinstein condensation
*Nobel Prize in Physics 2001  for the achievement of BoseEinstein condensation in dilute gases of alkali atoms, and for early fundamental studies of the properties of the condensates
*Physics Today: Cornell, Ketterle, and Wieman Share Nobel Prize for BoseEinstein Condensates
*BoseEinstein Condensates at JILA
*Atomcool at Rice University
*Alkali Quantum Gases at MIT
*Atom Optics at UQ
*Einstein's manuscript on the BoseEinstein condensate discovered at Leiden University
*BoseEinstein condensate on arxiv.org
*Bosons  The Birds That Flock and Sing Together
*Easy BEC machine  information on constructing a BoseEinstein condensate machine.
*Verging on absolute zero  Cosmos Online
*Lecture by W Ketterle at MIT in 2001
*BoseEinstein Condensation at NIST  NIST resource on BEC



[[B (programming language)]]

B is a programming language developed at Bell Labs circa 1969. It is the work of Ken Thompson with Dennis Ritchie. B first appeared circa 1969.

B was derived from BCPL, and its name may be a contraction of BCPL. It is possible that its name may be based on Bon, an earlier but unrelated, and rather different, programming language that Thompson designed for use on Multics. 

B was designed for recursive, non-numeric, machine independent applications, such as system and language software. 

==History==
Initially Ken Thompson and later Dennis Ritchie developed B basing it mainly on the BCPL language Thompson used in the Multics project. B was essentially the BCPL system stripped of any component Thompson felt he could do without in order to make it fit within the memory capacity of the minicomputers of the time. The BCPL to B transition also included changes made to suit Thompson's preferences (mostly along the lines of reducing the number of non-whitespace characters in a typical program). Much of the typical algol-like syntax of BCPL was rather heavily changed in this process, such as the := and = operators which were replaced with = for assignment and == for equality test. (The & and | of BCPL was later changed to && and || in the transition to what is now known as C.) 

Thomson invented arithmetic assignment operators for B, using x=+y to add y to x (nowadays the operator is spelled +=). B also introduced the increment and decrement operators (++ and --); Their prefix or postfix position determines whether the value is taken prior or post alteration of the operand. These innovations were not in the earliest versions of B. Some guess that they were created for the auto-increment and auto-decrement address modes of the DEC PDP-11. This is historically impossible as there was no PDP-11 at the time that B was developed. 

B is typeless, or more precisely has one data type: the computer word. Most operators (e.g., +, -, *, /) treated this as an integer, but others treated it as a memory address to be dereferenced. In many other ways it looked a lot like an early version of C. There are a few library functions, including some that vaguely resemble functions from the standard I/O library in C. 

Early implementations were for the DEC PDP-7 and PDP-11 minicomputers using early Unix, and Honeywell series bell-labs.com - Early Unix history and evolution, 2004-04-09 36-bit mainframes running the operating system GCOS. The earliest PDP-7 implementations compiled to threaded code, and then Ritchie wrote a compiler using TMG which produced machine code. In 1970 a PDP-11 was acquired and threaded code was used for the port. An early version of yacc was produced with this PDP-11 configuration. Ritchie took over maintenance during this period. 

The typeless nature of B made sense on the Honeywell, PDP-7 and many older computers, but was a problem on the PDP-11 because it was difficult to elegantly access the character data type that the PDP-11 and most modern computers fully support. Starting in 1971 Ritchie made changes to the language while converting its compiler to produce machine code, most notably adding data typing for variables. During 1971 and 1972 B evolved into "New B" (NB) and then C. 

B continues to see use (as of 2014) on GCOS mainframes, and on certain embedded systems for a variety of reasons, including limited hardware in the small systems; extensive libraries, tools, licensing cost issues; and simply being good enough for the job on others. The highly influential AberMUD was originally written in B.

B is almost extinct, having been superseded by the C language. 

==Examples==
The following example is from the Users' Reference to B by Ken Thompson: 

/* The following function will print a non-negative number, n, to
 the base b, where 2<=b<=10. This routine uses the fact that
 in the ASCII character set, the digits 0 to 9 have sequential
 code values. */

printn(n,b) {
 extrn putchar;
 auto a;

 if(a=n/b) /* assignment, not test for equality */
 printn(a, b); /* recursive */
 putchar(n%b + '0');
}

==See also==

==References==

==External links==
* [http://man.cat-v.org/unix-1st/1/b Manual page for b(1) from Unix First Edition
* The Development of the C Language, Dennis M. Ritchie. Puts B in the context of BCPL and C.
* Users' Reference to B, Ken Thompson. Describes the PDP-11 version.
* The Programming Language B, S. C. Johnson & B. W. Kernighan, Technical Report CS TR 8, Bell Labs (January 1973). The GCOS version on Honeywell equipment.
* B Language Reference Manual, Thinkage Ltd. The production version of the language as used on GCOS, including language and runtime library.



[[BeerLambert law]]

An example of BeerLambert law: green laser light in a solution of Rhodamine 6B. The beam intensity becomes weaker as it passes through solution
In physical optics and transport theory, the BeerLambert law, also known as Beer's law, the LambertBeer law, or the BeerLambertBouguer law (named after August Beer, Johann Heinrich Lambert, and Pierre Bouguer) relates the attenuation of light to the properties of the material through which one substance like light, neutrons or host rarefied gases is traveling. It is strongly related to BGK model.

==Equations==
The law states that there is a logarithmic dependence between the transmission (or transmissivity or transmittance), T, of light through a substance and the product of the attenuation coefficient of the substance, , and the distance the light travels through the material (i.e., the path length), . The attenuation coefficient can, in turn, be written as a product of either an absorptivity of the attenuator, , and the concentration c of attenuating species in the material, or a total (absorption and scattering) cross section, , and the (number) density N' of attenuators.
In some chemistry applications for liquids these relations are usually written with the notation:
:
whereas in biology and physics, they are normally written as:
:
where and are the intensity (power per unit area) of the incident radiation and the transmitted radiation, respectively;  is attenuation cross section and N is the concentration (number per unit volume) of attenuating medium.
The base 10 and base e conventions must not be confused because they have different numerical values for the attenuation coefficient: . However, it is easy to convert one to the other, using
: and to express the decimal logarithm quantity with the decibel unit of measure.
The transmissivity (ability to transmit) is expressed in terms of an absorbance which is defined as
:
whereas it can be expressed in decibels as:
:
This implies that the absorbance becomes linear with the concentration (or number density of attenuators) according to
:
and
:
for the two cases, respectively.
Thus, if the path length and the attenuation coefficient (or the total cross section) are known and the absorbance is measured, the concentration of the substance (or the number density of attenuators) can be deduced.
Although several of the expressions above often are used as BeerLambert law, the name should strictly speaking only be associated with the latter two. The reason is that historically, the Lambert law states that attenuation is proportional to the light path length, whereas the Beer law states that attenuation is proportional to the concentration of attenuating species in the material. J. D. J. Ingle and S. R. Crouch, Spectrochemical Analysis, Prentice Hall, New Jersey (1988) 
If the concentration is expressed as a mole fraction i.e., a dimensionless fraction, the attenuation coefficient () takes the same dimension as the attenuation coefficient, i.e., reciprocal length (e.g., m1). However, if the concentration is expressed in moles per unit volume, the attenuation coefficient () is used in Lmol1cm1, or sometimes in converted SI units of m2mol1.
The attenuation coefficient ' is one of many ways to describe the atenuation of electromagnetic waves. For the others, and their interrelationships, see the article: Mathematical descriptions of opacity. For example, ' can be expressed in terms of the imaginary part of the refractive index, , and the wavelength of the radiation(in free space), 0, according to
:
In molecular attenuation spectrometry, the attenuation cross section  is expressed in terms of a linestrength, S, and an (area-normalized) lineshape function, . The frequency scale in molecular spectroscopy is often in cm1, where the lineshape function is expressed in units of 1/cm1. Since N is given as a number density in units of 1/cm3, the linestrength is often given in units of cm2cm1/molecule. A typical linestrength in one of the vibrational overtone bands of smaller molecules, e.g., around 1.5 m in CO or CO2, is around 1023 cm2cm1, although it can be larger for species with strong transitions, e.g., C2H2. The linestrengths of various transitions can be found in large databases, e.g., HITRAN. The lineshape function often takes a value around a few 1/cm1, up to around 10/cm1 under low pressure conditions, when the transition is Doppler broadened, and below this under atmospheric pressure conditions, when the transition is collision broadened. It has also become commonplace to express the linestrength in units of cm2/atm since then the concentration is given in terms of a pressure in units of atm. A typical linestrength is then often in the order of 103 cm2/atm. Under these conditions, the detectability of a given technique is often quoted in terms of ppmm.
The fact that there are two commensurate definitions of attenuation (in base 10 or e) implies that the absorbance and the attenuation coefficient for the cases with gases, A' and ', are ln 10 (approximately 2.3) times as large as the corresponding values for liquids, i.e., A and , respectively. Therefore, care must be taken when interpreting data that the correct form of the law is used.
The law tends to break down at very high concentrations, especially if the material is highly scattering. If the radiation is especially intense, nonlinear optical processes can also cause variances. The main reason, however, is the following. At high concentrations, the molecules are closer to each other and begin to interact with each other. This interaction will change several properties of the molecule, and thus will change the attenuation. If the attenuation is different at higher concentrations than at lower ones, then the plot of the attenuation coefficient will not be linear, as is suggested by the equation, so you can only use it when all the concentrations you are working with are low enough that the absorbtivity is the same for all of them. http://elearnocean.com/chemical/ce/4th%20sem/ima/notes/22239.pdf 

==Derivation==
Classically, the BeerLambert law was first devised independently where Lambert's law stated that absorbance is directly proportional to the thickness of the sample, and Beer's law stated that absorbance is proportional to the concentration of the sample. The modern derivation of the BeerLambert law combines the two laws and correlate the absorbance to both, the concentration as well as the thickness (path length) of the sample. Derivation of BeerLambert Law 
In concept, the derivation of the BeerLambert law is straightforward. Divide the attenuating sample into thin slices that are perpendicular to the beam of light. The light that emerges from a slice is slightly less intense than the light that entered because some of the photons have run into molecules in the sample and did not make it to the other side. For most cases where measurements of attenuation are needed, a vast majority of the light entering the slice leaves without being attenuated. Because the physical description of the problem is in terms of differencesintensity before and after light passes through the slicewe can easily write an ordinary differential equation model for attenuation. The difference in intensity due to the slice of attenuating material is reduced; leaving the slice, it is a fraction of the light entering the slice . The thickness of the slice is , which scales the amount of attenuation (thin slice does not attenuates much light but a thick slice attenuates a lot). In symbols, , or . This conceptual overview uses to describe how much light is attenuated. All we can say about the value of this constant is that it will be different for each material. Also, its values should be constrained between 1 and 0. The following paragraphs cover the meaning of this constant and the whole derivation in much greater detail.
Assume that particles may be described as having an attenuation cross section (i.e., area), , perpendicular to the path of light through a solution, such that a photon of light is attenuated if it strikes the particle, and is transmitted if it does not.
Define z as an axis parallel to the direction that photons of light are moving, and A and dz as the area and thickness (along the z axis) of a 3-dimensional slab of space through which light is passing.
We assume that dz is sufficiently small that one particle in the slab cannot obscure another particle in the slab when viewed along the z direction. The concentration of particles in the slab is represented by N.
It follows that the fraction of photons attenuated (absorbed and scattered away) when passing through this slab is equal to the total opaque area of the particles in the slab, AN dz, divided by the area of the slab A, which yields N dz. Expressing the number of photons attenuated by the slab as dI'z, and the total number of photons incident on the slab as I'z, the number of photons attenuated by the slab is given by
:
Note that because there are fewer photons which pass through the slab than are incident on it, dI'z is actually negative (It is proportional in magnitude to the number of photons attenuated).
The solution to this simple differential equation is obtained by integrating both sides to obtain I'z as a function of z
:
The difference of intensity for a slab of real thickness  is I0 at z = 0, and Il at z = . Using the previous equation, the difference in intensity can be written as,
:
rearranging and exponentiating yields,
:
This implies that
:
and
:

The quantity  is called the total macroscopic cross section or attenuation coefficient, depending on the topic (for example in respectively the first term is used transport theory and the second one in shielding and radiation protection).
The derivation assumes that every attenuating particle behaves independently with respect to the light and is not affected by other particles. While it is commonly thought that error is introduced when particles are lying along the same optical path such that some particles are in the shadow of others, this is actually a key part of the derivation and why integration is used.

When the path taken is long enough to make the medium attenuation coefficient not uniform, the original equation must be modified as follows:
:
where z is the distance along the path through the medium, all other symbols are as defined above. ISBN 0-521-33956-1 Houghton, J.T. The Physics of Atmospheres 2nd ed. Chapter 2 This is taken into account in each in the atmospheric equation above.

==Deviations from BeerLambert law==
Under certain conditions BeerLambert law fails to maintain a linear relationship between attenuation and concentration of analyte. Mehta A.Limitations and Deviations of BeerLambert Law These deviations are classified into three categories:
# Real  fundamental deviations due to the limitations of the law itself.
# Chemical  deviations observed due to specific chemical species of the sample which is being analyzed.
# Instrument  deviations which occur due to how the attenuation measurements are made.

==Prerequisites==
There are at least six conditions that need to be fulfilled in order for Beers law to be valid. These are:
# The attenuators must act independently of each other;
# The attenuating medium must be homogeneous in the interaction volume
# The attenuating medium must not scatter the radiation  no turbidity - unless this is accounted for as e.g. in DOAS;
# The incident radiation must consist of parallel rays, each traversing the same length in the absorbing medium;
# The incident radiation should preferably be monochromatic, or have at least a width that is narrower than that of the attenuating transition. Otherwise a spectrometer as detector for the intensity is needed instead of a photodiode which has not a selective wavelength dependence; and
# The incident flux must not influence the atoms or molecules; it should only act as a non-invasive probe of the species under study. In particular, this implies that the light should not cause optical saturation or optical pumping, since such effects will deplete the lower level and possibly give rise to stimulated emission.
If any of these conditions are not fulfilled, there will be deviations from Beers law.

== Chemical analysis ==
Beer's law can be applied to the analysis of a mixture by spectrophotometry, without the need for extensive pre-processing of the sample. An example is the determination of bilirubin in blood plasma samples. The spectrum of pure bilirubin is known, so the molar attenuation coefficient is known. Measurements are made at one wavelength that is nearly unique for bilirubin and at a second wavelength in order to correct for possible interferences.The concentration is given by c = Acorrected / .
For a more complicated example, consider a mixture in solution containing two components at concentrations c1 and c2. The absorbance at any wavelength,  is, for unit path length, given by
:
Therefore, measurements at two wavelengths yields two equations in two unknowns and will suffice to determine the concentrations c1 and c2 as long as the molar absorbances of the two components, 1 and 2 are known at both wavelengths. This two system equation can be solved using Cramer's rule. In practice it is better to use linear least squares to determine the two concentrations from measurements made at more than two wavelengths. Mixtures containing more than two components can be analyzed in the same way, using a minimum of n wavelengths for a mixture containing n components.
The law is used widely in infra-red spectroscopy and near-infrared spectroscopy for analysis of polymer degradation and oxidation (also in biological tissue). The carbonyl group attenuation at about 6 micrometres can be detected quite easily, and degree of oxidation of the polymer calculated.

==BeerLambert law in the atmosphere==
This law is also applied to describe the attenuation of solar or stellar radiation as it travels through the atmosphere. In this case, there is scattering of radiation as well as absorption. The BeerLambert law for the atmosphere is usually written
:
where each is the optical depth whose subscript identifies the source of the absorption or scattering it describes:
* refers to aerosols (that absorb and scatter)
* are uniformly mixed gases (mainly carbon dioxide () and molecular oxygen () which only absorb)
* is nitrogen dioxide, mainly due to urban pollution (absorption only)
* are effects due to Raman scattering in the atmosphere
* is water vapour absorption
* is ozone (absorption only)
* is Rayleigh scattering from molecular oxygen () and nitrogen () (responsible for the blue color of the sky).
* The selection of the attenuators which have to be considered depends on the wavelength range and can include various other compounds. This can include Tetraoxygen, HONO, Formaldehyde, Glyoxal, a series of halogen radicals and others.
 is the optical mass or airmass factor, a term approximately equal (for small and moderate values of ) to , where is the observed object's zenith angle (the angle measured from
the direction perpendicular to the Earth's surface at the observation site).
This equation can be used to retrieve , the aerosol optical thickness,
which is necessary for the correction of satellite images and also important in accounting for the role of
aerosols in climate.

==History==
The law was discovered by Pierre Bouguer before 1729. Pierre Bouguer, Essai d'Optique, sur la gradation de la lumire (Paris, France: Claude Jombert, 1729) pp. 1622. It is often attributed to Johann Heinrich Lambert, who cited Bouguer's Essai d'Optique sur la Gradation de la Lumiere (Claude Jombert, Paris, 1729)  and even quoted from it  in his Photometria in 1760. J.H. Lambert, Photometria sive de mensura et gradibus luminis, colorum et umbrae or, On the measure and gradations of light, colors, and shade (Augsburg ("Augusta Vindelicorum"), Germany: Eberhardt Klett, 1760). See especially p. 391. Much later, August Beer extended the exponential attenuation law in 1852 to include the concentration of solutions in the attenuation coefficient. Beer (1852) "Bestimmung der Absorption des rothen Lichts in farbigen Flssigkeiten" (Determination of the absorption of red light in colored liquids), Annalen der Physik und Chemie, vol. 86, pp. 7888. 

==See also==

*Applied spectroscopy
*Atomic absorption spectroscopy
*Absorption spectroscopy
*Cavity ring-down spectroscopy
*Infra-red spectroscopy
*Job plot
*Laser absorption spectrometry
*Logarithm
*Polymer degradation
*Scientific laws named after people
*Quantification of nucleic acids
*Tunable diode laser absorption spectroscopy

==References==

== External links ==
*BeerLambert Law Calculator

*BeerLambert Law Simpler Explanation
*Reasons for Deviations from BeerLambert Law



[[The Beach Boys]]

The Beach Boys are an American rock band, formed in Hawthorne, California in 1961. The group's original lineup consisted of brothers Brian, Dennis and Carl Wilson, their cousin Mike Love and friend Al Jardine. Initially managed by the Wilsons' father Murry, the Beach Boys signed with Capitol Records in 1962. The band's early music gained popularity across the United States for its close vocal harmonies and lyrics reflecting a Southern California youth culture of surfing, cars and romance. During the early to mid-1960s, Brian Wilson's growing creative ambition and songwriting ability would dominate the group's musical direction. The primarily Wilson-composed Pet Sounds album and "Good Vibrations" single (both released in 1966) featured a complex, intricate and multi-layered sound that represented a departure from the simple surf rock of the Beach Boys' early years.

Starting in 1967, Wilson gradually ceded control to the rest of the band, reducing his input due to mental health and substance abuse issues. Though the more democratic incarnation of the Beach Boys recorded a string of albums in various musical styles that garnered international critical success, the group struggled to reclaim their commercial momentum in America, despite the period when they were the primary competitors to the Beatles. Since the 1980s, much-publicized legal wrangling over royalties, songwriting credits and use of the band's name transpired. Dennis Wilson drowned in 1983 and Carl died of lung cancer in 1998. After Carl's death, many different live configurations of the band fronted by Love and Johnston continued to tour into the 2000s while other members pursued solo projects. For the band's 50th anniversary, they briefly reunited as the Beach Boys for a new studio album, world tour, and career-spanning retrospective box set.

The Beach Boys have often been called "America's Band", "Still America's Band: The Beach Boys Today" Kevin M. Cherry. National Review. Published July 8, 2002. Retrieved July 12, 2008. and Allmusic stated that their "unerring abilitymade them America's first, best rock band." [ Allmusic "The Beach Boys  Overview"]. John Bush. Allmusic. Retrieved July 12, 2008. The group had over eighty songs chart worldwide, thirty-six of them United States Top 40 hits (the most by an American rock band), four reaching number-one on the Billboard Hot 100 chart. The Beach Boys have sold in excess of 100 million records worldwide, making them one of the world's best-selling bands of all time and are listed at number 12 on Rolling Stone magazine's 2004 list of the "100 Greatest Artists of All Time". The core quintet of the three Wilsons, Love and Jardine were inducted into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame in 1988.

== 195866: The Beach Boys under Brian Wilson ==

=== Formation and first years (195861) ===

A historical landmark at 3701 W. 119th St., Hawthorne, California marking where the Wilson family home once stood

At age 16, Brian Wilson shared a bedroom with his brothers, Dennis and Carl, in their family home in Hawthorne. He watched his father, Murry Wilson, play piano and listened intently to the harmonies of vocal groups such as the Four Freshmen. One night he taught his brothers a song called "Ivory Tower" and how to sing the background harmonies. For his 16th birthday, Brian was given a reel-to-reel tape recorder. He learned how to overdub, using his vocals and those of Carl and their mother. Brian would play piano with Carl and David Marks (an eleven-year-old longtime neighbor) playing guitars they got as Christmas presents.

Soon Brian was avidly listening to Johnny Otis on his KFOX radio show, a favorite station of Carl's. Inspired by the simple structure and vocals of the rhythm and blues songs he heard, he changed his piano-playing style and started writing songs. His enthusiasm interfered with his music studies at school. Family gatherings brought the Wilsons in contact with cousin Mike Love. Brian taught Love's sister Maureen and a friend harmonies. Later, Brian, Mike Love and two friends performed at Hawthorne High School. Brian also knew Al Jardine, a high school classmate who had already played guitar in a folk group called the Islanders. Brian suggested to Jardine that they team up with his cousin and brother Carl. It was at these sessions, held in Brian's bedroom, that "the Beach Boys sound" began to form. Brian says: "Everyone contributed something. Carl kept us hip to the latest tunes, Al taught us his repertoire of folk songs, and Dennis, though he didn't play anything, added a combustible spark just by his presence." Love encouraged Brian to write songs and gave the fledgling band its name: "The Pendletones", a combination of "Pendleton" a style of woolen shirt popular at the time and "tone", the musical term. In their earliest performances, the band wore heavy wool jacket-like shirts which were favored by surfers in the South Bay. Although surfing motifs were very prominent in their early songs, Dennis was the only avid surfer in the group. He suggested that his brothers compose some songs celebrating his hobby and the lifestyle which had developed around it in Southern California. The Beach Boys, rockhall.com, retrieved on May 2, 2014 

Jardine and a singer friend, Gary Winfrey, went to Brian's to see if he could help out with a version of a folk song they wanted to record"Sloop John B". In Brian's absence, the two spoke with Murry, a music industry veteran of modest success. Murry arranged for the Pendletones to meet publisher Hite Morgan. The group performed a slower ballad, "Their Hearts Were Full of Spring", but failed to impress the Morgans. After an awkward pause, Dennis mentioned they had an original song, "Surfin'". With help from Love, Brian finished the song and the group rented guitars, drums, amplifiers and microphones. They practiced for three days while the Wilsons' parents were on a short vacation.

In October, the Pendletones recorded twelve takes of "Surfin'" in the Morgans' cramped offices, David Marks was not present at the session as he was at school. A small number of singles were pressed. When the boys eagerly unpacked the first box of singles, on the Candix Records label, they were shocked to see their band name changed to "Beach Boys". Murry Wilson, now intimately involved with the band's fortunes, called the Morgans. Apparently a young promotion worker, Russ Regan, made the change to more obviously tie the group in with other surf bands of the time. Released in December 1961, "Surfin'" was soon aired on KFWB and KRLA, two of Los Angeles' most influential teen radio stations. It was a hit on the West Coast, going to number three in Southern California, and peaked at number 75 on the national pop charts. By the final weeks of 1961 "Surfin'" had sold more than 40,000 copies. "The Beach Boy Empire" Taylor, Derek. October 5, 1966. Hit Parader, p13. http://i351.photobucket.com/albums/q476/marcus1970/hit%20parader%201966/HitParaderp6October1966.jpg. Murry Wilson told the boys he did not like "Surfin'". By now the de facto manager of the Beach Boys, he landed the group's first paying gig on New Year's Eve, 1961, at the Ritchie Valens Memorial Dance in Long Beach, headlined by Ike & Tina Turner. Brian recalls how he wondered what they were doing there: "five clean-cut, unworldly white boys from a conservative white suburb, in an auditorium full of black kids". Brian describes the night as an "education"he knew afterwards that success was all about "R&B, rock and roll, and money".

=== Early successes with surf and hot rod-themed rock (196264) ===

The Beach Boys performing "I Get Around" on The Ed Sullivan Show in 1964.

Although Murry effectively seized managerial control of the band, Brian acknowledged that he "deserves credit for getting us off the ground... he hounded us mercilessly... also worked hard himself". In the first half of February 1962, Jardine left the band and was replaced by Marks. The band recorded two more originals on April 19 at Western Studios, Los Angeles; "Lonely Sea" and "409", also re-recording "Surfin' Safari". On June 4, the band released their second single "Surfin' Safari" backed with "409". The release prompted national coverage in the June 9 issue of Billboard where the magazine praised Love's lead vocal and deemed the song to have strong hit potential. After being turned down by Dot and Liberty, the Beach Boys eventually signed a seven-year contract with Capitol Records on July 16 based on the strength of the June demo session. By November, their first album was readySurfin' Safari which reached 32 on the US Billboard charts. Their song output continued along the same commercial line, focusing on California youth lifestyle. 

In January 1963, three months after the release of their debut album, the band began recording their sophomore effort, Surfin' U.S.A., placing a greater emphasis on surf rock instrumentals and tighter production. It has been hypothesized that the shift to a sound more typical of the surf rock genre was in response to the Californian surfer locals who were dismissive of the band's debut as it strayed from the sound of other surf acts. After the moderate success of Surfin' Safari, Surfin' U.S.A., released on March 25, 1963 met a more enthusiastic reception, reaching number two on the Billboard charts and propelling the band into a nationwide spotlight. Five days prior to the release of Surfin' U.S.A. Brian produced "Surf City", a song he had written for Jan and Dean. "Surf City" hit number one on the Billboard charts in July 1963, a development that pleased Brian but angered Murry, who felt his son had "given away" what should have been the Beach Boys' first chart-topper.

Sometime around late 1963, Brian Wilson heard the song "Be My Baby" by the Ronettes for the first time, which "revamped" Wilson's creative interests and songwriting. "Be My Baby" was later claimed by critics to be the epitome of Phil Spector's Wall of Sound production technique, a recording method that would fascinate Wilson for the next several decades. Wilson later in life stated: "I was unable to really think as a producer until I really got familiar with Phil Spector's work." Rock'n Roll In The Groove http://www.youtube.com/watch?feature=player_detailpage&v=tn_0JNiqLio#t=196s Apart from Murry, Spector and the close vocal harmonies of Brian's favorite groups, early inspiration came from Chuck Berry. "Surfin' U.S.A." is a variation of Berry's "Sweet Little Sixteen". Under pressure from Berry's publisher, Wilson's father and manager, Murry Wilson, had given the copyright, including Brian Wilson's lyrics, to Arc Music. Pegg, Bruce. Brown Eyed Handsome Man (2002): 162-163 

The 1932 Ford that appeared on the cover to the platinum certified Little Deuce Coupe album.

At the beginning of a tour of the Mid-West in April 1963, Jardine rejoined the Beach Boys at Brian's request. As he began playing live gigs again, Brian left the road to focus on writing and recording. Around this time, Brian began utilizing members of the Wrecking Crew, session musicians also used by Spector. The session musicians were never an outright replacement for members of the band, but were used to augment arrangements or save recording time. The result of this arrangement produced the albums Surfer Girl, released on September 16, 1963 and Little Deuce Coupe, released less than a month later on October 7, 1963. This sextet incarnation of the Beach Boys didn't extend beyond these two albums, as Marks officially left the band in early October due to conflict with manager Murry, pulling Brian back into touring. 

Following a successful Australasian tour in January and February 1964, the band returned home to face the "British invasion" through the Beatles appearances on the Ed Sullivan Show. Reportedly, Brian wanted more time to complete their next album, yet their record label insisted they finish recording swiftly to avoid being forgotten in the throes of the impending "invasion". Satisfying these demands, the band hastily finished the sessions on February 20, 1964 and titled the album Shut Down Volume 2. Critics have found evaluating the album's worth difficult through the years. Though songs like "The Warmth of the Sun" and "Don't Worry Baby" are widely acclaimed and seen as impressive milestones in the artistic growth of the band, others have not lasted. 

In April 1964, during recording of the single "I Get Around", Murry was relieved of his duties as manager. Brian reflected, "We love the family thing  y'know: three brothers, a cousin and a friend is a really beautiful way to have a group  but the extra generation can become a hang-up". When the single was released in May of that month, it would climb to number one, their first single to do so. Two months later, the album that the song later appeared on, All Summer Long, reached number four on the Billboard 200 charts. The album was a swan-song to the surf and car music the Beach Boys built their commercial standing upon. Later albums took a different stylistic and lyrical path.

The group's early songs made them major pop stars in the United States, the United Kingdom, Australia and other countries. They had sixteen hit singles between 1962 and 1965. The Beach Boys were one of the few American bands formed prior to the 1964 British Invasion to continue their success. Their early hits also helped raise the profile of the state of California and associated the band with surfing, hot-rod racing, and the pursuit of happiness by carefree teens. 

=== Today!, Summer Days and production advances (1965) ===

A Rickenbacker 360/12 identical to the 12-string guitar used by Carl Wilson in the early to mid-1960s.

By the end of 1964, the stress of road travel, composing, producing and maintaining a high level of creativity became too much for Brian Wilson. On December 23, while on a flight, he suffered an anxiety attack and left the tour. In January, 1965, he announced his withdrawal from touring to concentrate entirely on songwriting and record production. For the rest of 1964 and into 1965, Glen Campbell served as Wilson's temporary replacement in concert, until his own career success pulled him from the group in April 1965. Bruce Johnston was asked to locate a replacement for Campbell; having failed to find one, Johnston himself subsequently became a full-time member of the band on May 19, 1965, first replacing Wilson on the road and later contributing in the studio, beginning with the vocal sessions for "California Girls" on June 4, 1965. 

During the recording sessions for The Beach Boys Today!, Love told Melody Maker that he and the band wanted to look beyond surf rock, to avoid living in the past or resting on their laurels. Welch, C 1964, 'Beach Boys Brought their own vegetables  so audiences beware!, Melody Maker, 14 November, p.10 The resulting LP had largely guitar-oriented pop songs such as "Dance, Dance, Dance" and "Good to My Baby" on side A with B-side ballads such as "Please Let Me Wonder" and "She Knows Me Too Well". "Sessionography". In Today! booklet. Los Angeles: Capitol Records 

In June, 1965, the band released Summer Days (And Summer Nights!!). The album included a reworked arrangement of "Help Me, Rhonda" which had become the band's second number one single in the spring of 1965, displacing the Beatles' "Ticket to Ride". "Let Him Run Wild" tapped into the youthful angst that would later pervade their music. In November 1965, the group followed up their US number three charting "California Girls" from Summer Days (And Summer Nights!!) with another top-twenty single, "The Little Girl I Once Knew". It was considered the band's most experimental statement thus far, using silence as a pre-chorus, clashing keyboards, moody brass and vocal tics. Perhaps too extreme an arrangement to go much higher than its number 20 peak, it was the band's second single not to reach the top ten since their 1962 breakthrough. In December they scored an unexpected number two hit (number three in the UK) with "Barbara Ann", which Capitol released as a single with no band input. A cover of a 1961 song by the Regents, it became one of the Beach Boys' most recognized hits.

=== Pet Sounds, "Good Vibrations" and the genesis of Smile (1966) ===

Brian Wilson at a Pet Sounds session

Pet Sounds is regarded as one of the greatest albums of all time and is one of the most universally acclaimed in rock history. 

In 1966, the Beach Boys formally established their use of unconventional instruments and elaborate layers of vocal harmonies on their groundbreaking record Pet Sounds. An early album in the emerging psychedelic rock style, Pet Sounds has been championed and emulated for its experimental and revolutionary baroque instrumentation. In the same year, they released "Good Vibrations", one of their best known and most celebrated songs. The song made use of a Tannerin (an easier-to-manipulate version of a Theremin) which helped them claim a new hippie audience. C. Heylin, The Act You've Known For All These Years: the Life, and Afterlife, of Sgt. Pepper (London: Canongate Books, 2007), ISBN 1-84195-955-3, p. 85 

Pet Sounds displayed Wilson's growing mastery of studio recording. His increasingly sophisticated songs and complex arrangements peaked with this work. Influenced by psychedelic drugs, Brian turned inward and probed his deep-seated self-doubts and emotional longings. The piece did not address the problems in the world around them, unlike other psychedelic rock groups. The album's meticulously layered harmonies and inventive instrumentation (performed by Los Angeles session musicians known as the Wrecking Crew) set a new standard for pop and rock music. It remains one of the most evocative releases of the decade, with distinctive lushness, melancholy and nostalgia. The tracks "Wouldn't It Be Nice" and "God Only Knows" showcased Wilson's growing mastery as a composer, arranger, and producer as did "Caroline, No", which was issued as a Brian Wilson solo single, the only time he was credited as a solo artist during the early Capitol years. The album also included two instrumental tracks, "Let's Go Away for Awhile" and the title track. Because of his withdrawal from touring, Wilson was able to complete almost all the backing tracks for the album while the Beach Boys were on tour. They returned to find a substantially complete album, requiring only their vocals and a small amount of instrumental work to finish it.

Despite the critical praise it received, Pet Sounds was indifferently promoted by Capitol and failed to become the major hit Wilson had hoped it would be. Its failure to gain wider recognition in the US hurt him deeply. Pet Sounds reached number ten in the US and number two in the UK, an accomplishment which helped the Beach Boys become the strongest selling album act in the UK for the final quarter of 1966; dethroning the three-year reign of native bands such as the Beatles. 

Seeking to expand on Pet Sounds advances, Wilson began an even more ambitious project, originally dubbed Dumb Angel; in due course, the project became Smile. Its first fruit was "Good Vibrations", which Brian described as a "pocket symphony". The song became the Beach Boys' biggest hit to date and a US and UK number one single in 1966; many critics consider it to be one of the best rock singles of all time. It was one of the most complex pop productions ever undertaken, and was reputed to have been the most expensive American single ever recorded at that time. Costing a reported $50,000, more than most albums, sessions for the song stretched over several months in at least four major studios. According to Wilson, the electro-theremin work itself cost $15,000. In contrast to his work on Pet Sounds, Wilson adopted a modular approach to "Good Vibrations": he broke the song into sections and taped multiple versions of each at different studios to take advantage of the different sound and ambience of each facility. He then assembled his favorite sections into a master backing track and added vocals, the sessions being the most demanding of the group's career.

While putting the finishing touches to Pet Sounds, Brian Wilson met musician and songwriter Van Dyke Parks. In mid-1966, Brian and Parks began an intense collaboration that resulted in a suite of challenging new songs for Smile. Using the same techniques as on "Good Vibrations", recording began in August 1966 and carried on into early 1967. Although the structure of the album and the exact running order of the songs have been subjects of speculation, it is known that Wilson and Parks intended Smile to be a continuous suite of songs that were linked both thematically and musically, with the main songs being linked together by small vocal pieces and instrumental segments that elaborated upon the musical themes of the major songs.

Many factors combined to put intense pressure on Brian Wilson as Smile neared completion: his own mental instability, the pressure to create against fierce internal opposition to his new music, the relatively unenthusiastic response to Pet Sounds in the United States, Carl Wilson's draft resistance, and a major dispute with Capitol Records. Further, Wilson's reliance on both prescription drugs and amphetamines exacerbated his underlying mental health problems. Smile was shelved in May 1967, and would go on to become the most famous unreleased album in the history of popular music. Priore, Dominic (1997), Look Listen Vibrate Smile, Last Gasp pub., collects much of the "Smile" legend in historical articles and reviews. Comparable to Brian Jones and Syd Barrett, Brian Wilson's use of psychedelic drugsespecially LSDled to a nervous breakdown in the late-1960s. Out-Of-Sight! Smile Timeline As his legend grew, the Smile period came to be seen as the pivotal episode in his decline and he became tagged as one of the most notorious celebrity drug casualties of the rock era. 

== 196775: The Beach Boys as a democratic unit ==

=== Smiley Smile and Wild Honey (1967) ===

Some of the Smile tracks were salvaged and re-recorded in scaled-down versions at Brian's new home studio. Along with the single version of "Good Vibrations", these tracks were released on Smiley Smile, an album which elicited positive critical and commercial response abroad, but was the first real commercial failure for the group in the United States. By this time the Beach Boys' management (Nick Grillo and David Anderle) had created the band's own record label, Brother. One of the first labels to be owned by a rock group, Brother Records was intended for releases of Beach Boys side projects, and as an invitation to new talent. The initial output of the label, however, was limited to Smiley Smile and two resulting singles from the album; the failure of "Gettin' Hungry" caused the band to shelve Brother until 1970. Despite the cancellation of Smile, several tracksincluding "Our Prayer", "Cabin Essence" and "Surf's Up"continued to trickle out in later albums often as filler songs to offset Brian's unwillingness to contribute. The band was still expecting to complete and release Smile as late as 1973 before it became clear that only Brian could comprehend the endless fragments that had been recorded. Smiley Smile was followed up three months later with Wild Honey, featuring songs written by Wilson and Love, including the hit "Darlin'" and a rendition of Stevie Wonder's "I Was Made to Love Her". The album fared better than its predecessor, reaching number 24 in the US.

Compounding the group's recent setbacks, their public image took a cataclysmic hit following their withdrawal from the 1967 Monterey Pop Festival for the reason that they had no new material to play while their forthcoming single and album lay in limbo. Their cancellation was seen as "a damning admission that they were washed up unable to compete with the 'new music'". This notion was exacerbated by Rolling Stone writer Jann Wenner, whom within contemporary publications criticized Brian Wilson for his oft-repeated "genius" label which he called a "promotional shuck" and an attempt to compare with the Beatles. However, Wenner later responded to their Wild Honey album with more optimism, remarking two months later that "n any case it's good to see that the Beach Boys are getting their heads straight once again". 

=== Friends, 20/20 and initial interactions with the Maharishi (196869) ===

Maharishi Mahesh Yogi, in 1973.

After meeting Maharishi Mahesh Yogi at a UNICEF Variety Gala in Paris, France on December 15, 1967, Love, along with other high-profile celebrities such as Donovan and the Beatles traveled to Rishikesh in India during February and March 1968. The following Beach Boys album Friends (1968) had songs influenced by the Transcendental Meditation taught by the Maharishi. The album reached number 13 in the UK and 126 in the US, the title track placing at number 25 in the UK and number 47 in the US, the band's lowest singles peak since 1962. In support of the Friends album, Love had arranged for the Beach Boys to tour with the Maharishi in the US, which has been called "one of the more bizarre entertainments of the era". Starting on May 3, 1968, the tour lasted five shows and was cancelled when the Maharishi had to withdraw to fulfill film contracts. Due to disappointing audience numbers and the Maharishi's withdrawal, twenty-four tour dates were subsequently cancelled at a cost estimated at US$250,000 (approximately US$ today) for the band. This tour was followed by the release of "Do It Again", a single critics described as an update of the Beach Boys' surf rock past in a late-1960's style. The single went to the top of the Australian and UK single charts in 1968 and was moderately successful in the US, peaking at number 20.

In spring 1968, Dennis began a tenuous relationship with musician Charles Manson which persisted for several months afterward. Dennis bought him studio time at Brian's home studio and recorded one song: "Cease to Exist" rewritten as "Never Learn Not To Love". It was released as a Beach Boys single. Growing fearful, Dennis gradually distanced himself from Manson, whose family had taken over his home. Manson was eventually convicted for murder conspiracy; Dennis remained too afraid to testify.

For a short time in mid-1968, Brian Wilson sought psychological treatment in hospital. During his absence, other members began writing and producing material themselves. To complete their contract with Capitol, they produced one more album. 20/20 (1969) was one of the group's most stylistically diverse albums, including hard rock songs such as "All I Want to Do", the waltz-based "Time to Get Alone" and a remake of the Ronettes' "I Can Hear Music". The diversity of genres have been described as an indicator that the group was trying to establish an updated identity. The album performed strongly in the UK, reaching number three on the charts. In the US, the album reached a modest 68.

On April 12, 1969, the band revisited their 1967 lawsuit against Capitol Records after they alleged an audit undertaken revealed the band were owed over US$2,000,000 (US$ today) for unpaid royalties and production duties. The band's contract with Capitol Records expired on June 30, 1969, after which Capitol Records deleted the Beach Boys' catalog from print, effectively cutting off their royalty flow. In November 1969, Murry Wilson sold Sea of Tunes, the Beach Boys' catalogue, to Irving Almo Music, a decision which according to Marilyn Wilson "devastated Brian". In late 1969, the Beach Boys reactivated their Brother label and signed with Reprise. Around this time, the band commenced recording for a new album. At the time the Beach Boys tenure ended with Capitol in 1969, they had sold 65 million records worldwide, closing the decade as the most commercially successful American group in popular music. 

=== Sunflower, Surf's Up, Carl and the Passions, Holland and management reforms (197075) ===

In 1970, armed with the new Reprise contract, the band appeared rejuvenated, releasing the album Sunflower to critical acclaim. The album features a strong group presence with significant writing contributions from all band members. Brian Wilson was quite active during this period, writing or co-writing seven of the twelve songs on Sunflower and performing at half of the band's domestic concerts in 1970. Sunflower reached number 29 in the UK and number 151 in the US, the band's lowest domestic chart showing to that point. A version of "Cottonfields" arranged by Al Jardine appeared on European releases of Sunflower and as a single, reached number one in Australia, Norway, South Africa and Sweden and the top-five in six other countries, including the UK.

After Sunflower, the band hired Jack Rieley as their manager. Under Rieley's management, the group's music began emphasizing political and social awareness. During this time, Carl Wilson gradually assumed leadership of the band and Rieley contributed lyrics. On August 30, 1971 the band released Surf's Up, named after the Brian Wilson/Van Dyke Parks composition "Surf's Up". The album was moderately successful, reaching the US top 30, a marked improvement over their recent releases. While the record charted, the Beach Boys added to their renewed fame by performing a near-sellout set at Carnegie Hall, followed by an appearance with the Grateful Dead at Fillmore East on April 27, 1971. The live shows during this era included reworked arrangements of many of the band's previous songs.

Carl Wilson, Al Jardine, Ricky Fataar, Dennis Wilson, Blondie Chaplin and Mike Love in 1972.

Johnston ended his first stint with the band shortly after Surf's Ups release, reportedly because of friction with Rieley. At Carl's suggestion, the addition of Ricky Fataar and Blondie Chaplin in February 1972 led to a dramatic restructuring in the band's sound. The album Carl and the Passions  "So Tough" was an uncharacteristic mix that included several songs written by Fataar and Chaplin. For their next project the band, their families, assorted associates and technicians moved to the Netherlands for the summer of 1972. They rented a farmhouse to convert into a makeshift studio where recording sessions for the new project would take place. By the end of their sessions, the band felt they had produced one of their strongest efforts yet. Reprise, however, felt that the album required a strong single. This resulted in the song "Sail On, Sailor", a collaboration between Brian Wilson, Tandyn Almer, Ray Kennedy, Jack Rieley and Van Dyke Parks featuring a soulful lead vocal by Chaplin. Reprise subsequently approved and the resulting album, Holland, was released early in 1973, peaking at number 37. Brian's musical children story, "Mount Vernon and Fairway (A Fairy Tale)", narrated by Rieley and strongly directly influenced by Randy Newman's Sail Away album, was included as a bonus EP. Despite indifference from Reprise, the band's concert audience started to grow.

The Beach Boys in Concert, a double album documenting the 1972 and 1973 US tours, was another top-30 album and became the band's first gold record under Reprise. During this period the band established itself as one of America's most popular live acts. Chaplin and Fataar helped organize the concerts to obtain a high quality live performance, playing material off Surf's Up, Carl and the Passions and Holland and adding songs from their older catalog. This concert arrangement lifted them back into American public prominence. In late 1973, the soundtrack to American Graffiti, 41 Original Hits from the Soundtrack of American Graffiti, was released to mass commercial and critical success. The soundtrack included early Beach Boy songs "Surfin' Safari" and "All Summer Long" and was a catalyst in creating a wave of nostalgia that reintroduced the Beach Boys into contemporary American consciousness. In 1974, Capitol Records issued Endless Summer, the band's first major pre-Pet Sounds greatest hits package. The record sleeve's sunny, colorful graphics caught the mood of the nation and surged to the top of the Billboard album charts. It was the group's first multi-million selling record since "Good Vibrations", and remained on the album chart for three years. The following year, Capitol released a second compilation, Spirit of America, which also sold well. With these compilations, the Beach Boys became one of the most popular acts in rock, propelling themselves from opening for Crosby, Stills, Nash and Young to headliners selling out basketball arenas in a matter of weeks. Rolling Stone named the Beach Boys the "Band of the Year" for 1974, solely on the basis of their juggernaut touring schedule and material written over a decade earlier.

Rieley, who remained in the Netherlands after Hollands release, was relieved of his managerial duties in late 1973. Chaplin also left in late 1973 after an argument with Steve Love, the band's business manager (and Mike's brother). Fataar remained until 1974, when he was offered a chance to join a new group led by future Eagles member Joe Walsh. Chaplin's replacement, James William Guercio, started offering the group career advice that resulted in his becoming their new manager. Under Guercio, the Beach Boys staged a highly successful 1975 joint concert tour with Chicago, with each group performing some of the other's songs, including their previous year's collaboration on Chicago's hit "Wishing You Were Here". Beach Boys vocals were also heard on Elton John's 1974 hit "Don't Let the Sun Go Down on Me". Nostalgia had settled into the Beach Boys' hype; the group had not officially released any new material since 1973's Holland. While their concerts continuously sold out, the stage act slowly changed from a contemporary presentation followed by oldies encores to an entire show made up of mostly pre-1967 music.

== 197677: Brian Wilson's second tenure as leader ==

15 Big Ones included a stylized version of the Beach Boys' name by Dean Torrence which would later be used on compilations, That's Why God Made the Radio and promotion for their 50th anniversary reunion tour.

15 Big Ones (1976) marked Brian's return as a major force in the group. The album included new songs by Brian, as well as cover versions of oldies such as "Rock and Roll Music" (#5), "Blueberry Hill", and "In the Still of the Night". Brian and Love's "It's O.K." was in the vein of their early sixties style and was a moderate hit. The album was publicized by an August 1976 NBC-TV special, simply titled "The Beach Boys". The special, produced by Saturday Night Live (SNL) creator Lorne Michaels, featured appearances by SNL cast members John Belushi and Dan Aykroyd.

Brian Wilson behind Brother Studios' mixing console in 1976.

For the remainder of 1976 to early 1977, Brian Wilson spent his time making sporadic public appearances and producing the band's next album Love You (1977), a quirky collection of 14 songs mostly written, arranged and produced by Brian. Brian revealed to biographer Peter Ames Carlin that Love You is one of his favorite Beach Boys releases, telling him "That's when it all happened for me. That's where my heart lies." Love You peaked at number 28 in the UK and number 53 in the US and developed a cult following; regarded as one of the band's best albums by fans and critics alike. "The Beach Boys Biography". The Rock and Roll Hall of Fame and Museum, Inc. Retrieved 26 October 2012 

After Love You was released, Brian began to record and assemble Adult/Child an effort largely consisting of songs written by Wilson from 1976 and 1977 with select big band arrangements by Dick Reynolds. Though publicized as the Beach Boys' next release, Adult/Child reportedly caused tension within the group and was ultimately shelved. Following this period, his concert appearances with the band gradually diminished and their performances were occasionally erratic. Despite the much-hyped "Brian's Back" campaign in the mid to late 1970s, most critics at this point would comment on how he could become the latest celebrity drug casualty.

The internal wrangling came to a head after a show at Central Park on September 1, 1977, when the band effectively split into two camps; Dennis and Carl Wilson on one side, Mike Love and Al Jardine on the other with Brian remaining neutral. Following a confrontation on an airport tarmac, the band broke up for two and a half weeks, until a band meeting on September 17, at Brian's house. In light of a potential new Caribou Records the parties negotiated a settlement resulting in Love gaining control of Brian's vote in the group, allowing Love and Jardine to outvote Carl and Dennis Wilson on any matter. 

== Later years: fluctuating control ==

=== Infighting and the Wilsons' retreat (197883) ===

 The Beach Boys with President Ronald Reagan and First Lady Nancy Reagan, 1983
The Beach Boys' last album for Reprise, M.I.U. Album (1978), was recorded at Maharishi International University in Iowa at the suggestion of Love. Dennis and Carl made limited contributions; the album was mostly produced by Jardine and Ron Altbach, with Brian appearing as "Executive Producer". M.I.U. was largely a contractual obligation to finish out their association with Reprise, who likewise did not promote the result. The record cemented the divisions in the group. Love and Jardine focused on rock and roll-oriented material while Carl and Dennis chose the progressive focus they had established with the albums Carl and the Passions and Holland. Dennis withdrew from the group to focus on his second solo album and follow-up to Pacific Ocean Blue entitled Bambu. However alcoholism and marital problems overcame all three Wilson brothers and Bambu was shelved. Carl appeared intoxicated during concerts (notably at appearances on their disastrous 1978 Australia tour) and Brian gradually slid back into addiction and an unhealthy lifestyle.

After departing Reprise, the Beach Boys signed with CBS Records. They received a substantial advance and were paid $1 million per album even as CBS deemed their preliminary review of the band's first product, L.A. (Light Album) as unsatisfactory. Faced with the realization that Brian was unable to contribute, the band recruited Johnston as producer. The result paid off, as "Good Timin'" became a top 40 single. The album featured outstanding performances by both Dennis (cuts intended Bambu) and Carl ("Full Sail"). The group enjoyed moderate success with a disco reworking of the Wild Honey song "Here Comes the Night" which was followed by their highest charting UK single in nine years: Jardine's "Lady Lynda" peaked at #6 in the UK Singles Chart. 1980 saw the release of Keepin' the Summer Alive, with Johnston once again producing. Carl Wilson was the only Wilson to influence the finished product. Brian managed to contribute several ideas, as seen in the Going Platinum television special documenting the album's release, but was otherwise persona non grata. Dennis' ongoing personal problems kept him out of the special and album, though his drumming is heard on the cover version of Chuck Berry's "School Days".

From 1980 through 1982, the Beach Boys and The Grass Roots performed Independence Day concerts at the National Mall in Washington, D.C., attracting large crowds. "July 4: Day of Music, Parades, Fireworks", The Washington Post, Washington, D.C., July 3, 1982, p. D1. Phil McCombs, "Watt Outlaws Rock Music on Mall for July 4", The Washington Post, Washington, D.C., April 6, 1983, p. A1; Phil McCombs and Richard Harrington, "Watt Sets Off Uproar with Music Ban", The Washington Post, Washington, D.C., April 7, 1983, pp. A1, A17. However, in April 1983, James G. Watt, President Ronald Reagan's Secretary of the Interior, banned Independence Day concerts on the Mall by such groups. Watt said that "rock bands" that had performed on the Mall on Independence Day in 1981 and 1982 had encouraged drug use and alcoholism and had attracted "the wrong element", who would mug attendees. During the ensuing uproar, which included over 40,000 complaints to the Department of the Interior, the Beach Boys stated that the Soviet Union, which had invited them to perform in Leningrad in 1978, "obviously .... did not feel that the group attracted the wrong element". Vice President George H. W. Bush said of the Beach Boys, "They're my friends and I like their music". Watt later apologized to the band after learning that President Reagan and First Lady Nancy Reagan were fans. Tim Ahern, Associated Press, "Newton concert goes off despite rain", Gettysburg Times, Gettysburg, Pennsylvania, July 5, 1983, p. 7 in Google news. Retrieved February 18, 2010. White House staff presented Watt with a plaster foot with a hole in it, showing that he had "shot himself in the foot". Associated Press, "Newton Performance Dampened by Rain", Reading Eagle, Reading, Pennsylvania, July 5, 1983, p. 27,in Google news. Retrieved February 18, 2010. The band returned to D.C. for Independence Day in 1984 and performed to a crowd of 750,000 people. Richard Harrington, "Back to the Beach Boys: Rock Returns to Mall For the Fourth of July; Beach Boys to Perform On the Mall July 4", The Washington Post, Washington, D.C., June 6, 1984, p. B1. 

Dennis Wilson's personal problems continued to escalate, and on December 28, 1983, he drowned in Marina del Rey while diving from a friend's boat trying to recover items he had previously thrown overboard in fits of rage. Despite his death, the Beach Boys continued as a successful touring act.

=== Soundtrack appearances, "Kokomo" and nostalgia (198498) ===

On July 4, 1985, the Beach Boys played to an afternoon crowd of one million in Philadelphia and the same evening they performed for over 750,000 people on the Mall in Washington (the day's historic achievement was recorded in the Guinness Book of World Records). They also appeared nine days later at the Live Aid concert. That year, they released the eponymous album The Beach Boys and enjoyed a resurgence of interest later in the 1980s, assisted by tributes such as David Lee Roth's hit version of "California Girls". In 1987, they played with the rap group The Fat Boys, performing the song "Wipe Out" and filming a music video.

By 1988, Brian Wilson had officially left the Beach Boys and released his first solo album, which received critical acclaim. During this period the band unexpectedly claimed their first US number one hit single in 22 years with "Kokomo", which had appeared in the movie Cocktail. Written by John Phillips, Scott McKenzie, Mike Love and Terry Melcher, the song became the band's largest selling single of all time. The video for the song received heavy airplay on the music video channel VH1, and prominently featured actor John Stamos on conga drums. Inducted into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame earlier in the year, the group became the second artist after Aretha Franklin to hit number one in the US after their induction. They released the album Still Cruisin', which went gold in the US and gave them their best chart showing since 1976. In 1990, the band gathered several studio musicians and recorded the Melcher-produced title track of the comedy Problem Child. Stamos again appeared on the video, and later appeared singing lead vocals on "Forever" (written by Dennis Wilson for the Sunflower album) on their 1992 album Summer in Paradise. Having no new contributions from Brian Wilson due to interference from caretaker Eugene Landy, Summer in Paradise was poorly regarded by both critics and fans, was a commercial disaster and would become their last album of original material for two decades. Members of the band appeared on several television shows such as Full House, Home Improvement, and Baywatch in the late 1980s and 1990s.

In 1989, Wilson filed a lawsuit to reclaim the rights to his songs and the group's publishing company, Sea of Tunes, which he had supposedly signed away to his father Murry in 1969. He successfully argued that he had not been mentally fit to make an informed decision and that his father had potentially forged his signature. While Wilson failed to regain his copyrights, he was awarded $25 million for unpaid royalties. "The Beach Boys  The complete Guide", beachboys.com Soon after Wilson won his case, Love discovered that Murry Wilson had not properly credited him as co-writer on dozens of Beach Boys songs. With Love and Brian Wilson unable to determine exactly what Love was properly owed, Love sued Wilson in 1992, winning $13 million in 1994 for lost royalties. "Company Town : Beach Boys' Mike Love Wins His Case..." Los Angeles Times December 13, 1994 In interviews, Love revealed that on some songs he wrote most of the lyrics, on others only a line or two. Even though Love sued Wilson, both parties said in interviews that there was no malice between them; they simply couldn't come up with an agreeable settlement by themselves.

In 1993, the band appeared in Michael Feeney Callan's film The Beach Boys Today, which included in-depth interviews with all members except Brian. Carl confided to Callan that Brian would record again with the band at some point in the near future. A few Beach Boys sessions devoted to new Brian Wilson compositions occurred during the mid-1990s, but they remain largely unreleased, and the album was quickly aborted due to tenuous relations. In February 1996, the Beach Boys guested with Status Quo on a re-recording of "Fun, Fun, Fun", which became a British Top-30 hit. In June, the group worked with comedian Jeff Foxworthy on the recording "Howdy From Maui", and eventually released Stars and Stripes Vol. 1 in August 1996. The album consisted of country renditions of several Beach Boys hits, performed by popular country artists such as Toby Keith and Willie Nelson. Brian Wilson, who was in a better mental state at the time, acted as co-producer.

In early 1997, Carl Wilson was diagnosed with lung cancer after years of heavy smoking. Despite his terminal condition, Carl continued to perform with the band on its 1997 summer tour while undergoing chemotherapy. During performances, he sat on a stool and reportedly needed oxygen after every song. Carl was able to stand, however, when he played on "God Only Knows". By 1998 the cancer had spread to his brain. Carl died on February 6, 1998, two months after the death of the Wilsons' mother, Audree.

=== Splintering of the Beach Boys name and the relationships of the members (19992010) ===

The touring line-up of Mike Love and Bruce Johnston's "The Beach Boys Band", plus guest member David Marks, in 2008
Following Carl's death, the remaining members splintered. Love, Johnston and former guitarist Marks continued to tour without Jardine, initially as "America's Band", but following several cancelled bookings under that name, they sought authorization through Brother Records Inc. (BRI) to tour as "The Beach Boys" and secured the necessary license. In turn Jardine began to tour regularly with his band dubbed "Beach Boys: Family & Friends" until he ran into legal issues for using the name without license. BRI, through its longtime attorney, Ed McPherson, sued Jardine in Federal Court. Jardine, in turn, counter-claimed against BRI for wrongful termination. BRI ultimately prevailed after several years. Love was allowed to continue to tour as The Beach Boys, while Jardine was prohibited from touring using any form of the name. Released from Landy's control, Brian Wilson sought different treatments for his illnesses that aided him in his solo career. He toured regularly with his backing band consisting of members of Wondermints and other LA/Chicago musicians. Marks also maintained a solo career. Their tours remained reliable draws, with Wilson and Jardine both remaining legal members of the Beach Boys organization.

In September 2004, Brian Wilson issued a free CD through the Mail On Sunday that included Beach Boys songs he'd rerecorded, five of which he'd co-authored with Love. The 10 track compilation had 2.6 million copies distributed and prompted Love to file a lawsuit claiming the promotion hurt the sales of the original recordings. Love's suit was dismissed in 2007 when a judge determined that there were no triable issues. 

On June 13, 2006, the five surviving Beach Boys (Wilson, Love, Jardine, Johnston and Marks) appeared together for the celebration of the 40th anniversary of Pet Sounds and the double-platinum certification of their greatest hits compilation, , in a ceremony atop the Capitol Records building in Hollywood. Plaques were awarded for their efforts, with Brian accepting on behalf of Dennis and Carl.

=== The Smile Sessions, 50th anniversary tour and That's Why God Made the Radio (201112) ===

The cover for The Smile Sessions uses the artwork Frank Holmes prepared in December 1966 for Smile.

On October 31, 2011, the Beach Boys released surviving 1960s recordings from Smile in the form of The Smile Sessions. The albumeven in its incomplete formgarnered universal critical acclaim and experienced popular success, charting in both the Billboard US and UK Top 30. The artwork and packaging featured the original Frank Holmes illustrations and included the photo/illustration booklet insert that was intended for the 1967 release. The format of the recordings utilized Wilson's 2004 Brian Wilson Presents Smile solo effort as a template. The band was rewarded with glowing reviews, including inclusion in Rolling Stone's Top 500 album list at number 381. In a 500 set limited edition, the The Smile Sessions came in a box set with a lit-up shop front window. Each of these box sets came with Brian Wilson's signature on the box. The Smile Sessions deluxe album package went on to win Best Historical Album at the 2013 Grammy Awards. Brian Wilson personally accepted the award stating "I guess Van Dyke and I were on to something after all."

In February 2011, the Beach Boys released "Don't Fight the Sea", a charity single to aid the victims of the 2011 Japan earthquake. The single, released on Jardine's 2011 album A Postcard From California featured Jardine, Wilson, Love and Johnston, with prerecorded vocals by Carl Wilson. Rumors then circulated regarding a potential 50th anniversary band reunion.

On December 16, 2011, it was announced that Wilson, Love, Jardine, Johnston and Marks would reunite for a new album and 50th anniversary tour in 2012 to include a performance at the New Orleans Jazz Festival in April 2012. On February 12, 2012, the Beach Boys performed at the 2012 Grammy Awards, in what was billed as a "special performance" by organizers. It marked the group's first live performance to include Brian since 1996. This anniversary lineup performed "Good Vibrations" with Adam Levine and Mark Foster, after Maroon 5 opened the set with "Surfer Girl" and Foster the People played "Wouldn't It Be Nice" during the ceremony. Johnston said, "I never hoped for reunion, because I never thought any of us wanted to do it. We have probably, you know, the presidential honeymoon of six months but then we have to show something to keep it going. We have to make sure we have a great flowing song list but also make sure we don't sound like a greatest-hits band. We have a lot to balance." 
 The Beach Boys appeared at the April 10, 2012, season opener for the Los Angeles Dodgers and performed "Surfer Girl" along with "The Star-Spangled Banner". They also performed at the Bonnaroo Music and Arts Festival in Manchester, Tennessee on June 14, 2012. http://www.bonnaroo.com 

Johnston compared the sound of the new album to one of the band's least-successful albums but fan favorite Sunflower, while Jardine said the album is "very lush, very PetSound-ing". The first single from the album, the title track, made its national radio debut April 25, 2012, on ESPN's Mike and Mike in the Morning and was released on iTunes and other digital platforms on April 26. That's Why God Made the Radio debuted at number three on US charts, the group's highest charting album since 1974's compilation Endless Summer and its highest charting studio album since 1965's Summer Days (And Summer Nights!!). It became the band's first top ten studio album since 1976's 15 Big Ones. The album made its debut in the UK at number 15, its highest studio album debut since 1971's Surf's Up. The album also made US chart history by expanding the group's span of Billboard 200 top ten albums across 49 years and one week, passing the Beatles with 47 years of top ten albums. 

Later in 2012, the group released the Fifty Big Ones and Greatest Hits compilations along with reissues of 12 of their albums. The next year, the group released Live  The 50th Anniversary Tour a 41 song, 2-CD set documenting their 50th Anniversary Tour.

=== Breakup and return to solo careers (2012present) ===
While there were no definite plans, Brian stated that he would like to make another Beach Boys album following the world tour. "This time I would like to do some rock n' roll," Wilson says. "I would like it to be a bit harder and faster." Love and Johnston continued to tour, while Wilson expressed in more touring and recording with the band. In July 2012 Love said that Wilson and producer Joe Thomas had over 80 hours of music recorded, much of it culled from material they were working on around the time of Wilson's 1998 Your Imagination album that "were always songs he had earmarked for the Beach Boys." On October 5, 2012, Love announced in a self-written press release to the LA Times that the band would return to its pre-50th Reunion Tour lineup with him and Johnston touring as The Beach Boys without Wilson, Jardine and Marks:

Mike Love and Bruce Johnston performing as the Beach Boys in 2014.

Brian remained optimistic: "I wouldn't mind getting together with Mike and the guys and making an exciting rock & roll albumI'm sure by early next year we'll be ready to rock." On October 9, 2012, Wilson and Jardine submitted a written response to the rumors saying:

On December 13, 2012, Wilson and Jardine played a Christmas show at which they performed the Beach Boys Christmas songs, "Little Saint Nick" and "Christmas Day". Following this appearance, on January 23, 2013, Wilson announced a concert date featuring himself, Jardine and Marks. It has been speculated that the date announced will be followed by more dates as Wilson has said he will be spending the summer with Jardine and Marks. Love and Johnston continued to perform under the Beach Boys name, while Wilson, Jardine, and Marks continue to tour as a trio. The tour, with guitarist Jeff Beck, also included Chaplin at select dates.

Reflecting upon the band's recent reunion in 2013, Love stated: "I had a wonderful experience being in the studio together. Brian has lost none of his ability to structure those melodies and chord progressions, and when we heard us singing together coming back over the speakers it sounded like 1965 again. Touring was more for the fans.It was a great experience, it had a term to it, and now everyone's going on with their ways of doing things." In a July 8, 2013 interview, he continued by discussing the potential of another reunion, saying "I dont know how that sacking controversy started.The anniversary tour was originally 50 dates, and got extended to 73. At that point, Brian said: No more dates for us, please. So once we finished those 73 shows we went back to the line-up of the band before he rejoined.Id very much like to get in a room, just him and I, to write more songs.We didnt write together on last years album, and Id like to do that more than anything." On August 27, 2013 the group released Made in California, a six disc collection featuring more than seven and a half hours of music, including more than 60 previously unreleased tracks. Made in California also concluded the Beach Boys' 50th anniversary campaign. That same year, former members of the Beach Boys touring band, Bobby Figueroa, Billy Hinsche, Ed Carter, Matt Jardine (son of Al Jardine), and Philip Bardowell (sometimes with Randell Kirsch and others) united to form California Surf, Incorporated, performing Beach Boy songs.

Jardine, Marks, Johnston and Love appeared together at the 2014 Ella Awards Ceremony, where Love was honored for his work as a singer. Marks sang "409" in honor of Love while Jardine performed "Help Me Rhonda". They closed the show by performing "Fun, Fun, Fun". Brian Wilson's long time band associate Jeff Foskett also appeared, but not Wilson. On May 15, 2014 the band announced a tour celebrating "50 Years of 'Fun Fun Fun, named for their 1964 single. The tour will feature Marks and Jardine appearing with Love and Johnston at one and possibly more shows. The tour will also feature the addition of Foskett replacing Mike's son Christian. 

== Legacy ==

Regarded by some critics as one of the greatest American rock groups and an important catalyst in the evolution of popular music, the Beach Boys are one of the most critically acclaimed and commercially successful bands of all time. Influenced by barbershop music and rhythm and blues, they began playing 1950s style rock and roll married to a five part harmony. The band later went on to incorporate many different genres, from baroque pop to psychedelia and synthpop. 

The Beach Boys' sales estimates range from 100 to 350 million records worldwide, and have influenced artists spanning many genres and decades. Artists influenced by the Beach Boys include: the Beatles, George Martin, The Velvet Underground, Pink Floyd, Cream, the Who, Elton John, ABBA, Bruce Springsteen, the Ramones, The Stone Roses, Sonic Youth, Beck, R.E.M., Weezer, Neutral Milk Hotel, Radiohead, Of Montreal, The Olivia Tremor Control, The Flaming Lips, My Bloody Valentine, Daft Punk, Air, Kraftwerk, Yellow Magic Orchestra, Belle and Sebastian, The Beta Band, Alex Chilton, Yo La Tengo, Saint Etienne, Pixies, Mr. Bungle, MGMT, Marvin B. Naylor, and Animal Collective. Video: Rivers Cuomo Covers the Beach Boys 

The Beach Boys Today! (1965), Wild Honey (1967), Sunflower (1970), Surf's Up (1971), Holland (1973), and The Smile Sessions (2011) are featured in several "Greatest Albums of All Time" lists. The group's 1966 releases, Pet Sounds and Good Vibrations, frequently rank among the top of critics' lists of the greatest albums and singles of all time. Pet Sounds is on the greatest-albums lists for Time, Rolling Stone, New Musical Express, Mojo, and The Times. The record had a profound influence on many of the Beach Boys' contemporaries; McCartney named it one of his favorite albums of all time (with "God Only Knows" as his all-time favorite song). McCartney said that it was the inspiration behind the Beatles' album, Sgt. Pepper's Lonely Hearts Club Band. Echoing this sentiment, Beatles producer George Martin said, "Pepper was an attempt to equal Pet Sounds." 

 The Beach Boys' star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame, located at 1500 Vine Street 
In 1966 and 1967, reader polls conducted by the UK magazine NME crowned the Beach Boys as the world's number one vocal group, ahead of the Beatles and the Rolling Stones. In 1974, the Beach Boys were awarded "Band of the Year" by Rolling Stone. On December 30, 1980, the Beach Boys were awarded a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame, located at 1500 Vine Street. The Beach Boys| Hollywood Walk of Fame. Retrieved 24 March 2013 The group was inducted into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame in 1988. Ten years later they were selected for the Vocal Group Hall of Fame. The Beach Boys, rockhall.com, retrieved on May 2, 2014 Vocal Group Hall of Fame Inductees: The Beach Boys, vocalgroup.org, retrieved on January 15, 2007 In 2001, the group received a Grammy Lifetime Achievement Award. In 2004, Rolling Stone ranked the Beach Boys number 12 on its list of the 100 Greatest Artists of All Time. Brian Wilson was inducted into the UK Rock and Roll Hall of Fame in November 2006. Led Zeppelin make UK Hall of Fame, bbc.co.uk, retrieved on January 15, 2007 

The Wilsons' California house, where the Wilson brothers grew up and the group began, was demolished in 1986 to make way for Interstate 105, the Century Freeway. A Beach Boys Historic Landmark (California Landmark No. 1041 at 3701 West 119th Street), dedicated on May 20, 2005, marks the location.

== Discography ==

== Selected filmography ==

* (1976)
* (1985)
* (1996)
* Harmony: The Beach Boys Story|The Beach Boys: Endless Harmony] (1998)
* (2002)
* (2003)
* (2006)
* (2012)
* (2012)

The Beach Boys also appear in the beach party films The Girls on the Beach in which they perform three songs "The Girls on the Beach", "Lonely Sea", and "Little Honda" and The Monkey's Uncle in which they perform "The Monkey's Uncle" with Annette Funicello.

The life of the Beach Boys is the subject of two TV movies: and .

The Beach Boys appeared in an episode of Full House entitled "Beach Boy Bingo", which aired on November 18, 1988.

The Beach Boys also appeared in Season 6, Episode 4 of Baywatch (1995).

== See also ==

* The Beach Boys lineups
* List of best-selling music artists
* List of artists who reached number one in the United States
* List of best-charting music artists in the United States
* Good Vibrations (musical)

== References ==

== Bibliography ==

* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 

== External links ==

* 
* Official site
* Brian Wilson official website
* The Beach Boys Band official website
* Official website of former touring members Bobby Figueroa, Billy Hinsche, Ed Carter, Matt Jardine and Philip Bardowell
* * Endless Summer Quarterly Endless Summer Quarterly, the "World's Leading Beach Boys Publication"
* 



[[BCE (disambiguation)]]

BCE may stand for: 

* Before Common Era, an alternative to BC.
* European Central Bank in some Romance languages (e.g., Banque Centrale Europenne,Banco Central Europeo)
* Banco Central del Ecuador
* The office complex in downtown Toronto, Canada formerly known as BCE Place, now Brookfield Place
* Basic Chess Endings, a chess book on chess endgames by Reuben Fine
* Beauce region of the Province of Quebec
* Bell Canada Enterprises, the largest telecom corporation in Canada
* Behind Crimson Eyes, a hard rock band from Melbourne, Australia
* Bhagalpur College of Engineering
* Boundary Commission for England
* British Columbia Hydro and Power Authority (BC Electric) 
* Broadcasting Center Europe, a RTL Group subsidiary
* Budapesti Corvinus Egyetem, the Hungarian name for Corvinus University of Budapest
* Business Commitment to the Environment Award, UK environmental award established in 1975



[[BC]]

BC may refer to:
* Before Christ, an epoch used in dating years prior to the estimated birth of Jesus

== Geography ==
* Baja California, a state in Mexico
* Basque Country (greater region), a nation between Spain and France
* Bell Centre, an arena in Montreal, Quebec, Canada
* Botswana's WMO country code and FIPS 10-4 code
* British Columbia, the westernmost province of Canada

== Schools ==
* Bakersfield College, a college in Bakersfield, California
* Baghdad College, a high school, Baghdad, Iraq
* Bergen Catholic High School, a high school in Oradell, New Jersey
* Benedictine Military School, a high school in Savannah, Georgia
* Boston College, a university in Chestnut Hill, Massachusetts
** Boston College Eagles. this university's athletic program
* Brazosport College, a college in Lake Jackson, Texas

== Businesses and organizations ==
* BC Card, Korean credit card company
* Bella Center, a conference center in Copenhagen, Denmark
* Brasseries du Cameroun, a brewery in Cameroon
* British Council
* Brunswick Corporation's NYSE ticker symbol
* Basilian Chouerite Order, a religious order
* Borough Council, a class of second tier council in the United Kingdom
* Bureau of Corrections (Philippines), an agency of the Department of Justice of the Philippines

== Science and technology ==
* bc programming language, an arbitrary-precision calculator language
* Backcrossing, a crossing of a hybrid with one of its parents, or a genetically similar individual
* Ballistic coefficient, a measure of air drag on a projectile
* Base curve radius, a parameter of a contact lens
* Battle command, a military process
* Bayonet cap, a standard light bulb connection
* Black carbon, a carbonaceous component of soot
* Buoyancy compensator (diving), a piece of scuba diving equipment

== Transportation ==
* Belaruskaja yhunka, the national railway company of Belarus
* NZR BC class, a steam locomotive classification of the New Zealand Railways Department
* Skymark Airlines' IATA airline code

== Other uses ==
* B.C. (comic strip), a comic strip by Johnny Hart, and one of its characters
* BC (video game), a cancelled video game by Lionhead Studios
* BC Powder, a brand of pain reliever
* Bliss bibliographic classification, a library cataloguing system
* BookCrossing, a website that encourages leaving books in public places to be found by others
* Brassocattleya or Bc, an orchid genus
* Business continuity
* Baccalaureus or bc, a Bachelors' degree in the Netherlands
* Blind carbon copy (Bcc:), the practice of sending an e-mail to multiple recipients without disclosing the complete list of recipients
* BC The Archaeology of the Bible Lands, BBC television series
*British Citizen, a category of British nationality
*Bullet Club, professional wrestling stable



[[Beatrix Potter]]

Beatrix Potter (born Helen Beatrix Potter; 28 July 186622 December 1943) was an English author, illustrator, natural scientist and conservationist best known for her imaginative children's books, featuring animals such as those in The Tale of Peter Rabbit, which celebrated the British landscape and country life.

Born into a wealthy Unitarian family, Potter, along with her younger brother Walter Bertram (18721918), grew up with few friends outside her large extended family. Her parents were artistic, interested in nature and enjoyed the countryside. As children, Beatrix and Bertram had numerous small animals as pets which they observed closely and drew endlessly. Summer holidays were spent away from London, in Scotland and in the English Lake District where Beatrix developed a love of the natural world which was the subject of her painting from an early age.

She was educated by private governesses until she was 18. Her study of languages, literature, science and history was broad and she was an eager student. Her artistic talents were recognized early. She enjoyed private art lessons, and developed her own style, favouring watercolour. Along with her drawings of her animals, real and imagined, she illustrated insects, fossils, archaeological artefacts, and fungi. In the 1890s her mycological illustrations and research into the reproduction of fungus spores generated interest from the scientific establishment. Following some success illustrating cards and booklets, Potter wrote and illustrated The Tale of Peter Rabbit, publishing it first privately in 1901, and a year later as a small, three-colour illustrated book with Frederick Warne & Co. She became unofficially engaged to her editor Norman Warne in 1905 despite the disapproval of her parents, but he died suddenly a month later of leukemia. 

With the proceeds from the books and a legacy from an aunt, Potter bought Hill Top Farm in Near Sawrey, a tiny village in Cumbria, the English Lake District near Windermere, in 1905. Over the following decades, she purchased additional farms to preserve the unique hill country landscape. In 1913, at the age of 47, she married William Heelis, a respected local solicitor from Hawkshead. Potter was also a prize-winning breeder of Herdwick sheep and a prosperous farmer keenly interested in land preservation. She continued to write, illustrate and design spin-off merchandise based on her children's books for Warne until the duties of land management and her diminishing eyesight made it difficult to continue. Potter published over 23 books: the best known are those written between 1902 and 1922. She died of pneumonia/heart disease on 22 December 1943 at her home in Near Sawrey at age 77, leaving almost all her property to the National Trust. She is credited with preserving much of the land that now comprises the Lake District National Park.

Potter's books continue to sell throughout the world, in many languages. Her stories have been retold in song, film, ballet and animation. The World of Peter Rabbit and Friends, a TV series based on her stories, has been released on VHS by Pickwick Video and later Carlton Video.

==Biography==

===Early life===
Potter at fifteen years with her springer spaniel, Spot

Potter's paternal grandfather, Edmund Potter, from Glossop in Derbyshire, owned what was then the largest calico printing works in England, and later served as a Member of Parliament. Lear 2007, pp. 1014 Beatrix's father, Rupert William Potter (18321914), was educated at Manchester College by the Unitarian philosopher Dr. James Martineau.
 He then trained as a barrister in London. Rupert practised law, specialising in equity law and conveyancing. He married Helen Leech (18391932), the daughter of another wealthy cotton merchant and shipbuilder from Stalybridge, at Gee Cross on 8 August 1863. They lived comfortably at 2 Bolton Gardens, South Kensington, where Helen Beatrix was born on 28 July 1866 and her brother Walter Bertram on 14 March 1872. Lear 2007, pp. 1324 Both parents were artistically talented, Lear 2007, p. 21 and Rupert was an adept amateur photographer. Lear 2007, pp. 3536 Rupert Potter was a member of the Photographic Society, later Royal Photographic Society from 1869 until 1912. Information from Michael Pritchard, Director-General / www.rps.org, 13 May 2014. Rupert had invested in the stock market and by the early 1890s was extremely wealthy. Lear 2007, p. 19. Rupert came into his father's estate over the course of several years, 1884, 1891 and 1905. The Potters were comfortable but they did not live exclusively on inherited wealth; Lane, (1946) The Tale of Beatrix Potter 1946, p. 1 

Potter's family on both sides were from the Manchester area. Lear 2007, p. 10 They were English Unitarians, Lear 2007, p. 9 a dissenting Protestant sect who rejected the doctrine of the Trinity.

Beatrix was educated by three able governesses, the last of whom was Annie Moore (ne Carter), just three years older than Beatrix, who tutored Beatrix in German as well as acting as lady's companion. Lear 2007, p. 55 She and Beatrix remained friends throughout their lives and Annie's eight children were the recipients of many of Potter's delightful picture letters. It was Annie who later suggested that these letters might make good childrens books. Lear 2007, p. 142; Lane, 1978.The Magic Years of Beatrix Potter. Lane depicts Potters childhood as much more restricted than either or Potter's two later biographers. Taylor, Beatrix Potter: Artist Story Teller, Ch 1.; Lear, 2007, pp. 2548; Beatrix Potter, The Journal of Beatrix Potter: From 18811897. 

In their school room Beatrix and Bertram kept a variety of small pets, mice, rabbits, a hedgehog and some bats, along with collections of butterflies and other insects which they drew and studied. Lear 2007, p. 31, pp. 3744, p. 458nn15 Beatrix was devoted to the care of her small animals, often taking them with her on long holidays. Judy Taylor, Joyce Irene Whalley, Anne Stevenson Hobbs and Elizabeth Battrick, (1987) Beatrix Potter, 18661943: The Artist and Her World, pp.917, 3548; Lear, pp. 2548. In most of the first fifteen years of her life, Beatrix spent summer holidays at Dalguise, an estate on the River Tay in Perthshire, Scotland. There she sketched and explored an area that nourished her imagination and her observation. Lear 2007, pp. 268, 51 Beatrix and her brother were allowed great freedom in the country and both children became adept students of natural history. In 1887, when Dalguise was no longer available, the Potters took their first summer holiday in the Lake District, at Wray Castle near Windermere. Lear 2007, pp. 512 Here Beatrix met Hardwicke Rawnsley, vicar of Wray and later the founding secretary of the National Trust, whose interest in the countryside and country life inspired the same in Beatrix and who was to have a lasting impact on her life. Potter, The Journal, 18851897 Lear 2007, pp. 523 

About the age of 14 Beatrix began to keep a diary. It was written in a code of her own devising which was a simple letter for letter substitution. Her Journal was important to the development of her creativity, serving as both sketchbook and literary experiment: in tiny handwriting she reported on society, recorded her impressions of art and artists, recounted stories and observed life around her. Lear 2007, pp.4951 cf. also p. 463nn1 The Journal, decoded and transcribed by Leslie Linder in 1958, does not provide an intimate record of her personal life, but it is an invaluable source for understanding a vibrant part of British society in the late 19th century. It describes Potter's maturing artistic and intellectual interests, her often amusing insights on the places she visited, and her unusual ability to observe nature and to describe it. Started in 1881, her journal ends in 1897 when her artistic and intellectual energies were absorbed in scientific study and in efforts to publish her drawings. Potter, "The Journal, 18851897" Precocious but reserved and often bored, she was searching for more independent activities and wished to earn some money of her own whilst dutifully taking care of her parents, dealing with her especially demanding mother, Lear 2007, p. 94 also cf. p. 474nn55 and managing their various households.

===Scientific illustrations and work in mycology===
Beatrix Potter's parents did not discourage higher education. As was common in the Victorian era, women of her class were privately educated and rarely went to university. Taylor, Artist, Storyteller, pp. 5961; Elizabeth E. Battrick, (1999) Beatrix Potter: The Unknown Years; Lynn Barber, (1980) The Heyday of Natural History, Brian Gardiner, "Breatrix Potters Fossils and Her Interests in Geology", The Linnean, 16/1 (January 2000), 3147; Lear 2007, pp. 76103; Potter, Journal, 18911897. 

Beatrix Potter was interested in every branch of natural science save astronomy. Lear 2007, p. 98 Botany was a passion for most Victorians and nature study was a popular enthusiasm. Potter was eclectic in her tastes: collecting fossils, Brian G. Gardiner, "Beatrix Potter's fossils and her interest in Geology," The Linnean: Newsletter and Proceedings of the Linnean Society of London 16/1 (January 2000), pp. 3147 studying archeological artefacts from London excavations, and interested in entomology. In all these areas she drew and painted her specimens with increasing skill. By the 1890s her scientific interests centred on mycology. First drawn to fungi because of their colours and evanescence in nature and her delight in painting them, her interest deepened after meeting Charles McIntosh, a revered naturalist and mycologist, during a summer holiday in Dunkeld in Perthshire in 1892. He helped improve the accuracy of her illustrations, taught her taxonomy, and supplied her with live specimens to paint during the winter. Curious as to how fungi reproduced, Potter began microscopic drawings of fungus spores (the agarics) and in 1895 developed a theory of their germination. Lear 2007, pp. 81103 Through the connections of her uncle Sir Henry Enfield Roscoe, a chemist and vice-chancellor of the University of London, she consulted with botanists at Kew Gardens, convincing George Massee of her ability to germinate spores and her theory of hybridisation. Lear 2007, p. 117 She did not believe in the theory of symbiosis proposed by Simon Schwendener, the German mycologist, as previously thought; rather she proposed a more independent process of reproduction. M.A. Taylor and R.H. Rodger, eds. (2003) A Fascinating Acquaintance: Charles McIntosh and Beatrix Potter; Taylor, et al. (1987) Artist and Her World, pp. 7194; Lear 2007, pp. 104129; Nicholas P. Money, "Beatrix Potter, Victorian Mycologist", Fungi. 2:4 (Fall 2009); Roy Watling, "Helen Beatrix Potter: Her interest in fungi", The Linnean: Newsletter and Proceedings of the Linnean Society of London, 16/1 (January 2000), pp. 2431. 

Rebuffed by William Thiselton-Dyer, the Director at Kew, because of her gender and her amateur status, Beatrix wrote up her conclusions and submitted a paper, On the Germination of the Spores of the Agaricineae, to the Linnean Society in 1897. It was introduced by Massee because, as a female, Potter could not attend proceedings or read her paper. She subsequently withdrew it, realising that some of her samples were contaminated, but continued her microscopic studies for several more years. Her paper has only recently been rediscovered, along with the rich, artistic illustrations and drawings that accompanied it. Her work is only now being properly evaluated. Lear 2007, pp. 10425 Watling, "Helen Beatrix Potter: Her interest in fungi", The Linnean: Newsletter and Proceedings of the Linnean Society of London, 16/1 (January 2000) Potter later gave her other mycological and scientific drawings to the Armitt Museum and Library in Ambleside, where mycologists still refer to them to identify fungi. There is also a collection of her fungus paintings at the Perth Museum and Art Gallery in Perth, Scotland donated by Charles McIntosh. In 1967 the mycologist W.P.K. Findlay included many of Potter's beautifully accurate fungus drawings in his Wayside & Woodland Fungi, thereby fulfilling her desire to one day have her fungus drawings published in a book. Walter Philip Kennedy Findlay, (1967) Wayside & Woodland Fungi In 1997 the Linnean Society issued a posthumous apology to Potter for the sexism displayed in its handling of her research. Lear 2007, p. 125, p.482nn58 

===Artistic and literary career===
First edition, 1902
Potters artistic and literary interests were deeply influenced by fairies, fairy tales and fantasy. She was a student of the classic fairy tales of Western Europe. As well as stories from the Old Testament, John Bunyan's The Pilgrim's Progress and Harriet Beecher Stowe's Uncle Tom's Cabin, she grew up with Aesop's Fables, the fairy tales of the Brothers Grimm and Hans Christian Andersen, Charles Kingsley's The Water Babies, Lear 2007, pp. 301 the folk tales and mythology of Scotland, the German Romantics, Shakespeare, Lear 2007, p. 95. She liked to memorise his plays by heart. and the romances of Sir Walter Scott. Lear 2007, p. 35. Beatrix said she learnt to read "on" Scott As a young child, before the age of eight, Edward Lear's Book of Nonsense, including the much loved The Owl and the Pussycat, and Lewis Carroll's Alice in Wonderland had made their impression, although she later said of Alice that she was more interested in Tenniel's illustrations than what they were about. Lear 2007, p. 34 The Brer Rabbit stories of Joel Chandler Harris had been family favourites, and she later studied his Uncle Remus stories and illustrated them. Lear 2007, p.131. She began eight Uncle Remus drawings in the same year 1893 she began writing the Peter Rabbit picture letters to Noel Moore, completing the last in 1896. She studied book illustration from a young age and developed her own tastes, but the work of the picture book triumvirate Walter Crane, Kate Greenaway and Randolph Caldecott, the last an illustrator whose work was later collected by her father, was a great influence. Lear 2007, p. 33 When she started to illustrate, she chose first the traditional rhymes and stories, "Cinderella", "Sleeping Beauty", "Ali Baba and the Forty Thieves", "Puss-in-boots", and "Red Riding Hood". Lear 2007, pp. 1278 But most often her illustrations were fantasies featuring her own pets: mice, rabbits, kittens, and guinea pigs. Taylor, et al., The Artist and her World, pp. 4970; Potter, Journal, 18841897; Humphrey Carpenter (1985), Secret Gardens: The Golden Age of Childrens Literature. 

In her teenage years Potter was a regular visitor to the art galleries of London, particularly enjoying the summer and winter exhibitions at the Royal Academy in London. Lear 2007, p. 47-8. J. M. W. Turner was the first artist to impress her. Her Journal reveals her growing sophistication as a critic as well as the influence of her father's friend, the artist Sir John Everett Millais, who recognised Beatrix's talent of observation. Although Potter was aware of art and artistic trends, her drawing and her prose style were uniquely her own. Taylor, Artist, Storyteller, pp. 7095; Taylor, ed. 1989, Beatrix Potters Letters. 

As a way to earn money in the 1890s, Beatrix and her brother began to print Christmas cards of their own design, as well as cards for special occasions. Mice and rabbits were the most frequent subject of her fantasy paintings. In 1890 the firm of Hildesheimer and Faulkner bought several of her drawings of her rabbit Benjamin Bunny to illustrate verses by Frederic Weatherly titled A Happy Pair. In 1893 the same printer bought several more drawings for Weatherly's Our Dear Relations, another book of rhymes, and the following year Potter sold a series of frog illustrations and verses for Changing Pictures, a popular annual offered by the art publisher Ernest Nister. Potter was pleased by this success and determined to publish her own illustrated stories. Taylor, et al. 1987, pp. 107148; Katherine Chandler, "Thoroughly Post-Victorian, Pre-Modern Beatrix." Childrens Literature Quarterly. 32(4): 287-307. 

Whenever Potter went on holiday to the Lake District or Scotland, she sent letters to young friends, illustrating them with quick sketches. Many of these letters were written to the children of her former governess Annie Carter Moore, particularly to her eldest son Noel who was often ill. In September 1893 Potter was on holiday at Eastwood in Dunkeld, Perthshire. She had run out of things to say to Noel and so she told him a story about "four little rabbits whose names were Flopsy, Mopsy, Cottontail and Peter". It became one of the most famous children's letters ever written and the basis of Potter's future career as a writer-artist-storyteller. Judy Taylor 1992, Letters to Children from Beatrix Potter. 

In 1900, Potter revised her tale about the four little rabbits, and fashioned a dummy book of it - it has been suggested, in imitation of Helen Bannerman's 1899 bestseller The Story of Little Black Sambo. Stevenson, Laura C. "A Vogue for Small Books": The Tale of Peter Rabbit and its Contemporary Competitors" Unable to find a buyer for the work, she published it for family and friends at her own expense in December 1901. It was drawn in black and white with a coloured frontispiece. Family friend Canon Hardwicke Rawnsley had great faith in Potter's tale, recast it in didactic verse, and made the rounds of the London publishing houses. Frederick Warne & Co had previously rejected the tale but, eager to compete in the booming small format children's book market, reconsidered and accepted the "bunny book" (as the firm called it) following the recommendation of their prominent children's book artist L. Leslie Brooke. Lear 2007, pp. 144-7 The firm declined Rawnsley's verse in favour of Potter's original prose, and Potter agreed to colour her pen and ink illustrations, choosing the then new Hentschel three-colour process to reproduce her watercolours. Hobbs 1989, p. 15 
Potter used many real locations for her book illustrations, the Tower Bank Arms, Near Sawrey appears in The Tale of Jemima Puddle-Duck.
On 2 October 1902 The Tale of Peter Rabbit was published, Taylor 1996, p. 76 and was an immediate success. It was followed the next year by The Tale of Squirrel Nutkin and The Tailor of Gloucester, which had also first been written as picture letters to the Moore children. Working with Norman Warne as her editor, Potter published two or three little books each year: 23 books in all. The last book in this format was Cecily Parsley's Nursery Rhymes in 1922, a collection of favourite rhymes. Although The Tale of Little Pig Robinson was not published until 1930, it had been written much earlier. Potter continued creating her little books until after the First World War, when her energies were increasingly directed toward her farming, sheep-breeding and land conservation. Judy Taylor 2002, That Naughty Rabbit: Beatrix Potter and Peter Rabbit; Lear 2007, pp. 207-247; Anne Stevenson Hobbs, ed. 1989, Beatrix Potters Art: Paintings and Drawings. 

The immense popularity of Potter's books was based on the lively quality of her illustrations, the non-didactic nature of her stories, the depiction of the rural countryside, and the imaginative qualities she lent to her animal characters.

Potter was also a canny businesswoman. As early as 1903 she made and patented a Peter Rabbit doll. It was followed by other "spin-off" merchandise over the years, including painting books, board games, wall-paper, figurines, baby blankets and china tea-sets. All were licensed by Frederick Warne & Co and earned Potter an independent income, as well as immense profits for her publisher. See Judy Taylor 2002, "That Naughty Rabbit" 

In 1905, Potter and Norman Warne became unofficially engaged. Potter's parents objected to the match because Warne was "in trade" and thus not socially suitable. The engagement lasted only one month until Warne died of leukemia at age 37. Lear 2007, pp.198- 201 That same year Potter used some of her income and a small inheritance from an aunt to buy Hill Top Farm in Near Sawrey in the English Lake District. Potter and Warne may have hoped that Hill Top Farm would be their holiday home, but after Warne's death Potter went ahead with its purchase as she had always wanted to own that farm, and live in "that charming village". Lear 2007, p. 207 

===Country life===
Hill Top, Near Sawrey  Potter's former home, now owned by the National Trust and preserved as it was when she lived and wrote her stories there.
The tenant farmer John Cannon and his family agreed to stay on to manage the farm for her while she made physical improvements and learned the techniques of fell farming and of raising livestock, including pigs, cows and chickens; the following year she added sheep. Realising she needed to protect her boundaries, she sought advice from W.H. Heelis & Son, a local firm of solicitors with offices in nearby Hawkshead. With William Heelis acting for her she bought contiguous pasture, and in 1909 the 20 acre Castle Farm across the road from Hill Top Farm. She visited Hill Top at every opportunity, and her books written during this period (such as The Tale of Ginger and Pickles, about the local shop in Near Sawrey and The Tale of Mrs. Tittlemouse, a wood mouse) reflect her increasing participation in village life and her delight in country living. Taylor, ed., (2002) Beatrix Potters Letters; Hunter Davies, Beatrix Potters Lakeland; W.R. Mitchell, Potter: Her Life in the Lake District. 

Owning and managing these working farms required routine collaboration with the widely respected William Heelis. By the summer of 1912 Heelis had proposed marriage and Beatrix had accepted; although she did not immediately tell her parents, who once again disapproved because Heelis was only a country solicitor. Potter and Heelis were married on 15 October 1913 in London at St Mary Abbots in Kensington. The couple moved immediately to Near Sawrey, residing at Castle Cottage, the renovated farm house on Castle Farm. Hill Top remained a working farm but was now remodelled to allow for the tenant family and Potter's private studio and work shop. At last her own woman, Potter settled into the partnerships that shaped the rest of her life: her country solicitor husband and his large family, her farms, the Sawrey community and the predictable rounds of country life. The Tale of Jemima Puddle-Duck and The Tale of Tom Kitten are representative of Hill Top Farm and of her farming life, and reflect her happiness with her country life. John Heelis, (1999) The Tale of Mrs William Heelis  Beatrix Potter; Lear, Ch. 13. 

After Rupert Potter died in 1914, Potter, now a wealthy woman, found Lindeth Howe, a large house in nearby Windermere where her mother lived until her death in 1931 at the age of 93. Potter continued to write stories for Frederick Warne & Co and fully participated in country life. She established a Nursing Trust for local villages, and served on various committees and councils responsible for footpaths and other rural issues. Taylor et al. The Artist and Her World, pp. 185194; Taylor, Artist Storyteller, pp. 105144. 

===Sheep farming===
Beatrix Potter Heelis became keenly interested in the breeding and raising of Herdwick sheep, the indigenous fell sheep, soon after acquiring Hill Top Farm. In 1923 she bought a former deer park and vast sheep farm in the Troutbeck Valley called Troutbeck Park Farm, restoring its land with thousands of Herdwick sheep. This established her as one of the major Herdwick sheep farmers in the area. She was admired by her shepherds and farm managers for her willingness to experiment with the latest biological remedies for the common diseases of sheep, and for her employment of the best shepherds, sheep breeders, and farm managers. William Rollinson, (1981) How They Lived in the Lake District; Susan Denyer, 1993 Herdwick Sheep Farming; Geoff Brown, (2009) Herdwicks: Herdwick Sheep and the English Lake District; Judy Taylor, ed., (1998) Beatrix Potters Farming Friendship. Lake District Letters to Joseph Moscrop, 19261943. 

By the late 1920s Potter and her Hill Top farm manager Tom Storey had made a name for their prize-winning Herdwick flock, for which she won many prizes at the local agricultural shows, where she was also often asked to serve as a judge. In 1942 she was named President-elect of The Herdwick Sheepbreeders Association, the first time a woman had ever been elected to that office, but died before taking office. Lear 2007, pp. 381-404 

==Lake District conservation==
Potter had been a disciple of the land conservation and preservation ideals of her long-time friend and mentor, Canon Hardwicke Rawnsley, the first secretary and founding member of the National Trust for Places of Historic Interest or Natural Beauty. She supported the efforts of the National Trust to preserve not just the places of extraordinary beauty but also those heads of valleys and low grazing lands that would be irreparably ruined by development. She was also an authority on the traditional Lakeland crafts, period furniture and stonework. She restored and preserved the farms that she bought or managed, making sure that each farm house had in it a piece of antique Lakeland furniture. Potter was interested in preserving not only the Herdwick sheep, but also the way of life of fell farming. In 1930 the Heelises became partners with the National Trust in buying and managing the fell farms included in the large Monk Coniston Estate. The estate was composed of many farms spread over a wide area of north-western Lancashire, including the famously beautiful Tarn Hows. Potter was the de facto estate manager for the Trust for seven years until the National Trust could afford to buy most of the property back from her. Her stewardship of these farms earned her wide regard, but she was not without her critics. She was notable in observing the problems of afforestation, preserving the intake grazing lands, and husbanding the quarries and timber on these farms. All her farms were stocked with Herdwick sheep and frequently with Galloway cattle.

==Later life==
Potter continued to write stories and to draw, although mostly for her own pleasure. Her books in the late 1920s included the semi-autobiographical The Fairy Caravan, a fanciful tale set in her beloved Troutbeck fells. It was published only in the US during Potter's lifetime, and not until 1952 in the UK. Sister Anne, Potter's version of the story of Bluebeard, was written especially for her American readers, but illustrated by Katharine Sturges. A final folktale, Wag by Wall, was published posthumously by The Horn Book in 1944. Potter was a generous patron of the Girl Guides, whose troops she allowed to make their summer encampments on her lands and whose company she enjoyed as an older woman. Jane Morse, ed., (1982) Beatrix Potters Americans: Selected Letters; Susan Denyer, (2000) At Home with Beatrix Potter: The Creator of Peter Rabbit. 

Potter and William Heelis enjoyed a happy marriage of thirty years, continuing their farming and preservation efforts throughout the hard days of the Second World War. Although they were childless, Potter played an important role in Williams large family, particularly enjoying her relationship with several nieces whom she helped educate and giving comfort and aid to her husbands brothers and sisters. Heelis, Mrs. William Heelis; Taylor, ed., Beatrix Potters Letters. 

Potter died of complications from pneumonia and heart disease on 22 December 1943 at Castle Cottage and her remains were cremated at Carleton Crematorium. She left nearly all her property to the National Trust, including over 4,000 acre of land, sixteen farms, cottages and herds of cattle and Herdwick sheep. Hers was the largest gift at that time to the National Trust and it enabled the preservation of the lands now included in the Lake District National Park and the continuation of fell farming. The central office of the National Trust in Swindon was named "Heelis" in 2005 in her memory. William Heelis continued his stewardship of their properties and of her literary and artistic work for the eighteen months he survived her. When he died in August 1945 he left the remainder to the National Trust. Lear 2007, pp. 405-440; Taylor, ed., Beatrix Potters Letters; Taylor, et al., The Artist and Her World. 

==Legacies==
Goody and Mrs. Hackee, illustration to The Tale of Timmy Tiptoes, 1911
Potter left almost all the original illustrations for her books to the National Trust. The copyright to her stories and merchandise was then given to her publisher Frederick Warne & Co, now a division of the Penguin Group. On January 1, 2014, the copyright expired in the UK and other countries with a 70-years-after-death limit. Hill Top Farm was opened to the public by the National Trust in 1946; her artwork was displayed there until 1985 when it was moved to William Heeliss former law offices in Hawkshead, also owned by the National Trust as the Beatrix Potter Gallery. Bruce L. Thompson, Beatrix Potters Gift to the Public'. Country Life (3 March 1944), 370-371; Taylor, et al., The Artist Storyteller, Ch. 6; Lear 2007, pp. 441-447. 

Potter gave her folios of mycological drawings to the Armitt Library and Museum in Ambleside before her death. The Tale of Peter Rabbit is owned by Frederick Warne and Company, The Tailor of Gloucester by the Tate Gallery and The Tale of the Flopsy Bunnies by the British Museum.

The largest public collection of her letters and drawings is the Leslie Linder Bequest and Leslie Linder Collection at the Victoria and Albert Museum in London. In the United States, the largest public collections are those in the Special Collections of the Free Library of Philadelphia, and the Lloyd Cotsen Childrens Library at Princeton University.

==Themes==
There are many interpretations of Potters literary work, the sources of her art, and her life and times. These include critical evaluations of her corpus of children's literature, and Modernist interpretations of Humphrey Carpenter and Katherine Chandler. Judy Taylor, That Naughty Rabbit: Beatrix Potter and Peter Rabbit (rev. 2002) tells the story of the first publication and many editions. Taylor, et al., (2009) The Artist and Her World. Considers Potter's career and life in chapters arranged thematically; The Pitkin Guide to Beatrix Potter. 

Potters country life and her farming has also been widely discussed in the work of Susan Denyer and by other authors in the publications of The National Trust.

Potter's work as a scientific illustrator and her work in mycology is highlighted in several chapters in Linda Lear, Beatrix Potter: A Life in Nature, 2007; Beatrix Potter: The Extraordinary Life of a Victorian Genius. 2008, UK.

==Adaptations and fictionalisations==
In 1971 a ballet film was released, The Tales of Beatrix Potter, directed by Reginald Mills. Set to music by John Lanchbery with choreography by Frederick Ashton and performed in character costume by members of the Royal Ballet and the Royal Opera House orchestra. The ballet of the same name has been performed by other dance companies around the world.

In 1982, the BBC produced The Tale of Beatrix Potter. This dramatisation of her life was written by John Hawkesworth and directed by Bill Hayes. It starred Holly Aird and Penelope Wilton as the young and adult Beatrix respectively. 

In 2006 Chris Noonan directed Miss Potter, a biopic of Potters life focusing on her early career and romance with her editor Norman Warne. Rene Zellweger and Ewan McGregor play the lead roles. 

Potter is also featured in a series of light mysteries called The Cottage Tales of Beatrix Potter by Susan Wittig Albert. The eight books in the series starting with the Tale of Hill Top Farm (2004) deal with her life in the Lake District and the village of Near Sawrey between 1905 and 1913. 

==Publications==

The 23 Tales
#The Tale of Peter Rabbit (1902)
#The Tale of Squirrel Nutkin (1903)
#The Tailor of Gloucester (1903)
#The Tale of Benjamin Bunny (1904)
#The Tale of Two Bad Mice (1904)
#The Tale of Mrs. Tiggy-Winkle (1905)
#The Tale of the Pie and the Patty-Pan (1905)
#The Tale of Mr. Jeremy Fisher (1906)
#The Story of A Fierce Bad Rabbit (1906)
#The Story of Miss Moppet (1906)
#The Tale of Tom Kitten (1907)
#The Tale of Jemima Puddle-Duck (1908)
#The Tale of Samuel Whiskers or, The Roly-Poly Pudding (1908)
#The Tale of the Flopsy Bunnies (1909)
#The Tale of Ginger and Pickles (1909)
#The Tale of Mrs. Tittlemouse (1910)
#The Tale of Timmy Tiptoes (1911)
#The Tale of Mr. Tod (1912)
#The Tale of Pigling Bland (1913)
#Appley Dapply's Nursery Rhymes (1917)
#The Tale of Johnny Town-Mouse (1918)
#Cecily Parsley's Nursery Rhymes (1922)
#The Tale of Little Pig Robinson (1930)

Other books
#Peter Rabbit's Painting Book (1911)
#Tom Kitten's Painting Book (1917)
#Jemima Puddle-Duck's Painting Book (1925)
#Peter Rabbit's Almanac for 1929 (1928)
#The Fairy Caravan (1929)
#Sister Anne (illustrated by Katharine Sturges) (1932)
#Wag-by-Wall (decorations by J. J. Lankes) (1944)
#The Tale of the Faithful Dove (illustrated by Marie Angel) (1955, 1970)
#The Sly Old Cat (written 1906; first published 1971)
#The Tale of Tuppenny (illustrated by Marie Angel) (1973)

==References==

==Further reading==
;Letters, journals and writing collections

*
*
*
*
* Potter, Beatrix. (rev. 1989). The Journal of Beatrix Potter, 18811897, transcribed from her code writings by Leslie Linder. F. Warne & Co. ISBN 978-0-7232-3625-2
*

;Art studies
*
*
*
*
*

;Biographical studies

*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*

==External links==

*Beatrix Potters fossils and her interest in geology - B. G. Gardiner
* (plain text and HTML)
*Collection of Potter materials at Victoria and Albert Museum
* Beatrix Potter online feature at the University of Pittsburgh School of Information Sciences
*Beatrix Potter Society, UK
*Beatrix Potter's World
*Frederick Warne and Company
*Beatrix Potter, A Life in Nature
*Exhibition of Beatrix Potter's Picture Letters at the Morgan Library

 



[[Liberal Party (UK)]]

The Liberal Party was a liberal political movement that formed one of the two major political parties in the United Kingdom during the 19th and early 20th centuries. Its influence then waned, but not before it had moved toward social liberalism and introduced important elements of Britain's welfare state.

The party arose from an alliance of Whigs and free-trade Peelites and Radicals during the 1850s. By the end of the nineteenth century, it had formed four governments under William Gladstoneone of the party's most significant leadersalthough they were punctuated by heavy election defeats. Despite becoming divided over the issue of Irish Home Rule, the party returned to power in 1906 with a landslide victory and, between then and the onset of World War I, Liberal governments oversaw the welfare reforms that created a basic British welfare state. During this time, the party's other two most significant leaders came to the fore: Herbert Asquith, Prime Minister between 1908 and 1916; and David Lloyd George, who followed Asquith as Prime Minister for the rest of World War I and thereafter until 1922.

1922 marked the end of the coalition the party had formed with the Conservative ("Tory") Party during the war and the last time the party was, in government, anything more than a junior coalition partner. By the end of the 1920s, the Labour Party had replaced it as the Tories' primary rival and the party went into a decline that, by the 1950s, saw it winning no more than six seats at general elections. Apart from a few notable by-election victories, the party's fortunes did not improve significantly until it formed the SDPLiberal Alliance with the newly formed Social Democratic Party (SDP) in 1981. At the next general election, in 1983, the Alliance received over a quarter of the overall vote, but only secured 23 of the 650 seats contested. After the 1987 general election saw this share fall below 23%, the Liberal and SDP parties formally merged in 1988 to form the Liberal Democrats. A small splinter Liberal Party was formed in 1989 by former party members opposed to the merger.

Two of the most prominent intellectuals associated with the Liberal Party were the economist John Maynard Keynes and social planner William Beveridge.

== Ideology ==

During the 19th century, the Liberal Party was broadly in favour of what would today be called classical liberalism: supporting laissez-faire economic policies such as free trade and minimal government interference in the economy (this doctrine was usually termed 'Gladstonian Liberalism' after the Victorian era Liberal Prime Minister William Ewart Gladstone). The Liberal Party favoured social reform, personal liberty, reducing the powers of the Crown and the Church of England (many of them were Nonconformists) and an extension of the electoral franchise. Sir William Harcourt, a prominent Liberal politician in the Victorian era, said this about liberalism in 1872:

A crowd waits outside Leeds Town Hall to see them elect a Liberal Party candidate during the 1880 general elections.
If there be any party which is more pledged than another to resist a policy of restrictive legislation, having for its object social coercion, that party is the Liberal party. (Cheers.) But liberty does not consist in making others do what you think right, (Hear, hear.) The difference between a free Government and a Government which is not free is principally thisthat a Government which is not free interferes with everything it can, and a free Government interferes with nothing except what it must. A despotic Government tries to make everybody do what it wishes; a Liberal Government tries, as far as the safety of society will permit, to allow everybody to do as he wishes. It has been the tradition of the Liberal party consistently to maintain the doctrine of individual liberty. It is because they have done so that England is the place where people can do more what they please than in any other country in the world...It is this practice of allowing one set of people to dictate to another set of people what they shall do, what they shall think, what they shall drink, when they shall go to bed, what they shall buy, and where they shall buy it, what wages they shall get and how they shall spend them, against which the Liberal party have always protested. The Times (31 December 1872), p. 5. 

The political terms of "modern", "progressive" or "new" Liberalism began to appear in the mid to late 1880s and became increasingly common to denote the tendency in the Liberal Party to favour an increased role for the state as more important than the classical liberal stress on self-help and freedom of choice. W. H. Greenleaf, The British Political Tradition. Volume II: The Ideological Heritage (London: Methuen, 1983), p. 143. 

By the early 20th century the Liberals stance began to shift towards "New Liberalism", what would today be called social liberalism: a belief in personal liberty with a support for government intervention to provide minimum levels of welfare. This shift was best exemplified by the Liberal government of Herbert Henry Asquith and his Chancellor David Lloyd George, whose Liberal reforms in the early 1900s created a basic welfare state. 

David Lloyd George adopted a programme at the 1929 general election entitled We Can Conquer Unemployment!, although by this stage the Liberals had declined to third-party status. The Liberals now (as expressed in the Liberal Yellow Book) regarded opposition to state intervention as being a characteristic of right-wing extremists. Liberal Industrial Inquiry, Britain's Industrial Future (London, 1928), p. 453. 

After nearly becoming extinct in the 1940s and 50s, the Liberal Party revived its fortunes somewhat under the leadership of Jo Grimond in the 1960s, by positioning itself as a radical centrist non-socialist alternative to the Conservative and Labour Party governments of the time. 

==Origins==
Viscount Palmerston

The Liberal Party grew out of the Whigs, who had their origins in an aristocratic faction in the reign of Charles II, and the early 19th century Radicals. The Whigs were in favour of reducing the power of the Crown and increasing the power of Parliament. Although their motives in this were originally to gain more power for themselves, the more idealistic Whigs gradually came to support an expansion of democracy for its own sake. The great figures of reformist Whiggery were Charles James Fox (died 1806) and his disciple and successor Earl Grey. After decades in opposition, the Whigs returned to power under Grey in 1830 and carried the First Reform Act in 1832.

The Reform Act was the climax of Whiggism, but it also brought about the Whigs' demise. The admission of the middle classes to the franchise and to the House of Commons led eventually to the development of a systematic middle class liberalism and the end of Whiggery, although for many years reforming aristocrats held senior positions in the party. In the years after Grey's retirement, the party was led first by Lord Melbourne, a fairly traditional Whig, and then by Lord John Russell, the son of a Duke but a crusading radical, and by Lord Palmerston, a renegade Irish Tory and essentially a conservative, although capable of radical gestures.

As early as 1839 Russell had adopted the name of "Liberals", but in reality his party was a loose coalition of Whigs in the House of Lords and Radicals in the Commons. The leading Radicals were John Bright and Richard Cobden, who represented the manufacturing towns which had gained representation under the Reform Act. They favoured social reform, personal liberty, reducing the powers of the Crown and the Church of England (many of them were Nonconformists), avoidance of war and foreign alliances (which were bad for business), and above all free trade. For a century, free trade remained the one cause which could unite all Liberals.

In 1841 the Liberals lost office to the Conservatives under Sir Robert Peel, but their period in opposition was short, because the Conservatives split over the repeal of the Corn Laws, a free trade issue, and a faction known as the Peelites (but not Peel himself, who died soon after) defected to the Liberal side. This allowed ministries led by Russell, Palmerston, and the Peelite Lord Aberdeen to hold office for most of the 1850s and 1860s. A leading Peelite was William Ewart Gladstone, who was a reforming Chancellor of the Exchequer in most of these governments. The formal foundation of the Liberal Party is traditionally traced to 1859 and the formation of Palmerston's second government.

The Whig-Radical amalgam could not become a true modern political party, however, while it was dominated by aristocrats, and it was not until the departure of the "Two Terrible Old Men", Russell and Palmerston, that Gladstone could become the first leader of the modern Liberal Party. This was brought about by Palmerston's death in 1865 and Russell's retirement in 1868. After a brief Conservative government (during which the Second Reform Act was passed by agreement between the parties) Gladstone won a huge victory at the 1868 election and formed the first Liberal government. The establishment of the party as a national membership organisation came with the foundation of the National Liberal Federation in 1877.

==The Gladstonian era==
William Gladstone

For the next thirty years Gladstone and Liberalism were synonymous. William Ewart Gladstone served as prime minister four times (186874, 188085, 1886, and 189294). His financial policies, based on the notion of balanced budgets, low taxes, and laissez-faire, were suited to a developing capitalist society, but they could not respond effectively as economic and social conditions changed. Called the "Grand Old Man" later in life, Gladstone was always a dynamic popular orator who appealed strongly to the working class and to the lower middle class. Deeply religious, Gladstone brought a new moral tone to politics, with his evangelical sensibility and his opposition to aristocracy. J. P. Parry, Democracy and Religion: Gladstone and the Liberal Party, 18671875 (1989) p 174 His moralism often angered his upper-class opponents (including Queen Victoria), and his heavy-handed control split the Liberal Party. H. C. G. Matthew, "Gladstone, William Ewart (18091898)", Oxford Dictionary of National Biography (2004) J. L. Hammond and M. R. D. Foot, Gladstone and Liberalism (1952) 

In foreign policy, Gladstone was in general against foreign entanglements, but he did not resist the realities of imperialism. For example, he approved of the occupation of Egypt by British forces in 1882. His goal was to create a European order based on co-operation rather than conflict and on mutual trust instead of rivalry and suspicion; the rule of law was to supplant the reign of force and self-interest. This Gladstonian concept of a harmonious Concert of Europe was opposed to and ultimately defeated by a Bismarckian system of manipulated alliances and antagonisms. Graham D. Goodlad, British foreign and imperial policy, 18651919 (2000) p. 21 

As prime minister 1868 to 1874, Gladstone headed a Liberal Party which was a coalition of Peelites like himself, Whigs, and Radicals; he was now a spokesman for "peace, economy and reform." One major achievement was the Elementary Education Act of 1870, which provided England with an adequate system of elementary schools for the first time and made attendance compulsory. He also secured the abolition of the purchase of commissions in the army and of religious tests for admission to Oxford and Cambridge; the introduction of the secret ballot in elections; the legalization of trade unions; and the reorganization of the judiciary in the Judicature Act. 

Regarding Ireland, the major Liberal achievements were land reform, where he ended centuries of landlord oppression, and the disestablishment of the (Anglican) Church of Ireland through the Irish Church Act 1869.

In the 1874 general election Gladstone was defeated by the Conservatives under Disraeli during a sharp economic recession. He formally resigned as Liberal leader and was succeeded by the Marquess of Hartington, but he soon changed his mind and returned to active politics. He strongly disagreed with Disraeli's pro-Ottoman foreign policy and in 1880 he conducted the first outdoor mass-election campaign in Britain, known as the Midlothian campaign. The Liberals won a large majority in the 1880 election. Hartington ceded his place and Gladstone resumed office.

Among the consequences of the Third Reform Act (188485) was the giving of the vote to the Catholic peasants in Ireland, and the consequent creation of an Irish Parliamentary Party led by Charles Stewart Parnell. In the 1885 general election this party won the balance of power in the House of Commons, and demanded Irish Home Rule as the price of support for a continued Gladstone ministry. Gladstone personally supported Home Rule, but a strong Liberal Unionist faction led by Joseph Chamberlain, along with the last of the Whigs, Hartington, opposed it. The Irish Home Rule bill gave all owners of Irish land a chance to sell to the state at a price equal to 20 years' purchase of the rents and allowing tenants to purchase the land. Irish nationalist reaction was mixed, Unionist opinion was hostile, and the election addresses during the 1886 election revealed English radicals to be against the bill also. Among the Liberal rank and file, several Gladstonian candidates disowned the bill, reflecting fears at the constituency level that the interests of the working people were being sacrificed to finance a rescue operation for the landed elite. Graham D. Goodlad, "The Liberal Party and Gladstone's Land Purchase Bill of 1886. Historical Journal 1989 32(3): 627641 in JSTOR 

The result was a catastrophic split in the Liberal Party, and heavy defeat in the 1886 election at the hands of Lord Salisbury. There was a final weak Gladstone ministry in 1892, but it also was dependent on Irish support and failed to get Irish Home Rule through the House of Lords.

Gladstone finally retired in 1894, and his ineffectual successor, Lord Rosebery, led the party to another heavy defeat in the 1895 general election.

A major long-term consequence of the Third Reform Act was the rise of Lib-Lab candidates, in the absence of any committed Labour Party. The Act split all county constituencies (which were represented by multiple MPs) into single-member constituencies, roughly corresponding to population patterns. In areas with working class majorities, in particular coal-mining areas, Lib-Lab candidates were popular, and they received sponsorship and endorsement from trade unions. In the first election after the Act was passed (1885), thirteen were elected, up from two in 1874. The Third Reform Act also facilitated the demise of the Whig old guard: in two-member constituencies, it was common to pair a Whig and a radical under the Liberal banner. After the Third Reform Act, fewer Whigs were selected as candidates. 

==The Liberal zenith==
Herbert Henry Asquith
Liberal poster c.1905-10
The Liberals languished in opposition for a decade, while the coalition of Salisbury and Chamberlain held power. The 1890s were marred by infighting between the three principal successors to Gladstone, party leader William Harcourt, former Prime Minister Lord Rosebery, and Gladstone's personal secretary, John Morley. This intrigue finally led Harcourt and Morley to resign their positions in 1898 as they continued to be at loggerheads with Rosebery over Irish home rule and issues relating to imperialism. Replacing Harcourt as party leader was Sir Henry Campbell-Bannerman. Harcourt's resignation briefly muted the turmoil in the party, but the beginning of the Second Boer War soon nearly broke the party apart, with Rosebery and a circle of supporters including important future Liberal leaders H.H. Asquith, Edward Grey, and Richard Burdon Haldane forming a clique dubbed the "Liberal Imperialists" that supported the government in the prosecution of the war. On the other side, more radical members of the party formed a Pro-Boer faction that denounced the conflict and called for an immediate end to hostilities. Quickly rising to prominence among the Pro-Boers was David Lloyd George, a relatively new MP and a master of rhetoric, who took advantage of having a national stage to speak out on a controversial issue to make his name in the party. Harcourt and Morley also sided with this group, though with slightly different aims. Campbell-Bannerman tried to keep these forces together at the head of a moderate Liberal rump, but in 1901 he delivered a speech on the government's "methods of barbarism" in South Africa that pulled him further to the left and nearly tore the party in two. The party was saved after Salisbury's retirement in 1902 when his successor, Arthur Balfour, pushed a series of unpopular initiatives such as a new education bill and Joseph Chamberlain called for a new system of protectionist tariffs. Campbell-Bannerman was able to rally the party around the traditional liberal platform of free trade and land reform and led them to the greatest election victory in their history. This would prove the last time the Liberals won a majority in their own right.

Although he presided over a large majority, Sir Henry Campbell-Bannerman was overshadowed by his ministers, most notably Herbert Henry Asquith at the Exchequer, Edward Grey at the Foreign Office, Richard Burdon Haldane at the War Office and David Lloyd George at the Board of Trade. An ill Campbell-Bannerman retired in 1908 and died later that year. He was succeeded by Asquith, who stepped up the government's radicalism. Lloyd George succeeded Asquith at the Exchequer, and was in turn succeeded at the Board of Trade by Winston Churchill, a recent defector from the Conservatives.

The Liberals pushed through much legislation, including the regulation of working hours, National Insurance and welfare. It was at this time that a political battle over the so-called People's Budget resulted in the passage of an act ending the power of the House of Lords to block legislation. The cost was high, however, as the government was required by the king to call two general elections in 1910 to validate its position and ended up frittering away most of its large majority, being left once again dependent on the Irish Nationalists.

As a result Asquith was forced to introduce a new third Home Rule bill in 1912. Since the House of Lords no longer had the power to block the bill, the Unionist's Ulster Volunteers led by Sir Edward Carson, launched a campaign of opposition that included the threat of armed resistance in Ulster and the threat of mutiny by army officers in Ireland in 1914 (see Curragh Incident). In their resistance to Home Rule the Ulster Protestants had the full support of the Conservatives, whose leader, Andrew Bonar Law, was of Ulster-Scots descent. The country seemed to be on the brink of civil war when the First World War broke out in August 1914. Historian George Dangerfield has argued that the multiplicity of crises in 1910 to 1914, before the war broke out, so weakened the Liberal coalition that it marked the Strange Death of Liberal England. George Dangerfield, The Strange Death of Liberal England: 1910-1914 (1935) excerpt and text search, However, most historians date the collapse to the crisis of the First World War.

==Liberal decline==

The war struck at the heart of everything British Liberals believed in. The party divided over the distinctly illiberal policies that were introduced under its auspices, including conscription and the Defence of the Realm Act. Several Cabinet ministers resigned, and Asquith, the master of domestic politics, proved a poor war leader. Lloyd George and Churchill, however, were zealous supporters of the war, and gradually forced the old peace-oriented Liberals out. The poor British performance in the early months of the war forced Asquith to invite the Conservatives into a coalition (on 17 May 1915). This marked the end of the last all-Liberal government. This coalition fell apart at the end of 1916, when the Conservatives withdrew their support from Asquith and gave it instead to Lloyd George, who became Prime Minister at the head of a coalition government largely made up of Conservatives. Asquith and his followers moved to the opposition benches in Parliament and the Liberal Party was split once again. Trevor Wilson, The Downfall of the Liberal Party: 1914-1935 (1966) 

Wilson argues that Lloyd George abandoned many liberal principles in his single-minded crusade to win the war at all costs. That brought him and like-minded Liberals into a coalition with the Conservatives, largely on the ground long occupied by Conservatives: they were not oriented toward world peace or liberal treatment of Germany, nor discomfited by aggressive and authoritarian measures of state power. More deadly to the future of the Party, says Wilson, was its repudiation by ideological Liberals, who decided sadly that it no longer represented their principles. Finally the presence of the vigorous new Labour Party on the left gave a new home to voters disenchanted with the Liberal Party. Wilson, The Downfall of the Liberal Party: 1914-1935 (1966) pp 23-48 

David Lloyd George

In the 1918 general election Lloyd George, "the Man Who Won the War", led his coalition into another khaki election, and won a sweeping victory over the Asquithian Liberals and the newly emerging Labour Party. Lloyd George and the Conservative leader Andrew Bonar Law wrote a joint letter of support to candidates to indicate they were considered the official Coalition candidates  this "coupon", as it became known, was issued against many sitting Liberal MPs, often to devastating effect, though not against Asquith himself. Asquith and most of his colleagues lost their seats. Lloyd George still claimed to be leading a Liberal government, but he was increasingly under the influence of the rejuvenated Conservative party. In 1922 the Conservative backbenchers rebelled against the continuation of the coalition, citing in particular the Chanak Crisis over Turkey and Lloyd George's corrupt sale of honours, amongst other grievances, and Lloyd George was forced to resign. The Conservatives came back to power under Bonar Law and then Stanley Baldwin.

At the 1922 and 1923 elections the Liberals won barely a third of the vote and only a quarter of the seats in the House of Commons, as many radical voters abandoned the divided Liberals and went over to Labour. In 1922 Labour became the official opposition. A reunion of the two warring factions took place in 1923 when the new Conservative Prime Minister Stanley Baldwin committed his party to protective tariffs, causing the Liberals to reunite in support of free trade. The party gained ground in the 1923 general election but ominously made most of its gains from Conservatives whilst losing ground to Labour  a sign of the party's direction for many years to come. The party remained the third largest in the House of Commons, but the Conservatives had lost their majority. There was much speculation and fear about the prospect of a Labour government, and comparatively little about a Liberal government, even though it could have plausibly presented an experienced team of ministers compared to Labour's almost complete lack of experience, as well as offering a middle ground that could obtain support from both Conservatives and Labour in crucial Commons divisions. But instead of trying to force the opportunity to form a Liberal government, Asquith decided instead to allow Labour the chance of office, in the belief that they would prove incompetent and this would set the stage for a revival of Liberal fortunes at Labour's expense. It was a fatal error.

Share of the vote received by Conservatives (blue), Whigs/Liberals/Liberal Democrats (orange), Labour (red) and others (grey) in general elections since 1832. Table 2.01 "Summary Results of General Elections 18322005 (UK)", British electoral facts, 18322006, by Colin Rallings and Michael Thrasher, 7th edition, 2007, ISBN 978-0-7546-2712-8, p. 59. Following success as the successor to the Whig party, the party's share of the popular vote plummeted after the First World War as it lost votes to the new Labour party and fractured into groups such as the National and Coalition Liberals.
Labour was determined to destroy the Liberals and become the sole party of the left. Ramsay MacDonald was forced into a snap election in 1924, and although his government was defeated, he achieved his objective of virtually wiping the Liberals out as many more radical voters now moved to Labour, whilst moderate middle-class Liberal voters concerned about socialism moved to the Conservatives. The Liberals were reduced to a mere forty seats in Parliament, only seven of which had been won against candidates from both parties; and none of these formed a coherent area of Liberal survival. The party seemed finished, and during this period some Liberals, such as Churchill, went over to the Conservatives, while others went over to Labour. (Several Labour ministers of later generations, such as Michael Foot and Tony Benn, were the sons of Liberal MPs.)

Asquith died in 1928 and the enigmatic figure of Lloyd George returned to the leadership and began a drive to produce coherent policies on many key issues of the day. In the 1929 general election he made a final bid to return the Liberals to the political mainstream, with an ambitious programme of state stimulation of the economy called We Can Conquer Unemployment!, largely written for him by the Liberal economist John Maynard Keynes. The Liberals gained ground, but once again it was at the Conservatives' expense whilst also losing seats to Labour. Indeed the urban areas of the country suffering heavily from unemployment, which might have been expected to respond the most to the radical economic policies of the Liberals, instead gave the party its worst results. By contrast most of the party's seats were won either due to the absence of a candidate from one of the other parties or in rural areas on the "Celtic fringe", where local evidence suggests that economic ideas were at best peripheral to the electorate's concerns. The Liberals now found themselves with 59 members, holding the balance of power in a Parliament where Labour was the largest party but lacked an overall majority. Lloyd George offered a degree of support to the Labour government in the hope of winning concessions, including a degree of electoral reform to introduce the alternative vote, but this support was to prove bitterly divisive as the Liberals increasingly divided between those seeking to gain what Liberal goals they could achieve, those who preferred a Conservative government to a Labour one and vice-versa. Charles Loch Mowat, Britain between the Wars, 19181940 (1955) 

The last majority Liberal Government in Britain was elected in 1906.
The years preceding the First World War were marked by worker strikes and civil unrest and saw many violent confrontations between civilians and the police and armed forces. Other issues of the period included women's suffrage and the Irish Home Rule movement.
After the carnage of 19141918, the democratic reforms of the Representation of the People Act 1918 instantly tripled the number of people entitled to vote in Britain from seven to twenty-one million. The Labour Party benefited most from this huge change in the electorate, forming its first minority government in 1924. A. J. P. Taylor, English History, 19141945 (1965). 

==The splits over the National Government==
Herbert Samuel
In 1931 MacDonald's government fell apart under the Great Depression, and the Liberals agreed to join his National Government, dominated by the Conservatives. Lloyd George himself was ill and did not actually join. Soon, however, the Liberals faced another divisive crisis when a National Government was proposed to fight the 1931 general election with a mandate for tariffs. From the outside, Lloyd George called for the party to abandon the government completely in defence of free trade, but only a few MPs and candidates followed. Another group under Sir John Simon then emerged, who were prepared to continue their support for the government and take the Liberal places in the Cabinet if there were resignations. The third group under Sir Herbert Samuel pressed for the parties in government to fight the election on separate platforms. In doing so the bulk of Liberals remained supporting the government, but two distinct Liberal groups had emerged within this bulk  the Liberal Nationals (officially the "National Liberals" after 1947) led by Simon, also known as "Simonites", and the "Samuelites" or "official Liberals", led by Samuel who remained as the official party. Both groups secured about 34 MPs but proceeded to diverge even further after the election, with the Liberal Nationals remaining supporters of the government throughout its life. There were to be a succession of discussions about them rejoining the Liberals, but these usually foundered on the issues of free trade and continued support for the National Government. The one significant reunification came in 1946 when the Liberal and Liberal National party organisations in London merged.

The official Liberals found themselves a tiny minority within a government committed to protectionism. Slowly they found this issue to be one they could not support. In early 1932 it was agreed to suspend the principle of collective responsibility to allow the Liberals to oppose the introduction of tariffs. Later in 1932 the Liberals resigned their ministerial posts over the introduction of the Ottawa Agreement on Imperial Preference. However, they remained sitting on the government benches supporting it in Parliament, though in the country local Liberal activists bitterly opposed the government. Finally in late 1933 the Liberals crossed the floor of the House of Commons and went into complete opposition. By this point their number of MPs was severely depleted. In the 1935 general election, just 17 Liberal MPs were elected, along with Lloyd George and three followers as "independent Liberals". Immediately after the election the two groups reunited, though Lloyd George declined to play much of a formal role in his old party. Over the next ten years there would be further defections as MPs deserted to either the Liberal Nationals or Labour. Yet there were a few recruits, such as Clement Davies, who had deserted to the National Liberals in 1931 but now returned to the party during the Second World War and who would lead it after the war.

==Near extinction==
Samuel had lost his seat in the 1935 election and the leadership of the party fell to Sir Archibald Sinclair. With many traditional domestic Liberal policies now regarded as irrelevant, he focused the party on opposition to both the rise of Fascism in Europe and the appeasement foreign policy of the British government, arguing that intervention was needed, in contrast to the Labour calls for pacifism. Despite the party's weaknesses, Sinclair gained a high profile as he sought to recall the Midlothian Campaign and once more revitalise the Liberals as the party of a strong foreign policy.

In 1940 they joined Churchill's wartime coalition government, with Sinclair serving as Secretary of State for Air, the last British Liberal to hold Cabinet rank office for seventy years. However, it was a sign of the party's lack of importance that they were not included in the War Cabinet. At the 1945 general election, Sinclair and many of his colleagues lost their seats to both Conservatives and Labour, and the party returned just 12 MPs to Westminster. But this was just the beginning of the decline. In 1950, the general election saw the Liberals return just nine MPs. Another general election was called in 1951, and the Liberals were left with just six MPs in parliament; all but one of them were aided by the fact that the Conservatives refrained from fielding candidates in those constituencies. 

In 1957 this total fell to five when one of the Liberal MPs died and the subsequent by-election was lost to the Labour Party, which selected the former Liberal Deputy Leader Lady Megan Lloyd George as its own candidate. The Liberal Party seemed close to extinction. During this low period, it was often joked that Liberal MPs could hold meetings in the back of one taxi.

==Liberal revival==
Through the 1950s and into the 1960s the Liberals survived only because a handful of constituencies in rural Scotland and Wales clung to their Liberal traditions, whilst in two English towns, Bolton and Huddersfield, local Liberals and Conservatives agreed to each contest only one of the town's two seats. Jo Grimond, for example, who became Liberal leader in 1956, was MP for the remote Orkney and Shetland islands. Under his leadership a Liberal revival began, marked by the Orpington by-election of March 1962 which was won by Eric Lubbock. There, the Liberals won a seat in the London suburbs for the first time since 1935.

The Liberals became the first of the major British political parties to advocate British membership of the European Economic Community. Grimond also sought an intellectual revival of the party, seeking to position it as a non-socialist radical alternative to the Conservative government of the day. In particular he canvassed the support of the young post-war university students and recent graduates, appealing to younger voters in a way that many of his recent predecessors had not, and asserting a new strand of Liberalism for the post-war world.

The new middle-class suburban generation began to find the Liberals' policies attractive again. Under Grimond (who retired in 1967) and his successor, Jeremy Thorpe, the Liberals regained the status of a serious third force in British politics, polling up to 20% of the vote but unable to break the duopoly of Labour and Conservative and win more than fourteen seats in the Commons. An additional problem was competition in the Liberal heartlands in Scotland and Wales from the Scottish National Party and Plaid Cymru who both grew as electoral forces from the 1960s onwards. Although Emlyn Hooson held on to the seat of Montgomeryshire, upon Clement Davies death in 1962, the party lost five Welsh seats between 1950 and 1966. In September 1966 the Welsh Liberal Party formed their own state party, moving the Liberal Party into a fully federal structure. Russell Deacon (2011) History of the Welsh Liberal party, Welsh Academic Press 

In local elections Liverpool remained a Liberal stronghold, with the party taking the plurality of seats on the elections to the new Liverpool Metropolitan Borough Council in 1973. In the February 1974 general election the Conservative government of Edward Heath won a plurality of votes cast, but the Labour Party gained a plurality of seats due to the Ulster Unionist MPs refusing to support the Conservatives after the Northern Ireland Sunningdale Agreement. The Liberals now held the balance of power in the Commons. Conservatives offered Thorpe the Home Office if he would join a coalition government with Heath. Thorpe was personally in favour of it, but the party insisted on a clear government commitment to introducing proportional representation and a change of Prime Minister. The former was unacceptable to Heath's Cabinet and the latter to Heath personally, so the talks collapsed. Instead a minority Labour government was formed under Harold Wilson but with no formal support from Thorpe. In the October 1974 general election the Liberals slipped back slightly and the Labour government won a wafer-thin majority.

Thorpe was subsequently forced to resign after allegations about his private life. The party's new leader, David Steel, negotiated the Lib-Lab pact with Wilson's successor as Prime Minister, James Callaghan. According to this pact, the Liberals would support the government in crucial votes in exchange for some influence over policy. The agreement lasted from 1977 to 1978, but proved mostly fruitless, for two reasons: the Liberals' key demand of proportional representation was rejected by most Labour MPs, whilst the contacts between Liberal spokespersons and Labour ministers often proved detrimental, such as between finance spokesperson John Pardoe and Chancellor of the Exchequer Denis Healey, who were mutually antagonistic.

==Alliance with Social Democrats==

When the Labour government fell in 1979, the Conservatives under Margaret Thatcher won a victory which served to push the Liberals back into the margins.

In 1981, defectors from the moderate wing of the Labour Party, led by former Cabinet ministers Roy Jenkins, David Owen and Shirley Williams, founded the Social Democratic Party. The new party and the Liberals quickly formed an alliance, which for a while polled as high as 50% in the opinion polls and appeared capable of winning the next general election. However, they were later overtaken in the polls by the Conservatives and at the 1983 general election the Conservatives triumphed by a landslide, with Labour once again forming the opposition, while the SDP-Liberal Alliance came close to Labour in terms of votes (a share of more than 25%) although it only had 23 MPs compared to Labour's 209. 

The 1987 election saw the Alliance's share of the votes drop slightly and it now had 22 MPs, and in the election's aftermath Liberal leader David Steel proposed a merger of the two parties. Most SDP members voted in favour of the merger, but SDP leader David Owen objected and continued to lead a "rump" SDP, with the merger being completed in March 1988 to form the Social and Liberal Democrats, becoming the Liberal Democrats in October 1989. 

==Merger with Social Democrats==

In 1988 the Liberals and Social Democrats merged to create what came to be called the Liberal Democrats. Over two-thirds of the members, and all the serving MPs, of the Liberal Party joined this party, led first jointly by Steel and the SDP leader Robert Maclennan, and later by Paddy Ashdown (198899), Charles Kennedy (19992006), Sir Menzies Campbell (200607) and Nick Clegg (incumbent). 

Though the merger process was traumatic and the new party suffered a few years of extremely poor poll results, it gradually found much greater electoral success than the Liberal Party had achieved in the post-war era. In the 2005 general election, 62 Liberal Democrat MPs were elected to the House of Commons, a far cry from the days when the Liberals had just 5 MPs and Liberalism as a political force had seemed moribund.

As with the Liberal Party for most of the 20th century, the Liberal Democrats face constant questioning about which of the other two parties they are closer to, in particular about which they would support in the event of a hung parliament. The party is keen to maintain its independent identity, however, and argues that the need for a modern Liberal force in British politics has never been greater.

In the 2010 General Election, the Conservative Party won more seats than any other, but not enough to form a majority government. After several days of negotiation, the Liberal Democrats agreed to join the Conservatives as part of a coalition government.

==The post-1988 Liberal Party==

A group of Liberal opponents of the merger with the Social Democrats, including Michael Meadowcroft (formerly Liberal MP for Leeds West) and Paul Wiggin (who served on Peterborough City Council as a Liberal), continued under the old name of "the Liberal Party". This was legally a new organisation (the headquarters, records, assets and debts of the old party were inherited by the Liberal Democrats), but its constitution asserts it to be the same Liberal party. The party retains influence in some local councils. Meadowcroft himself eventually joined the Liberal Democrats in 2007.

==National Liberal Party==
In 1931 a number of Liberal MPs split from the original Liberal Party in protest at the leadership's adherence to free trade. The party name was appropriated in 2006 by the far-right political think tank the Third Way. 

==Liberal leaders 18591988==

===Liberal Leaders in the House of Lords, 18591988===

*Granville George Leveson-Gower, 2nd Earl Granville 18591865
*John Russell, 1st Earl Russell 18651868
*Granville George Leveson-Gower, 2nd Earl Granville 18681891
*John Wodehouse, 1st Earl of Kimberley 18911894
*Archibald Philip Primrose, 5th Earl of Rosebery 18941896
*John Wodehouse, 1st Earl of Kimberley 18961902
*John Spencer, 5th Earl Spencer 19021905
*George Robinson, 1st Marquess of Ripon 19051908
*Robert Crewe-Milnes, 1st Marquess of Crewe 19081923
*Edward Grey, 1st Viscount Grey of Fallodon 19231924
*William Lygon, 7th Earl Beauchamp 19241931
*Rufus Isaacs, 1st Marquess of Reading 19311936
*Robert Crewe-Milnes, 1st Marquess of Crewe 19361944
*Herbert Samuel, 1st Viscount Samuel 19441955
*Philip Rea, 2nd Baron Rea 19551967
*Frank Byers, Baron Byers 19671984
*Beatrice Seear, Baroness Seear 19841989

===Liberal Leaders in the House of Commons, 18591916===

*Henry John Temple, 3rd Viscount Palmerston 18591865
*William Ewart Gladstone 18651875
*Spencer Compton Cavendish, Marquess of Hartington 18751880
*William Ewart Gladstone 18801894
*Sir William Vernon Harcourt 18941898
*Sir Henry Campbell-Bannerman 18991908
*Herbert Henry Asquith, 1st Earl of Oxford and Asquith (1925) 19081916

===Leaders of the Liberal Party, 19161988===

*Herbert Henry Asquith, 1st Earl of Oxford and Asquith (1925) 19161926
**Donald Maclean, Acting Leader 19191920
*David Lloyd George 19261931
*Sir Herbert Samuel 19311935
*Sir Archibald Sinclair 19351945
*Clement Davies 19451956
*Jo Grimond 19561967
*Jeremy Thorpe 19671976
*Jo Grimond 1976 (Acting Leader)
*David Steel 19761988

===Deputy Leaders of the Liberal Party in the House of Commons===
*Herbert Samuel 19291931
*Archibald Sinclair 19311935
*Post vacant 19351945
*Percy Harris 19401945
*Post vacant 19451949
*Megan Lloyd George 19491951
*Post vacant 19511962
*Donald Wade 19621964
*Post vacant 19641979
*John Pardoe 19761979
*Post vacant 19791985
*Alan Beith 19851988

===Deputy Leaders of the Liberal Party in the House of Lords===
*Eric Drummond, 16th Earl of Perth 19461951
*Walter Layton, 1st Baron Layton 19521955
*Post vacant 19551965
*Gladwyn Jebb, 1st Baron Gladwyn 19651988

===Liberal Party Front Bench Team Members===
*19451956
*1956-1967
*1967-1976

==See also==
*Party (UK) MPs]
*List of Liberal Party (UK) MPs
*Contributions to liberal theory
*Liberalism worldwide
*List of liberal parties
*Liberal democracy
*Liberalism in the United Kingdom
*List of United Kingdom Liberal Party Leaders
*List of Liberal Chief Whips
*President of the Liberal Party
*Politics of the United Kingdom
*Liberalism
*List of liberal theorists
*List of UK Liberal Party general election manifestos

==Notes==

==Further reading==
* Campbell, John Lloyd George, The Goat in the Wilderness, 1922-31 (1977)
* Cook, Chris. A Short History of the Liberal Party, 19002001 (6th edition). Basingstoke: Palgrave, 2002. ISBN 0-333-91838-X.
* Cregier, Don M. "The Murder of the British Liberal Party," The History Teacher Vol. 3, No. 4 (May, 1970), pp. 2736 online edition, blames Asquith, Lloyd George and the voters
*Dutton, David. A History of the Liberal Party in the 20th Century, Palgrave Macmillan, 2004. ISBN 0-333-74656-2.
* Gilbert, Bentley Brinkerhoff. David Lloyd George: A Political Life: The Architect of Change 18631912 (1987); David Lloyd George: A Political Life: Organizer of Victory, 19121916 (1992)
* Hammond, J. L. and M. R. D. Foot. Gladstone and Liberalism (1952) online
* Hazlehurst, Cameron. "Asquith as Prime Minister, 19081916," The English Historical Review Vol. 85, No. 336 (Jul., 1970), pp. 502531 in JSTOR
* Jones; Thomas. Lloyd George (1951) online edition
* Mowat, Charles Loch. Britain between the Wars, 19181940 (1955) 694 pp; online edition
*Parry, Jonathan. The Rise and Fall of Liberal Government in Victorian Britain. Yale, 1993.ISBN 0-300-06718-6.
* Partridge, Michael Gladstone (2002) online; 304pp 
* Wilson, Trevor. The Downfall of the Liberal Party: 1914-1935 (1966)

==External links==

*Liberal Democrat History Group
*Catalogue of the Liberal Party papers (mostly dating from after 1945) at LSE Archives

 

United Kingdom 1860s



[[Bank of England]]

The Bank of England, formally the Governor and Company of the Bank of England, is the central bank of the United Kingdom and the model on which most modern central banks have been based. Established in 1694, it is the second oldest central bank in the world, after the Sveriges Riksbank, and the world's 8th oldest bank. It was established to act as the English Government's banker, and is still the banker for the Government of the United Kingdom. The Bank was privately owned by stockholders from its foundation in 1694 until nationalised in 1946. 

In 1998, it became an independent public organisation, wholly owned by the Treasury Solicitor on behalf of the government, with independence in setting monetary policy. 1 June 1998, The Bank of England Act 1998 (Commencement) Order 1998 s 2 BBC On This Day | 6|1997: Brown sets Bank of England free, Retrieved on 13 September 2009 Bank of England | About the Bank, Retrieved on 13 September 2009 Bank of England: Relationship with Parliament. Bank of England. Retrieved on 21 December 2007 

The Bank is one of eight banks authorised to issue banknotes in the United Kingdom, but has a monopoly on the issue of banknotes in England and Wales and regulates the issue of banknotes by commercial banks in Scotland and Northern Ireland. 

The Bank's Monetary Policy Committee has devolved responsibility for managing monetary policy. The Treasury has reserve powers to give orders to the committee "if they are required in the public interest and by extreme economic circumstances" but such orders must be endorsed by Parliament within 28 days. The Bank's Financial Policy Committee held its first meeting in June 2011 as a macro prudential regulator to oversee regulation of the UK's financial sector.

The Bank's headquarters have been in London's main financial district, the City of London, on Threadneedle Street, since 1734. It is sometimes known by the metonym The Old Lady of Threadneedle Street or The Old Lady, a name taken from the legend of Sarah Whitehead, whose ghost is said to haunt the Bank's garden. Historic UK, "The Old Lady of Threadneedle Street". Accessed 18 March 2012. The busy road junction outside is known as Bank junction.

Mark Carney assumed the post of The Governor of the Bank of England on 1 July 2013. He succeeded Mervyn King, who took over on 30 June 2003. Carney, a Canadian, will serve an initial five-year term rather than the typical eight, and will seek UK citizenship. He is the first non-British citizen to hold the post. As of January 2014, the Bank also has three Deputy Governors.

==History==
The sealing of the Bank of England Charter (1694)

England's crushing defeat by France, the dominant naval power, in naval engagements culminating in the 1690 Battle of Beachy Head, became the catalyst for England's rebuilding itself as a global power. England had no choice but to build a powerful navy. No public funds were available, and the credit of William III's government was so low in London that it was impossible for it to borrow the 1,200,000 (at 8 per cent) that the government wanted.

In order to induce subscription to the loan, the subscribers were to be incorporated by the name of the Governor and Company of the Bank of England. The Bank was given exclusive possession of the government's balances, and was the only limited-liability corporation allowed to issue bank notes. The lenders would give the government cash (bullion) and issue notes against the government bonds, which can be lent again. The 1.2m was raised in 12 days; half of this was used to rebuild the navy.

As a side effect, the huge industrial effort needed, from establishing iron-works to make more nails to agriculture feeding the quadrupled strength of the navy, started to transform the economy. This helped the new Kingdom of Great Britain  England and Scotland were formally united in 1707  to become powerful. The power of the navy made Britain the dominant world power in the late eighteenth and early nineteenth centuries. 

The establishment of the bank was devised by Charles Montagu, 1st Earl of Halifax, in 1694, to the plan which had been proposed by William Paterson three years before, but not acted upon. "Its foundation in 1694 arose out the difficulties of the Government of the day in securing subscriptions to State loans. Its primary purpose was to raise and lend money to the State and in consideration of this service it received under its Charter and various Act of Parliament, certain privileges of issuing bank notes. The corporation commenced, with an assured life of twelve years after which the Government had the right to annul its Charter on giving one year's notice. '&#39;'Subsequent extensions of this period coincided generally with the grant of additional loans to the State'&#39;'" He proposed a loan of 1.2m to the government; in return the subscribers would be incorporated as The Governor and Company of the Bank of England with long-term banking privileges including the issue of notes. The Royal Charter was granted on 27 July through the passage of the Tonnage Act 1694. H. Roseveare, /The Financial Revolution 16601760/ (1991, Longman), pp. 34 Public finances were in so dire a condition at the time that the terms of the loan were that it was to be serviced at a rate of 8% per annum, and there was also a service charge of 4,000 per annum for the management of the loan. The first governor was Sir John Houblon, who is depicted in the 50 note issued in 1994. The charter was renewed in 1742, 1764, and 1781.

Satirical cartoon protesting against the introduction of paper money, by James Gillray, 1797. The "Old Lady of Threadneedle St" (the Bank personified) is ravished by William Pitt the Younger.

The Bank's original home was in Walbrook in the City of London, where during reconstruction in 1954 archaeologists found the remains of a Roman temple of Mithras (Mithras was  rather fittingly  worshipped as being the God of Contracts); the Mithraeum ruins are perhaps the most famous of all twentieth-century Roman discoveries in the City of London and can be viewed by the public.

The Bank moved to its current location on Threadneedle Street, and thereafter slowly acquired neighbouring land to create the edifice seen today. Sir Herbert Baker's rebuilding of the Bank, demolishing most of Sir John Soane's earlier building, was described by architectural historian Nikolaus Pevsner as "the greatest architectural crime, in the City of London, of the twentieth century".

When the idea and reality of the National Debt came about during the 18th century this was also managed by the Bank. By the charter renewal in 1781 it was also the bankers' bank  keeping enough gold to pay its notes on demand until 26 February 1797 when war had so diminished gold reserves that the government prohibited the Bank from paying out in gold. This prohibition lasted until 1821.

The Bank also had a narrow escape of a different nature. In 1780, rioters in London tried to storm the building. Thereafter, every night until 1973, a detachment of soldiers patrolled the perimeter to ensure the safety of the nation's gold. 

===19th century===
The 1844 Bank Charter Act tied the issue of notes to the gold reserves and gave the Bank sole rights with regard to the issue of banknotes. Private banks that had previously had that right retained it, provided that their headquarters were outside London and that they deposited security against the notes that they issued. A few English banks continued to issue their own notes until the last of them was taken over in the 1930s. Scottish and Northern Irish private banks still have that right.

The bank acted as lender of last resort for the first time in the panic of 1866. 

===20th century===
The main Bank of England faade, c. 1980.

Britain remained on the gold standard until 1931 when the gold and foreign exchange reserves were transferred to the treasury, but their management was still handled by the Bank. 

During the governorship of Montagu Norman, from 1920 to 1944, the Bank made deliberate efforts to move away from commercial banking and become a central bank. In 1946, shortly after the end of Norman's tenure, the bank was nationalised by the Labour government.

After 1945 the Bank pursued the multiple goals of Keynesian economics, especially "easy money" and low interest rates to support aggregate demand. It tried to keep a fixed exchange rate, and attempted to deal with inflation and sterling weakness by credit and exchange controls. John Fforde, The Role of the Bank of England, 19411958 (1992) 

In 1977, the Bank set up a wholly owned subsidiary called Bank of England Nominees Limited (BOEN), a private limited company, with two of its hundred 1 shares issued. According to its Memorandum & Articles of Association, its objectives are:- To act as Nominee or agent or attorney either solely or jointly with others, for any person or persons, partnership, company, corporation, government, state, organisation, sovereign, province, authority, or public body, or any group or association of them.... Bank of England Nominees Limited was granted an exemption by Edmund Dell, Secretary of State for Trade, from the disclosure requirements under Section 27(9) of the Companies Act 1976, because, it was considered undesirable that the disclosure requirements should apply to certain categories of shareholders. The Bank of England is also protected by its Royal Charter status, and the Official Secrets Act. BOEN is a vehicle for governments and heads of state to invest in UK companies (subject to approval from the Secretary of State), providing they undertake "not to influence the affairs of the company". BOEN is no longer exempt from company law disclosure requirements. Although a dormant company, dormancy does not preclude a company actively operating as a nominee shareholder. BOEN has two shareholders: the Bank of England, and the Secretary of the Bank of England. 

In 1981 the reserve requirement for banks to hold a minimum fixed proportion of their deposits as reserves at the Bank of England was abolished - see reserve requirement#United Kingdom for more details.

Tercentenary of the Bank of England, commemorated on a 1994 British two pound coin.

On 6 May 1997, following the 1997 general election which brought a Labour government to power for the first time since 1979, it was announced by the Chancellor of the Exchequer, Gordon Brown, that the Bank would be granted operational independence over monetary policy. Under the terms of the Bank of England Act 1998 (which came into force on 1 June 1998), the Bank's Monetary Policy Committee was given sole responsibility for setting interest rates to meet the Government's Retail Prices Index (RPI) inflation target of 2.5%. The target has changed to 2% since the Consumer Price Index (CPI) replaced the Retail Prices Index as the treasury's inflation index. If inflation overshoots or undershoots the target by more than 1%, the Governor has to write a letter to the Chancellor of the Exchequer explaining why, and how he will remedy the situation.

The handing over of monetary policy to the Bank had been a key plank of the Liberal Democrats' economic policy since the 1992 general election. Liberal Democrat election manifesto, 1992 Conservative MP Nicholas Budgen had also proposed this as a private member's bill in 1996, but the bill failed as it had the support of neither the government nor the opposition.

==Functions of the Bank==
The Bank performs all the functions of a central bank. The most important of these is supposed to be maintaining price stability and supporting the economic policies of the Government, thus promoting economic growth. There are two main areas which are tackled by the Bank to ensure it carries out these functions efficiently: 
Bank House, the Bank of England offices on King Street in Leeds.

===Monetary stability===
:Stable prices and confidence in the currency are the two main criteria for monetary stability. Stable prices are maintained by making sure price increases meet the Government's inflation target. The Bank aims to meet this target by adjusting the base interest rate, which is decided by the Monetary Policy Committee, and through its communications strategy, such as publishing yield curves. Bank of England - Yield Curves by Internet Archive. 

===Financial stability===
:Maintaining financial stability involves protecting against threats to the whole financial system. Threats are detected by the Bank's surveillance and market intelligence functions. The threats are then dealt with through financial and other operations, both at home and abroad. In exceptional circumstances, the Bank may act as the lender of last resort by extending credit when no other institution will.
The Bank works together with other institutions to secure both monetary and financial stability, including:
* HM Treasury, the Government department responsible for financial and economic policy; and
* Other central banks and international organisations, with the aim of improving the international financial system.
The 1997 Memorandum of Understanding describes the terms under which the Bank, the Treasury and the FSA work toward the common aim of increased financial stability. In 2010 the incoming Chancellor announced his intention to merge the FSA back into the Bank. As of 2012, the current director for financial stability is Andy Haldane. 

The Bank acts as the government's banker, and it maintains the government's Consolidated Fund account. It also manages the country's foreign exchange and gold reserves. The Bank also acts as the bankers' bank, especially in its capacity as a lender of last resort.

The Bank has a monopoly on the issue of banknotes in England and Wales. Scottish and Northern Irish banks retain the right to issue their own banknotes, but they must be backed one to one with deposits in the Bank, excepting a few million pounds representing the value of notes they had in circulation in 1845. The Bank decided to sell its bank note printing operations to De La Rue in December 2002, under the advice of Close Brothers Corporate Finance Ltd. 

Since 1998, the Monetary Policy Committee (MPC) has had the responsibility for setting the official interest rate. However, with the decision to grant the Bank operational independence, responsibility for government debt management was transferred to the new UK Debt Management Office in 1998, which also took over government cash management in 2000. Computershare took over as the registrar for UK Government bonds (gilt-edged securities or gilts) from the Bank at the end of 2004.

The Bank used to be responsible for the regulation and supervision of the banking and insurance industries, although this responsibility was transferred to the Financial Services Authority in June 1998. After the financial crises in 2008 new banking legislation transferred the responsibility for regulation and supervision of the banking and insurance industries back to the Bank.

In 2011 the interim Financial Policy Committee (FPC) was created as a mirror committee to the MPC to spearhead the Bank's new mandate on financial stability. The FPC is responsible for macro prudential regulation of all UK banks and insurance companies.

In order to help maintain economic stability, the Bank attempts to broaden understanding of its role, both through regular speeches and publications by senior Bank figures, a semiannual Financial Stability Report, [http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/fsr/ ] and through a wider education strategy aimed at the general public. It maintains a free museum and runs the Target Two Point Zero competition for A-level students. 

===Asset purchase facility ===
The Bank has operated, since January 2009, an Asset Purchase Facility (APF) to buy "high-quality assets financed by the issue of Treasury bills and the DMO's cash management operations" and thereby improve liquidity in the credit markets. It has, since March 2009, also provided the mechanism by which the Bank's policy of quantitative easing (QE) is achieved, under the auspices of the MPC. Along with the managing the 200 billion of QE funds, the APF continues to operate its corporate facilities. Both are undertaken by a subsidiary company of the Bank of England, the Bank of England Asset Purchase Facility Fund Limited (BEAPFF). 

==Banknote issues==

The Bank has issued banknotes since 1694. Notes were originally hand-written; although they were partially printed from 1725 onwards, cashiers still had to sign each note and make them payable to someone. Notes were fully printed from 1855. Until 1928 all notes were "White Notes", printed in black and with a blank reverse. In the 18th and 19th centuries White Notes were issued in 1 and 2 denominations. During the 20th century White Notes were issued in denominations between 5 and 1000.

Until the mid-nineteenth century, commercial banks were able to issue their own banknotes, and notes issued by provincial banking companies were commonly in circulation. The Bank Charter Act 1844 began the process of restricting note issue to the Bank; new banks were prohibited from issuing their own banknotes and existing note-issuing banks were not permitted to expand their issue. As provincial banking companies merged to form larger banks, they lost their right to issue notes, and the English private banknote eventually disappeared, leaving the Bank with a monopoly of note issue in England and Wales. The last private bank to issue its own banknotes in England and Wales was Fox, Fowler and Company in 1921. However, the limitations of the 1844 Act only affected banks in England and Wales, and today three commercial banks in Scotland and four in Northern Ireland continue to issue their own banknotes, regulated by the Bank. 

At the start of the First World War, the Currency and Bank Notes Act 1914 was passed, which granted temporary powers to HM Treasury for issuing banknotes to the value of 1 and 10/- (ten shillings). Treasury notes had full legal tender status and were not convertible for gold through the Bank, replacing the gold coin in circulation to prevent a run on sterling and to enable raw material purchases for armament production. These notes featured an image of King George V (Bank of England notes did not begin to display an image of the monarch until 1960). The wording on each note was:

Treasury notes were issued until 1928, when the Currency and Bank Notes Act 1928 returned note-issuing powers to the banks. 

 The Bank of England issued notes for ten shillings and one pound for the first time on 22 November 1928.

During the Second World War the German Operation Bernhard attempted to counterfeit denominations between 5 and 50 producing 500,000 notes each month in 1943. The original plan was to parachute the money on the UK in an attempt to destabilise the British economy, but it was found more useful to use the notes to pay German agents operating throughout Europe  although most fell into Allied hands at the end of the war, forgeries frequently appeared for years afterwards, which led banknote denominations above 5 to be removed from circulation.

In 2006, over 53 million in banknotes belonging to the bank was stolen from a depot in Tonbridge, Kent. Record 53m stolen in depot raid, BBC, 27 February 2006 

Modern banknotes are printed by contract with De La Rue Currency in Loughton, Essex. http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/banknotes/pages/about/production.aspx 

==The vault==
The Bank is custodian to the official gold reserves of the United Kingdom and many other countries. The vault, beneath the City of London, covers a floor space greater than that of the second-tallest building in the City, Tower 42, and needs keys that are three feet long to open. The Bank is the 15th-largest custodian of gold reserves, holding around 4600 tonnes. These gold deposits were estimated in February 2012 to have a current market value of 156,000,000,000. 

==See also==
* Bank of England Act
* Bank of England club
* Bank of England Museum
* British coinage
* East India Company shareholders
* European Central Bank
* Financial Sanctions Unit
* Fractional-reserve banking
* United Kingdom national debt
* Governors of the Bank of England

==References==

==Further reading==
* , on nationalization 1945-50, pp 4376
* Capie, Forrest. The Bank of England: 1950s to 1979 (Cambridge University Press, 2010). xxviii + 890 pp. ISBN 978-0-521-19282-8 excerpt and text search
* Clapham, J. H. Bank of England (2 vol 1944) for 16941914
* Fforde, John. The Role of the Bank of England, 19411958 (1992) excerpt and text search
* Francis, John. History of the Bank of England: Its Times and Traditions excerpt and text search
* Hennessy, Elizabeth. A Domestic History of the Bank of England, 19301960 (2008) excerpt and text search
* Roberts, Richard, and David Kynaston. The Bank of England: Money, Power and Influence 16941994(1995)
* Sayers, R. S. The Bank of England, 18911944 (1986) excerpt and text search
* Schuster, F. The Bank of England and the State
* Wood, John H. A History of Central Banking in Great Britain and the United States (Cambridge University Press, 2005)

==External links==

*

 
England

England



[[Bakelite]]

Bakelite ( ), or polyoxybenzylmethylenglycolanhydride, is an early plastic. It is a thermosetting phenol formaldehyde resin, formed from an elimination reaction of phenol with formaldehyde. It was developed by Belgian-born chemist Leo Baekeland in New York in 1907.

One of the first plastics made from synthetic components, Bakelite was used for its electrical nonconductivity and heat-resistant properties in electrical insulators, radio and telephone casings, and such diverse products as kitchenware, jewelry, pipe stems, firearms, and children's toys. Bakelite was designated a National Historic Chemical Landmark in 1993 by the American Chemical Society in recognition of its significance as the world's first synthetic plastic. ACS National Historic Chemical Landmark, Bakelite: The World's First Synthetic Plastic (1993). The "retro" appeal of old Bakelite products has made them collectible.

==History==
Dr. Baekeland had originally set out to find a replacement for shellac, made from the excretion of lac bugs. Chemists had begun to recognize that many natural resins and fibres were polymers, and Baekeland investigated the reactions of phenol and formaldehyde. He first produced a soluble phenol-formaldehyde shellac called "Novolak" that never became a market success, then turned to developing a binder for asbestos which, at that time, was molded with rubber. By controlling the pressure and temperature applied to phenol and formaldehyde, he produced a hard moldable material and patented in 1907 known as Bakelite. It was the first synthetic thermosetting plastic ever made. It was often referred to as "the material of 1000 uses", a phrase originated by Baekeland himself. 
He announced the invention at a meeting of the American Chemical Society on February 5, 1909. 

The Bakelite Corporation was formed in 1922 (after patent litigation favorable to Baekeland) from a merger of three companies: the General Bakelite Company, which Baekeland founded in 1910, the Condensite Company, founded by J.W. Aylesworth, and the Redmanol Chemical Products Company, founded by L.V. Redman. A factory was built near Bound Brook, New Jersey, in 1929. 

Bakelite Limited, a merger of three British phenol formaldehyde resin suppliers (Damard Lacquer Company Limited of Birmingham, Mouldensite Limited of Darley Dale and Redmanol Chemical Products Company of London) was formed in 1926. A new factory opened in Tyseley, Birmingham, England around 1928. It was demolished in 1998.

In 1939 the companies were acquired by Union Carbide and Carbon Corporation. Union Carbide's phenolic resin business including the Bakelite and Bakelit registered trademarks are owned by Momentive Specialty Chemicals.

==Properties==

Phenolics are more rarely used in general consumer products today, due to the cost and complexity of production and their brittle nature. Nevertheless they are still used in some applications where their specific properties are required, such as small precision-shaped components, molded disc brake cylinders, saucepan handles, electrical plugs and switches and parts for electrical irons. Today, Bakelite is manufactured and produced in sheet, rod and tube form for hundreds of industrial applications in the electronics, power generation and aerospace industries, and under a variety of commercial brand names. 
 
Bakelite distributor rotor
Bakelite letter opener circa 1920
Phenolic sheet is a hard, dense material made by applying heat and pressure to layers of paper or glass cloth impregnated with synthetic resin. These layers of laminations are usually of cellulose paper, cotton fabrics, synthetic yarn fabrics, glass fabrics or unwoven fabrics. When heat and pressure are applied to the layers, a chemical reaction (polymerization) transforms the layers into a high-pressure thermosetting industrial laminated plastic. When rubbed or burnt, Bakelite has a distinctive, acrid, sickly-sweet fishy odor.

Bakelite phenolic sheet is produced in dozens of commercial grades and with various additives to meet diverse mechanical, electrical and thermal requirements. Some common types include:
*Paper reinforced NEMA XX per MIL-I-24768 PBG Normal electrical applications, moderate mechanical strength, continuous operating temperature of 250 F.
*Canvas reinforced NEMA C per MIL-I-24768 TYPE FBM NEMA CE per MIL-I-24768 TYPE FBG Good mechanical and impact strength with continuous operating temperature of 250 F.
*Linen reinforced NEMA L per MIL-I-24768 TYPE FBI NEMA LE per MIL-I-24768 TYPE FEI Good mechanical and electrical strength. Recommended for intricate high strength parts. Continuous operating temperature 250 F.
*Nylon reinforced NEMA N-1 per MIL-I-24768 TYPE NPG Superior electrical properties under humid conditions, fungus resistant, continuous operating temperature of 160 F.

Note that phenolic resin products are apt to swell slightly if they are used in areas which are perpetually damp. Varnishing the product helps to prevent this.

==Synthesis==

Bakelite was a combination of phenol, formaldehyde, and wood flour. The mixture is put under pressure, and after curing, a hard plastic material forms. 

==Applications and usage==
Bakelite radio at Bakelite museum
 Bakelite buttons, Chemical Heritage Foundation, Photograph by Gregory Tobias
In its industrial applications, Bakelite was particularly suitable for the emerging electrical and automobile industries because of its extraordinarily high resistance - not only to electricity, but to heat and chemical action. It was soon used for all nonconducting parts of radios and other electrical devices, such as bases and sockets for light bulbs and vacuum tubes, supports for electrical components, automobile distributor caps and other insulators.

Bakelite is used today for wire insulation, brake pads and related automotive components, and industrial electrical-related applications.

In the early 20th century, it was found in myriad applications including saxophone mouthpieces, whistles, cameras, solid-body electric guitars, telephone housings and handsets, early machine guns, pistol grips, and appliance casings. In the pure form it was made into such articles as pipe stems, buttons, etc.

The thermosetting phenolic resin was at one point considered for the manufacture of coins, due to a shortage of traditional material; in 1943, Bakelite and other non-metal materials were tested for usage for the one cent coin in the US before the Mint settled on zinc-coated steel. J2051/P2073 USPatterns.com. Accessed July 28, 2006 The New Yorker. Penny Dreadful. David Owen. March 31, 2008. 

After the Second World War, factories were retrofitted to produce Bakelite using a more efficient extrusion process which increased production and enabled the uses of Bakelite to extend into other genres: jewelry boxes, desk sets, clocks, radios, game pieces like chessmen, poker chips, billiard balls and Mah Jong sets. Kitchenware such as canisters and tableware were also made of Bakelite through the 1950s. Beads, bangles and earrings were produced by the Catalin Company which introduced 15 new colors in 1927. The creation of marbled Bakelite was also attributed to the Catalin Company. Translucent Bakelite jewelry, poker chips and other gaming items such as chess sets were also introduced in the 1940s under the Prystal Corporation name; however, its basic chemical composition remained the same.

The primary commercial uses for Bakelite today remain in the area of inexpensive board and tabletop games produced in China, India and Hong Kong. Items such as billiard balls, dominoes and pieces for games like chess, checkers, and backgammon are constructed of Bakelite for its look, durability, fine polish, weight, and sound. Common dice are sometimes made of Bakelite for weight and sound, but the majority are made of a thermoplastic polymer such as acrylonitrile butadiene styrene (ABS).

Bakelite is used to make the presentation boxes of Breitling watches and sometimes as a substitute for metal firearm magazines. Bakelite is also used in the mounting of metal samples in metallography. 

Phenolic resins have been commonly used in ablative heat shields. Soviet heatshields for ICBM warheads and spacecraft reentry consisted of asbestos textolite, impregnated with Bakelite. Roads to Space: an oral history of the Soviet space program 

US Patent 942699 for the bakelite product.

==Patents==
The United States Patent and Trademark Office granted Baekeland a patent for a "Method of making insoluble products of phenol and formaldehyde" on December 7, 1909. Producing hard, compact, insoluble and infusable condensation products of phenols and formaldehyde marked the beginning of the modern plastics industry. 

==Similar plastics==
*Catalin - another phenolic resin, similar to Bakelite, but with different mineral fillers that allowed the production of light colors
*Celluloid - another early plastic
*Condensite - a similar material of the age having much the same properties, characteristics, and uses
*Crystalate - another early plastic
*Galalith - another early plastic, derived from milk
*Micarta - early composite insulating plate that used Bakelite as a binding agent, trademarked 1912 by Westinghouse Elec. & Mfg Co.
*Novotext - brand name for cotton textile-phenolic resin

==References==

==External links==

*Amsterdam Bakelite Collection
*Large Bakelite Collection
*Bakelite: The Material of a Thousand Uses
*Virtual Bakelite Museum of Ghent 1907-2007

 

[[Bean]]

"Painted Pony" dry bean (Phaseolus vulgaris)

Bean is a common name for large plant seeds used for human food or animal feed of several genera of the family Fabaceae (alternately Leguminosae).

== Terminology ==
The term bean originally referred to the seed of the broad or fava bean, but was later expanded to include members of the New World genus Phaseolus, such as the common bean and the runner bean, and the related genus Vigna. The term is now applied generally to many other related plants such as Old World soybeans, peas, chickpeas (garbanzos), vetches, and lupins.

Bean is sometimes used as a synonym of pulse, an edible legume, though the term pulses is normally reserved for leguminous crops harvested for their dry grain. The term bean usually excludes crops used mainly for oil extraction (such as soybeans and peanuts), as well as those used exclusively for sowing purposes (such as clover and alfalfa). Leguminous crops harvested green for food, such as snap peas, snow peas, and so on, are not considered beans, and are classified as vegetable crops. According to United Nation's Food and Agriculture Organization the term bean should include only species of Phaseolus; however, a strict consensus definition has proven difficult because in the past, several species such as Vigna angularis (azuki bean), mungo (black gram), radiata (green gram), aconitifolia (moth bean)) were classified as Phaseolus and later reclassified. The use of the term bean to refer to species other than Phaseolus thus remains. In some countries, the term bean can mean a host of different species. 

In English usage, the word bean is also sometimes used to refer to the seeds or pods of plants that are not in the family leguminosae, but which bear a superficial resemblance to true beansfor example coffee beans, castor beans and cocoa beans (which resemble bean seeds), and vanilla beans, which superficially resemble bean pods.

==Cultivation==
Field beans (broad beans, Vicia faba, ready for harvest
Unlike the closely related pea, beans are a summer crop that needs warm temperatures to grow. Maturity is typically 5560 days from planting to harvest. As the bean pods mature, they turn yellow and dry up, and the beans inside change from green to their mature colour. As a vine, bean plants need external support, which may be provided in the form of special "bean cages" or poles. Native Americans customarily grew them along with corn and squash (the so-called Three Sisters), with the tall cornstalks acting as support for the beans.

In more recent times, the so-called "bush bean" has been developed which does not require support and has all its pods develop simultaneously (as opposed to pole beans which develop gradually). This makes the bush bean more practical for commercial production.

==History==
The Beaneater (1580-90) by Annibale Carracci
Beans are one of the longest-cultivated plants. Broad beans, also called fava beans, in their wild state the size of a small fingernail, were gathered in Afghanistan and the Himalayan foothills. Kaplan, pp. 27 ff In a form improved from naturally occurring types, they were grown in Thailand since the early seventh millennium BCE, predating ceramics. They were deposited with the dead in ancient Egypt. Not until the second millennium BCE did cultivated, large-seeded broad beans appear in the Aegean, Iberia and transalpine Europe. Daniel Zohary and Maria Hopf Domestication of Plants in the Old World Oxford University Press, 2012, ISBN 0199549060, p. 114. In the Iliad (late-8th century) is a passing mention of beans and chickpeas cast on the threshing floor. "And as in some great threshing-floor go leaping From a broad pan the black-skinned beans or peas." (Iliad xiii, 589). 

Beans were an important source of protein throughout Old and New World history, and still are today.

The oldest-known domesticated beans in the Americas were found in Guitarrero Cave, an archaeological site in Peru, and dated to around the second millennium BCE. 

Most of the kinds commonly eaten fresh or dried, those of the genus Phaseolus, come originally from the Americas, being first seen by a European when Christopher Columbus, during his exploration of what may have been the Bahamas, found them growing in fields. Five kinds of Phaseolus beans were domesticated Kaplan, p. 30: Domestication, besides involving selection for larger seed size, also involved selection for pods that did not curl and open when ripe, scattering the beans they contained.. by pre-Columbian peoples: common beans (Phaseolus vulgaris) grown from Chile to the northern part of what is now the United States, and lima and sieva beans (Phaseolus lunatus), as well as the less widely distributed teparies (Phaseolus acutifolius), scarlet runner beans (Phaseolus coccineus) and polyanthus beans (Phaseolus polyanthus) Kaplan, p. 30 One especially famous use of beans by pre-Columbian people as far north as the Atlantic seaboard is the "Three Sisters" method of companion plant cultivation:

:In the New World, many tribes would grow beans together with maize (corn), and squash. The corn would not be planted in rows as is done by European agriculture, but in a checkerboard/hex fashion across a field, in separate patches of one to six stalks each.

:Beans would be planted around the base of the developing stalks, and would vine their way up as the stalks grew. All American beans at that time were vine plants, "bush beans" having been bred only more recently. The cornstalks would work as a trellis for the beans, and the beans would provide much-needed nitrogen for the corn.

:Squash would be planted in the spaces between the patches of corn in the field. They would be provided slight shelter from the sun by the corn, would shade the soil and reduce evaporation, and would deter many animals from attacking the corn and beans because their coarse, hairy vines and broad, stiff leaves are difficult or uncomfortable for animals such as deer and raccoons to walk through, crows to land on, etc.

Dry beans come from both Old World varieties of broad beans (fava beans) and New World varieties (kidney, black, cranberry, pinto, navy/haricot).

Beans are a heliotropic plant, meaning that the leaves tilt throughout the day to face the sun. At night, they go into a folded "sleep" position.

==Types==
Currently, the world genebanks hold about 40,000 bean varieties, although only a fraction are mass-produced for regular consumption. Laura McGinnis and Jan Suszkiw, ARS. Breeding Better Beans. Agricultural Research magazine. June 2006. 

Some bean types include:
* Vicia
** V. faba or broad bean
Vica faba or broad beans, known in the US as fava beans
* Vigna
** V. aconitifolia or Moth bean
** V. angularis or azuki bean
** V. mungo or urad bean
** V. radiata or mung bean
** V. subterranea, Bambara bean or ground-bean
** V. umbellatta or ricebean
** V. unguiculata or cowpea (includes the black-eyed pea, yardlong bean and others)
* Cicer
** C. arietinum or chickpea (also known as the garbanzo bean)
* Pisum
** P. sativum or pea
* Lathyrus
** Lathyrus sativus (Indian pea)
** Lathyrus tuberosus (Tuberous pea)
* Lens
Lentils
** L. culinaris or lentil
* Lablab
** L. purpureus or hyacinth bean
Hyacinth Beans
* Phaseolus
** P. acutifolius or tepary bean
** P. coccineus or runner bean
** P. lunatus or lima bean
** P. vulgaris or common bean (includes the pinto bean, kidney bean, black bean, as well as green beans, and many others)
** P. polyanthus (aka P. Dumosus, recognized as a separate species in 1995)
* Glycine
** G. max or soybean
* Psophocarpus
** P. tetragonolobus or winged bean
 Psophocarpus tetragonolobus (winged bean)
* Cajanus
** C. cajan or pigeon pea
* Stizolobium
** S. spp or velvet bean
* Cyamopsis
** C. tetragonoloba or guar
* Canavalia
** C. ensiformis or jack bean
** Canavalia gladiata or sword bean
* Macrotyloma
** M. uniflorum or horse gram
* Lupinus or Lupin
** L. mutabilis or tarwi
** Lupinus albus or lupini bean
* Erythrina
** E. herbacea or Coral bean
* Arachis
** A. hypogaea or Peanut

==Toxins==
Some kinds of raw beans, especially red and kidney beans, contain a harmful toxin (lectin phytohaemagglutinin) that must be removed by cooking. A recommended method is to boil the beans for at least ten minutes; undercooked beans may be more toxic than raw beans. 
Cooking beans in a slow cooker, because of the lower temperatures often used, may not destroy toxins even though the beans do not smell or taste 'bad' (though this should not be a problem if the food reaches boiling temperature and stays there for some time).

Fermentation is used in some parts of Africa to improve the nutritional value of beans by removing toxins. Inexpensive fermentation improves the nutritional impact of flour from dry beans and improves digestibility, according to research co-authored by Emire Shimelis, from the Food Engineering Program at Addis Ababa University. Beans are a major source of dietary protein in Kenya, Malawi, Tanzania, Uganda and Zambia. Summary: Fermentation 'improves nutritional value of beans' (Sub Saharan Africa page, Science and Development Network website). Paper: Influence of natural and controlled fermentations on -galactosides, antinutrients and protein digestibility of beans (Phaseolus vulgaris L.) 

==Nutrition==
Beans have significant amounts of fiber and soluble fiber, with one cup of cooked beans providing between nine and 13 grams of fiber. Mixed Bean Salad (information and recipe) from The Mayo Clinic Healthy Recipes. Accessed February 2010. Soluble fiber can help lower blood cholesterol. Dietary fiber: Essential for a healthy diet. MayoClinic.com (2012-11-17). Retrieved on 2012-12-18. Beans are also high in protein, complex carbohydrates, folate, and iron. 

This figure shows the grams of fiber and protein per 100g serving of each legume. The size of the circle is proportional to its iron content. From this view, lentil and kidney beans are by far the healthiest while soybeans and peas have the least nutrients per serving.

==Flatulence==
Many edible beans, including broad beans and soybeans, contain oligosaccharides (particularly raffinose and stachyose), a type of sugar molecule also found in cabbage. An anti-oligosaccharide enzyme is necessary to properly digest these sugar molecules. As a normal human digestive tract does not contain any anti-oligosaccharide enzymes, consumed oligosaccharides are typically digested by bacteria in the large intestine. This digestion process produces flatulence-causing gases as a byproduct. This aspect of bean digestion is the basis for the children's rhyme "Beans, Beans, the Musical Fruit".

Some species of mold produce alpha-galactosidase, an anti-oligosaccharide enzyme, which humans can take to facilitate digestion of oligosaccharides in the small intestine. This enzyme, currently sold in the United States under the brand-names Beano and Gas-X Prevention, can be added to food or consumed separately. In many cuisines beans are cooked along with natural carminatives such as anise seeds, coriander seeds and cumin .

One effective strategy is to soak beans in alkaline (baking soda) water overnight before rinsing thoroughly . Sometimes vinegar is added, but only after the beans are cooked as vinegar interferes with the beans' softening.

Fermented beans will usually not produce most of the intestinal problems that unfermented beans will, since yeast can consume the offending sugars.

==Production==
Lablab bean and bean flower cultivated in West Bengal, India
The world leader in production of dry bean is India, followed by Brazil and Myanmar. In Africa, the most important producer is Tanzania.

 Top ten dry bean producers2010 
 Country Production (tonnes) Footnote 
 4,870,000 
 3,202,150 
 3,029,800 A 
 1,538,693 
 1,442,470 
 1,156,250 
 950,000 F 
 460,000 F 
 390,598 
 338,120 
 World 23,230,000 A 
 No symbol = official figure, P = official figure, F = FAO estimate, * = Unofficial/Semi-official/mirror data, C = Calculated figure A = Aggregate (may include official, semi-official or estimates); Source: Food And Agricultural Organization of United Nations: Economic And Social Department: The Statistical Division 

==See also==

* Baked beans
* Common bean
* Fassoulada
* List of edible seeds
* List of legume dishes
* Pulses

== References ==

== Bibliography ==
*

== External links ==

* Everett H. Bickley Collection, 19191980 Archives Center, National Museum of American History, Smithsonian Institution.
* Discovery Online: The Skinny On Why Beans Give You Gas
* Fermentation improves nutritional value of beans
* Cook's Thesaurus on Beans



[[Breast]]

The breast is the upper ventral region of the torso of a primate, in left and right sides, containing the mammary gland which in a female can secrete milk used to feed infants.

Both men and women develop breasts from the same embryological tissues. However, at puberty, female sex hormones, mainly estrogen, promote breast development which does not occur in men due to the higher amount of testosterone. As a result, women's breasts become far more prominent than those of men.

During pregnancy, the breast is responsive to a complex interplay of hormones that cause tissue development and enlargement in order to produce milk. Three such hormones are estrogen, progesterone and prolactin, which cause glandular tissue in the breast and the uterus to change during the menstrual cycle. 

Each breast contains 1520 lobes. The subcutaneous adipose tissue covering the lobes gives the breast its size and shape. Each lobe is composed of many lobules, at the end of which are sacs where milk is produced in response to hormonal signals. 

== Etymology ==
The English word breast derives from the Old English word brost (breast, bosom) from Proto-Germanic breustam (breast), from the Proto-Indo-European base bhreus (to swell, to sprout). Indo-European Lexicon: Pokorny Master PIE Etyma. Utexas.edu. Retrieved on 2011-04-22. The breast spelling conforms to the Scottish and North English dialectal pronunciations. Online Etymology Dictionary. Etymonline.com. Retrieved 22 April 2011. 

== Structure ==
The Breast: cross-section scheme of the mammary gland. 1. Chest wall 2. Pectoralis muscles 3. Lobules 4. Nipple 5. Areola 6. Milk duct 7. Fatty tissue 8. Skin
In women, the breasts overlay the pectoralis major muscles and usually extend from the level of the second rib to the level of the sixth rib in the front of the human rib cage; thus, the breasts cover much of the chest area and the chest walls. At the front of the chest, the breast tissue can extend from the clavicle (collarbone) to the middle of the sternum (breastbone). At the sides of the chest, the breast tissue can extend into the axilla (armpit), and can reach as far to the back as the latissimus dorsi muscle, extending from the lower back to the humerus bone (the longest bone of the upper arm). As a mammary gland, the breast is an composed of layers of different types of tissue, among which predominate two types, adipose tissue and glandular tissue, which effects the lactation functions of the breasts.
 

Morphologically, the breast is a cone with the base at the chest wall, and the apex at the nipple, the center of the NAC (nipple-areola complex). The supercial tissue layer (superficial fascia) is separated from the skin by 0.52.5 cm of subcutaneous fat (adipose tissue). The suspensory Cooper's ligaments are fibrous-tissue prolongations that radiate from the superficial fascia to the skin envelope. The adult breast contains 1418 irregular lactiferous lobes that converge to the nipple, to ducts 2.04.5 mm in diameter; the milk ducts (lactiferous ducts) are immediately surrounded with dense connective tissue that functions as a support framework. The glandular tissue of the breast is biochemically supported with estrogen; thus, when a woman reaches menopause (cessation of menstruation) and her body estrogen levels decrease, the milk gland tissue then atrophies, withers, and disappears, resulting in a breast composed of adipose tissue, supercial fascia, suspensory ligaments, and the skin envelope.

The dimensions and weight of the breast vary among women, ranging from approximately 500 to 1,000 grams (1.1 to 2.2 pounds) each; thus, a small-to-medium-sized breast weighs 500 grams (1.1 pounds) or less; and a large breast weighs approximately 750 to 1,000 grams (1.7 to 2.2 pounds.) The tissue composition ratios of the breast likewise vary among women; some breasts have greater proportions of glandular tissue than of adipose or connective tissues, and vice versa; therefore the fat-to-connective-tissue ratio determines the density (firmness) of the breast. In the course of a woman's life, her breasts will change size, shape, and weight, because of the hormonal bodily changes occurred in thelarche (pubertal breast development), menstruation (fertility), pregnancy (reproduction), the breast-feeding of an infant child, and the climacterium (the end of fertility). Pamplona DC, de Abreu Alvim C. Breast Reconstruction with Expanders and Implants: a Numerical Analysis. Articial Organs 8 (2004), pp. 353356. Grassley JS. Breast Reduction Surgery: What every Woman Needs to Know. Lifelines 6 (2002), pp. 244249. 

===Glandular structure===
The breast is an apocrine gland that produces milk to feed an infant child; for which the nipple of the breast is centred in (surrounded by) an areola (nipple-areola complex, NAC), the skin color of which varies from pink to dark brown, and has many sebaceous glands. The basic units of the breast are the terminal duct lobular units (TDLUs), which produce the fatty breast milk. They give the breast its offspring-feeding functions as a mammary gland. They are distributed throughout the body of the breast; approximately two-thirds of the lactiferous tissue is within 30 mm of the base of the nipple. The terminal lactiferous ducts drain the milk from TDLUs into 418 lactiferous ducts, which drain to the nipple; the milk-glands-to-fat ratio is 2:1 in a lactating woman, and 1:1 in a non-lactating woman. In addition to the milk glands, the breast also is composed of connective tissues (collagen, elastin), white fat, and the suspensory Cooper's ligaments. Sensation in the breast is provided by the peripheral nervous system innervation, by means of the front (anterior) and side (lateral) cutaneous branches of the fourth-, the fifth-, and the sixth intercostal nerves, while the T-4 nerve (Thoracic spinal nerve 4), which innervates the dermatomic area, supplies sensation to the nipple-areola complex. Introduction to the Human Body, Fifth Edition. John Wiley & Sons, Inc.: New York, 2001. 560. 

=== Lymphatic drainage ===
Approximately 75% of the lymph from the breast travels to the axillary lymph nodes on the same side of the body, whilst 25% of the lymph travels to the parasternal nodes (beside the sternum bone). A small amount of remaining lymph travels to the other breast, and to the abdominal lymph nodes. The axillary lymph nodes include the pectoral (chest), subscapular (under the scapula), and humeral (humerus-bone area) lymph-node groups, which drain to the central axillary lymph nodes and to the apical axillary lymph nodes. The lymphatic drainage of the breasts is especially relevant to oncology, because breast cancer is a cancer common to the mammary gland, and cancer cells can metastasize (break away) from a tumour and be dispersed to other parts of the woman's body by means of the lymphatic system.

=== Shape and support ===
The topography of the breasts indicate the glandular body, the nipple-areola complex (NAC), and the inframammary fold (IMF).
The morphologic variations in the size, shape, volume, tissue density, pectoral locale, and spacing of the breasts determine their natural shape, appearance, and configuration upon the chest of a woman; yet such features do not indicate its mammary-gland composition (fat-to-milk-gland ratio), nor the potential for nursing an infant child. The size and the shape of the breasts are influenced by normal-life hormonal changes (thelarche, menstruation, pregnancy, menopause) and medical conditions (e.g. virginal breast hypertrophy). The shape of the breasts is naturally determined by the support of the suspensory Cooper's ligaments, the underlying muscle and bone structures of the chest, and the skin envelope. The suspensory ligaments sustain the breast from the clavicle (collarbone) and the clavico-pectoral fascia (collarbone and chest), by traversing and encompassing the fat and milk-gland tissues, the breast is positioned, affixed to, and supported upon the chest wall, while its shape is established and maintained by the skin envelope.

The base of each breast is attached to the chest by the deep fascia over the pectoralis major muscles. The space between the breast and the pectoralis major muscle is called retromammary space and gives mobility to the breast. Some breasts are mounted high upon the chest wall, are of rounded shape, and project almost horizontally from the chest, which features are common to girls and women in the early stages of thelarchic development, the sprouting of the breasts. In the high-breast configuration, the dome-shaped and the cone-shaped breast is affixed to the chest at the base, and the weight is evenly distributed over the base area. In the low-breast configuration, a proportion of the breast weight is supported by the chest, against which rests the lower surface of the breast, thus is formed the inframammary fold (IMF). Because the base is deeply affixed to the chest, the weight of the breast is distributed over a greater area, and so reduces the weight-bearing strain upon the chest, shoulder, and back muscles that bear the weight of the bust.

The chest (thoracic cavity) progressively slopes outwards from the thoracic inlet (atop the breastbone) and above to the lowest ribs that support the breasts. The inframammary fold, where the lower portion of the breast meets the chest, is an anatomic feature created by the adherence of the breast skin and the underlying connective tissues of the chest; the IMF is the lower-most extent of the anatomic breast. In the course of thelarche, some girls develop breasts the lower skin-envelope of which touches the chest below the IMF, and some girls do not; both breast anatomies are statistically normal morphologic variations of the size and shape of women's breasts. 

====Size====
Breast size varies with race and ethnic origin. A study released in 2013 suggests the existence of a single genetic mutation responsible for multiple characteristics of East Asians, including thicker hair, more sweat glands and smaller breasts on women. 

== Development ==

The Tanner Scale indicates the five development stages of the secondary sex characteristics (breasts and pubic hair) of girls and women.
The basic morphological structure of the human breast is the same in both male and female children. For a girl in puberty, during thelarche (the breast-development stage), the female sex hormones (principally estrogens) promote the sprouting, growth, and development of the breasts, in the course of which, as mammary glands, they grow in size and volume, and usually rest on her chest; these development stages of secondary sex characteristics (breasts, pubic hair, etc.) are illustrated in the five-stage Tanner Scale. During thelarche, the developing breasts sometimes are of unequal size, and usually the left breast is slightly larger; said condition of asymmetry is transitory and statistically normal to female physical and sexual development. Moreover, breast development sometimes is abnormal, manifested either as overdevelopment (e.g. virginal breast hypertrophy) or as underdevelopment (e.g. tuberous breast deformity) in girls and women; and manifested in boys and men as gynecomastia (woman's breasts), the consequence of a biochemical imbalance between the normal levels of the estrogen and testosterone hormones of the male body. 

=== Asymmetry ===
Approximately two years after the onset of puberty (a girl's first menstrual cycle), the hormone estrogen stimulates the development and growth of the glandular, fat, and suspensory tissues that compose the breast. This continues for approximately four years until establishing the final shape of the breast (size, volume, density) when she is a woman of approximately 21 years of age. 
About 90% of women's breasts are asymmetrical to some degree, either in size, volume, or relative position upon the chest. Asymmetry can be manifested in the size of the breast, the position of the nipple-areola complex (NAC), the angle of the breast, and the position of the inframammary fold, where the breast meets the chest.

For about 5% to 10% women, their breasts are severely different, with the left breast being larger in 62% of cases. This is due to the breast proximity to the heart and a greater number of arteries and veins, along with a protective layer of fat surrounding the heart located beneath it. Up to 25% of women experience notable breast asymmetry of at least one cup size difference. 

If a woman is uncomfortable with her breasts' asymmetry, she can minimize the difference with a corrective bra or use gel bra inserts. Alternatively, she can seek a surgical solution. Options include a minimally invasive procedure known as platelet injection fat transfer, which transfers fat cells from a woman's thighs to her smaller breast. More invasive procedures include corrective mammoplasty, such as mastopexy, breast reduction plasty, or breast augmentation, depending on the nature of the asymmetry. Most surgeons will only perform an augmentation procedure to treat asymmetry if the woman's breasts differ by at least one cup size. 

=== Hormonal change ===
On the skin envelope of the breast, stretch marks may indicate the relative-size increments and decrements occurred during the life of the woman.
Because the breasts are principally composed of adipose tissue, which surrounds the milk glands, their sizes and volumes fluctuate according to the hormonal changes particular to thelarche (sprouting of breasts), menstruation (egg production), pregnancy (reproduction), lactation (feeding of offspring), and menopause (end of menstruation). For example, during the menstrual cycle, the breasts are enlarged by premenstrual water retention; during pregnancy the breasts become enlarged and denser (firmer) because of the prolactin-caused organ hypertrophy, which begins the production of breast milk, increases the size of the nipples, and darkens the skin color of the nipple-areola complex; these changes continue during the lactation and the breastfeeding periods. Afterwards, the breasts generally revert to their pre-pregnancy size, shape, and volume, yet might present stretch marks and breast ptosis. At menopause, the breasts can decrease in size when the levels of circulating estrogen decline, followed by the withering of the adipose tissue and the milk glands. Additional to such natural biochemical stimuli, the breasts can become enlarged consequent to an adverse side effect of combined oral contraceptive pills; and the size of the breasts can also increase and decrease in response to the body weight fluctuations of the woman. Moreover, the physical changes occurred to the breasts often are recorded in the stretch marks of the skin envelope; they can serve as historical indicators of the increments and the decrements of the size and the volume of a woman's breasts throughout the course of her life.

=== Breast ptosis ===

 The seven stages of breast ptosis.
Ptosis is a normal consequence of aging where the breast tissue sags lower on the chest and the nipple points downward. The rate at which a woman develops ptosis depends on many factors including genetics, smoking, body mass index, number of pregnancies, the size of breasts before pregnancy, and age. 

Plastic surgeons categorize ptosis by evaluating the position of the nipple relative to the inframammary crease (where the underside of the breast meets the chest wall). This is determined by measuring from the center of the nipple to the sternal notch (at the top of the breast bone) to gauge how far the nipple has fallen. The standard anthropometric measurement for young women is 21 cm. This measurement is used to assess both breast ptosis and breast symmetry. The surgeon will assess the breast's angle of projection. The apex of the breast, which includes the nipple, can have a flat angle of projection (180 degrees) or acute angle of projection (greater than 180 degrees). The apex rarely has an angle greater than 60 degrees. The angle of the breast apex is partly determined by the tautness of the suspensory Cooper's ligaments. For example, when a woman lies on her back, the angle of the breast apex becomes a flat, obtuse angle (less than 180 degrees) while the base-to-length ratio of the breast ranges from 0.5 to 1.0. 

== Functions and health ==

=== Lactation ===

The functional breast nourishing an infant girl.
The primary function of the breasts  as mammary glands  is the feeding and the nourishing of an infant child with breast milk during the maternal lactation period. The round shape of the breast helps to limit the loss of maternal body heat, because milk production depends upon a higher-temperature environment for the proper, milk-production function of the mammary gland tissues, the lactiferous ducts. Regarding the shape of the breast, the study The Evolution of the Human Beast (2001) proposed that the rounded shape of a woman's breast evolved to prevent the sucking infant offspring from suffocating while feeding at the teat; that is, because of the human infant's small jaw, which did not project from the face to reach the nipple, he or she might block the nostrils against the mother's breast if it were of a flatter form (cf. chimpanzee); theoretically, as the human jaw receded into the face, the woman's body compensated with round breasts. 

In a woman, the condition of lactation unrelated to pregnancy can occur as galactorrhea (spontaneous milk flow), and because of the adverse effects of drugs (e.g. antipsychotic medications), of extreme physical stress, and of endocrine disorders. In a newborn infant, the capability of lactation is consequence of the mother's circulating hormones (prolactin, oxytocin, etc.) in his or her blood stream, which were introduced by the shared circulatory system of the placenta. In men, the mammary glands are also present in the body, but normally remain undeveloped because of the hormone testosterone, however, when male lactation occurs, it is considered a pathological symptom of a disorder of the pituitary gland.

=== Reproduction ===
In considering the human animal, zoologists proposed that the human female is the only primate that possesses permanent, full-form breasts when not pregnant. Other mammalian females develop full breasts only when pregnant.

==Clinical significance==

The breast is susceptible to numerous benign and malignant conditions. The most frequent benign conditions are puerperal mastitis, fibrocystic breast changes and mastalgia. Breast cancer is one of the leading causes of death among women.

==Society and culture==

=== Anthropomorphic geography ===

There are many mountains named after the breast because they resemble it in appearance and so are objects of religious and ancestral veneration as a fertility symbol and of well-being. In Asia, there was "Breast Mountain," which had a cave where the Buddhist monk Bodhidharma (Da Mo) spent much time in meditation. Other such breast mountains are Mount Elgon on the Uganda-Kenya border, Beinn Chochan and the Maiden Paps in Scotland, the "Bundok ng Susong Dalaga" (Maiden's breast mountains) in Talim Island, Philippines, the twin hills known as the Paps of Anu (D Chch Anann or the breasts of Anu), near Killarney in Ireland, the 2,086 m high Tetica de Bacares or "La Tetica" in the Sierra de Los Filabres, Spain, and Khao Nom Sao in Thailand, Cerro Las Tetas in Puerto Rico and the Breasts of Aphrodite in Mykonos, among many others. In the United States, the Teton Range is named after the French word for "breast." 

=== Art history ===
A Cretan Snake Goddess from the Minoan Civilization, c. 1600 BC.
In European pre-historic societies, sculptures of female figures with pronounced or highly exaggerated breasts were common. A typical example is the so-called Venus of Willendorf, one of many Paleolithic Venus figurines with ample hips and bosom. Artifacts such as bowls, rock carvings and sacred statues with breasts have been recorded from 15,000 BC up to late antiquity all across Europe, North Africa and the Middle East. Many female deities representing love and fertility were associated with breasts and breast milk. Figures of the Phoenician goddess Astarte were represented as pillars studded with breasts. Isis, an Egyptian goddess who represented, among many other things, ideal motherhood, was often portrayed as suckling pharaohs, thereby confirming their divine status as rulers. Even certain male deities representing regeneration and fertility were occasionally depicted with breast-like appendices, such as the river god Hapy who was considered to be responsible for the annual overflowing of the Nile. Female breasts were also prominent in the Minoan civilization in the form of the famous Snake Goddess statuettes. In Ancient Greece there were several cults worshipping the "Kourotrophos", the suckling mother, represented by goddesses such as Gaia, Hera and Artemis. The worship of deities symbolized by the female breast in Greece became less common during the first millennium. The popular adoration of female goddesses decreased significantly during the rise of the Greek city states, a legacy which was passed on to the later Roman Empire. Yalom (1998) pp. 916; see Eva Keuls (1993), Reign of the Phallus: Sexual Politics in Ancient Athens for a detailed study of male-dominant rule in ancient Greece. 

During the middle of the first millennium BC, Greek culture experienced a gradual change in the perception of female breasts. Women in art were covered in clothing from the neck down, including female goddesses like Athena, the patron of Athens who represented heroic endeavor. There were exceptions: Aphrodite, the goddess of love, was more frequently portrayed fully nude, though in postures that were intended to portray shyness or modesty, a portrayal that has been compared to modern pin ups by historian Marilyn Yalom. Yalom (1998), p. 18. Although nude men were depicted standing upright, most depictions of female nudity in Greek art occurred "usually with drapery near at hand and with a forward-bending, self-protecting posture". Hollander (1993), p. 6. A popular legend at the time was of the Amazons, a tribe of fierce female warriors who socialized with men only for procreation and even removed one breast to become better warriors (the idea being that the right breast would interfere with the operation of a bow and arrow). The legend was a popular motif in art during Greek and Roman antiquity and served as an antithetical cautionary tale.

=== Body image ===
Top: conventional mastectomy. Bottom: Skin sparing mastectomy and latissimus dorsi myocutaneous flap reconstruction, prior to nipple reconstruction and tattooing.Pre-operative (left) and post-operative (right) aspects of cosmetic surgery procedures: reduction mammoplasty (top), breast lift (center), breast augmentation with breast implants (bottom).

Many women regard their breasts, which are female secondary sex characteristics, as important to their sexual attractiveness, as a sign of femininity that is important to their sense of self. So, when a woman considers her breasts deficient in some respect, she might choose to undergo a plastic surgery procedure to enhance them, either to have them augmented or to have them reduced, or to have them reconstructed if she suffered a deformative disease, such as breast cancer. After mastectomy, the reconstruction of the breast or breasts is done with breast implants or autologous tissue transfer, using fat and tissues from the abdomen, which is performed with a TRAM flap or with a back (latissiumus muscle flap). Breast reduction surgery is a procedure that involves removing excess breast tissue, fat, and skin, and the repositioning of the nipple-areola complex.

Cosmetic improvement procedures include breast lift (mastopexy), breast augmentation with implants, and combination procedures; the two types of available breast implants are models filled with silicone gel, and models filled with saline solution. These types of breast surgery can also repair inverted nipples by releasing milk duct tissues that have become tethered. Furthermore, in the case of the obese woman, a breast lift (mastopexy) procedure, with or without a breast volume reduction, can be part of an upper-body lift and contouring for the woman who has undergone massive body weight loss.

Surgery of the breast presents the health risk of interfering with the ability to breast-feed an infant child, and might include consequences such as altered sensation in the nipple-areola complex, interference with mammography (breast x-rays images) when there are breast implants present in the breasts. Regarding breast-feeding capability after breast reduction surgery, studies reported that women who underwent breast reduction can retain the ability to nurse an infant child, when compared to women in a control group who underwent breast surgery using a modern pedicle surgical technique. Plastic surgery organizations generally discourage elective cosmetic breast augmentation surgery for teen-aged girls, because, at that age, the volume of the breast tissues (milk glands and fat) can continue to grow as the girl matures to womanhood. Breast reduction surgery for teen-aged girls, however, is a matter handled according to the particulars of the case of hypoplasia. (see: breast hypertrophy)

=== Clothing ===

As is customary in her culture, a bare-breasted Himba woman of northern Namibia wears a traditional headdress and skirt.
Because breasts are mostly fatty tissue, their shape can within limits be molded by clothing, such as foundation garments. Bras are commonly worn by about 90% of Western women, and are often worn for support. Breast size, bra fit and thoracic pain in young women: a correlational study Retrieved 5 January 2012 The social norm in most Western cultures is to cover breasts in public, though the extent of coverage varies depending on the social context. Some religions ascribe a special status to the female breast, either in formal teachings or through symbolism. Islam forbids women from exposing their breasts in public.

Many cultures associate breasts with sexuality and tend to regard bare breasts as immodest or indecent. In some cultures, like the Himba in northern Namibia, bare-breasted women are normal, while a thigh is highly sexualised and not exposed in public. In a few Western countries female toplessness at a beach is acceptable, although it may not be acceptable in the town center. In some areas, exposing a woman's breasts applies only to the exposure of nipples.

In the United States, women who breast-feed in public can receive negative attention. There have been instances where women have been asked to leave public venues. In New York, the topfreedom equality movement helped to bring a case, People v. Santorelli (1992), to the New York State Court of Appeals. They ruled that New York's indecent exposure laws did not apply to a bare-breasted woman. Other (gender equality) efforts succeeded in most of Canada in the 1990s. Bare-breasted women are legal and culturally acceptable at public beaches in Australia and much of Europe.

=== Sexual characteristic ===

In some cultures, breasts play a role in human sexual activity. Breasts and especially the nipples are among the various human erogenous zones. They are sensitive to the touch as they have many nerve endings; and it is common to press or massage them with hands or orally before or during sexual activity. Some women can achieve an orgasm from such activities. Research has suggested that the sensations are genital orgasms caused by nipple stimulation, and may also be directly linked to "the genital area of the brain". Sensation from the nipples travels to the same part of the brain as sensations from the vagina, clitoris and cervix. Nipple stimulation may trigger uterine contractions, which then produce a sensation in the genital area of the brain. In the ancient Indian work the Kama Sutra, light scratching of the breasts with nails and biting with teeth are considered erotic. During sexual arousal, breast size increases, venous patterns across the breasts become more visible, and nipples harden. Compared to other primates, human breasts are proportionately large throughout adult females' lives. Some writers have suggested that they may have evolved as a visual signal of sexual maturity and fertility. 

Many people regard the female human body, of which breasts are an important aspect, to be aesthetically pleasing, as well as erotic. Research conducted at the Victoria University of Wellington showed that breasts are often the first thing men look at, and for a longer time than other body parts. Scientific proof that men look at women's breasts first and their face is almost last The Daily Telegraph The writers of the study had initially speculated that the reason for this is due to endocrinology with larger breasts indicating higher levels of estrogen and a sign of greater fertility, but the researchers said that "Men may be looking more often at the breasts because they are simply aesthetically pleasing, regardless of the size." 

Many people regard bare female breasts to be erotic, and they can elicit heightened sexual desires in men in many cultures. Some people show a sexual interest in female breasts distinct from that of the person, which may be regarded as a breast fetish. Hickey, Eric W. (2003). Encyclopaedia of Murder and Violent Crime. Sage Publications Inc. ISBN 978-0-7619-2437-1 While U.S. culture prefers breasts that are youthful and upright, some cultures venerate women with drooping breasts, indicating mothering and the wisdom of experience. 

=== Symbolism ===
In Christian iconography, some works of art depict women with their breasts in their hands or on a platter, signifying that they died as a martyr by having their breasts severed; one example of this is Saint Agatha of Sicily.

== See also ==
* Intimate part
* Milk line
* Udder

== References ==
;Notes

;Bibliography
* Hollander, Anne Seeing through Clothes. University of California Press, Berkeley. 1993 ISBN 978-0-520-08231-1
* Morris, Desmond The Naked Ape: a zoologist's study of the human animal Bantam Books, Canada. 1967
* Yalom, Marilyn A History of the Breast. Pandora, London. 1998 ISBN 978-0-86358-400-8

== External links ==

* 
* Images of female breasts
* Breast Cancer Treatment and Facts
* 

 



[[Baghdad]]

Baghdad ( , Iraqi pronunciation: ) is the capital of the Republic of Iraq, as well as the coterminous Baghdad Province. The population of Baghdad, as of 2011, is approximately 7,216,040, making it the largest city in Iraq, Estimates of total population differ substantially. The Encyclopdia Britannica gives a 2001 population of 4,950,000, the 2006 Lancet Report states a population of 7,216,050 in 2011.
*"Baghdad" Encyclopdia Britannica. 2006. Encyclopdia Britannica Online. 13 November 2006.
*. By Gilbert Burnham, Riyadh Lafta, Shannon Doocy, and Les Roberts. The Lancet, October 11, 2006
*Baghdad from GlobalSecurity.org
 "Cities and urban areas in Iraq with population over 100,000", Mongabay.com the second largest city in the Arab world (after Cairo, Egypt), and the second largest city in Western Asia (after Tehran, Iran). According to the government, which is preparing for a census, the population of the country has reached 35 million, with 9 million in the capital. 

Located along the Tigris River, the city was founded in the 8th century and became the capital of the Abbasid Caliphate. Within a short time of its inception, Baghdad evolved into a significant cultural, commercial, and intellectual center for the Islamic world. This, in addition to housing several key academic institutions (e.g. House of Wisdom), garnered the city a worldwide reputation as the "Center of Learning". Throughout the High Middle Ages, Baghdad was considered to be the largest city in the world with an estimated population of 1,200,000 people. According to some archeologists it was the first city to reach a population over one million inhabitants. The city was largely destroyed at the hands of the Mongol Empire in 1258, resulting in a decline that would linger through many centuries due to frequent plagues and multiple successive empires. With the recognition of Iraq as an independent state (formerly the British Mandate of Mesopotamia) in 1938, Baghdad gradually regained some of its former prominence as a significant center of Arab culture.

In contemporary times, the city has often faced severe infrastructural damage, most recently due to the 2003 invasion of Iraq, and the subsequent Iraq War that lasted until December 2011. In recent years, the city has been frequently subjected to insurgency attacks. Though the nation continues to work toward rebuilding and reconciliation, as of 2012, Baghdad continues to be listed as one of the least hospitable places in the world to live, and was ranked by Mercer as the worst of 221 major cities as measured by quality-of-life. The Central African Republic: On the brink 

==City name==
The name Baghdad is pre-Islamic and its origins are under some dispute. The site where the city of Baghdad came to stand has been populated for millennia and by the 8th century AD several Aramaic Christian villages had developed there, one of which was called Baghdad, the name which would come to be used for the Abbasid metropolis. Encyclopedia of Islam 

The name has been used as Baghdadu on Assyrian cuneiform and Babylonian records going back to at least 2000 BC. The Woman I Loved Syria and Palestine An inscription by Nebuchadnezzar (600 BC) describes how he rebuilt the old Babylonian town of Bagh-dadu. http://books.google.nl/books?id=qDQPAQAAMAAJ There used to be another Babylonian settlement called Baghdad, in upper Mesopotamia, near the ancient city of Edessa. The name has not been attested outside of Mesopotamia. 

Even though the name has been attested in pre-Persian times, a Persian origin has been accepted by most scholars. It has been proposed that the name is a Middle Persian http://admin.iraqupdates.net/p_articles.php/article/35631 compound of Bag "god" and dd "given", translating to "God-given" or "God's gift", from which comes Modern Persian . This in turn can be traced to Old Persian. Guy Le Strange, "Baghdad During the Abbasid Caliphate from Contemporary Arabic and Persian", pg 10 Another proposal is the Persian compound b "garden" and dd "fair", translating to "The fair garden". However, a Persian explanation remains somewhat problematic, given that the name was used long before the Persians arrived in Mesopotamia. Baghdad 

When the Abbasid caliph, al-Mansur, founded a completely new city for his capital, he chose the name Madinat al-Salaam or City of Peace. This was the official name on coins, weights, and other official usage, although the common people continued to use the old name. By the 11th century, "Baghdad" became almost the exclusive name for the world-renowned metropolis.

==History==

=== Foundation ===
After the fall of the Umayyads, the first Muslim dynasty, the victorious Abbasid rulers wanted their own capital. Choosing a site north of the Sassanid capital of Ctesiphon (and just north of where ancient Babylon and Seleucia once stood), on 30 July 762, the caliph Al-Mansur commissioned the construction of the city and it was built under the supervision of the Barmakids. Mansur believed that Baghdad was the perfect city to be the capital of the Islamic empire under the Abbasids. Mansur loved the site so much he is quoted saying, "This is indeed the city that I am to found, where I am to live, and where my descendants will reign afterward". 

The city's growth was helped by its location, which gave it control over strategic and trading routes, along the Tigris. A reason why Baghdad provided an excellent location was the abundance of water and the dry climate. Water exists on both north and south ends of the city gates, allowing all households to have a plentiful supply, which was very uncommon during this time.

Zumurrud Khaton tomb in Baghdad (built in 1202 AD), photo of 1932.
Baghdad eclipsed Ctesiphon, the capital of the Persian Empire, which was located some 30 km to the southeast. Today, all that remains of Ctesiphon is the shrine town of Salman Pak, just to the south of Greater Baghdad. Ctesiphon itself had replaced and absorbed Seleucia, the first capital of the Seleucid Empire. Seleucia had earlier replaced the city of Babylon.

In its early years, the city was known as a deliberate reminder of an expression in the Qur'an, when it refers to Paradise. Wiet, pg. 13 It took four years to build (764-768). Mansur assembled engineers, surveyors, and art constructionists from around the world to come together and draw up plans for the city. Over 100,000 construction workers came to survey the plans; many were distributed salaries to start the building of the city. July was chosen as the starting time because two Astrologers, Naubakht Ahvazi and Mashallah, believed that the city should be built under the sign of the lion, Leo. Wiet, pg. 12 Leo is associated with fire and symbolises productivity, pride, and expansion.

The bricks used to make the city were 18 in on all four sides. Ab anfa was the counter of the bricks and he developed a canal, which brought water to the work site for the use of both human consumption and the manufacturing of the bricks. Marble was also used to make buildings throughout the city, and marble steps led down to the river's edge.

The basic framework of the city consists of two large semicircles about 19 km in diameter. The city was designed as a circle about 2 km in diameter, leading it to be known as the "Round City". The original design shows as single ring of residential and commercial structures along the inside of the city walls, but the final construction added another ring inside the first. http://islamicceramics.ashmol.ox.ac.uk/Abbasid/baghdad.htm Within the city there were many parks, gardens, villas, and promenades. "Yakut: Baghdad under the Abbasids, c. 1000CE" In the center of the city lay the mosque, as well as headquarters for guards. The purpose or use of the remaining space in the center is unknown. The circular design of the city was a direct reflection of the traditional Persian Sasanian urban design. The Sasanian city of Gur in Fars, built 500 years before Baghdad, is nearly identical in its general circular design, radiating avenues, and the government buildings and temples at the centre of the city. This style of urban planning contrasted with Ancient Greek and Roman urban planning, in which cities are designed as squares or rectangles with streets intersecting each other at right angles.

===The surrounding walls===
The four surrounding walls of Baghdad were named Kufa, Basra, Khurasan, and Damascus; named because their gates pointed in the directions of these destinations. The distance between these gates was a little less than 1.5 mi. Each gate had double doors that were made of iron; the doors were so heavy it took several men to open and close them. The wall itself was about 44 m thick at the base and about 12 m thick at the top. Also, the wall was 30 m high, which included merlons, a solid part of an embattled parapet usually pierced by embrasures. This wall was surrounded by another wall with a thickness of 50 m. The second wall had towers and rounded merlons, which surrounded the towers. This outer wall was protected by solid glacis, which is made out of bricks and quicklime. Beyond the outer wall was a water-filled moat.

====Golden Gate Palace====
In the middle of Baghdad, in the central square was the Golden Gate Palace. The Palace was the residence of the caliph and his family. In the central part of the building was a green dome that was 39 m high. Surrounding the palace was an esplanade, a waterside building, in which only the caliph could come riding on horseback. In addition, the palace was near other mansions and officer's residences. Near the Gate of Syria a building served as the home for the guards. It was made of brick and marble. The palace governor lived in the latter part of the building and the commander of the guards in the front. In 813, after the death of caliph Al-Amin the palace was no longer used as the home for the caliph and his family. Wiet, pg. 15 
The roundness points to the fact that it was based on Arabic script. See:
*
*Encyclopdia Iranica, Columbia University, p.413. The two designers who were hired by Al-Mansur to plan the city's design were Naubakht, a Zoroastrian who also determined that the date of the foundation of the city would be astrologically auspicious, and Mashallah, a Jew from Khorasan, Iran. 

====The Abbasids and the round city====
The Round city of Baghdad between 767 and 912 AD
The Abbasid Caliphate was based on their being the descendants of the uncle of Muhammad and being part of the Quraysh tribe. They used Shi'a resentment, Khorasanian movement, and appeals to the ambitions and traditions of the newly conquered Persian aristocracy to overthrow the Umayyads. Atlas of the Medieval World pg. 78 
The Abbasids sought to combine the hegemony of the Arab tribes with the imperial, court, ceremonial, and administrative structures of the Persians. The Abbasids considered themselves the inherittures and the need of Mansur to place the capital in a place that was representative of Arab-Islamic identity by building the House of Wisdom, where ancient texts were translated from their original language, such as Greek, to Arabic. Mansur is credited with the "Translation Movement" for this. Further, Baghdad is also near the ancient Sassanid imperial seat of Ctesiphon on the Tigris River.

===A centre of learning (8th to 13th centuries)===

Within a generation of its founding, Baghdad became a hub of learning and commerce. The House of Wisdom was an establishment dedicated to the translation of Greek, Middle Persian and Syriac works. Scholars headed to Baghdad from all over the Abbasid Caliphate, facilitating the introduction of Persian, Greek and Indian science into the Arabic and Islamic world at that time. Baghdad was likely the largest city in the world from shortly after its foundation until the 930s, when it was tied by Crdoba. 
Several estimates suggest that the city contained over a million inhabitants at its peak. Matt T. Rosenberg, Largest Cities Through History. Many of the One Thousand and One Nights tales are set in Baghdad during this period.

====The end of the Abbasids in Baghdad====
Suq al-Ghazel (The Yarn Bazaar) Minaret in Baghdad, Mesopotamia (Iraq). This is the oldest minaret in Baghdad. It belonged to the Caliph Mosque, built by Caliph Muktafi 901907 AD.
By the 10th century, the city's population was between 1.2 million George Modelski, World Cities: 3000 to 2000, Washington, D.C.: FAROS 2000, 2003. ISBN 978-0-9676230-1-6. See also Evolutionary World Politics Homepage. and 2 million. Baghdad's early meteoric growth eventually slowed due to troubles within the Caliphate, including relocations of the capital to Samarra (during 808819 and 836892), the loss of the western and easternmost provinces, and periods of political domination by the Iranian Buwayhids (9451055) and Seljuk Turks (10551135).

The Seljuks were a clan of the Oghuz Turks from the Central Asia that converted to the Sunni branch of Islam. In 1040, they destroyed the Ghaznavids, taking over their land and in 1055, Tughril Beg, the leader of the Seljuks, took over Baghdad. The Seljuks expelled the Buyid dynasty of Shiites that ruled for some time and took over power and control of Baghdad. They ruled as Sultans in the name of the Abbasid caliphs (they saw themselves as being part of the Abbasid regime). Tughril Beg saw himself as the protector of the Abbasid Caliphs. Atlas of the Medieval World pg. 170 

Conquest of Baghdad by the Mongols in 1258
In 1058, Baghdad was captured by the Fatimids under the Turkish general Abu'l-rith Arsln al-Basasiri, an adherent of the Ismailis along with the 'Uqaylid Quraysh. Virani, Shafique N. The Ismailis in the Middle Ages: A History of Survival, A Search for Salvation, (New York: Oxford University Press, 2007), 6. Not long before the arrival of the Saljuqs in Baghdad, al-Basasiri petitioned to the Fatimid Imam-Caliph al-Mustansir to support him in conquering Baghdad on the Ismaili Imam's behalf. It has recently come to light that the famed Fatimid da'i, al-Mu'ayyad al-Shirazi, had a direct role in supporting al-Basasiri and helped the general to succeed in taking Mawil, Wsit and Kufa. Soon after, Daftary, Farhad. The Isma'ilis: Their History and Doctrines Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1990, 205-206. by December 1058, a Shi'i adhn (call to prayer) was implemented in Baghdad and a khutbah (sermon) was delivered in the name of the Fatimid Imam-Caliph. Despite his Shi'i inclinations, Al-Basasiri received support from Sunnis and Shi'is alike, for whom opposition to the Saljuq power was a common factor. Daftary, Farhad. The Isma'ilis: Their History and Doctrines Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1990), 206. 

On 10 February 1258, Baghdad was captured by the Mongols led by Hulegu, a grandson of Chingiz Khan (Genghis Khan), during the siege of Baghdad. Central Asian world cities, George Modelski Many quarters were ruined by fire, siege, or looting. The Mongols massacred most of the city's inhabitants, including the caliph Al-Musta'sim, and destroyed large sections of the city. The canals and dykes forming the city's irrigation system were also destroyed. The sack of Baghdad put an end to the Abbasid Caliphate, a blow from which the Islamic civilization never fully recovered.

At this point, Baghdad was ruled by the Il-Khanids, the Mongol rulers of Iran. In 1401, Baghdad was again sacked, by the Central Asian Turkic conqueror Timur ("Tamerlane"). Ian Frazier, Annals of history: Invaders: Destroying Baghdad, The New Yorker 25 April 2005. p.5 When his forces took Baghdad, he spared almost no one, and ordered that each of his soldiers bring back two severed human heads. New Book Looks at Old-Style Central Asian Despotism, EurasiaNet Civil Society, Elizabeth Kiem, April 28, 2006 It became a provincial capital controlled by the Mongol Jalayirid (14001411), Turkic Kara Koyunlu (14111469), Turkic Ak Koyunlu (14691508), and the Iranian Safavid (15081534) dynasties.

Baghdad in 1930

===Ottoman era (16th to 19th centuries)===

In 1534, Baghdad was captured by the Ottoman Turks. Under the Ottomans, Baghdad fell into a period of decline, partially as a result of the enmity between its rulers and Iranian Safavids, which did not accept the Sunni control of the city. Between 1623 and 1638, it returned to Iranian rule before falling back into Ottoman hands.

Baghdad has suffered severely from visitations of the plague and cholera, "The Fertile Crescent, 1800-1914: a documentary economic history". Charles Philip Issawi (1988). Oxford University Press US. p.99. ISBN 0-19-504951-9 and sometimes two-thirds of its population has been wiped out. Suraiya Faroqhi, Halil nalck, Donald Quataert (1997). "An economic and social history of the Ottoman Empire". Cambridge University Press. p.651. ISBN 0-521-57455-2 

For a time, Baghdad had been the largest city in the Middle East. The city saw relative revival in the latter part of the 18th century under a Mamluk government. Direct Ottoman rule was reimposed by Ali Ridha Pasha in 1831. From 1851 to 1852 and from 1861 to 1867, Baghdad was governed, under the Ottoman Empire by Mehmed Namk Pasha. Cetinsaya, Gokhan. Ottoman Administration of Iraq, 18901908. London and New York: Routledge, 2006. The Nuttall Encyclopedia reports the 1907 population of Baghdad as 185,000. Baghdad was also home to a substantial Jewish community, which comprised over a quarter of the city's population.

===20th and 21st centuries===
Baghdad in 1932

Baghdad and southern Iraq remained under Ottoman rule until 1917, when captured by the British during World War I. From 1920, Baghdad became the capital of the British Mandate of Mesopotamia and, after 1932, Baghdad was the capital of the Kingdom of Iraq. Iraq was given formal independence in 1932 and increased autonomy in 1946. The city's population grew from an estimated 145,000 in 1900 to 580,000 in 1950.

On 1 April 1941, members of the "Golden Square" and Rashid Ali staged a coup in Baghdad. Rashid Ali installed a pro-German and pro-Italian government to replace the pro-British government of Regent Abdul Ilah. On 31 May, after the resulting Anglo-Iraqi War and after Rashid Ali and his government had fled, the Mayor of Baghdad surrendered to British and Commonwealth forces.

On 14 July 1958, members of the Iraqi Army, under Abd al-Karim Qasim, staged a coup to topple the Kingdom of Iraq. King Faisal II, former Prime Minister Nuri as-Said, former Regent Prince 'Abd al-Ilah, members of the royal family, and others were brutally killed during the coup. Many of the victim's bodies were then dragged through the streets of Baghdad.

During the 1970s, Baghdad experienced a period of prosperity and growth because of a sharp increase in the price of petroleum, Iraq's main export. New infrastructure including modern sewerage, water, and highway facilities were built during this period. However, the IranIraq War of the 1980s was a difficult time for the city, as money was diverted by Saddam Hussein to the army and thousands of residents were killed. Iran launched a number of missile attacks against Baghdad in retaliation for Saddam Hussein's continuous bombardments of Tehran's residential districts.

In 1991 and 2003, the Gulf War and the 2003 invasion of Iraq caused significant damage to Baghdad's transportation, power, and sanitary infrastructure as the US-led coalition forces launched massive aerial assaults in the city in the two wars.

==Main sights==
Points of interest include the National Museum of Iraq whose priceless collection of artifacts was looted during the 2003 invasion, and the iconic Hands of Victory arches. Multiple Iraqi parties are in discussions as to whether the arches should remain as historical monuments or be dismantled. Thousands of ancient manuscripts in the National Library were destroyed under Saddam's command.

===Baghdad Zoo===

The Baghdad Zoo was the largest zoo in the Middle East. Within eight days following the 2003 invasion, however, only 35 of the 650 animals in the facility survived. This was a result of theft of some animals for human food, and starvation of caged animals that had no food. South African Lawrence Anthony and some of the zoo keepers cared for the animals and fed the carnivores with donkeys they had bought locally. Eventually, L. Paul Bremer, Director of the Coalition Provisional Authority in Iraq from May 11, 2003 to June 28, 2004 ordered protection of the zoo and U.S. engineers helped to reopen the facility. 

===Kadhimiya mosque===

The Al-Kdhimiya Mosque is a shrine that is located in the Kdhimayn suburb of Baghdad, Iraq. It contains the tombs of the seventh Twelver Sha Imm Musa al-Kadhim and the ninth Twelver Sha Imm Muhammad at-Taq al-Jawd. Many Shias travel to the mosque from far away places to commemorate.

==Geography==
Astronaut view of Baghdad
The city is located on a vast plain bisected by the River Tigris. The Tigris splits Baghdad in half, with the eastern half being called 'Risafa' and the Western half known as 'Karkh'. The land on which the city is built is almost entirely flat and low-lying, being of alluvial origin due to the periodic large floods which have occurred on the river.

===Climate===
Baghdad has a subtropical arid climate (Kppen climate classification BWh) and is, in terms of maximum temperatures, one of the hottest cities in the world. In the summer from June to August, the average maximum temperature is as high as 44 C accompanied by blazing sunshine: rainfall has in fact been recorded on fewer than half a dozen occasions at this time of year and has never exceeded 1 mm. Monthly rainfall for Baghdad (WMO #40650) Temperatures exceeding 50 C in the shade are by no means unheard of, and even at night temperatures in summer are seldom below 24 C. Because the humidity is very low (usually under 10%) due to Baghdad's distance from the marshy Persian Gulf, dust storms from the deserts to the west are a normal occurrence during the summer.

Winters boast mild days and variable nights. From December to February, Baghdad has maximum temperatures averaging 15.5 to, though highs above 70 F are not unheard of. Morning temperatures can be chilly: the average January low is 3.8 C but lows below freezing only occur a couple of times per year.

Annual rainfall, almost entirely confined to the period from November to March, averages around 150 mm, but has been as high as 338 mm and as low as 37 mm. Annual Rainfall Statistics for Baghdad (WMO #40650) On January 11, 2008, light snow fell across Baghdad for the first time in memory. 

==Administrative divisions==
Baghdad as seen from the International Space Station
The city of Baghdad has 89 official neighbourhoods within 9 districts. These official subdivisions of the city served as administrative centres for the delivery of municipal services but until 2003 had no political function. Beginning in April 2003, the U.S. controlled Coalition Provisional Authority (CPA) began the process of creating new functions for these. The process initially focused on the election of neighbourhood councils in the official neighbourhoods, elected by neighbourhood caucuses.

The CPA convened a series of meetings in each neighbourhood to explain local government, to describe the caucus election process and to encourage participants to spread the word and bring friends, relatives and neighbours to subsequent meetings. Each neighbourhood process ultimately ended with a final meeting where candidates for the new neighbourhood councils identified themselves and asked their neighbours to vote for them.

Once all 88 (later increased to 89) neighbourhood councils were in place, each neighbourhood council elected representatives from among their members to serve on one of the city's nine district councils. The number of neighbourhood representatives on a district council is based upon the neighbourhood's population. The next step was to have each of the nine district councils elect representatives from their membership to serve on the 37 member Baghdad City Council. This three tier system of local government connected the people of Baghdad to the central government through their representatives from the neighbourhood, through the district, and up to the city council.

The same process was used to provide representative councils for the other communities in Baghdad Province outside of the city itself. There, local councils were elected from 20 neighbourhoods (Nahia) and these councils elected representatives from their members to serve on six district councils (Qada). As within the city, the district councils then elected representatives from among their members to serve on the 35 member Baghdad Regional Council.

The first step in the establishment of the system of local government for Baghdad Province was the election of the Baghdad Provincial Council. As before, the representatives to the Provincial Council were elected by their peers from the lower councils in numbers proportional to the population of the districts they represent. The 41 member Provincial Council took office in February, 2004 and served until national elections held in January 2005, when a new Provincial Council was elected.

This system of 127 separate councils may seem overly cumbersome; however, Baghdad Province is home to approximately seven million people. At the lowest level, the neighbourhood councils, each council represents an average of 75,000 people.

The nine District Advisory Councils (DAC) are as follows: 

A residential area on Haifa Street, Baghdad
Albunneya mosque in Al-Alawi district Baghdad 1973

*Adhamiyah
*Karkh 
*Karrada 
*Kadhimiya 
*Mansour
*Sadr City (Thawra) 
*Al Rashid 
*Rusafa
*New Baghdad (Tisaa Nissan) (9 April) NBC 6 News - 1st Cav Headlines 

The nine districts are subdivided into 89 smaller neighborhoods which may make up sectors of any of the districts above. The following is a selection (rather than a complete list) of these neighborhoods:

*Al-Ghazaliya
*Al-A'amiriya
*Dora
*Karrada
*Al-Jadriya
*Al-Hebnaa
*Zayouna
*Al-Saydiya
*Al-Sa'adoon
*Al-Shu'ala
*Al-Mahmudiyah
*Bab Al-Moatham
**Al-Baya'
*Al-Za'franiya
*Hayy Ur
*Sha'ab
*Hayy Al-Jami'a
*Al-Adel
*Al Khadhraa
*Hayy Al-Jihad
*Hayy Al-A'amel
*Hayy Aoor
*Al-Hurriya
*Hayy Al-Shurtta
*Yarmouk
*Jesr Diyala
*Abu Disher
*Raghiba Khatoun
*Arab Jibor
*Al-Fathel
*Al-Ubedy
*Al-Washash
*Al-Wazireya

==Economy==

Iraqi Airways, the national airline of Iraq, has its headquarters on the grounds of Baghdad International Airport in Baghdad. Arab Air Carriers Organization. Retrieved on October 19, 2009. Al-Naser Airlines has its head office in Karrada, Baghdad. "Contact Us." Al-Naser Airlines. Retrieved on 13 February 2011. "Main Branch: Al-Karrada, Babil Region - Distrlct 929 - St21 - Home 46 - Beside Al Jadirya Private Hospital. Iraq- Baghdad." 

===Reconstruction efforts===

Most Iraqi reconstruction efforts have been devoted to the restoration and repair of badly damaged urban infrastructure. More visible efforts at reconstruction through private development, like architect and urban designer Hisham N. Ashkouri's Baghdad Renaissance Plan and the Sindbad Hotel Complex and Conference Center have also been made.
 ARCADD 

The Baghdad Eye, a tall Ferris wheel, was proposed for Baghdad in August 2008. At that time, three possible locations had been identified, but no estimates of cost or completion date were given. Iraq Looking To Build Giant Observation Wheel In Baghdad To Promote Tourism Iraq plans giant Ferris wheel, hopes to lure tourists to Baghdad Wikinews: Iraq plans 'Baghdad Eye' to draw in tourists In October 2008, it was reported that Al-Zawraa Park was expected to be the site, Obama ad attacks McCain for Baghdad Ferris wheel project being built on land leased by a Democratic Party donor and a wheel was installed there in March 2011. New Ferris wheel attracts leisure-starved Iraqis 

Iraq's Tourism Board also is seeking investors to develop a "romantic" island on the River Tigris in Baghdad that was once a popular honeymoon spot for newlywed Iraqis. The project would include a six-star hotel, spa, an 18-hole golf course and a country club. In addition, the go-ahead has been given to build numerous architecturally unique skyscrapers along the Tigris that would develop the city's financial centre in Kadhehemiah. 

In October 2008, the Baghdad Metro resumed service. It connects the center to the southern neighborhood of Dora.
In May 2010, a new residential and commercial project nicknamed Baghdad Gate was announced. This project not only addresses the urgent need for new residential units in Baghdad but also acts as a real symbol of progress in the war torn city, as Baghdad has not seen projects of this scale for decades. 

===Retails===
*Baghdad | Baghdad Mall (4 floors) + Baghdad Rayhan Hotel by Rotana + offices (30 floors) (105 metres) + offices (7 floors)

===Stadiums===
*Baghdad | Taji | 60,000 seats Stadium.

===Housing===
*Baghdad | Bismayah New City | 100,000 housing units.
*Baghdad | Zuhour | 5400 units (100 apartments)
*Baghdad | Ibn Firnas Residential Project | 2016 housing Units
*Baghdad | Al Ayadi Residential Project | 1335 housing Units
*Baghdad | Riyadh Apartments | 8 floors

In 2012, the Central Bank of Iraq signed a deal with Zaha Hadid Architects to build a tower which will be used as the bank's new headquarters.

===Education===
The Mustansiriya Madrasah was established in 1227 by the Abbasid Caliph al-Mustansir. The name was changed to Al-Mustansiriya University in 1963. The University of Baghdad is the largest university in Iraq and the second largest in the Arab world.

===Universities===
*Al-Mustansiriya University
*Iraqi University
*Nahrain University
*University of Baghdad
*University of Technology, Iraq

==Culture==

The Iraqi National Symphony Orchestra, officially founded in 1959, performing a concert in Iraq in July 2007.

Baghdad has always played a significant role in the broader Arab cultural sphere, contributing several significant writers, musicians and visual artists. Famous Arab poets and singers such as Nizar Qabbani, Umm Kulthum, Fairuz, Salah Al-Hamdani, Ilham al-Madfai and others have performed for the city.

The dialect of Arabic spoken in Baghdad today differs from that of other large urban centres in Iraq, having features more characteristic of nomadic Arabic dialects (Verseegh, The Arabic Language). It is possible that this was caused by the repopulating of the city with rural residents after the multiple sacks of the late Middle Ages.

===Institutions===
Two ballet dancers of the Iraqi National Ballet (which is based in Baghdad) performing a ballet show in Iraq in 2007.
Many events are hosted at the Baghdad Convention Center
Some of the important cultural institutions in the city include:
*Iraqi National Symphony Orchestra  Rehearsals and performances were briefly interrupted during the Second Gulf War, but have since returned to normal
*National Theater  The theatre was looted during the 2003 invasion of Iraq, but efforts are underway to restore the theatre. Five women confront a new Iraq | csmonitor.com 

The live theatre scene received a boost during the 1990s, when UN sanctions limited the import of foreign films. As many as 30 movie theatres were reported to have been converted to live stages, producing a wide range of comedies and dramatic productions. 

Institutions offering cultural education in Baghdad include The Music and Ballet School of Baghdad and the Institute of Fine Arts Baghdad. Baghdad is also home to a number of museums which housed artifacts and relics of ancient civilization; many of these were stolen, and the museums looted, during the widespread chaos immediately after United States forces entered the city.

During the 2003 occupation of Iraq, AFN Iraq ("Freedom Radio") broadcast news and entertainment within Baghdad, among other locations. There is also a private radio station called "Dijlah" (named after the Arabic word for the Tigris River) that was created in 2004 as Iraq's first independent talk radio station. Radio Dijlah offices, in the Jamia neighborhood of Baghdad, have been attacked on several occasions. 

==Sport==
Baghdad is home to some of the most successful football (soccer) teams in Iraq, the biggest being current Iraqi League champions Al-Shorta (Police), Al-Quwa Al-Jawiya (Airforce club), Al-Zawra'a, and Talaba (Students). The largest stadium in Baghdad is Al-Shaab Stadium, which was opened in 1966. Another, but much larger stadium, is still in the opening stages of construction.

The city has also had a strong tradition of horse racing ever since World War I, known to Baghdadis simply as 'Races'. There are reports of pressures by the Islamists to stop this tradition due to the associated gambling.

==Major streets==
Haifa Street, as seen from the Medical City Hospital across the Tigris River
*Haifa Street
*Salihiya Residential area - situated off Al Sinak bridge in central Baghdad, surrounded by Al- Mansur Hotel in the north and Al-Rasheed hotel in the south
*Hilla Road  Runs from the south into Baghdad via Yarmouk (Baghdad)
*Caliphs Street  site of historical mosques and churches
*Sadoun Street  stretching from Liberation Square to Masbah
*Mohammed Al-Qassim highway near Adhamiyah
*Abu Nuwas Street  runs along the Tigris from the from Jumhouriya Bridge to 14 July Suspended Bridge
*Damascus Street  goes from Damascus Square to the Baghdad Airport Road
*Mutanabbi Street  A street with numerous books, named after the 10th century Iraqi poet Al-Mutanabbi
*Rabia Street
*Arbataash Tamuz (14th July) Street (Mosul Road)
*Muthana al-Shaibani Street
*Bor Saeed (Port Said) Street
*Thawra Street
*Al Qanat Street  runs through Baghdad north-south
*Al Khat al Sare'a  Mohammed al Qasim (high speed lane)  runs through Bagdhad, north-south
*Al Sinaa Street (Industry Street) runs by the University of Technology  centre of computers trade in Baghdad
*Al Nidhal Street
*Al Rasheed Street  city centre Baghdad
*Al Jamhuriah Street  city centre Baghdad
*Falastin Street
*Tariq el Muaskar  (Al Rasheed Camp Road)
*Aakhrot street

*Baghdad Airport Road Map from 2002 based on a 1983 tourist map 

==Sister cities==
* Amman, Jordan
* Beirut, Lebanon 
* Dubai, United Arab Emirates

==See also==

*195051 Baghdad bombings
*Round city of Baghdad
*List of places in Iraq
*Firdos Square - is a public open space in Baghdad and the location of two of the best-known hotels, the Palestine Hotel and the Sheraton Ishtar, which are both also the tallest buildings in Baghdad. The square was the site of the statue of Saddam Hussein that was pulled down by U.S. coalition forces in a widely televised event during the 2003 invasion of Iraq.
*Operation Imposing Law Baghdad Security Plan
*Anti-Zionist League in Iraq - founded in Baghdad in 1945

==References==

==Further reading==
*By Desert Ways to Baghdad, by Louisa Jebb (Mrs. Roland Wilkins), 1908 (1909 ed) (a searchable facsimile at the University of Georgia Libraries; DjVu & format)
*A Dweller in Mesopotamia, being the adventures of an official artist in the Garden of Eden, by Donald Maxwell, 1921 (a searchable facsimile at the University of Georgia Libraries; DjVu & format)
*Miastoprojekt goes abroad: the transfer of architectural labour from socialist Poland to Iraq (19581989) by Lukasz Stanek, The Journal of Architecture, Volume 17, Issue 3, 2012 

Books:
*
*"Travels in Asia and Africa 1325-135" by Ibn Battuta
*"Gertrude Bell: the Arabian diaries,19131914." by Bell Gertrude Lowthian, and O'Brien, Rosemary.
*"Historic cities of the Islamic world."by Bosworth, Clifford Edmund.
*"Ottoman administration of Iraq, 18901908." by Cetinsaya, Gokhan.
*"Naked in Baghdad." by Garrels, Anne, and Lawrence, Vint.
*"A memoir of Major-General Sir Henry Creswicke Rawlinson." by Rawlinson, George.

==External links==

*Map of Baghdad
*Iraq Image - Baghdad Satellite Observation
*National Commission for Investment in Iraq
*Interactive map
*Iraq - Urban Society
*Envisioning Reconstruction In Iraq
*Description of the original layout of Baghdad
*Ethnic and sectarian map of Baghdad - Healingiraq
*UAE Investors Keen On Taking Part In Baghdad Renaissance Project
*Man With A Plan: Hisham Ashkouri
*Behind Baghdad's 9/11
*Iraq Inter-Agency Information & Analysis Unit Reports, maps and assessments of Iraq from the UN Inter-Agency Information & Analysis Unit

 



[[Outline of biology]]

The following outline is provided as an overview of and topical guide to biology:

Biology &ndash; study of living organisms. It is concerned with the characteristics, classification, and behaviors of organisms, how species come into existence, and the interactions they have with each other and with the environment. Biology encompasses a broad spectrum of academic fields that are often viewed as independent disciplines. However, together they address phenomena related to living organisms (biological phenomena) over a wide range of scales, from biophysics to ecology. All concepts in biology are subject to the same laws that other branches of science obey, such as the laws of thermodynamics and conservation of energy.

==Branches of biology==
* Acarology
* Anatomy
* Arachnology
* Biochemistry
* Bioinformatics
* Biomechanics
* Bionomics
* Biophysics
* Biotechnology
* Botany
* Cell biology
* Ecology
* Entomology
* Evolution
* Genetics
* Gerontology
* Herpetology
* Histology
* Ichnology
* Ichthyology
* Immunology
* Limnology
* Marine biology
* Microbiology
* Molecular biology
* Mycology
* Myrmecology
* Neurobiology
* Ornithology
* Paleontology
* Palynology
* Parasitology
* Photobiology
* Phycology
* Physiology
* Plant physiology
* Biological psychology Radiobiology
* Sociobiology
* Structural biology
* Taxonomy
* Virology
* Zoology

==History of biology==

*Anatomy
*Biochemistry
*Biotechnology
*Ecology
*Genetics
*Evolutionary thought
*Medicine
*Model organisms
*Modern evolutionary synthesis
*Molecular biology
*Molecular evolution
*Natural history
*Plant systematics

==Ecology and evolution==

*Life: origin of life  hierarchy of life - MillerUrey experiment

*Ecology:
**Autecology: autotroph  heterotroph  acclimatization  endotherm  ectotherm  hibernation  homeostasis  behavior  circadian rhythm
**Population ecology: population  competition  mating  biological dispersal  endemism  niche  growth curve  carrying capacity
**Community ecology: community  keystone species  mimicry  symbiosis  pollination  mutualism  commensalism  parasitism  predation  invasive species  environmental heterogeneity  edge effect
**Ecosystems: biodiversity  biome  habitat  plankton  thermocline  carbon cycle  water cycle  nitrogen cycle  food web  trophic level  saprobe  decomposition

*Evolutionary biology (evolution)
**Microevolution: species  speciation  adaptation  selection  natural selection  directional selection  sexual selection  genetic drift  sexual reproduction  asexual reproduction  colony  allele frequency  neutral theory of molecular evolution  population genetics  Hardy-Weinberg principle
**Macroevolution: adaptive radiation  convergent evolution  extinction  mass extinction  fossil  taphonomy  geologic time  plate tectonics  continental drift  vicariance  Gondwana  Pangaea  endosymbiosis
**Systematics: taxon  taxonomy  scientific classification  phylogeny  evolutionary tree  cladistics  synapomorphy  homology  molecular clock

==Organismal biology==

(also known as functional biology)
*Groups of living organisms
**viruses : DNA viruses  RNA viruses  retroviruses
**Single-cell organisms:
***prokaryotes : microbe  bacteria  archaea
***eukaryotes: fungi  algae  protozoa  protista
**Multicellular organisms:
***plantae  plants  bryophytes  pteridophytes  seed plants
***animalia  animals  metazoa  insects  molluscs  vertebrates
***fungi  lichen  mycorrhizae
*Developmental biology : gamete  spermatid  ovum  zygote  embryo  cellular differentiation  morphogenesis homeobox
**Animal development: stem cell  blastula  gastrula  egg (biology)  fetus  placenta
**Plant development: seed  cotyledon  meristem  apical meristem  vascular cambium  cork cambium

*Morphology, anatomy and physiology:
**Techniques: electrophysiology  electron microscopy
**tissues  organ  senescence
**Plant systems: root  shoot  stem  leaf  flower
***vascular tissue  Casparian strip  turgor pressure  xylem  phloem  transpiration  wood
***alternation of generations  gametophyte  antheridium  archegonium  sporophyte  spore  sporangium
***tropism  taxis
**Animal systems: skin cell
***skeleton  bone  cartilage  joint  muscle  tendon  actin  myosin  reflex
***circulatory system  respiration  lung  heart  artery  vein  capillary  blood  blood cell
***digestive system  stomach  intestine  liver  nutrition  primary nutritional groups metabolism  kidney  excretion
***nervous system: limbic system  vestibular system  neuron  axon  dendrite  brain  eye  vision  audition  proprioception  olfaction  memory
***nerve signaling: action potential  signal transduction  synapse  receptor
***endocrine system  hormone
***reproductive system  testes  ovary  pregnancy

*Medicine:
**Diseases: cancer  diabetes  obesity  hereditary disease  communicable disease
**immune system: antibody  host  vaccine  immune cell  AIDS  T-cell  leucocyte
**Drugs: antibiotic  barbiturate  SSRI
**Techniques: MRI  Computed axial tomography  blood count

==Cellular and molecular biology==

*Cell biology: the cell
**Techniques: cell culture  microscope  SEM  TEM
**cell components:
***organelles: Golgi apparatus  nucleus  cytoplasm  vacuole  vesicle  lysosome  peroxisome  mitochondrion  plastid  chloroplast
***membranes: plasma membrane  endomembrane system  endoplasmic reticulum  mitochondrial membrane  chloroplast membrane
***Other subcellular features: cell wall  pseudopod  cytoskeleton  mitotic spindle  flagellum  cilium
**Cell processes:
***diffusion  osmosis  isotonic  active transport  phagocytosis
***energy pathways: fermentation  glycolysis  cellular respiration  citric acid cycle  photosynthesis  Calvin cycle
***protein biosynthesis  ribosomes
***cellular reproduction: cytokinesis  centromere  meiosis
***nuclear reproduction: mitosis  interphase  prophase  metaphase  anaphase  telophase
***programmed cell death  apoptosis  cell senescence

*Biochemistry:
**Biomolecules:
***Small: amino acids  Adenosine triphosphate (ATP)  fats  lipids  oil  phospholipid  prion  sugar  vitamins  neurotransmitter  wax
***Medium-sized:
****pigments: chlorophyll  carotenoid  xanthophyll  melanin
***Biopolymers/macromolecules
****proteins: primary structure  secondary structure  tertiary structure  conformation  native state  protein folding  enzyme  receptor  transmembrane receptor  ion channel  membrane transporter collagen  silk
****DNA  RNA
****polysaccharide: cellulose  carbohydrate  chitin  glycogen  starch
**Biochemical mechanisms: proteolysis  cooperativity
**Techniques: electrophoresis  His tag affinity chromatography  x-ray diffraction  Proteomics  mass spectrometry

*Molecular biology:
**genetic structure: DNA  DNA replication  nucleosome  genetic code  codon  transcription factor  transcription  translation  RNA  histone  telomere
**gene expression  heterochromatin  promoter  enhancer  operon
**mutation  point mutation  crossover  recombination plasmid  transposon
**molecular genetics: DNA fingerprinting  genetic fingerprint  microsatellite  gene knockout imprinting  RNA interference
**Genomics: computational biology  bioinformatics
**Molecular Techniques: gel electrophoresis  transformation  PCR  PCR mutagenesis  primer  chromosome walking  RFLP  restriction enzyme  sequencing  shotgun sequencing  cloning  culture  DNA microarray

*Genetics (classical genetics) :
**heredity  Mendelian inheritance  gene  locus  trait  allele  polymorphism  homozygote  heterozygote  hybrid  hybridization  dihybrid cross  Punnett square
**genotype-phenotype distinction  genotype  phenotype  dominant gene  recessive gene
**genetic interactions  Mendel's law of segregation  genetic mosaic  maternal effect  penetrance  complementation  suppression  epistasis  genetic linkage
**chromosomal effects: chromosome  haploid  diploid  polyploidy  dosage effect  inbreeding
**Model organisms: Drosophila  Arabidopsis  Caenorhabditis elegans  mouse  Saccharomyces cerevisiae  Escherichia coli  Lambda phage  Xenopus  chicken  zebrafish  Ciona intestinalis  amphioxus
**Techniques: genetic screen  paternity test  linkage map  genetic map

==Biologists==
: Main articles: Biologist and List of biologists

* Charles Robert Darwin
* Alfred Russel Wallace
* Jean-Baptiste Lamarck
* Gregor Mendel
* Hugo De Vries
* Aristotle
* Carolus Linnaeus
* Konrad Lorenz
* Robert Hooke
* Louis Pasteur
* Robert Koch
* Marcello Malpighi
* Ernst Haeckel
* Alexander Fleming
* Sydney Brenner
* Linus Pauling
* Frederick Sanger
* Hans Adolf Krebs
* Kary Mullis
* Ernst Mayr
* Theodosius Dobzhansky
* Stephen Jay Gould
* Francis Galton
* Thomas Henry Huxley
* James D. Watson
* Francis Crick
* Lynn Margulis
* Carl Woese
* Ronald Fisher
* Sewall Wright
* J. B. S. Haldane
* Thomas Hunt Morgan
* Edmund Beecher Wilson
* Nettie Stevens
* Franois Jacob
* Jacques Monod
* Christiane Nsslein-Volhard
* Eric F. Wieschaus
* Alexander von Humboldt
* Luigi Luca Cavalli-Sforza
* Jacques Cousteau
* Jane Goodall

==See also==

*Invasion biology terminology
*Bibliography of biology
*List of omics topics in biology

; Related outlines
*Outline of engineering
*Outline of technology
*List of social sciences

==External links==

*The Dolan DNA Learning Center: The source for timely information about your life
*OSU's Phylocode
*The Tree of Life: A multi-authored, distributed Internet project containing information about phylogeny and biodiversity.
*MIT video lecture series on biology
*A wiki site for protocol sharing run from MIT.
*Biology and Bioethics.
*Biology online wiki dictionary.
*Biology Video Sharing Community.
*What is Biotechnology : a voluntary program as Biotech for Beginners.

===Journals===
* Biology journals

Biology
 

[[British thermal unit]]

The British thermal unit (BTU or Btu) is a traditional unit of energy equal to about 1055 joules. It is the amount of energy needed to cool or heat one pound of water by one degree Fahrenheit. In science, the joule, the SI unit of energy, has largely replaced the BTU.

The BTU is most often used as a measure of power (as BTU/h) in the power, steam generation, heating, and air conditioning industries, and also as a measure of agricultural energy production (BTU/kg). It is still used in metric English-speaking countries (such as Canada), and remains the standard unit of classification for air conditioning units manufactured and sold in many non-English-speaking metric countries. In North America, the heat value (energy content) of fuels is expressed in BTUs.

==Definitions==
A BTU is the amount of heat required to raise the temperature of of liquid water by 1 F-change at a constant pressure of one atmosphere. As with the calorie, several definitions of the BTU exist, because the temperature response of water to heat energy is non-linear. This means that the change in temperature of a water mass caused by adding a certain amount of heat to it will be a function of the water's initial temperature. Definitions of the BTU based on different water temperatures can therefore vary by up to 0.5%.
A BTU can be approximated as the heat produced by burning a single wooden match Energy and the Environment. Ristinen, Robert A. c. 2006, pg 13 or as the amount of energy it takes to lift a one-pound weight . Energy and the Environment. Ristinen, Robert A. c. 2006, pg 14 

 Nominal temperature BTU equivalent in joules Notes 
 39 F  1059.67 Uses the calorie value of water at its maximum density (4 C) 
 Mean  1055.87 Uses a calorie averaged over water temperatures 0 to 
 IT  1055.05585262 The most widespread BTU uses the International Table (IT) calorie, which was defined by the Fifth International Conference on the Properties of Steam (London, July 1956) to be exactly 4.1868 J 
 ISO  1055.056 International standard ISO 31-4 on Quantities and unitsPart 4: Heat, International standard ISO 31-4:1992 Quantities and unitsPart 4: Heat Appendix A. This value uses the IT calorie and is rounded to a realistic accuracy 
 59 F  1054.804 Chiefly American. Uses the 15 C calorie, itself now defined as exactly 4.1855 J (Comit international 1950; PV, 1950, 22, 7980) 
 60 F  1054.68 Chiefly Canadian 
 63 F  1054.6 
 Thermochemical (\"Th\" )  1054.35026444 Uses the \"thermochemical calorie\" of exactly 4.184 J 

The unit MBtu or mBtu was defined as one thousand BTU, presumably from the Roman numeral system where "M" or "m" stands for one thousand (1,000). This notation is easily confused with the SI mega- (M) prefix, which denotes multiplication by a factor of one million (106), or with the SI milli- (m) prefix, which denotes division by a factor of one thousand (103). To avoid confusion, many companies and engineers use the notation MMBtu or mmBtu to represent one million BTU (although, confusingly, MM in Roman numerals would traditionally represent 2,000) and in many contexts this form of notation is deprecated and discouraged in favour of the more modern SI prefixes. Alternatively, the term therm may be used to represent 100,000 (or 105) BTU, and quad for 1015 BTU. Some companies also use BtuE6 in order to reduce confusion between 103 BTU and 106 BTU. 

==Conversions==
One BTU is approximately:
* 1.054 to 1.060 kJ (kilojoules)
* 0.293071 Wh (watt hours)
* 252 to 253 cal (calories, or "little calories")
* 0.25 kcal (kilocalories, "large calories," or "food calories")
* 25,031 to 25,160 ftpdl (foot-poundal)
* 778 to 782 ftlbf (foot-pounds-force)
* 5.40395 (lbf/in2)ft3

===For natural gas===
* In natural gas, by convention 1 MMBtu (1 million BTU) = 1.054615 GJ. 
* The energy content (high or low heating value) of a volume of natural gas varies with the composition of the natural gas, which means there is no universal conversion factor for the number of BTU to volume. 1 standard cubic foot of typical natural gas yields  1030 BTU (between 1010 BTU and 1070 BTU, depending on quality, when burned)
* As a coarse approximation, 1000 ft3 of natural gas yields  1 MMBTU  1 GJ
* 1 ft3 of natural gas yields  1000 BTU
* For natural gas price conversion 1000 m3  35.8 MMBTU and 1 MMBTU  27.9 m3

===As a unit of power===
When used as a unit of power for heating and cooling systems, BTU per hour (BTU/h) is the correct unit, though this is often abbreviated to just "BTU"..
* 1 watt is approximately 3.41214 BTU/h 2009 ASHRAE Handbook  Fundamentals (I-P Edition). (pp: 38.2). American Society of Heating, Refrigerating and Air-Conditioning Engineers, Inc 
* 1000 BTU/h is approximately 293.071 W
* 1 horsepower is approximately 2544 BTU/h

==Associated units==
* 1 ton of cooling, a common unit in North American refrigeration and air conditioning applications, is 12,000 BTU/h. It is the amount of power needed to freeze 1 ST of water into ice in 24 hours.
* 1 therm is defined in the United States and European Union as 100,000 BTUbut the U.S. uses the BTU59 F while the EU uses the BTUIT. The therm is used to price natural gas. 
* 1 quad (short for quadrillionBTU) is 1015 BTU, which is about one exajoule (). Quads are used in the United States for representing the annual energy consumption of large economies: for example, the U.S. economy used 99.75 quads in 2005. Husher, John Durbin. Crises of the 21st Century: Start Drilling-The Year 2020 Is Coming Fast, iUniverse, 2009. Page 376. One quad/year is about 33.43 gigawatts.

The BTU should not be confused with the Board of Trade Unit (B.O.T.U.), which is a much larger quantity of energy (1 kWh).

The BTU is often used to express the conversion-efficiency of heat into electrical energy in power plants. Figures are quoted in terms of the quantity of heat in BTU required to generate 1 kWh of electrical energy. A typical coal-fired power plant works at 10,500 BTU/kWh, an efficiency of 3233%. Electric Generation Efficiency, NPC Global Oil & Gas Study, 18 July 2007 

== See also ==
*Conversion of units
*Latent heat
*Metrication
*Ton of refrigeration

== References ==

== External links ==
* The Units of Measurement Regulations 1995
* Natural Gas: A Primer



[[Bugatti]]

Automobiles Ettore Bugatti was a French car manufacturer of high-performance automobiles, founded in 1909 in the then German city of Molsheim, Alsace by Italian-born Ettore Bugatti. Bugatti cars were known for their design beauty (Ettore Bugatti was from a family of artists and considered himself to be both an artist and constructor) and for their many race victories. Famous Bugattis include the Type 35 Grand Prix cars, the Type 41 "Royale", the Type 57 "Atlantic" and the Type 55 sports car.

The death of Ettore Bugatti in 1947 proved to be the end for the marque, and the death of his son Jean Bugatti in 1939 ensured there was not a successor to lead the factory. No more than about 8000 cars were made. The company struggled financially, and released one last model in the 1950s, before eventually being purchased for its airplane parts business in the 1960s. In the 1990s, an Italian entrepreneur revived it as a builder of limited production exclusive sports cars. Today, the name is owned by German automobile manufacturing group Volkswagen.

==Under Ettore Bugatti==
Founder Ettore Bugatti was born in Milan, Italy, and the automobile company that bears his name was founded in 1909 in Molsheim located in the Alsace region which was part of the German Empire from 1871 to 1919. The company was known both for the level of detail of its engineering in its automobiles, and for the artistic way in which the designs were executed, given the artistic nature of Ettore's family (his father, Carlo Bugatti (18561940), was an important Art Nouveau furniture and jewelry designer).

===World War I and its aftermath===
During the war Ettore Bugatti was sent away, initially to Milan and later to Paris, but as soon as hostilities had been concluded he returned to his factory at Molsheim. Less than four months after the Versailles Treaty formalised the transfer of Alsace from Germany to France, Bugatti was able to obtain, at the last minute, a stand at the 15th Paris motor show in October 1919. He exhibited three light cars, all of them closely based on their pre-war equivalents, and each fitted with the same overhead camshaft 4-cylinder 1,368cc engine with four valves per cylinder. Smallest of the three was a "Type 13" with a racing body (constructed by Bugatti themselves) and using a chassis with a 2000 mm wheelbase. The others were a "Type 22" and a "Type 23" with wheelbases of 2250 and respectively. 

===Racing successes===
The company also enjoyed great success in early Grand Prix motor racing: in 1929 a privately entered Bugatti won the first ever Monaco Grand Prix. Racing success culminated with driver Jean-Pierre Wimille winning the 24 hours of Le Mans twice (in 1937 with Robert Benoist and 1939 with Pierre Veyron).

Bugatti cars were extremely successful in racing. The little Bugatti Type 10 swept the top four positions at its first race. The 1924 Bugatti Type 35 is probably the most successful racing car of all time, with over 2,000 wins. Bugattis swept to victory in the Targa Florio for five years straight from 1925 through 1929. Louis Chiron held the most podiums in Bugatti cars, and the modern marque revival Bugatti Automobiles S.A.S. named the 1999 Bugatti 18/3 Chiron concept car in his honour. But it was the final racing success at Le Mans that is most rememberedJean-Pierre Wimille and Pierre Veyron won the 1939 race with just one car and meagre resources.

===Airplane racing===
In the 1930s, Ettore Bugatti got involved in the creation of a racer airplane, hoping to beat the Germans in the Deutsch de la Meurthe prize. This would be the Bugatti 100P, which never flew. It was designed by Belgian engineer Louis de Monge who had already applied Bugatti Brescia engines in his "Type 7.5" lifting body.

===Railcar===
Ettore Bugatti also designed a successful motorised railcar, the Autorail (Autorail Bugatti). 

===Family tragedy===
The death of Ettore Bugatti's son, Jean Bugatti, on 11 August 1939 marked a turning point in the company's fortunes. Jean died while testing a Type 57 tank-bodied race car near the Molsheim factory.

==After the next war==
World War II left the Molsheim factory in ruins and the company lost control of the property. During the war, Bugatti planned a new factory at Levallois, a northwestern suburbs of Paris. After the war, Bugatti designed and planned to build a series of new cars, including the Type 73 road car and Type 73C single seat racing car, but in all Bugatti built only five Type 73 cars.

A 375 cc supercharged car was stopped when Ettore Bugatti died on 21 August 1947. Following Ettore Bugatti's death, the business declined further and made its last appearance as a business in its own right at a Paris Motor Show in October 1952. 

After a long decline, the original incarnation of Bugatti ceased operations in 1952.

==Design==
Bugattis noticeably focused on design. Engine blocks were hand scraped to ensure that the surfaces were so flat that gaskets were not required for sealing, many of the exposed surfaces of the engine compartment featured Guilloch (engine turned) finishes on them, and safety wires had been threaded through almost every fastener in intricately laced patterns. Rather than bolt the springs to the axles as most manufacturers did, Bugatti's axles were forged such that the spring passed though a carefully sized opening in the axle, a much more elegant solution requiring fewer parts. He famously described his arch competitor Bentley's cars as "the world's fastest lorries" for focusing on durability. According to Bugatti, "weight was the enemy".

===Most important models built===

 Prototypes Racing Cars Road Cars 
 *19001901 Type 2 *1903 Type 5 *1908 Type 10 Petit Pur Sang *1925 Type 36 *19291930 Type 45/47 *Type 56 (electric car) *1939 Type 64 (coupe) *1943/1947 Type 73C *19101914 Type 13/Type 15/17/22 *1912 Type 16 Bb *19221926 Type 29 Cigare *1923 Type 32 Tank *19241930 Type 35/35A/35B/35T/35C/37/39 Grand Prix *19271930 Type 52 (electric racer for children) *19361939 Type 57G \"Tank\" *19371939 Type 50B *19311936 Type 53 *19311936 Type 51/51A/54GP/59 *19551956 Type 251 *1910 Type 13 Georgano, G.N. Cars: Early and Vintage, 18861930. (London: Grange-Universal, 1985) *19121914 Type 18 *19131914 Type 23/Brescia Tourer (roadster) *19221934 Type 30/38/40/43/44/49 (touring car) *19271933 Type 41 Royale *19291939 Type 46/50/50T (touring car) *19321935 Type 55 (roadster) *19341940 Type 57/57S/Type 57SC (touring car) *19511956 Type 101 (coupe) *19571962 Type 252 (2-seater sports convertible) 

==Gallery==

File:Bugatti 1913.JPG|1913 Bugatti 22, 3 seat Vinet
File:RL 1938 Bugatti 57SC Atlantic 34 2.jpg|1938 Type 57SC Atlantic from the Ralph Lauren collection
File:1933 Bugatti Type 59 Grand Prix 34 rear.jpg|1933 Type 59 Grand Prix racer from the Ralph Lauren collection

===Racing Victories===

 Year Race Driver Car 
 1921 Voiturettes Grand Prix Ernest Friderich 
 1925 Targa Florio Bartolomeo Costantini Type 35 
 1926 French Grand Prix Jules Goux Type 39 A 
 1926 Italian Grand Prix Louis Charavel 
 1926 Spanish Grand Prix Bartolomeo Costantini 
 1926 Targa Florio Bartolomeo Costantini Type 35 T 
 1927 Italian Grand Prix Tazio Nuvolari Type 35 C 
 1927 Targa Florio Emilio Materassi Type 35 C 
 1928 French Grand Prix William Grover-Williams Type 35 C 
 Italian Grand Prix Louis Chiron 
 Spanish Grand Prix Louis Chiron 
 Targa Florio Albert Divo Type 35 B 
 1929 French Grand Prix William Grover-Williams Type 35 B 
 German Grand Prix Louis Chiron 
 Spanish Grand Prix Louis Chiron 
 Monaco Grand Prix William Grover-Williams Type 35 B 
 Targa Florio Albert Divo Type 35 C 
 1930 Belgian Grand Prix Louis Chiron 
 Czechoslovakian Grand Prix Heinrich-Joachim von Morgen and Hermann zu Leiningen 
 French Grand Prix Philippe tancelin Type 35 C 
 Monaco Grand Prix Ren Dreyfus 
 1931 Belgian Grand Prix William Grover-Williams and Caberto Conelli 
 Czechoslovakian Grand Prix Louis Chiron 
 French Grand Prix Louis Chiron and Achille Varzi Type 51 
 Monaco Grand Prix Louis Chiron 
 1932 Czechoslovakian Grand Prix Louis Chiron 
 1933 Czechoslovakian Grand Prix Louis Chiron 
 Monaco Grand Prix Achille Varzi 
 1934 Belgian Grand Prix Ren Dreyfus 
 1936 French Grand Prix Jean-Pierre Wimille and Raymond Sommer Type 57 G 
 1937 24 hours of Le Mans Jean-Pierre Wimille and Robert Benoist Type 57 G 
 1939 24 hours of Le Mans Jean-Pierre Wimille and Pierre Veyron Type 57 C 

===1956 Formula One===
(key)

 Year Chassis Engine(s) Tires Drivers 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 Points WCC 
 Bugatti Type 251 Bugatti Straight-8 ARG MON 500 BEL FRA GBR GER ITA 0* -* 
 Maurice Trintignant Ret 

* The World Constructors' Championship was not awarded before 1958.

===Notable finds in the modern era===
Relatives of Dr. Harold Carr found a rare 1937 Bugatti Type 57S Atalante when cataloguing the doctor's belongings after his death in 2009. Dr. Carr's Type 57S is notable because it was originally owned by British race car driver Earl Howe. Because much of the car's original equipment is intact, it can be restored without relying on replacement parts. 

On 10 July 2009, a 1925 Bugatti Brescia Type 22 which had lain at the bottom of Lake Maggiore on the border of Switzerland and Italy for 75 years was recovered from the lake. The Mullin Museum in Oxnard, California bought it at auction for $351,343 at Bonham's Retromobile sale in Paris in 2010.

==Attempts at revival==
The company attempted a comeback under Roland Bugatti in the mid-1950s with the mid-engined Type 251 race car. Designed with help from Gioacchino Colombo, the car failed to perform to expectations and the company's attempts at automobile production were halted.

In the 1960s, Virgil Exner designed a Bugatti as part of his "Revival Cars" project. A show version of this car was actually built by Ghia using the last Bugatti Type 101 chassis, and was shown at the 1965 Turin Motor Show. Finance was not forthcoming, and Exner then turned his attention to a revival of Stutz.

Bugatti continued manufacturing airplane parts and was sold to Hispano-Suiza, also a former auto maker turned aircraft supplier, in 1963. Snecma took over Hispano-Suiza in 1968. After acquiring Messier, Snecma merged Messier and Bugatti into Messier-Bugatti in 1977.

==Modern revivals==

===Bugatti Automobili SpA 19871995===
Bugatti EB110 (1996)
Italian entrepreneur Romano Artioli acquired the Bugatti brand in 1987, and established Bugatti Automobili SpA. Bugatti commissioned architect Giampaolo Benedini to design the factory which was built in Campogalliano, Italy.

By 1989 the plans for the new Bugatti revival were presented by Paolo Stanzani and Marcello Gandini, designers of the Lamborghini Miura and Lamborghini Countach. Bugatti called their first production vehicle the Bugatti EB110 GT. Bugatti advertised the EB110 as the most technically advanced sports car ever produced.

Famed racing car designer Mauro Forghieri served as Bugatti's technical director from 1992 through 1994.

On 27 August 1993, through his holding company, ACBN Holdings S.A. of Luxembourg, Romano Artioli purchased Lotus Cars from General Motors. Bugatti made plans to list the company's shares on international stock exchanges.

Bugatti presented a prototype large saloon called the EB112 in 1993.

Perhaps the most famous Bugatti EB110 owner was seven-time Formula One World Champion racing driver Michael Schumacher who purchased an EB110 in 1994. Schumacher sold his EB110, which had been repaired after a severe 1994 crash, to Modena Motorsport, a Ferrari service and race preparation garage in Germany.

By the time the EB110 came to market, the North American and European economies were in recession. Poor economic conditions forced the company to fail and operations ceased in September 1995. A model specific to the US market called the "Bugatti America" was in the preparatory stages when the company ceased operations.

Bugatti's liquidators sold Lotus Cars to Proton of Malaysia. German firm Dauer Racing purchased the EB110 licence and remaining parts stock in 1997 in order to produce five more EB110 SS vehicles. These five SS versions of the EB110 were greatly refined by Dauer. The Campogalliano factory was sold to a furniture-making company, which subsequently collapsed before moving in, leaving the building unoccupied. After Dauer stopped producing cars in 2011, Toscana-Motors GmbH of Germany purchased the remaining parts stock from Dauer.

===Bugatti Automobiles S.A.S. 1998present===
Bugatti Veyron 16.4

Volkswagen AG acquired the Bugatti brand in 1998.

Bugatti Automobiles S.A.S. commissioned Giorgetto Giugiaro of ItalDesign to produce Bugatti's first concept vehicle, the EB118, a coup that debuted at the 1998 Paris Auto Show. The EB118 concept featured a 408 kW, W-18 engine. After its Paris debut, the EB118 concept was shown again in 1999 at the Geneva Auto Show and the Tokyo Motor Show.

Bugatti introduced its next concepts, the EB 218 at the 1999 Geneva Motor Show and the 18/3 Chiron at the 1999 Frankfurt Motor Show (IAA).

Bugatti Automobiles S.A.S. began assembling its first regular-production vehicle, the Bugatti Veyron 16.4 (the 1001 BHP super car with an 8-litre W-16 engine with four turbochargers) in September 2005 at the Bugatti Molsheim, France assembly "studio". 

==See also==
* Muse National de l'Automobile de Mulhouse, home of the Schlumpf Collection of Bugatti cars
* Bugatti Type 8
* Bugatti Veyron

==References==

==External links==

*Bugatti Automobiles S.A.S.
*Bugatti bibliography
*The Bugatti Trust
*Bugatti at LeMans

 



[[Benchmark]]

 
Benchmark may refer to:

==Business==
*Benchmark price, a point of reference for setting the price of a commodity
*Benchmark (crude oil), used in pricing crude oil

==Geology==
*Benchmark (surveying), a point of reference for a measurement
**Benchmarking (geolocating), an activity involving finding benchmarks
*Benchmark (crude oil), used in pricing crude oil

==Music Label==
*Benchmark Recordings, a music label with CDs by the Fabulous Thunderbirds and Mike Bloomfield.

==Science==
*Benchmark (science), comparing simulations with empirical data or comparing different simulations with each other.

==Technology==
*Benchmark (computing), the result of running a computer program to assess performance
*A best-performing test, also called the gold standard

==Other uses==
*Benchmarking, evaluating performance in organizations
*Benchmark (venture capital firm), a venture capital firm
*Benchmark Electronics, an electronics manufacturer

==See also==
*Specification (technical standard)



[[Band]]

Band may refer to:

== Science and technology ==
* BAND (application), a private space for groups
* Band (mathematics), an idempotent semigroup
* Band (radio), a range of frequencies or wavelengths used in radio transmission and radar
* Band cell, a type of white blood cell
* Gastric band, a weight-control measure
* Bird banding, placing numbered bands of metal on birds' legs for identification

== Organizations ==
* Band (channel), nickname of Brazilian broadcast television network Rede Bandeirantes
* Bands (Italian Army irregulars), military units once in the service of the Italian Regio Esercito
* The Band (professional wrestling), the Total Nonstop Wrestling name for the professional wrestling stable New World Order

== Music ==
* Band (music), a group of people who perform instrumental or vocal music
** Concert band, an ensemble of woodwind, brass, and percussion instruments
** School band, a group of student musicians who rehearse and perform instrumental music together
** Marching band, a group of instrumental musicians who generally perform outdoors incorporating some type of marching
** Jazz band, a musical ensemble that plays jazz music
* The Band, a Canadian-American rock and roll group
** The Band (album), its eponymous album released in 1969

== Clothing, jewelry, and accessories ==
* Bands (neckwear), two pieces of cloth fitted around the neck as part of formal clothing for clergy, academics, and lawyers
* Bandolier or bandoleer, an ammunition belt
* Wedding band, a metal ring indicating the wearer is married
* Belt (clothing), a flexible band or strap, typically made of leather or heavy cloth, and worn around the waist
* Strap, an elongated flap or ribbon, usually of fabric or leather

== Society and government ==
* Band (First Nations Canada), the primary unit of First Nations Government in Canada
* Band society, a small group of humans in a simple form of society
* Tribe (Native American), a tribe, band, nation, or other group or community of Indigenous peoples in the United States

== Places ==
* Bnd, a village in Hungary
* Band, Iran, a village in Urmia County, West Azerbaijan Province, Iran
* Band, Mure, a commune in Romania
* Band-e Majid Khan, a village in Bukan County, West Azerbaijan Province, Iran
* Band-e Mohammad Abdollah, a village in Bushehr Province, Iran

== Other uses ==
* Band (surname), various people with the surname
* The Band (film), a 1978 Israeli film

==See also==
* Herd, a social grouping of certain animals of the same species
* 
* 
* Banding (disambiguation)
* Band of Brothers (disambiguation)
* Bandy (disambiguation)
* Drum and bugle corps (disambiguation)
* Stripe (disambiguation)



[[Black Death]]

Illustration of the Black Death from the Toggenburg Bible (1411)
The Black Death was one of the most devastating pandemics in human history, resulting in the deaths of an estimated 75 to 200 million people and peaking in Europe in the years 134653. Although there were several competing theories as to the etiology of the Black Death, analysis of DNA from victims in northern and southern Europe published in 2010 and 2011 indicates that the pathogen responsible was the Yersinia pestis bacterium, probably causing several forms of plague. 

The Black Death is thought to have originated in the arid plains of central Asia, where it then travelled along the Silk Road, reaching the Crimea by 1346. From there, it was most likely carried by Oriental rat fleas living on the black rats that were regular passengers on merchant ships. Spreading throughout the Mediterranean and Europe, the Black Death is estimated to have killed 3060% of Europe's total population. All in all, the plague reduced the world population from an estimated 450 million down to 350375 million in the 14th century.

The aftermath of the plague created a series of religious, social, and economic upheavals, which had profound effects on the course of European history. It took for Europe's population to recover. The plague recurred occasionally in Europe until the 19th century.

==Overview==
Inspired by the Black Death, The Dance of Death or Danse Macabre, an allegory on the universality of death, is a common painting motif in the late medieval period.

===Major outbreaks===
There have been three major outbreaks of plague. The Plague of Justinian in the 6th and 7th centuries is the first known attack on record, and marks the first firmly recorded pattern of bubonic plague. From historical descriptions, as much as 40% of the population of Constantinople died from the plague. Modern estimates suggest half of Europe's population died as a result of the plague before it disappeared in the 700s. After 750, major epidemic diseases did not appear again in Europe until the Black Death of the 14th century. J. N. Hays (2005). "Epidemics and pandemics: their impacts on human history". p. 23. ISBN 1-85109-658-2 The Third Pandemic hit China in the 1890s and devastated India, but was confined to limited outbreaks in the west. 

The Black Death originated in or near China and spread by way of the Silk Road or by ship. It may have reduced world population from an estimated 450 million down to 350375 million by the year 1400. 

The plague is thought to have returned at intervals with varying virulence and mortality until the 18th century. On its return in 1603, for example, the plague killed 38,000 Londoners. Other notable 17th-century outbreaks were the Italian Plague (162931); the Great Plague of Seville (164752); the Great Plague of London (166566); and the Great Plague of Vienna (1679). There is some controversy over the identity of the disease, but in its virulent form, after the Great Plague of Marseille in 172022, the Great Plague of 1738 (which hit Eastern Europe), and the Russian plague of 1770-1772, it seems to have gradually disappeared from Europe. By the early 19th century, the threat of plague had diminished, but it was quickly replaced by a new disease. The Asiatic cholera was the first of several cholera pandemics to sweep through Asia and Europe during the 19th and 20th centuries. "Cholera's seven pandemics". CBC News. 2 December 2008. 

The 14th-century eruption of the Black Death had a drastic effect on Europe's population, irrevocably changing the social structure, and resulted in widespread persecution of minorities such as Jews, foreigners, beggars, and lepers (see Persecutions). The uncertainty of daily survival has been seen as creating a general mood of morbidity, influencing people to "live for the moment," as illustrated by Giovanni Boccaccio in The Decameron (1353). 

===Naming===
Medieval people called the catastrophe of the 14th century either the "Great Pestilence"' or the "Great Plague". J. M. Bennett and C. W. Hollister, Medieval Europe: A Short History (New York: McGraw-Hill, 2006), p. 326. In 1350, Simon de Covino (or Couvin), a Belgian astronomer, wrote the poem "De judicio Solis in convivio Saturni" (On the judgment of the Sun at a feast of Saturn) in which he attributed the plague to a conjunction of Jupiter and Saturn.
* On page 22 of the manuscript in Gallica, Simon mentions the phrase "mors nigra" (Black Death): "Cum rex finisset oracula judiciorum / Mors nigra surrexit, et gentes reddidit illi;" (When the king ended the oracles of judgment / Black Death arose, and the nations surrendered to him;).
* A more legible copy of the poem appears in: Emile Littr (1841) "Opuscule relatif  la peste de 1348, compos par un contemporain" (Work concerning the plague of 1348, composed by a contemporary), Bibliothque de l'cole des chartes, 2 (2) : 201-243; see especially page 228.
* See also: Joseph Patrick Byrne, The Black Death (Westport, Connecticut: Greenwood Press, 2004), page 1. Writers contemporary to the plague referred to the event as the "Great Mortality". Swedish and Danish chronicles of the 17th century described the events as "black" for the first time, not to describe the late-stage sign of the disease, in which the sufferer's skin would blacken due to subepidermal hemorrhages and the extremities would darken with a form of gangrene, acral necrosis, but more likely to refer to black in the sense of glum or dreadful and to denote the terror and gloom of the events. Gasquet (1908) claimed that the Latin name "atra mors" (Black Death) for an epidemic first appeared in modern times in 1631 in a book on Danish history by J.I. Pontanus, where Pontanus wrote about a disease that occurred in 1348: "Vulgo & ab effectu atram mortem vocatibant." (Commonly and from effects, they called the black death.). Francis Aidan Gasquet, The Black Death of 1348 and 1349, 2nd ed. (London, England: George Bell and Sons, 1908), page 7. Johan Isaksson Pontanus, Rerum Danicarum Historia ... (Amsterdam (Netherlands): Johann Jansson, 1631), page 476. D'Irsay points out that the phrase "black death" dates back at least to Homer's Odyssey, where Homer said that Scylla's mouth contained rows of teeth    (full of black death). Many Roman authors also used the phrase. The medieval French physician Gilles de Corbeil (c. 1140 - (1200-1225)) in his De signis et sinthomatibus egritudinum (On the signs and symptoms of diseases) referred to a pestilential fever (febris pestilentialis) as "atra mors" (black death). See: Stephen d'Irsay (May 1926) "Notes to the origin of the expression: atra mors," Isis, 8 (2) : 328-332. However, Gasquet doubted that Pontanus was referring to bubonic plague. Nevertheless, the name spread through Scandinavia and then Germany. The German physician Justus Hecker (1795-1850) cited the phrase in Icelandic (Svartur Daudi), Danish (den sorte Dod), etc. See: J.F.C. Hecker, Der schwarze Tod im vierzehnten Jahrhundert Black Death in the Fourteenth Century (Berlin, (Germany): Friedr. Aug. Herbig, 1832), page 3. In England, it was not until 1823 that the medieval epidemic was first called the Black Death. The name "Black Death" first appeared in English in:
* "Mrs. Markham" (pen name of Elizabeth Penrose (ne Cartwright)), A History of England ... (Edinburgh, Scotland: Archibald Constable, 1823). In the 1829 edition, the relevant text appeared on pages 249-250, where, about the English king Edward III, she wrote: "Edward's successes in France were interrupted during the next six years by a most terrible pestilence  so terrible as to be called the black death  which raged throughout Europe, and proved a greater scourge to the people than even the calamities of war." (For further information about this book and Mrs. Penrose, see: Wikisource and the Oxford Dictionary of National Biography).
* See also: J. L. Bolton, "Looking for Yersinia pestis: Scientists, Historians and the Black Death" in: Linda Clark and Carole Rawcliffe, ed.s, The Fifteenth Century XII: Society in an Age of Plague (Woodbridge, England: Boydell Press, 2013), page 15.
The name "Black Death" was spread more widely when in 1833, Dr. Benjamin Guy Babington published an English translation of J.F.C. Hecker's book Der schwarze Tod im vierzehnten Jahrhundert as: J.F.C. Hecker with Benjamin Guy Babington, trans., The Black Death in the Fourteenth Century (London, England: A. Schloss, 1833). 

==Migration==

===Populations in crisis===
Spread of the Black Death in Europe (134653)
In Europe, the Medieval Warm Period ended sometime towards the end of the 13th century, with the climate turning towards the "Little Ice Age" World Regions in Global Context Third Edition and harsher winters with reduced harvests. In most of Europe, new technological innovations such as the heavy plough with an improved mouldboard and pulled by oxen or horses and the three-field system had had a major impact over the previous five centuries; they had opened up more intense cultivation of the heavy and fertile clay soils of northern and central Europe and helped increase population by many millions, especially in Germany, England and France. Lynn White, Jr., Medieval Technology and Social Change (Oxford: University Press, 1962), p. 42 Jean Gimpel,The Medieval Machine, ch.2 (Futura Publications, UK, 1979) These agricultural innovations had also boosted productivity and population in the western Mediterranean basin, and by 1300, in much of western and southern Europe, the population was most likely outgrowing what could be sustained given the technological limits of the age. Lynn White, Jr, ibid 1962 

Food shortages and rapidly inflating (or fluctuating) prices were becoming a fact of life in some parts of France and Italy by the early 14th century, and over the next hundred years these would spread and worsen. Wheat, oats, hay and consequently livestock were all in short supply. Their scarcity resulted in malnutrition, which increases susceptibility to infections due to weakened immunity. Consistently high fertility rates, at five or more children per woman throughout Europe, had helped power high population growth rates and now contributed to these food shortages. In the autumn of 1314, heavy rains began to fall, followed by several years of cold and wet winters. The already weak harvests of the north suffered and a seven-year famine ensued. In the years 1315 to 1317, a catastrophic famine, known as the Great Famine, struck much of northwest Europe. It was the first major famine with this kind of severity in Europe for at least a hundred years.

===Infection and migration===
The plague disease, caused by Yersinia pestis, is enzootic (commonly present) in populations of fleas carried by ground rodents, including marmots, in various areas including Central Asia, Kurdistan, Western Asia, Northern India and Uganda. Nestorian graves dating to 13389 near Lake Issyk Kul in Kyrgizstan have inscriptions referring to plague and are thought by many epidemiologists to mark the outbreak of the epidemic, from which it could easily have spread to China and India. In October 2010, medical geneticists suggested that all three of the great waves of the plague originated in China. In China, the 13th century Mongol conquest caused a decline in farming and trading. However, economic recovery had been observed at the beginning of the 14th century. In the 1330s a large number of natural disasters and plagues led to widespread famine, starting in 1331, with a deadly plague arriving soon after. The Cambridge History of China: Alien regimes and border states, 9071368, p.585 The 14th-century plague killed an estimated 25 million Chinese and other Asians during the 15 years before it reached Constantinople in 1347. However, according to George Sussman, the first obvious medical description of plague in China dates to 1644. 

The disease may have travelled along the Silk Road with Mongol armies and traders or it could have come via ship. 
 By the end of 1346, reports of plague had reached the seaports of Europe: "India was depopulated, Tartary, Mesopotamia, Syria, Armenia were covered with dead bodies". cited by Ziegler, p. 15. 

Plague was reportedly first introduced to Europe at the trading city of Caffa in the Crimea in 1347. After a protracted siege, during which the Mongol army under Jani Beg was suffering the disease, the army catapulted the infected corpses over the city walls to infect the inhabitants. The Genoese traders fled, taking the plague by ship into Sicily and the south of Europe, whence it spread north. Whether or not this hypothesis is accurate, it is clear that several existing conditions such as war, famine, and weather contributed to the severity of the Black Death.

===European outbreak===

 'The seventh year after it began, it came to England and first began in the towns and ports joining on the seacoasts, in Dorsetshire, where, as in other counties, it made the country quite void of inhabitants so that there were almost none left alive.... But at length it came to Gloucester, yea even to Oxford and to London, and finally it spread over all England and so wasted the people that scarce the tenth person of any sort was left alive.' (Geoffrey the Baker, Chronicon Angliae) 

There appear to have been several introductions into Europe. The plague reached Sicily in October 1347, carried by twelve Genoese galleys, 
Michael of Piazza (Platiensis) Bibliotheca scriptorum qui res in Sicilia gestas retulere Vol 1, p. 562, cited in Ziegler, 1998, p. 40. and rapidly spread all over the island. Galleys from Caffa reached Genoa and Venice in January 1348, but it was the outbreak in Pisa a few weeks later that was the entry point to northern Italy. Towards the end of January, one of the galleys expelled from Italy arrived in Marseille. De Smet, Vol II, Breve Chronicon, p. 15. 

From Italy, the disease spread northwest across Europe, striking France, Spain, Portugal and England by June 1348, then turned and spread east through Germany and Scandinavia from 134850. It was introduced in Norway in 1349 when a ship landed at Asky, then spread to Bjrgvin (modern Bergen) and Iceland. 
 Finally it spread to northwestern Russia in 1351. The plague spared some parts of Europe, including the Kingdom of Poland, the majority of the Basque Country and isolated parts of Belgium and the Netherlands.

===Middle Eastern outbreak===
The plague struck various countries in the Middle East during the pandemic, leading to serious depopulation and permanent change in both economic and social structures. As it spread to western Europe, the disease entered the region from southern Russia also. By autumn 1347, the plague reached Alexandria in Egypt, probably through the port's trade with Constantinople, and ports on the Black Sea. During 1347, the disease travelled eastward to Gaza, and north along the eastern coast to cities in Lebanon, Syria and Palestine, including Ashkelon, Acre, Jerusalem, Sidon, Damascus, Homs, and Aleppo. In 134849, the disease reached Antioch. The city's residents fled to the north, most of them dying during the journey, but the infection had been spread to the people of Asia Minor.

Mecca became infected in 1349. During the same year, records show the city of Mawsil (Mosul) suffered a massive epidemic, and the city of Baghdad experienced a second round of the disease. In 1351 Yemen experienced an outbreak of the plague, coinciding with the return of King Mujahid of Yemen from imprisonment in Cairo. His party may have brought the disease with them from Egypt.

==Symptoms==

Contemporary accounts of the plague are often varied or imprecise. The most commonly noted symptom was the appearance of buboes (or gavocciolos) in the groin, the neck and armpits, which oozed pus and bled when opened. Boccaccio's description is graphic:

Ziegler comments that the only medical detail that is questionable is the infallibility of approaching death, as if the bubo discharges, recovery is possible. 

This was followed by acute fever and vomiting of blood. Most victims died two to seven days after initial infection. David Herlihy identifies another potential sign of the plague: freckle-like spots and rashes D. Herlihy, The Black Death and the Transformation of the West (Harvard University Press: Cambridge, Massachusetts, 1997), p. 29. which could be caused by flea-bites.

Some accounts, like that of Louis Heyligen, a musician in Avignon who died of the plague in 1348, noted a distinct form of the disease which infected the lungs and led to respiratory problems and which is identified with pneumonic plague.

==Causes==

Yersinia pestis (200x magnification). The bacterium which causes bubonic plague . 

Medical knowledge had stagnated during the Middle Ages. The most authoritative account at the time came from the medical faculty in Paris in a report to the king of France that blamed the heavens, in the form of a conjunction of three planets in 1345 that caused a "great pestilence in the air". This report became the first and most widely circulated of a series of "plague tracts" that sought to give advice to sufferers. That the plague was caused by bad air became the most widely accepted theory. The word plague had no special significance at this time, and only the recurrence of outbreaks during the Middle Ages gave it the name that has become the medical term.

The importance of hygiene was recognised only in the nineteenth century; until then it was common that the streets were filthy, with live animals of all sorts around and human parasites abounding. A transmissible disease will spread easily in such conditions. One development as a result of the Black Death was the establishment of the idea of quarantine in Dubrovnik in 1377 after continuing outbreaks. 

 

The dominant explanation for the Black Death is the plague theory, which attributes the outbreak to Yersinia pestis, also responsible for an epidemic that began in southern China in 1865, eventually spreading to India. The investigation of the pathogen that caused the 19th-century plague was begun by teams of scientists who visited Hong Kong in 1894, among whom was the French-Swiss bacteriologist Alexandre Yersin, after whom the pathogen was named Yersinia pestis. G. Christakos, Interdisciplinary Public Health Reasoning and Epidemic Modelling: the Case of Black Death (, 2005), ISBN 3-540-25794-2, pp. 11014. The mechanism by which Y. pestis was usually transmitted was established in 1898 by Paul-Louis Simond and was found to involve the bites of fleas whose midguts had become obstructed by replicating Y. pestis several days after feeding on an infected host. This blockage results in starvation and aggressive feeding behaviour by the fleas, which repeatedly attempt to clear their blockage by regurgitation, resulting in thousands of plague bacteria being flushed into the feeding site, infecting the host. The bubonic plague mechanism was also dependent on two populations of rodents: one resistant to the disease, which act as hosts, keeping the disease endemic; and a second that lack resistance. When the second population dies, the fleas move on to other hosts, including people, thus creating a human epidemic. 

The historian Francis Aidan Gasquet, who had written about the 'Great Pestilence' in 1893 and suggested that "it would appear to be some form of the ordinary Eastern or bubonic plague" was able to adopt the epidemiology of the bubonic plague for the Black Death for the second edition in 1908, implicating rats and fleas in the process, and his interpretation was widely accepted for other ancient and medieval epidemics, such as the Justinian plague that was prevalent in the Eastern Roman Empire from 541 to 700 CE. 

More recently other forms of plague have been implicated. The modern bubonic plague has a mortality rate of 3075% and symptoms including fever of 38 , headaches, painful aching joints, nausea and vomiting, and a general feeling of malaise. Left untreated, of those that contract the bubonic plague, 80 percent die within eight days. R. Totaro, Suffering in Paradise: The Bubonic Plague in English Literature from More to Milton (Pittsburgh: Duquesne University Press, 2005), p. 26. Pneumonic plague has a mortality rate of 90 to 95 percent. Symptoms include fever, cough, and blood-tinged sputum. As the disease progresses, sputum becomes free flowing and bright red. Septicemic plague is the least common of the three forms, with a mortality rate near 100%. Symptoms are high fevers and purple skin patches (purpura due to disseminated intravascular coagulation). In cases of pneumonic and particularly septicemic plague the progress of the disease is so rapid that there would often be no time for the development of the enlarged lymph nodes that were noted as buboes. 

"Many modern scholars accept that the lethality of the Black Death stemmed from the combination of bubonic and pneumonic plague with other diseases and warn that every historical mention of 'pest' was not necessarily bubonic plague...In her study of 15th-century outbreaks, Ann Carmichael states that worms, the pox, fevers and dysentery clearly accompanied bubonic plague." quoting 

===Alternative explanations===
Plague victims being blessed, shown with symptoms from a late 14th-century manuscript Omne Bonum by James le Palmer
This interpretation was first significantly challenged by the work of British bacteriologist J. F. D. Shrewsbury in 1970, who noted that the reported rates of mortality in rural areas during the 14th-century pandemic were inconsistent with the modern bubonic plague, leading him to conclude that contemporary accounts were exaggerations. In 1984 zoologist Graham Twigg produced the first major work to challenge the bubonic plague theory directly, and his doubts about the identity of the Black Death have been taken up by a number of authors, including Samuel K. Cohn, Jr. (2002), David Herlihy (1997), and Susan Scott and Christopher Duncan (2001). 

It is recognised that an epidemiological account of the plague is as important as an identification of symptoms, but researchers are hampered by the lack of reliable statistics from this period. Most work has been done on the spread of the plague in England, and even estimates of overall population at the start vary by over 100% as no census was undertaken between the time of publication of the Domesday Book and the year 1377. Estimates of plague victims are usually extrapolated from figures from the clergy.

In addition to arguing that the rat population was insufficient to account for a bubonic plague pandemic, sceptics of the bubonic plague theory point out that the symptoms of the Black Death are not unique (and arguably in some accounts may differ from bubonic plague); that transference via fleas in goods was likely to be of marginal significance and that the DNA results may be flawed and might not have been repeated elsewhere, despite extensive samples from other mass graves. Other arguments include the lack of accounts of the death of rats before outbreaks of plague between the 14th and 17th centuries; temperatures that are too cold in northern Europe for the survival of fleas; that, despite primitive transport systems, the spread of the Black Death was much faster than that of modern bubonic plague; that mortality rates of the Black Death appear to be very high; that, while modern bubonic plague is largely endemic as a rural disease, the Black Death indiscriminately struck urban and rural areas; and that the pattern of the Black Death, with major outbreaks in the same areas separated by 5 to 15 years, differs from modern bubonic plaguewhich often becomes endemic for decades with annual flare-ups. 

Walle complains that all of these authors "take it for granted that Simond's infection model, black rat  rat flea  human, which was developed to explain the spread of plague in India, is the only way an epidemic of Yersinia pestis infection could spread", whilst pointing to several other possibilities. 
 

Anthrax skin lesion
A variety of alternatives to the Y. pestis have been put forward. Twigg suggested that the cause was a form of anthrax and N. F. Cantor (2001) thought it may have been a combination of anthrax and other pandemics. Scott and Duncan have argued that the pandemic was a form of infectious disease that characterise as hemorrhagic plague similar to Ebola. Archaeologist Barney Sloane has argued that there is insufficient evidence of the extinction of large number of rats in the archaeological record of the medieval waterfront in London and that the plague spread too quickly to support the thesis that the Y. pestis was spread from fleas on rats and argues that transmission must have been person to person. . . However, no single alternative solution has achieved widespread acceptance. Many scholars arguing for the Y. pestis as the major agent of the pandemic suggest that its extent and symptoms can be explained by a combination of bubonic plague with other diseases, including typhus, smallpox and respiratory infections. In addition to the bubonic infection, others point to additional septicemic (a type of "blood poisoning") and pneumonic (an airborne plague that attacks the lungs before the rest of the body) forms of the plague, which lengthen the duration of outbreaks throughout the seasons and help account for its high mortality rate and additional recorded symptoms. In 2014, scientists with Public Health England announced the results of an examination of 25 bodies exhumed from the Clerkenwell area of London, as well as of wills registered in London during the period, which supported the pneumonic hypothesis. 

===DNA evidence===
Skeletons in a mass grave from 17201721 in Martigues, France, yielded molecular evidence of the orientalis strain of Yersinia pestis, the organism responsible for bubonic plague. The second pandemic of bubonic plague was active in Europe from AD 1347, the beginning of the Black Death, until 1750.

In October 2010, the open-access scientific journal PLoS Pathogens published a paper by a multinational team who undertook a new investigation into the role of Yersinia pestis in the Black Death following the disputed identification by Drancourt and Raoult in 1998. 
 see also Their surveys tested for DNA and protein signatures specific for Y. pestis in human skeletons from widely distributed mass graves in northern, central and southern Europe that were associated archaeologically with the Black Death and subsequent resurgences. The authors concluded that this new research, together with prior analyses from the south of France and Germany

:"...ends the debate about the etiology of the Black Death, and unambiguously demonstrates that Y. pestis was the causative agent of the epidemic plague that devastated Europe during the Middle Ages." 

The study also found that there were two previously unknown but related clades (genetic branches) of the Y. pestis genome associated with medieval mass graves. These clades (which are thought to be extinct) were found to be ancestral to modern isolates of the modern Y. pestis strains Y. p. orientalis and Y. p. medievalis, suggesting the plague may have entered Europe in two waves. Surveys of plague pit remains in France and England indicate the first variant entered Europe through the port of Marseille around November 1347 and spread through France over the next two years, eventually reaching England in the spring of 1349, where it spread through the country in three epidemics. Surveys of plague pit remains from the Dutch town of Bergen op Zoom showed the Y. pestis genotype responsible for the pandemic that spread through the Low Countries from 1350 differed from that found in Britain and France, implying Bergen op Zoom (and possibly other parts of the southern Netherlands) was not directly infected from England or France in 1349 and suggesting a second wave of plague, different from those in Britain and France, may have been carried to the Low Countries from Norway, the Hanseatic cities or another site. 

The results of the Haensch study have since been confirmed and amended. Based on genetic evidence derived from Black Death victims in the East Smithfield burial site in England, Schuenemann et al. concluded in 2011 "that the Black Death in medieval Europe was caused by a variant of Y. pestis that may no longer exist." Schuenemann VJ, Bos K, DeWitte S, Schmedes S, Jamieson J, Mittnik A, Forrest S, Coombes BK, Wood JW, Earn DJD, White W, Krause J, Poinar H (2011): Targeted enrichment of ancient pathogens yielding the pPCP1 plasmid of Yersinia pestis from victims of the Black Death. PNAS 2011; published ahead of print 29 August 2011, A study published in Nature in October 2011 sequenced the genome of Y. pestis from plague victims and indicated that the strain that caused the Black Death is ancestral to most modern strains of the disease. 

DNA taken from 25 skeletons in London that died in the 14th century, have shown the plague is a strain of Y. pestis that is almost identical to that which hit Madagascar in 2013. Black Death skeletons unearthed by Crossrail project 

==Consequences==

===Death toll===
Citizens of Tournai bury plague victims.
There are no exact figures for the death toll; the rate varied widely by locality. It killed some 75 to 200 million people in Eurasia. According to medieval historian Philip Daileader in 2007:

The trend of recent research is pointing to a figure more like 4550% of the European population dying during a four-year period. There is a fair amount of geographic variation. In Mediterranean Europe, areas such as Italy, the south of France and Spain, where plague ran for about four years consecutively, it was probably closer to 7580% of the population. In Germany and England ... it was probably closer to 20%. Philip Daileader, The Late Middle Ages, audio/video course produced by The Teaching Company, (2007) ISBN 978-1-59803-345-8. 

The most widely accepted estimate for the Middle East, including Iraq, Iran and Syria, during this time, is for a death rate of about a third. The Black Death killed about 40% of Egypt's population. Egypt  Major Cities, U.S. Library of Congress Half of Paris's population of 100,000 people died. In Italy, Florence's population was reduced from 110120 thousand inhabitants in 1338 down to 50 thousand in 1351. At least 60% of Hamburg's and Bremen's population perished, and a similar percentage of Londoners may have died from the disease as well. Before 1350, there were about 170,000 settlements in Germany, and this was reduced by nearly 40,000 by 1450. In 1348, the plague spread so rapidly that before any physicians or government authorities had time to reflect upon its origins, about a third of the European population had already perished. In crowded cities, it was not uncommon for as much as 50% of the population to die. The disease bypassed some areas, and the most isolated areas were less vulnerable to contagion. Monks and priests were especially hard hit since they cared for the Black Death's victims. J. M. Bennett and C. W. Hollister, Medieval Europe: A Short History (New York: McGraw-Hill, 2006), p. 329. 

===Persecutions===

Renewed religious fervor and fanaticism bloomed in the wake of the Black Death. Some Europeans targeted "various groups such as Jews, friars, foreigners, beggars, pilgrims", David Nirenberg, Communities of Violence, 1998, ISBN 0-691-05889-X. lepers R.I. Moore The Formation of a Persecuting Society, Oxford, 1987 ISBN 0-631-17145-2 and Romani, thinking that they were to blame for the crisis. Lepers, and other individuals with skin diseases such as acne or psoriasis, were singled out and exterminated throughout Europe.

Because 14th-century healers were at a loss to explain the cause, Europeans turned to astrological forces, earthquakes, and the poisoning of wells by Jews as possible reasons for the plague's emergence. The governments of Europe had no apparent response to the crisis because no one knew its cause or how it spread. The mechanism of infection and transmission of diseases was little understood in the 14th century; many people believed only God's anger could produce such horrific displays.

There were many attacks against Jewish communities. Black Death, Jewishencyclopedia.com In August 1349, the Jewish communities of Mainz and Cologne were exterminated. In February of that same year, the citizens of Strasbourg murdered 2,000 Jews. By 1351, 60 major and 150 smaller Jewish communities were destroyed. "Jewish History 13401349". 

==Recurrence==
The Great Plague of London, in 1665, killed up to 100,000 people
The plague repeatedly returned to haunt Europe and the Mediterranean throughout the 14th to 17th centuries. "The Great Plague". Stephen Porter (2009). Amberley Publishing. p.25. ISBN 1-84868-087-2 According to Biraben, plague was present somewhere in Europe in every year between 1346 and 1671. J. N. Hays (1998). "The burdens of disease: epidemics and human response in western history.". p 58. ISBN 0-8135-2528-4 The (disease)#Second Pandemic: Black Death|Second Pandemic] was particularly widespread in the following years: 136063; 1374; 1400; 143839; 145657; 146466; 148185; 150003; 151831; 154448; 156366; 157388; 159699; 160211; 162340; 164454; and 166467. Subsequent outbreaks, though severe, marked the retreat from most of Europe (18th century) and northern Africa (19th century). "Epidemics and pandemics: their impacts on human history". J. N. Hays (2005). p.46. ISBN 1-85109-658-2 According to Geoffrey Parker, "France alone lost almost a million people to plague in the epidemic of 162831." Geoffrey Parker (2001). "Europe in crisis, 15981648". Wiley-Blackwell. p.7. ISBN 0-631-22028-3 

In England, in the absence of census figures, historians propose a range of preincident population figures from as high as 7 million to as low as 4 million in 1300, The Black Death in Egypt and England: A Comparative Study, Stuart J. Borsch, Austin: University of Texas and a postincident population figure as low as 2 million. Secondary sources such as the Cambridge History of Medieval England often contain discussions of methodology in reaching these figures that are necessary reading for anyone wishing to understand this controversial episode in more detail. By the end of 1350, the Black Death subsided, but it never really died out in England. Over the next few hundred years, further outbreaks occurred in 136162, 1369, 137983, 138993, and throughout the first half of the 15th century. An outbreak in 1471 took as much as 1015% of the population, while the death rate of the plague of 147980 could have been as high as 20%. The most general outbreaks in Tudor and Stuart England seem to have begun in 1498, 1535, 1543, 1563, 1589, 1603, 1625, and 1636, and ended with the Great Plague of London in 1665. 
Plague Riot in Moscow in 1771: During the course of the city's plague, between 50 and 100 thousand people died, comprising to of its population.

In 1466, perhaps 40,000 people died of plague in Paris. Plague, 1911 Edition of the Encyclopdia Britannica During the 16th and 17th centuries, plague visited Paris for almost one year out of every three. Vanessa Harding (2002). "The dead and the living in Paris and London, 15001670.". p.25. ISBN 0-521-81126-0 The Black Death ravaged Europe for three years before it continued on into Russia, where the disease hit somewhere once every five or six years from 1350 to 1490. Plague epidemics ravaged London in 1563, 1593, 1603, 1625, 1636, and 1665, Vanessa Harding (2002). "The dead and the living in Paris and London, 15001670.". p.24. ISBN 0-521-81126-0 reducing its population by 10 to 30% during those years. "Plague in London: spatial and temporal aspects of mortality", J. A. I. Champion, Epidemic Disease in London, Centre for Metropolitan History Working Papers Series, No. 1 (1993). Over 10% of Amsterdam's population died in 162325, and again in 163536, 1655, and 1664. Geography, climate, population, economy, society. J.P.Sommerville. There were 22 outbreaks of plague in Venice between 1361 and 1528. "Crisis and Change in the Venetian Economy in the Sixteenth and Seventeenth Centuries". Brian Pullan. (2006). p.151. ISBN 0-415-37700-5 The plague of 157677 killed 50,000 in Venice, almost a third of the population. "Medicine and society in early modern Europe". Mary Lindemann (1999). Cambridge University Press. p.41. ISBN 0-521-42354-6 Late outbreaks in central Europe included the Italian Plague of 16291631, which is associated with troop movements during the Thirty Years' War, and the Great Plague of Vienna in 1679. Over 60% of Norway's population died in 134850. The last plague outbreak ravaged Oslo in 1654. 

In the first half of the 17th century, a plague claimed some 1.7 million victims in Italy, or about 14% of the population. Karl Julius Beloch, Bevlkerungsgeschichte Italiens, volume 3, pp. 359360. In 1656, the plague killed about half of Naples' 300,000 inhabitants. More than 1.25 million deaths resulted from the extreme incidence of plague in 17th-century Spain. The Seventeenth-Century Decline, S. G. Payne, A History of Spain and Portugal The plague of 1649 probably reduced the population of Seville by half. In 170913, a plague epidemic that followed the Great Northern War (170021, Sweden v. Russia and allies) killed about 100,000 in Sweden, "Bubonic plague in early modern Russia: public health and urban disaster". John T. Alexander (2002). Oxford University Press US. p.21. ISBN 0-19-515818-0 and 300,000 in Prussia. "Armies of pestilence: the effects of pandemics on history". James Clarke & Co. (2004). p.72. ISBN 0-227-17240-X The plague killed two-thirds of the inhabitants of Helsinki, and claimed a third of Stockholm's population. "Stockholm: A Cultural History". Tony Griffiths (2009). Oxford University Press US. p.9. ISBN 0-19-538638-8 Europe's last major epidemic occurred in 1720 in Marseille. 
Worldwide distribution of plague-infected animals 1998
The Black Death ravaged much of the Islamic world. Plague was present in at least one location in the Islamic world virtually every year between 1500 and 1850. 
 Plague repeatedly struck the cities of North Africa. Algiers lost 30 to 50 thousand inhabitants to it in 162021, and again in 165457, 1665, 1691, and 174042. "Christian Slaves, Muslim Masters: White Slavery in the Mediterranean, the Barbary Coast and Italy, 15001800". Robert Davis (2004) ISBN 1-4039-4551-9. Plague remained a major event in Ottoman society until the second quarter of the 19th century. Between 1701 and 1750, thirty-seven larger and smaller epidemics were recorded in Constantinople, and an additional thirty-one between 1751 and 1800. Baghdad has suffered severely from visitations of the plague, and sometimes two-thirds of its population has been wiped out. "The Fertile Crescent, 18001914: a documentary economic history". Charles Philip Issawi (1988). Oxford University Press US. p.99. ISBN 0-19-504951-9 

===Third plague pandemic===

The Third plague pandemic (18551859) started in China in the middle of the 19th century, spreading to all inhabited continents and killing 10 million people in India alone. Infectious Diseases: Plague Through History, sciencemag.org Twelve plague outbreaks in Australia in 190025 resulted in well over , chiefly in Sydney. This led to the establishment of a Public Health Department there which undertook some leading-edge research on plague transmission from rat fleas to humans via the bacillus Yersinia pestis. Bubonic Plague comes to Sydney in 1900, University of Sydney, Sydney Medical School 

The first North American plague epidemic was the San Francisco plague of 19001904, followed by another outbreak in 190708. 

 From 1944 through 1993, 362 cases of human plague were reported in the United States; approximately 90% occurred in four western states: Arizona, California, Colorado, and New Mexico. Human Plague  United States, 19931994, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention Plague was confirmed in the United States from 9 western states during 1995. Currently, 5 to 15 people in the United States are estimated to catch the disease each yeartypically in western states. Oregon Man to Lose Fingers From Black Plague, 'Lucky' to Be Alive 

The plague bacterium could develop drug-resistance and again become a major health threat. One case of a drug-resistant form of the bacterium was found in Madagascar in 1995. Drug-resistant plague a 'major threat', say scientists, SciDev.Net. 

==See also==

* Black Death (film)
* Black Death in England
* CCR5, a human gene hypothesised to be associated with the plague
* Cronaca fiorentina, Chronicle of Florence 14th century Black Death by Baldassarre Bonaiuti
* Crisis of the Late Middle Ages
* Danse Macabre
* Death
* Four Thieves Vinegar, a popular French legend says this recipe provided immunity to the plague. 
* Globalization and disease
* Plague doctor
* Plague doctor costume
* Ring a Ring o' Roses

==References==

==Further reading==
* 
* Cantor, Norman F. (2001), In the Wake of the Plague: The Black Death and the World It Made, New York, Free Press.
* Cohn, Samuel K. Jr., (2002), The Black Death Transformed: Disease and Culture in Early Renaissance Europe, London: Arnold.
* 
* 
* Herlihy, D., (1997), The Black Death and the Transformation of the West, Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard University Press.
* 
* Scott, S., and Duncan, C. J., (2001), Biology of Plagues: Evidence from Historical Populations, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
* Shrewsbury, J. F. D., (1970), A History of Bubonic Plague in the British Isles, London: Cambridge University Press
* Twigg, G., (1984), The Black Death: A Biological Reappraisal, London: Batsford.
* 1st editions 1969.

==External links==

* 
* 
* 
* Black Death at BBC

 

 



[[Biotechnology]]

Insulin crystals

Biotechnology is the use of living systems and organisms to develop or make useful products, or "any technological application that uses biological systems, living organisms or derivatives thereof, to make or modify products or processes for specific use" (UN Convention on Biological Diversity, Art. 2). Text of the CBD. CBD.int. Retrieved on 2013-03-20. Depending on the tools and applications, it often overlaps with the (related) fields of bioengineering and biomedical engineering.

For thousands of years, humankind has used biotechnology in agriculture, food production, and medicine. "Incorporating Biotechnology into the Classroom What is Biotechnology?", from the curricula of the 'Incorporating Biotechnology into the High School Classroom through Arizona State University's BioREACH program', accessed on October 16, 2012). Public.asu.edu. Retrieved on 2013-03-20. The term itself is largely believed to have been coined in 1919 by Hungarian engineer Kroly Ereky. In the late 20th and early 21st century, biotechnology has expanded to include new and diverse sciences such as genomics, recombinant gene technologies, applied immunology, and development of pharmaceutical therapies and diagnostic tests. 

==Definitions==

The wide concept of "biotech" or "biotechnology" encompasses a wide range of procedures (and history) for modifying living organisms according to human purposes, going back to domestication of animals, cultivation of plants, and "improvements" to these through breeding programs that employ artificial selection and hybridization. Modern usage also includes genetic engineering as well as cell and tissue culture technologies. The American Chemical Society defines biotechnology as the application of biological organisms, systems, or processes by various industries to learning about the science of life and the improvement of the value of materials and organisms such as pharmaceuticals, crops, and livestock. Biotechnology. Portal.acs.org. Retrieved on 2013-03-20. In other words, biotechnology can be defined as the mere application of technical advances in life science to develop commercial products. Biotechnology also writes on the pure biological sciences (animal cell culture, biochemistry, cell biology, embryology, genetics, microbiology, and molecular biology). In many instances, it is also dependent on knowledge and methods from outside the sphere of biology including:

* bioinformatics, a new brand of computer science
* bioprocess engineering
* biorobotics
* chemical engineering

Conversely, modern biological sciences (including even concepts such as molecular ecology) are intimately entwined and heavily dependent on the methods developed through biotechnology and what is commonly thought of as the life sciences industry. Biotechnology is the research and development in the laboratory using bioinformatics for exploration, extraction, exploitation and production from any living organisms and any source of biomass by means of biochemical engineering where high value-added products could be planned (reproduced by biosynthesis, for example), forecasted, formulated, developed, manufactured and marketed for the purpose of sustainable operations (for the return from bottomless initial investment on R & D) and gaining durable patents rights (for exclusives rights for sales, and prior to this to receive national and international approval from the results on animal experiment and human experiment, especially on the pharmaceutical branch of biotechnology to prevent any undetected side-effects or safety concerns by using the products). What is biotechnology?. Europabio. Retrieved on 2013-03-20. KEY BIOTECHNOLOGY INDICATORS (December 2011). oecd.org Biotechnology policies  Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development. Oecd.org. Retrieved on 2013-03-20. 

By contrast, bioengineering is generally thought of as a related field that more heavily emphasizes higher systems approaches (not necessarily the altering or using of biological materials directly) for interfacing with and utilizing living things. Bioengineering is the application of the principles of engineering and natural sciences to tissues, cells and molecules. This can be considered as the use of knowledge from working with and manipulating biology to achieve a result that can improve functions in plants and animals. What Is Bioengineering?. Bionewsonline.com. Retrieved on 2013-03-20. Relatedly, biomedical engineering is an overlapping field that often draws upon and applies biotechnology (by various definitions), especially in certain sub-fields of biomedical and/or chemical engineering such as tissue engineering, biopharmaceutical engineering, and genetic engineering.

==History==
Brewing was an early application of biotechnology

Although not normally what first comes to mind, many forms of human-derived agriculture clearly fit the broad definition of "'using a biotechnological system to make products". Indeed, the cultivation of plants may be viewed as the earliest biotechnological enterprise.

Agriculture has been theorized to have become the dominant way of producing food since the Neolithic Revolution. Through early biotechnology, the earliest farmers selected and bred the best suited crops, having the highest yields, to produce enough food to support a growing population. As crops and fields became increasingly large and difficult to maintain, it was discovered that specific organisms and their by-products could effectively fertilize, restore nitrogen, and control pests. Throughout the history of agriculture, farmers have inadvertently altered the genetics of their crops through introducing them to new environments and breeding them with other plants  one of the first forms of biotechnology.

These processes also were included in early fermentation of beer. See Arnold, John P. (2005) . Origin and History of Beer and Brewing: From Prehistoric Times to the Beginning of Brewing Science and Technology. Cleveland, Ohio: BeerBooks. p. 34. ISBN 978-0-9662084-1-2. OCLC 71834130. These processes were introduced in early Mesopotamia, Egypt, China and India, and still use the same basic biological methods. In brewing, malted grains (containing enzymes) convert starch from grains into sugar and then adding specific yeasts to produce beer. In this process, carbohydrates in the grains were broken down into alcohols such as ethanol. Later other cultures produced the process of lactic acid fermentation which allowed the fermentation and preservation of other forms of food, such as soy sauce. Fermentation was also used in this time period to produce leavened bread. Although the process of fermentation was not fully understood until Louis Pasteur's work in 1857, it is still the first use of biotechnology to convert a food source into another form.

For thousands of years, humans have used selective breeding to improve production of crops and livestock to use them for food. In selective breeding, organisms with desirable characteristics are mated to produce offspring with the same characteristics. For example, this technique was used with corn to produce the largest and sweetest crops. 

In the early twentieth century scientists gained a greater understanding of microbiology and explored ways of manufacturing specific products. In 1917, Chaim Weizmann first used a pure microbiological culture in an industrial process, that of manufacturing corn starch using Clostridium acetobutylicum, to produce acetone, which the United Kingdom desperately needed to manufacture explosives during World War I. 

Biotechnology has also led to the development of antibiotics. In 1928, Alexander Fleming discovered the mold Penicillium. His work led to the purification of the antibiotic compound formed by the mold by Howard Florey, Ernst Boris Chain and Norman Heatley - to form what we today know as penicillin. In 1940, penicillin became available for medicinal use to treat bacterial infections in humans. 

The field of modern biotechnology is generally thought of as having been born in 1971 when Paul Berg's (Stanford) experiments in gene splicing had early success. Herbert W. Boyer (Univ. Calif. at San Francisco) and Stanley N. Cohen (Stanford) significantly advanced the new technology in 1972 by transferring genetic material into a bacterium, such that the imported material would be reproduced. The commercial viability of a biotechnology industry was significantly expanded on June 16, 1980, when the United States Supreme Court ruled that a genetically modified microorganism could be patented in the case of Diamond v. Chakrabarty. "Diamond v. Chakrabarty, 447 U.S. 303 (1980). No. 79-139." United States Supreme Court. June 16, 1980. Retrieved on May 4, 2007. Indian-born Ananda Chakrabarty, working for General Electric, had modified a bacterium (of the Pseudomonas genus) capable of breaking down crude oil, which he proposed to use in treating oil spills. (Chakrabarty's work did not involve gene manipulation but rather the transfer of entire organelles between strains of the Pseudomonas bacterium.

Revenue in the industry is expected to grow by 12.9% in 2008. Another factor influencing the biotechnology sector's success is improved intellectual property rights legislationand enforcementworldwide, as well as strengthened demand for medical and pharmaceutical products to cope with an ageing, and ailing, U.S. population. VoIP Providers And Corn Farmers Can Expect To Have Bumper Years In 2008 And Beyond, According To The Latest Research Released By Business Information Analysts At IBISWorld. Los Angeles (March 19, 2008) 

Rising demand for biofuels is expected to be good news for the biotechnology sector, with the Department of Energy estimating ethanol usage could reduce U.S. petroleum-derived fuel consumption by up to 30% by 2030. The biotechnology sector has allowed the U.S. farming industry to rapidly increase its supply of corn and soybeansthe main inputs into biofuelsby developing genetically modified seeds which are resistant to pests and drought. By boosting farm productivity, biotechnology plays a crucial role in ensuring that biofuel production targets are met. The Recession List  Top 10 Industries to Fly and Fl... (ith anincreasing share accounted for by ...), bio-medicine.org 

==Applications==
A rose plant that began as cells grown in a tissue culture

Biotechnology has applications in four major industrial areas, including health care (medical), crop production and agriculture, non food (industrial) uses of crops and other products (e.g. biodegradable plastics, vegetable oil, biofuels), and environmental uses.

For example, one application of biotechnology is the directed use of organisms for the manufacture of organic products (examples include beer and milk products). Another example is using naturally present bacteria by the mining industry in bioleaching. Biotechnology is also used to recycle, treat waste, cleanup sites contaminated by industrial activities (bioremediation), and also to produce biological weapons.

A series of derived terms have been coined to identify several branches of biotechnology; for example:
* Bioinformatics is an interdisciplinary field which addresses biological problems using computational techniques, and makes the rapid organization as well as analysis of biological data possible. The field may also be referred to as computational biology, and can be defined as, "conceptualizing biology in terms of molecules and then applying informatics techniques to understand and organize the information associated with these molecules, on a large scale." Gerstein, M. "Bioinformatics Introduction." Yale University. Retrieved on May 8, 2007. Bioinformatics plays a key role in various areas, such as functional genomics, structural genomics, and proteomics, and forms a key component in the biotechnology and pharmaceutical sector.
* Blue biotechnology is a term that has been used to describe the marine and aquatic applications of biotechnology, but its use is relatively rare.
* Green biotechnology is biotechnology applied to agricultural processes. An example would be the selection and domestication of plants via micropropagation. Another example is the designing of transgenic plants to grow under specific environments in the presence (or absence) of chemicals. One hope is that green biotechnology might produce more environmentally friendly solutions than traditional industrial agriculture. An example of this is the engineering of a plant to express a pesticide, thereby ending the need of external application of pesticides. An example of this would be Bt corn. Whether or not green biotechnology products such as this are ultimately more environmentally friendly is a topic of considerable debate.
* Red biotechnology is applied to medical processes. Some examples are the designing of organisms to produce antibiotics, and the engineering of genetic cures through genetic manipulation.
* White biotechnology, also known as industrial biotechnology, is biotechnology applied to industrial processes. An example is the designing of an organism to produce a useful chemical. Another example is the using of enzymes as industrial catalysts to either produce valuable chemicals or destroy hazardous/polluting chemicals. White biotechnology tends to consume less in resources than traditional processes used to produce industrial goods. http://www.bio-entrepreneur.net/Advance-definition-biotech.pdf}

The investment and economic output of all of these types of applied biotechnologies is termed as "bioeconomy".

===Medicine===
In medicine, modern biotechnology finds applications in areas such as pharmaceutical drug discovery and production, pharmacogenomics, and genetic testing (or genetic screening).
DNA microarray chip  some can do as many as a million blood tests at once 

Pharmacogenomics (a combination of pharmacology and genomics) is the technology that analyses how genetic makeup affects an individual's response to drugs. Ermak G., Modern Science & Future Medicine (second edition), 164 p., 2013 It deals with the influence of genetic variation on drug response in patients by correlating gene expression or single-nucleotide polymorphisms with a drug's efficacy or toxicity. By doing so, pharmacogenomics aims to develop rational means to optimize drug therapy, with respect to the patients' genotype, to ensure maximum efficacy with minimal adverse effects. Such approaches promise the advent of "personalized medicine"; in which drugs and drug combinations are optimized for each individual's unique genetic makeup. 

Computer-generated image of insulin hexamers highlighting the threefold symmetry, the zinc ions holding it together, and the histidine residues involved in zinc binding.

Biotechnology has contributed to the discovery and manufacturing of traditional small molecule pharmaceutical drugs as well as drugs that are the product of biotechnology - biopharmaceutics. Modern biotechnology can be used to manufacture existing medicines relatively easily and cheaply. The first genetically engineered products were medicines designed to treat human diseases. To cite one example, in 1978 Genentech developed synthetic humanized insulin by joining its gene with a plasmid vector inserted into the bacterium Escherichia coli. Insulin, widely used for the treatment of diabetes, was previously extracted from the pancreas of abattoir animals (cattle and/or pigs). The resulting genetically engineered bacterium enabled the production of vast quantities of synthetic human insulin at relatively low cost. U.S. Department of State International Information Programs, "Frequently Asked Questions About Biotechnology", USIS Online; available from USinfo.state.gov, accessed 13 September 2007. Cf. Biotechnology has also enabled emerging therapeutics like gene therapy. The application of biotechnology to basic science (for example through the Human Genome Project) has also dramatically improved our understanding of biology and as our scientific knowledge of normal and disease biology has increased, our ability to develop new medicines to treat previously untreatable diseases has increased as well. 

Genetic testing allows the genetic diagnosis of vulnerabilities to inherited diseases, and can also be used to determine a child's parentage (genetic mother and father) or in general a person's ancestry. In addition to studying chromosomes to the level of individual genes, genetic testing in a broader sense includes biochemical tests for the possible presence of genetic diseases, or mutant forms of genes associated with increased risk of developing genetic disorders. Genetic testing identifies changes in chromosomes, genes, or proteins. Most of the time, testing is used to find changes that are associated with inherited disorders. The results of a genetic test can confirm or rule out a suspected genetic condition or help determine a person's chance of developing or passing on a genetic disorder. As of 2011 several hundred genetic tests were in use. Since genetic testing may open up ethical or psychological problems, genetic testing is often accompanied by genetic counseling.

===Agriculture===

Genetically modified crops ("GM crops", or "biotech crops") are plants used in agriculture, the DNA of which has been modified using genetic engineering techniques. In most cases the aim is to introduce a new trait to the plant which does not occur naturally in the species. 

Examples in food crops include resistance to certain pests, Genetically Altered Potato Ok'd For Crops Lawrence Journal-World  6 May 1995 diseases, stressful environmental conditions, Paarlburg, Robert Drought Tolerant GMO Maize in Africa, Anticipating Regulatory Hurdles International Life Sciences Institute, January 2011. Retrieved 25 April 2011 resistance to chemical treatments (e.g. resistance to a herbicide Carpenter J. & Gianessi L. (1999). Herbicide tolerant soybeans: Why growers are adopting Roundup Ready varieties. AgBioForum, 2(2), 65-72. ), reduction of spoilage, or improving the nutrient profile of the crop. About Golden Rice. Irri.org. Retrieved on 2013-03-20. Examples in non-food crops include production of pharmaceutical agents, Gali Weinreb and Koby Yeshayahou for Globes May 2, 2012. FDA approves Protalix Gaucher treatment biofuels, Carrington, Damien (19 January 2012) GM microbe breakthrough paves way for large-scale seaweed farming for biofuels The Guardian. Retrieved 12 March 2012 and other industrially useful goods, as well as for bioremediation. Strange, Amy (20 September 2011) Scientists engineer plants to eat toxic pollution The Irish Times. Retrieved 20 September 2011 

Farmers have widely adopted GM technology. Between 1996 and 2011, the total surface area of land cultivated with GM crops had increased by a factor of 94, from 17000 km2 to 1,600,000 km2 (395 million acres). 10% of the world's crop lands were planted with GM crops in 2010. As of 2011, 11 different transgenic crops were grown commercially on 395 million acres (160 million hectares) in 29 countries such as the USA, Brazil, Argentina, India, Canada, China, Paraguay, Pakistan, South Africa, Uruguay, Bolivia, Australia, Philippines, Myanmar, Burkina Faso, Mexico and Spain. 

Genetically modified foods are foods produced from organisms that have had specific changes introduced into their DNA using the methods of genetic engineering. These techniques have allowed for the introduction of new crop traits as well as a far greater control over a food's genetic structure than previously afforded by methods such as selective breeding and mutation breeding. GM Science Review First Report, Prepared by the UK GM Science Review panel (July 2003). Chairman Professor Sir David King, Chief Scientific Advisor to the UK Government, P 9 Commercial sale of genetically modified foods began in 1994, when Calgene first marketed its Flavr Savr delayed ripening tomato. To date most genetic modification of foods have primarily focused on cash crops in high demand by farmers such as soybean, corn, canola, and cotton seed oil. These have been engineered for resistance to pathogens and herbicides and better nutrient profiles. GM livestock have also been experimentally developed, although as of November 2013 none are currently on the market. 

There is broad scientific consensus that food on the market derived from GM crops poses no greater risk to human health than conventional food. American Association for the Advancement of Science (AAAS), Board of Directors (2012). Legally Mandating GM Food Labels Could Mislead and Falsely Alarm Consumers American Medical Association (2012). Report 2 of the Council on Science and Public Health: Labeling of Bioengineered Foods "Bioengineered foods have been consumed for close to 20 years, and during that time, no overt consequences on human health have been reported and/or substantiated in the peer-reviewed literature." (first page) FAO, 2004. State of Food and Agriculture 20032004. Agricultural Biotechnology: Meeting the Needs of the Poor. Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, Rome. "Currently available transgenic crops and foods derived from them have been judged safe to eat and the methods used to test their safety have been deemed appropriate. These conclusions represent the consensus of the scientific evidence surveyed by the ICSU (2003) and they are consistent with the views of the World Health Organization (WHO, 2002). These foods have been assessed for increased risks to human health by several national regulatory authorities (inter alia, Argentina, Brazil, Canada, China, the United Kingdom and the United States) using their national food safety procedures (ICSU). To date no verifiable untoward toxic or nutritionally deleterious effects resulting from the consumption of foods derived from genetically modified crops have been discovered anywhere in the world (GM Science Review Panel). Many millions of people have consumed foods derived from GM plants - mainly maize, soybean and oilseed rape - without any observed adverse effects (ICSU)." GM crops also provide a number of ecological benefits, if not used in excess. Andrew Pollack for the New York Times. April 13, 2010 Study Says Overuse Threatens Gains From Modified Crops However, opponents have objected to GM crops per se on several grounds, including environmental concerns, whether food produced from GM crops is safe, whether GM crops are needed to address the world's food needs, and economic concerns raised by the fact these organisms are subject to intellectual property law.

===Industrial biotechnology===
An industrial biotechnology plant for the production of modified wheat starch and gluten
Industrial biotechnology (known mainly in Europe as white biotechnology) is the application of biotechnology for industrial purposes, including industrial fermentation. It includes the practice of using cells such as micro-organisms, or components of cells like enzymes, to generate industrially useful products in sectors such as chemicals, food and feed, detergents, paper and pulp, textiles and biofuels. Industrial Biotechnology and Biomass Utilisation In doing so, biotechnology uses renewable raw materials and may contribute to lowering greenhouse gas emissions and moving away from a petrochemical-based economy. Industrial biotechnology, A powerful, innovative technology to mitigate climate change 

===Regulation===

The regulation of genetic engineering concerns the approaches taken by governments to assess and manage the risks associated with the use of genetic engineering technology and the development and release of genetically modified organisms (GMO), including genetically modified crops and genetically modified fish. There are differences in the regulation of GMOs between countries, with some of the most marked differences occurring between the USA and Europe. Regulation varies in a given country depending on the intended use of the products of the genetic engineering. For example, a crop not intended for food use is generally not reviewed by authorities responsible for food safety. PotatoPro The European Union differentiates between approval for cultivation within the EU and approval for import and processing. While only a few GMOs have been approved for cultivation in the EU a number of GMOs have been approved for import and processing. Wesseler, J. and N. Kalaitzandonakes (2011): Present and Future EU GMO policy. In Arie Oskam, Gerrit Meesters and Huib Silvis (eds.), EU Policy for Agriculture, Food and Rural Areas. Second Edition, pp. 23323  23-332. Wageningen: Wageningen Academic Publishers The cultivation of GMOs has triggered a debate about coexistence of GM and nonGM crops. Depending on the coexistence regulations incentives for cultivation of GM crops differ. Beckmann, V., C. Soregaroli, J. Wesseler (2011): Coexistence of genetically modified (GM) and non-modified (non GM) crops: Are the two main property rights regimes equivalent with respect to the coexistence value? In "Genetically modified food and global welfare" edited by Colin Carter, GianCarlo Moschini and Ian Sheldon, pp 201224. Volume 10 in Frontiers of Economics and Globalization Series. Bingley, UK: Emerald Group Publishing 

==Education==
In 1988, after prompting from the United States Congress, the National Institute of General Medical Sciences (National Institutes of Health) (NIGMS) instituted a funding mechanism for biotechnology training. Universities nationwide compete for these funds to establish Biotechnology Training Programs (BTPs). Each successful application is generally funded for five years then must be competitively renewed. Graduate students in turn compete for acceptance into a BTP; if accepted, then stipend, tuition and health insurance support is provided for two or three years during the course of their Ph.D. thesis work. Nineteen institutions offer NIGMS supported BTPs. Nigms.Nih.Gov. Nigms.Nih.Gov. Retrieved on 2011-09-05. Biotechnology training is also offered at the undergraduate level and in community colleges.

==See also==

* Bioculture
* Bioeconomics (biophysical)
* Bioengineering
* Biomimetics
* Bionic architecture
* Biotechnology industrial park
* Competitions and prizes in biotechnology
* Genetic Engineering
* Green Revolution
* History of Biotechnology
* List of biotechnology articles
* List of biotechnology companies
* List of emerging biotechnologies
* Metabolic engineering
* NASDAQ Biotechnology Index
* Outline of biotechnology
* Pharmaceutical chemistry
* Pharmaceutical companies
* SWORD-financing
* Timeline of biotechnology
* Virotherapy

==References and notes==

==Further reading==
* 
* 
* Viviana Zelizer Best Paper in Economic Sociology Award (20052006), American Sociological Association.
* 
* Agricultural Biotechnology: An Economic Perspective by the USDA Economic Research Service. A 1994 publication from the Agricultural Economic Report.

==External links==

* University Students Society Of Biotechnology
* The International Forum on Biotechnology
* Foundation for Biotechnology Awareness and Education,
* A report on Agricultural Biotechnology focusing on the impacts of "Green" Biotechnology with a special emphasis on economic aspects. fao.org.
* US Economic Benefits of Biotechnology to Business and Society NOAA Economics, economics.noaa.gov
* Database of the Safety and Benefits of Biotechnology  a database of peer-reviewed scientific papers and the safety and benefits of biotechnology.
*What is Biotechnology? - A curated collection of resources about the people, places and technologies that have enabled biotechnology to transform the world we live in today

 

[[Battle of Poitiers]]

The Battle of Poitiers was a major battle of the Hundred Years' War between England and France. The battle occurred on 19 September 1356 near Poitiers, France. Preceded by the Battle of Crcy in 1346, and followed by the Battle of Agincourt in 1415, it was the second of the three great English victories of the war.

== Background ==

Edward, Prince of Wales (later known as the Black Prince), the eldest son of King Edward III, began a great chevauche on 8 August 1356. He conducted many scorched earth raids William W. Lace, The Hundred Years' War ISBN 978-1560062332 1/1994 northwards from the English base in Aquitaine, in an effort to bolster his troops in central France, as well as to raid and ravage the countryside. His forces met little resistance, burning numerous towns to the ground and living off the land, until they reached the Loire River at Tours. They were unable to take the castle or burn the town due to a heavy downpour. This delay allowed John II, King of France, to attempt to catch Edward's army. The King, who had been besieging Breteuil in Normandy, arranged the bulk of his army at Chartres to the north of the besieged Tours, dismissing approximately 15,00020,000 of his lower-quality infantry to increase the speed of his forces. Jonathan Sumption, The Hundred Years War: Vol. 2: Trial by Fire (London: Faber, 2001), pp. 223, 227228 

== Negotiations prior to the Battle of Poitiers ==
There were negotiations before the battle of Poitiers that are recorded in the writings of the life of Sir John Chandos. He records the final moments of a meeting of both sides in an effort to avoid the bloody conflict at Poitiers. The extraordinary narrative occurred just before that battle and reads as follows:

== Nobles and men-at-arms who fought with the Black Prince ==
Jean Froissart states these men fought at Poitiers: Earl of Warwick, the Earl of Suffolk; Earl of Salisbury, Earl of Oxford, Raynold Cobham, Lord Spencer, Lord James Audley, Lord Peter his brother, Lord Berkeley, Lord Basset, Lord Warin, Lord Delaware, Lord Manne, Lord Willoughby, Lord Bartholomew de Burghersh, Lord of Felton, Lord Richard of Pembroke, Lord Stephen of Cosington; Lord Bradetane and other Englishmen; Lord of Pommiers from Gascon, Lord of Languiran, the captal of Buch, Lord John the 69th of Caumont, Lord de Lesparre, Lord of Rauzan, Lord of Condon, Lord of Montferrand, the Lord of Landiras, Lord Soudic of Latrau and other (men-at-arms); from Hainowes, Lord Eustace d'Aubrecicourt; Lord John of Ghistelles, and two other strangers, Lord Daniel Pasele and Lord Denis of Amposta, a fortress in Catalonia. John Bourchier; G. C. Macaulay, Chronicles of Froissart, New York: Macmillan and Co., Ltd., 1948, p. 123 Edward le Despencer, 1st Baron le Despencer also fought at Poitiers under The Black Prince. David Nicolle, Graham Turner, Poitiers 1356: The Capture of a King (U.K. Osprey Publishing, 2004), p. 10 Sir Thomas Felton fought not only at Poitiers but also at the Battle of Crcy. 
One of the chief commanders at both Crcy and Poitiers was John de Vere, Earl of Oxford, mentioned above. Edward Maunde Thompson, Chronicle of Geoffrey le Baker, (Oxford at the Clarendon Press 1889) p. 248 

Another account states that John of Ghistelles perished at the Battle of Crcy.

== Nobles and men-at-arms who fought with King Jean II at, or just prior to, the battle ==
The Battle of Poitiers (1356) Eugne Delacroix
Froissart describes, with less specificity in this passage, some of the nobles that were assembled at, or just prior to the Battle: The Englishmen were coasted by certain expert knights of France, who always made report to the king what the Englishmen did. The king came to the Haye in Touraine and his men had passed the river of Loire, some at the bridge of Orlans and some at Meung, at Saumur, at Blois, and at Tours and other places: they were in number a twenty thousand men of arms beside other. He estimates there were a twenty-six dukes and earls (Counts) and more than sixscore banners, and the four sons of the king, Duke Charles of Normandy, the Duke Louis, the Duke of Anjou, and John, Duke of Berry, and Lord Philip. John Bourchier; G. C. Macaulay, Chronicles of Froissart, (New York Macmillan and Co., Ltd. 1948), p. 120 

The French army also included a contingent of Scots commanded by Sir William Douglas. William F. Skene, John of Forduns Chronicle of the Scottish Nation, (Edinburgh Edmonston and Douglas 1872), p. 365 Douglas fought in the King's own Battle, but when the fight seemed over Douglas was dragged by his men from the melee. Froissart states that "... the Earl Douglas of Scotland, who fought a season valiantly, but when he saw the discomfiture he departed and saved himself; for in no wise would he be taken by the Englishmen, he would rather there be slain". John Bourchier; G. C. Macaulay, Chronicles of Froissart, (New York Macmillan and Co., Ltd. 1948), p. 126 

Others who were either killed or captured at the actual Battle were as follows: King Jean II; Prince Philip (youngest son and progenitor of the House of Valois-Burgundy), Geoffroi de Charny, carrier of the Oriflamme, Peter I, Duke of Bourbon, Walter VI, Count of Brienne and Constable of France, Jean de Clermont, Marshal of France, Arnoul d'Audrehem, the Count of Eu, the Count of Marche and Ponthieu Jacques de Bourbon taken prisoner at the Battle and died 1361, the Count of tampes, the Count of Tancarville, the Count of Dammartin, the Count of Joinville, Guillaume de Melun, Archbishop of Sens. John Bourchier; G. C. Macaulay, Chronicles of Froissart, (New York Macmillan and Co., Ltd. 1948), pp. 104106 Edward Maunde Thompson, Chronicle of Geoffrey le Baker, (Oxford at the Clarendon Press 1889) p. 297 

== The battle ==
At the beginning of the battle, the English removed their baggage train leading the French to think they were about to retreat which provoked a hasty charge by the French knights against the archers. William L. Urban, Medieval Mercenaries: The Business of War (London: Greenhill Books, 2006), p. 99 According to Froissart, the English attacked the enemy, especially the horses, with a shower of arrows. Geoffrey the Baker writes that the French armour was invulnerable to the English arrows, that the arrowheads either skidded off the armour or shattered on impact. Given the following actions of the archers, it seems likely Baker was correct. The armour on the horses was weaker on the sides and back, so the archers moved to the sides of the cavalry and shot the horses in the flanks. This was a popular method of stopping a cavalry charge, as a falling horse often destroyed the cohesion of the enemy's line. The results were devastating. D. Green, The Battle of Poitiers 1356, (Tempus Publishing, Charleston, S.C., 2002) Edward Maunde Thompson, Chronicle of Geoffrey le Baker, (Oxford at the Clarendon Press 1889) p. 304 The Dauphin attacked Salisbury and pressed his advance in spite of heavy shot by the English archers and complications of running into the retreating vanguard of Clermont's force. Green suggests that the Dauphin had thousands of troops with him in this phase of the attack. He advanced to the English lines but ultimately fell back. The French were unable to penetrate the protective hedge the English were using. This phase of the attack lasted about two hours. Battle of Poitiers 

This cavalry attack was followed by infantry attack. The Dauphin's infantry engaged in heavy fighting, but withdrew to regroup. The next wave of infantry under Orlans, seeing that the Dauphin's men were not attacking, turned back and panicked. This stranded the forces led by the King himself. This was a formidable fighting force, and the English archers were running very low on arrows; the archers joined the infantry in the fight and some of both groups mounted horses to form an improvised cavalry.

At about this time, King John sent two sons from the battlefield. His youngest son, Philip, stayed with him and fought at his side in the final phase of the battle. When the Dauphin and other sons withdrew, the duke of Orlans also withdrew. Combat was hard, but the Black Prince still had a mobile reserve hidden in the woods, commanded by Jean de Grailly, the Captal de Buch; which was able to circle around and attack the French in the flank and rear. The French were fearful of encirclement and attempted to flee. King John was captured with his immediate entourage only after a memorable resistance. Edward Maunde Thompson, Chronicle of Geoffrey le Baker, (Oxford at the Clarendon Press 1889) p. 308 

Amongst the notable captured or killed according to Froissart were:
* King Jean II of France, captured.
* Prince Philip, the King's youngest son and progenitor of the House of Valois-Burgundy, captured
* Peter I, Duke of Bourbon, killed.
* Walter VI, Count of Brienne and Constable of France, killed.
* Jean de Clermont, Marshal of France, killed
* Arnoul d'Audrehem, Marshal of France, captured.
* The Count of Eu, wounded and captured.
* The Count of Marche and Ponthieu, captured.
* The Count of tampes, captured.
* The Count of Tancarville, captured.
* The Count of Dammartin, captured.
* The Count of Joinville, captured.
* Guillaume de Melun, Archbishop of Sens, captured
* Geoffroi de Charny, carrier of the Oriflamme, killed.

== The capture of the French king ==
Froissart again gives us a vivid description of the capture of King Jean II and his youngest son in this passage: 

== Aftermath of the battle ==
Jean II, the Good, being captured.
As Edward, the Black Prince, wrote shortly afterward in a letter to the people of London:

See also Ransom of King John II of France.

== Aftermath in France ==

Jean de Venette, a Carmelite friar and medieval chronicler vividly describes the chaos in France which he states he himself witnessed, after the time of this Battle. Jean Birdsall, Richard A. Newhall, The Chronicles of Jean de Venette (Columbia University Press 1953) p. 1 He states: Jean is referring here not only to the French Nobles, but to the Companies who also plundered the peasants and Churches. Jean Birdsall, Richard A. Newhall, The Chronicles of Jean de Venette (Columbia University Press 1953) 1356 

== References ==

== Sources ==
*Belloc, Hilaire (1913). Poitiers, London: H. Rees. Via Internet Archive.
*
*
*
*

== Further reading ==
*Cornwell, Bernard: 1356, HarperCollins, 2012. ISBN 978-0007478200.
* Christian Cameron, The Ill-Made Knight, Orion, 2013.

== External links ==

*The Chandos Herald: Life of the Black Prince includes a detailed account of the Battle of Poitiers.
* Froissart: The Chronicles of Poitiers (eBook) including "The Battle of Poitiers" in Charles W. Elliot (ed.): Chronicle and Romance: Froissart, Malory, Holinshed, 1910, The Harvard Classics. ISBN 9780766181885.
*On The Hundred Years War, a primary source written by Jean Froissart
*Great Battles: The Battle of Poitiers (myArmoury.com article)

Poitiers 1356



[[Backbone cabal]]

The backbone cabal was an informal organization of large-site administrators of the worldwide distributed newsgroup-based discussion system Usenet. It existed from about 1983 at least into the 2000s.

The cabal was created in an effort to facilitate reliable propagation of new Usenet posts: While in the 1970s and 1980s many news servers only operated during night time to save on the cost of long distance communication, servers of the backbone cabal were available 24 hours a day. The administrators of these servers gained sufficient influence in the otherwise anarchic Usenet community to be able to push through controversial changes, for instance the Great Renaming of Usenet newsgroups during the 1980s.

== History ==
As Usenet has few technologically or legally enforced hierarchies, just about the only ones that formed were social hierarchies. People acquired power through persuasion, exerted both publicly and privately, public debate, force of will (often via aggressive flames), garnering authority and respect by spending much time and effort contributing to the community (by being a maintainer of a FAQ, for example; see also Kibo, etc.).

Credit for organizing the backbone about 1983 is commonly attributed to Gene "Spaf" Spafford, The Great Renaming FAQ although it is also claimed by Mary Ann Horton. Mary Ann Horton's Resum Other prominent members of the cabal were Brian Reid, Richard Sexton, Chuq von Rospach, Neil Crellin and Rick Adams.

== In Internet culture ==
During most of its existence, the cabal (sometimes capitalized) steadfastly denied its own existence; those involved would often respond "There is no Cabal" (sometimes abbreviated as "TINC"), whenever the existence or activities of the group were speculated on in public. It is sometimes used humorously to dispel cabal-like organizational conspiracy theories, or as an ironic statement, indicating one who knows the existence of "the cabal" will invariably deny there is one.

This belief became a model for various conspiracy theories about various Cabals with dark nefarious objectives beginning with taking over Usenet or the Internet. Spoofs include the "Eric Conspiracy" of moustachioed hackers named "Eric"; ex-members of the P.H.I.R.M.; and the Lumber Cartel putatively funding anti-spam efforts to support the paper industry.

The result of this policy was an aura of mystery, even a decade after the cabal mailing list disbanded in late 1988 following an internal fight. 

== References ==
*alt= This article incorporates text from the corresponding entry in the Jargon File, which is in the public domain according to its Introduction.

==Further reading==
# Henry Edward Hardy, 1993. The Usenet System, ITCA Teleconferencing Yearbook 1993, ITCA Research Committee, International Teleconferencing Association, Washington, DC. pp 140151, esp. subheading "The Great Renaming" and "The Breaking of the Backbone Cartel".

==External links==
* Jargon File entry
* Cabal Conspiracy FAQ
* Lumber Cartel
* Entry for "TINC" at the Jargon File
* alt.conspiracy.usenet-cabal FAQ on the Cabal and TINC
* The Eric Conspiracy



[[Bongo (antelope)]]

The bongo (Tragelaphus eurycerus) is a herbivorous, mostly nocturnal forest ungulate; it is among the largest of the African forest antelope species.

Bongos are characterised by a striking reddish-brown coat, black and white markings, white-yellow stripes and long slightly spiralled horns. Indeed, bongos are the only tragelaphid in which both sexes have horns. They have a complex social interaction and are found in African dense forest mosaics.

The western or lowland bongo, T. e. eurycerus, faces an ongoing population decline, and the IUCN Antelope Specialist Group considers it to be Near Threatened on the conservation status scale.

The eastern or mountain bongo, T. e. isaaci, of Kenya, has a coat even more vibrant than that of T. e. eurycerus. The mountain bongo is only found in the wild in one remote region of central Kenya. This bongo is classified by the IUCN Antelope Specialist Group as Critically Endangered, with more specimens in captivity than in the wild.

In 2000, the Association of Zoos and Aquariums in the USA (AZA) upgraded the bongo to a Species Survival Plan participant and in 2006 named the Bongo Restoration to Mount Kenya Project to its list of the Top Ten Wildlife Conservation Success Stories of the year. However, in 2013, it seems, these successes have been negated with reports of possibly only 100 mountain bongos left in the wild due to logging and poaching.

==Taxonomy==
The bongo belongs to the genus Tragelaphus, which includes the sitatunga (T. spekeii), the nyala (T. angasii), the bushbuck (T. scriptus), the mountain nyala (T. buxtoni), the lesser kudu (T. imberbis), and the greater kudu (T. strepsiceros).

Bongos are further classified into two subspecies: T. e. eurycerus, the lowland or western bongo, and the far rarer T. e. isaaci, the mountain or eastern bongo, restricted to northeastern Central Africa. The eastern bongo is larger and heavier than the western bongo. Two other subspecies are described from West and Central Africa, but taxonomic clarification is required. They have been observed to live up to 19 years. Spinage, C.A. (1986) The Natural History of Antelopes. New York: Facts on File Publications. 

The generic name Tragelaphus is derived from the Greek words trago (a male goat) and elaphos (a deer), in combination referring to "an antelope". The specific name eurycerus originated from the fusion of eurus (broad, widespread) and keras (an animal's horn). "Bongo" is derived from a West African native name.

==Distribution and habitat==
Bongos are found in dense tropical jungles with dense undergrowth up to an altitude of 4,000 meters (12,800 ft) in Central Africa, with isolated populations in Kenya, and these West African countries: Angola, Benin, Burkina Faso, Cameroon, the Central African Republic, the Republic of the Congo, the Democratic Republic of Congo, the Ivory Coast, Equatorial Guinea, Ethiopia, Gabon, Ghana, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Kenya, Liberia, Mali, Niger, Sierra Leone, Sudan, Togo, and Uganda (regionally extinct, IUCN, 2002).
A bongo drinks from a swamp.
Historically, bongos occurred in three disjunct parts of Africa: East, Central and West. Today, all three populations ranges have shrunk in size due to habitat loss for agriculture and uncontrolled timber cutting, as well as hunting for meat.

Bongos favour disturbed forest mosaics that provide fresh, low-level green vegetation. Such habitats may be promoted by heavy browsing by elephants, fires, flooding, tree-felling (natural or by logging), and fallowing. Mass bamboo die-off provides ideal habitat in East Africa. They can live in bamboo forests.

==Appearance==
Bongos are one of the largest of the forest antelopes. In addition to the deep chestnut colour of their coats, they have bright white stripes on their sides to help camouflage them from their enemies.

Adults of both sexes are similar in size. Adult height is about 1.1 to at the shoulder and length is 2.15 to, including a tail of 45 -. Females weigh around 150 , while males weigh about 220 . Its large size puts it as the third-largest in the Bovidae tribe of Strepsicerotini, behind both the common and greater elands by about 300 kg, and above the greater kudu by about 40 kg. 

Both sexes have heavy spiral horns; those of the male are longer and more massive. All bongos in captivity are from the isolated Aberdare Mountains of central Kenya.

===Coat and body===
The side facial patination of an eastern bongo 
The bongo sports a bright auburn or chestnut coat, with the neck, chest, and legs generally darker than the rest of the body. Coats of male bongos become darker and buffy as they age until they reach a dark mahogany-brown colour. Coats of female bongos are usually more brightly coloured than those of males.

The pigmentation in the coat rubs off quite easily; anecdotal reports suggest rain running off a bongo may be tinted red with pigment. The smooth coat is marked with 1015 vertical white-yellow stripes, spread along the back from the base of the neck to the rump. The number of stripes on each side is rarely the same. It also has a short, bristly, and vertical brown ridge of hair along the spine from the shoulder to the rump; the white stripes run into this ridge.

A white chevron appears between the eyes, and two large white spots grace each cheek. Another white chevron occurs where the neck meets the chest. The large ears are to sharpen hearing, and the distinctive coloration may help bongos identify one another in their dark forest habitats. Bongos have no special secretion glands, so rely less on scent to find one another than do other similar antelopes. The lips of a bongo are white, topped with a black muzzle.

===Horns===
A western bongo's horns
Bongos have two heavy and slightly spiralled horns that slope over their backs, and like in many other antelope species, both male and female bongos have horns. Bongos are the only tragelaphids in which both sexes have horns. The horns of bongos are in the form of a lyre and bear a resemblance to those of the related antelope species of nyalas, sitatungas, bushbucks, kudus and elands.

Unlike deer, which have branched antlers shed annually, bongos and other antelopes have pointed horns they keep throughout their lives. Males have massive backswept horns, while females have smaller, thinner, and more parallel horns. The size of the horns range between 75 and 99 cm (3039 in). The horns twist once.

Like all other horns of antelopes, the core of a bongo's horn is hollow and the outer layer of the horn is made of keratin, the same material that makes up human fingernails, toenails. and hair. The bongo runs gracefully and at full speed through even the thickest tangles of lianas, laying its heavy spiralled horns on its back so the brush cannot impede its flight. Bongos are hunted for their horns by humans. Walther, F. R. (1990) "Spiral-horned antelopes". In Grzimek's Encyclopedia of Mammals. S. P. Parker (ed.). New York: McGraw-Hill. Volume 5, pp. 344359. 

==Social organization and behavior==
This female eastern bongo presents her hindquarters while looking over her shoulder to check for threats at Mt. Kenya Wildlife Conservancy.
Like other forest ungulates, bongos are seldom seen in large groups. Males, called bulls, tend to be solitary, while females with young live in groups of six to eight. Bongos have seldom been seen in herds of more than 20. Gestation is about 285 days (9.5 months), with one young per birth, and weaning occurs at six months. Sexual maturity is reached at 2427 months. The preferred habitat of this species is so dense and difficult to operate in, few Europeans or Americans observed this species until the 1960s.
As young males mature and leave their maternal groups, they most often remain solitary, although rarely they join an older male. Adult males of similar size/age tend to avoid one another. Occasionally, they meet and spar with their horns in a ritualised manner and rarely serious fights take place. However, such fights are usually discouraged by visual displays, in which the males bulge their necks, roll their eyes, and hold their horns in a vertical position while slowly pacing back and forth in front of the other male. They seek out females only during mating time. Estes, Richard D. (1991) The Behavior Guide to African Mammals: Including Hoofed Mammals, Carnivores, Primates. Berkeley and Los Angeles: University of California Press. When they are with a herd of females, males do not coerce them or try to restrict their movements as do some other antelopes.

Although mostly nocturnal, they are occasionally active during the day. However, like deer, bongos may exhibit crepuscular behaviour. Bongos are both timid and easily frightened; after a scare, a bongo moves away at considerable speed, even through dense undergrowth. They seek cover, where they stand still and alert, facing away from the disturbance and turning their heads from time to time to check on the situation. The bongo's hindquarters are less conspicuous than the forequarters, and from this position the animal can quickly flee.

When in distress, the bongo emits a bleat. It uses a limited number of vocalisations, mostly grunts and snorts; females have a weak mooing contact-call for their young. Females prefer to use traditional calving grounds restricted to certain areas, while newborn calves lie in hiding for a week or more, receiving short visits by the mother to suckle. Estes, Richard (1993) The Safari Companion. Vermont: Chelsea Green Publishing Co.. 

The calves grow rapidly and can soon accompany their mothers in the nursery herds. Their horns grow rapidly and begin to show in 3.5 months. They are weaned after six months and reach sexual maturity at about 20 months.

==Diet==
A male bongo eating grass at Louisville Zoo
Like many forest ungulates, bongos are herbivorous browsers and feed on tree/bush leaves, bushes, vines, bark and pith of rotting trees, grasses/herbs, roots, cereals, shrubs, and fruits.

Bongos require salt in their diets, and are known to regularly visit natural salt licks. Examination of bongo feces revealed the charcoal from trees burnt by lightning is consumed. This behavior is believed to be a means of getting salts and minerals into their diets. This behavior has also been reported in the okapi. Another similarity to the okapi, though the bongo is unrelated, is bongo has a long prehensile tongue which it uses to grasp grasses and leaves.

Suitable habitats for bongos must have permanent water available. Nowak, Ronald (1991) M. Walker's Mammals of the World 5th ed. Vol. II. Baltimore: The Johns Hopkins University Press A large animal, the bongo requires an ample amount of food, and is restricted to areas with abundant year-round growth of herbs and low shrubs. 

==Population and conservation==
Few estimates of population density are available. Assuming average population densities of 0.25 animals per km2 in regions where it is known to be common or abundant, and 0.02 per km2 elsewhere, and with a total area of occupancy of 327,000 km2, a total population estimate of around 28,000 is suggested. Only about 60% are in protected areas, suggesting the actual numbers of the lowland subspecies may only be in the low tens of thousands. In Kenya, their numbers have declined significantly and on Mt. Kenya, they were extirpated within the last decade due to illegal hunting with dogs. Although information on their status in the wild is lacking, lowland bongos are not presently considered endangered.

Bongos are susceptible to diseases such as rinderpest, which almost exterminated the species the 1890s. Tragelaphus eurycerus may suffer from goitre. Over the course of the disease, the thyroid glands greatly enlarge (up to 10 x 20 cm) and may become polycystic. Pathogenesis of goiter in the bongo may reflect a mixture of genetic predisposition coupled with environmental factors, including a period of exposure to a goitrogen. Leopards and spotted hyenas are the primary natural predators (lions are seldom encountered due to differing habitat preferences); pythons sometimes eat bongo calves. Humans prey on them for their pelts, horns, and meat, with the species being a common local source for "bush meat". Wilson, D. E. and Reeder, D. M. (eds.) (1993) Mammal Species of the World 2nd ed. Washington: Smithsonian Institution Press Bongo populations have been greatly reduced by hunting, poaching, and animal trapping, although some bongo refuges exist.

Although bongos are quite easy for humans to catch using snares, many people native to the bongos' habitat believed that if they ate or touched bongo, they would have spasms similar to epileptic seizures. Because of this superstition, bongos were less harmed in their native ranges than expected. However, these taboos are said no longer to exist, which may account for increased hunting by humans in recent times.

===Zoo programmes===
Eastern bongo at Edinburgh Zoo 
An international studbook is maintained to help manage animals held in captivity. Because of its bright colour, it is very popular in zoos and private collections. In North America, over 400 individuals are thought to be held, a population that probably exceeds that of the mountain bongo in the wild.

In 2000, the Association of Zoos and Aquariums (AZA) upgraded the bongo to a Species Survival Plan participant, which works to improve the genetic diversity of managed animal populations. The target population for participating zoos and private collections in North America is 250 animals. Through the efforts of zoos in North America, a reintroduction to the population in Kenya is being developed. 

At least one collaborative effort for reintroduction between North American wildlife facilities has already been carried out. In 2004, 18 eastern bongos born in North American zoos gathered at White Oak Conservation in Yulee, Florida for release in Kenya. White Oak staff members traveled with the bongos to a Mt. Kenya holding facility, where they stayed until being reintroduced. 

===Conservation===
In the last few decades, a rapid decline in the numbers of wild mountain bongo has occurred due to poaching and human pressure on their habitat, with local extinctions reported in Cherangani and Chepalungu hills, Kenya.

The Bongo Surveillance Programme, working alongside the Kenya Wildlife Service, have recorded photos of bongos at remote salt licks in the Aberdare Forests using camera traps, and, by analyzing DNA extracted from dung, have confirmed the presence of bongo in Mount Kenya, Eburru and Mau forests. The programme estimate as few as 140 animals left in the wild  spread across four isolated populations. Whilst captive breeding programmes can be viewed as having been successful in ensuring survival of this species in Europe and North America, the situation in the wild has been less promising. Evidence exists of bongo surviving in Kenya. However, these populations are believed to be small, fragmented, and vulnerable to extinction.

Animal populations with impoverished genetic diversity are inherently less able to adapt to changes in their environments (such as climate change, disease outbreaks, habitat change, etc.). The isolation of the four remaining small bongo populations, which themselves would appear to be in decline, means a substantial amount of genetic material is lost each generation. Whilst the population remains small, the impact of transfers will be greater, so the establishment of a "metapopulation management plan" occurs concurrently with conservation initiatives to enhance in situ population growth, and this initiative is both urgent and fundamental to the future survival of mountain bongo in the wild.

The western/lowland bongo faces an ongoing population decline as habitat destruction and hunting pressures increase with the relentless expansion of human settlement. Its long-term survival will only be assured in areas which receive active protection and management. At present, such areas comprise about 30,000 km2, and several are in countries where political stability is fragile. So, a realistic possibility exists whereby its status could decline to Threatened in the near future.

As the largest and most spectacular forest antelope, the western/lowland bongo is both an important flagship species for protected areas such as national parks, and a major trophy species which has been taken in increasing numbers in Central Africa by sport hunters during the 1990s. Both of these factors are strong incentives to provide effective protection and management of populations. Institute of Applied Ecology (1998). "Tragelaphus eurycerus". In African Mammals Databank  A Databank for the Conservation and Management of the African Mammals Vol 1 and 2. Bruxelles: European Commission Directorate 

A young mountain bongo grazes

Trophy hunting has the potential to provide economic justification for the preservation of larger areas of bongo habitat than national parks, especially in remote regions of Central Africa, where possibilities for commercially successful tourism are very limited. 

The eastern/mountain bongos survival in the wild is dependent on more effective protection of the surviving remnant populations in Kenya. If this does not occur, it will eventually become extinct in the wild. The existence of a healthy captive population of this subspecies offers the potential for its reintroduction. IUCN (International Union for Conservation of Nature and Natural Resources). 2002. IUCN Red List of Threatened Species 

===Groups supporting bongo conservation in Kenya===
Four bongo calves photographed here with a "nanny": All will be released into the wild near Mount Kenya.
In 2004, Dr. Jake Veasey; the head of the Department of Animal Management and Conservation at Woburn Safari Park and a member of the European Association of Zoos and Aquariums Population Management Advisory Group, with the assistance of Lindsay Banks, took over responsibility for the management and coordination of the European Endangered Species Programme for the eastern bongo. This includes some 250 animals across Europe and the Middle East.

Along with the Rothschild giraffe, the eastern bongo is arguably one of the most threatened large mammals in Africa, with recent estimates numbering less than 140 animals, below a minimum sustainable viable population. The situation is exacerbated because these animals are spread across four isolated populations. Whilst the bongo endangered species program can be viewed as having been successful in ensuring survival of this species in Europe, it has not yet become actively involved in the conservation of this species in the wild in a coordinated fashion. The plan is to engage in conservation activities in Kenya to assist in reversing the decline of the eastern bongo populations and genetic diversity in Africa, and in particular, applying population management expertise to help ensure the persistence of genetic diversity in the free ranging wild populations.

A baby eastern bongo at Louisville Zoo in Kentucky
To illustrate significance of genetic diversity loss, assume the average metapopulation size is 35 animals based on 140 animals spread across four populations (140/4=35). Assuming stable populations, these populations will lose 8% of their genetic diversity every decade. By managing all four populations as one, through strategic transfers, gene loss is reduced from 8% to 2% per decade, without any increase in bongo numbers in Kenya. By managing the European and African populations as one  by strategic exports from Europe combined with in situ transfers, gene loss is reduced to 0.72% every 100 years, with both populations remaining stable. If populations in Kenya are allowed to grow through the implementation of effective conservation, including strategic transfers, gene loss can be effectively halted in this species and its future secured in the wild.

The initial aims of the project are: 
# Through faecal DNA analysis, estimate the genetic diversity of the remaining wild bongos and calculate the relatedness of the isolated wild populations.
# More accurately estimate the total population of wild bongos through faecal DNA analysis, camera trapping, and transect surveying.
# Through direct sampling, estimate the genetic diversity of the captive bongo population and calculate its relatedness with the remaining isolated wild populations.
# Collect DNA samples from western bongos to calculate the relatedness of the two subspecies.
# Fund rangers to collect the above data in Kenya, enhance the degree of protection afforded to and level of understanding of the eastern bongos' ecological needs.
# To realise such a metapopulation management plan, work with local communities is essential to reverse the decline and allow for the implementation of a transfer strategy. A substantial proportion of wild genetic diversity likely will have already have been lost.

If effective protection were implemented immediately and bongo populations allowed to expand without transfers, then this would create a bigger population of genetically impoverished bongos. These animals would be less able to adapt to a dynamic environment. Whilst the population remains small, the impact of transfers will be greater. For this reason, the 'metapopulation management plan' must occur concurrently with conservation strategies to enhance in situ population growth. This initiative is both urgent and fundamental to the future survival of the mountain bongo in the wild.

In 2013, SafariCom telecommunications donated money to the Bongo Surveillance Programme Bongo Surveillance Programme monitoring and surveillance continues in Aberdare, Mt. kenya, Eburru and South West Mau. mountainbongo.org to try and keep tabs on what is thought to be the last 100 eastern bongos left in the wild in the Mau Eburu Forest in central Kenya, whose numbers are still declining due to logging of their habitat and illegal poaching. Kenya's Mountain Bongo antelope under threat. BBC News. 18 April 2013 

==Status==
In 2002, the IUCN, listed the western/lowland species as Near Threatened. These bongos may be endangered due to human environmental interaction, as well as hunting and illegal actions towards wildlife. Database entry includes a brief justification of why this species is of near threatened. CITES lists bongos as an Appendix III species, only regulating their exportation from a single country, Ghana. It is not protected by the US Endangered Species Act and is not listed by the USFWS.

The IUCN Antelope Specialist Group considers the western or lowland bongo, T. e. eurycerus, to be Lower Risk (Near Threatened), and the eastern or mountain bongo, T. e. isaaci, of Kenya, to be Critically Endangered. Other subspecific names have been used, but their validity has not been tested.

==References==

==External links==

*ARKive  images and movies of the bongo (Tragelaphus eurycerus)
*WWF
*Tragelaphus eurycerus
*East African Bongo
*Bongos: Wildlife summary from the African Wildlife Foundation
*The Bongo Repatriation to Mount Kenya Project
*The International Bongo Foundation
*Tragelaphus eurycerus at Animal Diversity Web



[[Bunyip]]

The bunyip, or kianpraty, E.E.Morris(1898) Austral English; A Dictionary of Australasian words, Phrases and Usages. pp. 65-66. McMillan and Co, New York. Reprinted Gale Research Company, Book Tower, Detroit, USA, 1968. is a large mythical creature from Aboriginal mythology, said to lurk in swamps, billabongs, creeks, riverbeds, and waterholes.
The origin of the word bunyip has been traced to the Wemba-Wemba or Wergaia language of Aboriginal people of South-Eastern Australia. However, the bunyip appears to have formed part of traditional Aboriginal beliefs and stories throughout Australia, although its name varied according to tribal nomenclature. In his 2001 book, writer Robert Holden identified at least nine regional variations for the creature known as the bunyip across Aboriginal Australia. Various written accounts of bunyips were made by Europeans in the early and mid-19th century, as settlement spread across the country.

==Meaning==
The word bunyip is usually translated by Aboriginal Australians today as "devil" or "evil spirit". See for example, Oodgeroo Noonuccal (Kath Walker)'s story in Stradbroke Dreamtime. However, this translation may not accurately represent the role of the bunyip in Aboriginal mythology or its possible origins before written accounts were made. Some modern sources allude to a linguistic connection between the bunyip and Bunjil, "a mythic 'Great Man' who made the mountains and rivers and man and all the animals." The word bunyip may not have appeared in print in English until the mid-1840s. See Geelong Advocate 2 July 1845 at Peter Ravenscrofts Bunyip and Inland Seal Archive 

By the 1850s, bunyip had also become a "synonym for impostor, pretender, humbug and the like" in the broader Australian community. The term bunyip aristocracy was first coined in 1853 to describe Australians aspiring to be aristocrats. In the early 1990s, it was famously used by Prime Minister Paul Keating to describe members of the conservative Liberal Party of Australia opposition. 

The word bunyip can still be found in a number of Australian contexts, including place names such as the Bunyip River (which flows into Westernport Bay in southern Victoria) and the town of Bunyip, Victoria.

==Characteristics==
Bunyip (1935), artist unknown, from the National Library of Australia digital collections, demonstrates the variety in descriptions of the legendary creature.
Descriptions of bunyips vary widely. George French Angus may have collected a description of a bunyip in his account of a "water spirit" from the Moorundi people of the Murray River before 1847, stating it is "much dreaded by them ... It inhabits the Murray; but ... they have some difficulty describing it. Its most usual form ... is said to be that of an enormous starfish." George French Angus(1847) Savage Life and Scenes in Australia and New Zealand. Vol 1, p.99. London. Reprinted 1969 Libraries Board of South Australia. Robert Brough Smyth's Aborigines of Victoria of 1878 devoted ten pages to the bunyip, but concluded "in truth little is known among the blacks respecting its form, covering or habits; they appear to have been in such dread of it as to have been unable to take note of its characteristics." Smyth cited in However, common features in many 19th-century newspaper accounts include a dog-like face, a crocodile like head, dark fur, a horse-like tail, flippers, and walrus-like tusks or horns or a duck-like bill. For numerous examples see Peter Ravenscrofts survey of nineteenth century newspaper accounts of the bunyip at Bunyip and Inland Seal Archive 

The Challicum bunyip, an outline image of a bunyip carved by Aborigines into the bank of Fiery Creek, near Ararat, Victoria, was first recorded by The Australasian newspaper in 1851. According to the report, the bunyip had been speared after killing an Aboriginal man. Antiquarian Reynell Johns claimed that until the mid-1850s, Aboriginal people made a "habit of visiting the place annually and retracing the outlines of the figure the bunyip which is about 11 paces long and 4 paces in extreme breadth." Johns cited in The outline image no longer exists.

==Debate over origins of the bunyip==
Non-Aboriginal Australians have made various attempts to understand and explain the origins of the bunyip as a physical entity over the past 150 years.

Writing in 1933, Charles Fenner suggested that it was likely that the "actual origin of the bunyip myth lies in the fact that from time to time seals have made their way up the ... Murray and Darling (Rivers)". He provided examples of seals found as far inland as Overland Corner, Loxton, and Conargo and reminded readers that "the smooth fur, prominent 'apricot' eyes and the bellowing cry are characteristic of the seal."

Another suggestion is that the bunyip may be a cultural memory of extinct Australian marsupials such as the Diprotodon, Zygomaturus, Nototherium or Palorchestes. This connection was first formally made by Dr George Bennett of the Australian Museum in 1871, but in the early 1990s, palaeontologist Pat Vickers-Rich and geologist Neil Archbold also cautiously suggested that Aboriginal legends "perhaps had stemmed from an acquaintance with prehistoric bones or even living prehistoric animals themselves ... When confronted with the remains of some of the now extinct Australian marsupials, Aborigines would often identify them as the bunyip." They also note that "legends about the mihirung paringmal of western Victorian Aborigines ... may allude to the ... extinct giant birds the Dromornithidae." 

Another connection to the bunyip is the shy Australasian bittern (Botaurus poiciloptilus). During the breeding season, the male call of this marsh-dwelling bird is a "low pitched boom"; hence, it is occasionally called the "bunyip bird". 

==Early accounts of settlers==
An 1882 illustration of an Aboriginal man telling the story of the bunyip to two white children

During the early settlement of Australia by Europeans, the notion that the bunyip was an actual unknown animal that awaited discovery became common. Early European settlers, unfamiliar with the sights and sounds of the island continent's peculiar fauna, regarded the bunyip as one more strange Australian animal and sometimes attributed unfamiliar animal calls or cries to it. It has also been suggested that 19th-century bunyip lore was reinforced by imported European memories, such as that of the Irish Pca. 

A large number of bunyip sightings occurred during the 1840s and 1850s, particularly in the southeastern colonies of Victoria, New South Wales and South Australia, as European settlers extended their reach. The following is not an exhaustive list of accounts:

===Hume find of 1818===
One of the earliest accounts relating to a large unknown freshwater animal was in 1818, when Hamilton Hume and James Meehan found some large bones at Lake Bathurst in New South Wales. They did not call the animal a bunyip, but described the remains indicating the creature as very much like a hippopotamus or manatee. The Philosophical Society of Australasia later offered to reimburse Hume for any costs incurred in recovering a specimen of the unknown animal, but for various reasons, Hume did not return to the lake. See minutes cited (19 December 1821) in Peter Ravenscroft's Bunyip and Inland Seal Archive It might be noted that Diprotodon skeletons have sometimes been compared to the hippopotamus; they are a land animal, but have sometimes been found in a lake or water course. Cites Australian Museum and Coonabarabran Visitor Information and Exhibition Centre as source of information. 

===Wellington Caves fossils, 1830===
More significant was the discovery of fossilised bones of "some quadruped much larger than the ox or buffalo" Ranken, George cited in in the Wellington Caves in mid-1830 by bushman George Rankin and later by Thomas Mitchell. Sydney's Reverend John Dunmore Lang announced the find as "convincing proof of the deluge". Lang cited in However, it was British anatomist Sir Richard Owen who identified the fossils as the gigantic marsupials Nototherium and Diprotodon. At the same time, some settlers observed "all natives throughout these ... districts have a tradition (of) a very large animal having at one time existed in the large creeks and rivers and by many it is said that such animals now exist." Cited in 

===First written use of the word bunyip, 1845===
In July 1845, The Geelong Advertiser announced the discovery of fossils found near Geelong, under the headline "Wonderful Discovery of a new Animal". This was a continuation of a story on 'fossil remains' from the previous issue. The newspaper continued, "On the bone being shown to an intelligent black (sic), he at once recognised it as belonging to the bunyip, which he declared he had seen. On being requested to make a drawing of it, he did so without hesitation." The account noted a story of an Aboriginal woman being killed by a bunyip and the "most direct evidence of all"  that of a man named Mumbowran "who showed several deep wounds on his breast made by the claws of the animal". The account provided this description of the creature:

Shortly after this account appeared, it was repeated in other Australian newspapers. However, it appears to be the first use of the word bunyip in a written publication.

===The Australian Museum's bunyip of 1847===
The so-called bunyip skull

In January 1846, a peculiar skull was taken from the banks of Murrumbidgee River near Balranald, New South Wales. Initial reports suggested that it was the skull of something unknown to science. The squatter who found it remarked, "all the natives to whom it was shown called a bunyip". Cited in By July 1847, several experts, including W. S. Macleay and Professor Owen, had identified the skull as the deformed foetal skull of a foal or calf. At the same time, however, the so-called bunyip skull was put on display in the Australian Museum (Sydney) for two days. Visitors flocked to see it, and The Sydney Morning Herald said that it prompted many people to speak out about their "bunyip sightings". National library of Australia. Bunyips  Evidence Reports of this discovery used the phrase 'Kine Pratie' as well as Bunyip and explorer William Hovell, who examined the skull, also called it a 'katen-pai'. 

In March of that year "a bunyip or an immense Platibus" (Platypus) was sighted "sunning himself on the placid bosom of the Yarra, just opposite the Custom House" in Melbourne. "Immeadiately a crowd gathered" and three men set off by boat "to secure the stranger" who "disappeared" when they were "about a yard from him". 

===William Buckley's account of bunyips, 1852===
Another early written account is attributed to escaped convict William Buckley in his 1852 biography of thirty years living with the Wathaurong people. His 1852 account records "in ... Lake Moodewarri Lake Modewarre as well as in most of the others inland ... is a ... very extraordinary amphibious animal, which the natives call Bunyip." Buckley's account suggests he saw such a creature on several occasions. He adds, "I could never see any part, except the back, which appeared to be covered with feathers of a dusky grey colour. It seemed to be about the size of a full grown calf ... I could never learn from any of the natives that they had seen either the head or tail." Tim Flannery(Ed.)(2002): The Life and Adventures of William Buckley; 32 Years a wanderer amongst the Aborigines of the then unexplored country around Port Phillip, now the Province of Victoria by John Morgan. First published 1852. This edition, Text Publishing, Melbourne Australia. p.66. ISBN 1-877008-20-6 Buckley also claimed the creature was common in the Barwon River and cites an example he heard of an Aboriginal woman being killed by one. He emphasized the bunyip was believed to have supernatural powers. Tim Flannery(Ed.)(2002) The Life and Adventures of William Buckley. pp. 1389 

==In popular culture and fiction==
The word bunyip has been used in other Australian contexts, including The Bunyip newspaper as the banner of a local weekly newspaper published in the town of Gawler, South Australia. First published as a pamphlet by the Gawler Humbug Society in 1863, the name was chosen because "the Bunyip is the true type of Australian Humbug!" The word is also used in numerous other Australian contexts, including the House of the Gentle Bunyip in Clifton Hill, Victoria. The 1860s house was saved from demolition by community action and redeveloped as a home for low income people. There is also a coin-operated bunyip at Murray Bridge, South Australia, at Sturt Reserve on the town's riverfront. 

Numerous tales of the bunyip in written literature appeared in the 19th and early 20th centuries. These included a story in Andrew Lang's The Brown Fairy Book (1904). The Bunyip of Berkeley's Creek is a more recent (1973) Australian children's picture book about a bunyip.

Bibhutibhushan Bandyopadhyay wrote a Bengali novel Chander Pahar which has account of Bunyip in it. One film adaptation Chander Pahar (film) was also released, in late 2013. It was visulized as the primary threat to the treasure seekers in the wilderness of Richtersveld mountains of Southern Africa in the Bengali novel called Chander Pahar by Bibhutibhushan Bandyopadhyay.In this novel Bibhutibhusan Bandopadhyay had visualized Bunyip as a three-toed ape-like hominid.

Alexander Bunyip, created by children's author and illustrator Michael Salmon, first appeared in print in The Monster That Ate Canberra in 1972, Alexander Bunyip went on to appear in many other books and a live-action television series, Alexander Bunyip's Billabong. A statue of Alexander was opened in front of the Gungahlin Library in 2011. The artwork by Anne Ross, called 'A is for Alexander, B is for Bunyip, C is for Canberra' was commissioned by the ACT Government for Gungahlins $3.8 million town park. 

Bunyips appear in Naomi Novik's fantasy novel Tongues of Serpents., and in the short story Bunyip's Gift in Mind's Eye by Jackie French.

In the early 1950s, Bertie the Bunyip was a popular character on Channel 3 in Philadelphia. 

The 1977 film Dot and the Kangaroo contains a song "The Bunyip (Bunyip Moon)". 

The Bunyip is also a familiar in the MMORPG RuneScape. As a reference to its origins, it speaks with a thick Australian accent.

A character named Bruce Bunyip appears in the book The Neddiad by Daniel Pinkwater. He is initially described as "big and swarthy, and had tiny eyes, a scowl and his eyebrows grew together." Later, the character wails that his mother "says my father is a monster and I'm a monster too." 

In the video game series Ty the Tasmanian Tiger, Bunyips are portrayed as peaceful mystical elders who inhabit the world of The Dreaming, though not as ferocious as their namesake and more primate looking.
The robotic suits that Ty can pilot in and are named after the Bunyips, such as Shadow Bunyip, Battle Bunyip and Missile Bunyips.

In the 2000 Squaresoft video game Chrono Cross, the Bunyip is the boss monster that guards the Black Crystal in Another World's Fort Dragonia. http://www.chronowiki.org/wiki/Bunyip 

==See also==
* Yara-ma-yha-who, a creature from Australian Aboriginal mythology
* Yowie, or Wowee, a creature that has its origins in Australian Aboriginal mythology
* Min Min light, a natural phenomenon that may have influenced Australian Aboriginal mythology
* Rainbow Serpent, a common motif in the art and mythology of Aboriginal Australia
* Marsupial lion, an extinct species of carnivorous marsupial mammal that lived in Australia from the early to the late Pleistocene
* P. A. Yeomans, inventor of the Bunyip Slipper Imp, a plough for developing watersheds
* Dropbear, a fictitious Australian mammal

==Notes==

==References==

*
*
*



[[Brabant]]

Brabant may refer to:

Historically:
*Duchy of Brabant (11831795), a duchy of the Holy Roman Empire (1183-1556), Burgundian Netherlands (14301482), Habsburg Netherlands (14821581), and Southern Netherlands (15811795), covering parts of the Netherlands and Belgium
* Landgraviate of Brabant (10851183), the part of the pagus between the rivers Dender and Dijle
*House of Brabant, a noble family from Lotharingia

In contemporary usage:

In Belgium:
* Province of Brabant, Belgium, which in 1995 was split up into two provinces and an autonomous region:
** Flemish Brabant, in the Flanders region
** Walloon Brabant, in the Wallonia region
** Brussels-Capital Region
* East Brabant, or Hageland, an area east of Brussels between the cities of Leuven, Aarschot, Diest and Tienen
* Klein-Brabant, the municipalities Bornem, Puurs and Sint-Amands in the Antwerp province of Flanders region
In the Netherlands:
* North Brabant province
* Brabantian, a dialect that formed the basis of the Dutch language

In France:
* Brabant-en-Argonne, commune in the Meuse department
* Brabant-le-Roi, commune in the Meuse department
* Brabant-ls-Villers, a commune between 1973&ndash;1982, an amalgamation of Brabant-le-Roi and Villers-aux-Vents

Outside Europe:
* Brabant, West Virginia, USA
* Brabant, Saskatchewan, Canada
* Brabant Island, Antarctica
* Le Morne Brabant, a mountain on Mauritius

Other uses:

* The Belgian (horse) is also known as a Brabant or Brabanon
* HNLMS Noord-Brabant, several ships of the Dutch navy



[[Boone, North Carolina]]

Boone is a town located in the Blue Ridge Mountains of western North Carolina, United States. Boone's population was 17,122 in 2010. Boone is the county seat of Watauga County and the home of Appalachian State University.
The town is named for famous American pioneer and explorer Daniel Boone, and every summer since 1952 has hosted an outdoor amphitheatre portrayal of the life and times of its namesake.

In 2012, Boone was listed among the 10 best places to retire in the U.S. by U.S. News. The 10 Best Places to Retire in 2012 

==Boone==

Boone as seen from Howard's Knob Boone took its name from the famous pioneer and explorer Daniel Boone, who on several occasions camped at a site generally agreed to be within the present city limits. Daniel's nephews, Jesse and Jonathan (sons of brother Israel Boone), were founders of the town's first church, Three Forks Baptist, still in existence today.
Boone was served by the narrow gauge East Tennessee and Western North Carolina Railroad (nicknamed "Tweetsie") until the flood of 1940. The flood washed away much of the tracks and it was decided not to replace them.

Boone is the home of Appalachian State University, a constituent member of the University of North Carolina.
Appalachian State is the sixth largest university in the seventeen-campus system.
Caldwell Community College & Technical Institute also operates a satellite campus in Boone.

"Horn in the West", a dramatization of the life and times of the early settlers of the mountain area, which features Daniel Boone as one of its characters, has been performed in an outdoor amphitheatre above the town every summer since 1952.
The original actor in the role of "Daniel Boone" was Ned Austin. His "Hollywood Star" stands on a pedestal on King Street in downtown Boone. He was followed in the role by Glenn Causey, who portrayed the rugged frontiersman for 41 years, and whose image is still seen in many of the depictions of Boone featured in the area today.

The late guitarist Michael Houser was born in Boone.
He is best known as a founding member of and lead guitarist for the band Widespread Panic.
The late, Grammy Award-winning guitar player Doc Watson also came from the Boone area, as do many bluegrass musicians and Appalachian storytellers.

==Geography and climate==
Boone is located at (36.211364, 81.668657) and has an elevation of 3,333 feet (1015.9 m) above mean sea level. An earlier survey gave the elevation as 3,332 ft and since then it has been published as having an elevation of 3,333 ft (1,016 m). Boone has the highest elevation of any town of its size (over 10,000 population) east of the Mississippi River. As such, Boone features, depending on the isotherm used, a subtropical highland climate (Kppen Cfb), or a humid continental climate (Kppen Dfb), a rarity for the Southeastern United States, and straddles the boundary between USDA Plant Hardiness Zones 6B and 7A; the elevation also results in enhanced precipitation, with 52.7 in of average annual precipitation. Compared to the lower elevations of the Carolinas, winters are long and cold, with frequent sleet and snowfall. The daily average temperature in January is 31.2 F, which gives Boone a winter climate more similar to coastal southern New England rather than the Southeast, where a humid subtropical climate dominates. Blizzard-like conditions are not unusual during many winters. Summers are warm, but far cooler and less humid than lower regions to the south and east, with a July daily average temperature of 68.5 F. Boone typically receives on average nearly 35 in of snowfall annually, far higher than the lowland areas in the rest of North Carolina.

==Demographics==

As of the census of 2000, there were 13,472 people, 4,374 households, and 1,237 families residing in the town. The population density was 2,307.0 people per square mile (890.7/km). There were 4,748 housing units at an average density of 813.0 per square mile (313.9/km). The racial makeup of the town was 93.98% White, 3.42% Black or African American, 0.30% Native American, 1.19% Asian, 0.05% Pacific Islander, 0.46% from other races, and 0.60% from two or more races. 1.64% of the population were Hispanic or Latino of any race.

There were 4,374 households out of which 9.6% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 21.0% were married couples living together, 5.6% had a female householder with no husband present, and 71.7% were non-families. 38.4% of all households were made up of individuals and 7.3% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 1.97 and the average family size was 2.63.

The age distribution is 5.8% under 18, 65.9% from 18 to 24, 12.1% from 25 to 44, 9.1% from 45 to 64, and 7.1% who were 65 or older. The median age was 21 years. Both the overall age distribution and the median age are driven by the presence of the local university, Appalachian State. For every 100 females there are 95.6 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 94.7 males.

The median household income is $20,541, and the median family income is $49,762. The per capita income is $12,256. 37.0% of the population and 9.2% of families were below the poverty line.

Men had a median income of $28,060 versus $20,000 for women. However, poverty statistics that are based on surveys of the entire population can be extremely misleading in communities dominated by students, such as Boone. Out of the total population, 6.3% of those under the age of 18 and 9.1% of those 65 and older were living below the poverty line.

==Media==

===Newspaper===
Boone is mainly served by three local newspapers:

* The Watauga Democrat is published on Wednesday, Friday and Sunday of each week,
* The Mountain Times (free weekly entertainment publication).
* The High Country Press (daily online news publication).

A smaller newspaper, The Appalachian, is Appalachian State University's campus newspaper published twice a week on Tuesdays and Thursdays. In addition to the locally printed papers, a monthly entertainment pamphlet named Kraut Creek Revival has limited circulation and is funded by a Denver, NC-based newspaper.

===Radio===
* WATA-AM 1450 AM is predominantly News Talk.
* WZJS-FM 100.7 FM is an Oldies radio station.
* WMMY-FM 106.1 FM is a Country Music radio station.
* WWMY 102.3 FM is an Adult Contemporary radio station, mostly music, also University of North Carolina Tar Heels sports network, and Carolina Panthers football.
* WECR-AM 1130 AM is primarily a Gospel Music and Local News station.
* WXIT-AM 1200 AM is predominantly Conservative Talk Radio.
* WASU 90.5 FM is a college radio station run from the Appalachian campus.
* WNCW 92.9 NPR Affiliate a noncommercial public radio station licensed to Isothermal Community College.

==Law and government==

Boone operates under a mayor-council government. The city council consists of five members. The mayor presides over the council and casts a vote on issues only in the event of a tie. As of December 2013, the Town Council members are: Andy Ball, Mayor; Rennie Brantz, Mayor Pro Tem, and Councilors: Lynne Mason, Fred Hay, Jennifer Pea, and Quint David. http://www.townofboone.net/mayor/mayor.php 

==Development==

Industrial, commercial, and residential development in the town of Boone is a controversial issue due to its location in the mountains of Appalachia. On October 16, 2009, the town council accepted the "Boone 2030 Land Use Plan." While the document itself is not in any way actual law, it is used by the town council, board of adjustment, and other committees to guide decision making as to what types of development are appropriate. 

In 2009, the North Carolina Department of Transportation began widening 1.1 miles of U.S. 421 (King Street) to a four to six-lane divided highway with a raised concrete median from U.S. 321 (Hardin Street) to east of N.C. 194 (Jefferson Road), including a new entrance and exit to the new Watauga High School, at a cost of $16.2 million. The widening has displaced 25 businesses and 63 residences east of historic downtown King Street. The project was slated to be completed by December 31, 2011; as of 16 March 2012, construction is ongoing.

==Economy==
Samaritan's Purse is based in Boone.

===Largest Employers===
According to the Town's 2011 Comprehensive Annual Financial Report, Town of Boone CAFR the top employers in the city are:

 # Employer # of Employees 
 1 Appalachian State University 1,000+ 
 2 Watauga County Board of Education 500-999 
 3 Watauga County 500-999 
 4 Walmart 250-499 
 5 Town of Boone 100-250 
 6 Glenbridge Health & Rehabilitation 100-250 
 7 Lowe's Home Improvement 100-250 
 8 IRC/TT Electronics - No longer in business 100-250 
 9 Hospitality Mints 100-250 
 10 Appalachian Hospitality 100-250 

==Points of interest==
* Appalachian State University
* Blue Ridge Parkway
* Daniel Boone Native Gardens
* Horn in the West
* Howard's Knob
* Tweetsie Railroad
* Watauga River
* Elk Knob State Park
* Grandfather Mountain

==Notable people==
Doc Watson sculpture in downtown Boone
*Robby Benson
*Franklin Graham
*Doc Hendley
*James Holshouser
*Ralph T. Troy
*Doc Watson

==References==

==External links==
 
* 
* Historical Boone Photos, Postcards, and Paper
* Cy Crumley ET&WNC Photo Collection



[[Banshee]]

The banshee ( ), from ("woman of the S#The sdhe: abodes of the aes sdhe|sdhe]" or "woman of the fairy mounds") is a female spirit in Irish mythology, usually seen as an omen of death and a messenger from the underworld.

In legend, a banshee is a fairy woman who begins to wail if someone is about to die. In Scottish Gaelic mythology, she is known as the bean sth or bean-nighe and is seen washing the bloodstained clothes or armour of those who are about to die. Alleged sightings of banshees have been reported as recently as 1948. Similar beings are also found in Welsh, Wiffen, B. B., Choice Notes from "Notes and Queries", P.P.  London.  Notes and Queries, William John Thoms. p. 32 Norse Kellog, various (2001:745) Orchard, Andy (1997). Dictionary of Norse Myth and Legend. Cassell. ISBN 0-304-34520-2 Simek, Rudolf (2007) translated by Angela Hall. Dictionary of Northern Mythology. D.S. Brewer. ISBN 0-85991-513-1 and American folklore. 

==Overview==
 
Long ago in Ireland a keener would sing a caoinadh or lament at a funerals. Keeners were always women and people would seek to invite the best keeners to the funerals of their relatives. For some great houses it was said that a bean shee or a woman of the fairies would come and keen at their funerals. When these stories were translated into English bean sidhe was anglicised as banshee rather than being translated as fairy woman and from this the stories of the banshee developed. In later stories, the appearance of the banshee could foretell death. Banshees were said to appear for particular Irish families, though which families made it onto this list varied depending on who was telling the story. Stories of banshees were also prevalent in the West Highlands of Scotland. 

Banshees are usually seen by a person who is about to die in a violent way such as murder.

Although not always seen, her mourning call is heard, usually at night when someone is about to die and usually around woods.

The banshee can appear in a variety of guises. Most often she appears as an ugly, frightening hag, but she can also appear as a stunningly beautiful woman of any age that suits her. In some tales, the figure who first appears to be a "banshee" is later revealed to be the Irish battle goddess, the Morrgan.

The banshee may also appear in a variety of other forms, such as that of a hooded crow, stoat, hare and weasel  animals associated in Ireland with witchcraft.

In 1437, King James I of Scotland was approached by an Irish seer who was later identified as a banshee who foretold his murder at the instigation of the Earl of Atholl. There are records of several prophets believed to be incarnate banshees attending the great houses of Ireland and the courts of local Irish kings.

In some parts of Leinster, she is referred to as the bean chaointe (keening woman) whose wail can be so piercing that it shatters glass. In Kerry in the southwest of Ireland, her keen is experienced as a "low, pleasant singing"; in Tyrone in the north, as "the sound of two boards being struck together"; and, on Rathlin Island, as "a thin, screeching sound somewhere between the wail of a woman and the moan of an owl".

==History and mythology==
In legend, a banshee wails nearby when someone is about to die. There are some special families who are believed to have banshees attached to them, and whose cries herald the death of a member of that family. Most, though not all, surnames associated with banshees have the  or Mac prefix. They were also associated with the Airlie clan. Accounts of banshees go back as far as 1380 with the publication of the Cathreim Thoirdhealbhaigh (Triumphs of Torlough) by Sean mac Craith. Mentions of banshees can also be found in Norman literature of that time. 
The Ban Si was also known to wail at the crowning of the true king. Such a cry was reported to be heard at the crowning of Brian Boru.

Traditionally, when a person died a woman would sing a lament (in , or , "caoin" meaning "to weep, to wail") at the funeral. These women are referred to as "keeners" and the best keeners would be in high demand. Legend has it that for great Gaelic families  the O'Gradys, the O'Neills, the  Longs, the McCnaimhns, the  Briains, the  Conchobhairs, and the Caomhnachs  the lament would be sung by a fairy woman; having foresight, she would sing it when a family member died, even if the person had died far away and news of their death had not yet come, so that the wailing of the banshee was the first warning the household had of the death.

The  Briains' banshee was thought to have the name of Eevul, and was ruler of 25 other banshees who would always be at her attendance. It is thought that from this myth comes the idea that the wailing of numerous banshees signifies the death of a great person. 

In later versions, the banshee might appear before the death and warn the family by wailing. Visual or oral Hallucinations of the Banshee may cause death especially in a person who is very sick and close to dying by destroying that person's confidence that he/she can survive, see Nocebo effect. When several banshees appeared at once, it indicated the death of someone great or holy. Yeats, W. B. "Fairy and Folk Tales of the Irish Peasantry" in Booss, Claire; Yeats, W.B.; Gregory, Lady (1986) A Treasury of Irish Myth, Legend, and Folklore. New York: Gramercy Books. p. 108. ISBN 978-0-517-48904-8 The tales sometimes recounted that the woman, though called a fairy, was a ghost, often of a specific murdered woman, or a mother who died in childbirth. Briggs (1976), pp. 1416: "Banshee". 

Banshees are frequently described as dressed in white or grey, often having long, pale hair which they brush with a silver comb, a detail scholar Patricia Lysaght attributes to confusion with local mermaid myths. This comb detail is also related to the centuries-old traditional romantic Irish story that, if you ever see a comb lying on the ground in Ireland, you must never pick it up, or the banshees (or mermaids  stories vary), having placed it there to lure unsuspecting humans, will spirit such gullible humans away. Other stories portray banshees as dressed in green, red, or black with a grey cloak. 

One explanation for the origin of the banshee is in the screech of the Barn owl (Tyto alba). The nocturnal hunter is known for its chilling screech and has long been associated with agricultural activities in Ireland, attracted to the rodent activity around grain stores and barns.

==In other mythologies==

===American folklore===
Stories of banshees can also be found in America in the late 18th century. The most prevalent of the American stories comes from Tar River in Edgecombe County, North Carolina. However, in this variation of the story, the banshee is simply a ghoul, as opposed to a sign of misfortune. 

In the badlands of South Dakota, a banshee is said to wail upon a hill near Watch Dog Butte. Like other American tales of banshees, this legend does not connect her to any particular death (aside, perhaps, from her own). Skinner, Charles M. "Myths and Legends of Our Own Land". J.P. Lippincott Company, 1896, p. 216. 

===Other Celtic cultures===
In Scottish mythology, a similar creature is known as the bean nighe or ban nigheachain (little washerwoman) or nigheag na h-th (little washer at the ford). In Welsh folklore, a similar creature is known as the Hag of the mist. Owen, Elias (1887). Welsh folk-lore: A collection of the folk-tales and legends of North Wales. Felinfach: Llanerch. p. 142. 

===In popular culture===
See Banshee in popular culture

==See also==

*Aswang
*Bean nighe
*Bnnach
*Cailleach
*Clodhna
*Irish mythology in popular culture
*La Llorona
*Pontianak
*Psychopomp
*Rusalka
*White Lady (ghost)
*List of English words of Irish origin

==Notes==

==Further reading==
*
*
*
* 

==External links==

* MovilleInishowen.com: The Legend of the Banshee, Leo Bowes
* Irish Culture and Customs: Creepy Irish Creatures, Bridget Haggerty
* 



[[Genetically modified maize]]

Genetically modified maize (corn) is a genetically modified crop. Specific maize strains have been genetically engineered to express agriculturally-desirable traits, including resistance to pests and to herbicides. Maize strains with both traits are now in use in multiple countries. GM maize has also caused controversy with respect to possible health effects, impact on other insects and impact on other plants via gene flow. One strain, called Starlink, was approved only for animal feed in the US, but was found in food, leading to a series of recalls starting in 2000.

== Marketed Products ==

=== Herbicide resistant maize ===
Corn varieties resistant to glyphosate herbicides were first commercialized in 1996 by Monsanto, and are known as "Roundup Ready Corn". They tolerate the use of Roundup. Bayer CropScience developed "Liberty Link Corn" that is resistant to glufosinate. Bayer LibertyLink official website Pioneer Hi-Bred has developed and markets corn hybrids with tolerance to imidazoline herbicides under the trademark "Clearfield" - though in these hybrids, the herbicide-tolerance trait was bred using tissue culture selection and the chemical mutagen ethyl methanesulfonate not genetic engineering. Consequently, the regulatory framework governing the approval of transgenic crops does not apply for Clearfield. 

As of 2011, herbicide-resistant GM corn was grown in 14 countries. By 2012, 26 varieties herbicide-resistant GM maize were authorised for import into the European Union. Staff EU register of genetically modified food and feed European Commission, Health and Consumers, EU register of authorised GMOs, Retrieved 26 August 2012 In 2012 the EU was reported to import 30 million tons a year of GM crops, but such imports remain controversial. Hogan, Michael (5 April 2012) BASF to undertake GMO potato trials in Europe Reuters Edition US, Accessed 26 August 2012 Cultivation of herbicide-resistant corn in the EU provides substantial farm-level benefits. Wesseler, J., S. Scatasta, E. Nillesen (2007): The Maximum Incremental Social Tolerable Irreversible Costs (MISTICs) and other Benefits and Costs of Introducing Transgenic Maize in the EU-15. Pedobiologia 51(3):261-269 

=== Insecticide-producing corn ===
The European corn borer, Ostrinia nubilalis, destroys corn crops by burrowing into the stem, causing the plant to fall over.

Bt corn is a variant of maize that has been genetically altered to express one or more proteins from the Bacillus thuringiensis bacteria. The protein is poisonous to certain insect pests and is widely used in organic gardening. The European corn borer causes about a billion dollars in damage to corn crops each year. Ostlie KR et al. University of Minnesota Extension Office. Last Reviewed 2008. Bt Corn & European Corn Borer: Long-Term Success Through Resistance Management 

In recent years, traits have been added to ward off Corn ear worms and root worms, the latter of which annually causes about a billion dollars in damages. Marra, M.C., Piggott, N.E., & Goodwin, B.K. (2012). The impact of corn rootworm protected biotechnology traits in the United States. AgBioForum, 15(2), 217-230 Erin W. Hodgson, Utah State University Extension and Utah Plant Pest Diagnostic Laboratory. Western corn rootworm 

The Bt protein is expressed throughout the plant. When a vulnerable insect eats the Bt-containing plant, the protein is activated in its gut, which is alkaline (the human gut is acidic ). In the alkaline environment the protein partially unfolds and is cut by other proteins, forming a toxin that paralyzes the insect's digestive system and forms holes in the gut wall. The insect stops eating within a few hours and eventually starves. W.S. Cranshaw, Colorado State University Extension Office. Last updated March 26, 2013. Bacillus thuringiensis Fact Sheet 

In 1996, the first GM maize producing a Bt Cry protein was approved, which killed the European corn borer and related species; subsequent Bt genes were introduced that killed corn rootworm larvae. Hellmich, R. L. & Hellmich, K. A. (2012) Use and Impact of Bt Maize. Nature Education Knowledge 3(10):4 

Bt genes that are approved include the following, singly and stacked (event name between brackets): Cry1A.105 (MON89034), CryIAb (MON810), CryIF (1507), Cry2Ab (MON89034), Cry3Bb1 (MON863 and MON88017), Cry34Ab1 (59122), Cry35Ab1 (59122), mCry3A (MIR604), and Vip3A (MIR162), in both corn and cotton. Ric Bessin, Extension Entomologist, University of Kentucky College of Agriculture. May 1996, last updated November 2010. Bt-Corn for Corn Borer Control Castagnola AS, Jurat-Fuentes, JL. Bt Crops: Past and Future. Chapter 15 in Thuringiensis Biotechnology, Ed. Estibaliz Sansinenea. Springer, Mar 2, 2012 Corn genetically modified to produce VIP was first approved in the US in 2010. Erin Hodgson and Aaron Gassmann, Iowa State Extension, Department of Entomology. May 2010. New Corn Trait Deregulated in U.S. 

===Drought resistance===
In 2013 Monsanto launched the first transgenic drought tolerance trait in a line of corn hybrids called DroughtGard. OECD BioTrack Database. MON87460 The MON 87460 trait is provided by the insertion of the cspB gene from the soil microbe Bacillus subtilis; it was approved by the USDA in 2011 Federal Register, Vol. 76, No. 248, December 27, 2011. and by China in 2013. Michael Eisenstein Plant breeding: Discovery in a dry spell Nature 501, S7S9 (26 September 2013) Published online 25 September 2013 

==== Sweet corn ====
GM sweet corn varieties include "Attribute", the brand name for insect-resistant sweet corn developed by Syngenta. Syngenta Sweet Corn Products 

== Products in development ==
In 2007, South African researchers announced the production of transgenic maize resistant to maize streak virus (MSV), although it has not been released as a product. 

== Refuges ==
US Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) regulations require farmers who plant Bt corn to plant non-Bt corn nearby (called a "refuge") to provide a location to harbor vulnerable pests. 

The theory behind these refuges is to slow the evolution of resistance to the pesticide. EPA regulations also require seed companies to train farmers how to maintain refuges, to collect data on the refuges and to report that data to the EPA. A study of these reports found that from 2003 to 2005 farmer compliance with keeping refuges was above 90%, but that by 2008 approximately 25% of Bt corn farmers did not keep refuges properly, raising concerns that resistance would develop. 

Unmodified crops received most of the economic benefits of Bt corn in the US in 1996-2007, because of the overall reduction of pest populations. This reduction came because females laid eggs on modified and unmodified strains alike. 

== Resistance ==
Resistant strains of the European corn borer have developed in areas with defective or absent refuge management. Staff, University of Minnesota Extension. Section: Can European corn borer develop resistance to Bt corn? in the Bt Corn & European Corn Borer 

In November 2009, Monsanto scientists found the pink bollworm had become resistant to first-generation Bt cotton in parts of Gujarat, India - that generation expresses one Bt gene, Cry1Ac. This was the first instance of Bt resistance confirmed by Monsanto anywhere in the world. Bollworm resistance to first generation Bt cotton has been identified in the Australia, China, Spain and the United States. In 2012, a Florida field trial demonstrated that army worms were resistant to pesticide-containing GM corn produced by Dupont-Dow; armyworm resistance was first discovered in Puerto Rico in 2006, prompting Dow and DuPont to voluntarily stop selling the product on the island. Jack Kaskey for Bloomberg News Nov 16, 2012 DuPont-Dow Corn Defeated by Armyworms in Florida: Study 

== Regulation ==

Regulation of GM crops varies between countries, with some of the most-marked differences occurring between the USA and Europe. Regulation varies in a given country depending on intended uses. Wesseler, J. and N. Kalaitzandonakes (2011): Present and Future EU GMO policy. In Arie Oskam, Gerrit Meesters and Huib Silvis (eds.), EU Policy for Agriculture, Food and Rural Areas. Second Edition, pp. 23-323  23-332. Wageningen: Wageningen Academic Publishers Beckmann, V., C. Soregaroli, J. Wesseler (2011): Coexistence of genetically modified (GM) and non-modified (non GM) crops: Are the two main property rights regimes equivalent with respect to the coexistence value? In "Genetically modified food and global welfare" edited by Colin Carter, GianCarlo Moschini and Ian Sheldon, pp 201-224. Volume 10 in Frontiers of Economics and Globalization Series. Bingley, UK: Emerald Group Publishing 

== Controversy ==

Broad scientific consensus holds that food derived from GM crops poses no greater risk to human health than conventional food. American Association for the Advancement of Science (AAAS), Board of Directors (2012). Legally Mandating GM Food Labels Could Mislead and Falsely Alarm Consumers American Medical Association (2012). Report 2 of the Council on Science and Public Health: Labeling of Bioengineered Foods FAO, 2004. State of Food and Agriculture 20032004. Agricultural Biotechnology: Meeting the Needs of the Poor. Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, Rome. "Currently available transgenic crops and foods derived from them have been judged safe to eat and the methods used to test their safety have been deemed appropriate. These conclusions represent the consensus of the scientific evidence surveyed by the ICSU (2003) and they are consistent with the views of the World Health Organization (WHO, 2002). These foods have been assessed for increased risks to human health by several national regulatory authorities (inter alia, Argentina, Brazil, Canada, China, the United Kingdom and the United States) using their national food safety procedures (ICSU). To date no verifiable untoward toxic or nutritionally deleterious effects resulting from the consumption of foods derived from genetically modified crops have been discovered anywhere in the world (GM Science Review Panel). Many millions of people have consumed foods derived from GM plants - mainly maize, soybean and oilseed rape - without any observed adverse effects (ICSU)." Other sources:
* World Health Organization. Food safety: 20 questions on genetically modified foods. Accessed December 22, 2012.
* United States Institute of Medicine and National Research Council (2004). Safety of Genetically Engineered Foods: Approaches to Assessing Unintended Health Effects. National Academies Press. Free full-text. National Academies Press. See pp11ff on need for better standards and tools to evaluate GM food.
* Tamar Haspel for the Washington Post. October 15, 2013. Genetically modified foods: What is and isnt true
* Winter CK and Gallegos LK (2006). Safety of Genetically Engineered Food. University of California Agriculture and Natural Resources Communications, Publication 8180.
* 
* Dr. Christopher Preston, AgBioWorld 2011. Peer Reviewed Publications on the Safety of GM Foods. The scientific rigor of the studies regarding human health has been disputed due to alleged lack of independence and due to conflicts of interest involving governing bodies and some of those who perform and evaluate the studies. http://www.nytimes.com/2009/02/20/business/20crop.html?_r=0 http://news.sciencemag.org/2012/05/european-food-safety-official-resigns-amidst-conflict-interest-controversy http://www.nature.com/news/fields-of-gold-1.12897 http://www.wired.com/wiredscience/2014/03/rootworm-resistance-bt-corn/ 

GM crops provide a number of ecological benefits, but there are also concerns for their overuse, stalled research outside of the Bt seed industry, proper management and issues with Bt resistance arising from their misuse. Andrew Pollack for the New York Times. April 13, 2010 Study Says Overuse Threatens Gains From Modified Crops http://www.sfgate.com/science/article/Genetically-modified-crops-results-raise-concern-3520087.php 

Critics have objected to GM crops on ecological, economic and health grounds. The economic issues derive from those organisms that are subject to intellectual property law, mostly patents. The first generation of GM crops lose patent protection beginning in 2015. Monsanto has claimed it will not to pursue farmers who retain seeds of off-patent varieties. These controversies have led to litigation, international trade disputes, protests and to restrictive legislation in most countries. Wesseler, J. (ed.) (2005): Environmental Costs and Benefits of Transgenic Crops. Dordrecht, NL: Springer Press 

=== Effects on nontarget insects ===
Critics claim that Bt proteins could target predatory and other beneficial or harmless insects as well as the targeted pest. These proteins have been used as organic sprays for insect control in France since 1938 and the USA since 1958 with no ill effects on the environment reported. While cyt proteins are toxic towards the insect orders Coleoptera (beetles) and Diptera (flies), cry proteins selectively target Lepidopterans (moths and butterflies). As a toxic mechanism, cry proteins bind to specific receptors on the membranes of mid-gut (epithelial) cells, resulting in rupture of those cells. Any organism that lacks the appropriate gut receptors cannot be affected by the cry protein, and therefore Bt. Dorsch, J.A. et al. Cry1a Toxins of Bacillus Thuringiensis Bind Specifically to a Region Adjacent to the Membrane-Proximal Extracellular Domain of Bt-R-1 in Manduca Sexta: Involvement of a Cadherin in the Entomopathogenicity of Bacillus Thuringiensis. Insect Biochemistry and Molecular Biology 32, 1025-1036 (2002) Regulatory agencies assess the potential for the transgenic plant to impact nontarget organisms before approving commercial release. 

A 1999 study found that in a lab environment, pollen from Bt maize dusted onto milkweed could harm the monarch butterfly. Losey JE et al. (1999) Transgenic pollen harms monarch larvae. Nature 399: 214 Several groups later studied the phenomenon in both the field and the laboratory, resulting in a risk assessment that concluded that any risk posed by the corn to butterfly populations under real-world conditions was negligible. A 2002 review of the scientific literature concluded that "the commercial large-scale cultivation of current Btmaize hybrids did not pose a significant risk to the monarch population". A 2007 review found that "nontarget invertebrates are generally more abundant in Bt cotton and Bt maize fields than in nontransgenic fields managed with insecticides. However, in comparison with insecticide-free control fields, certain nontarget taxa are less abundant in Bt fields." 

=== Gene flow ===
Gene flow is the transfer of genes and/or alleles from one species to another. Concerns focus on the interaction between GM and other maize varieties in Mexico, and of gene flow into refuges.

In 2009 the government of Mexico created a regulatory pathway for genetically modified maize, GMO Compass. 5 June 2009 Mexico: controlled cultivation of genetically modified maize but because Mexico is the center of diversity for maize, gene flow could affect a large fraction of the world's maize strains. Mike Shanahan for Science and Development Network, 10 November 2004. Warning issued on GM maize imported to Mexico - SciDev.Net Katie Mantell for Science and Development Network, 30 November 2001 GM maize found contaminating wild strains - SciDev.Net A 2001 report in Nature presented evidence that Bt maize was cross-breeding with unmodified maize in Mexico. The data in this paper was later described as originating from an artifact. Nature later stated, "the evidence available is not sufficient to justify the publication of the original paper". A 2005 large-scale study failed to find any evidence of contamination in Oaxaca. However, other authors also found evidence of cross-breeding between natural maize and transgenic maize. 

A 2004 study found Bt protein in kernels of refuge corn. 

=== Food ===
The French High Council of Biotechnologies Scientific Committee reviewed the 2009 Vendmois et al. study and concluded that it "..presents no admissible scientific element likely to ascribe any haematological, hepatic or renal toxicity to the three re-analysed GMOs." However, the French government applies the precautionary principle with respect to GMOs.

A review by Food Standards Australia New Zealand and others of the same study concluded that the results were due to chance alone. EFSA Minutes of the 55th Plenary Meeting of the Scientific Panel on Genetically Mofified Organisms Held on 27-28 January 2010 IN Parma, Italy, Annex 1, Vendemois et al. 2009 European Food Safety Authority report, Retrieved 27 July 2012 

A 2011 Canadian study looked at the presence of CryAb1 protein (BT toxin) in non-pregnant women, pregnant women and fetal blood. All groups had detectable levels of the protein, including 93% of pregnant women and 80% of fetuses at concentrations of 0.19  0.30 and 0.04  0.04 mean  SD ng/ml, respectively. The paper did not discuss safety implications or find any health problems. The paper was found to be unconvincing by multiple authors and organizations. Alain de Weck: Une protine pesticide OGM (Cry1ab) dans le sang de femmes gravides et de leur ftus? Un travail bcl et un scnario catastrophe trs probablement inexistant In a swine model, Cry1Ab-specific antibodies were not detected in pregnant sows or their offspring and no negative effects from feeding Bt maize to pregnant sows were observed. 

In January 2013, the European Food Safety Authority released all data submitted by Monsanto in relation to the 2003 authorisation of maize genetically modified for glyphosate tolerance. 

=== Starlink corn recalls ===

StarLink contains Cry9C, which had not previously been used in a GM crop. Department of Soil and Crop Sciences at Colorado State University, Page last updated March 11, 2004 StarLink Corn Starlink's creator, Plant Genetic Systems had applied to the US Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) to market Starlink for use in animal feed and in human food. Michael R. Taylor and Jody S. Tick of Resources for the Future, Pew Initiative on Food and Biotechnology. The StarLink Case: Issues for the Future However, because the Cry9C protein lasts longer in the digestive system than other Bt proteins, the EPA had concerns about its allergenicity, and PGS did not provide sufficient data to prove that Cry9C was not allergenic. "While EPA had no specific data to indicate that Cry9C was an allergen, the protein expressed in StarLink corn did exhibit certain characteristics (i.e. relative heat stability and extended time to digestion) that were common to known food allergens such as those found in peanuts, eggs, etc. EPAs concern was that StarLink corn may be a human food allergen and in the absence of more definitive data, EPA has not made a decision whether or not to register the human food use." Staff, EPA. November 2000 Executive Summary: EPA Preliminary Evaluation of Information Contained in the October 25, 2000 Submission from Aventis Cropscience As a result PGS split its application into separate permits for use in food and use in animal feed. Plant Genetic Systems (America) Inc.: PP 7G4921 Federal Register Vol. 62, No. 228, November 26, 1997 pp 63169 bottom of middle column - 63170 right column; see especially p63169 top of right column Starlink was approved by the EPA for use in animal feed only in May 1998. 

StarLink corn was subsequently found in food destined for consumption by humans in the US, Japan, and South Korea. This corn became the subject of the widely publicized Starlink corn recall, which started when Taco Bell-branded taco shells sold in supermarkets were found to contain the corn. Sales of StarLink seed were discontinued. King D, Gordon A. Contaminant found in Taco Bell taco shells. Food safety coalition demands recall (press release), vol 2001. Washington, DC: Friends of the Earth, 2000. 3 November 2001. The registration for Starlink varieties was voluntarily withdrawn by Aventis in October 2000. (Pioneer had been bought by AgrEvo which then became Aventis CropScience at the time of the incident, which was later bought by Bayer Agricultural Biotechnology: Updated Benefit Estimates, Janet E. Carpenter and Leonard )P. Gianessi 2001, National Center for Food and Agricultural Policy 

Fifty-one people reported adverse effects to the FDA; US Centers for Disease Control (CDC), which determined that 28 of them were possibly related to Starlink. Staff, EPA review committee. LLP Incidents However, the CDC studied the blood of these 28 individuals and concluded there was no evidence of hypersensitivity to the Starlink Bt protein. CDC, National Center for Environmental Health. Investigation of Human Health Effects Associated with Potential Exposure to Genetically Modified Corn: A Report to the U.S. Food and Drug Administration from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Atlanta,GA:Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, 2001. 

A subsequent review of these tests by the Federal Insecticide, Fungicide, and Rodenticide Act Scientific Advisory Panel points out that while "the negative results decrease the probability that the Cry9C protein is the cause of allergic symptoms in the individuals examined ... in the absence of a positive control and questions regarding the sensitivity and specificity of the assay, it is not possible to assign a negative predictive value to this." FIFRA Scientific Advisory Panel Report No. 2001-09, July 2001 

The US corn supply has been monitored for the presence of the Starlink Bt proteins since 2001. 

In 2005, aid sent by the UN and the US to Central American nations also contained some StarLink corn. The nations involved, Nicaragua, Honduras, El Salvador and Guatemala refused to accept the aid. 

In August 2013, StarLink corn was reported to be found in some foods in Saudi Arabia. 

=== Corporate Espionage ===
On December 19, 2013 six Chinese citizens were indicted in Iowa on charges of plotting to steal genetically modified seeds worth tens of millions of dollars to Monsanto and DuPont Mo Hailong, director of international business at the Beijing Dabeinong Technology Group Co., part of the Beijing-based DBN Group, was accused of stealing trade secrets after he was found digging in an Iowa cornfield. 

== See also ==
* Genetically modified food
* Genetically modified crops
* Genetically modified food controversies

== References ==

== External links ==
* GMO Safety - Overview on biosafety research projects on genetically modified maize funded by the Federal Ministry of Education and Research (BMBF)
* Co-Extra - research project on coexistence and traceability of GM and non-GM supply chains



[[Body substance isolation]]

Body substance isolation is a practice of isolating all body substances (blood, urine, feces, tears, etc.) of individuals undergoing medical treatment, particularly emergency medical treatment of those who might be infected with illnesses such as HIV, or hepatitis so as to reduce as much as possible the chances of transmitting these illnesses. Lynch P, Jackson MM, Cummings MJ, Stamm WE. Rethinking the role of isolation practices in the prevention of nosocomial infections. Ann Intern Med 1987;107(2):243-6. BSI is similar in nature to universal precautions, but goes further in isolating workers from pathogens, including substances now known to carry HIV.

==Place of body substance isolation practice in history==
Practice of Universal precautions was introduced in 198588. CDC. Update: universal precautions for prevention of transmission of human immunodeficiency virus, hepatitis B virus, and other bloodborne pathogens in health-care settings. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep 1988;37(24):377-82, 87-8. CDC. Recommendations for preventing transmission of infection with human T- lymphotropic virus type III/lymphadenopathy-associated virus in the workplace. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep 1985;34(450):681-6, 91-5. In 1987, the practice of Universal precautions was adjusted by a set of rules known as body substance isolation. In 1996, both practices were replaced by the latest approach known as standard precautions (health care). Nowadays and in isolation, practice of body substance isolation has just historical significance.

Body substance isolation went further than universal precautions in isolating workers from pathogens, including substances now currently known to carry HIV. These pathogens fall into two broad categories, bloodborne (carried in the body fluids) and airborne. The practice of BSI was common in Pre-Hospital care and Emergency Medical Services due to the often unknown nature of the patient and his/her disease or medical conditions. It was a part of the National Standards Curriculum for Prehospital Providers and Firefighters.

Types of body substance isolation included:
* Hospital gowns
* Medical gloves
* Shoe covers
* Surgical mask or N95 Respirator
* Safety Glasses

It was postulated that BSI precautions should be practiced in environment where treaters were exposed to bodily fluids, such as:
* blood, semen, preseminal fluid, vaginal secretions, synovial fluid, amniotic fluid, cerebrospinal fluid, pleural fluid, peritoneal fluid, marrow, pericardial fluid, feces, nasal secretions, urine, vomitus, sputum, mucus, cervical mucus, phlegm, saliva, breastmilk, colostrum, and secretions and blood from the umbilical cord Lynch P, Jackson MM, Cummings MJ, Stamm WE. Rethinking the role of isolation practices in the prevention of nosocomial infections. Ann Intern Med 1987;107(2):243-6. 

Such infection control techniques that were recommended following the AIDS outbreak in the 1980s. Every patient was treated as if infected and therefore precautions were taken to minimize risk. Other conditions which called for minimizing risks with BSI:

* Diseases with air-borne transmission (e.g., tuberculosis)
* Diseases with droplet transmission (e.g., mumps, rubella, influenza, pertussis)
* Transmission by direct or indirect contact with dried skin (e.g., colonisation with MRSA) or contaminated surfaces
* Prion diseases (e.g., Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease)
or any combination of the above.

== Footnotes ==

== Further reading ==
*
*

Epidemiology



[[Boudica]]

Boudica (; alternative spelling: Boudicca), also known as Boadicea , and known in Welsh as Buddug (d. AD 60 or 61) was queen of the British Iceni tribe, a Celtic tribe who led an uprising against the occupying forces of the Roman Empire.

Boudica's husband Prasutagus was ruler of the Iceni tribe. He ruled as a nominally independent ally of Rome and left his kingdom jointly to his daughters and the Roman emperor in his will. However, when he died, his will was ignored and the kingdom was annexed as if conquered. Boudica was flogged, her daughters were raped, and Roman financiers called in their loans.

In AD 60 or 61, while the Roman governor Gaius Suetonius Paulinus was leading a campaign on the island of Anglesey off the northwest coast of Wales, Boudica led the Iceni as well as the Trinovantes and others in revolt. Hingley, Richard; Unwin, Christina, Boudica: Iron Age Warrior Queen, Hambledon Continuum; New Ed edition (15 June 2006), ISBN 978-1-85285-516-1, p.44 and 61 They destroyed Camulodunum, which is modern Colchester. Camulodunum was earlier the capital of the Trinovantes, but at that time was a coloniaa settlement for discharged Roman soldiers, as well as the site of a temple to the former Emperor Claudius. Upon hearing the news of the revolt, Suetonius hurried to Londinium (modern London), the twenty-year-old commercial settlement that was the rebels' next target.

The Romans, having concluded that they did not have the numbers to defend the settlement, evacuated and abandoned Londinium. Boudica led 100,000 Iceni, Trinovantes and others to fight the Legio IX Hispana and burned and destroyed Londinium, and Verulamium (modern-day St Albans). N. Davies, The Isles: A History, 2008, p. 93. S. Dando-Collins, Legions of Rome: The definitive history of every Roman legion, 2012 An estimated 70,00080,000 Romans and British were killed in the three cities by those led by Boudica. Tacitus, Annals 14.33 Suetonius, meanwhile, regrouped his forces in the West Midlands, and despite being heavily outnumbered, defeated the Britons in the Battle of Watling Street.

The crisis caused the Emperor Nero to consider withdrawing all Roman forces from Britain, but Suetonius's eventual victory over Boudica confirmed Roman control of the province. Boudica then either killed herself so she would not be captured, or fell ill and died. The extant sources, Tacitus Tacitus, Agricola 14-16; Annals 14:29-39 and Cassius Dio, differ. Cassius Dio, Roman History .html#1 62:1-12 

Interest in the history of these events was revived during the English Renaissance and led to a resurgence of Boudica's fame during the Victorian era, and Queen Victoria was portrayed as her namesake. The Gentleman's Magazine, Vol. 42, 1854. http://books.google.co.uk/books?id=MFZIAAAAYAAJ&pg=PA541&dq=victoria+boadicea+namesake&hl=en&sa=X&ei=EsIjUcrkB4O_0QXXx4DwBQ&ved=0CDEQ6AEwAA#v=onepage&q=victoria%20boadicea%20namesake&f=false Boudica has since remained an important cultural symbol in the United Kingdom. However, the absence of native British literature during the early part of the first millennium means that knowledge of Boudica's rebellion comes solely from the writings of the Romans.

==History==

===Boudica's name===
Boudica has been known by several versions of her name. Raphael Holinshed calls her Voadicia, while Edmund Spenser calls her Bunduca, a version of the name that was used in the popular Jacobean play Bonduca, in 1612. Francis Beaumont and John Fletcher, Bonduca William Cowper's poem, Boadicea, an ode (1782) popularised an alternate version of the name. William Cowper, Boadicea, an ode From the 19th century and much of the late 20th century, Boadicea was the most common version of the name, which is probably derived from a mistranscription when a manuscript of Tacitus was copied in the Middle Ages.

Her name was clearly spelled Boudicca in the best manuscripts of Tacitus, but also , , and  in the (later and probably secondary) epitome of Cassius Dio. The name is attested in inscriptions as "Boudica" in Lusitania, Boudiga in Bordeaux, and Bodicca in Algeria. Graham Webster, Boudica: The British Revolt against Rome AD 60, 1978; Guy de la Bdoyre, The Roman Army in Britain. Retrieved 5 July 2005 

Kenneth Jackson concludes, based on later development of Welsh and Irish, that the name derives from the Proto-Celtic feminine adjective *boudka, "victorious", that in turn is derived from the Celtic word *bouda, "victory" (cf. Irish bua (Classical Irish buadh), Buaidheach, Welsh buddugoliaeth), and that the correct spelling of the name in the British language is Boudica, pronounced .

The closest English equivalent to the vowel in the first syllable is the ow in "bow-and-arrow"). Kenneth Jackson, "Queen Boudica?", Britannia 10, 1979 The modern English pronunciation is , Boudicca. Dictionary.com. Dictionary.com Unabridged (v 1.1). Random House, Inc. (Retrieved 20 December 2007). and it has been suggested that the most comparable English name, in meaning only, would be "Victoria". Rhys, Sir John. 1908. General Literature Committee: Society for Promoting Christian Knowledge (Great Britain). Early Britain, Celtic Britain. p. 284. 

===Background===
Location of Iceni territory within England, Wales and Mann; modern county borders for England and pre-1996 borders for Wales are shown for context.
Tacitus and Dio agree that Boudica was of royal descent. Dio says that she was "possessed of greater intelligence than often belongs to women", that she was tall and had hair described as red, reddish-brown, or tawny hanging below her waist. Dio also says she had a harsh voice and piercing glare, and habitually wore a large golden necklace (perhaps a torc), a many-coloured tunic, and a thick cloak fastened by a brooch. P. Keegan, Boudica, Cartimandua, Messalina and Agrippina the Younger. Independent Women of Power and the Gendered Rhetoric of Roman History The term xanthotrichos translated in this passage as red-brown or tawny can also mean auburn, or a shade short of brown, but most translators now agree a colour in between light and browny red - tawny -Boudica and her stories: narrative transformations of a warrior queen, Carolyn D. Williams, University of Delaware Press, 2009, p. 62. 

Her husband Prasutagus was the king of the Iceni, the people who inhabited roughly what is now Norfolk. They initially were not part of the territory under direct Roman control, having voluntarily allied themselves to Rome following Claudius' conquest of AD 43. They were proud of their independence, and had revolted in AD 47 when the then-governor Publius Ostorius Scapula threatened to disarm them. Tacitus, Annals 12:31-32 Prasutagus had lived a long life of conspicuous wealth and, hoping to preserve his line, made the Roman emperor co-heir to his kingdom, along with his wife and two daughters.

It was normal Roman practice to allow allied kingdoms their independence only for the lifetime of their client king, who would then agree to leave his kingdom to Rome in his will. For example, the provinces of Bithynia H. H. Scullard, From the Gracchi to Nero, 1982, p. 90 and Galatia, John Morris, Londinium: London in the Roman Empire, 1982, pp. 107-108 were incorporated into the Empire in just this way. Roman law also allowed inheritance only through the male line, so when Prasutagus died, his attempts to preserve his line were ignored and his kingdom was annexed as if it had been conquered. His lands and property were confiscated and nobles treated like slaves. According to Tacitus, Boudica was flogged and her daughters were raped. Cassius Dio says that Roman financiers, including Seneca the Younger, chose this time to call in their loans. Tacitus does not mention this, but does single out the Roman procurator Catus Decianus for criticism for his "avarice". Prasutagus, it seems, had lived well on borrowed Roman money, and on his death his subjects had become liable for the debt.

===Boudica's uprising===
In AD 60 or 61, while the current governor, Gaius Suetonius Paulinus, was leading a campaign against the island of Mona (modern Anglesey) in the north of Wales, which was a refuge for British rebels and a stronghold of the druids, the Iceni conspired with their neighbours the Trinovantes, amongst others, to revolt. Boudica was chosen as their leader. According to Tacitus, they drew inspiration from the example of Arminius, the prince of the Cherusci who had driven the Romans out of Germany in AD 9, and their own ancestors who had driven Julius Caesar from Britain. Tacitus, Agricola 15 Dio says that at the outset Boudica employed a form of divination, releasing a hare from the folds of her dress and interpreting the direction in which it ran, and invoked Andraste, a British goddess of victory.

The rebels' first target was Camulodunum (Colchester), the former Trinovantian capital and, at that time, a Roman colonia. The Roman veterans who had been settled there mistreated the locals and a temple to the former emperor Claudius had been erected there at local expense, making the city a focus for resentment. The Roman inhabitants sought reinforcements from the procurator, Catus Decianus, but he sent only two hundred auxiliary troops. Boudica's army fell on the poorly defended city and destroyed it, besieging the last defenders in the temple for two days before it fell. Archaeologists have shown that the city was methodically demolished. Jason Burke, "Dig uncovers Boudicca's brutal streak", The Observer, 3 December 2000 The future governor Quintus Petillius Cerialis, then commanding the Legio IX Hispana, attempted to relieve the city, but suffered an overwhelming defeat. His infantry was wiped outonly the commander and some of his cavalry escaped. The location of this famous destruction of the Legio IX is now claimed by some to be the village of Great Wratting, in Suffolk, which lies in the Stour Valley on the Icknield Way West of Colchester, and by a village in Essex. After this defeat, Catus Decianus fled to Gaul.

When news of the rebellion reached him, Suetonius hurried along Watling Street through hostile territory to Londinium. Londinium was a relatively new settlement, founded after the conquest of AD 43, but it had grown to be a thriving commercial centre with a population of travellers, traders, and, probably, Roman officials. Suetonius considered giving battle there, but considering his lack of numbers and chastened by Petillius's defeat, decided to sacrifice the city to save the province.

...Alarmed by this disaster and by the fury of the province which he had goaded into war by his rapacity, the procurator Catus crossed over into Gaul. Suetonius, however, with wonderful resolution, marched amidst a hostile population to Londinium, which, though undistinguished by the name of a colony, was much frequented by a number of merchants and trading vessels. Uncertain whether he should choose it as a seat of war, as he looked round on his scanty force of soldiers, and remembered with what a serious warning the rashness of Petilius had been punished, he resolved to save the province at the cost of a single town. Nor did the tears and weeping of the people, as they implored his aid, deter him from giving the signal of departure and receiving into his army all who would go with him. Those who were chained to the spot by the weakness of their sex, or the infirmity of age, or the attractions of the place, were cut off by the enemy. - Tacitus 

Londinium was abandoned to the rebels who burnt it down, slaughtering anyone who had not evacuated with Suetonius. Archaeology shows a thick red layer of burnt debris covering coins and pottery dating before AD 60 within the bounds of Roman Londinium., George Patrick Welch, Britannia: The Roman Conquest & Occupation of Britain, 1963, p. 107. whilst Roman-era skulls found in the Walbrook in 2013 were potentially linked to victims of the rebels. http://www.theguardian.com/science/2013/oct/02/roman-skulls-crossrail-london-boudicca Verulamium (St Albans) was next to be destroyed.

In the three settlements destroyed, between seventy and eighty thousand people are said to have been killed. Tacitus says that the Britons had no interest in taking or selling prisoners, only in slaughter by gibbet, fire, or cross. Dio's account gives more detail; that the noblest women were impaled on spikes and had their breasts cut off and sewn to their mouths, "to the accompaniment of sacrifices, banquets, and wanton behaviour" in sacred places, particularly the groves of Andraste.

===Romans rally===
Boadicea by Thomas Thornycroft, standing near Westminster Pier, London

While Boudica's army continued their assault in Verulamium (St. Albans), Suetonius regrouped his forces. According to Tacitus, he amassed a force including his own Legio XIV Gemina, some vexillationes (detachments) of the XX Valeria Victrix, and any available auxiliaries. Tacitus, Annals 14.34 The prefect of Legio II Augusta, Poenius Postumus, stationed near Exeter, ignored the call, Tacitus, Annals 14.37 and a fourth legion, IX Hispana, had been routed trying to relieve Camulodunum, Tacitus, Annals 14.32 but nonetheless the governor was able to call on almost ten thousand men.

Suetonius took a stand at an unidentified location, probably in the West Midlands somewhere along the Roman road now known as Watling Street, in a defile with a wood behind him  but his men were heavily outnumbered. Dio says that, even if they were lined up one deep, they would not have extended the length of Boudica's line. By now the rebel forces were said to have numbered 230,000, however, this number should be treated with scepticism  Dio's account is known only from a late epitome, and ancient sources commonly exaggerate enemy numbers.

Boudica exhorted her troops from her chariot, her daughters beside her. Tacitus gives her a short speech in which she presents herself not as an aristocrat avenging her lost wealth, but as an ordinary person, avenging her lost freedom, her battered body, and the abused chastity of her daughters. She said their cause was just, and the deities were on their side; the one legion that had dared to face them had been destroyed. She, a woman, was resolved to win or die; if the men wanted to live in slavery, that was their choice.

However, the lack of manoeuvrability of the British forces, combined with lack of open-field tactics to command these numbers, put them at a disadvantage to the Romans, who were skilled at open combat due to their superior equipment and discipline. Also, the narrowness of the field meant that Boudica could put forth only as many troops as the Romans could at a given time.

First, the Romans stood their ground and used volleys of pila (heavy javelins) to kill thousands of Britons who were rushing toward the Roman lines. The Roman soldiers, who had now used up their pila, were then able to engage Boudica's second wave in the open. As the Romans advanced in a wedge formation, the Britons attempted to flee, but were impeded by the presence of their own families, whom they had stationed in a ring of wagons at the edge of the battlefield, and were slaughtered. This is not the first instance of this tacticthe women of the Cimbri, in the Battle of Vercellae against Gaius Marius, were stationed in a line of wagons and acted as a last line of defence. Florus, Epitome of Roman History 1.38 Ariovistus of the Suebi is reported to have done the same thing in his battle against Julius Caesar. Julius Caesar, Commentarii de Bello Gallico 1.51 Tacitus reports that "according to one report almost eighty thousand Britons fell" compared with only four hundred Romans.

Boadicea Front View Thomas Thornycroft

According to Tacitus in his Annals, Boudica poisoned herself, though in the Agricola which was written almost twenty years prior he mentions nothing of suicide and attributes the end of the revolt to socordia ("indolence"); Dio says she fell sick and died and then was given a lavish burial; though this may be a convenient way to remove her from the story. Considering Dio must have read Tacitus, it is worth noting he mentions nothing about suicide (which was also how Postumus and Nero ended their lives).

Postumus, on hearing of the Roman victory, fell on his sword. Catus Decianus, who had fled to Gaul, was replaced by Gaius Julius Alpinus Classicianus. Suetonius conducted punitive operations, but criticism by Classicianus led to an investigation headed by Nero's freedman Polyclitus. Fearing Suetonius' actions would provoke further rebellion, Nero replaced the governor with the more conciliatory Publius Petronius Turpilianus. Tacitus, Annals 14.39 The historian Gaius Suetonius Tranquillus tells us the crisis had almost persuaded Nero to abandon Britain. Suetonius, Nero 18, 39-40 

===Location of her defeat===
The location of Boudica's defeat is unknown. Most historians favour a site in the West Midlands, somewhere along the Roman road now known as Watling Street. Kevin K. Carroll suggests a site close to High Cross in Leicestershire, on the junction of Watling Street and the Fosse Way, which would have allowed the Legio II Augusta, based at Exeter, to rendezvous with the rest of Suetonius's forces, had they not failed to do so. Kevin K. Carroll, "The Date of Boudicca's Revolt", Britannia 10, 1979 Manduessedum (Mancetter), near the modern town of Atherstone in Warwickshire, has also been suggested, Sheppard Frere, Britannia: A History of Roman Britain, 1987, p. 73 as has "The Rampart" near Messing in Essex, according to legend. Messing-cum-Inworth Community Website: Messing Village More recently, a discovery of Roman artefacts in Kings Norton close to Metchley Camp has suggested another possibility, Is Boudicca buried in Birmingham?, BBC, 25 May 2006. Retrieved 9 September 2006 and a thorough examination of a stretch of Watling Street between St. Albans, Boudica's last known location, and the Fosse Way junction has suggested the Cuttle Mill area of Paulerspury in Northamptonshire, which has topography very closely matching that described by Tacitus of the scene of the battle. Battlefield Britain (BBC). "The Rebellion of Boudicca" (2004), Paulerspury website 

In 2009 it was suggested that the Iceni were returning to East Anglia along the Icknield Way when they encountered the Roman army in the vicinity of Arbury Bank, Hertfordshire. Appleby, G. 2009. The Boudican Revolt: Countdown to Defeat. In Hertfordshire Archaeology and History, Volume 16, 2009, pp. 57-65. In March 2010, evidence was published suggesting the site may be located at Church Stowe, Northamptonshire. "Landscape Analysis and Appraisal Church Stowe, Northamptonshire, as a Candidate Site for the Battle of Watling Street, by craft:pegg" 

===Historical sources===
Tacitus, the most important Roman historian of this period, took a particular interest in Britain as his father-in-law Gnaeus Julius Agricola served there three times (and was the subject of his first book). Agricola was a military tribune under Suetonius Paulinus, which almost certainly gave Tacitus an eyewitness source for Boudica's revolt. Cassius Dio's account is only known from an epitome, and his sources are uncertain. He is generally agreed to have based his account on that of Tacitus, but he simplifies the sequence of events and adds details, such as the calling in of loans, that Tacitus does not mention.

Gildas, in his 6th century De Excidio et Conquestu Britanniae, may have been alluding to Boudica when he wrote "A treacherous lioness butchered the governors who had been left to give fuller voice and strength to the endeavours of Roman rule". 

==Cultural depictions==

===History and literature===
By the Middle Ages Boudica was forgotten. She makes no appearance in Bede's work, the Historia Brittonum, the Mabinogion or Geoffrey of Monmouth's History of the Kings of Britain. But the rediscovery of the works of Tacitus during the Renaissance allowed Polydore Vergil to reintroduce her into British history as "Voadicea" in 1534. Polydore Vergil's English History Book 2 (pp. 69-72). Raphael Holinshed also included her story in his Chronicles (1577), based on Tacitus and Dio, Raphael Holinshed, Chronicles: History of England 4.9-13 and inspired Shakespeare's younger contemporaries Francis Beaumont and John Fletcher to write a play, Bonduca, in 1610. William Cowper wrote a popular poem, "Boadicea, an ode", in 1782. 

It was in the Victorian era that Boudica's fame took on legendary proportions as Queen Victoria came to be seen as Boudica's "namesake", their names being identical in meaning. Victoria's Poet Laureate, Alfred, Lord Tennyson, wrote a poem, "Boadicea", and several ships were named after her. Alfred, Lord Tennyson, Boadicea A great bronze statue of Boudica with her daughters in her war chariot (furnished with scythes after the Persian fashion) was commissioned by Prince Albert and executed by Thomas Thornycroft. It was completed in 1905 and stands next to Westminster Bridge and the Houses of Parliament, with the following lines from Cowper's poem, referring to the British Empire:

Regions Caesar never knew
Thy posterity shall sway.

Ironically, the great anti-imperialist rebel was now identified with the head of the British Empire, and her statue stood guard over the city she razed to the ground. Graham Webster, Boudica: The British Revolt against Rome AD 60, 1978 

In more recent times, Boudica has been the subject of numerous documentaries, including some by Discovery Channel, History International Channel (now known as H2), and the BBC.

===Boudica and King's Cross===
The area of King's Cross, London was previously a village known as Battle Bridge which was an ancient crossing of the River Fleet. The original name of the bridge was Broad Ford Bridge.

The name "Battle Bridge" led to a tradition that this was the site of a major battle between the Romans and the Iceni tribe led by Boudica. The tradition is not supported by any historical evidence and is rejected by modern historians. However, Lewis Spence's 1937 book Boadicea - warrior queen of the Britons went so far as to include a map showing the positions of the opposing armies. There is a belief that she was buried between platforms 9 and 10 in King's Cross station in London, England. There is no evidence for this and it is probably a post-World War II invention. 

===Fiction/Music/Film===
*Henry Purcell's last major work, composed in 1695, was music for play entitled Bonduca, or the British Heroine (Z. 574). Selections include "To Arms", "Britons, Strike Home", and "O lead me to some peaceful gloom". Boudica has also been the primary subject of songs by Irish singer/songwriter Enya, Dutch soprano Petra Berger, Scottish singer/songwriter Steve McDonald, English metal band Bal-Sagoth, Faith and the Muse, and Dreams in the Witching House.
*Boudica has been the subject of two feature films, the 1928 film Boadicea, where she was portrayed by Phyllis Neilson-Terry, Boadicea (1928) and 2003's Boudica (Warrior Queen in the US), a UK TV film written by Andrew Davies and starring Alex Kingston as Boudica. Boudica (2003) She has also been the subject of a 1978 British TV series, Warrior Queen, starring Sin Phillips as Boudica. Jennifer Ward-Lealand portrayed Boudica in an episode of titled "The Deliverer" in 1997.
*The Viking Queen is a 1967 Hammer Films adventure film set in ancient Britain, in which the role of Queen Salina is based upon the historical figure of Boudica.
*In the fictional world of Ghosts of Albion, Queen Bodicea is one of three Ghosts who once were mystical protectors of Albion and assists the current protectors with advice and knowledge.
*In The Mauritius Command by Patrick O'Brian, the 4th novel of the Aubrey-Maturin series, Jack Aubrey is given command of the .
*Boudica's story is the subject of several novels, including books by Rosemary Sutcliff, Roxanne Gregory, Pauline Gedge, Manda Scott, Alan Gold, Diana L. Paxson, David Wishart, George Shipway, Simon Scarrow, Mary Mackie and J. F. Broxholme (a pseudonym of Duncan Kyle). She plays a central role in the first part of G. A. Henty's novel Beric the Briton, and The Queen's Brooch, a children's novel by Henry Treece, is set during her rebellion. One of the viewpoint characters of Ian Watson's novel Oracle is an eyewitness to her defeat. She has also appeared in several comic book series, including the Sline, which featured two runs, titled "Demon Killer" and "Queen of Witches" giving a free interpretation of Boudica's story. Other comic appearances include Witchblade and From Hell. The DC Comics character Boodikka, a member of the Green Lantern Corps, was named after Boudica. Additionally, in the alternate history novel Ruled Britannia by Harry Turtledove, Boudicca is the subject of a play written by William Shakespeare to incite the people of Britain to revolt against Spanish conquerors.
*Boudicca is a character in the animated series Gargoyles. Boudicca at The Gargoyles Encyclopedia. 
*The 2012 Big Finish Productions Doctor Who audio play The Wrath of the Iceni starring Tom Baker takes place during Boudica's uprising against the Romans. Boudica is portrayed by British actress Ella Kenion. Wrath of the Iceni at bigfinish.com. 
*In and , Boudicca is leader of the Celtic tribe.
*Enya recorded a song entitled "Boadicea" for her 1987 LP Enya.
*The lyrics of the song "The Good Old Days", written by Pete Doherty and Carl Barat for British rock band The Libertines, refer to her under the alternate spelling ("If Queen Boadicea is long dead and gone, Still then the spirit in her children's children's children, it lives on").
*Martha Howe-Douglas played Boudica in Horrible Histories.
*She appears as a character in the Xbox One exclusive game .
*She appears as a warrior angel in the pc game League of Angels as Boadicea.

===Other cultural references===
In 2003 an LTR retrotransposon from the genome of the human blood fluke "Schistosoma mansoni" was named "Boudicca". Copeland CS, Brindley PJ, Heyers O, Michael SF, Johnston DA, Williams DL, Ivens AC, Kalinna BH, "Boudica, a retrovirus-like long terminal repeat retrotransposon from the genome of the human blood fluke Schistosoma mansoni". Journal of Virology 2003 Jun;77(11):6153-66; Copeland CS, Heyers O, Kalinna BH, Bachmair A, Stadler PF, Hofacker IL, Brindley PJ, "Structural and evolutionary analysis of the transcribed sequence of Boudicca, a Schistosoma mansoni retrotransposon". Gene 2004;329:103-114. The Boudicca retrotransposon, a high-copy retroviral-like element, was the first mobile genetic element of this type to be discovered in S. mansoni.

In July 2008, the British television series Bonekickers, dedicated an hour to Boudica in the episode named "The Eternal Fire". "The Eternal Fire" on IMDB Various female politicians, including former Prime Minister of New Zealand Helen Clark have been called Boadicea. 

==See also==
*Gwenllian ferch Gruffydd
*List of women warriors in folklore

==References==

==Further reading==
* Aldhouse-Green, M., Boudica Britannia: Rebel, War-Leader and Queen (Harlow, Pearson Longman, 2006).
* 
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
* 
*
*
*
*
*

==External links==

* 
* (Subscription required). 
* The Iceni Hoard at the British Museum
* James Grout: Boudica, part of the Encyclopdia Romana
* Trying to Rule Britannia; BBC; 6 August 2004
* Iceni at Roman-Britain.org
* Iceni at Romans in Britain
* Boadicea may have had her chips on site of McDonald's by Nick Britten
* PBS Boudica / Warrior Queen website
* Warrior queens and blind critics - article on the 2004 film King Arthur which discusses Boudica
* Channel 4 History - In Boudica's Footsteps
* 

 



[[Borneo]]

Borneo is the third-largest island in the world and the largest island of Asia. At the geographic centre of Maritime Southeast Asia, in relation to major Indonesian islands, it is located north of Java, west of Sulawesi, and east of Sumatra.

The island is divided among three countries: Brunei and Malaysia on the north, and Indonesia to the south. Approximately 73% of the island is Indonesian territory. In the north, the Malaysian states of Sabah and Sarawak, along with the federal territory of Labuan, make up about 26% of the island. The sovereign state of Brunei, located on the north coast, comprises about 1% of Borneo's land area. Borneo is home to one of the oldest rainforests in the world.

==Geography==
Mount Kinabalu

Borneo is surrounded by the South China Sea to the north and northwest, the Sulu Sea to the northeast, the Celebes Sea and the Makassar Strait to the east, and the Java Sea and Karimata Strait to the south. To the west of Borneo are the Malay Peninsula and Sumatra. To the south and east are islands of Indonesia: Java and Sulawesi, respectively. To the northeast are the Philippines.

With an area of 743330 km2, it is the third-largest island in the world, and is the largest island of Asia (the largest continent). Its highest point is Mount Kinabalu in Sabah, Malaysia, with an elevation of 4095 m. 

The largest river system is the Kapuas in West Kalimantan, with a length of 1143 km. Other major rivers include the Mahakam in East Kalimantan (980 km), the Barito in South Kalimantan (880 km), and Rajang in Sarawak (562.5 km).

Borneo has significant cave systems. Clearwater Cave, for example, has one of the world's longest underground rivers. Deer Cave is home to over three million bats, with guano accumulated to over 100 m deep. BBC-TV: "Borneo", Planet Earth 

Before sea levels rose at the end of the last Ice Age, Borneo was part of the mainland of Asia, forming, with Java and Sumatra, the upland regions of a peninsula that extended east from present day Indochina. The South China Sea and Gulf of Thailand now submerge the former low-lying areas of the peninsula. Deeper waters separating Borneo from neighboring Sulawesi prevented a land connection to that island, creating the divide between Asian and Australia-New Guinea biological regions, known as Wallace's Line.

==Ecology==

True-color satellite image of the island of Borneo on 14 May 2012, as taken by the Terra satellite

The Borneo rainforest is 140 million years old, making it one of the oldest rainforests in the world. There are about 15,000 species of flowering plants with 3,000 species of trees (267 species are dipterocarps), 221 species of terrestrial mammals and 420 species of resident birds in Borneo. There are about 440 freshwater fish species in Borneo (about the same as Sumatra and Java combined). Nguyen, T.T.T., and S. S. De Silva (2006). "Freshwater Finfish Biodiversity and Conservation: An Asian Perspective", Biodiversity & Conservation 15(11): 3543-3568 It is the centre of the evolution and distribution of many endemic species of plants and animals. The Borneo rainforest is one of the few remaining natural habitats for the endangered Bornean orangutan. It is an important refuge for many endemic forest species, including the Asian elephant, the Sumatran rhinoceros, the Bornean clouded leopard, the Hose's civet and the dayak fruit bat.

In 2010 the World Wide Fund for Nature stated that 123 species have been discovered in Borneo since the "Heart of Borneo" agreement was signed in 2007. 

The WWFN has classified the island into seven distinct ecoregions. Most are lowland regions: 
* Borneo lowland rain forests cover most of the island, with an area of 427500 km2;
* Borneo peat swamp forests;
* Kerangas or Sundaland heath forests;
* Southwest Borneo freshwater swamp forests; and
* Sunda Shelf mangroves.
* The Borneo montane rain forests lie in the central highlands of the island, above the 1000 m elevation. The highest elevations of Mount Kinabalu are home to the Kinabalu mountain alpine meadow, an alpine shrubland notable for its numerous endemic species, including many orchids.

The island historically had extensive rainforest cover, but the area was reduced due to heavy logging for the Malaysian and Indonesian plywood industry. Half of the annual global tropical timber acquisition comes from Borneo. Palm oil plantations have been widely developed and are rapidly encroaching on the last remnants of primary rainforest. Forest fires of 1997 to 1998, started by the locals to clear the forests for plantations were exacerbated by an exceptionally dry El Nio season, worsening the annual shrinkage of the rainforest. During these fires, hotspots were visible on satellite images and the resulting haze affected four countries: Brunei, Malaysia, Indonesia, and Singapore.

In 2010 Sarawak announced a plan for energy production, the Sarawak Corridor of Renewable Energy, to try to establish sustainability. 

==History==
===Early history===
According to ancient Chinese, Indian and Javanese manuscripts, western coastal cities of Borneo had become trading ports by the first millennium. In Chinese manuscripts, gold, camphor, tortoise shells, hornbill ivory, rhinoceros horn, crane crest, beeswax, lakawood (a scented heartwood and root wood of a thick liana, Dalbergia parviflora), dragon's blood, rattan, edible bird's nests and various spices were described as among the most valuable items from Borneo. The Indians named Borneo Suvarnabhumi (the land of gold) and also Karpuradvipa (Camphor Island). The Javanese named Borneo Puradvipa, or Diamond Island. Archaeological findings in the Sarawak river delta reveal that the area was a thriving trading centre between India and China from the 500s until about 1300 AD. 

Dayaks, the natives of Borneo in their traditional war dress. Headhunting was an important part of Dayak culture.
One of the earliest evidence of Hindu influence in Southeast Asia were stone pillars which bear inscriptions in the Pallava script, found in Kutai along the Mahakam River in East Kalimantan, dating to around the second half of the 300s AD. 

By the 14th century, Borneo was under the control of the Majapahit kingdom based in present-day Indonesia. Muslims entered the island and converted many of the indigenous peoples to Islam.

During the 1450s, Shari'ful Hashem Syed Abu Bakr, an Arab born in Johor, arrived in Sulu from Malacca. In 1457, he founded the Sultanate of Sulu; he titled himself as "Paduka Maulana Mahasari Sharif Sultan Hashem Abu Bakr". The Sultanate of Brunei, during its golden age from the 15th century to the 17th century, ruled a large part of northern Borneo. In 1703 (other sources say 1658), the Sultanate of Sulu received the eastern part of North Borneo from the Sultan of Brunei, after Sulu sent aid against a rebellion in Brunei.

===Dutch and British control===
The Sultanate of Brunei granted large parts of land in Sarawak in 1842 to the English adventurer James Brooke, as reward for his having helped quell a local rebellion. Brooke established the Kingdom of Sarawak and was recognized as its rajah after paying a fee to the Sultanate. He established a monarchy, and the Brooke dynasty (through his nephew and great-nephew) ruled Sarawak for 100 years; the leaders were known as the White Rajahs. 

Raden Demang Bh, head of the Ot-Danom-Dayaks in Ambalu (Upper-Melawi river), Central-Borneo. Photographed between 1890 and 1920.
A large log being placed on a railroad car at Batottan, British North Borneo in 1926

In the early 19th century, British and Dutch governments signed the Anglo-Dutch Treaty of 1824 to exchange trading ports under their controls and assert spheres of influence. This resulted in indirectly establishing British- and Dutch-controlled areas in Borneo, in the north and south, respectively. The Malay and Sea Dayak pirates preyed on maritime shipping in the waters between Singapore and Hong Kong from their haven in Borneo. 

The British North Borneo Company controlled the territory of North Borneo (present-day Sabah) from 1882 to 1941. 

===World War II===

During World War II, Japanese forces gained control and occupied Borneo (194145). They decimated many local populations and killed Malay intellectuals. Sultan Muhammad Ibrahim Shafi ud-din II of Sambas in Kalimantan was executed in 1944. The Sultanate was thereafter suspended and replaced by a Japanese council. http://pariwisata.kalbar.go.id/index.php?op=deskripsi&u1=1&u2=1&idkt=4 During the Japanese occupation, the Dayak played a role in guerrilla warfare against the occupying forces, particularly in the Kapit Division. They temporarily revived headhunting of Japanese toward the end of the war. "'Guests' can succeed where occupiers fail", New York Times, 9 November 2007. Allied Z Special Unit provided assistance to them. After the fall of Singapore, the Japanese sent several thousand British and Australian prisoners of war to camps in Borneo. At one of the worst sites, around Sandakan in Borneo, only six of some 2,500 prisoners survived. Japanese Prisoners of War. Philip Towle, Margaret Kosuge, Yichi Kibata (2000). Continuum International Publishing Group. pp.4748. ISBN 1-85285-192-9 In 1945 the island was liberated by the Allies from the Japanese.

===Recent history===
Borneo was the main site of the confrontation between Indonesia and Malaysia between 1962 and about 1969. The British Army was deployed against the Indonesians and communist revolts to gain control of the whole area. Before the formation of Malaysian Federation, the Philippines claimed that the Malaysian state of Sabah was within their territory. They based this on the history of the Sultanate of Sulu's leasing agreement with the British North Borneo Company.

==Demographics==
The demonym for Borneo is Bornean or Bornese.

Borneo has 19.8 million inhabitants (in mid-2010), a population density of 26 inhabitants per square km. Most of the population lives in coastal cities, although the hinterland has small towns and villages along the rivers. The population consists mainly of Malay, Banjar, Chinese and Dayak ethnic groups. The Chinese, who make up 29% of the population of Sarawak and 17% of total population in West Kalimantan, Indonesia "Province of West Kalimantan, Indonesia". Guangdong Foreign Affairs Office. are descendants of immigrants primarily from southeastern China. "The world's successful diasporas", Management Today. 3 April 2007. 

The religion of the majority of the population in Kalimantan is Muslim, and some indigenous groups continue to practice animism. But, approximately 91% of the Dayak are Christian, a religion introduced by missionaries in the 19th century. In Central Kalimantan is a small Hindu minority. In the interior of Borneo are the Penan, some of who still live as nomadic hunter-gatherers. Some coastal areas have marginal settlements of the Bajau, who historically lived in a sea-oriented, boat-dwelling, nomadic culture. In the northwest of Borneo, the Dayak ethnic group is represented by the Iban, with about 710,000 members.

In Kalimantan since the 1990s, the Indonesian government has undertaken an intense transmigration program; it financed the relocation to that area of poor, landless families from Java, Madura, and Bali. By 2001, transmigrants made up 21% of the population in Central Kalimantan. Since the 1990s, the indigenous Dayak and Malays have resisted encroachment by these migrants: violent conflict has occurred between some transmigrant and indigenous populations. In the 1999 Sambas riots Muslim Malays and Animist Dayaks joined together to massacre thousands of the Muslim Madurese migrants. In Kalimantan, thousands were killed in 2001 fighting between Madurese transmigrants and the Dayak people in the Sampit conflict. 

==Largest cities==
The following is a list of 20 largest cities in Borneo by population, based on 2010 census for Indonesia and 2010 census for Malaysia. Population data signifies number within official districts and does not include adjoining or nearby conurbation outside defined districtssuch as, but not limited to, Kota Kinabalu and Banjarbaru. In other instances, the district area is much larger than the actual city it represents thereby "inflating" the population by including the rural population living further outside the actual citysuch as, but not limited to, Tawau and Palangkaraya.

 Rank City/Town Population Density (/km2) Country 
 1 Samarinda, East Kalimantan 727,500 929 Indonesia 
 2 Banjarmasin, South Kalimantan 625,481 8,687 Indonesia 
 3 Kuching, Sarawak 617,886 332 Malaysia 
 4 Balikpapan, East Kalimantan 557,579 1,058 Indonesia 
 5 Pontianak, West Kalimantan 554,764 5,146 Indonesia 
 6 Kota Kinabalu, Sabah 462,963 1,319 Malaysia 
 7 Tawau, Sabah 412,375 67 Malaysia 
 8 Sandakan, Sabah 409,056 181 Malaysia 
 9 Miri, Sarawak 300,543 64 Malaysia 
 10 Bandar Seri Begawan 276,608 490 Brunei 
 11 Sibu, Sarawak 247,995 111 Malaysia 
 12 Palangkaraya, Central Kalimantan 220,962 92 Indonesia 
 13 Lahad Datu, Sabah 206,861 28 Malaysia 
 14 Banjarbaru, South Kalimantan 199,627 538 Indonesia 
 15 Tarakan, North Kalimantan 193,370 771 Indonesia 
 16 Bintulu, Sarawak 189,146 26 Malaysia 
 17 Singkawang, West Kalimantan 186,462 370 Indonesia 
 18 Keningau, Sabah 177,735 50 Malaysia 
 19 Bontang, East Kalimantan 143,683 353 Indonesia 
 20 Victoria, Labuan 85,272 950 Malaysia 

==Administration==
Political divisions of Borneo
The island of Borneo is divided administratively by three countries. It is the only island in the world so divided:
* The Indonesian provinces of East, South, West, North and Central Kalimantan
* The Malaysian states of Sabah and Sarawak (The Federal Territory of Labuan is located on nearshore islands of Borneo, but not on the island of Borneo itself.)
* The independent country of Brunei (main part and eastern exclave of Temburong)

 Federal Stateor Province Capital Part of country Areakm2 Area% Populationcensuses of 2000 1) Populationcensuses of 2010 3) Population% 
 Brunei Bandar Seri Begawan Independent Sultanate 5,770 0.77 320,000 406,200(2009 est) 2.1 
 Sarawak Kuching Malaysia 124,450 16.55 2,012,616 2,420,009 12.2 
 Sabah Kota Kinabalu Malaysia 73,619 9.79 3,449,389 3,120,040 15.7 
 Labuan Victoria MalaysiaFederal territory 92 0.01 70,517 85,272 0.4 
 Malaysian Borneo Malaysia 198,161 26.4 4,532,522 5,625,321 28.4 
 West Kalimantan Pontianak Indonesia 146,760 19.5 4,034,198 4,393,239 22.2 
 Central Kalimantan Palangkaraya Indonesia 152,600 20.3 1,855,473 2,202,599 11.1 
 South Kalimantan Banjarmasin Indonesia 37,660 5.0 2,984,026 3,626,119 18.3 
 East Kalimantan Samarinda Indonesia 210,985 28.1 2,455,120 3,550,586 17.9 
 North Kalimantan Tanjung Selor Indonesia 71,177 9.46 (no data) 525,000 2.65 
 Kalimantan Indonesia 548,005 72.9 11,328,817 13,772,543 69.5 
 Borneo  3 countries 751,936 100.0 16,196,924 19,804,064 100.0 

1) Brunei: Census of Population 2001
2) islands administered as Borneo, geologically part of Borneo, on nearshore islands (2.5 km off the main island of Borneo)
3) Citypopulation.de reports on Official Decennial Censuses in 2010 for both Indonesia and Malaysia, independent estimate for Brunei.

==See also==

* Fauna of Borneo
* Flora of Borneo
* Endemic birds of Borneo
* Mammals of Borneo
* Hikayat Banjar
* Islands of Indonesia
* Maphilindo

==References==

==Further reading==
* Bowen, M. R., and T. V. Eusebio. 1982. "Acacia mangium: updated information on seed collection and handling and germination testing", Seed Series No. 5. FAO/UNDP-MAL/78/009. Forest Research Centre, Sandakan, Sabah, Malaysia.
* Bowen, M.R. and Eusebio, T.V. (1982): "Seed handling practices: four fast-growing hardwoods for humid tropical plantations in the eighties", Malaysian Forester, Vol. 45, No. 4: 534547
* Ghazally Ismail et al. (eds.) Scientific Journey Through Borneo Series. Universiti Malaysia Sarawak, Kota Samarahan. 19962001. * Gudgeon, L. W. W. British North Borneo. Adam and Charles Black, London, 1913.(An early, well-illustrated book on "British North Borneo", now known as Sabah)
* Mathai, J., Hon, J., Juat, N., Peter, A., & Gumal, M. 2010. "Small carnivores in a logging concession in the Upper Baram, Sarawak, Borneo," Small Carnivore Conservation 42: 19.
* K M Wong & C L Chan. "Mt Kinabalu: Borneo's Magic Mountain." Natural History Publications, Kota Kinabalu. 1998.
* Dennis Lau. Borneo: A Photographic Journey.
* Stephen Holley. "White Headhunter in Borneo", in Robert Young Pelton, Borneo.
* Mel White: " Borneo's moment of truth", National Geographic Magazine, November 2008.
* Mathai, J. 2010. "Hose's Civet: Borneo's mysterious carnivore". Nature Watch 18/4: 28.
* Robert Young Pelton. Fielding's Borneo
* Eric Hansen. Stranger in the Forest: On Foot Across Borneo.
* John Wassner. Espresso with the Headhunters: A Journey Through the Jungles of Borneo.
* Redmond O'Hanlon. Into the Heart of Borneo: An Account of a Journey Made in 1983 to the Mountains of Batu Tiban with James Fenton.
* Charles M. Francis. A Photographic Guide to Mammals of South-east Asia.
* Abdullah, MT. "Biogeography and variation of Cynopterus brachyotis in Southeast Asia." PhD thesis. The University of Queensland, St Lucia, Australia. 2003.
* Corbet, GB, Hill JE. The mammals of the Indomalayan region: a systematic review. Oxford University Press, Oxford. 1992.
* G.W.H. Davison, Chew Yen Fook. A Photographic Guide to Birds of Borneo.
* Hall LS, Gordon G. Grigg, Craig Moritz, Besar Ketol, Isa Sait, Wahab Marni and MT Abdullah. "Biogeography of fruit bats in Southeast Asia." Sarawak Museum Journal LX(81):191284. 2004.
* Karim, C., A.A. Tuen and M.T. Abdullah. "Mammals." Sarawak Museum Journal Special Issue No. 6. 80: 221234. 2004.
* Garbutt, Nick, and J. Cede Prudente. Wild Borneo: The Wildlife and Scenery of Sabah, Sarawak, Brunei, and Kalimantan. 2007.
* Mohd. Azlan J., Ibnu Maryanto, Agus P. Kartono, and MT Abdullah. "Diversity, Relative Abundance and Conservation of Chiropterans in Kayan Mentarang National Park, East Kalimantan, Indonesia." Sarawak Museum Journal 79: 251265. 2003.
* Hall LS, Richards GC, Abdullah MT. "The bats of Niah National Park, Sarawak." Sarawak Museum Journal. 78: 255282. 2002.

==External links==

* Environmental Profile of Borneo  Background on Borneo, including natural and social history, deforestation statistics, and conservation news.



[[Ballpoint pen]]

A ballpoint pen (also biro, and ball pen) is a writing instrument which dispenses a viscous ink from an internal reservoir through the rolling action of a metal ball at its point. This "ball point" may vary in diameter, and may be made of brass, steel, or tungsten carbide. 

Originally conceived and developed as a cleaner and more reliable alternative to quill and fountain pens, ballpoint pens are now the dominant writing instrument. 
Millions are manufactured and sold every day, worldwide, with low-cost and ubiquity assuring that there is always a ballpoint pen within reach. 

This so-called "invention that changed the way we write" has also influenced the way art is made; some professional artists use ballpoints to create fine artwork.
The Bic Cristal, a popular disposable model has gained recognition for its industrial design as part of the permanent collection at New York's Museum of Modern Art. Bic Cristal in MoMA collection Designer ballpoints are also produced for the high-end market by pen manufacturers, and prized by collectors.

==History==
Tip of a ballpoint pen highly magnified

===Origins===
The concept of using a ball point within a writing instrument as a method of applying ink to paper has existed since the late 19th century.
In these inventions, the ink was placed in a thin tube whose end was blocked by a tiny ball, held so that it could not slip into the tube or fall out of the pen. The ink clung to the ball, which spun as the pen was drawn across the paper.

The first patent for a ballpoint pen Collingridge, M. R. et al. (2007) "Ink Reservoir Writing Instruments 190520" Transactions of the Newcomen Society 77(1): pp. 69100, page 69 was issued on 30 October 1888, to John J. Loud, Great Britain Patent No. 15630, 30 October 2008 a leather tanner, who was attempting to make a writing instrument that would be able to write on his leather products, which then-common fountain pens could not. Loud's pen had a small rotating steel ball, held in place by a socket. Although it could be used to mark rough surfaces such as leather, as Loud intended, it proved to be too coarse for letter-writing. With no commercial viability, its potential went unexploited and the patent eventually lapsed. 
The manufacture of economical, reliable ballpoint pens as we know them arose from experimentation, modern chemistry, and precision manufacturing capabilities of the early 20th century. 
Patents filed worldwide during early development are testaments to failed attempts at making the pens commercially viable and widely available. 
Early ballpoints did not deliver the ink evenly; overflow and clogging were among the obstacles inventors faced toward developing reliable ballpoint pens. If the ball socket were too tight, or the ink too thick, it would not reach the paper. If the socket were too loose, or the ink too thin, the pen would leak or the ink would smear. 
Ink reservoirs pressurized by piston, spring, capillary action, and gravity would all serve as solutions to ink-delivery and flow problems. Collingridge, M. R. et al. (2007) "Ink Reservoir Writing Instruments 190520" Transactions of the Newcomen Society 77(1): pp. 69100, page 80 

Lszl Br, a Hungarian newspaper editor frustrated by the amount of time that he wasted filling up fountain pens and cleaning up smudged pages, noticed that inks used in newspaper printing dried quickly, leaving the paper dry and smudge free. He decided to create a pen using the same type of ink. 
Br enlisted the help of his brother Gyrgy, a chemist, to develop viscous ink formulas for new ballpoint designs. 

Br's innovation successfully coupled ink-viscosity with a ball-socket mechanism which act compatibly to prevent ink from drying inside the reservoir while allowing controlled flow. 
Br filed a British patent on 15 June 1938. The first complete specifications appear to be UK 498997, June 1938 and UK 512218, December 1938; his rather basic Hungarian patent 120037 was dated April 1938. Collingridge, M. R. et al. (2007) "Ink Reservoir Writing Instruments 190520" Transactions of the Newcomen Society 77(1): pp. 69100, page 80 

In 1941 the Br brothers and a friend, Juan Jorge Meyne, fled Germany and moved to Argentina, where they formed Br Pens of Argentina and filed a new patent in 1943. Their pen was sold in Argentina as the Birome (portmanteau of the names Br and Meyne), which is how ballpoint pens are still known in that country. 
This new design was licensed by the British, who produced ball point pens for RAF aircrew as the Biro. Ballpoint pens were found to be more versatile than fountain pens, especially at high altitudes where fountain pens were prone to ink-leakage. 

===Postwar proliferation===
Following World War II, many companies vied to commercially produce their own ballpoint pen design.
In post-war Argentina, success of the Birome ballpoint was limited, but in mid-1945 the Eversharp Co., a maker of mechanical pencils, teamed up with Eberhard Faber Co. to license the rights from Birome for sales in the United States. 

During the same period, American entrepreneur Milton Reynolds came across a Birome ballpoint pen during a business trip to Buenos Aires, Argentina. 
Recognizing commercial potential, he purchased several ballpoint samples, returned to the United States, and founded Reynolds International Pen Company.
Reynolds bypassed the Birome patent with sufficient design alterations to obtain an American patent, beating Eversharp and other competitors to introduce the pen to the US market. 
Debuting at Gimbels department store in New York City on 29 October 1945, for US$9.75 each, Reynolds Rocket became the first commercially successful ballpoint pen. 
Reynolds went to great extremes to market the pen, with great success; Gimbel's sold many thousands of pens within one week.
In Britain, the Miles Martin pen company was producing the first commercially successful ballpoint pens there by the end of 1945. 

Neither Reynolds' nor Eversharp's ballpoint lived up to consumer expectations in America and, although ballpoint pen sales peaked in 1946, consumer interest subsequently plunged due to market-saturation. 
By the early 1950s the ballpoint boom had subsided and Reynolds' company folded. 

Paper Mate pens, among the emerging ballpoint brands of the 1950s, bought the rights to distribute their own ballpoint pens in Canada. 
Facing concerns about ink-reliability, Paper Mate would pioneer new ink formulas and advertise them as "banker-approved". 
In 1954 Parker Pens released The Jotterthat company's first ballpointboasting additional features and technological advances which would also include the use of tungsten-carbide textured ball-bearings in their pens. 
In less than a year, Parker sold several million pens at prices between three and nine dollars. 
In the 1960s, the failing Eversharp Co. sold its pen division to Parker and ultimately folded. 

Marcel Bich also introduced a ballpoint pen to the American marketplace in the 1950s, licensed from Br and based on the Argentine designs. 
Bich shortened his name to Bic in 1953, becoming the ballpoint brand now recognised globally. 
Bic pens struggled until the company launched its "Writes The First Time, Every Time!" advertising campaign in the 1960s. 
Competition during this era forced unit prices to drop considerably. 
Bic Cristal ballpoint pens shown in four basic ink colours.

==Types of ballpoint pens==
Ballpoint pens are produced in both disposable and refillable models.
Refills allow for the entire internal ink reservoir, including a ballpoint and socket, to be replaced.
Such characteristics are usually associated with designer-type pens or those constructed of finer materials.
The simplest types of ballpoint pens are disposable and have a cap to cover the tip when the pen is not in use, or a mechanism for retracting the tip, which varies between manufacturers but is usually a spring- or screw-mechanism.

Rollerball pens employ the same ballpoint mechanics, but with the use of water-based inks instead of oil-based inks.
Compared to oil-based ballpoints, rollerball pens are said to provide more fluid ink-flow, but the water-based inks will blot if held stationary against the writing surface.
Water-based inks also remain wet longer when freshly applied and are thus prone to smearingposing problems to left-handed people (or right handed people writing right-to-left script) and running, should the writing surface become wet.

Because of a ballpoint pen's reliance on gravity to coat the ball with ink, most cannot be used to write upside-down. However, technology developed by Fisher pens in the United States resulted in the production of what came to be known as the "Fisher Space Pen."
Space Pens combine a more viscous ink with a pressurised ink reservoir which forces the ink toward the point. Unlike standard ballpoints, the rear end of a Space Pen's pressurized reservoir is sealed, eliminating evaporation and leakage, thus allowing the pen to write upside-down, in zero-gravity environments, and reportedly underwater. Astronauts have made use of these pens in outer space. 

Ballpoint pens with "erasable ink" were pioneered by the Paper Mate pen company. 
The ink formulas of erasable ballpoints have properties similar to rubber cement, allowing the ink it to be literally rubbed clean from the writing surface before drying and eventually becoming permanent. 
Erasable ink is much thicker than standard ballpoint inks, requiring pressurised cartridges to facilitate inkflowmeaning they may also write upside-down.
Though these pens are equipped with erasers, any eraser will suffice. 

The inexpensive, disposable Bic Cristal (also simply Bic pen or Biro) is reportedly the most widely sold pen in the world. Phaidon Design Classics- Volume 2, 2006 Phaidon Press Ltd. ISBN 0-7148-4399-7 
 Humble Masterpieces - The Museum of Modern Art New York, 8 April  27 September 2004. 
It was the Bic company's first product and is still synonymous with the company name.
 
 
The Bic Cristal is part of the permanent collection at the Museum of Modern Art in New York City, acknowledged for its industrial design.
 
Its hexagonal barrel mimics that of a wooden pencil and is transparent, showing the ink level in the reservoir.
The pen's streamlined cap has a small hole to prevent suffocation if children suck it into the throat. BICWorld.com FAQ - BIC World 
Example of a ballpoint pen work-in-progress by artist James Mylne.

Ballpoint pens are sometimes provided free by businesses, such as hotels, as a form of advertisingprinted with a company's name; a ballpoint pen is a relatively low cost advertisement that is highly effective (customers will use, and therefore see, a pen daily). Businesses and charities include ballpoint pens in direct mail campaigns to increase a customer's interest in the mailing. Ballpoints have also been produced to commemorate events, such as a pen commemorating the 1963 assassination of President John F. Kennedy. 

==As art medium==

Ballpoint pens have proven to be a versatile art medium for professional artists as well as amateur doodlers. Low cost, availability, and portability are cited by practitioners as qualities which make this common writing tool a convenient, alternative art supply. 
Some artists use them within mixed-media works, while others use them solely as their medium-of-choice. 

Effects not generally associated with ballpoint pens can be achieved. 
Traditional pen-and-ink techniques such as stippling and cross-hatching can be used to create half-tones or the illusion of form and volume. 
For artists whose interests necessitate precision line-work, ballpoints are an obvious attraction; ballpoint pens allow for sharp lines not as effectively executed using a brush. 
Finely applied, the resulting imagery has been mistaken for airbrushed artwork and photography, causing reactions of disbelief which ballpoint artist Lennie Mace refers to as the Wow Factor. 

Famous 20th Century artists such as Andy Warhol, among others, have utilised ballpoint pens to some extent during their careers. Ballpoint pen artwork continues to attract interest in the 21st Century, with contemporary artists gaining recognition for their specific use of ballpoint pens; for their technical proficiency, imagination and innovation. Korean-American artist Il Lee has been creating large-scale, ballpoint-only abstract artwork since the late 1970s. 
Since the 1980s, Lennie Mace creates imaginative, ballpoint-only artwork of varying content and complexity, applied to unconventional surfaces including wood and denim. The artist coined terms such as PENtings and Media Graffiti to describe his varied output. 
More recently, British artist James Mylne has been creating photo-realistic artwork using mostly black ballpoints, sometimes with minimal mixed-media color. 
In the mid-2000s (decade) Juan Francisco Casas generated Internet attention for a series of large-scale, photo-realistic ballpoint duplications of his own snapshots of friends, utilising only blue pens. 
Ballpoint "PENting" by Lennie Mace, Uchuu Neko Parade (2005) ballpoint pen and hardware on paper.

Using ballpoint pens to create artwork is not without limitations.
Color availability and sensitivity of ink to light are among concerns of ballpoint pen artists. 
Mistakes pose greater risks to ballpoint artists; once a line is drawn, it generally cannot be erased. 
Additionally, "blobbing" of ink on the drawing surface and "skipping" of ink-flow require consideration when using ballpoint pens for artistic purposes. 
Although the mechanics of ballpoint pens remain relatively unchanged, ink composition has evolved to solve certain problems over the years, resulting in unpredictable sensitivity to light and some extent of fading. 

==Manufacturing==
Although designs and construction vary between brands, basic components of all ballpoint pens are universal. 
Standard components include the freely-rotating ball point itself (distributing the ink), a socket holding the ball in place, and a self-contained ink reservoir supplying ink to the ball. 
In modern pens, narrow plastic tubes contain the ink, which is compelled downward to the ball by gravity. Brass, steel or tungsten carbide are used to manufacture the ball bearing-like points, then housed in a brass socket. 

The function of these components can be compared with the ball-applicator of roll-on antiperspirant; the same technology at a larger scale. The ball point delivers the ink to the writing surface while acting as a buffer between the ink in the reservoir and the air outside, preventing the quick-drying ink from drying inside the reservoir. Modern ballpoints are said to have a two-year shelf life, on average. 

The common ballpoint pen is a product of mass-production, with components produced separately on assembly-lines. 
Basic steps in the manufacturing process include (production) of ink formulas, moulding of metal and plastic components, and assembly. 
Marcel Bich was involved in developing the production of inexpensive ballpoint pens. 

===Standards===
The International Organization for Standardization has published standards for ball point and roller ball pens:

; ISO 12756:1998: Drawing and writing instruments  Ball point pens  Vocabulary 
; ISO 12757-1:1998: Ball point pens and refills  Part 1: General use 
; ISO 12757-2:1998: Ball point pens and refills  Part 2: Documentary use (DOC) 
Pentel R.S.V.P. ballpoint pens manufactured in multiple colours.
; ISO 14145-1:1998: Roller ball pens and refills  Part 1: General use 
; ISO 14145-2:1998: Roller ball pens and refills  Part 2: Documentary use (DOC) 

==See also==
*Gel pen
* List of pen types, brands and companies
*Rollerball pen

==References==

==External links==

* A history of the ballpoint pen.
* Did Biros really revolutionise writing? - BBC News - 24 October 2006
* Il Lees artist page at Art Projects International
* Lennie Maces official website
* James Mylnes official website
* Juan Francisco Casas' official website
* Laszlo Biro on Jewish.hu's list of famous Hungarians



[[Bipolar spectrum]]

#redirect bipolar disorder



[[Burroughs Corporation]]

right
The Burroughs Corporation was a major American manufacturer of business equipment. The company was founded in 1886 as the American Arithmometer Company, and after the 1986 merger with Sperry Univac was renamed Unisys. The company's history paralleled many of the major developments in computing. At its start it produced mechanical adding machines, and later moved into programmable ledgers and then computers. And while it was one of the largest producers of mainframe computers in the world, Burroughs also produced related equipment as well, including typewriters and printers.

==Early history==
1914 advertisement
An early Burroughs adding machine 
Desktop model in use around 1910
In 1886, the American Arithmometer Company was established in St. Louis, Missouri to produce and sell an adding machine invented by William Seward Burroughs (grandfather of Beat Generation author William S. Burroughs). In 1904, six years after Burroughs' death, the company moved to Detroit and changed its name to the Burroughs Adding Machine Company. It soon was the biggest adding machine company in America.

==Evolving product lines==

The adding machine range began with the basic, hand-cranked P100 which was only capable of adding. The design included some revolutionary features, foremost of which was the dashpot. The P200 offered a subtraction capability and the P300 provided a means of keeping 2 separate totals. The P400 and the P600, the top of the range of which was the P612 provided a moveable carriage and, in the case of the P600/P612 range some limited programmability based upon the position of the carriage. The range was further extended by the inclusion of the "J" series which provided a single finger calculation facility, and the "c" series of both manual and electrical assisted comptometers. In the late 60's the Burroughs sponsored "nixi-tube" provided an electronic display calculator.
Burroughs developed a range of adding machines with different capabilities, gradually increasing in their capabilities. A revolutionary adding machine was the Sensimatic, which was able to perform many business functions semi-automatically. It had a moving programmable carriage to maintain ledgers. It could store 9, 18 or 27 balances during the ledger posting operations and worked with a mechanical adder named a Crossfooter. The Sensimatic developed into the Sensitronic which could store balances on a magnetic stripe which was part of the ledger card. This balance was read into the accumulator when the card was inserted into the carriage. The Sensitronic was followed by the E1000, the E2000, E4000, E6000 and the E8000, which was computer system supporting magnetic tape, card reader/punches and a line printer.

Later, Burroughs was selling more than adding machines, including typewriters. But the biggest shift in company history came in 1953; the Burroughs Adding Machine Company was renamed the Burroughs Corporation and began moving into computer products, initially for banking institutions. This move began with Burrough's purchase, in June 1956, of the ElectroData Corporation in Pasadena, California, a spinoff of the Consolidated Engineering Corporation which had designed test instruments and had a cooperative relationship with Caltech in Pasadena. Sawyer, T.J., "Burroughs 205 HomePage" ElectroData had built the Datatron 205 and was working on the Datatron 220. The first major computer product that came from this marriage was the B205 tube computer. In the late 1960s the D2000, D4000 range was produced (also known as the TC500Terminal Computer 500) which had a golf ball printer and a 1K (80 bit) disk memory. These were popular as branch terminals to the B5500/6500/6700 systems, which sold well in the banking sector, where they were often connected to non-Burroughs mainframes. In conjunction with these products, Burroughs also manufactured an extensive range of cheque processing equipment, normally attached as terminals to a larger system such as a B2700 or B1700.

==A force in the computing industry==
Burroughs was one of the nine major United States computer companies (with IBM, the largest, Honeywell, NCR Corporation, Control Data Corporation, General Electric, Digital Equipment Corporation, RCA and UNIVAC) through most of the 1960s. In terms of sales, Burroughs was always a distant second to IBM. In fact, IBM's share of the market at the time was so much larger than all of the others, that this group was often referred to as "IBM and the Seven Dwarfs." 
 By 1972 when GE and RCA were no longer in the mainframe business, the remaining five companies behind IBM became known as the BUNCH, an acronym based on their initials.

At the same time, Burroughs was very much a competitor. Like IBM, Burroughs tried to supply a complete line of products for its customers, including Burroughs-designed printers, disk drives, tape drives, computer printing paper, and even typewriter ribbons.

In the 1950s, Burroughs worked with the Federal Reserve Bank on the development and computer processing of magnetic ink character recognition (MICR) especially for the processing of bank cheques. Burroughs made special MICR/OCR sorter/readers which attached to their medium systems line of computers (2700/3700/4700) and this entrenched the company in the computer side of the banking industry.

===Developments and innovations===
The Burroughs Corporation developed three highly innovative architectures, based on the design philosophy of "language directed design". Their machine instruction sets favored one or many high level programming languages, such as ALGOL, COBOL or FORTRAN. All three architectures were considered mainframe class machines:
* The Burroughs large systems machines started with the B5000 in 1961. The B5500 came a few years later when large rotating disks replaced drums as the main external memory media. These B5000 Series systems used the world's first virtual memory multi-programming operating system. They were followed by the B6500/B6700 in the later 1960s, the B7700 in the mid 1970s, and the A series in the 1980s. The underlying architecture of these machines is similar and continues today as the Unisys ClearPath MCP line of computers: stack machines designed to be programmed in an extended Algol 60. Their operating systems, called MCP (Master Control Program&mdash;the name later borrowed by the screenwriters for Tron), were programmed in ESPOL (Executive Systems Programming Oriented Language, a minor extension of ALGOL), and later in NEWP (with further extensions to ALGOL) almost a decade before Unix. The command interface developed into a compiled structured language with declarations, statements and procedures called WFL (Work Flow Language). Many computer scientists consider these series of computers to be technologically groundbreaking. Stack oriented processors, with 48 bit word length where each word was defined as data or program contributed significantly to a secure operating environment, long before spyware and viruses affected computing. And the modularity of these large systems was also unique: multiple CPUs, multiple memory modules and multiple I/O and Data Comm processors permitted incremental and cost effective growth of system performance and reliability. In industries like banking, where continuous operations was mandatory, Burroughs large systems penetrated most every large bank, including the Federal Reserve Bank. And Burroughs built the backbone switching systems for Society for Worldwide Interbank Financial Telecommunication (SWIFT) which sent its first message in 1977. Unisys is still the provider to SWIFT today.
* Burroughs produced the B2500 or "medium systems" computers aimed primarily at the business world. The machines were designed to execute COBOL efficiently. This included a BCD (Binary Coded Decimal) based arithmetic unit, storing and addressing the main memory using base 10 numbering instead of binary. The designation for these systems was Burroughs B2500 through B49xx, followed by Unisys V-Series V340 through V560.
* Burroughs produced the B1700 or "small systems" computers that were designed to be microprogrammed, with each process potentially getting its own virtual machine designed to be the best match to the programming language chosen for the program being run.
* The smallest general-purpose computers were the B700 "microprocessors" which were used both as stand-alone systems and as special-purpose data-communications or disk-subsystem controllers.
* Burroughs also manufactured an extensive range of accounting machines including both stand-alone systems such as the Sensimatic, L500 and B80, and dedicated terminals including the TC500 and specialised check processing equipment. Burroughs B80 Family 
* In 1982, Burroughs began producing personal computers, the B20 and B25 lines with the Intel 8086/8088 family of 8-bit chips as the processor. "B25 FAMILY OF UNIVERSAL WORKSTATIONS INTRODUCTION", 1987 These ran the BTOS operating system, which Burroughs licensed from Convergent Technologies. These machines implemented an early Local Area Network to share a hard disk between workgroup users. These microcomputers were later manufactured in Kunming, China for use in China under agreement with Burroughs. "China Deal For Burroughs", The New York Times, AP story, January 3, 1985 

* Burroughs collaborated with University of Illinois on a multiprocessor architecture developing the ILLIAC IV computer in the early 1960s. The ILLIAC had up to 128 parallel processors while the B6700 & B7700 only accommodated a total of 7 CPUs and/or IO units (the 8th unit was the memory tester).
* Burroughs made military computers, such as the D825 (the "D" prefix signifying it was for defense industrial use), in its Great Valley Laboratory in Paoli, Pennsylvania. "Burroughs BUIC - AN/GSA-51 SAGE Backup", archived at SMECC The D825 was, according to some scholars, the first true multiprocessor computer. Paoli was also home to the Defense and Space Group Marketing Division. 
"Burroughs Display Systems", Defense and Space Group Marketing Division, Paoli, Pennsylvania, 1965 
* In 1964 Burroughs had also completed the D830 which was another variation of the D825 designed specifically for real-time applications, such as airline reservations. Burroughs designated it the B8300 after Trans World Airlines (TWA) ordered one in September 1965. A system with three instruction processors was installed at TWA's reservations center in Rockleigh, New Jersey in 1968. The system, which was called George, with an application programmed in JOVIAL, was intended to support some 4000 terminals, but even after a fourth processor was added it couldn't handle the workload. TWA canceled the project in 1970, acquiring one IBM System/360 Model 75, two IBM System/360 model 65s, and IBM's PARS software for its reservations system. TWA sued Burroughs for non-fulfillment of the contract, but Burroughs counter-sued, stating that the basic system did work and that the problems were in TWA's applications software. The two companies reached an out-of-court settlement. Gray, George, "Burroughs Third-Generation Computers", Unisys History Newsletter, Volume 3, Number 5, October, 1999 
* Burroughs developed a half-size version of the D825 called the D82, cutting the word size from 48 to 24 bits and simplifying the computer's instruction set. The D82 could have up to 32,768 words of core memory and continued the use of separate instruction and i/o processors. Burroughs sold a D82 to Air Canada to handle reservations for trips originating in Montreal and Quebec. This design was further refined and made much more compact as the D84 machine which was completed in 1965. A D84 processor/memory unit with 4096 words of memory occupied just 1.4 cubic feet. This system was used successfully in two military projects: field test systems used to check the electronics of the Air Force General Dynamics F-111 Aardvark fighter plane and systems used to control the countdown and launch of the Army's Pershing missile. "Title: Trade show exhibition featuring the D84; Date 1965", University of Minnesota archives 

==Merger==
In September 1986, Burroughs Corporation merged with Sperry Corporation to form Unisys. For a time, the combined company retained the Burroughs processors as the A- and V-systems lines. However, as the market for large systems shifted from proprietary architectures to common servers, the company eventually dropped the V-Series line, although customers continued to use V-series systems . Unisys continues to develop and market the A-Series, now known as ClearPath. 

 

== Re-emergence of the Burroughs name ==
Burroughs Payment Systems in Plymouth, Michigan, 2011
In 2010, UNISYS sold off its Payment Systems Division to Marlin Equity Partners, a California-based private investment firm, which incorporated it as Burroughs Payment Systems based in Plymouth, Michigan. "Marlin Equity Partners acquires elements of Unisys payment systems", Burroughs press release, February 3, 2010. Burroughs Payment Systems website.In 2012, the company changed its name to Burroughs, Inc. "The re-emergence of a company brand that began over 100 years ago solidifies our commitment to provide innovative solutions to your business needs. Back then, the introduction of Burroughs adding machines simplified daily operations for thousands of corporations. Today, our focus on payment systems related technologies and services has resulted in countless efficiencies for financial institutions and businesses alike who process check and cash transactions." 

==References in popular culture==
Burroughs B205 hardware has appeared as props in many Hollywood television and film productions from the late 1950s. For example a B205 console was often shown in the television series Batman as the Bat Computer; also as the computer in Lost in Space. B205 tape drives were often seen in series such as The Time Tunnel and Voyage to the Bottom of the Sea. "B205 On Screen" 

==References==

==Further reading==
* Allweiss, Jack A., "Evolution of Burroughs Stack Architecture - Mainframe Computers", 2010
* Barton, Robert S. "A New Approach to the Functional Design of a Digital Computer" Proc. western joint computer Conf. ACM (1961).
*Gray, George. "Some Burroughs Transistor Computers", Unisys History Newsletter, Volume 3, Number 1, March 1999.
*Gray, George. "Burroughs Third-Generation Computers", Unisys History Newsletter, Volume 3, Number 5, October 1999.
*Hauck, E.A., Dent, Ben A. "Burroughs B6500/B7500 Stack Mechanism", SJCC (1968) pp. 245251.
* Martin, Ian L. (2012) "Too far ahead of its time: Barclays, Burroughs and real-time banking", IEEE Annals of the History of Computing 34(2), pp. 519. ISSN 1051-6180. (Draft version)
* Mayer, Alastair J.W., "The Architecture of the Burroughs B5000 - 20 Years Later and Still Ahead of the Times?", ACM Computer Architecture News, 1982 (archived at the Southwest Museum of Engineering, Communications and Computation. Glendale, Arizona)
*McKeeman, William M. "Language Directed Computer Design", FJCC (1967) pp. 413417.
*Organick, Elliot I. "Computer System Organization The B5700/B6700 series", Academic Press (1973)
*Wilner, Wayne T. "Design of the B1700", FJCC pp. 489497 (1972).
* Wilner, Wayne T., "B1700 Design and Implementation", Burroughs Corporation, Santa Barbara Plant, Goleta, California, May 1972.

==External links==

* Burroughs Corporation Records Charles Babbage Institute University of Minnesota, Minneapolis. Collection contains the records of the Burroughs Corporation, and its predecessors the American Arithmometer Company and Burroughs Adding Machine Company. Materials include corporate records, photographs, films and video tapes, scrapbooks, papers of employees and the records of companies acquired by Burroughs. CBI's Burroughs Corporation Records includes over 100,000 photographs depicting the entire visual history of Burroughs from its origin as the American Arithmometer Corporation in 1886 to its merger with the Sperry Corporation to form the Unisys Corporation in 1986.
* Burroughs Corporation Photo Database at the Charles Babbage Institute University of Minnesota. The searchable photo database permits browsing and retrieval of over 550 historical images.
* "Burroughs B 5000 Conference, OH 98", Oral history on 6 September 1985, Marina del Ray, California. Charles Babbage Institute, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis. The Burroughs 5000 computer series is discussed by individuals responsible for its development and marketing from 1957 through the 1960s in a 1985 conference sponsored by AFIPS and Burroughs Corporation.
* Oral history interview with Isaac Levin Auerbach Charles Babbage Institute University of Minnesota. Auerbach discusses his work at Burroughs 19491957 managing development for the SAGE project, BEAM I computer, the Intercontinental Ballistic Missile System, a magnetic core encryption communications system, and Atlas missile.
* Oral history interview with Robert V. D. Campbell. Discusses his work at Burroughs (19491966) as director of research and in program planning.
* Oral history interview with Alfred Doughty Cavanaugh Cavanaugh discusses the work of his grandfather, A. J. Doughty, with William Seward Burroughs and the Burroughs Adding Machine Company.
* Oral history interview with Carel Sellenraad Charles Babbage Institute University of Minnesota. Sellenraad describes his long association with Burroughs Adding Machine Company, and the impact of World Wars I & II on the sales and service of calculators, and adding and bookkeeping machines in Europe.
* Oral history interview with Ovid M. Smith Charles Babbage Institute University of Minnesota. Smith reviews his 46 year career at Burroughs Adding Machine Company (later Burroughs Corporation).
* "Early Burroughs Machines", University of Virginia's Computer Museum.
* Older Burroughs computer manuals online
* Burroughs computers such as the D825 at BRL
* An historical Burroughs Adding Machine Company/Burroughs site
* Unofficial list of Burroughs manufacturing plants and labs
* Ian Joyner's Burroughs page
* The Burroughs B5900 and E-Mode: A bridge to 21st Century Computing - Jack Allweiss

 

[[Brick]]

 A wall constructed in glazed-headed Flemish bond with bricks of various shades and lengths
A pallet of bricks stacked without mortar
An old brick wall in English bond laid with alternating courses of headers and stretchers
Bricked Front Street along the Cane River in historic Natchitoches, Louisiana

A brick is a block or a single unit of a kneaded clay-bearing soil, sand and lime, or concrete material, fire hardened or air dried, used in masonry construction. Fired brick are the most numerous type and are laid in courses and numerous patterns known as bonds, collectively known as brickwork, and may be laid in various kinds of mortar to hold the bricks together to make a durable structure. World Book Encyclopedia Brick are produced in numerous types, materials, and sizes which vary with region and time period, and are produced in bulk quantities. Two most basic categories of brick are fired and non-fired brick. Fired brick are one of the longest lasting and strongest building materials sometimes referred to as artificial stone and have been used since circa 5000 BC. Air dried bricks have a history older than fired bricks, are known by the synonyms mud brick and adobe, and have an additional ingredient of a mechanical binder such as straw.

==History==
Brick Using for House Construction - Kerala, India
The Roman Basilica Aula Palatina in Trier, Germany, built with fired bricks in the 4th century as an audience hall for Constantine I

===Middle East===
The earliest bricks were dried brick, meaning they were formed from clay-bearing earth or mud and dried (usually in the sun) until they were strong enough for use. The oldest discovered bricks, originally made from shaped mud and dating before 7500 BC, were found at Tell Aswad, in the upper Tigris region and in southeast Anatolia close to Diyarbakir. IFP Orient  Tell Aswad. Wikis.ifporient.org. Retrieved on 2012-11-16. Other more recent findings, dated between 7,000 and 6,395 BC, come from Jericho, Catal Hyk, and the ancient Indus Valley cities of Buhen, Mohenjo-daro, Harappa, History of brickmaking, Encyclopdia Britannica. and Mehrgarh. 

The ancient Jetavanaramaya stupa in Anuradhapura, Sri Lanka is one of the largest brick structures in the world.
The world's highest brick tower of St. Martin's Church in Landshut, Germany, completed in 1500
Malbork Castle, former Ordensburg of the Teutonic Order  biggest brick castle in the world

Ceramic, or fired brick was used as early as 2900 BC in early Indus Valley cities , Bricks and urbanism in the Indus Valley. 

===China===
In pre-modern China, bricks were being used from the 2nd millennium BCE at a site near Xi'an. Brook, 1920 Bricks were produced on a larger scale under the Western Zhou dynasty about 3,000 years ago, and evidence for some of the first fired bricks ever produced has been discovered in ruins dating back to the Zhou. Earliest Chinese building brick appeared in Xi'an (). takungpao.com (2010-1-28) China's first brick, possible earliest brick in China ("" "")  (Earliest fired brick discovered in Xi'an). sina.com.tw. 2010-01-30 (in Chinese) The carpenter's manual Yingzao Fashi, published in 1103 at the time of the Song Dynasty described the brick making process and glazing techniques then in use. Using the 17th century encyclopedic text Tiangong Kaiwu, historian Timothy Brook outlined the brick production process of Ming Dynasty China:

:"...the kilnmaster had to make sure that the temperature inside the kiln stayed at a level that caused the clay to shimmer with the colour of molten gold or silver. He also had to know when to quench the kiln with water so as to produce the surface glaze. To anonymous laborers fell the less skilled stages of brick production: mixing clay and water, driving oxen over the mixture to trample it into a thick paste, scooping the paste into standardized wooden frames (to produce a brick roughly 42cm long, 20cm wide, and 10cm thick), smoothing the surfaces with a wire-strung bow, removing them from the frames, printing the fronts and backs with stamps that indicated where the bricks came from and who made them, loading the kilns with fuel (likelier wood than coal), stacking the bricks in the kiln, removing them to cool while the kilns were still hot, and bundling them into pallets for transportation. It was hot, filthy work.

The brickwork of Shebeli Tower in Iran displays 12th-century craftsmanship

===Europe===
Early civilizations around the Mediterranean adopted the use of fired bricks, including the Ancient Greeks and Romans. The Roman legions operated mobile kilns, and built large brick structures throughout the Roman Empire, stamping the bricks with the seal of the legion.

During the Early Middle Ages the use of bricks in construction became popular in Northern Europe, after being introduced there from Northern-Western Italy. An independent style of brick architecture, known as brick Gothic (similar to Gothic architecture) flourished in places that lacked indigenous sources of rocks. Examples of this architectural style can be found in modern-day Denmark, Germany, Poland, and Russia.

This style evolved into Brick Renaissance as the stylistic changes associated with the Italian Renaissance spread to northern Europe, leading to the adoption of Renaissance elements into brick building. A clear distinction between the two styles only developed at the transition to Baroque architecture. In Lbeck, for example, Brick Renaissance is clearly recognisable in buildings equipped with terracotta reliefs by the artist Statius von Dren, who was also active at Schwerin (Schwerin Castle) and Wismar (Frstenhof).
Chile house in Hamburg, Germany

Long distance bulk transport of bricks and other construction equipment remained prohibitively expensive until the development of modern transportation infrastructure, with the construction of canal, roads and railways.

===Industrial era===
Production of bricks increased massively with the onset of the Industrial Revolution and the rise in factory building in England. For reasons of speed and economy, bricks were increasingly preferred as building material to stone, even in areas where the stone was available. It was at this time in London, that bright red brick was chosen for construction in order to make the buildings more visible in the heavy fog and to prevent traffic accidents. 

The transition from the traditional method of production known as 'hand-moulding' to a mechanised form of mass production slowly took place during the first half of the nineteenth century. Possibly the first successful brick-making machine was patented by a Mr Henry Clayton, employed at the Atlas Works in Middlesex, England, in 1855, and was capable of producing up to 25,000 bricks daily with minimal supervision. His mechanical apparatus soon achieved widespread attention after it was adopted for use by the South Eastern Railway Company for brick-making at their factory near Folkestone. The Bradley & Craven Ltd Stiff-Plastic Brickmaking Machine was patented in 1853, apparently predating Clayton. Bradley & Craven went on to be a dominant manufacturer of brickmaking machinery. The First Hundred Years: the Early History of Bradley & Craven, Limited, Wakefield, England by Bradley & Craven Ltd (1963) 

The demand for high office building construction at the turn of the 20th century, led to a much greater use of cast and wrought iron and later steel and concrete. The use of brick for skyscraper construction severely limited the size of the building - the Monadnock Building, built in 1896 in Chicago required exceptionally thick walls to maintain the structural integrity of its 17 storeys.

Following pioneering work in the 1950s at the Swiss Federal Institute of Technology and the Building Research Establishment in Watford, UK, the use of improved masonry for the construction of tall structures up to 18 storeys high was made viable. However, the use of brick has largely remained restricted to small to medium sized buildings, as steel and concrete remain superior materials for high-rise construction. 

==Methods of manufacture==

Brick making at the beginning of the 20th century.

Three basic types of brick are un-fired, fired, and chemically set bricks. Each type is manufactured differently. 

===Fired brick===
Fired bricks are burned in a kiln which makes them durable. Modern, fired, clay bricks are formed in one of three processes  soft mud, dry press, or extruded.

Normally, brick contains the following ingredients: 

# Silica (sand)  50% to 60% by weight
# Alumina (clay)  20% to 30% by weight
# Lime  2 to 5% by weight
# Iron oxide   7% by weight
# Magnesia  less than 1% by weight

The soft mud method is the most common, as it is the most economical. It starts with the raw clay, preferably in a mix with 2530% sand to reduce shrinkage. The clay is first ground and mixed with water to the desired consistency. The clay is then pressed into steel moulds with a hydraulic press. The shaped clay is then fired ("burned") at 9001000 C to achieve strength.

====Rail kilns====
Xhosa brickmaker at kiln near Ngcobo in the former Transkei in 2007.

In modern brickworks, this is usually done in a continuously fired tunnel kiln, in which the bricks are fired as they move slowly through the kiln on conveyors, rails, or kiln cars, which achieves a more consistent brick product. The bricks often have lime, ash, and organic matter added, which accelerates the burning process.

====Bull's Trench Kilns====
In India, brick making is typically a manual process. The most common type of brick kiln in use there is the Bull's Trench Kiln (BTK), based on a design developed by British engineer W. Bull in the late 19th century.

An oval or circular trench is dug, 69 metres wide, 2-2.5 metres deep, and 100150 metres in circumference. A tall exhaust chimney is constructed in the centre. Half or more of the trench is filled with "green" (unfired) bricks which are stacked in an open lattice pattern to allow airflow. The lattice is capped with a roofing layer of finished brick.

In operation, new green bricks, along with roofing bricks, are stacked at one end of the brick pile; cooled finished bricks are removed from the other end for transport to their destinations. In the middle, the brick workers create a firing zone by dropping fuel (coal, wood, oil, debris, and so on) through access holes in the roof above the trench.

West face of Roskilde Cathedral in Roskilde, Denmark.

The advantage of the BTK design is a much greater energy efficiency compared with clamp or scove kilns. Sheet metal or boards are used to route the airflow through the brick lattice so that fresh air flows first through the recently burned bricks, heating the air, then through the active burning zone. The air continues through the green brick zone (pre-heating and drying the bricks), and finally out the chimney, where the rising gases create suction which pulls air through the system. The reuse of heated air yields savings in fuel cost.

As with the rail process above, the BTK process is continuous. A half dozen laborers working around the clock can fire approximately 15,00025,000 bricks a day. Unlike the rail process, in the BTK process the bricks do not move. Instead, the locations at which the bricks are loaded, fired, and unloaded gradually rotate through the trench. Pakistan Environmental Protection Agency, Brick Kiln Units (PDF file) 

====Dry pressed bricks====
The dry press method is similar to the soft mud brick method, but starts with a much thicker clay mix, so it forms more accurate, sharper-edged bricks. The greater force in pressing and the longer burn make this method more expensive.

====Extruded bricks====
For extruded bricks the clay is mixed with 1015% water (stiff extrusion) or 2025% water (soft extrusion) in a pugmill. This mixture is forced through a die to create a long cable of material of the desired width and depth. This mass is then cut into bricks of the desired length by a wall of wires. Most structural bricks are made by this method as it produces hard, dense bricks, and suitable dies can produce perforations as well. The introduction of such holes reduces the volume of clay needed, and hence the cost. Hollow bricks are lighter and easier to handle, and have different thermal properties from solid bricks. The cut bricks are hardened by drying for 20 to 40 hours at 50 to 150 C before being fired. The heat for drying is often waste heat from the kiln.

European-style extruded bricks or blocks are used in single-wall construction with finishes applied on the inside and outside. Their many voids comprise a greater proportion of the volume than the solid, thin walls of fired clay. Such bricks are made in 15-, 25-, 30-, 42- and 50-cm widths. Some models have very high thermal insulation properties, making them suitable for zero-energy buildings.

====Types of fired clay bricks====
There are thousands of types of bricks that are named for there use, size, forming method, origin, quality, texture, and/or materials.

*Face - A very common classification meaning they are suitable to be visible.
*Common or building - An less common type of brick not intended to be visible such as being underground or covered with render or plaster.
*Hollow - not solid, the holes are less than 25% of the brick volume
*Perforated - holes greater than 25% of the brick volume
*Indentations called frogs
*Keyed - indentations in at least one face and end to be used with rendering and plastering
*Paving - brick intended to be in ground contact as a walkway or roadway.
*Ceramic glazed - face bricks with a decorative glazing
*Thin - brick with normal height and length but thin width to be used as a veneer.
*Chemically resistant -
*Industrial floor -
*Engineering - a type of hard, dense, brick used where strength, low water porosity or acid (flue gas) resistance are needed. Further classified as type A and type B based on there compressive strength.
*accrington - a type of engineering brick
*Acid brick - acid resistant bricks
*Fire or refractory - highly heat resistant bricks
*Clinker - a vitrified brick
*Salmon - an under burned brick, soft and porous named for its color
*Dutch -
*Roman -
*Norman - 
*Cream City brick - a light yellow brick made in Milwaukee, Wisconsin
*London stock - 
*Staffordshire blue brick - 
*Fareham red brick - 
*Nanak Shahi bricks - a type of brick in India
*Wire cut - cut to size with a tensioned wire which may leave drag marks
*Water struck - the mould is dipped in water before forming the brick giving the brick an irregular texture when the mould is removed
*Sand struck - hand made in a mould coated with sand
*Sand surfaced - 
*Flashed - heated to produce a deeper color on the face and end
*numerous other textures including smooth, velour, matte, sandblasted, bark...
*Extruded - made by being forced through an opening, a very consistent size and shape.
*Pressed - wire cut bricks which are then pressed to improve appearances
*Moulded - shaped in moulds rather than being extruded
*Interior quality - lower quality brick not for exterior exposure
*Special quality - High quality for use in wet and freezing conditions
*BS 3921 classifies the soluble salt content grades as L (low) and N (normal), frost resistance as F (frost resistant), M (moderately frost resistant), or O (not-frost resistant, for internal use only). These class can be combined such as a type LF brick has a low salt content and is frost resistant.

==Chemically set bricks==
Chemically set bricks are not fired but may have the curing process accelerated by the application of heat and pressure in an autoclave.

=== Calcium-Silicate bricks ===
Swedish Mexitegel.

Calcium silicate bricks are also called sandlime or flintlime bricks depending on their ingredients. Rather than being made with clay they are made with lime binding the silicate material. The raw materials for calcium-silicate bricks include lime mixed in a proportion of about 1 to 10 with sand, quartz, crushed flint or crushed siliceous rock together with mineral colourants. The materials are mixed and left until the lime is completely hydrated; the mixture is then pressed into moulds and cured in an autoclave for three to fourteen hours to speed the chemical hardening. McArthur, Hugh, and Duncan Spalding. Engineering materials science: properties, uses, degradation and remediation. Chichester, U.K.: Horwood Pub., 2004. 194. Print. The finished bricks are very accurate and uniform, although the sharp arrises need careful handling to avoid damage to brick and bricklayer. The bricks can be made in a variety of colours; white, black, buff and grey-blues are common and pastel shades can be achieved. This type of brick is common in Sweden, especially in houses built or renovated in the 1970s, where it is known as "Mexitegel" (en: Mexi Bricks). In India these are known as fly ash bricks, manufactured using the FaL-G (fly ash, lime and gypsum) process. Calcium-silicate bricks are also manufactured in Canada and the United States, and meet the criteria set forth in ASTM C73  10 Standard Specification for Calcium Silicate Brick (Sand-Lime Brick). It has lower embodied energy than cement based man-made stone and clay brick.

===Concrete bricks===
A concrete brick-making assembly line in Guilinyang Town, Hainan, China. This operation produces a pallet containing 42 bricks, approximately every 30 seconds.
Bricks of concrete with sand aggregate can be made using a simple machine and a basic assembly line. A conveyor belt adds the mixture to a machine, which pours a measured amount of concrete into a form. The form is vibrated to remove bubbles, after which it is raised to reveal the wet bricks, spaced out on a plywood sheet. A small elevator then stacks these palettes, after which a forklift operator moves them to the brickyard for drying.

Concrete bricks are available in many colors and as an engineering brick made with sulfate-resisting Portland cement or equivalent. When made with adequate amount of cement they are suitable for harsh environments such as wet conditions and retaining walls. They are made to standards BS 6073, EN 771-3. Concrete bricks expand and contract more than clay or sandlime bricks so they need movement joints every 5 to 6 meters, but are similar to other bricks of similar density in thermal and sound resistance and fire resistance. 

==Influence on fired colour==
Yellow London Stocks at Waterloo
The fired colour of clay bricks is influenced by the chemical and mineral content of the raw materials, the firing temperature, and the atmosphere in the kiln. For example, pink coloured bricks are the result of a high iron content, white or yellow bricks have a higher lime content. Most bricks burn to various red hues; as the temperature is increased the colour moves through dark red, purple and then to brown or grey at around 1300 C. Calcium silicate bricks have a wider range of shades and colours, depending on the colourants used. The names of bricks may reflect their origin and colour, such as London stock brick and Cambridgeshire White.

"Bricks" formed from concrete are usually termed blocks, and are typically pale grey in colour. They are made from a dry, small aggregate concrete which is formed in steel moulds by vibration and compaction in either an "egglayer" or static machine. The finished blocks are cured rather than fired using low-pressure steam. Concrete blocks are manufactured in a much wider range of shapes and sizes than clay bricks and are also available with a wider range of face treatments  a number of which simulate the appearance of clay bricks.

An impervious and ornamental surface may be laid on brick either by salt glazing, in which salt is added during the burning process, or by the use of a "slip," which is a glaze material into which the bricks are dipped. Subsequent reheating in the kiln fuses the slip into a glazed surface integral with the brick base.

Natural stone bricks are of limited modern utility due to their enormous comparative mass, the consequent foundation needs, and the time-consuming and skilled labour needed in their construction and laying. They are very durable and considered more handsome than clay bricks by some. Only a few stones are suitable for bricks. Common materials are granite, limestone and sandstone. Other stones may be used (for example, marble, slate, quartzite, and so on) but these tend to be limited to a particular locality.

==Optimal dimensions, characteristics, and strength==
Loose bricks
For efficient handling and laying, bricks must be small enough and light enough to be picked up by the bricklayer using one hand (leaving the other hand free for the trowel). Bricks are usually laid flat and as a result the effective limit on the width of a brick is set by the distance which can conveniently be spanned between the thumb and fingers of one hand, normally about four inches (about 100 mm). In most cases, the length of a brick is about twice its width, about eight inches (about 200 mm) or slightly more. This allows bricks to be laid bonded in a structure which increases stability and strength (for an example, see the illustration of bricks laid in English bond, at the head of this article). The wall is built using alternating courses of stretchers, bricks laid longways, and headers, bricks laid crossways. The headers tie the wall together over its width. In fact, this wall is built in a variation of English bond called English cross bond where the successive layers of stretchers are displaced horizontally from each other by half a brick length. In true English bond, the perpendicular lines of the stretcher courses are in line with each other.

A bigger brick makes for a thicker (and thus more insulating) wall. Historically, this meant that bigger bricks were necessary in colder climates (see for instance the slightly larger size of the Russian brick in table below), while a smaller brick was adequate, and more economical, in warmer regions. A notable illustration of this correlation is the Green Gate in Gdansk; built in 1571 of imported Dutch brick, too small for the colder climate of Gdansk, it was notorious for being a chilly and drafty residence. Nowadays this is no longer an issue, as modern walls typically incorporate specialized insulation materials.

The correct brick for a job can be selected from a choice of colour, surface texture, density, weight, absorption and pore structure, thermal characteristics, thermal and moisture movement, and fire resistance.

+Face brick (\"house brick\") sizes, (alphabetical order) Standard Imperial Metric 
 9  4  3 in 230  110  76 mm 
 9  4  2 in 228  108  54 mm 
 9  4  2 in 240  115  71 mm 
 9  4  2 in 228  107  69 mm 
 9  4  2 in 240  115  63 mm 
 10  4  2 in 250  120  65 mm 
 8  4  3 in 222  106  73 mm 
 10  4  2 in 250  120  62 mm 
 8  4  2 in 215  102.5  65 mm 
 7  3  2 in 194  92  57 mm 

In England, the length and width of the common brick has remained fairly constant over the centuries (but see brick tax), but the depth has varied from about two inches (about 51 mm) or smaller in earlier times to about two and a half inches (about 64 mm) more recently. In the United Kingdom, the usual size of a modern brick is 215  102.5  65 mm (about   inches), which, with a nominal 10 mm ( inch) mortar joint, forms a unit size of 225  112.5  75 mm (9   3 inches), for a ratio of 6:3:2.

In the United States, modern standard bricks are (controlled by American Society for Testing and Materials ASTM ASTM C652  13 Standard Specification for Hollow Brick (Hollow Masonry Units Made From Clay or Shale). Astm.org. Retrieved on 2013-10-01. ) about 8   inches (203  92  57 mm). The more commonly used is the modular brick   inches (194  92  57 mm). This modular brick of plus a mortar joint eased the calculations of the number of bricks in a given run. bricksizes. Maconline.org. Retrieved on 2013-10-01. 

Some brickmakers create innovative sizes and shapes for bricks used for plastering (and therefore not visible) where their inherent mechanical properties are more important than their visual ones. Crammix Maxilite. crammix.co.za These bricks are usually slightly larger, but not as large as blocks and offer the following advantages:
* a slightly larger brick requires less mortar and handling (fewer bricks), which reduces cost
* their ribbed exterior aids plastering
* more complex interior cavities allow improved insulation, while maintaining strength.

Blocks have a much greater range of sizes. Standard coordinating sizes in length and height (in mm) include 400200, 450150, 450200, 450225, 450300, 600150, 600200, and 600225; depths (work size, mm) include 60, 75, 90, 100, 115, 140, 150, 190, 200, 225, and 250. They are usable across this range as they are lighter than clay bricks. The density of solid clay bricks is around 2,000 kg/m: this is reduced by frogging, hollow bricks, and so on, but aerated autoclaved concrete, even as a solid brick, can have densities in the range of 450850 kg/m.

Bricks may also be classified as solid (less than 25% perforations by volume, although the brick may be "frogged," having indentations on one of the longer faces), perforated (containing a pattern of small holes through the brick, removing no more than 25% of the volume), cellular (containing a pattern of holes removing more than 20% of the volume, but closed on one face), or hollow (containing a pattern of large holes removing more than 25% of the brick's volume). Blocks may be solid, cellular or hollow

The term "frog" for the indentation on one bed of the brick is a word that often excites curiosity as to its origin. The most likely explanation is that brickmakers also call the block that is placed in the mould to form the indentation a frog. Modern brickmakers usually use plastic frogs but in the past they were made of wood. When these are wet and have clay on them they resemble the amphibious kind of frog and this is where they got their name. Over time this term also came to refer to the indentation left by them.
Brick arch from a vault in Roman Bath  England
A brick section of the old Dixie Highway, United States

The compressive strength of bricks produced in the United States ranges from about 1000 lbf/in to 15,000 lbf/in (7 to 105 MPa or N/mm ), varying according to the use to which the brick are to be put. In England clay bricks can have strengths of up to 100 MPa, although a common house brick is likely to show a range of 2040 MPa.

==Use==
Bricks are used for building, block paving and pavement. In the USA, brick pavement was found incapable of withstanding heavy traffic, but it is coming back into use as a method of traffic calming or as a decorative surface in pedestrian precincts. For example, in the early 1900s, most of the streets in the city of Grand Rapids, Michigan were paved with brick. Today, there are only about 20 blocks of brick paved streets remaining (totalling less than 0.5 percent of all the streets in the city limits). Michigan | Success Stories | Preserve America | Office of the Secretary of Transportation | U.S. Department of Transportation. 

Bricks in the metallurgy and glass industries are often used for lining furnaces, in particular refractory bricks such as silica, magnesia, chamotte and neutral (chromomagnesite) refractory bricks. This type of brick must have good thermal shock resistance, refractoriness under load, high melting point, and satisfactory porosity. There is a large refractory brick industry, especially in the United Kingdom, Japan, the United States, Belgium and the Netherlands.

In Northwest Europe, bricks have been used in construction for centuries. Until recently, almost all houses were built almost entirely from bricks. Although many houses are now built using a mixture of concrete blocks and other materials, many houses are skinned with a layer of bricks on the outside for aesthetic appeal.

Engineering bricks are used where strength, low water porosity or acid (flue gas) resistance are needed.

In the UK a redbrick university is one founded and built in the Victorian era. The term is used to refer to such institutions collectively to distinguish them from the older Oxbridge institutions, the post-war 'plate glass' universities, and the 'new' universities of the 1990s.

Colombian architect Rogelio Salmona was noted for his extensive use of red brick in his buildings and for using natural shapes like spirals, radial geometry and curves in his designs. Most buildings in Colombia are made of brick, given the abundance of clay in equatorial countries like this one.

==Limitations==
Starting in the 20th century, the use of brickwork declined in some areas due to concerns with earthquakes. Earthquakes such as the San Francisco earthquake of 1906 and the 1933 Long Beach earthquake revealed the weaknesses of brick masonry in earthquake-prone areas. During seismic events, the mortar cracks and crumbles, and the bricks are no longer held together. Brick masonry with steel reinforcement, which helps hold the masonry together during earthquakes, was used to replace many of the unreinforced masonry buildings. Retrofitting older unreinforced masonry structures has been mandated in many jurisdictions.

== Gallery ==

Image:Pergamonmuseum Babylon Ischtar-Tor.jpg|Ishtar Gate of Babylon in the Pergamon Museum, Berlin, Germany
Image:Opus reticulatum 2.JPG|Roman opus reticulatum on Hadrian's Villa in Tivoli, Italy (2nd century)
Image:Munich Frauenkirche.jpg|Frauenkirche, Munich, Germany, erected 14681488, looking up at the towers
Image:Torun sw Jakub szczyt zach.JPG|Eastern gable of church of St. James in Toru (14th century)
Image:Radzyn Chelm zamek zendrowka.jpg|Decorative pattern made of strongly fired bricks in Radzy Castle (14th century)
Image:Teruel - Torre de San Martn.jpg|Mudjar brick church tower in Teruel, Spain, (14th century)
Image:thornbury.twochimneys.arp.750pix.jpg|Brick sculpturing on Thornbury Castle, Thornbury, near Bristol, England. The chimneys were erected in 1514
Image:Rijksmonument450429.JPG|A typical brick house in the Netherlands.
Image:Rieten dak old farmhouse.jpg|A typical Dutch farmhouse near Wageningen, Netherlands
File:St Michael and All Angels Church, Blantyre, Malawi Brick Detail 2.JPG|Decorative bricks in St Michael and All Angels Church, Blantyre, Malawi
Image:BiblioBarco.jpg|Virgilio Barco Public Library, Bogot, Colombia
Image:Maria_Claudia_Cali_edificio_FES.jpg|FES Building, Cali, Colombia
Image:Brick_likn_india.JPG|A brick kiln, Tamil Nadu, India
Image:Brickwork.JPG| Brickwork, United States.
Image:Porotherm style clay block brick angle 1.jpg|Porotherm style clay block brick
Image:Cegly01.jpg|Moulding bricks, Poland
File:Normanby Brick.jpg|Brick made as a byproduct of ironstone mining Normanby  UK

==See also==
* Banna'i
* Brick tinting
* Ceramic building material
* Clinker brick
* Concrete masonry unit (cinder block)
* Cream City brick
* Fareham red brick
* Fire brick
* Fly ash brick
* Glossary of British bricklaying
* Millwall brick, a street weapon in England
* Opus africanum
* Opus latericium
* Opus mixtum
* Opus reticulatum
* Opus spicatum
* Opus vittatum
* Polychrome brickwork
* Roman brick
* Staffordshire blue brick
* Stockade Building System
* Tile
* Wienerberger

==Notes==

==References==
* 

==Further reading==
* 
*
* 
*
* 
*
*
*Hudson, Kenneth (1972) Building Materials; chap. 3: Bricks and tiles. London: Longman; pp. 2842
*

== External links ==

*Compressive strength test of Bricks
*Brick in 20th-Century Architecture
*"Bricks Made Automatically by One-Man Machine" Popular Mechanics, April 1935, pg. 523 bottom-left

 



[[Bla Bartk]]

Bla Bartk in 1927

Bla Viktor Jnos Bartk (; ; March 25, 1881  September 26, 1945) was a Hungarian composer and pianist. He is considered one of the most important composers of the 20th century; he and Liszt are regarded as Hungary's greatest composers (Gillies 2001). Through his collection and analytical study of folk music, he was one of the founders of comparative musicology, which later became ethnomusicology.

==Biography==

===Childhood and early years (188198)===
Bla Bartk was born in the small Banatian town of Nagyszentmikls in the Kingdom of Hungary, Austria-Hungary (since 1920 Snnicolau Mare, Romania) on March 25, 1881. Bartk's family reflected some of the ethno-cultural diversities of the country. His father, Bla Sr., considered himself thoroughly Hungarian, because on his father's side the Bartk family was a Hungarian lower noble family, originating from Borsod county (Mser 2006a, 44; Bartk 1981, 13), though his mother, Paula (born Paula Voit), had German as a mother tongue, but was ethnically of "mixed Hungarian" ancestry (Bayley 2001, 16).

Among her closest forefathers there were family names like Polereczky (Magyarized Polish or Slovak) and Fegyveres (Magyar). Bla displayed notable musical talent very early in life: according to his mother, he could distinguish between different dance rhythms that she played on the piano before he learned to speak in complete sentences (Gillies 1990, 6). By the age of 4, he was able to play 40 pieces on the piano; his mother began formally teaching him the next year.

Bla was a small and sickly child and suffered from severe eczema until the age of 5 (Gillies 1990, 5). In 1888, when he was seven, his father (the director of an agricultural school) died suddenly. Bla's mother then took him and his sister, Erzsbet, to live in Nagyszls (today Vinogradiv, Ukraine) and then to Pozsony (German: Pressburg, today Bratislava, Slovakia). In Pozsony, Bla gave his first public recital at age 11 to a warm critical reception. Among the pieces he played was his own first composition, written two years previously: a short piece called "The Course of the Danube" (de Toth 1999). Shortly thereafter Lszl Erkel accepted him as a pupil.

===Early musical career (18991908)===
Bartk's signature on his high-school-graduation photograph, dated September 9, 1899
From 1899 to 1903, Bartk studied piano under Istvn Thomn, a former student of Franz Liszt, and composition under Jnos Koessler at the Royal Academy of Music in Budapest. There he met Zoltn Kodly, who influenced him greatly and became his lifelong friend and colleague. In 1903, Bartk wrote his first major orchestral work, Kossuth, a symphonic poem which honored Lajos Kossuth, hero of the Hungarian Revolution of 1848.

The music of Richard Strauss, whom he met in 1902 at the Budapest premiere of Also sprach Zarathustra, strongly influenced his early work. When visiting a holiday resort in the summer of 1904, Bartk overheard a young nanny, Lidi Dsa from Kibd in Transylvania, sing folk songs to the children in her care. This sparked his lifelong dedication to folk music.

From 1907, he also began to be influenced by the French composer Claude Debussy, whose compositions Kodly had brought back from Paris. Bartk's large-scale orchestral works were still in the style of Johannes Brahms and Richard Strauss, but he wrote a number of small piano pieces which showed his growing interest in folk music. The first piece to show clear signs of this new interest is the String Quartet No. 1 in A minor (1908), which contains folk-like elements.

In 1907, Bartk began teaching as a piano professor at the Royal Academy. This position freed him from touring Europe as a pianist and enabled him to work in Hungary. Among his notable students were Fritz Reiner, Sir Georg Solti, Gyrgy Sndor, Ern Balogh, and Lili Kraus. After Bartk moved to the United States, he taught Jack Beeson and Violet Archer.

In 1908, he and Kodly traveled into the countryside to collect and research old Magyar folk melodies. Their growing interest in folk music coincided with a contemporary social interest in traditional national culture. They made some surprising discoveries. Magyar folk music had previously been categorised as Gypsy music. The classic example is Franz Liszt's famous Hungarian Rhapsodies for piano, which he based on popular art songs performed by Romani bands of the time. In contrast, Bartk and Kodly discovered that the old Magyar folk melodies were based on pentatonic scales, similar to those in Asian folk traditions, such as those of Central Asia, Anatolia and Siberia.

Bartk and Kodly quickly set about incorporating elements of such Magyar peasant music into their compositions. They both frequently quoted folk song melodies verbatim and wrote pieces derived entirely from authentic songs. An example is his two volumes entitled For Children for solo piano, containing 80 folk tunes to which he wrote accompaniment. Bartk's style in his art music compositions was a synthesis of folk music, classicism, and modernism. His melodic and harmonic sense was profoundly influenced by the folk music of Hungary, Romania, and other nations. He was especially fond of the asymmetrical dance rhythms and pungent harmonies found in Bulgarian music. Most of his early compositions offer a blend of nationalist and late Romanticism elements.

===Middle years and career (190939)===

==== Personal life ====
In 1909 at the age of 28, Bartk married Mrta Ziegler (18931967), aged 16. Their son, Bla III, was born on August 22, 1910. After nearly 15 years together, Bartk divorced Mrta in June 1923.

Two months later he married Ditta Psztory (19031982), a piano student, ten days after proposing to her. She was aged 19, he 42. Their son, Pter, was born in 1924.

==== Opera ====
In 1911, Bartk wrote what was to be his only opera, Bluebeard's Castle, dedicated to Mrta. He entered it for a prize by the Hungarian Fine Arts Commission, but they rejected his work as not fit for the stage (Chalmers 1995, 93). In 1917 Bartk revised the score for the 1918 premire, and rewrote the ending. Following the 1919 revolution, he was pressured by the new Soviet government to remove the name of the librettist Bla Balzs from the opera (Chalmers 1995, 123), as he was blacklisted and had left the country for Vienna. Bluebeard's Castle received only one revival, in 1936, before Bartk emigrated. For the remainder of his life, although he was passionately devoted to Hungary, its people and its culture, he never felt much loyalty to the government or its official establishments.

==== Folk music and composition ====
After his disappointment over the Fine Arts Commission competition, Bartk wrote little for two or three years, preferring to concentrate on collecting and arranging folk music. He collected first in the Carpathian Basin (then the Kingdom of Hungary), where he notated Hungarian, Slovakian, Romanian, and Bulgarian folk music. He also collected in Moldavia, Wallachia, and (in 1913) Algeria. The outbreak of World War I forced him to stop the expeditions; and he returned to composing, writing the ballet The Wooden Prince (191416) and the String Quartet No. 2 in (191517), both influenced by Debussy.

Raised as a Roman Catholic, by his early adulthood Bartk had become an atheist. He believed that the existence of God could not be determined and was unnecessary. He later became attracted to Unitarianism and publicly converted to the Unitarian faith in 1916. As an adult, his son later became president of the Hungarian Unitarian Church (Hughes 19992007).

Bartk wrote another ballet, The Miraculous Mandarin influenced by Igor Stravinsky, Arnold Schoenberg, as well as Richard Strauss. He next wrote his two violin sonatas (written in 1921 and 1922 respectively), which are harmonically and structurally some of his most complex pieces. The Miraculous Mandarin, a modern story of prostitution, robbery, and murder, was started in 1918, but not performed until 1926 because of its sexual content.

In 192728, Bartk wrote his Third and Fourth String Quartets, after which his compositions demonstrated his mature style. Notable examples of this period are Music for Strings, Percussion and Celesta (1936) and Divertimento for String Orchestra BB 118 (1939). The Fifth String Quartet was composed in 1934, and the Sixth String Quartet (his last) in 1939.

In 1936 he travelled to Turkey to collect and study folk music. He worked in collaboration with Turkish composer Ahmet Adnan Saygun mostly around Adana (zgentrk 2008; Sipos 2000).

===World War II and last years in America (194045)===
In 1940, as the European political situation worsened after the outbreak of World War II, Bartk was increasingly tempted to flee Hungary. He was strongly opposed to the Nazis and Hungary's siding with Germany. After the Nazis came to power in the early 1930s, Bartk refused to give concerts in Germany and broke away from his publisher there. His anti-fascist political views caused him a great deal of trouble with the establishment in Hungary. Having first sent his manuscripts out of the country, Bartk reluctantly emigrated to the U.S. with his wife Ditta in October that year. They settled in New York City. After joining them in 1942, their son, Pter Bartk, enlisted in the United States Navy where he served in the Pacific during the remainder of the war and later settled in Florida where he became a recording and sound engineer. His oldest son, Bla Bartk, III, remained in Hungary where he survived the war and later worked as a railroad official until his retirement in the early 1980s.

Although he became an American citizen in 1945, shortly before his death (Gagn 2012, 28), Bartk never became fully at home in the USA. He initially found it difficult to compose. Although well known in America as a pianist, ethnomusicologist and teacher, he was not well known as a composer. There was little American interest in his music during his final years. He and his wife Ditta gave some concerts, although demand for them was low. Bartk, who had made some recordings in Hungary, also recorded for Columbia Records after he came to the US; many of these recordings (some with Bartk's own spoken introductions) were later issued on LP and CD (Bartk 1994, 1995a, 1995b, 2003, 2007, 2008).

Supported by a research fellowship from Columbia University, for several years, Bartk and Ditta worked on a large collection of Serbian and Croatian folk songs in Columbia's libraries. Bartk's economic difficulties during his first years in America were mitigated by publication royalties, teaching and performance tours. While his finances were always precarious, he did not live and die in poverty as was the common myth. He had enough friends and supporters to ensure that there was sufficient money and work available for him to live on. Bartk was a proud man and did not easily accept charity. Despite being short on cash at times, he often refused money that his friends offered him out of their own pockets. Although he was not a member of the ASCAP, the society paid for any medical care he needed during his last two years. Bartk reluctantly accepted this (Chalmers 1995, 196203).

The first symptoms of his health problems began late in 1940, when his right shoulder began to show signs of stiffening. In 1942, symptoms increased and he started having bouts of fever, but no underlying disease was diagnosed, in spite of medical examinations. Finally, in April 1944, leukemia was diagnosed, but by this time, little could be done (Chalmers 1995, 202207).

As his body slowly failed, Bartk found more creative energy, and he produced a final set of masterpieces, partly thanks to the violinist Joseph Szigeti and the conductor Fritz Reiner (Reiner had been Bartk's friend and champion since his days as Bartk's student at the Royal Academy). Bartk's last work might well have been the String Quartet No. 6 but for Serge Koussevitzky's commission for the Concerto for Orchestra. Koussevitsky's Boston Symphony Orchestra premired the work in December 1944 to highly positive reviews. Concerto for Orchestra quickly became Bartk's most popular work, although he did not live to see its full impact. In 1944, he was also commissioned by Yehudi Menuhin to write a Sonata for Solo Violin. In 1945, Bartk composed his Piano Concerto No. 3, a graceful and almost neo-classical work, as a surprise 42nd birthday present for Ditta, but he died just over a month before her birthday, with the scoring not quite finished. He had sketched his Viola Concerto, but had barely started the scoring at his death.

Bla Bartk's portrait on 1,000 Hungarian forint banknote (printed between 1983 and 1992; no longer in circulation)

Bla Bartk died at age 64 in a hospital in New York City from complications of leukemia (specifically, of secondary polycythemia) on September 26, 1945. His funeral was attended by only ten people. Among them were his wife Ditta, their son Pter, and his pianist friend Gyrgy Sndor (anon. 2006).

Bartk's body was initially interred in Ferncliff Cemetery in Hartsdale, New York. During the final year of communist Hungary in the late 1980s, the Hungarian government, along with his two sons, Bla III and Pter, requested that his remains be exhumed and transferred back to Budapest for burial, where Hungary arranged a state funeral for him on July 7, 1988. He was reinterred at Budapest's Farkasrti Cemetery, next to the remains of Ditta, who died in 1982, the year after his centenary (Chalmers 1995, 214).

The Third Piano Concerto was nearly finished at his death. For his Viola Concerto, Bartk had completed only the viola part and sketches of the orchestral part. Both works were later completed by his pupil, Tibor Serly. Gyrgy Sndor was the soloist in the first performance of the Third Piano Concerto on February 8, 1946. Ditta Psztory-Bartk later played and recorded it. The Viola Concerto was revised and polished in the 1990s by Bartk's son, Peter; this version may be closer to what Bartk intended (Chalmers 1995, 210).

Concurrently, Peter Bartk, in association with Nelson Dellamaggiore, worked to re-print and revise past editions of the Third Piano Concerto (Somfai 1996).

==Statues==
* A statue of Bla Bartk stands in Brussels, Belgium near the central train station in a public square, Spanjeplein-Place d'Espagne (Dicaire 2010, 145)(BrusselsRemembers.com).
* A statue stands outside Malvern Court, south of South Kensington Underground Station, and just north of 7 Sydney Place, where he stayed when performing in London. An English Heritage blue plaque, unveiled in 1997, now commemorates Bartk at 7 Sydney Place (Anon. n.d.).
* A statue of him was installed in front of one of the houses which Bartk owned in the hills above Budapest. It is now operated as a house museum.
* A bust and plaque located at his last residence, in New York City at 309 W. 57th Street, inscribed: "The Great Hungarian Composer / Bla Bartk / (18811945) / Made His Home In This House / During the Last Year of His Life".
* A bust of him is located in the front yard of Ankara State Conservatory, Ankara, Turkey right next to the bust of Ahmet Adnan Saygun.
* A statue of Bla Bartk stands in Paris, France in the 15th arrondissement near Seine in a public park.

==Compositions==

Bartk's music reflects two trends that dramatically changed the sound of music in the 20th century: the breakdown of the diatonic system of harmony that had served composers for the previous two hundred years (Griffiths 1978, 7); and the revival of nationalism as a source for musical inspiration, a trend that began with Mikhail Glinka and Antonn Dvok in the last half of the 19th century (Einstein 1947, 332). In his search for new forms of tonality, Bartk turned to Hungarian folk music, as well as to other folk music of the Carpathian Basin and even of Algeria and Turkey; in so doing he became influential in that stream of modernism which exploited indigenous music and techniques (Botstein , 6).

One characteristic style of music is his Night music, which he used mostly in slow movements of multi-movement ensemble or orchestral compositions in his mature period. It is characterised by "eerie dissonances providing a backdrop to sounds of nature and lonely melodies" (Schneider 2006, 84). An example is the third movement Adagio of his Music for Strings, Percussion and Celesta.

His music can be grouped roughly in accordance with the different periods in his life.

===Youth: Late-Romanticism (18901902)===
The works of his youth are of a late-Romantic style. Between 1890 and 1894 (nine to 13 years of age) he wrote 31 pieces with corresponding opus numbers. He started numbering his works anew with "opus 1" in 1894 with his first large scale work, a piano sonata. Up to 1902, Bartk wrote in total 74 works which can be considered in Romantic style. Most of these early compositions are either scored for piano solo or include a piano. Additionally, there is some chamber music for strings.

===New influences (190311)===
Under the influence of Richard Strauss (among other works Also sprach Zarathustra) (Stevens 1993, 1517), Bartk composed in 1903 Kossuth, a symphonic poem in ten tableaux. In 1904 followed his Rhapsody for piano and orchestra which he numbered opus 1 again, marking it himself as the start of a new era in his music. An even more important occurrence of this year was his overhearing the eighteen-year-old nanny Lidi Dsa from Transylvania sing folk songs, sparking Bartk's lifelong dedication to folk music (Stevens 1993, 22). When criticised for not composing his own melodies Bartk pointed out that Molire and Shakespeare mostly based their plays on well-known stories too. Regarding the incorporation of folk music into art music he said:
The question is, what are the ways in which peasant music is taken over and becomes transmuted into modern music? We may, for instance, take over a peasant melody unchanged or only slightly varied, write an accompaniment to it and possibly some opening and concluding phrases. This kind of work would show a certain analogy with Bach's treatment of chorales. ... Another method ... is the following: the composer does not make use of a real peasant melody but invents his own imitation of such melodies. There is no true difference between this method and the one described above. ... There is yet a third way ... Neither peasant melodies nor imitations of peasant melodies can be found in his music, but it is pervaded by the atmosphere of peasant music. In this case we may say, he has completely absorbed the idiom of peasant music which has become his musical mother tongue. (Bartk 1931/1976, 34144)

Bartk became first acquainted with Debussy's music in 1907 and regarded his music highly. In an interview in 1939 Bartk said

Debussy's great service to music was to reawaken among all musicians an awareness of harmony and its possibilities. In that, he was just as important as Beethoven, who revealed to us the possibilities of progressive form, or as Bach, who showed us the transcendent significance of counterpoint. Now, what I am always asking myself is this: is it possible to make a synthesis of these three great masters, a living synthesis that will be valid for our time? (Moreux 1953, 92) Debussy's influence is present in the Fourteen Bagatelles (1908). These made Ferruccio Busoni exclaim 'At last something truly new!' (Bartk, 1948, 2:83). Until 1911, Bartk composed widely differing works which ranged from adherence to romantic-style, to folk song arrangements and to his modernist opera Bluebeard's Castle. The negative reception of his work led him to focus on folk music research after 1911 and abandon composition with the exception of folk music arrangements (Gillies 1993, 404; Stevens 1964, 4749).

===New inspiration and experimentation (191621)===
His pessimistic attitude towards composing was lifted by the stormy and inspiring contact with Klra Gombossy in the summer of 1915 (Gillies 1993, 405). This interesting episode in Bartk's life remained hidden until it was researched by Denijs Dille between 1979 and 1989 (Dille 1990, 25777). Bartk started composing again, including the Suite for piano opus 14 (1916), and The Miraculous Mandarin (1918) and he completed The Wooden Prince (1917).

Bartk felt the result of World War I as a personal tragedy (Stevens 1993, 3). Many regions he loved were severed from Hungary: Transylvania, the Banat where he was born, and Pozsony where his mother lived. Additionally, the political relations between Hungary and the other successor states to the Austro-Hungarian empire prohibited his folk music research outside of Hungary (Somfai, 1996, 18). Bartk also wrote the noteworthy Eight Improvisations on Hungarian Peasant Songs in 1920, and the sunny Dance Suite in 1923, the year of his second marriage.

==="Synthesis of East and West" (192645)===
In 1926, Bartk needed a significant piece for piano and orchestra with which he could tour in Europe and America. In the preparation for writing his First Piano Concerto, he wrote his Sonata, Out of Doors, and Nine Little Pieces, all for solo piano (Gillies 1993, 173). He increasingly found his own voice in his maturity. The style of his last periodnamed "Synthesis of East and West" (Gillies 1993, 189)is hard to define let alone to put under one term. In his mature period, Bartk wrote relatively few works but most of them are large-scale compositions for large settings. Only his voice works have programmatic titles and his late works often adhere to classical forms.

Among his masterworks are all the six string quartets (1908, 1917, 1927, 1928, 1934, and 1939), the Cantata Profana (1930, Bartk declared that this was the work he felt and professed to be his most personal "credo", Szabolcsi 1974, 186), the Music for Strings, Percussion and Celesta (1936), the Concerto for Orchestra (1943) and the Third Piano Concerto (1945).

Bartk also made a lasting contribution to the literature for younger students: for his son Pter's music lessons, he composed Mikrokosmos, a six-volume collection of graded piano pieces.

==Musical analysis==
Bla Bartk memorial plaque in Baja, Hungary

Paul Wilson lists as the most prominent characteristics of Bartk's music from late 1920s onwards the influence of the Carpathian basin and European art music, and his changing attitude toward (and use of) tonality, but without the use of the traditional harmonic functions associated with major and minor scales (Wilson 1992, 24).

Although Bartk claimed in his writings that his music was always tonal, he rarely uses the chords or scales of tonality, and so the descriptive resources of tonal theory are of limited use. George Perle (1955) and Elliott Antokoletz (1984) focus on alternative methods of signaling tonal centers, via axes of inversional symmetry. Others view Bartk's axes of symmetry in terms of atonal analytic protocols. Richard Cohn (1988) argues that inversional symmetry is often a byproduct of another atonal procedure, the formation of chords from transpositionally related dyads. Atonal pitch-class theory also furnishes the resources for exploring polymodal chromaticism, projected sets, privileged patterns, and large set types used as source sets such as the equal tempered twelve tone aggregate, octatonic scale (and alpha chord), the diatonic and heptatonia secunda seven-note scales, and less often the whole tone scale and the primary pentatonic collection (Wilson 1992, 2429).

He rarely used the simple aggregate actively to shape musical structure, though there are notable examples such as the second theme from the first movement of his Second Violin Concerto, commenting that he "wanted to show Schoenberg that one can use all twelve tones and still remain tonal" (Gillies 1990, 185). More thoroughly, in the first eight measures of the last movement of his Second Quartet, all notes gradually gather with the twelfth (G) sounding for the first time on the last beat of measure 8, marking the end of the first section. The aggregate is partitioned in the opening of the Third String Quartet with CDDE in the accompaniment (strings) while the remaining pitch classes are used in the melody (violin 1) and more often as 735 (diatonic or "white-key" collection) and 535 (pentatonic or "black-key" collection) such as in no. 6 of the Eight Improvisations. There, the primary theme is on the black keys in the left hand, while the right accompanies with triads from the white keys. In measures 5051 in the third movement of the Fourth Quartet, the first violin and 'cello play black-key chords, while the second violin and viola play stepwise diatonic lines (Wilson 1992, 25). On the other hand, from as early as the Suite for piano, op. 14 (1914), he occasionally employed a form of serialism based on compound interval cycles, some of which are maximally distributed, multi-aggregate cycles (Martins 2004; Gollin 2007).

Fibonacci intervals (counting in semitones) in Bartk's Sonata for Two Pianos and Percussion, 3rd mov. (1937) (Maconie 2005, 26, 28, citing Lendvai 1972) 

Ern Lendva (1971) analyses Bartk's works as being based on two opposing tonal systems, that of the acoustic scale and the axis system, as well as using the golden section as a structural principle.

Milton Babbitt, in his 1949 critique of Bartk's string quartets, criticized Bartk for using tonality and non tonal methods unique to each piece. Babbitt noted that "Bartk's solution was a specific one, it cannot be duplicated" (Babbitt 1949, 385). Bartk's use of "two organizational principles"tonality for large scale relationships and the piece-specific method for moment to moment thematic elementswas a problem for Babbitt, who worried that the "highly attenuated tonality" requires extreme non-harmonic methods to create a feeling of closure (Babbitt 1949, 37778).

==Catalogues and opus numbers==
The cataloguing of Bartk's works is somewhat complex. Bartk assigned opus numbers to his works three times, the last of these series ending with the Sonata for Violin and Piano No. 1, Op. 21 in 1921. He ended this practice because of the difficulty of distinguishing between original works and ethnographic arrangements, and between major and minor works. Since his death, three attemptstwo full and one partialhave been made at cataloguing. The first, and still most widely used, is Andrs Szllsy's chronological Sz. numbers, from 1 to 121. Denijs Dille subsequently reorganised the juvenilia (Sz. 125) thematically, as DD numbers 1 to 77. The most recent catalogue is that of Lszl Somfai; this is a chronological index with works identified by BB numbers 1 to 129, incorporating corrections based on the Bla Bartk Thematic Catalogue.

==Discography==
* Bartk, Bla. 1994. Bartk at the Piano. Hungaroton 12326. 6-CD set.
* Bartk, Bla. 1995a. Bartok Plays Bartok  Bartok at the Piano 192941. Pearl 9166. CD recording.
* Bartk, Bla. 1995b. Bartk Recordings from Private Collections. Hungaroton 12334. CD recording.
* Bartk, Bla. 2003. Bartk Plays Bartk. Pearl 179. CD recording.
* Bartk, Bla. 2007. Bartk: Contrasts, Mikrokosmos. Membran/Documents 223546. CD recording.
* Bartk, Bla. 2008. Bartok Plays Bartok. Urania 340. CD recording.

==Media==

==See also==

==References==
* Anon. n.d. "Bartk, Bla (18811945) Plaque erected in 1997 by English Heritage at 7 Sydney Place, South Kensington, London SW7 3NL, Royal Borough of Kensington and Chelsea". English Heritage website (Accessed 19 October 2012).
* Anon. 2006. "Gyorgy Sandor, Pianist and Bartok Authority, Dies at 93". The Juilliard Journal Online 21, no. 5 (February). (Accessed September 15, 2010)
* Antokoletz, Elliott. 1984. The Music of Bla Bartk: A Study of Tonality and Progression in Twentieth-Century Music. Berkeley and Los Angeles: University of California Press. ISBN 0-520-04604-8.
* Babbitt, Milton. 1949. "The String Quartets of Bartk". Musical Quarterly 35 (July): 37785. Reprinted in The Collected Essays of Milton Babbitt, edited by Stephen Peles, with Stephen Dembski, Andrew Mead, and Joseph N. Straus, [http://press.princeton.edu/chapters/s7616.pdf ]. Princeton: Princeton University Press, 2003. ISBN 0-691-08966-3.
* Bartk, Bla. 1981. The Hungarian Folk Song, second English edition, edited by Benjamin Suchoff, translated by Michel D. Calvocoressi, with annotations by Zoltn Kodly. The New York Bartok Archive Studies in Musicology 13. Albany: State University of New York Press.
* Bayley, Amanda. 2001. Cambridge Companion to Bartk. Cambridge Companions to Music. Cambridge and New York: Cambridge University Press.
* Botstein, Leon. "Modernism", Grove Music Online, ed. L. Macy (Accessed April 29, 2008), (subscription access).
* Chalmers, Kenneth. 1995. Bla Bartk. 20th-Century Composers. London: Phaidon Press. ISBN 0-7148-3164-6 (pbk).
* Cohn, Richard, 1988. "Inversional Symmetry and Transpositional Combination in Bartok." Music Theory Spectrum 10:1942.
* de Toth, June. 1999. "Bla Bartk: A Biography". Bela Bartok Biography Liner notes to Bla Bartk: Complete Piano Works 7-CD set, Eroica Classical Recordings.
* Dicaire, David (2010). The Early Years of Folk Music: Fifty Founders of the Tradition, p.145. McFarland. ISBN 9780786457373.
* Dille, Denijs. 1990. Bla Bartk: Regard sur le Pass. (French, no English version available). Namur: Presses universitaires de Namur. ISBN 2-87037-168-3 ISBN 978-2-87037-168-8.
* Einstein, Alfred. 1947. Music in the Romantic Era. New York: W. W. Norton.
* Gagn, Nicole V. 2012. Historical Dictionary of Modern and Contemporary Classical Music. Historical Dictionaries of Literature and the Arts. Lanham, Maryland: Scarecrow Press. ISBN 978-0-8108-6765-9.
* Gillies, Malcolm (ed.). 1990. Bartk Remembered. London: Faber. ISBN 0-571-14243-5 (cased) ISBN 0-571-14244-3 (pbk)
* Gillies, Malcolm (ed.). 1993. The Bartk Companion. London: Faber. ISBN 0-571-15330-5 (cloth), ISBN 0-571-15331-3 (pbk); New York: Hal Leonard. ISBN 0-931340-74-8.
* Gillies, Malcolm. 2001. "Bla Bartk". The New Grove Dictionary of Music and Musicians, second edition, edited by Stanley Sadie and John Tyrrell. London: Macmillan Publishers. Also in Grove Music Online, ed. L. Macy (Accessed May 23, 2006), (subscription access).
* Gollin, Edward. 2007. "Multi-Aggregate Cycles and Multi-Aggregate Serial Techniques in the Music of Bla Bartk". Music Theory Spectrum 29, no. 2 (Fall): 14376.
* Griffiths, Paul. 1978. A Concise History of Modern Music. London: Thames and Hudson. ISBN 0-500-20164-1.
* Hughes, Peter. 19992007. "Bla Bartk" in Dictionary of Unitarian and Universalist Biography. : Unitarian Universalist Historical Society.
* Lendva, Ern. 1971. Bla Bartk: An Analysis of His Music, introduced by Alan Bush. London: Kahn & Averill. ISBN 0-900707-04-6 .
* Lendva, Ern. 1972. "Einfhrung in die Formen- und Harmoniewelt Bartks" (1953). In his Bla Bartk: Weg und Werk, edited by Bence Szabolcsi, 10549. Kassel: Brenreiter.
* Maconie, Robin. 2005. Other Planets: The Music of Karlheinz Stockhausen. Lanham, MD, Toronto, Oxford: The Scarecrow Press, Inc. ISBN 978-0-8108-5356-0.
* Moreux, Serge. 1953. Bla Bartk, translated G. S. Fraser and Erik de Mauny. London: The Harvill Press.
* Mser, Zoltn. 2006a. "Szavak, feliratok, kivonatok". Tiszatj 60, no. 3 (March): 4145.
* zgentrk, Nebil. 2008. Trkiye'nin Hatra Defteri, episode 3. Istanbul: Bir Yudum nsan Prodksiyon LTD. T. Turkish CNN television documentary series.
* Perle, George. 1955. "Symmetrical Formations in the String Quartets of Bla Bartk". Music Review 16, no. 4 (November 1955). Reprinted in The Right Notes: Twenty-Three Selected Essays by George Perle on Twentieth-Century Music, foreword by Oliver Knussen, introduction by David Headlam, 189205. Monographs in Musicology. Stuyvesant, NY: Pendragon Press. ISBN 0-945193-37-8.
* Schneider, David E. 2006. Bartk, Hungary, and the Renewal of Tradition: Case Studies in the Intersection of Modernity and Nationality. California Studies in 20th-Century Music 5. Berkeley: University of California Press. ISBN 978-0-520-24503-7.
* Sipos, Jnos (ed.). 2000. In the Wake of Bartk in Anatolia 1: Collection Near Adana. Budapest: Ethnofon Records.
* Somfai, Lszl. 1996. Bla Bartk: Composition, Concepts, and Autograph Sources. Ernest Bloch Lectures in Music 9. Berkeley : University of California Press. ISBN 978-0-520-08485-8.
* Stevens, Halsey. 1964. The Life and Music of Bla Bartk, second edition. New York: Oxford University Press. ASIN: B000NZ54ZS (Third edition 1993, ISBN 978-0-19-816349-7).
* Szabolcsi, Bence. 1974. "Bartk Bla: Cantata profana". In "Mirt szp szzadunk zenje?" (Why is the music of the Twentieth century so beautiful), ed. Gyrgy Kro. Budapest.
* Wilson, Paul. 1992. The Music of Bla Bartk. New Haven: Yale University Press. ISBN 0-300-05111-5.
* "Statue: Bela Bartok", BrusselsRemembers.com.

==Further reading==
* Anon. 2003. "Bla Bartk 18811945". Websophia.com. (Accessed March 25, 2009)
* Bartk, Bla. 1948. Levelek, fnykpek, kziratok, kottk. ("Letters, photographs, manuscripts, scores"), ed. Jnos Demny, 2 vols. A Muvszeti Tancs knyvei, 1.2. sz. Budapest: Magyar Muvszeti Tancs. English edition, as Bla Bartk: Letters, translated by Pter Balabn and Istvn Farkas; translation revised by Elisabeth West and Colin Mason (London: Faber and Faber Ltd.; New York: St. Martin's Press, 1971). ISBN 978-0-571-09638-1
* Bartk, Bla. 1976. "The Influence of Peasant Music on Modern Music (1931)". In Bla Bartk Essays, edited by Benjamin Suchoff, 34044. London: Faber & Faber. ISBN 0-571-10120-8 
* Bartk, Peter. 2002. "My Father". Homosassa, Florida, Bartk Records (ISBN 0-9641961-2-3).
* Bnis, Ferenc. 2006. let-kpek: Bartk Bla. Budapest: Balassi Kiad: Vvi Kft., Alfldi Nyomda Zrt. ISBN 963-506-649-X.
* Boys, Henry. 1945. "Bla Bartk 18811945". Musical Times 86, no. 1233 (November): 32931.
* Cohn, Richard, 1992. "Bartok's Octatonic Strategies: A Motivic Approach." Journal of the American Musicological Society 44
* Czeizel, Endre. 1992. Csaldfa: honnan jvnk, mik vagyunk, hov megynk? : Kossuth Knyvkiad. ISBN 963-09-3569-4
* Jyrkiinen, Reijo. 2012. "Form, Monothematicism, Variation and Symmetry in Bla Bartk's String Quartets". Ph.D. diss. Helsinki: University of Helsinki. ISBN 978-952-10-8040-1 (Abstract).
* Krpti, Jnos. 1975. Bartk's String Quartets, translated by Fred MacNicol. Budapest: Corvina Press.
* Kasparov, Andrey. 2000. "Third Piano Concerto in the Revised 1994 Edition: Newly Discovered Corrections by the Composer". Hungarian Music Quarterly 11, nos. 34:211.
* Leafstedt, Carl S. 1999. Inside Bluebeard's Castle. New York: Oxford University Press. ISBN 0-19-510999-6
* Loxdale, Hugh D., and Adalbert Balog. 2009. "Bela Bartok: Musician, Musicologist, Composer, and Entomologist!." Antenna  Bulletin of the Royal Entomological Society of London 33, no. 4:17582.
* Mser, Zoltn. 2006b. "Bartk-sk Gmrben". Honismeret: A Honismereti Szvetsg folyirata 34, no. 2 (April): 911.
* Nelson, David Taylor (2012). "Bla Bartk: The Father of Ethnomusicology", Musical Offerings: Vol. 3: No. 2, Article 2. Available at http://digitalcommons.cedarville.edu/musicalofferings/vol3/iss2/2.
* Sluder, Claude K. 1994. "Revised Bartok Composition Highlights Pro Musica Concert". The Republic (16 February).
* Somfai, Lszl. 1981. Tizennyolc Bartk-tanulmny Bartk Studies. Budapest: Zenemkiad. ISBN 963-330-370-2.
* Wells, John C. 1990. "Bartk", in Longman Pronunciation Dictionary, 63. Harlow, England: Longman. ISBN 0-582-05383-8.

==External links==

* The Lied and Art Song Texts Page Original texts of the songs of Bartok with translations in various languages.
* Bartk Bla Memorial House, Budapest
* The Belgian Bartk Archives, housed in the Brussels Royal Library and founded by Denijs Dille
* Gallery of Bartk portraits
* 
* Virtual Exhibition on Bartk

* In the BBC Discovering Music: Listening Library
* 



[[Bill Haley]]

William John Clifton Haley (; July 6, 1925  February 9, 1981), known as Bill Haley, was an American rock and roll musician. He is credited by many with first popularizing this form of music in the early 1950s with his group Bill Haley & His Comets (inspired by Halley's Comet) and million selling hits such as "Rock Around the Clock", "See You Later, Alligator", "Shake, Rattle and Roll", "Skinny Minnie", and "Razzle Dazzle". He has sold over 25 million records worldwide. 

==Biography==
===Early life and career===
Sunday, August 7, 1955 rehearsal publicity photograph on the Ed Sullivan Show or Toast of the Town, CBS, Hartford, Connecticut
Bill Haley was born July 6, 1925 in Highland Park, Michigan as William John Clifton Haley. Because of the effects of the Great Depression on the Detroit area, his father moved the family to Boothwyn, near Chester, Pennsylvania, when Bill was seven years old. Haley's father William Albert Haley was from Kentucky and played the banjo and mandolin, and his mother, Maude Green, who was originally from Ulverston in Lancashire, England, was a technically accomplished keyboardist with classical training. Haley told the story that when he made a simulated guitar out of cardboard, his parents bought him a real one. Bill Haley: The Daddy of Rock and Roll. John Swenson. 1982. Stein and Day. pages 15, 17. ISBN 0-8128-2909-3 

The anonymous sleeve notes accompanying the 1956 Decca album "Rock Around The Clock" describe Haley's early life and career thus: "Bill got his first professional job at the age of 13, playing and entertaining at an auction for the fee of $1 a night. Very soon after this he formed a group of equally enthusiastic youngsters and managed to get quite a few local bookings for his band."

The sleeve notes continue: "When Bill Haley was fifteen 1940 he left home with his guitar and very little else and set out on the hard road to fame and fortune. The next few years, continuing this story in a fairy-tale manner, were hard and poverty-stricken, but crammed full of useful experience. Apart from learning how to exist on one meal a day and other artistic exercises, he worked at an open-air park show, sang and yodelled with any band that would have him, and worked with a traveling medicine show. Eventually he got a job with a popular group known as the "Down Homers" while they were in Hartford, Connecticut. Soon after this he decided, as all successful people must decide at some time or another, to be his own boss again  and he has been that ever since.' these notes fail to account for his early band, known as the Four Aces of Western Swing. During the 1940s Haley was considered one of the top cowboy yodelers in America as "Silver Yodeling Bill Haley". 

The sleeve notes conclude: "For six years Bill Haley was a musical director of Radio Station WPWA in Chester, Pennsylvania, and led his own band all through this period. It was then known as Bill Haley's Saddlemen, indicating their definite leaning toward the tough Western style. They continued playing in clubs as well as over the radio around Philadelphia, and in 1951 made their first recordings on Ed Wilson's Keystone Records in Philadelphia."

===Bill Haley & His Comets===
Bill Haley and the Comets performing during 1974

During the Labor Day weekend in 1952, the Saddlemen were renamed Bill Haley with Haley's Comets (inspired by the supposedly official pronunciation of Halley's Comet), and in 1953, Haley's recording of "Crazy Man, Crazy" (co-written by Haley and his bass player, Marshall Lytle although Lytle would not receive credit until 2001) became the first rock and roll song to hit the American charts, peaking at no.15 on Billboard and no.11 on Cash Box. Soon after, the band's name was revised to Bill Haley & His Comets.

In 1953, a song called "Rock Around the Clock" was written for Haley. Dawson 2005 He was unable to record it until April 12, 1954. Initially, it was relatively unsuccessful, peaking at no. 23 on the Billboard pop singles chart and staying on the charts for only one week.

Haley soon scored a major worldwide hit with a cover version of Big Joe Turner's "Shake, Rattle and Roll", which went on to sell a million copies and became the first ever rock 'n' roll song to enter the British singles charts in December 1954 and became a Gold Record. He retained elements of the original, but threw some country music aspects into the song (specifically, Western Swing) and cleaned up the lyrics. Haley and his band were important in launching the music known as "Rock and Roll" to a wider, mostly white audience after a period of it being considered an underground genre.

When "Rock Around the Clock" appeared as the theme song of the 1955 film Blackboard Jungle starring Glenn Ford, it soared to the top of the American Billboard chart for eight weeks. The single is commonly used as a convenient line of demarcation between the "rock era" and the music industry that preceded it. Billboard separated its statistical tabulations into 18901954 and 1955present. After the record rose to number one, Haley was quickly given the title "Father of Rock and Roll" by the media, and by teenagers who had come to embrace the new style of music. With the song's success, the age of rock music began overnight and instantly ended the dominance of the jazz and pop standards performed by Frank Sinatra, Jo Stafford, Perry Como, Bing Crosby and others.

Success came at somewhat of a price as the new music confused and horrified most people over the age of 30, leading to Cold War-fueled suspicion that rock-and-roll was part of a communist plot to corrupt the minds of American teenagers. FBI chief J. Edgar Hoover attempted to dig up incriminating material on Bill Haley, who took to carrying a gun with him on tours for his own safety.

"Rock Around the Clock" was the first record ever to sell over one million copies in both Britain and Germany and, in 1957, Haley became the first major American rock singer to tour Europe. Haley continued to score hits throughout the 1950s such as "See You Later, Alligator" and he starred in the first rock and roll musical films Rock Around the Clock and Don't Knock the Rock, both in 1956. Haley was already 30 years old and so he was soon eclipsed in the United States by the younger, sexier Elvis Presley, but continued to enjoy great popularity in Latin America, Europe and Australia during the 1960s.

Bill Haley and the Comets performed "Rock Around the Clock" on the Texaco Star Theater hosted by Milton Berle on May 31, 1955 on NBC in an a cappella and lip-synched version. Berle predicted that the song would go no. 1: "A group of entertainers who are going right to the top." Berle also sang and danced to the song which was performed by the entire cast of the show. This was one of the earliest nationally televised performances by a rock and roll band and provided the new musical genre called "rock and roll" a much wider audience.

Bill Haley and the Comets were the first rock and roll act to appear on the iconic American musical variety series the Ed Sullivan Show on Sunday, August 7, 1955 on CBS in a broadcast that originated from the Shakespeare Festival Theater in Hartford, Connecticut. They performed a live version of "Rock Around the Clock" with Franny Beecher on lead guitar and Dick Richards on drums. The band made their second appearance on the show on Sunday, April 28, 1957 performing the songs "Rudy's Rock" and "Forty Cups of Coffee".

Bill Haley and the Comets appeared on American Bandstand hosted by Dick Clark on ABC twice in 1957, on the prime time show October 28, 1957 and on the regular daytime show on November 27, 1957. The band also appeared on Dick Clark's Saturday Night Beechnut Show, also known as The Dick Clark Show, a primetime TV series from New York on March 22, 1958 during the first season and on February 20, 1960, performing "Rock Around the Clock", "Shake, Rattle, and Roll", and "Tamiami".
Bill Haley and Elvis Presley at the Brooklyn High School Auditorium, Cleveland, Ohio, October 20, 1955

===Death and legacy===
A self-admitted alcoholic (as indicated in a 1974 radio interview for the BBC), Haley fought a battle with alcohol into the 1970s. Nonetheless, he and his band continued to be a popular touring act, benefiting from a 1950s nostalgia movement that began in the late 1960s and the signing of a lucrative record deal with the European Sonet label. After performing for Queen Elizabeth II at the Royal Variety Performance on November 10, 1979, Haley made his final performances in South Africa in May and June 1980. Before the South African tour, he was diagnosed with a brain tumor, and a planned tour of Germany in the autumn of 1980 was cancelled. 

The October 25, 1980 edition of the German paper Bild reported that Haley had a brain tumor. It quoted British manager Patrick Maylan as saying that Haley "had taken a fit and went over the seat. He didn't recognize anyone anymore" after being taken to his home in Beverly Hills. It also reported that a doctor at the clinic where Haley had been taken said, "The tumor can't be operated on anymore." Bill Haley: The Daddy of Rock and Roll. John Swenson. 1982. Stein and Day. page 154. ISBN 0-8128-2909-3 

The "Berliner Zeitung" reported a few days later that Haley had collapsed after a performance in Texas and been taken to the hospital in his home town of Harlingen, Texas. However, this account is questionable as Bill Haley did not perform in the United States at all in 1980.

Despite his ill health, Haley began compiling notes for possible use as a basis for either a biographical film based on his life, or a published autobiography (accounts differ), and there were plans for him to record an album in Memphis, Tennessee, when the brain tumor began affecting his behavior and Haley went back to his home in Harlingen, Texas, where he died early in the morning of February 9, 1981.

Martha, Bill's widow, who was with him in these troubling times, denies he had a brain tumor as does his old, very close friend, Hugh McCallum. Martha and friends related that Bill did not want to go on the road any more and that ticket sales for that planned tour of Germany in the fall of 1980 were slow. According to McCallum, "It's my unproven gut feeling that that brain tumor was said to curtail talks about the tour and play the sympathy card."

It was obvious that his drinking problem was getting worse. By this time, Bill and Martha fought all the time and she told him to stop drinking or move out. He then did move out into a room in their pool house. Martha still took care of him and sometimes he would come in the house to eat, but he ate very little. "There were days we never saw him," said his daughter Martha Maria.

In addition to Haley's drinking problems, it had also become obvious that he was having serious mental problems as well; Martha Maria said that, "It was like sometimes he was drunk even when he wasn't drinking." After he'd been jailed by the Harlingen Police, Martha had the judge put Haley in the hospital where he was seen by a psychiatrist who said Bill's brain was overproducing a chemical, like adrenaline. The doctor prescribed a medication to stop the overproduction but said Bill would have to stop drinking. Martha said, "This is pointless." She took him home, however, fed him and gave him his first dose. As soon as he felt better, he went back out to his room in the pool house and the downward spiral continued until his death on February 9, 1981. Falling Comet. Michael Hall. 2011. Texas Monthly, June 2011. 

Haley's death certificate listed "Natural causes: Most likely heart attack" as the 'Immediate Cause' of death. The next lines, 'Due to, or as a consequence Of" were blank. Bill Haley: The Daddy of Rock and Roll. John Swenson. 1982. Stein and Day. page 164. ISBN 0-8128-2909-3 

Haley made a succession of bizarre, mostly monologue late-night phone calls to friends and relatives in which he seemed incoherently drunk or ill. Haley's first wife has been quoted as saying, "He would call and ramble and dwell on the past, his mind was really warped." A belligerent phone call to a business associate was taped and gives evidence of Haley's troubled state of mind. Bill Haley: The Daddy of Rock and Roll. John Swenson. 1982. Stein and Day. pages 155159. ISBN 0-8128-2909-3 

Media reports immediately following his death indicated Haley displayed deranged and erratic behavior in his final weeks, although beyond a biography of Haley by John Swenson, released a year later, which described Haley painting the windows of his home black, there is little information extant about Haley's final days. 

After a small funeral service, Haley was cremated, although his widow Martha won't say what was done with the ashes.

Haley was posthumously inducted into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame in 1987. His son Pedro represented him at the ceremony. He has a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame. Dawson, Jim and Whitcomb, Ian (2005). Rock Around the Clock: The Record that Started the Rock Revolution!, p. 180. Hal Leonard Corporation. ISBN 0-87930-829-X The Comets were separately inducted into the Hall of Fame as a group in 2012, after a rule change allowed the induction of backing groups (the Comets were mass-inducted alongside several other groups such as Hank Ballard's Midnighters and Gene Vincent's Blue Caps). 

Songwriters Tom Russell and Dave Alvin addressed Haley's demise in musical terms with "Haley's Comet" on Alvin's 1991 album Blue Blvd. Dwight Yoakam sang backup on the tribute.

Surviving members of the 1954-55 contingent of Haley's Comets reunited in the late 1980s and continued to perform for many years around the world. They released a concert DVD in 2004 on Hydra Records, played the Viper Room in West Hollywood in 2005, and performed at Dick Clark's American Bandstand Theater in Branson, Missouri beginning in 200607. As of 2014, only two members of this particular contingent are still alive (Joey Ambrose and Dick Richards), but they continue to perform in Branson and in Europe. At least two other groups also continue to perform in North America under the Comets name as of 2014.

In March 2007, the Original Comets pre-opened the Bill Haley Museum in Munich, Germany. On October 27, 2007, ex-Comets guitar player Bill Turner opened the Bill Haley Museum for the public.

Two of Haley's children, Bill Haley Jr. and Gina Haley, are themselves musicians and have in recent years recorded albums of their father's music and headlined tribute musical shows.

Bill Haley on a lobby card from the 1956 Columbia Pictures film Rock Around The Clock
====Asteroid====
:Main article  79896 Billhaley

In February 2006, the International Astronomical Union announced the naming of asteroid 79896 Billhaley to mark the 25th anniversary of Bill Haley's death.

====Children====
Married three times, Bill Haley had at least four children. John W. Haley, his eldest son, wrote Sound and Glory, a biography of Haley, while his youngest daughter, Gina Haley, is a professional musician based in Texas. Carman, Tim. "Rock and Roll Royalty", "The Houston Press", Houston, May 18, 1995. Scott Haley is an athlete. His youngest son Pedro is also a musician. 

He also had a daughter, Martha Maria, from his last marriage with Martha Velasco. 

Bill Haley Jr. (Haley's second son and first with Joan Barbara "Cuppy" Haley-Hahn) publishes a regional business magazine in Southeastern Pennsylvania (Route 422 Business Advisor). He sings and plays guitar with a band called "Bill Haley and the Satellites," and released a CD in 2011.
 He also has occasionally appeared with the "Original Comets" at the Bubba Mac Shack in Somers Point, New Jersey from 20042011, and at the Twin Bar re-dedication ceremony in Gloucester City, New Jersey, in 2007. In February 2011, he formed a tribute band "Bill Haley Jr. and the Comets," performing his father's music and telling the stories behind the songs. 

==Biographies==
* In 1980, Haley began working on an autobiography entitled The Life and Times of Bill Haley but died after completing only 100 pages. The work is registered with the U.S. Copyright Office but has yet to be released to the public.
* In 1982, John Swenson wrote Bill Haley: The Daddy of Rock and Roll (published in the UK under the title, Bill Haley).
* In 1990, Haley's eldest son, John W. Haley, along with John von Holle wrote Sound and Glory, a biography focusing mostly on Haley's early life and peak career years. This book is out of print.
* A German language biography was published soon after Haley's death, written by Peter Cornelsen and Harald D. Kain.
* A book on the history of Haley's most famous recording, Rock Around the Clock: The Record That Started the Rock Revolution by Jim Dawson was published in June 2005. 

==Film portrayals==
Unlike his contemporaries, Bill Haley has rarely been portrayed on screen. Following the success of The Buddy Holly Story in 1978, Haley expressed interest in having his life story committed to film, but this never came to fruition. In the 1980s and early 1990s, numerous media reports emerged that plans were underway to do a biopic based upon Haley's life, with Beau Bridges, Jeff Bridges and John Ritter all at one point being mentioned as actors in line to play Haley (according to Goldmine Magazine, Ritter attempted to buy the film rights to Sound and Glory). 

Bill Haley has also been portrayed  not always in a positive light  in several "period" films:
* John Paramor in Shout! The Story of Johnny O'Keefe (1985)
* Michael Daingerfield in Mr. Rock 'n' Roll: The Alan Freed Story (1999)
* Dicky Barrett (of The Mighty Mighty Bosstones) in (also 1999)

In March 2005, the British network Sky TV reported that Tom Hanks was planning to produce a biopic on the life of Bill Haley, with production tentatively scheduled to begin in 2006. [http://www.sky.com/showbiz/picture_gallery/0,,50004-1175946-2,00.html ] However this rumor was quickly debunked by Hanks.

==Discography==
Sunday, April 28, 1957 second appearance on the Ed Sullivan Show rehearsal photograph, CBS
Before the formation of Bill Haley and the Saddlemen, which later became the Comets, Haley released several singles with other groups. Dates are approximate due to lack of documentation. 

As Bill Haley and the Four Aces of Western Swing:

1948
* Too Many Parties and Too Many Pals (vocal by Tex King)/Four Leaf Clover Blues (Cowboy CR1201)
1949
* Tennessee Border/Candy Kisses (Cowboy CR1202)

As Johnny Clifton and His String Band:

1950
* Stand Up and Be Counted/Loveless Blues (Center C102)

Many Haley discographies list two 1946 recordings by the Down Homers released on the Vogue Records label as featuring Haley. Haley historian Chris Gardner, as well as surviving members of the group, have confirmed that the two singles: "Out Where the West Winds Blow"/"Who's Gonna Kiss You When I'm Gone" (Vogue R736) and "Boogie Woogie Yodel"/"Baby I Found Out All About You" (Vogue R786) do not feature Haley. Thegardnerfamily.org However, the tracks were nonetheless included in the compilation box set Rock 'n' Roll Arrives released by Bear Family Records in 2006.

:See the discography section of Bill Haley & His Comets for a list of the singles and album releases made by Haley with the Saddlemen and the Comets from 1950 onwards.

===Unreleased recordings===
Bill Haley recorded prolifically during the 1940s, often at the radio stations where he worked, or in formal studio settings. Virtually none of these recordings were ever released. Liner notes for a 2003 CD release by Hydra Records entitled Bill Haley and Friends Vol. 2: The Legendary Cowboy Recordings reveal that several additional Cowboy label single releases were planned for the Four Aces, but this never occurred. 

A number of previously unreleased Haley country-western recordings from the 19461950 period began to emerge near the end of Haley's life, some of which were released by the Arzee label, with titles such as "Yodel Your Blues Away" and "Rose of My Heart." Still more demos, alternate takes, and wholly unheard-before recordings have been released since Haley's death. Notable examples of such releases include the albums Golden Country Origins by Grassroots Records of Australia and Hillbilly Haley by the British label, Rollercoaster, as well as the aforementioned German release by Hydra Records. In 2006, Bear Family Records of Germany released what is considered to be the most comprehensive (yet still incomplete) collection of Haley's 19461950 recordings as part of its Haley box set Rock n' Roll Arrives.

==Compositions==

Bill Haley's compositions included "Four Leaf Clover Blues", "Crazy Man, Crazy", "What'Cha Gonna Do", "Fractured", "Live It Up", "Farewell, So Long, Goodbye", "Real Rock Drive", "Rocking Chair on the Moon", "Sundown Boogie", "Green Tree Boogie", "Tearstains on My Heart", "Down Deep in My Heart", "Straight Jacket", "Birth of the Boogie", "Two Hound Dogs", "Rock-A-Beatin' Boogie", "Hot Dog Buddy Buddy", "R-O-C-K", "Rudy's Rock", "Calling All Comets", "Tonight's the Night", "Hook, Line and Sinker", "Sway with Me", "Paper Boy (On Main Street U.S.A.)", "Skinny Minnie", "B.B. Betty", "Eloise", "Whoa Mabel!", "Vive la Rock and Roll", "I've Got News For You", "So Right Tonight", "Ana Maria", "Yucatn Twist", "Football Rock and Roll", and "Chick Safari". 

He also wrote or co-wrote songs for other artists such as "Calypso Rock" for Dave Day and The Red Coats on Kapp in 1956, "A.B.C. Rock" and "Rocky the Rockin' Rabbit" for Sally Starr on Arcade, and "(Ya Gotta) Sing For the Ladies" and "Butterfly Love" for Ginger Shannon and Johnny Montana in 1960 on Arcade as well as the unissued "I'm Shook" in 1958.

==Quotations==

NME  October 1955 

NME  January 1957 
==Grammy Hall of Fame==
The following recording by Bill Haley was inducted into the Grammy Hall of Fame, which is a special Grammy award established in 1973 to honor recordings that are at least 25 years old and that have "qualitative or historical significance."

 Bill Haley: Grammy Hall of Fame Awards Grammy Hall of Fame Database. 
 Year Recorded Title Genre Label Year Inducted Notes 
 1954 \"Rock Around the Clock\" Rock & Roll (single) Decca Records 1982 

==References==

==Other sources==
* Jim Dawson, Rock Around the Clock: The Record That Started the Rock Revolution! (San Francisco: Backbeat Books, 2005)
* John W. Haley and John von Holle, Sound and Glory (Wilmington, DE: Dyne-American, 1990)
* John Swenson, Bill Haley (London: W.H. Allen, 1982)

==External links==
* Bill Haley's new Comets web site
* Melody Manor (Bill Haley's house) Google Map
*
* Bill Haley Jr. and the Comets site



[[Northern bobwhite]]

The northern bobwhite, Virginia quail or (in its home range) bobwhite quail (Colinus virginianus) is a ground-dwelling bird native to the United States, Mexico, and the Caribbean. It is a member of the group of species known as New World quails (Odontophoridae). They were initially placed with the Old World quails in the pheasant family (Phasianidae), but are not particularly closely related. The name "bobwhite" derives from its characteristic whistling call. Despite its secretive nature, the northern bobwhite is one of the most familiar quails in eastern North America because it is frequently the only quail in its range. There are 21 subspecies of northern bobwhite, and many of the birds are hunted extensively as game birds. One subspecies, the masked bobwhite (Colinus virginianus ridgewayi), is listed as endangered with wild populations located in Sonora, Mexico, and a reintroduced population in Buenos Aires National Wildlife Refuge in southern Arizona.

==Appearance==
This is a moderately-sized quail and is the only small galliform native to eastern North America. The bobwhite can range from 24 to in length with a 33 to wingspan. As indicated by body mass, weights increase in birds found further north, as corresponds to Bergmann's rule. In Mexico, northern bobwhites weigh from 129 to whereas in the north they average 170 to and large males can attain as much as 255 g. Pheasants, Partridges, and Grouse : A Guide to the Pheasants, Partridges, Quails, Grouse, Guineafowl, Buttonquails, and Sandgrouse of the World (Princeton Field Guides) by Tami Davis Biddle. Princeton University Press (2002). ISBN 978-0691089089. Nelson, A. L. and A. C. Martin. 1953. Gamebird weights. J. Wildl. Manage. 17:36-42. Among standard measurements, the wing chord is 9.7 to, the tail is 5 to the culmen is 1.3 to and the tarsus is 2.7 to. Aldrich, J. W. 1946. The United States races of the bob-white. The Auk 63:493-508. It has the typical chunky, rounded shape of a quail. The bill is short, curved and brown-black in color. This species is sexually dimorphic. Males have a white throat and brow stripe bordered by black. The overall rufous plumage has gray mottling on the wings, white scalloped stripes on the flanks, and black scallops on the whitish underparts. The tail is gray. Females are similar but are duller overall and have a buff throat and brow without the black border. Both sexes have pale legs and feet.

==Taxonomy==

===Subspecies===
Plate 76 of Birds of America by John James Audubon depicting Virginian Partridge.
There are twenty-one recognized subspecies in 3 groups. 1 subspecies is extinct.
*Eastern Group
** C. v. aridus (Lawrence, 1853) - Jaumave bobwhite - west-central Tamaulipas to southeastern San Luis Potos
** C. v. cubanensis (GR Gray, 1846) - Cuban bobwhite - Cuba and the Isle of Pines
** C. v. floridanus (Coues, 1872) - Florida bobwhite - peninsular Florida
** C. v. insulanus (Howe, 1904) - Key West bobwhite - Florida Keys
** C. v. maculatus (Nelson, 1899) - spot-bellied bobwhite - central Tamaulipas to northern Veracruz and southeastern San Luis Potos
** C. v. marilandicus (Linnaeus, 1758) - coastal New England to Pennsylvania and central Virginia
** C. v. mexicanus (Linnaeus, 1766) - eastern United States west of Atlantic Seaboard to Great Plains
** C. v. taylori (Lincoln, 1915) - plains bobwhite - South Dakota to northern Texas, western Missouri and northwest Arkansas
** C. v. texanus (Lawrence, 1853) - Texas bobwhite - southwest Texas to northern Mexico
** C. v. virginianus (Linnaeus, 1758) - nominate - Atlantic coast from Virginia to northern Florida and southeast Alabama
*Grayson's Group
** C. v. graysoni (Lawrence, 1867) - Grayson's bobwhite - west central Mexico
** C. v. nigripectus (Nelson, 2015) - puebla bobwhite - eastern Mexico
*Black-breasted Group
** C. v. godmani (Nelson, 1897) - Godman's bobwhite - eastern slopes and mountains of central Veracruz
** C. v. minor (Nelson, 1901) - least bobwhite - northeast Chiapas and Tabasco
** C. v. pectoralis (Gould, 1883) - black-breasted bobwhite - eastern slopes and mountains of central Veracruz
** C. v. thayeri (Bangs and Peters, 1928) - Thayer's bobwhite - northeast Oaxaca
*Masked Group
** C. v. atriceps (Ogilvie-Grant, 1893) - black-headed bobwhite - interior of western Oaxaca
** C. v. coyolcos (Statius Mller, 1776) - Coyolcos bobwhite - Pacific Coast of Oaxaca and Chiapas
** C. v. harrisoni (Orr and Webster, 1968) - southwest Oaxaca
** C. v. insignis (Nelson, 1897) - Guatemalan bobwhite - Guatemala and southern Chiapas
** C. v. ridgwayi (Brewster, 1885) - masked bobwhite - north central Sonora
** C. v. salvini (Nelson, 1897) - Salvin's bobwhite - coastal and southern Chiapas

==Diet==
The northern bobwhite's diet consists of plants and small bugs, like snails, grasshoppers, and potato beetles. Plant sources include grass seeds, wild berries, partridge peas, and cultivated grains. It forages on the ground in open areas with some spots of taller vegetation. 

==Habitat==
The northern bobwhite can be found year-round in agricultural fields, grassland, open woodland areas, roadsides and wood edges. Its range covers the southeastern quadrant of the United States from the Great Lakes and southern Minnesota east to Pennsylvania and southern Massachusetts, and extending west to southern Nebraska, Kansas, Oklahoma and all but westernmost Texas. It is absent from the southern tip of Florida and the highest elevations of the Appalachian Mountains, but occurs in eastern Mexico and in Cuba. Isolated populations have been introduced in Oregon and Washington. The northern bobwhite has also been introduced to New Zealand.

==Vocalizations==
The clear whistle "bob-WHITE" or "bob-bob-WHITE" call is very recognizable. The syllables are slow and widely spaced, rising in pitch a full octave from beginning to end. Other calls include lisps, peeps, and more rapidly whistled warning calls.

==Behavior==
Egg
Like most game birds, the northern bobwhite is shy and elusive. When threatened, it will crouch and freeze, relying on camouflage to stay undetected, but will flush into low flight if closely disturbed. It is generally solitary or paired early in the year, but family groups are common in the late summer and winter roosts may have two dozen or more birds in a single covey.

==Reproduction==
The species is generally monogamous, but there is some evidence of polygamy. Both parents incubate a brood for 23 to 24 days, and the precocial young leave the nest shortly after hatching. Both parents lead the young birds to food and care for them for 14 to 16 days until their first flight. A pair may raise one or two broods annually, with 12 to 16 eggs per clutch.

==Introduced populations==

=== European Union ===

Northern bobwhite were introduced into Italy in 1927, Ghigi, 1968 and are reported in the plains and hills in the northwest of the country. Other reports from the EU are in France, Spain, and Yugoslavia. http://www.tandfonline.com/doi/pdf/10.1080/11250009209386651 Habitat requirements of the bobwhite quail in northern Italy, Alberto Meriggi, Armando Gariboldi, & Barbara Magnani As bobwhites are highly productive and popular aviary subjects, it is reasonable to expect other introductions have been made in other parts of the EU, especially in the UK and Ireland, where game-bird breeding, liberation, and naturalisation are almost national-pastimes.

=== New Zealand ===

From 1898 Ayson, L.F. 1899:1. to 1902, some 1300 birds were imported from America and released in many parts of the North and South Islands, K.E. Westerskov, MSc, PhD. Complete Book of New Zealand Birds from Northland to Southland. The bird was briefly on the Nelson game shooting licence, but: "It would seem that the committee was a little too eager in placing these Quail on the licence, or the shooters of the day were over-zealous and greedy in their bag limits, for the Virginian Quail, like the Mountain Quail were soon thing of the past." Ann.Rep. Nelson Acclimatisation Society, 1968:38 The Taranaki (Acclimatisation) Society released a few in 1900 and was confidant that in a year or two they might offer good sport; two years later, broods were reported and the species was said to be steadily increasing; but after another two years they seemed to have disappeared and that was the end of them. The Otago (Acclimatisation) Society imported more in 1948, Ann.Rep. Otago Acclimatisation Society, 1948 but these releases did no good. Ann.Rep. North Canterbury Acclimatisation Society, 1954:21 Gamekeepers for the Nation, 1994, R.M. McDowell After 1923, no more genuinely wild birds were sighted until 1952, when a small population was found North-West of Wairoa in the Ruapapa Road area. Since then bobwhite have been found at several localities around Waikaremoana, in farmland, open bush and along roadsides. K.E. Westerskov, MSc, PhD. Complete Book of New Zealand Birds 

More birds have been imported into New Zealand by private individuals since the 1990s and a healthy captive population is now held by backyard aviculturalists and have been found to be easily cared for, bred, and are popular for their song and good-looks. A larger proportion of the national captive population belong to a few game preserves and game bird breeders. Though the birds would be self-sustaining in the wild if they were protected; it is tricky to guess what the effect of an annual population subsidy and hunting has on any of the original populations from the Acclimatisation Society releases. It would be fair to suggest most birds in the wild are no more than one generation from captive stock.

An albino hen was present in a covey in Bayview, Hawkes Bay for a couple of seasons sometime around 2000. J.J. Holland 

=== Captive populations ===

Bobwhites are popular throughout the world, with healthy captive populations everywhere where bird-keeping is enjoyed. Certain countries/states require permits and record keeping, as the possibility that an introduced population may compete with or spread diseases with native quail is a real threat.

==Captivity==

=== Housing ===

Bobwhites are generally compatible with most parrots, softbills and doves. This species should, however, be the only ground-dwelling species in the aviary. Most individuals will do little damage to finches, but one should watch that nests are not being crushed when the species perches at night. Single pairs are preferred, unless the birds have been raised together as a group since they were chicks. Some fighting will occur between cocks at breeding time. One cock may be capable of servicing several hens at once, but the fertility seems to be highest in the eggs from the preferred hen. Aviary style is a compromise between what is tolerated by the bird and what is best for the bird. Open parrot-style type aviaries may be used, but some birds will remain flighty and shy in this situation. In a planted aviary, this species will generally settle down to become quite tame and confiding. Parents with chicks will roost on the ground, forming a circular arrangement, with heads facing outwards. In the early morning and late afternoon, the cock will utter its call, which, although not loud, carries well and may offend noise-sensitive neighbors. Most breeding facilities keep birds in breeding groups, on wire up off the ground. This keeps the birds clean and generally avoids diseases and parasites which can devastate a covey. Cages with mesh floors for pairs and trios are also employed, but usually where there is a photo-period manipulation to keep birds breeding through winter.

=== Feeding ===

In the wild the bobwhite feeds on a variety of seeds of weeds, grasses, as well as insects. These are generally collected on the ground or from low foliage. Birds in the aviary are easily catered for with a commercial small seed mix (finch, budgerigar, or small parrot mix) when supplemented with greenfeed. Live food is not usually necessary for breeding, but will be ravenously accepted. High protein foods such as chicken grower crumble are more convenient to supply and will be useful for the stimulation of breeding birds. Extra calcium is required, especially by laying hens; it can be supplied in the form of shell grit, or cuttlefish bone.

=== Breeding ===

In an open aviary hens will lay all over the show if a nesting site and privacy are not provided. Hens that do this may lay upwards of 80 eggs in a season which can be taken for artificial incubation - and chicks hand raised. Otherwise hens with nesting cover, that do make a nest (on the ground) will build up 825 eggs in a clutch, with eggs being laid daily.

=== Mutations and hybrids ===

Some captive bobwhite hybrids recorded are between blue quail (scaled quail), Gambel's quail, California quail, mountain quail and it has long been suggested that there are Japanese quail hybrids being bred commercially; there is a distinct lack of photographic proof to substantiate this. Inter-subspecific hybrids have been common.

Several mutations have long been established, including Californian Jumbo, Wisconsin Jumbo, Northern Giant, Albino, Snowflake, Blonde, Fawn, Barred, Silver, and Red.

==Similar species==
The Central American spot-bellied bobwhite looks very similar, but lacks black facial coloration. The Asian rain quail is larger in size and has a black breast.

==References==

==External links==

* Northern Bobwhite at BirdWeb (seattleaudubon.org)
* Northern Bobwhite info at About.com
* National Bobwhite Conservation Initiative
* 
* 
* 



[[Bipolar disorder]]

Bipolar disorder, also known as bipolar affective disorder, manic-depressive illness, or affective psychosis, is a mental illness characterized by periods of elevated mood and periods of depression. The elevated mood is significant and is known as mania or hypomania depending on the severity. During mania an individual feels or acts abnormally happy, energetic, or irritable. They often make poorly thought out decisions with little regard to the consequences. The need for sleep is usually reduced. During periods of depression there may be crying, poor eye contact with others, and a negative outlook on life. The risk of suicide among those with the disorder is high at greater than 6% over 20 years, while self harm occurs in 30-40%. Other mental health issues such as anxiety disorder and drug misuse are commonly associated. 

The cause is not clearly understood, but both genetic and environmental factors play a role. Typically many genes are involved. Environmental factors include long term stress and a history of childhood abuse. It is divided into bipolar I disorder if there is at least one manic episode and bipolar II disorder if there are at least one hypomanic episode and one major depressive episode. In those with less severe symptoms of a prolonged duration the condition cyclothymic disorder may be present. If due to drugs or medical problems it is classified separately. Other conditions that may present in a similar manner include: drug misuse, personality disorders, attention deficit hyperactivity disorder, and schizophrenia as well as a number of medical conditions. 

Treatment commonly includes psychotherapy and medications such as mood stabilizers or antipsychotics. Examples of mood stabilizers that are commonly used include: lithium and anticonvulsants. Treatment in hospital against a person's wishes may be required at times as people may be at risk to themselves or others yet refuse treatment. Severe behavioural problems may be managed with short term benzodiazepines or antipsychotics. In periods of mania it is recommended that antidepressants be stopped. If antidepressants are used for periods of depression they should be used with a mood stabilizer. Electroconvulsive therapy may be helpful in those who do not respond to other treatments. If treatments is stopped it is recommended that this be done slowly. Most people have social, financial or work related problem due to the disorder. These difficulties occur a quarter to a third of the time on average. The risk of death from natural causes such as heart disease is twice that of the general population. This is due to poor lifestyle choices and the side effects from medications. 

About 3% of people in the United States have bipolar disorder at some point in their life. Lower rates of around 1% are found in other countries. The most common age at which symptoms begin is 25. Rates appear to be similar in males as females. The economic costs of the disorder has been estimated at $45 billion for the United States in 1991. A large proportion of this was related to a higher number of missed work days estimated at 50 per year. People with bipolar disorder often face problems with social stigma. 

== Signs and symptoms ==
Mania is the defining feature of bipolar disorder, and can occur with different levels of severity. With milder levels of mania, known as hypomania, individuals appear energetic, excitable, and may be highly productive. As mania worsens, individuals begin to exhibit erratic and impulsive behavior, often making poor decisions due to unrealistic ideas about the future, and sleep very little. At the most severe level, manic individuals can experience very distorted beliefs about the world known as psychosis. A depressive episode commonly follows an episode of mania. The biological mechanisms responsible for switching from a manic or hypomanic episode to a depressive episode or vice versa remain poorly understood. 

=== Manic episodes ===
Mania is a distinct period of at least one week of elevated or irritable mood, which can take the form of euphoria, and exhibit three or more of the following behaviors (four if irritable): speak in a rapid, uninterruptible manner, are easily distracted, have racing thoughts, display an increase in goal-oriented activities or feel agitated, or exhibit behaviors characterized as impulsive or high-risk such as hypersexuality or excessive money spending. To meet the definition for a manic episode, these behaviors must impair the individual's ability to socialize or work. If untreated, a manic episode usually lasts three to six months. 

People with mania may also experience a decreased need for sleep, speak excessively in addition to speaking rapidly, and may have impaired judgment. Manic individuals often have issues with substance abuse due to a combination of thrill-seeking and poor judgment. At more extreme levels, a person in a manic state can experience psychosis, or a break with reality, a state in which thinking is affected along with mood. They may feel out of control or unstoppable, or as if they have been "chosen" and are on a special mission, or have other grandiose or delusional ideas. Approximately 50% of those with bipolar disorder experience delusions or hallucinations. This may lead to violent behaviors and hospitalization in an inpatient psychiatric hospital. The severity of manic symptoms can be measured by rating scales such as the Young Mania Rating Scale. 

The onset of a manic (or depressive) episode is often foreshadowed by sleep disturbances. Mood changes, psychomotor and appetite changes, and an increase in anxiety can also occur up to three weeks before a manic episode develops. 

=== Hypomanic episodes ===
Hypomania is a milder form of mania defined as at least four days of the same criteria as mania, but does not cause a significant decrease in the individual's ability to socialize or work, lacks psychotic features (i.e., delusions or hallucinations), and does not require psychiatric hospitalization. Overall functioning may actually increase during episodes of hypomania and is thought to serve as a defense mechanism against depression. Hypomanic episodes rarely progress to true manic episodes. Some hypomanic people show increased creativity while others are irritable or demonstrate poor judgment. Hypomanic people generally have increased energy and increased activity levels.

Hypomania may feel good to the person who experiences it. Thus, even when family and friends recognize mood swings, the individual often will deny that anything is wrong. What might be called a "hypomanic event", if not accompanied by depressive episodes, is often not deemed as problematic, unless the mood changes are uncontrollable, volatile or mercurial. Most commonly, symptoms continue for a few weeks to a few months. 

=== Depressive episodes ===
Signs and symptoms of the depressive phase of bipolar disorder include persistent feelings of sadness, anxiety, guilt, anger, isolation, or hopelessness; disturbances in sleep and appetite; fatigue and loss of interest in usually enjoyable activities; problems concentrating; loneliness, self-loathing, apathy or indifference; depersonalization; loss of interest in sexual activity; shyness or social anxiety; irritability, chronic pain (with or without a known cause); lack of motivation; and morbid suicidal thoughts. In severe cases, the individual may become psychotic, a condition also known as severe bipolar depression with psychotic features. These symptoms include delusions or, less commonly, hallucinations, which are usually unpleasant. A major depressive episode persists for at least two weeks, and may continue for over six months if left untreated. 

The earlier the age of onset, the more likely the first few episodes are to be depressive. Because a bipolar diagnosis requires a manic or hypomanic episode, many patients are initially diagnosed and treated as having major depression. 

=== Mixed affective episodes ===
In the context of bipolar disorder, a mixed state is a condition during which symptoms of both mania and depression occur at the same time. Individuals experiencing a mixed state may have manic symptoms such as grandiose thoughts while at the same time experiencing depressive symptoms such as excessive guilt or feeling suicidal. Mixed states are considered to be high-risk for suicidal behavior since depressive emotions such as hopelessness are often paired with mood swings or difficulties with impulse control. Anxiety disorder occurs more frequently as a comorbidity in mixed bipolar episodes than in non mixed bipolar depression or mania. Substance abuse (including alcohol) also follows this trend. 

=== Associated features ===

Associated features are clinical phenomena that often accompany the disorder but are not part of the diagnostic criteria. In adults with the condition, bipolar disorder is often accompanied by changes in cognitive processes and abilities. These include reduced attentional and executive capabilities and impaired memory. How the individual processes the world also depends on the phase of the disorder, with differential characteristics between the manic, hypomanic and depressive states. Some studies have found a significant association between bipolar disorder and creativity. Those with bipolar disorder may have difficulty in maintaining relationships. There are several common childhood precursors seen in children who later receive a diagnosis of bipolar disorder; these disorders include mood abnormalities, full major depressive episodes, and attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD). 

=== Comorbid conditions ===
The diagnosis of bipolar disorder can be complicated by coexisting (comorbid) psychiatric conditions including the following: obsessive-compulsive disorder, substance abuse, eating disorders, attention deficit hyperactivity disorder, social phobia, premenstrual syndrome (including premenstrual dysphoric disorder), or panic disorder. A careful longitudinal analysis of symptoms and episodes, enriched if possible by discussions with friends and family members, is crucial to establishing a treatment plan where these comorbidities exist. 

== Causes ==
The causes of bipolar disorder likely vary between individuals and the exact mechanism underlying the disorder remains unclear. Genetic influences are believed to account for 60-80% of the risk of developing the disorder indicating a strong hereditary component. The overall heritability of the bipolar spectrum has been estimated at 0.71. Twin studies have been limited by relatively small sample sizes but have indicated a substantial genetic contribution, as well as environmental influence. For bipolar disorder type I, the (probandwise) concordance rates in modern studies have been consistently estimated at around 40% in identical twins (same genes), compared to about 5% in fraternal twins. A combination of bipolar I, II and cyclothymia produced concordance rates of 42% vs 11%, with a relatively lower ratio for bipolar II that likely reflects heterogeneity. There is overlap with unipolar depression and if this is also counted in the co-twin the concordance with bipolar disorder rises to 67% in monozygotic twins and 19% in dizygotic. The relatively low concordance between dizygotic twins brought up together suggests that shared family environmental effects are limited, although the ability to detect them has been limited by small sample sizes. 

=== Genetic ===
Genetic studies have suggested that many chromosomal regions and candidate genes are related to bipolar disorder susceptibility with each gene exerting a mild to moderate effect. The risk of bipolar disorder is nearly ten-fold higher in first degree-relatives of those affected with bipolar disorder when compared to the general population; similarly, the risk of major depressive disorder is three times higher in relatives of those with bipolar disorder when compared to the general population. 

Although the first genetic linkage finding for mania was in 1969, the linkage studies have been inconsistent. The largest and most recent genome-wide association study failed to find any particular locus that exerts a large effect reinforcing the idea that no single gene is responsible for bipolar disorder in most cases. 

Findings point strongly to heterogeneity, with different genes being implicated in different families. Robust and replicable genome-wide significant associations showed several common single nucleotide polymorphisms, including variants within the genes CACNA1C, ODZ4, and NCAN. 

Advanced paternal age has been linked to a somewhat increased chance of bipolar disorder in offspring, consistent with a hypothesis of increased new genetic mutations. 

=== Physiological ===
Brain imaging studies have revealed differences in the volume of various brain regions between BD patients and healthy control subjects
Abnormalities in the structure and/or function of certain brain circuits could underlie bipolar. Meta-analyses of structural MRI studies in bipolar disorder report an increase in the volume of the lateral ventricles, globus pallidus and increase in the rates of deep white matter hyperintensities. Functional MRI findings suggest that abnormal modulation between ventral prefrontal and limbic regions, especially the amygdala, are likely contribute to poor emotional regulation and mood symptoms. 

According to the "kindling" hypothesis, when people who are genetically predisposed toward bipolar disorder experience stressful events, the stress threshold at which mood changes occur becomes progressively lower, until the episodes eventually start (and recur) spontaneously. There is evidence supporting an association between early-life stress and dysfunction of the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis (HPA axis) leading to its over activation, which may play a role in the pathogenesis of bipolar disorder. 

Other brain components which have been proposed to play a role are the mitochondria and a sodium ATPase pump. Alterations to these components are believed to cause cyclical periods of poor neuron firing (depression) and hypersensitive neuron firing (mania). Circadian rhythms and melatonin activity also seem to be altered. 

=== Environmental ===
Evidence suggests that environmental factors play a significant role in the development and course of bipolar disorder, and that individual psychosocial variables may interact with genetic dispositions. There is fairly consistent evidence from prospective studies that recent life events and interpersonal relationships contribute to the likelihood of onsets and recurrences of bipolar mood episodes, as they do for onsets and recurrences of unipolar depression. There have been repeated findings that 30-50% of adults diagnosed with bipolar disorder report traumatic/abusive experiences in childhood, which is associated on average with earlier onset, a higher rate of suicide attempts, and more co-occurring disorders such as PTSD. The total number of reported stressful events in childhood is higher in those with an adult diagnosis of bipolar spectrum disorder compared to those without, particularly events stemming from a harsh environment rather than from the child's own behavior. 

=== Neurological ===
Less commonly bipolar disorder or a bipolar-like disorder may occur as a result of or in association with a neurological condition or injury. Such conditions and injuries include (but are not limited to) stroke, traumatic brain injury, HIV infection, multiple sclerosis, porphyria, and rarely temporal lobe epilepsy. Murray ED, Buttner N, Price BH. (2012) Depression and Psychosis in Neurological Practice. In: Neurology in Clinical Practice, 6th Edition. Bradley WG, Daroff RB, Fenichel GM, Jankovic J (eds.) Butterworth Heinemann. April 12, 2012. ISBN 1437704344 | ISBN 978-1437704341 

=== Neuroendocrinological ===
Dopamine, a known neurotransmitter responsible for mood cycling, has been shown to have increased transmission during the manic phase. The dopamine hypothesis states that the increase in dopamine results in secondary homeostatic down regulation of key systems and receptors such as an increase in dopamine mediated G protein-coupled receptors. This results in decreased dopamine transmission characteristic of the depressive phase. The depressive phase ends with homeostatic up regulation potentially restarting the cycle over again. 

Two additional neurotransmitters, gamma-Aminobutyric acid (GABA) and glutamate, have been found to cause elevated mood states. Glutamate is significantly increased within the left dorsolateral prefrontal cortex during the manic phase of bipolar disorder, and returns to normal levels once the phase is over. GABA is found in higher concentrations in people with bipolar disorder, overall leading to a decrease in GABA B receptors. The increase in GABA is possibly caused by a disturbance in early development causing a disturbance of cell migration and the formation of normal lamination, the layering of brain structures commonly associated with the cerebral cortex. 

=== Evolutionary ===
Because bipolar disorder affects an individuals ability to function in society and has a high morbidity rate, evolutionary theory would suggest that the genes responsible would have been naturally selected against, effectively culling the disorder. Yet there continue to be high rates of bipolar disorder in many populations, suggesting the genes responsible may have an evolutionary benefit.

Proponents of evolutionary medicine hypothesize that the genes that cause severe bipolar disorder when inherited in large doses may increase fitness when inherited in small doses. High rates of bipolar disorder throughout history suggest that the ability to switch between depressive and manic moods conveyed some evolutionary advantage on ancestral humans. Theories put forward to explain the evolutionary advantages of major depressive disorder may also explain the adaptiveness of the depressive episodes of bipolar disorder. For example, in individuals under increased stress, depressive mood may serve as a defensive strategy that causes the individual to retreat from the external stressor, increase sleep, and preserve resources and energy for better times. Additionally, manic moods may convey advantage in some situations. Creativity, confidence, and high energy have all been linked to mania and hypomania. The ability to utilize mild manic symptoms to be more productive and think more creatively during stress-free times may have increased the fitness of ancestral humans. Being able to employ both hypomania and mild depression convey advantages that benefit individuals in a variable environment. However, if the genes enabling the manipulation of both of these moods are over activated, the manic and/or severe depressive moods of full bipolar disorder may be triggered instead.

Evolutionary biologists have hypothesized that bipolar disorder could have come from an adaptation to extreme climactic conditions in the northern temperate zone during the Pleistocene. The Evolutionary Origin of Bipolar Disorder (EOBD) hypothesis states that during the short summers of extreme climactic zones, hypomania would be adaptive, allowing the completion of many tasks necessary for survival within a short period of time. During long winters the lethargy, hypersomnia, lack of interest in social activities, and overeating of depression would be adaptive to group cohesion and survival. Evidence for the EOBD hypothesis include an association between bipolar disorder and a cold-adapted build, correlation between seasonality and mood changes in those with bipolar disorder, and low rates of bipolar disorder in African Americans. The EOBD hypothesis suggests that in the absence of the extreme climactic conditions that fostered the success of bipolar disorder genes, many bipolar disorder behaviors are maladaptive and can often severely impair normal functioning.

== Prevention ==
Prevention of bipolar has focused on stress (such as childhood adversity or highly conflictual families) which, although not a diagnostically specific causal agent for bipolar, does place genetically and biologically vulnerable individuals at risk for a more pernicious course of illness. There has been debate regarding the causal relationship between usage of cannabis and bipolar disorder. 

== Diagnosis ==
Bipolar disorder often goes unrecognized and is commonly diagnosed during adolescence or early adulthood. The disorder can be difficult to distinguish from unipolar depression and the mean delay in diagnosis is 510 years after symptoms begin. Diagnosis of bipolar disorder takes several factors into account and considers the self-reported experiences of the symptomatic individual, behavior abnormalities reported by family members, friends or co-workers, and observable signs of illness as assessed by a psychiatrist, nurse, social worker, clinical psychologist or other health professional. Assessment is usually done on an outpatient basis; admission to an inpatient facility is considered if there is a risk to oneself or others. The most widely used criteria for diagnosing bipolar disorder are from the American Psychiatric Association's Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, the current version being DSM-IV-TR, and the World Health Organization's International Statistical Classification of Diseases and Related Health Problems, currently the ICD-10. The latter criteria are typically used in Europe and other regions while the DSM criteria are used in the USA and other regions, as well as prevailing in research studies. The DSM-V, published in 2013, included further and more accurate sub-typing. 

An initial assessment may include a physical exam by a physician. Although there are no biological tests that are diagnostic of bipolar disorder, tests may be carried out to exclude medical illnesses with clinical presentations similar to that of bipolar disorder such as hypothyroidism or hyperthyroidism, metabolic disturbance, a chronic disease, or an infection such as HIV or syphilis. An EEG may be used to exclude a seizure disorder such as epilepsy, and a CT scan of the head may be used to exclude brain lesions. Investigations are not generally repeated for a relapse unless there is a specific medical indication.

Several rating scales for the screening and evaluation of bipolar disorder exist, such as the Bipolar spectrum diagnostic scale. The use of evaluation scales can not substitute a full clinical interview but they serve to systematize the recollection of symptoms. On the other hand, instruments for the screening of bipolar disorder have low sensitivity and limited diagnostic validity. 

=== Bipolar spectrum ===
Bipolar spectrum disorders (BSD) include the following four disorders: bipolar I disorder, bipolar II disorder, cyclothymic disorder, and bipolar disorder not otherwise specified. These disorders typically involve depressive symptoms or episodes that alternate with elevated mood states or with mixed episodes that feature symptoms of both depressive and elevated mood states. The concept of the bipolar spectrum is similar to that of Emil Kraepelin's original concept of manic depressive illness. Currently, manic depressive illness is usually referred to as bipolar disorder or simply bipolar. A simple nomenclature system was introduced in 1978 to classify more easily individuals' affectedness within the spectrum. 

Points on the spectrum using this nomenclature are denoted using the following codes:
* Msevere mania
* Dsevere depression (unipolar depression)
* mless severe mania (hypomania)
* dless severe depression

Thus, mD represents a case with hypomania and major depression. A further distinction is sometimes made in the ordering of the letters, to represent the order of the episodes, where the patient's normal state is euthymic, interrupted by episodes of mania followed by depression (MD) or vice versa (DM).

Employing this schema, major depression would be denoted D. Unipolar mania (M) is, depending on the authority cited, either very rare, Why No "Unipolar Mania" Listing in DSM-IV? | Serendip's Exchange or nonexistent with such cases actually being Md.

Unipolar hypomania (m) without accompanying depression has been noted in the medical literature. There is speculation as to whether this condition may occur with greater frequency in the general, untreated population; successful social function of these potentially high-achieving individuals may lead to being labeled as normal, rather than as individuals with substantial dysregulation.

=== Criteria and subtypes ===
There is no clear consensus as to how many types of bipolar disorder exist. In DSM-IV-TR and ICD-10, bipolar disorder is conceptualized as a spectrum of disorders occurring on a continuum. The DSM-IV-TR lists three specific subtypes and one for non-specified: 

* Bipolar I disorder: At least one manic episode is necessary to make the diagnosis; depressive episodes are common in bipolar disorder I, but are unnecessary for the diagnosis. 

* Bipolar II disorder: No manic episodes, but one or more hypomanic episodes and one or more major depressive episode. Hypomanic episodes do not go to the full extremes of mania (i.e., do not usually cause severe social or occupational impairment, and are without psychosis), and this can make bipolar II more difficult to diagnose, since the hypomanic episodes may simply appear as a period of successful high productivity and is reported less frequently than a distressing, crippling depression.

* Cyclothymia: A history of hypomanic episodes with periods of depression that do not meet criteria for major depressive episodes. There is a low-grade cycling of mood which appears to the observer as a personality trait and interferes with functioning.

* Bipolar disorder NOS (not otherwise specified): This is a catchall category, diagnosed when the disorder does not fall within a specific subtype. Bipolar NOS can still significantly impair and adversely affect the quality of life of the patient.

The bipolar I and II categories have specifiers that indicate the presentation and course of the disorder. For example, the "with full interepisode recovery" specifier applies if there was full remission between the two most recent episodes. 

==== Rapid cycling ====
Most people who meet criteria for bipolar disorder experience a number of episodes, on average 0.4 to 0.7 per year, lasting three to six months. Rapid cycling, however, is a course specifier that may be applied to any of the above subtypes. It is defined as having four or more mood disturbance episodes within a one year span and is found in a significant proportion of individuals with bipolar disorder. These episodes are separated from each other by a remission (partial or full) for at least two months or a switch in mood polarity (i.e., from a depressive episode to a manic episode or vice versa). The definition of rapid cycling most frequently cited in the literature (including the DSM) is that of Dunner and Fieve: at least four major depressive, manic, hypomanic or mixed episodes are required to have occurred during a 12-month period. Ultra-rapid (days) and ultra-ultra rapid or ultradian (within a day) cycling have also been described. The literature examining the pharmacological treatment of rapid cycling is sparse and there is no clear consensus with respect to its optimal pharmacological management. 

=== Differential diagnosis ===
There are several other mental disorders with symptoms similar to those seen in bipolar disorder. These disorders include schizophrenia, major depressive disorder, attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD), and certain personality disorders, such as borderline personality disorder. 

It has been noted that the bipolar disorder diagnosis is officially characterized in historical terms such that, technically, anyone with a history of (hypo)mania and depression has bipolar disorder whatever their current or future functioning and vulnerability. This has been described as "an ethical and methodological issue", as it means no one can be considered as being recovered (only "in remission") from bipolar disorder according to the official criteria. This is considered especially problematic given that brief hypomanic episodes are widespread among people generally and not necessarily associated with dysfunction. 

== Management ==

Light therapy is one of several approaches to treating bipolar disorder. No one method is universally successful and most persons suffering from the illness need several forms of support.
There are a number of pharmacological and psychotherapeutic techniques used to treat bipolar disorder. Individuals may use self-help and pursue recovery.

Hospitalization may be required especially with the manic episodes present in bipolar I. This can be voluntary or (if mental health legislation allows and varying state-to-state regulations in the USA) involuntary (called civil or involuntary commitment). Long-term inpatient stays are now less common due to deinstitutionalization, although these can still occur. Following (or in lieu of) a hospital admission, support services available can include drop-in centers, visits from members of a community mental health team or Assertive Community Treatment team, supported employment and patient-led support groups, intensive outpatient programs. These are sometimes referred to partial-inpatient programs. 

=== Psychosocial ===
Psychotherapy is aimed at alleviating core symptoms, recognizing episode triggers, reducing negative expressed emotion in relationships, recognizing prodromal symptoms before full-blown recurrence, and, practicing the factors that lead to maintenance of remission. Lam et al., 1999; Miklowitz & Goldstein, 1997; Frank, 2005. Cognitive behavioral therapy, family-focused therapy, and psychoeducation have the most evidence for efficacy in regard to relapse prevention, while interpersonal and social rhythm therapy and cognitive-behavioral therapy appear the most effective in regard to residual depressive symptoms. Most studies have been based only on bipolar I, however, and treatment during the acute phase can be a particular challenge. Some clinicians emphasize the need to talk with individuals experiencing mania, to develop a therapeutic alliance in support of recovery. 

=== Medication ===
Lithium carbonate is one of many treatments for bipolar disorder.
A number of medications are used to treat bipolar disorder. The medication with the best evidence is lithium, which is effective in treating acute manic episodes and preventing relapses; lithium is also an effective treatment for bipolar depression. Lithium reduces the risk of suicide, self-harm, and death in people with bipolar disorder. 

Four anticonvulsants are used in the treatment of bipolar disorder. Carbamazepine effectively treats manic episodes, with some evidence it has greater benefit in rapid-cycling bipolar disorder, or those with more psychotic symptoms or a more schizoaffective clinical picture. It is less effective in preventing relapse than lithium or valproate. Carbamazepine became a popular treatment option for bipolar in the late 1980s and early 1990s, but was displaced by sodium valproate in the 1990s. Since then, valproate has become a commonly prescribed treatment, and is effective in treating manic episodes. Lamotrigine has some efficacy in treating bipolar depression, and this benefit is greatest in more severe depression. It has also been shown to have some benefit in preventing further episodes, though there are concerns about the studies done, and is of no benefit in rapid cycling disorder. The effectiveness of topiramate is unknown. Depending on the severity of the case, anticonvulsants may be used in combination with lithium or on their own.

Antipsychotic medications are effective for short-term treatment of bipolar manic episodes and appear to be superior to lithium and anticonvulsants for this purpose. However, other medications such as lithium are preferred for long-term use. Olanzapine is effective in preventing relapses, although the evidence is not as solid as for lithium. Antidepressants have not been found to be of any benefit over that found with mood stabilizers. 

Short courses of benzodiazepines may be used in addition to other medications until mood stabilizing become effective. 

===Alternative medicine===
There is some evidence that the addition of omega 3 fatty acids may have beneficial effects on depressive symptoms, although studies have been scarce and of variable quality. 

== Prognosis ==
For many individuals with bipolar disorder a good prognosis results from good treatment, which, in turn, results from an accurate diagnosis. Of the various forms of bipolar disorder, rapid cycling bipolar disorder is associated with the worst prognosis. Because bipolar disorder can have a high rate of both under-diagnosis and misdiagnosis, it is often difficult for individuals with the condition to receive timely and competent treatment.

Bipolar disorder can be a severely disabling medical condition. However, many individuals with bipolar disorder can live full and satisfying lives. Quite often, medication is needed to enable this. Persons with bipolar disorder may have periods of normal or near normal functioning between episodes.

=== Functioning ===
Functioning in bipolar I and II varies over time along a spectrum from good to fair to poor. During periods of major depression or mania (in BPI), functioning was on average poor, with depression being more persistently associated with disability than mania. Functioning between episodes was on average good  more or less normal. Subthreshold symptoms were generally still substantially impairing, however, except for hypomania (below or above threshold) which was associated with improved functioning. 

=== Recovery and recurrence ===
A naturalistic study from first admission for mania or mixed episode (representing the hospitalized and therefore most severe cases) found that 50% achieved syndromal recovery (no longer meeting criteria for the diagnosis) within six weeks and 98% within two years. Within two years, 72% achieved symptomatic recovery (no symptoms at all) and 43% achieved functional recovery (regaining of prior occupational and residential status). However, 40% went on to experience a new episode of mania or depression within 2 years of syndromal recovery, and 19% switched phases without recovery. 

Symptoms preceding a relapse (prodromal), specially those related to mania, can be reliably identified by people with bipolar disorder. There have been intents to teach patients coping strategies when noticing such symptoms with encouraging results. 

=== Suicide ===
Bipolar disorder can cause suicidal ideation that leads to suicidal attempts. Individuals whose bipolar disorder begins with a depressive or mixed affective episode seem to have a poorer prognosis and an increased risk of suicide. One out of two people with bipolar disorder attempt suicide at least once during their lifetime and many attempts are successfully completed. The annual average suicide rate is 0.4%, which is 10-20 times that of the general population. The standardized mortality ratio from suicide in bipolar disorder is between 18 and 25. The lifetime risk of suicide has been estimated to be as high as 20% in those with bipolar disorder. 

== Epidemiology ==
Burden of bipolar disorder around the world: disability-adjusted life years per 100,000 inhabitants in 2002.

Bipolar disorder is the sixth leading cause of disability worldwide and has a lifetime prevalence of about 3% in the general population. However, a reanalysis of data from the National Epidemiological Catchment Area survey in the United States suggested that 0.8% of the population experience a manic episode at least once (the diagnostic threshold for bipolar I) and a further 0.5% have a hypomanic episode (the diagnostic threshold for bipolar II or cyclothymia). Including sub-threshold diagnostic criteria, such as one or two symptoms over a short time-period, an additional 5.1% of the population, adding up to a total of 6.4%, were classified as having a bipolar spectrum disorder. A more recent analysis of data from a second US National Comorbidity Survey found that 1% met lifetime prevalence criteria for bipolar I, 1.1% for bipolar II, and 2.4% for subthreshold symptoms. There are conceptual and methodological limitations and variations in the findings. Prevalence studies of bipolar disorder are typically carried out by lay interviewers who follow fully structured/fixed interview schemes; responses to single items from such interviews may suffer limited validity. In addition, diagnoses (and therefore estimates of prevalence) vary depending on whether a categorical or spectrum approach is used. This consideration has led to concerns about the potential for both underdiagnosis and overdiagnosis. 

The incidence of bipolar disorder is similar in men and women as well as across different cultures and ethnic groups. A 2000 study by the World Health Organization found that prevalence and incidence of bipolar disorder are very similar across the world. Age-standardized prevalence per 100,000 ranged from 421.0 in South Asia to 481.7 in Africa and Europe for men and from 450.3 in Africa and Europe to 491.6 in Oceania for women. However, severity may differ widely across the globe. Disability-adjusted life year rates, for example, appear to be higher in developing countries, where medical coverage may be poorer and medication less available.

Within the United States, African and European Americans have similar rates of bipolar disorder, while Asian Americans have lower rates. 

Late adolescence and early adulthood are peak years for the onset of bipolar disorder. One study also found that in 10% of bipolar cases, the onset of mania had happened after the patient had turned 50. 

== History ==

German psychologist Emil Kraeplin first distinguished between manicdepressive illness and "dementia praecox" (now known as schizophrenia) in the late 19th century
Variations in moods and energy levels have been observed as part of the human experience since throughout history. The words "melancholia" (an old word for depression) and "mania" originated in Ancient Greek. The word melancholia is derived from melas/, meaning "black", and chole/, meaning "bile" or "gall", indicative of the term's origins in pre-Hippocratic humoral theories. Within the humoral theories, mania was viewed as arising from an excess of yellow bile, or a mixture of black and yellow bile. The linguistic origins of mania, however, are not so clear-cut. Several etymologies are proposed by the Roman physician Caelius Aurelianus, including the Greek word ania, meaning "to produce great mental anguish", and manos, meaning "relaxed" or "loose", which would contextually approximate to an excessive relaxing of the mind or soul. There are at least five other candidates, and part of the confusion surrounding the exact etymology of the word mania is its varied usage in the pre-Hippocratic poetry and mythologies. 

In the early 1800s, French psychiatrist Jean-tienne Dominique Esquirol's lypemania, one of his affective monomanias, was the first elaboration on what was to become modern depression. The basis of the current conceptualisation of manicdepressive illness can be traced back to the 1850s; on January 31, 1854, Jules Baillarger described to the French Imperial Academy of Medicine a biphasic mental illness causing recurrent oscillations between mania and depression, which he termed folie  double forme ("dual-form insanity"). . Two weeks later, on February 14, 1854, Jean-Pierre Falret presented a description to the Academy on what was essentially the same disorder, and designated folie circulaire ("circular insanity") by him. 

These concepts were developed by the German psychiatrist Emil Kraepelin (18561926), who, using Kahlbaum's concept of cyclothymia, categorized and studied the natural course of untreated bipolar patients. He coined the term manic depressive psychosis, after noting that periods of acute illness, manic or depressive, were generally punctuated by relatively symptom-free intervals where the patient was able to function normally. Kraepelin, Emil (1921) Manicdepressive Insanity and Paranoia ISBN 0-405-07441-7 

The term "manicdepressive reaction" appeared in the first American Psychiatric Association Diagnostic Manual in 1952, influenced by the legacy of Adolf Meyer who had introduced the paradigm illness as a reaction of biogenetic factors to psychological and social influences. Subclassification of bipolar disorder was first proposed by German psychiatrist Karl Leonhard in 1957; he was also the first to introduce the terms bipolar (for those with mania) and unipolar (for those with depressive episodes only).

== Society and culture ==

Singer Rosemary Clooney's public revelation of bipolar disorder in 1977 made her an early celebrity spokeswoman for mental illness
There are widespread problems with social stigma, stereotypes, and prejudice against individuals with a diagnosis of bipolar disorder. 

Kay Redfield Jamison, a clinical psychologist and Professor of Psychiatry at the Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, profiled her own bipolar disorder in her memoir An Unquiet Mind (1995). In his autobiography (2008) Chris Joseph describes his struggle between the creative dynamism which allowed the creation of his multi-million pound advertising agency Hook Advertising, and the money-squandering dark despair of his bipolar illness.

Several dramatic works have portrayed characters with traits suggestive of the diagnosis that has been the subject of discussion by psychiatrists and film experts alike. A notable example is Mr. Jones (1993), in which Mr. Jones (Richard Gere) swings from a manic episode into a depressive phase and back again, spending time in a psychiatric hospital and displaying many of the features of the syndrome. In The Mosquito Coast (1986), Allie Fox (Harrison Ford) displays some features including recklessness, grandiosity, increased goal-directed activity and mood lability, as well as some paranoia. Psychiatrists have suggested that Willy Loman, the main character in Arthur Miller's classic play Death of a Salesman, suffers from bipolar disorder, though that specific term for the condition did not exist when the play was written.

TV specials, for example the BBC's , MTV's True Life: I'm Bipolar, talk shows, and public radio shows, and the greater willingness of public figures to discuss their own bipolar disorder, have focused on psychiatric conditions, thereby, raising public awareness.

On April 7, 2009, the nighttime drama 90210 on the CW network, aired a special episode where the character Silver was diagnosed with bipolar disorder. Stacey Slater, a character from the BBC soap EastEnders, has been diagnosed with the disorder. The storyline was developed as part of the BBC's Headroom campaign. The Channel 4 soap Brookside had earlier featured a story about bipolar disorder when the character Jimmy Corkhill was diagnosed with the condition. In April 2014, ABC premiered a medical drama, Black Box, in which the main character, a world-renowned neuroscientist, is bipolar. 

Currently, British secret intelligence agency, SIS, doesn't accept job applications from those who "have ever suffered from bipolar disorder". 

== Specific populations ==

=== Children ===

 Lithium is the only medication approved for treating mania in children by the FDA

In the 1920s, Emil Kraepelin noted that manic episodes are rare before puberty. In general, bipolar disorder in children was not recognized in the first half of the twentieth century. This issue diminished with an increased following of the DSM criteria in the last part of the twentieth century. 

While in adults the course of bipolar disorder is characterized by discrete episodes of depression and mania with no clear symptomatology between them, in children and adolescents very fast mood changes or even chronic symptoms are the norm. In pediatric bipolar disorder is commonly characterized by outbursts of anger, irritability and psychosis, rather than euphoric mania, which is more likely to be seen in adults. Early onset bipolar disorder is more likely to manifest as depression rather than mania or hypomania. 

The diagnosis of childhood bipolar disorder is controversial, although it is not under discussion that the typical symptoms of bipolar disorder have negative consequences for minors suffering them. The debate is mainly centered on whether what is called bipolar disorder in children refers to the same disorder as when diagnosing adults, and the related question of whether the criteria for diagnosis for adults are useful and accurate when applied to children. Regarding diagnosis of children, some experts recommend following the DSM criteria. Others believe that these criteria do not correctly separate children with bipolar disorder from other problems such as ADHD, and emphasize fast mood cycles. Still others argue that what accurately differentiates children with bipolar disorder is irritability. The practice parameters of the AACAP encourage the first strategy. American children and adolescents diagnosed with bipolar disorder in community hospitals increased 4-fold reaching rates of up to 40% in 10 years around the beginning of the 21st century, while in outpatient clinics it doubled reaching 6%. Studies using DSM criteria show that up to 1% of youth may have bipolar disorder. 

Treatment involves medication and psychotherapy. Drug prescription usually consists in mood stabilizers and atypical antipsychotics. Among the former, lithium is the only compound approved by the FDA for children. Psychological treatment combines normally education on the disease, group therapy and cognitive behavioral therapy. Chronic medication is often needed. 

Current research directions for bipolar disorder in children include optimizing treatments, increasing the knowledge of the genetic and neurobiological basis of the pediatric disorder and improving diagnostic criteria. The DSM-V has proposed a new diagnosis which is considered to cover some presentations currently thought of as childhood-onset bipolar.  

=== Elderly ===
There is a relative lack of knowledge about bipolar disorder in late life. There is evidence that it becomes less prevalent with age but nevertheless accounts for a similar percentage of psychiatric admissions; that older bipolar patients had first experienced symptoms at a later age; that later onset of mania is associated with more neurologic impairment; that substance abuse is considerably less common in older groups; and that there is probably a greater degree of variation in presentation and course, for instance individuals may develop new-onset mania associated with vascular changes, or become manic only after recurrent depressive episodes, or may have been diagnosed with bipolar disorder at an early age and still meet criteria. There is also some weak evidence that mania is less intense and there is a higher prevalence of mixed episodes, although there may be a reduced response to treatment. Overall, there are likely more similarities than differences from younger adults. In the elderly, recognition and treatment of bipolar disorder may be complicated by the presence of dementia or the side effects of medications being taken for other conditions. 

== See also ==
* Bipolar disorders research
* Bipolar Disorders (journal)

== References ==

== Footnotes ==

* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
** 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 

== External links ==

* 
* Bipolar Disorder overview from the U.S. National Institute of Mental Health website
* NICE Bipolar Disorder clinical guidelines from the U.K. National Institute for Health and Clinical Excellence website

 



[[Blitz]]

Blitz, German for "lightning", may refer to:

==In warfare==
*The Blitz, the German aerial campaign against Britain in the Second World War

==People==
*Blitz (surname), a list of people
*Bobby Ellsworth, American thrash metal musician known as Blitz

==Computing==
*Blitz BASIC, a dialect of the BASIC programming language
*BlitzMail, the internal e-mail network at Dartmouth College
*Blitz++, a C++ class library for scientific computing
*Blitz (software), a cloud-based load-and performance-testing service (SaaS)

==Video games==
*Blitz (video game), a bombing game for the Commodore Vic-20
*, a 2005 American football game series developed by Midway Games
*Cray Blitz, chess program for the Cray supercomputer

==Sports==

===American football===
*Blitz (gridiron football), a type of defensive maneuver
*Bakersfield Blitz, former arena football team
*Chicago Blitz, a United States Football League team in the 1980s
*London Blitz (American football), a London-based team
*Montreal Blitz, a women's team
*Syracuse Blitz, former Professional Indoor Football League team
*The Blitz (ESPNEWS), a TV show on ESPNEWS
*Blitz (mascot), the mascot of the Seattle Seahawks

===Other sports===
*Blitz, a Japanese tuning company which competes in the D1 Grand Prix
*SV Blitz Breslau, former German soccer team
*Utah Blitzz, former professional soccer team

==Music==
*Blitz, a band formed in 1993 by former Ultravox members John Foxx and Robin Simon
*Blitz (band), a British punk rock band
*Blitz (Brazilian band), a new wave Brazilian band from the 1980s
*Blitz (album), 2009 KMFDM studio album
*Blitz! (musical), by Lionel Bart based on The Blitz
*The Blitz (Krokus album), 1984
*The Blitz (Thebandwithnoname album), 2002

==Toys and games==
*Blitz chess, fast chess in which each player is allotted only five minutes
*Blitz (game), a card game
*Blitz, an American football themed Beanie Baby

== Characters ==
*Blitz, the alter-ego of George in the web comic Bob and George
*Blitz (character), a fictional anthropomorphic doberman from the action/comedy cartoon Road Rovers
*Blitz, a robot dog from the cartoon C.O.P.S.
*Zorin Blitz, from the manga Hellsing
*Blitz (comics), a Flash-based Big Bang Comics hero
*Blitz, the villain in the 2011 film of the same name
*the Blitz, in the "Blitzgiving" episode of the TV show How I Met Your Mother

==Companies==
*Blitz Games, British computer games company
*Blitz Research, New Zealand software company

==Other==
*, an Imperial German Navy light cruiser
*Blitz (film), a 2011 film
*Blitz, alternative title of the 1986 Michael Verhoeven film Killing Cars
*Blitz, a 1980s night club in London (see Blitz Kids)
*Blitz (movement), a radical youth movement in Norway
* Blitz (magazine), a Portuguese music magazine, started in 1984 as qnewspaper
*Blitz (newspaper), Indian investigative newspaper, started in 1941 by Russi Karanjia
*Weekly Blitz, a weekly Bangladeshi newspaper
*Opel Blitz, a German lorry built by Opel

==See also==
*Bristol Blitz, the German bombing raids on Bristol, England in 1940 and 1941
*Hull Blitz, the German Second World War bombing campaign targeting Kingston upon Hull
*Rotterdam Blitz, the German bombing raid on Rotterdam, Netherlands in 1940
*Blitzkrieg ("lightning war"), a military strategy developed by Nazi Germany
*Blitzy, a fictional dog character from Mona the Vampire



[[Burt Lancaster]]

Burton Stephen "Burt" Lancaster (November 2, 1913  October 20, 1994) was an American film actor noted for his athletic physique, blue eyes, and distinctive smile (which he called "The Grin"). After initially building his career on "tough guy" roles Lancaster abandoned his "all-American" image in the late 1950s in favor of more complex and challenging roles, and came to be regarded as one of the best motion picture actors of his generation.

Lancaster was nominated four times for Academy Awards and won once for his work in Elmer Gantry in 1960. He also won a Golden Globe for that performance and BAFTA Awards for The Birdman of Alcatraz (1962) and Atlantic City (1980). His production company, Hecht-Hill-Lancaster, was the most successful and innovative star-driven independent production company in Hollywood in the 1950s, making movies such as Marty (1955), Trapeze (1956), Sweet Smell of Success (1957), and Separate Tables (1958).

In 1999, the American Film Institute named Lancaster 19th among the greatest male stars of all time. "America's Greatest Legends." American Film Institute. Retrieved: July 29, 2009. 

==Youth==
Lancaster was born in Manhattan, New York City, at his parents' home at 209 East 106th Street, between Second and Third Avenues, today the site of Benjamin Franklin Plaza. Lancaster was the son of Elizabeth (ne Roberts) and James Henry Lancaster, who was a postman. Buford 2008, p. 12. Both of his parents were Protestants of working-class origin. Lancaster's grandparents were Northern Irish immigrants to the U.S.; his maternal grandparents were from Belfast, and were descendants of English immigrants to Ireland. The family believed themselves to be related to Frederick Roberts, 1st Earl Roberts. Lancaster grew up in East Harlem and spent much of his time on the streets, where he developed great interest and skill in gymnastics while attending DeWitt Clinton High School, where he was a basketball star. Before he graduated from DeWitt Clinton, his mother died of a cerebral hemorrhage. Lancaster was accepted into New York University with an athletic scholarship but subsequently dropped out. Buford 2008, p. 28. 

==Circus career and military==
At the age of 19, Lancaster met Nick Cravat, with whom he continued to work throughout his life. Together they learned to act in local theatre productions and circus arts at Union Settlement, one of the city's oldest settlement houses. Andreychuk 2005, p. 3. They formed the acrobat duo "Lang and Cravat" in the 1930s and soon joined the Kay Brothers circus. However, in 1939, an injury forced Lancaster to give up the profession, with great regret. He then found temporary work until 1942first as a salesman for Marshall Fields, and then as a singing waiter in various restaurants. Andreychuk 2005, p. 6. 

The United States having then entered World War II, Lancaster joined the US Army and performed with the Army's Twenty-First Special Services Division, one of the military groups organized to follow the troops on the ground and provide USO entertainment to keep up morale. He served with General Mark Clark's Fifth Army in Italy from 19431945. Andreychuk 2005, p. 7. 

==Film career==

===Acting===
With Ava Gardner in The Killers (1946)
Though initially unenthusiastic about acting, he returned from service, auditioned for a Broadway play, and was offered a role. Although Harry Brown's A Sound of Hunting had a run of only three weeks, Lancaster's performance drew the attention of a Hollywood agent, Harold Hecht, and through him to Hal Wallis, who cast Lancaster in The Killers (1946). (Hecht and Lancaster later formed several production companies in the 1950s to give Lancaster greater creative control.) The tall, muscular actor won significant acclaim and appeared in two more films the following year. Subsequently, he played in a variety of films, especially in dramas, thrillers, and military and adventure films. In two, The Flame and the Arrow and The Crimson Pirate, a friend from his circus years, Nick Cravat, played a key supporting role, and both actors impressed audiences with their acrobatic prowess.
With Deborah Kerr in From Here to Eternity (1953)
In 1953, Lancaster played one of his best remembered roles with Deborah Kerr in From Here to Eternity. The American Film Institute acknowledged the iconic status of the scene from that film in which he and Deborah Kerr make love on a Hawaiian beach amid the crashing waves. The organization named it one of "AFI's top 100 Most Romantic Films" of all time.

Lancaster won the 1960 Academy Award for Best Actor, a Golden Globe Award, and the New York Film Critics Award for his performance in Elmer Gantry.

In 1968, at the age of 55, Lancaster appeared semi-nude in director Frank Perry's film, The Swimmer in what Roger Ebert called, "his finest performance." Roger Ebert "The Swimmer" review, July 2, 1968 Prior to working on The Swimmer, Lancaster was terrified of the water because he didn't know how to swim. In preparation for the film, the athlete took swimming lessons from UCLA swim coach, Bob Horn. "The Story of The Swimmer" Documentary, by Chris Innis, available on the Grindhouse Releasing 2014 release of "The Swimmer" on Blu-ray/DVD 

During the latter part of his career, Lancaster left adventure and acrobatic films behind and portrayed more distinguished characters. This period brought him work on several European productions, with directors such as Luchino Visconti and Bernardo Bertolucci. Lancaster sought demanding roles, and if he liked a part or a director, he was prepared to work for much lower pay than he might have earned elsewhere. He even helped to finance movies whose artistic value he believed in. He also mentored directors such as Sydney Pollack and John Frankenheimer and appeared in several television films. Lancaster's last film was Field of Dreams (1989).

For his contribution to the motion picture industry, Lancaster has a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame at 6801 Hollywood Boulevard.

=== Directing and producing===
With Audrey Hepburn in The Unforgiven (1960)
Lancaster was an early and successful actor/producer. In 1952, Lancaster co-produced The Crimson Pirate with producer Harold Hecht (who had previously produced three Lancaster films under his own production company Norma Productions; Kiss the Blood Off My Hands (1948), The Flame and the Arrow (1950), and Ten Tall Men (1951)). In 1954, they collaborated again on His Majesty O'Keefe, with Lancaster acting and Hecht producing. The writer for this film was James Hill. The trio started a production company, originally with Hill as a silent partner, under the name "Hecht-Lancaster." The name was later extended to include all three with "Hecht-Hill-Lancaster."

The "H-H-L" team impressed Hollywood with its success; as Life wrote in 1957, "fter the independent production of a baker's dozen of pictures it has yet to have its first flop ... (They were also good pictures.)." Hodgins, Eric. "Amid Ruins of an Empire a New Hollywood Arises." Life, June 10, 1957, p. 146. Retrieved: April 22, 2012. Together they produced the films Apache (1954), Vera Cruz (1954), Marty (1955) (which won both the Academy Award for Best Picture and the Palme d'Or award at the Cannes Film Festival), The Kentuckian (1955), Trapeze (1956), The Bachelor Party (1956), Sweet Smell of Success (1957), Run Silent, Run Deep (1958), Separate Tables (1958), The Devil's Disciple (1959), Take a Giant Step (1959), Summer of the Seventeenth Doll (1960), and The Unforgiven (1960). The company dissolved in 1960, but Hecht would produce two more films in which Lancaster acted, under Norma Productions, The Young Savages (1961) and Birdman of Alcatraz (1962). Twelve years later, Hecht and Lancaster produced Ulzana's Raid (1972) together.

In the late 1960s, Lancaster teamed with Roland Kibbee to form "Norlan Productions" and along with "Bristol Films" produce The Scalphunters (1968), Valdez Is Coming (1971), and The Midnight Man (1974).

In addition, Lancaster directed two films, The Kentuckian (1955) and The Midnight Man (1974). Buford 2008, pp. 138, 354. The Midnight Man was in fact starred in, co-written, produced, and directed by Lancaster.

===Frequent collaborations===
Apart from acting in a total of seventeen films produced by Harold Hecht, Lancaster also appeared in eight films produced by Hal B. Wallis.

Lancaster made seven films over the years with Kirk Douglas, including I Walk Alone (1948), Gunfight at the O.K. Corral (1957), The Devil's Disciple (1959), The List of Adrian Messenger (1963), Seven Days in May (1964), Victory at Entebbe (1976) and Tough Guys (1986). Additionally, the pair acted in comedy musical sketches for the 1958 and 1959 Oscar celebrations. Although perceived as a friendly collaboration, the two actors were never friends or fond of each other in real life, as was depicted in their respective biographical books. 

in Judgment at Nuremberg (1961)
Lancaster also often asked his close friend Nick Cravat to appear in his films. They co-starred together in nine films: "Movies Burt Lancaster and Nick Cravat have starred in together" The Flame and the Arrow (1952), Ten Tall Men (1951), The Crimson Pirate (1952), Run Silent, Run Deep (1958), The Scalphunters (1968), Valdez Is Coming (1971), Ulzana's Raid (1972), The Midnight Man (1974), and The Island of Dr. Moreau (1977). Guillen, Michael. "Gun, Smile, Smirk: The Films of Burt Lancaster." twitchfilm.com, November 16, 2010. 

Lancaster starred in three films with Deborah Kerr; From Here to Eternity, Separate Tables, and The Gypsy Moths.

In addition, John Frankenheimer directed five films with Lancaster: The Young Savages (1961), Birdman of Alcatraz (1962), Seven Days in May (1964), The Train (1964), and The Gypsy Moths (1969).

Among his final films, he had a small role in the 1983 British film Local Hero.

Lancaster used make-up veteran Robert Schiffer in 20 credited films. Lancaster hired Schiffer on nearly all the films he produced.

===Legacy===
The centennial of Lancaster's birth was honored at New York City's Film Society of Lincoln Center in May 2013 with the screening of twelve of the actor's finest films, from The Killers of 1946 to Atlantic City in 1980. Holden, Stephen. "Film: lots of Lancaster at Lincoln Center." The New York Times, May 12, 2013. 

==Personal life==

===Marriages and relationships===
Lancaster's son Bill in The Big Valley (1967)
Lancaster vigorously guarded his private life. He was married three times. His first two marriages ended in divorceto June Ernst from 1935 to 1946, and to Norma Anderson from 1946 to 1969. His third marriage, to Susan Martin, was from September 1990 until his death in 1994. All five of his children were with Norma Anderson: Bill, who became a screenwriter; James; Susan; Joanna; and Sighle (pronounced Sheila). He claimed he was romantically involved with Deborah Kerr during the filming of From Here to Eternity in 1953. Buford 2008, pp. 12730. However, Kerr stated that while there was a spark of attraction, nothing ever happened. He also had an affair with Joan Blondell. In her 1980 autobiography, Shelley Winters claimed to have had a long affair with him. Winters 1980, p. 259. 

===Political views===
Lancaster was a vocal supporter of liberal political causes, and frequently spoke out in support of racial minorities, including at the March on Washington in 1963. He was a vocal opponent of the Vietnam War and political movements such as McCarthyism, and he helped pay for the successful defense of a soldier accused of "fragging" (murdering) another soldier during the war. Buford 2008, p. 266. In 1968, Lancaster actively supported the presidential candidacy of antiwar Senator Eugene McCarthy of Minnesota, and frequently spoke on his behalf during the Democratic primaries. He heavily campaigned for George McGovern in the 1972 presidential election. In 1985, Lancaster, a longtime supporter of gay rights, joined the fight against AIDS after his close friend, Rock Hudson, contracted the disease. He campaigned for Michael Dukakis in the 1988 presidential election.

===Health problems and death===
Burt Lancaster's grave
As Lancaster grew older, he became increasingly plagued by atherosclerosis, barely surviving a routine gall bladder operation in January 1980. Following two minor heart attacks he had to undergo an emergency quadruple coronary bypass in 1983, after which he was extremely weak, but he still managed to continue acting and attended a 1988 Congressional hearing with old colleagues such as Jimmy Stewart and Ginger Rogers to protest media magnate Ted Turner's plan to colorize various black-and-white films from the 1930s and 1940s. His acting career ended after he suffered a stroke on November 30, 1990 which left him partly paralyzed and largely unable to speak. He died in his Century City apartment in Los Angeles from a third heart attack at 4:50 A.M. on October 20, 1994 at the age of 80.

Lancaster was cremated and his ashes were buried under a large oak tree in Westwood Memorial Park located in Westwood Village, Los Angeles County, California. A small square ground plaque inscribed only with "BURT LANCASTER 19131994" marks his final resting place. Upon his death, as he requested, he had no memorial or funeral service. "Short bio-article w/burial location and pictures." Find a Grave. Retrieved: November 18, 2011. 

==Filmography and awards==

===Films===

 Year Film Role Notes 
 1946 The Killers 'Swede' Andersen With Ava Gardner 
 1947 Brute Force Joe Collins With Hume Cronyn 
 1947 Desert Fury Tom Hanson With Lizabeth Scott 
 1948 I Walk Alone Frankie Madison With Kirk Douglas 
 1948 All My Sons Chris Keller With Edward G. Robinson 
 1948 Sorry, Wrong Number Henry Stevenson With Barbara Stanwyck 
 1948 Kiss the Blood Off My Hands William Earle 'Bill' Saunders With Joan Fontaine 
 1949 Criss Cross Steve Thompson, narrator With Yvonne de Carlo 
 1949 Rope of Sand Michael (Mike) Davis With Paul Henreid 
 1950 The Flame and the Arrow Dardo Bartoli With Virginia Mayo 
 1950 Mister 880 Steve Buchanan With Dorothy McGuire 
 1951 Vengeance Valley Owen Daybright With Robert Walker 
 1951 Jim Thorpe  All-American Jim Thorpe With Charles Bickford 
 1951 Ten Tall Men Sgt Mike Kincaid With Jody Lawrance 
 1952 Capitan Vallo With Nick Cravat 
 1952 Come Back, Little Sheba Doc Delaney With Shirley Booth 
 1953 South Sea Woman Master Gunnery Sgt. James O'Hearn With Virginia Mayo 
 1953 From Here to Eternity 1st Sgt. Milton Warden New York Film Critics Circle Award for Best ActorNominatedAcademy Award for Best Actor 
 1953 Three Sailors and a Girl Marine (uncredited) With Jane Powell 
 1954 His Majesty O'Keefe Captain David Dion O'Keefe, narrator With Joan Rice 
 1954 Apache Massai With Jean Peters 
 1954 Vera Cruz Joe Erin With Gary Cooper 
 1955 Elias Wakefield (Big Eli) DirectorNominatedGolden Lion 
 1955 The Rose Tattoo Alvaro Mangiacavallo With Anna Magnani 
 1956 Trapeze Mike Ribble Silver Bear for Best Actor at Berlin 
 1956 Bill Starbuck, aka Bill Smith, Bill Harley, Tornado Johnson NominatedGolden Globe Award for Best Actor  Motion Picture Drama 
 1957 Gunfight at the O.K. Corral Marshal Wyatt Earp With Kirk Douglas 
 1957 Sweet Smell of Success J.J. Hunsecker Written by Ernest Lehman 
 1958 Run Silent, Run Deep Lt. Commander Jim Bledsoe With Clark Gable 
 1958 Separate Tables John Malcolm With David Niven 
 1959 The Rev. Anthony Anderson With Kirk Douglas and Laurence Olivier 
 1960 Ben Zachary With Audrey Hepburn 
 1960 Elmer Gantry Elmer Gantry Academy Award for Best ActorGolden Globe Award for Best Actor  Motion Picture DramaNew York Film Critics Circle Award for Best ActorNominatedBAFTA Award for Best Actor in a Leading Role 
 1961 ADA Hank Bell With Dina Merrill 
 1961 Judgment at Nuremberg Dr. Ernst Janning With Spencer Tracy 
 1962 Birdman of Alcatraz Robert Stroud BAFTA Award for Best Actor in a Leading RoleVolpi CupNominatedAcademy Award for Best ActorNominatedGolden Globe Award for Best Actor  Motion Picture Drama 
 1963 Dr. Ben Clark With Judy Garland 
 1963 Prince Don Fabrizio Salina With Claudia Cardinale 
 1963 Cameo With George C. Scott 
 1964 Seven Days in May Gen. James Mattoon Scott With Kirk Douglas 
 1964 Paul Labiche With Jeanne Moreau 
 1965 Col. Thaddeus Gearhart With Lee Remick 
 1966 Bill Dolworth With Lee Marvin 
 1967 All About People Narrator 
 1968 Joe Bass With Shelley Winters 
 1968 Ned Merrill With Janice Rule 
 1969 Castle Keep Maj. Abraham Falconer With Peter Falk 
 1969 Mike Rettig With Deborah Kerr 
 1970 Airport Mel Bakersfeld With Dean Martin 
 1971 Lawman Bannock Town Marshal Jered Maddox With Robert Ryan 
 1971 Valdez Is Coming Marshal Bob Valdez With Susan Clark 
 1972 Ulzana's Raid U.S. Cavalry Scout McIntosh With Bruce Davison 
 1973 Scorpio Cross With Alain Delon 
 1973 Executive Action James Farrington With Robert Ryan 
 1974 Jim Slade Co-Director 
 1974 Gruppo di famiglia in un interno (Conversation Piece) The Professor David di Donatello for Best Actor 
 1976 Buffalo Bill and the Indians, or Sitting Bull's History Lesson Ned Buntline With Paul Newman 
 1976 1900 (Novecento) Alfredo's Grandfather With Robert De Niro 
 1976 Col. Stephen Mackenzie With Sophia Loren 
 1977 Twilight's Last Gleaming Gen. Lawrence Dell With Richard Widmark 
 1977 Dr. Paul Moreau NominatedSaturn Award for Best Actor 
 1978 Go Tell the Spartans Maj. Asa Barker With Craig Wasson 
 1978 The Unknown War Burt Lancaster(Narrator) 
 1979 Zulu Dawn Col. Anthony Durnford With Peter O'Toole 
 1980 Atlantic City Lou Pascal BAFTA Award for Best Actor in a Leading RoleBoston Society of Film Critics Award for Best ActorDavid di Donatello for Best ActorKansas City Film Critics Circle Award for Best ActorLos Angeles Film Critics Association Award for Best ActorNational Society of Film Critics Award for Best ActorNew York Film Critics Circle Award for Best ActorNominatedAcademy Award for Best ActorNominatedGenie Award for Best Performance by an Actor in a Leading RoleNominatedGolden Globe Award for Best Actor  Motion Picture Drama 
 1981 Cattle Annie and Little Britches Bill Doolin, the Oklahoma outlaw With Amanda Plummer and Diane Lane 
 1981 La pelle Gen. Mark Clark With Marcello Mastroianni 
 1983 Local Hero Felix Happer NominatedBAFTA Award for Best Actor in a Supporting Role 
 1983 CIA Director Maxwell Danforth With Rutger Hauer 
 1985 Little Treasure Delbert Teschemacher With Margot Kidder 
 1986 Tough Guys Harry Doyle With Kirk Douglas 
 1987 Il Giorno prima Dr. Herbert Monroe With Ben Gazzara 
 1988 Rocket Gibraltar Levi Rockwell With Patricia Clarkson 
 1989 Field of Dreams Dr. Archibald 'Moonlight' Graham With Kevin Costner 
 1989 La Bottega dell'orefice The Jeweller With Olivia Hussey 

===TV===

 Year Film Role Notes 
 1974 Moses the Lawgiver Moses mini-series 
 1976 Victory at Entebbe Shimon Peres with Anthony Hopkins 
 1978 As himself, narrator 20 episode USA-USSR archival documentary series on WWII 
 1982 Marco Polo Teobaldo Visconti / Pope Gregory X mini-series 
 1982 Verdi Narrator in American version mini-series 
 1985 Scandal Sheet Harold Fallen 
 1986 Vter und Shne  Eine deutsche Tragdie Geheimrat Carl Julius Deutz mini-series 
 1986 On Wings of Eagles Lieutenant Colonel Arthur D. \"Bull\" Simons mini-series 
 1989 I Promessi sposi Cardinal Federigo Borromeo mini-series 
 1990 Gerard Carriere mini-series 
 1990 Leon Klinghoffer 
 1991 Separate But Equal John W. Davis 

==In other media==
Spanish music group Hombres G released an album named La cagaste, Burt Lancaster (You messed up, Burt Lancaster) in 1986.

==References==

===Notes===

===Bibliography===

* Andreychuk, Ed. Burt Lancaster: A Filmography And Biography. Jefferson, North Carolina: McFarland & Company, Inc., Publishers, 2005. ISBN 978-0-7864-2339-2.
* Buford, Kate. Burt Lancaster: An American Life. London: Aurum Press, 2008. ISBN 1-84513-385-4.
* Winters, Shelley. Shelley: Also known as Shirley. New York: Morrow, 1980. ISBN 978-0-688-03638-6.

==External links==

* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* Literature on Burt Lancaster



[[Balts]]

The Balts or Baltic peoples (, ) are an Indo-European ethno-linguistic group who speak the Baltic languages, a branch of the Indo-European language family, which was originally spoken by tribes living in area east of Jutland peninsula in the west and Moscow, Oka and Volga rivers basins in the east. One of the features of Baltic languages is the number of conservative or archaic features retained. Bojtr page 18. Among the Baltic peoples are modern Lithuanians, Latvians (including Latgalians)  all Eastern Balts  as well as the Old Prussians, Yotvingians and Galindians  the Western Balts  whose people also survived, but their languages and cultures are now extinct, and are now being assimilated into the Eastern Baltic community.

==Etymology==

Adam of Bremen in the latter part of the 11th century C.E. was the first writer to use the term Baltic in its modern sense to mean the sea of that name. Bojtr page 9. Although he must have been familiar with the ancient name, Balcia, Balcia, Abalcia, Abalus, Basilia, Balisia. The linguistic problem with these names is that Balcia cannot become Baltia by known rule. meaning a supposed island in the Baltic Sea, and although he may have been aware of the Baltic words containing the stem balt-, "white", ; ; Latgalian: bolti, lit. "white". as "swamp", he reports that he followed the local use of balticus from baelt ("belt") because the sea stretches to the east "in modum baltei" ("in the manner of a belt"). This is the first reference to "the Baltic or Barbarian Sea, a day's journey from Hamburg." Bojtr cites Bremensis I,60 and IV,10. 

The Germanics, however, preferred some form of "East Sea" (in different languages) until after about 1600, when they began to use forms of "Baltic Sea." Around 1840 the German nobles of the Governorate of Livonia devised the term "Balts" to mean themselves, the German upper classes of Livonia, excluding the Latvian and Estonian lower classes. They spoke an exclusive dialect, Baltic German. For all practical purposes that was the Baltic language until 1919. Bojtr page 10. 
Scandinavians begin settling in Western Baltic lands in Lithuania and Latvia.

In 1845 Georg Heinrich Ferdinand Nesselmann proposed a distinct language group for Latvian and Lithuanian to be called Baltic. Book review. It found some credence among linguists but was not generally adopted until the creation of the Baltic states as part of the settlement of World War I in 1919. Gradually the non-Baltic Estonian was excluded from the linguistic meaning of Baltic, as was Livonian, a now extinct Finnic language in present-day Latvia, while Old Prussian  long recognized as close to Lithuanian and Latvian  was added. Estonia and Finland (the states of Baltic Finns), however, also became counted among the Baltic states in the geopolitical sense. (Finland was dropped from this definition after World War II, though Estonia remains within the definition.)

==History==

===Origins===
The Balts or Baltic peoples, defined as speakers of one of the Baltic languages, a branch of the Indo-European language family, are descended from a group of Indo-European tribes who settled the area between the lower Vistula and upper Daugava and Dnieper rivers on the southeast shore of the Baltic Sea. Because the thousands of lakes and swamps in this area contributed to the Balts' geographical isolation, the Baltic languages retain a number of conservative or archaic features.

It is possible that around 3,5002,500 B.C., there was massive migration of peoples representing the Corded Ware culture. They came from the southeast and spread all across Eastern and Central Europe, reaching even southern Finland. It is believed that Corded Ware culture peoples were Indo-European ancestors of many Europeans, including Balts. It is thought that those Indo-European newcomers were quite numerous and in the Eastern Baltic assimilated earlier indigenous cultures (Europidic cultures  Narva culture and Neman culture). Over time the new people formed the Baltic peoples and they spread in the area from the Baltic sea in the west to the Volga in the east.

Some of the major authorities on Balts, such as Bga, Vasmer, Toporov and Trubachov, in conducting etymological studies of eastern European river names, were able to identify in certain regions names of specifically Baltic provenance, which most likely indicate where the Balts lived in prehistoric times. This information is summarized and synthesized by Marija Gimbutas in The Balts (1963) to obtain a likely proto-Baltic homeland. Its borders are approximately: from a line on the Pomeranian coast eastward to include or nearly include the present-day sites of Berlin, Warsaw, Kiev, and Kursk, northward through Moscow to the River Berzha, westward in an irregular line to the coast of the Gulf of Riga, north of Riga.

===Proto-history===
In 98 AD Tacitus described one of the tribes living near the Baltic Sea (Mare Svebicum) as Aestiorum gentes and amber gatherers. It is believed that these peoples were inhabitants of the Sambian peninsula, although no other contemporary sources exist.

This homeland includes all historical Balts, and every location where Balts are thought to have been at different periods in time. Over time, the huge area of Baltic habitation shrank, due to assimilation by other groups, and invasions. According to one of the theories which has gained considerable traction over the years, one of the western Baltic tribes, Galindians, Galindae, or Goliad, migrated to the Eastern end of Baltic realm around the 4th century AD, and settled around modern day Moscow, Russia. Finally, according to Slavic chronicles of the time, they warred with Slavs, and perhaps, were defeated and assimilated some time in the 11th to 13th centuries.

Balts became differentiated into Western and Eastern Balts in the late centuries B.C.E. The eastern Baltic region was inhabited by ancestors of Western Balts  Old Prussians, Sudovians/Jotvingians, Scalvians, Nadruvians, and Curonians. Meanwhile, Eastern Balts were living in modern day Belarus, Ukraine and Russia. Subsequent Germanic and Gothic domination in the first half of the first millennium C.E. in Northern and Eastern Europe, as well as later Slavic expansion, caused large migrations of the Balts  first, Galindae or Galindians to the east, and later, Eastern Balts to the west  until they reached the ethnographic area of the Balts as we know it since 13th and 14th centuries. Many other Eastern and Southern Balts either assimilated with other Balts, or contributed to the formation of the Slavs in the 4th7th centuries and were gradually slavicized.

===Middle Ages===
In the 12th and the 13th centuries, internal struggles, as well as invasions by Ruthenians and Poles and later the expansion of the Teutonic Order resulted in an almost complete annihilation of the Galindians, Curonians, and Yotvingians. Gradually Old Prussians became Germanized or some Lithuanized during period from the 15th to the 17th centuries, especially after the Reformation in Prussia. The cultures of the Lithuanians and Latgalians/Latvians survived and became the ancestors of the populations of the modern countries of Latvia and Lithuania.

Old Prussian was closely related to the other extinct Western Baltic languages, Curonian, Galindian and Sudovian. It is more distantly related to the surviving Eastern Baltic languages, Lithuanian and Latvian. Compare the Prussian word seme (zem), Mikkels Klussis. Bziscas prsiskai-latawiskas wirdens per tlaisin laksikis rekreacinin Donelaitis.vdu.lt (Lithuanian version of Donelaitis.vdu.lt). the Latvian zeme, the Lithuanian em (land in English).

Old Prussian contained a few borrowings specifically from Gothic (e.g., Old Prussian ylo "awl," as with Lithuanian la, Latvian lens) and even North Germanic.

==List of Baltic tribes==
Distribution of the Baltic tribes, circa 1200 CE. The Eastern Balts are shown in brown hues while the Western Balts are shown in green. The boundaries are approximate.

 Regions Tribes and nations Localities 
 Eastern Balts Eastern Galindians Moscow region 
 Dniepr Balts Dnieper basin 
 Eastern (Middle) Balts Latvians Latgalians 
 Lithuanians Auktaitians (\"highlanders\") 
 Samogitians (\"lowlanders\") 
 Prussian Lithuanians 
 Transitional Balts Bojtr page 207. Selonians Toponomastic only. 
 Semigallians Toponomastic only. 
 Curonians, Curonian Kings Toponomastic only. 
 Western Balts Yotvingians or Sudovians Historic region 
 Prussians Sambians 
 Scalvians 
 Nadruvians 
 Natangians 
 Bartians 
 Pomesanians 
 Pogesanians 
 Western Galindians 
 Warmians or Varmians 
 Sasnans 
 Lubavians 
 Pomeranian Balts Pomerania 

Extinct

==See also==

* Aesti
* Neuri

==References==

===English language===
* 
* 
* 

===Polish language===
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 

==Notes==

==External links==
* E-book of the original.
* 
* 
* 

 



[[Burnt-in timecode]]

Color bars with burnt-in timecode
Burnt-in timecode (often abbreviated to BITC by analogy to VITC) is a human-readable on-screen version of the timecode information for a piece of material superimposed on a video image. BITC is sometimes used in conjunction with "real" machine-readable timecode, but more often used in copies of original material on to a non-broadcast format such as VHS, so that the VHS copies can be traced back to their master tape and the original time codes easily located. 

Many professional VTRs can "burn" (overlay) the tape timecode onto one of their composite outputs. This output (which usually also displays the setup menu or on-screen display) is known as the super out or monitor out. The character switch or menu item turns this behaviour on or off. The character function is also used to display the timecode on the preview monitors in linear editing suites.

Videotapes that are recorded with timecode numbers overlaid on the video are referred to as window dubs, named after the "window" that displays the burnt-in timecode on-screen.

Timecode can also be superimposed on video using a dedicated overlay device, often called a "window dub inserter". This inputs a video signal and its separate timecode audio signal, reads the timecode, superimposes the timecode display over the video, and outputs the combined display (usually via composite), all in real time. Stand-alone timecode generator / readers often have the window dub function built-in. 

Some consumer cameras, in particular DV cameras, can "burn" (overlay) the tape timecode onto the composite output. This output typically is semi-transparent and may include other tape information. It is usually activated by turning on the 'display' info in one of the camera's sub-menus. While not as 'professional' as an overlay as created by a professional VCRs, it is a cheap alternative that is just as accurate.

Timecode is stored in the metadata areas of captured DV AVI files, and some software is able to "burn" (overlay) this into the video frames. For example, DVMP Pro DVMP Pro - Software for burning in timecode and other items of metadata for DV AVI files. is able to "burn" timecode or other items of DV metadata (such as date and time, iris, shutter speed, gain, white balance mode, etc.) into DV AVI files.

Some modern editing systems can use OCR techniques to read BITC in situations where other forms of timecode are not available.

BITC can also be referred to as Viz-Code.

==See also==
*Linear timecode
*Vertical interval timecode
*SMPTE time code
*MIDI timecode
*CTL timecode
*AES-EBU embedded timecode
*Rewritable consumer timecode

== References ==



[[Braket notation]]

In quantum mechanics, braket notation is a standard notation for describing quantum states, composed of angle brackets and vertical bars. It can also be used to denote abstract vectors and linear functionals in mathematics. It is so called because the inner product (or dot product on a complex vector space) of two states is denoted by a ,
: ,
consisting of a left part, , called the bra , and a right part, , called the ket . The notation was introduced in 1939 by Paul Dirac 
 and is also known as Dirac notation, though the notation has precursors in Grassmann's use of the notation for his inner products nearly 100 years previously. 

Braket notation is widespread in quantum mechanics: almost every phenomenon that is explained using quantum mechanicsincluding a large portion of modern physics  is usually explained with the help of braket notation. Part of the appeal of the notation is the abstract representation-independence it encodes, together with its versatility in producing a specific representation (e.g. x, or p, or eigenfunction base) without much ado, or excessive reliance on the nature of the linear spaces involved. The overlap expression is typically interpreted as the probability amplitude for the state  to collapse into the state .

==Vector spaces==

===Background: Vector spaces===

In physics, basis vectors allow any Euclidean vector to be represented geometrically using angles and lengths, in different directions, i.e. in terms of the spatial orientations. It is simpler to see the notational equivalences between ordinary notation and braket notation; so, for now, consider a vector A starting at the origin and ending at an element of 3-d Euclidean space; the vector then is specified by this end-point, a triplet of elements in the field of real numbers, symbolically dubbed as A  3.

The vector A can be written using any set of basis vectors and corresponding coordinate system. Informally basis vectors are like "building blocks of a vector": they are added together to compose a vector, and the coordinates are the numerical coefficients of basis vectors in each direction. Two useful representations of a vector are simply a linear combination of basis vectors, and column matrices. Using the familiar Cartesian basis, a vector A may be written as

:
::

3d real vector components and bases projection; similarities between vector calculus notation and Dirac notation. Projection is an important feature of the Dirac notation.
respectively, where ex, ey, ez denote the Cartesian basis vectors (all are orthogonal unit vectors) and Ax, Ay, Az are the corresponding coordinates, in the x, y, z directions. In a more general notation, for any basis in 3-d space one writes
:

Generalizing further, consider a vector A in an N-dimensional vector space over the field of complex numbers , symbolically stated as A  N. The vector A is still conventionally represented by a linear combination of basis vectors or a column matrix:

:
though the coordinates are now all complex-valued.

Even more generally, A can be a vector in a complex Hilbert space. Some Hilbert spaces, like N, have finite dimension, while others have infinite dimension. In an infinite-dimensional space, the column-vector representation of A would be a list of infinitely many complex numbers.

===Ket notation for vectors===

Rather than boldtype, over arrows, underscores etc. conventionally used elsewhere; , Dirac's notation for a vector uses vertical bars and angular brackets: . When this notation is used, these vectors are called "ket", read as "ket-A". Quantum Mechanics Demystified, D. McMahon, Mc Graw Hill (USA), 2006, ISBN(10-) 0-07-145546 9 This applies to all vectors, the resultant vector and the basis. The previous vectors are now written

:
or in a more easily generalized notation,
:
The last one may be written in short as
:

Note how any symbols, letters, numbers, or even words  whatever serves as a convenient label  can be used as the label inside a ket. In other words, the symbol has a specific and universal mathematical meaning, while just the "A" by itself does not. Nevertheless, for convenience, there is usually some logical scheme behind the labels inside kets, such as the common practice of labeling energy eigenkets in quantum mechanics through a listing of their quantum numbers. Further note that a ket and its representation by a coordinate vector are not the same mathematical object: a ket does not require specification of a basis, whereas the coordinate vector needs a basis in order to be well defined (the same holds for an operator and its representation by a matrix). Modern Quantum Mechanics Revised Revision, Sakurai, p. 20 In this context, one should best use a symbol different than the equal sign, for example the symbol  , read as "is represented by".

===Inner products and bras===

An inner product is a generalization of the dot product. The inner product of two vectors is a complex number. Braket notation uses a specific notation for inner products:
:
For example, in three-dimensional complex Euclidean space,
:
where denotes the complex conjugate of Ai. A special case is the inner product of a vector with itself, which is the square of its norm (magnitude):
:
Braket notation splits this inner product (also called a "bracket") into two pieces, the "bra" and the "ket":
:
where is called a bra, read as "bra-A", and is a ket as above.

The purpose of "splitting" the inner product into a bra and a ket is that both the bra and the ket are meaningful on their own, and can be used in other contexts besides within an inner product. There are two main ways to think about the meanings of separate bras and kets:

====Bras and kets as row and column vectors====
For a finite-dimensional vector space, using a fixed orthonormal basis, the inner product can be written as a matrix multiplication of a row vector with a column vector:
:
Based on this, the bras and kets can be defined as:
:
:
and then it is understood that a bra next to a ket implies matrix multiplication.

The conjugate transpose (also called Hermitian conjugate) of a bra is the corresponding ket and vice versa:
:
because if one starts with the bra
:
then performs a complex conjugation, and then a matrix transpose, one ends up with the ket
:

====Bras as linear operators on kets====

A more abstract definition, which is equivalent but more easily generalized to infinite-dimensional spaces, is to say that bras are linear functionals on kets, i.e. operators that input a ket and output a complex number. The bra operators are defined to be consistent with the inner product.

In mathematics terminology, the vector space of bras is the dual space to the vector space of kets, and corresponding bras and kets are related by the Riesz representation theorem.

=== Non-normalizable states and non-Hilbert spaces ===

Braket notation can be used even if the vector space is not a Hilbert space.

In quantum mechanics, it is common practice to write down kets which have infinite norm, i.e. non-normalisable wavefunctions. Examples include states whose wavefunctions are Dirac delta functions or infinite plane waves. These do not, technically, belong to the Hilbert space itself. However, the definition of "Hilbert space" can be broadened to accommodate these states (see the GelfandNaimarkSegal construction or rigged Hilbert spaces). The braket notation continues to work in an analogous way in this broader context.

For a rigorous treatment of the Dirac inner product of non-normalizable states, see the definition given by D. Carf. For a rigorous definition of basis with a continuous set of indices and consequently for a rigorous definition of position and momentum basis, see. For a rigorous statement of the expansion of an S-diagonalizable operator, or observable, in its eigenbasis or in another basis, see. 

Banach spaces are a different generalization of Hilbert spaces. In a Banach space B, the vectors may be notated by kets and the continuous linear functionals by bras. Over any vector space without topology, we may also notate the vectors by kets and the linear functionals by bras. In these more general contexts, the bracket does not have the meaning of an inner product, because the Riesz representation theorem does not apply.

==Usage in quantum mechanics==

The mathematical structure of quantum mechanics is based in large part on linear algebra:
*Wave functions and other quantum states can be represented as vectors in a complex Hilbert space. (The exact structure of this Hilbert space depends on the situation.) In braket notation, for example, an electron might be in the "state" . (Technically, the quantum states are rays of vectors in the Hilbert space, as c corresponds to the same state for any nonzero complex number c.)
*Quantum superpositions can be described as vector sums of the constituent states. For example, an electron in the state + i is in a quantum superposition of the states and .
*Measurements are associated with linear operators (called observables) on the Hilbert space of quantum states.
*Dynamics are also described by linear operators on the Hilbert space. For example, in the Schrdinger picture, there is a linear time evolution operator U with the property that if an electron is in state right now, then in one second it will be in the state U, the same U for every possible .
*Wave function normalization is scaling a wave function so that its norm is 1.
Since virtually every calculation in quantum mechanics involves vectors and linear operators, it can involve, and often does involve, braket notation. A few examples follow:

===Spinless positionspace wave function===
 

The Hilbert space of a spin-0 point particle is spanned by a "position basis" { }, where the label r extends over the set of all points in position space. Since there are uncountably infinitely many vectors in the basis, this is an uncountably infinite-dimensional Hilbert space. The dimensions of the Hilbert space (usually infinite) and position space (usually 1, 2 or 3) are not to be conflated.

Starting from any ket in this Hilbert space, we can define a complex scalar function of r, known as a wavefunction:
: .
On the left side, (r) is a function mapping any point in space to a complex number; on the right side, 1= =  d3r (r) is a ket.

It is then customary to define linear operators acting on wavefunctions in terms of linear operators acting on kets, by
:

For instance, the momentum operator p has the following form,
:

One occasionally encounters a sloppy expression like
:
though this is something of a (common) abuse of notation. The differential operator must be understood to be an abstract operator, acting on kets, that has the effect of differentiating wavefunctions once the expression is projected into the position basis,
:
even though, in the momentum basis, the operator amounts to a mere multiplication operator (by ip).

===Overlap of states===
In quantum mechanics the expression is typically interpreted as the probability amplitude for the state  to collapse into the state . Mathematically, this means the coefficient for the projection of  onto . It is also described as the projection of state  onto state .

===Changing basis for a spin-1/2 particle===
A stationary spin- particle has a two-dimensional Hilbert space. One orthonormal basis is:
:
where is the state with a definite value of the spin operator Sz equal to +1/2 and is the state with a definite value of the spin operator Sz equal to 1/2.

Since these are a basis, any quantum state of the particle can be expressed as a linear combination (i.e., quantum superposition) of these two states:
:
where a, b are complex numbers.

A different basis for the same Hilbert space is:
:
defined in terms of Sx rather than Sz.

Again, any state of the particle can be expressed as a linear combination of these two:
:

In vector form, you might write
:
depending on which basis you are using. In other words, the "coordinates" of a vector depend on the basis used.

There is a mathematical relationship between a, b, c, d; see change of basis.

===Misleading uses===

There are a few conventions and abuses of notation that are generally accepted by the physics community, but which might confuse the non-initiated.

It is common among physicists to use the same symbol for labels and constants in the same equation. It supposedly becomes easier to identify that the constant is related to the labeled object, and is claimed that the divergent nature of each will
eliminate any ambiguity and no further differentiation is required. For example, 1= = , where the symbol  is used simultaneously as the name of the operator , its eigenvector and the associated eigenvalue .

Something similar occurs in component notation of vectors. While  (uppercase) is traditionally associated with wavefunctions,  (lowercase) may be used to denote a label, a wave function or complex constant in the same context, usually differentiated only by a subscript.

The main abuses are including operations inside the vector labels. This is usually done for a fast notation of scaling vectors. E.g. if the vector is scaled by , it might be denoted by , which makes no sense since  is a label, not a function or a number, so you can't perform operations on it.

This is especially common when denoting vectors as tensor products, where part of the labels are moved outside the designed slot. E.g. 1= = 1  2. Here
part of the labeling that should state that all three vectors are different was moved outside the kets, as subscripts 1 and 2. And a further abuse occurs, since  is meant to refer to the norm of the first vector  which is a label is denoting a value.

==Linear operators==

===Linear operators acting on kets===

A linear operator is a map that inputs a ket and outputs a ket. (In order to be called "linear", it is required to have certain properties.) In other words, if A is a linear operator and is a ket, then A is another ket.

In an N-dimensional Hilbert space, can be written as an N1 column vector, and then A is an NN matrix with complex entries. The ket A can be computed by normal matrix multiplication.

Linear operators are ubiquitous in the theory of quantum mechanics. For example, observable physical quantities are represented by self-adjoint operators, such as energy or momentum, whereas transformative processes are represented by unitary linear operators such as rotation or the progression of time.

===Linear operators acting on bras===

Operators can also be viewed as acting on bras from the right hand side. Specifically, if A is a linear operator and is a bra, then A is another bra defined by the rule

:

(in other words, a function composition). This expression is commonly written as (cf. energy inner product)

: .

In an N-dimensional Hilbert space, can be written as a 1N row vector, and A (as in the previous section) is an NN matrix. Then the bra A can be computed by normal matrix multiplication.

If the same state vector appears on both bra and ket side,
:
then this expression gives the expectation value, or mean or average value, of the observable represented by operator A for the physical system in the state .

===Outer products===

A convenient way to define linear operators on H is given by the outer product: if is a bra and is a ket, the outer product
:
denotes the rank-one operator that maps the ket to the ket (where is a scalar multiplying the vector ).

For a finite-dimensional vector space, the outer product can be understood as simple matrix multiplication:
:
The outer product is an NN matrix, as expected for a linear operator.

One of the uses of the outer product is to construct projection operators. Given a ket of norm 1, the orthogonal projection onto the subspace spanned by is
:

===Hermitian conjugate operator===

Just as kets and bras can be transformed into each other (making into ), the element from the dual space corresponding to A is A, where A denotes the Hermitian conjugate (or adjoint) of the operator A. In other words,
: if and only if .

If A is expressed as an NN matrix, then A is its conjugate transpose.

Self-adjoint operators, where 1=A = A, play an important role in quantum mechanics; for example, an observable is always described by a self-adjoint operator. If is a self-adjoint operator, then A is always a real number (not complex). This implies that expectation values of observables are real.

==Properties==
Braket notation was designed to facilitate the formal manipulation of linear-algebraic expressions. Some of the properties that allow this manipulation are listed herein. In what follows, c1 and c2 denote arbitrary complex numbers, c denotes the complex conjugate of c, A and B denote arbitrary linear operators, and these properties are to hold for any choice of bras and kets.

===Linearity===
* Since bras are linear functionals,

::

* By the definition of addition and scalar multiplication of linear functionals in the dual space, Lecture notes by Robert Littlejohn, eqns 12 and 13 

::

===Associativity===
Given any expression involving complex numbers, bras, kets, inner products, outer products, and/or linear operators (but not addition), written in braket notation, the parenthetical groupings do not matter (i.e., the associative property holds). For example:
:
:
and so forth. The expressions on the right (with no parentheses whatsoever) are allowed to be written unambiguously because of the equalities on the left. Note that the associative property does not hold for expressions that include non-linear operators, such as the antilinear time reversal operator in physics.

===Hermitian conjugation===
Braket notation makes it particularly easy to compute the Hermitian conjugate (also called dagger, and denoted ) of expressions. The formal rules are:
* The Hermitian conjugate of a bra is the corresponding ket, and vice-versa.
* The Hermitian conjugate of a complex number is its complex conjugate.
* The Hermitian conjugate of the Hermitian conjugate of anything (linear operators, bras, kets, numbers) is itselfi.e.,
::1= (x) = x.
* Given any combination of complex numbers, bras, kets, inner products, outer products, and/or linear operators, written in braket notation, its Hermitian conjugate can be computed by reversing the order of the components, and taking the Hermitian conjugate of each.

These rules are sufficient to formally write the Hermitian conjugate of any such expression; some examples are as follows:
* Kets:
::
* Inner products:
::
* Matrix elements:
::
::
* Outer products:
::

==Composite bras and kets==
Two Hilbert spaces V and W may form a third space V  W by a tensor product. In quantum mechanics, this is used for describing composite systems. If a system is composed of two subsystems described in V and W respectively, then the Hilbert space of the entire system is the tensor product of the two spaces. (The exception to this is if the subsystems are actually identical particles. In that case, the situation is a little more complicated.)

If is a ket in V and is a ket in W, the direct product of the two kets is a ket in V  W. This is written in various notations:
:

See quantum entanglement and the EPR paradox for applications of this product.

==The unit operator==
Consider a complete orthonormal system (basis), , for a Hilbert space H, with respect to the norm from an inner product . From basic functional analysis we know that any ket can also be written as
:
with the inner product on the Hilbert space.

From the commutativity of kets with (complex) scalars now follows that
:
must be the identity operator, which sends each vector to itself. This can be inserted in any expression without affecting its value, for example
: ,
where, in the last identity, the Einstein summation convention has been used.

In quantum mechanics, it often occurs that little or no information about the inner product of two arbitrary (state) kets is present, while it is still possible to say something about the expansion coefficients and of those vectors with respect to a specific (orthonormalized) basis. In this case, it is particularly useful to insert the unit operator into the bracket one time or more.

For more information, see Resolution of the identity, 1=1 =  dx =  dp , where 1= =  dx eixp//; since 1= = (x  x), plane waves follow, 1= = exp(ixp/)/.

== Notation used by mathematicians ==

The object physicists are considering when using the "braket" notation is a Hilbert space (a complete inner product space).

Let be a Hilbert space and is a vector in . What physicists would denote as is the vector itself. That is

:.

Let be the dual space of . This is the space of linear functionals on . The isomorphism is defined by where for all we have
:,
where and 
are just different notations for expressing an inner product between two elements in a Hilbert space (or for the first three, in any inner product space). Notational confusion arises when identifying and with and respectively. This is because of literal symbolic substitutions. Let and let . This gives

:

One ignores the parentheses and removes the double bars. Some properties of this notation are convenient since we are dealing with linear operators and composition acts like a ring multiplication.

Moreover, mathematicians usually write the dual entity not at the first place, as the physicists do, but at the second one, and they don't use the *-symbol, but an overline (which the physicists reserve for averages and Dirac conjugation) to denote conjugate-complex numbers, i.e. for scalar products mathematicians usually write
:
whereas physicists would write for the same quantity
:

==See also==
* Angular momentum diagrams (quantum mechanics)
* Quantum state
* Inner product

== References and notes ==
 

== Further reading ==
* 

==External links==
*Richard Fitzpatrick, "Quantum Mechanics: A graduate level course", The University of Texas at Austin.
** 1. Ket space
** 2. Bra space
** 3. Operators
** 4. The outer product
** 5. Eigenvalues and eigenvectors
*Robert Littlejohn, Lecture notes on "The Mathematical Formalism of Quantum mechanics", including braket notation.



[[Blue]]

Blue is the colour of the clear sky and the deep sea. See Webster's New World Dictionary of the American Language, College Edition, 1962. See also Le Petit LaRousse, 1997: "De la couleur du ciel sans nuages, de l'azur". On the optical spectrum, blue is located between violet and green. Merriam-Webster.com online dictionary, "blue". 

Surveys in the U.S. and Europe show that blue is the colour most commonly associated with harmony, faithfulness, and confidence. In U.S. and European public opinion polls it is overwhelmingly the most popular colour, chosen by almost half of both men and women as their favourite colour. Eva Heller (2009), Psychologie de la Couleur, pg. 13. It is also commonly associated with the sky, the sea, ice, cold, and sometimes with sadness.

==Shades and variations==

Blue is between violet and green in the spectrum of visible light
Blue is the colour of light between violet and green on the visible spectrum. Hues of blue include indigo and ultramarine, closer to violet; pure blue, without any mixture of other colours; Cyan, which is midway on the spectrum between blue and green, and the other blue-greens turquoise, teal, and aquamarine.

Blues also vary in shade or tint; darker shades of blue contain black or grey, while lighter tints contain white. Darker shades of blue include ultramarine, cobalt blue, navy blue, and Prussian blue; while lighter tints include sky blue, azure, and Egyptian blue. (For a more complete list see the List of colours).

Blue pigments were originally made from minerals such as lapis lazuli, cobalt and azurite, and blue dyes were made from plants; usually woad in Europe, and Indigofera tinctoria, or True indigo, in Asia and Africa. Today most blue pigments and dyes are made by a chemical process.

File:Toulon Harbour.JPG|Blue is the colour of the deep sea and the clear sky. The harbour of Toulon, France, on the Mediterranean Sea.
File:Solid blue.svg|Pure blue, also known as high blue, is not mixed with any other colours.
File:000080 Navy Blue Square.svg|Navy blue, also known as low blue, is the darkest shade of pure blue.
File:Gabbiano cielo.jpg|Sky blue or pale azure, mid-way on the RBG colour wheel between blue and cyan.
File:Indigo plant extract sample.jpg|Extract of natural Indigo, the most popular blue dye before the invention of synthetic dyes. It was the colour of the first blue jeans.
File:Lapis lazuli block.jpg|A block of lapis lazuli, originally used to make ultramarine.
File:Ultramarineblue.jpg|Ultramarine, the most expensive blue during the Renaissance, is a slightly violet-blue. 
File:Cobalt blue.jpg|Cobalt has been used since 2000 BC to colour cobalt glass, Chinese porcelain, and the stained glass windows of medieval cathedrals.
File:Cobaltblue.jpg|The synthetic pigment cobalt blue was invented in 1802, and was popular with Vincent van Gogh and other impressionist painters. 
File:Cyan-square.gif|Cyan is made by mixing equal amounts of blue and green light, or removing red from white light.
File:Common Teal (Anas crecca) near Hodal, Haryana W IMG 6512.jpg|The colour teal takes its name from the colour around the eyes of the common teal duck. 
File:Tripodic goblet Louvre AO4079.jpg|Egyptian blue goblet from Mesopotamia, 15001300 BC. This was the first synthetic blue, first made in about 2500 BC.
File:Prussian blue.jpg|Prussian blue, invented in 1707, was the first modern synthetic blue.
File:Ceruleanblue.jpg|Cerulean blue pigment was invented in 1805 and first marketed in 1860. It was frequently used for painting skies.

==Etymology and linguistic differences==
The modern English word blue comes from Middle English bleu or blewe, from the Old French bleu, a word of Germanic origin, related to the Old High German word blao. Webster's Seventh New Collegiate Dictionary, (1970). In heraldry, the word azure is used for blue. 

In Russian and some other languages, there is no single word for blue, but rather different words for light blue (, goluboy) and dark blue (, siniy).

Several languages, including Japanese, Thai, Korean, and Lakota Sioux, use the same word to describe blue and green. For example, in Vietnamese the colour of both tree leaves and the sky is xanh. In Japanese, the word for blue ( ao) is often used for colours that English speakers would refer to as green, such as the colour of a traffic signal meaning "go". (For more on this subject, see Distinguishing blue from green in language)

==History==

===In the ancient world===
Blue was a latecomer among colours used in art and decoration, as well as language and literature. Regier, T., Kay, P., Gilbert, L., Ivry, B. (2007). Language and Thought: Which Side Are You on Anyway?. Retrieved April 8, 2009, from http://www.ccp.uchicago.edu/faculty/Terry_Regier/papers/lehigh.pdf. Reds, blacks, browns, and ochres are found in cave paintings from the Upper Paleolithic period, but not blue. Blue was also not used for dyeing fabric until long after red, ochre, pink and purple. This is probably due to the perennial difficulty of making good blue dyes and pigments. See Michel Pastoureau, Blue: Histoire d'une couleur, pg. 1317. The earliest known blue dyes were made from plants  woad in Europe, indigo in Asia and Africa, while blue pigments were made from minerals, usually either lapis lazuli or azurite.

Lapis lazuli, a semi-precious stone, has been mined in Afghanistan for more than three thousand years, and was exported to all parts of the ancient world. In Iran and Mesopotamia, it was used to make jewellery and vessels. In Egypt, it was used for the eyebrows on the funeral mask of King Tutankhamun (13411323 BC). Alessandro Bongioanni & Maria Croce (ed.), The Treasures of Ancient Egypt: From the Egyptian Museum in Cairo, Universe Publishing, a division of Ruzzoli Publications Inc., 2003. p. 310 
 
The cost of importing lapis lazuli by caravan across the desert from Afghanistan to Egypt was extremely high. Beginning in about 2500 BC, the ancient Egyptians began to produce their own blue pigment known as Egyptian blue, made by grinding silica, lime, copper and alkalai, and heating it to 800 or 900 degrees C. This is considered the first synthetic pigment. Chase, W.T. 1971, "Egyptian blue as a pigment and ceramic material." In: R. Brill (ed.) Science and Archaeology. Cambridge, Mass: MIT Press. ISBN 0-262-02061-0 Egyptian blue was used to paint wood, papyrus and canvas, and was used to colour a glaze to make faience beads, inlays, and pots. It was particularly used in funeral statuary and figurines and in tomb paintings. Blue was a considered a beneficial colour which would protect the dead against evil in the afterlife. Blue dye was also used to colour the cloth in which mummies were wrapped. J. Baines, "Color Terminology and Color Classification in Ancient Egyptian Color Terminology and Polychromy", in The American Anthropologist, volume LXXXVII, 1985, pg. 282297. 

In Egypt, blue was associated with the sky and with divinity. The Egyptian god Amun could make his skin blue so that he could fly, invisible, across the sky. Blue could also protect against evil; many people around the Mediterranean still wear a blue amulet, representing the eye of God, to protect them from misfortune. Eva Heller, Psychologie de la couleur: effets et symboliques, pg. 17 

Blue glass was manufactured in Mesopotamia and Egypt as early as 2500 BC, using the same copper ingredients as Egyptian blue pigment. They also added cobalt, which produced a deeper blue, the same blue produced in the Middle Ages in the stained glass windows of the cathedrals of Saint-Denis and Chartres. Philip Ball, Bright Earth, Art and the Invention of Colour, pg. 8889 

The Ishtar Gate of ancient Babylon (604562 BC) was decorated with deep blue glazed bricks used as a background for pictures of lions, dragons and aurochs. 
 
The ancient Greeks classified colours by whether they were light or dark, rather than by their hue. The Greek word for dark blue, kyaneos, could also mean dark green, violet, black or brown. The ancient Greek word for a light blue, glaukos, also could mean light green, grey, or yellow. Michel Pastourou, Bleu: Histoire d'une couleur, pg. 24 

The Greeks imported indigo dye from India, calling it indikon. They used Egyptian blue in the wall paintings of Knossos, in Crete, (2100 BC). It was not one of the four primary colours for Greek painting described by Pliny the Elder (red, yellow, black and white), but nonetheless it was used as a background colour behind the friezes on Greek temples and to colour the beards of Greek statues. Philip Ball, Bright Earth: Art and the Invention of Colour, pg. 106 

The Romans also imported indigo dye, but blue was the colour of working class clothing; the nobles and rich wore white, black, red or violet. Blue was considered the colour of mourning. It was also considered the colour of barbarians; Julius Caesar reported that the Celts and Germans dyed their faces blue to frighten their enemies, and tinted their hair blue when they grew old. Caesar, The Gallic Wars, V., 14, 2. Cited by Miche Pastourou, pg. 178. 

Nonetheless, the Romans made extensive use of blue for decoration. According to Vitruvius, they made dark blue pigment from indigo, and imported Egyptian blue pigment. The walls of Roman villas in Pompeii had frescoes of brilliant blue skies, and blue pigments were found in the shops of colour merchants. The Romans had many different words for varieties of blue, including caeruleus, caesius, glaucus, cyaneus, lividus, venetus, aerius, and ferreus, but two words, both of foreign origin, became the most enduring; blavus, from the Germanic word blau, which eventually became bleu or blue; and azureus, from the Arabic word lazaward, which became azure. Michel Pastoureau, Bleu: Histoire d'une couleur, pg. 26. 

File:Mesolapis.jpg|Lapis lazuli pendant from Mesopotamia (Circa 2900 BC).
File:Lapis bowl Iran.JPG|A lapis azuli bowl from Iran (End of 3rd, beginning 2nd millennium BC) 
File:Blue hippo Egypt.JPG|A hippo decorated with aquatic plants, made of faience with a blue glaze, made to resemble lapis lazuli. (20331710 BC)
File:"Pond in a Garden" (fresco from the Tomb of Nebamun).jpg|Egyptian blue colour in a tomb painting (Around 1500 BC)
File:Egyptian - Faience Bowl - Walters 48451 - Interior.jpg|Egyptian faience bowl (Between 1550 and 1450 BC)
File:Egyptian - "Malqata Kateriskos" Vessel - Walters 4732 - Profile.jpg|a decorated cobalt glass vessel from Ancient Egypt (14501350 BC)
File:Tutmask.jpg|The blue eyebrows in the gold funeral mask of King Tutankhamun are made of lapis lazuli. Other blues in the mask are made of turquoise, glass and faience.
File:Seth tomb blue.JPG|Figure of a servant from the tomb of King Seth I (12441279 BC). The figure is made of faience with a blue glaze, designed to resemble turquoise.
File:Babylon relief.jpg|A lion against a blue background from the Ishtar Gate of ancient Babylon. (575 BC)
File:Pompejanischer Maler um 30 001.jpg|A Roman wall painting of Venus and her son Eros, from Pompeii (about 30 BC)
File:Metropolitan wall painting Roman 1C BC 7.jpg|Mural in the bedroom of the villa of Fannius Synestor in Boscoreale, (50-40 BC) in the Metropolitan Museum.
File:China qing blue.JPG| A painted pottery pot coloured with Han blue from the Han Dynasty in China (206 BC to 220 AD).
File:Eastern Han Luoyang Mural of Liubo players.jpg|A tomb painting from the eastern Han Dynasty (25220 AD) in Henan Province, China.

===In the Byzantine Empire and the Islamic World===
Dark blue was widely used in the decoration of churches in the Byzantine Empire. In Byzantine art Christ and the Virgin Mary usually wore dark blue or purple. Blue was used as a background colour representing the sky in the magnificent mosaics which decorated Byzantine churches. L. Brehier, Les mosaiques a fond d'azur, in Etudes byzantines, volume III, Paris, 1945. Pg. 46 and the following pages. 

In the Islamic world, blue was of secondary importance to green, believed to be the favourite colour of the Prophet Mohammed. At certain times in Moorish Spain and other parts of the Islamic world, blue was the colour worn by Christians and Jews, because only Muslims were allowed to wear white and green. Anne Varichon, Couleurs- Pigments et teintures dans les mains des peoples, pg. 175 Dark blue and turquoise decorative tiles were widely used to decorate the facades and interiors of mosques and palaces from Spain to Central Asia. Lapis lazuli pigment was also used to create the rich blues in Persian miniatures.

File:Meister des Mausoleums der Galla Placidia in Ravenna 001.jpg|Blue Byzantine mosaic ceiling representing the night sky in the Mausoleum of Galla Placidia in Ravenna, Italy (5th century).
File:Hagiasophia-christ.jpg|Blue mosaic in the cloak of Christ in the Hagia Sophia church in Istanbul (13th century).
File:Bowl with rosettes from Iran, 12th century, glazed stone-paste, HAA.JPG|Glazed stone-paste bowl from Persia (12th century).
File:Mubarakshah ibn Qutb - Left Side of a Double-page Illuminated Frontispiece - Walters W5592A - Full Page.jpg|Decorated page of a Koran from Persia (1373 AD)
File:HeratFridayMosque.jpg| Blue tile on the facade of the Friday Mosque in Herat, Afghanistan (15th century).
File:Behzad advice ascetic.jpg|Persian miniature from the 16th century.
File:4219 Istanbul - Topkapi - Harem - Sala di Murat III - Foto G. Dall'Orto 27-5-2006.jpg|Decoration in the Murat III hall of the Topkapi Palace in Istanbul (16th century).
File:Tile panel flowers Louvre OA3919-2-297.jpg|Flower-pattern tile from Iznik, Turkey, from second half of 16th century. 
File:Granada Alhambra gazelle Poterie 9019.JPG|Gazelle against a blue sky in the Alhambra Palace, Spain (14th century)

===During the Middle Ages===
In the art and life of Europe during the early Middle Ages, blue played a minor role. The nobility wore red or purple, while only the poor wore blue clothing, coloured with poor-quality dyes made from the woad plant. Blue played no part in the rich costumes of the clergy or the architecture or decoration of churches. This changed dramatically between 1130 and 1140 in Paris, when the Abbe Suger rebuilt the Saint Denis Basilica. He installed stained glass windows coloured with cobalt, which, combined with the light from the red glass, filled the church with a bluish violet light. The church became the marvel of the Christian world, and the colour became known as the "bleu de Saint-Denis". In the years that followed even more elegant blue stained glass windows were installed in other churches, including at Chartres Cathedral and Sainte-Chapelle in Paris. Michel Pastoureau, Bleu- Histoire d'une couleur, pg. 4447 

Another important factor in the increased prestige of the colour blue in the 12th century was the veneration of the Virgin Mary, and a change in the colours used to depict her clothing. In earlier centuries her robes had usually been painted in sombre black, grey, violet, dark green or dark blue. In the 12th century they began to be painted a rich lighter blue, usually made with a new pigment imported from Asia; ultramarine. Blue became associated with holiness, humility and virtue.

Ultramarine was made from lapis lazuli, from the mines of Badakshan, in the mountains of Afghanistan, near the source of the Oxus River. The mines were visited by Marco Polo in about 1271; he reported, "here is found a high mountain from which they extract the finest and most beautiful of blues." Ground lapis was used in Byzantine manuscripts as early as the 6th century, but it was impure and varied greatly in colour. Ultramarine refined out the impurities through a long and difficult process, creating a rich and deep blue. It was called bleu outremer in French and blu otramere in Italian, since it came from the other side of the sea. It cost far more than any other colour, and it became the luxury colour for the Kings and Princes of Europe. Philip Ball, Bright Earth, Art and Invention of Colour. Pg. 346 

King Louis IX of France, better known as Saint Louis (12141270), became the first King of France to regularly dress in blue. This was copied by other nobles. Paintings of the mythical King Arthur began to show him dressed in blue. The coat of arms of the Kings of France became an azure or light blue shield, sprinkled with golden fleur-de-lis or lilies. Blue had come from obscurity to become the royal colour. Michel Pastoureau, Blue- Histoire d'une couleur, pg. 5152. 

Once blue became the colour of the King, it also became the colour of the wealthy and powerful in Europe. In the Middle Ages in France and to some extent in Italy, the dyeing of blue cloth was subject to license from the crown or state. In Italy, the dyeing of blue was assigned to a specific guild, the tintori di guado, and could not be done by anyone else without severe penalty. The wearing of blue implied some dignity and some wealth. Daniel V. Thompson, The Materials and Techniques of Medieval Painting (1956), Dover Publications, New York, (ISBN 0-486-20327-1) 

Besides ultramarine, Several other blues were widely used in the Middle Ages and later in the Renaissance. Azurite, a form of copper carbonate, was often used as a substitute for ultramarine. The Romans used it under the name lapis armenius, or Armenian stone. The British called it azure of Amayne, or German azure. The Germans themselves called it bergblau, or mountain stone. It was mined in France, Hungary, Spain and Germany, and it made a pale blue with a hint of green, which was ideal for painting skies. It was a favourite background colour of the German painter Albrecht Drer. Philip Ball, Bright Earth, Art and the Invention of Colour. Pg. 139140 

Another blue often used in the Middle Ages was called tournesol or folium. It was made from the plant Crozophora tinctoria, which grew in the south of France. It made a fine transparent blue valued in medieval manuscripts. Philip Ball, Bright Earth, Art and the Invention of Colour. Pg. 141143 

Another common blue pigment was smalt, which was made by grinding blue cobalt glass into a fine powder. It made a deep violet blue similar to ultramarine, and was vivid in frescoes, but it lost some of its brilliance in oil paintings. It became especially popular in the 17th century, when ultramarine was difficult to obtain. It was employed at times by Titian, Tintoretto, Veronese, El Greco, Van Dyck, Rubens and Rembrandt. Philip Ball, Bright Earth, Art and the Invention of Colour. Pg. 178 

File:Basilique Saint-Denis chapelle de la Vierge.jpg|Stained glass windows of the Basilica of Saint Denis (11411144).
File:Chartres - cathdrale - ND de la belle verrire.JPG|Notre Dame de la Belle Verrire window, Chartres Cathedral. (11801225).
File:Baptism Sainte-Chapelle MNMA Cl23717.jpg|Detail of the windows at Sainte-Chapelle (1250).
File:Duccio maesta1021.jpg|The Maesta by Duccio (1308) showed the Virgin Mary in a robe painted with ultramarine. Blue became the colour of holiness, virtue and humility.
File:Arms of the Kingdom of France (Ancien).svg|In the 12th century blue became part of the royal coat of arms of France.
File:Wilton diptych.jpg|The Wilton Diptych, made for King Richard II of England, made lavish use of ultramarine. (About 1400) 
File:Coronation of Louis VIII and Blanche of Castile 1223.jpg|The Coronation of King Louis VIII of France in 1223 showed that blue had become the royal colour. (painted in 1450).

===In the European Renaissance===
In the Renaissance, a revolution occurred in painting; artists began to paint the world as it was actually seen, with perspective, depth, shadows, and light from a single source. Artists had to adapt their use of blue to the new rules. In medieval paintings, blue was used to attract the attention of the viewer to the Virgin Mary, and identify her. In Renaissance paintings, artists tried to create harmonies between blue and red, lightening the blue with lead white paint and adding shadows and highlights. Raphael was a master of this technique, carefully balancing the reds and the blues so no one colour dominated the picture. Philip Ball, Bright Earth, Art and Invention of Colour, pg. 165 

Utramarine was the most prestigious blue of the Renaissance, and patrons sometimes specified that it be used in paintings they commissioned. The contract for the Madone des Harpies by Andrea del Sarto (1514) required that the robe of the Virgin Mary be coloured with ultramarine costing "at least five good florins an ounce." Philip Ball, Bright Earth, Art and Invention of Colour, pg. 347 Good ultramarine was more expensive than gold; in 1508 the German painter Albrecht Drer reported in a letter that he had paid twelve ducats- the equivalent of forty-one grams of gold - for just thirty grams of ultramarine. Eva Heller, Psychologie de la couleur- effets et symboliques (pg. 20). 

Often painters or clients saved money by using less expensive blues, such as azurite smalt, or pigments made with indigo, but this sometimes caused problems. Pigments made from azurite were less expensive, but tended to turn dark and green with time. An example is the robe of the Virgin Mary in The Madonna Enthroned with Saints by Raphael in the Metropolitan Museum in New York. The Virgin Mary's azurite blue robe has degraded into a greenish-black. The Metropolitan Museum of Art - Madonna and Child Enthroned with Saints 

The introduction of oil painting changed the way colours looked and how they were used. Ultramarine pigment, for instance, was much darker when used in oil painting than when used in tempera painting, in frescoes. To balance their colours, Renaissance artists like Raphael added white to lighten the ultramarine. The sombre dark blue robe of the Virgin Mary became a brilliant sky blue. Philip Ball, Bright Earth, Art and Invention of Colour, pg. 171 Titian created his rich blues by using many thin glazes of paint of different blues and violets which allowed the light to pass through, which made a complex and luminous colour, like stained glass. He also used layers of finely ground or coarsely ground ultramarine, which gave subtle variations to the blue. Philip Ball, Bright Earth, Art and Invention of Colour, pg. 186189 
 
File:Giotto - Scrovegni - -18- - Adoration of the Magi.jpg|Giotto was one of the first Italian Renaissance painters to use ultramarine, here in the murals of the Arena Chapel in Padua (circa 1305).
File:Angelico, madonna col bambino, pinacoteca sabauda.jpg|Throughout the 14th and 15th centuries, the robes of the Virgin Mary were painted with ultramarine. This is The Virgin of Humility by Fra Angelico (about 1430). Blue fills the picture.
File:Raffael 030.jpg|In In the Virgin of the Meadow (1506), Raphael used white to soften the ultramarine blue of Virgin Mary's robes to balance the red and blue, and to harmonize with the rest of the picture.
File:Giovanni Bellini 009.jpg|Giovanni Bellini was the master of the rich and luminous blue, which almost seemed to glow. This Madonna is from 1480.
File:Titian Bacchus and Ariadne.jpg|Titian used an ultramarine sky and robes to give depth and brilliance to Bacchus and Ariadne (15201523)

File:Madonna and Child Enthroned with Saints.jpg|In this painting of The Madonna and Child Enthroned with Saints an early work by Raphael in the Metropolitan Museum of Art, the blue cloak of the Virgin Mary has turned a green-black. It was painted with less-expensive azurite. 
File:Andrea della Robbia - Virgin Adoring the Christ Child - Walters 27212 (2).jpg |Glazed Terracotta of The Virgin Adoring the Christ Child, from the workshop of Andrea della Robbia (1483)
File:Les Trs Riches Heures du duc de Berry Janvier.jpg| The Trs Riches Heures du Duc de Berry was the most important illuminated manuscript of the 15th century. The blue was the extravagantly expensive ultramarine, whose fine grains gave it its brilliant colour. It shows the Duc Du Berry himself seated at the lower right. His costume shows that blue had become a colour for the dress of the nobility, not just of peasants. 

===Blue and white porcelain===
In about the 9th century, Chinese artisans abandoned the Han blue colour they had used for centuries, and began to use cobalt blue, made with cobalt salts of alumina, to manufacture fine blue and white porcelain, The plates and vases were shaped, dried, the paint applied with a brush, covered with a clear glaze, then fired at a high temperature. Beginning in the 14th century, this type of porcelain was exported in large quantity to Europe where it inspired a whole style of art, called Chinoiserie. European courts tried for many years to imitate Chinese blue and white porcelain, but only succeeded in the 18th century after a missionary brought the secret back from China.

Other famous white and blue patterns appeared in Delft, Meissen, Staffordshire, and Saint Petersburg, Russia.

File:Early blue and white ware circa 1335 Jingdezhen.jpg|Chinese blue and white porcelain from about 1335, made in Jingdezhen, the porcelain centre of China. Exported to Europe, this porcelain launched the style of Chinoiserie. 
File:Rouen porcelain vase end of the 17th century.jpg|A soft-paste porcelain vase made in Rouen, France, at the end of the 17th century, imitating Chinese blue and white.
File:Delftware pushkin museum01.jpg|Eighteenth century blue and white pottery from Delft, in the Netherlands. 
File:LFZ chinaware 3.jpg|Russian porcelain of the cobalt net pattern, made with cobalt blue pigment. The Imperial Porcelain Factory in Saint Petersburg was founded in 1744. This pattern, first produced in 1949, was copied after a design made for Catherine the Great. 

===The war of the blues  indigo versus woad===
While blue was an expensive and prestigious colour in European painting, it became a common colour for clothing during the Renaissance. The rise of the colour blue in fashion in the 12th and 13th centuries led to the creation of a thriving blue dye industry in several European cities, notably Amiens, Toulouse and Erfurt. They made a dye called pastel from woad, a plant common in Europe, which had been used to make blue dye by the Celts and German tribes. Blue became a colour worn by domestics and artisans, not just nobles. In 1570, when Pope Pius V listed the colours that could be used for ecclesiastical dress and for altar decoration, he excluded blue, because he considered it too common. Eva Heller, Psychologie de la couleur effets et symboliques (pg. 21) 

The process of making blue with woad was particularly long and noxious- it involved soaking the leaves of the plant for from three days to a week in human urine, ideally urine from men who had been drinking a great deal of alcohol, which was said to improve the colour. The fabric was then soaked for a day in the urine, then put out in the sun, where as it dried it turned blue. 

The pastel industry was threatened in the 15th century by the arrival from India of new blue dye, indigo, made from a shrub widely grown in Asia. Indigo blue had the same chemical composition as woad, but it was more concentrated and produced a richer and more stable blue. In 1498, Vasco de Gama opened a trade route to import indigo from India to Europe. In India, the indigo leaves were soaked in water, fermented, pressed into cakes, dried into bricks, then carried to the ports London, Marseille, Genoa and Bruges. Later, in the 17th century, the British, Spanish and Dutch established indigo plantations in Jamaica, South Carolina, the Virgin Islands and South America, and began to import American indigo to Europe.

The countries with large and prosperous pastel industries tried to block the use of indigo. The German government outlawed the use of indigo in 1577, describing it as a "pernicious, deceitful and corrosive substance, the Devil's dye." Lippincott's Magazine of Popular Literature and Science, Volume 17, No. 100, April 1876. D G Schreber, Historische, physische und economische Beschreibung des Waidtes, 1752, the appendix; Thorpe JF and Ingold CK, 1923, Synthetic colouring matters - vat colours (London: Longmans, Green), p. 23 In France, Henry IV, in an edict of 1609, forbade under pain of death the use of "the false and pernicious Indian drug". It was forbidden in England until 1611, when British traders established their own indigo industry in India and began to import it into Europe. Eva Heller, Psychologie de la couleur - effets et symboliques (pg. 28) 

The efforts to block indigo were in vain; the quality of indigo blue was too high and the price too low for pastel made from woad to compete. In 1737 both the French and German governments finally allowed the use of indigo. This ruined the dye industries in Toulouse and the other cities that produced pastel, but created a thriving new indigo commerce to seaports such as Bordeaux, Nantes and Marseille. F. Lauterbach, Der Kampf des Waides mit dem Indigo, Leipzig, pg. 25. Cited by Michel Pastoureau, Bleu - Histoire d'une couleur, pg. 108113. 

Another war of the blues took place at the end of the 19th century, between indigo and the new synthetic indigo, first discovered in 1868 by the German chemist Johann Friedrich Wilhelm Adolf von Baeyer. The German chemical firm BASF put the new dye on the market in 1897, in direct competition with the British-run indigo industry in India, which produced most of the world's indigo. In 1897 Britain sold ten thousand tons of natural indigo on the world market, while BASF sold six hundred tons of synthetic indigo. The British industry cut prices and reduced the salaries of its workers, but it was unable to compete; the synthetic indigo was more pure, made a more lasting blue, and was not dependent upon good or bad harvests. In 1911, India sold only 660 tons of natural indigo, while BASF sold 22,000 tons of synthetic indigo.

Not long after the battle between natural and synthetic indigo, chemists discovered a new synthetic blue dye, called indanthrene, which made a blue which did not fade. By the 1950s almost all fabrics, including blue jeans, were dyed with the new synthetic dye. In 1970, BASF stopped making synthetic indigo, and switched to newer synthetic blues. 

File:Isatis tinctoria02.JPG|Isatis tinctoria, or woad, was the main source of blue dye in Europe from ancient times until the arrival of indigo from Asia and America. It was processed into a paste called pastel. 
File:The Hunt of the Unicorn Tapestry 1.jpg|A Dutch tapestry from 1495 to 1505. The blue colour comes from woad. 
File:Indigofera tinctoria1.jpg|Indigofera tinctoria, a tropical shrub, is the main source of indigo dye. The chemical composition of indigo dye is the same as that of woad, but the colour is more intense.
File:Indigo-Historische Farbstoffsammlung.jpg|Cakes of indigo. The leaf has been soaked in water, fermented, mixed with lye or another base, then pressed into cakes and dried, ready for export. 
File:Schreber woad mill 1752.JPG|A woad mill in Thuringia, in Germany, in 1752. The woad industry was already on its way to extinction, unable to compete with indigo blue.

===The blue Uniform===
In the 17th century, Frederick William, Elector of Brandenburg, was one of the first rulers to give his army blue uniforms. The reasons were economic; the German states were trying to protect their pastel dye industry against competition from imported indigo dye. When Brandenburg became the Kingdom of Prussia in 1701, the uniform colour was adopted by the Prussian army. Most German soldiers wore dark blue uniforms until the First World War, with the exception of the Bavarians, who wore light blue. Eva Heller, Psychologie de la couleur, effets et symboliques (pg. 30) 

Thanks in part to the availability of indigo dye, the 18th century saw the widespread use of blue military uniforms. Prior to 1748, British naval officers simply wore upper-class civilian clothing and wigs. In 1748, the British uniform for naval officers was officially established as an embroidered coat of the colour then called marine blue, now known as navy blue. J.R. Hill, The Oxford Illustrated History of the Royal Navy, Oxford University Press, 1995. When the Continental Navy of the United States was created in 1775, it largely copied the British uniform and colour.

In the late 18th century, the blue uniform became a symbol of liberty and revolution. In October 1774, even before the United States declared its independence, George Mason and one hundred Virginia neighbours of George Washington organised a voluntary militia unit (the Fairfax County Independent Company of Volunteers) and elected Washington the honorary commander. For their uniforms they chose blue and buff, the colours of the Whig Party, the opposition party in England, whose policies were supported by George Washington and many other patriots in the American colonies. Blue and Buff: Buff and Blue: Whig politics in the late 18th century Ron Chernow, , pg. 174. ISBN 978-0-14-311996-8. 

When the Continental Army was established in 1775 at the outbreak of the American Revolution, the first Continental Congress declared that the official uniform colour would be brown, but this was not popular with many militias, whose officers were already wearing blue. In 1778 the Congress asked George Washington to design a new uniform, and in 1779 Washington made the official colour of all uniforms blue and buff. Blue continued to be the colour of the field uniform of the U.S. Army until 1902, and is still the colour of the dress uniform. Army Dress Uniform 

In France, the Gardes Franaises, the elite regiment which protected Louis XVI, wore dark blue uniforms with red trim. In 1789, the soldiers gradually changed their allegiance from the King to the people, and they played a leading role in the storming of the Bastille. After the fall of Bastille, a new armed force, the Garde Nationale, was formed under the command of the Marquis de Lafayette, who had served with George Washington in America. Lafayette gave the Garde Nationale dark blue uniforms similar to those of the Continental Army. Blue became the colour of the Revolutionary armies, opposed to the white uniforms of the Royalists and the Austrians. Jean Tulard, Jean-Franois Fayard, Alfred Fierro, Histoire et dictionnaire de la Rvolution franaise, 17891799, ditions Robert Laffont, collection Bouquins, Paris, 1987. ISBN 2-7028-2076-X 

Napoleon Bonaparte abandoned many of the doctrines of the French Revolution but he kept blue as the uniform colour for his army, although he had great difficulty obtaining the blue dye, since the British controlled the seas and blocked the importation of indigo to France. Napoleon was forced to dye uniforms with woad, which had an inferior blue colour. Michel Pastoureau, Bleu- Histoire d'une couleur, pg. 137140 The French army wore a dark blue uniform coat with red trousers until 1915, when it was found to be a too visible target on the battlefields of World War I. It was replaced with uniforms of a light blue-grey colour called horizon blue.

Blue was the colour of liberty and revolution in the 18th century, but in the 19th it increasingly became the colour of government authority, the uniform colour of policemen and other public servants. It was considered serious and authoritative, without being menacing. In 1829, when Robert Peel created the first London Metropolitan Police, he made the colour of the uniform jacket a dark, almost black blue, to make the policemen look different from soldiers, who until then had patrolled the streets. The traditional blue jacket with silver buttons of the London "bobbie" was not abandoned until the mid-1990s, when it was replaced by a light blue shirt and a jumper or sweater of the colour officially known as NATO blue. Metropolitan Police Service - History - Definition & History of Policing 

The New York City Police Department, modelled after the London Metropolitan Police, was created in 1844, and in 1853, they were officially given a navy blue uniform, the colour they wear today. 
 
File:Inf. Regiment Nr.3.jpg|Elector Frederic William of Brandenburg gave his soldiers blue uniforms (engraving from 1698). When Brandenburg became the Kingdom of Prussia in 1701, blue became the uniform colour of the Prussian Army. 
File:Lieutenant with Cutter 1777.jpg|Uniform of a lieutenant in the Royal Navy (1777). Marine blue became the official colour of the Royal Navy uniform coat in 1748. 
File:Washington 1779.jpg|George Washington chose blue and buff as the colours of the Continental Army uniform. They were the colours of the English Whig Party, which Washington admired.
File:Le serment de La Fayette a la fete de la Federation 14 July 1790 French School 18th century.jpg|The Marquis de Lafayette in the uniform of the Garde Nationale during the French Revolution (1790).
File:ESM St Cyr cadets DSC03305.JPG|The cadets of the Ecole Spciale Militaire de Saint-Cyr, the French military academy, still wear the blue and red uniform of the French army before 1915.
File:Police uniform NY 1854.jpg|In 1853, New York policemen and firemen were officially outfitted in navy blue uniforms.
File:Very friendly MPS officers in London.jpg|Metropolitan Police officers in Soho, London (2007). 
File:5.29.10NYPDByLuigiNovi6.jpg|New York City police officers on Times Square (2010).
File:Chicago police officer on segway.jpg|Chicago policeman in blue on a Segway PT (2005)

===The search for the perfect blue===
During the 17th and 18th centuries, chemists in Europe tried to discover a way to create synthetic blue pigments, avoiding the expense of importing and grinding lapis lazuli, azurite and other minerals. The Egyptians had created a synthetic colour, Egyptian blue, three thousand years BC, but the formula had been lost. The Chinese had also created synthetic pigments, but the formula was not known in the west.

In 1709, a German druggist and pigment maker named Diesbach accidentally discovered a new blue while experimenting with potassium and iron sulphides. The new colour was first called Berlin blue, but later became known as Prussian blue. By 1710 it was being used by the French painter Antoine Watteau, and later his successor Nicolas Lancret. It became immensely popular for the manufacture of wallpaper, and in the 19th century was widely used by French impressionist painters. Michel Pastoureau, Bleu - HIstoire d'une couleur, pg. 114116 

Beginning in 1820s, Prussian blue was imported into Japan through the port of Nagasaki. It was called bero-ai, or Berlin Blue, and it became popular because it did not fade like traditional Japanese blue pigment, ai-gami, made from the dayflower. Prussian blue was used by both Hokusai, in his famous wave paintings, and Hiroshige. oger Keyes, Japanese Woodblock Prints: A Catalogue of the Mary A. Ainsworth Collection, R, Allen Memorial Art Museum, Oberlin College, 1984, p. 42, plate #140, p. 91 and catalogue entry #439, p. 185. for more on the story of Prussian blue in Japanese prints, see also the website of the Victoria and Albert Museum, London. 

In 1824, the Societ pour l'Encouragement d'Industrie in France offered a prize for the invention of an artificial ultramarine which could rival the natural colour made from lapis lazuli. The prize was won in 1826 by a chemist named Jean Baptiste Guimet, but he refused to reveal the formula of his colour. In 1828, another scientist, Christian Gmelin then a professor of chemistry in Tbingen, found the process and published his formula. This was the beginning of new industry to manufacture artificial ultramarine, which eventually almost completely replaced the natural product. Maerz and Paul A Dictionary of Color New York:1930--McGraw Hill Page 206 

In 1878, a German chemist named a. Von Baeyer discovered a synthetic substitute for indigotine, the active ingredient of indigo. This product gradually replaced natural indigo, and after the end of the First World War, it brought an end to the trade of indigo from the East and West Indies.

In 1901, a new synthetic blue dye, called Indanthrone blue, was invented, which had even greater resistance to fading during washing or in the sun. This dye gradually replaced artificial indigo, whose production ceased in about 1970. Today almost all blue clothing is dyed with an indanthrone blue. Eva Heller, Psychologie de la couleur, page 32. 

File:Great Wave off Kanagawa2.jpg|The 19th-century Japanese woodblock artist, Hokusai used Prussian blue, a synthetic colour imported from Europe, in his wave paintings. 
File:Indigoproduktion BASF 1890.JPG|A synthetic indigo dye factory in Germany in 1890. The manufacture of this dye ended the trade in indigo from America and India that had begun in the 15th century.

===The Impressionist painters===
The invention of new synthetic pigments in the 18th and 19th centuries considerably brightened and expanded the palette of painters. J.M.W. Turner experimented with the new cobalt blue, and of the twenty colours most used by the Impressionists, twelve were new and synthetic colours, including cobalt blue, ultramarine and cerulean blue. Philip Ball, Bright Earth, Art and the Invention of Colour, pg. 265. 

Another important influence on painting in the 19th century was the theory of complementary colours, developed by the French chemist Michel Eugene Chevreul in 1828 and published in 1839. He demonstrated that placing complementary colours, such as blue and yellow-orange or ultramarine and yellow, next to each other heightened the intensity of each colour "to the apogee of their tonality." Michel Eugene Chevreul, De la loi du contraste simultan des couleurs, Paris, (1839). Cited by Philip Ball, pg. 257. In 1879 an American physicist, Ogden Rood, published a book charting the complementary colours of each colour in the spectrum. Ogden Rood, Modern Chromatics, (1879). This principle of painting was used by Claude Monet in his Impression  Sunrise  Fog (1872), where he put a vivid blue next to a bright orange sun, (1872) and in Rgate  Argenteuil (1872), where he painted an orange sun against blue water. The colours brighten each other. Renoir used the same contrast of cobalt blue water and an orange sun in Canotage sur la Seine (18791880). Both Monet and Renoir liked to use pure colours, without any blending. 

Monet and the impressionists were among the first to observe that shadows were full of colour. In his La Gare Saint-Lazare, the grey smoke, vapour and dark shadows are actually composed of mixtures of bright pigment, including cobalt blue, cerulean blue, synthetic ultramarine, emerald green, Guillet green, chrome yellow, vermilion and ecarlate red. Philip Ball, Bright Earth, Art and the Invention of Colour, pg. 268. Blue was a favourite colour of the impressionist painters, who used it not just to depict nature but to create moods, feelings and atmospheres. Cobalt blue, a pigment of cobalt oxide-aluminium oxide, was a favourite of Auguste Renoir and Vincent van Gogh. It was similar to smalt, a pigment used for centuries to make blue glass, but it was much improved by the French chemist Louis Jacques Thnard, who introduced it in 1802. It was very stable but extremely expensive. Van Gogh wrote to his brother Theo, "'Cobalt is a divine colour and there is nothing so beautiful for putting atmosphere around things ..." 

Van Gogh described to his brother Theo how he composed a sky: "The dark blue sky is spotted with clouds of an even darker blue than the fundamental blue of intense cobalt, and others of a lighter blue, like the bluish white of the Milky Way ... the sea was very dark ultramarine, the shore a sort of violet and of light red as I see it, and on the dunes, a few bushes of prussian blue." Letter to his brother Theo, (1888). Cited by Philip Ball, from "Letters of Vincent van Gogh, edited by M. Roskill, Flamingo, London, 2000. Pg. 268. 

File:La Gare Saint-Lazare.jpg|Claude Monet used several recently invented colours in his Gare Saint-Lazare (1877). He used cobalt blue, invented in 1807, cerulean blue invented in 1860, and French ultramarine, first made in 1828.
File:Claude Monet 042.jpg|In Rgate  Argenteuil (1872), Monet used two complementary colours together  blue and orange  to brighten the effect of both colours.
File:Pierre-Auguste Renoir 122.jpg|Umbrellas, by Pierre Auguste-Renoir. (1881 and 1885). Renoir used cobalt blue for right side of the picture, but used the new synthetic ultramarine introduced in the 1870s, when he added two figures to left of the picture a few years later.
File:VanGogh-Irises 1.jpg|In Vincent van Gogh's Irises, the blue irises are placed against their complementary colour, yellow-orange. 
File:Starry Night Over the Rhone.jpg|Van Gogh's Starry Night Over the Rhone (1888). Blue used to create a mood or atmosphere. A cobalt blue sky, and cobalt or ultramarine water.
File:Vincent Willem van Gogh 041.jpg|Wheatfield under clouded sky (July 1890), One of the last paintings by Vincent van Gogh, He wrote of cobalt blue, "there is nothing so beautiful for putting atmosphere around things."

===The blue suit===
Blue had first become the high fashion colour of the wealthy and powerful in Europe in the 13th century, when it was worn by Louis IX of France, better known as Saint Louis (1214-1270). Wearing blue implied dignity and wealth, and blue clothing was restricted to the nobility. Daniel V. Thompson (1956), The Materials and Techniques of Medieval Painting, Dover Publications, New York (ISBN 0-486-20327-1) However, blue was replaced by black as the power colour in the 14th century, when European princes, and then merchants and bankers, wanted to show their seriousness, dignity and devoutness (see Black).

Blue gradually returned to court fashion in the 17th century, as part of a palette of peacock-bright colours shown off in extremely elaborate costumes. The modern blue business suit has its roots in England in the middle of the 17th century. Following the London plague of 1665 and the London fire of 1666, King Charles II of England ordered that his courtiers wear simple coats, waistcoats and breeches, and the palette of colours became blue, grey, white and buff. Widely imitated, this style of men's fashion became almost a uniform of the London merchant class and the English country gentleman. "Suitably Dressed," the Economist, December 16, 2010. 

During the American Revolution, the leader of the Whig Party in England, Charles James Fox, wore a blue coat and buff waistcoat and breeches, the colours of the Whig Party and of the uniform of George Washington, whose principles he supported. The men's suit followed the basic form of the military uniforms of the time, particularly the uniforms of the cavalry. 

In the early 19th century, during the Regency of the future King George IV, the blue suit was revolutionized by a courtier named George Beau Brummel. Brummel created a suit that closely fitted the human form. The new style had a long tail coat cut to fit the body and long tight trousers to replace the knee-length breeches and stockings of the previous century. He used plain colours, such as blue and grey, to concentrate attention on the form of the body, not the clothes. Brummel observed, "If people turn to look at you in the street, you are not well dressed." *Kelly, Ian. Beau Brummell: The Ultimate Dandy. Hodder & Stoughton, 2005 This fashion was adopted by the Prince Regent, then by London society and the upper classes. Originally the coat and trousers were different colours, but in the 19th century the suit of a single colour became fashionable. By the late 19th century the black suit had become the uniform of businessmen in England and America. In the 20th century, the black suit was largely replaced by the dark blue or grey suit. 

File:Louis-innocentiv.jpg |King Louis IX of France (on the right, with Pope Innocent) was the first European king to wear blue. It quickly became the colour of the nobles and wealthy.
File:Anthony Lee Portrait of Joseph Leeson, later 1st Earl of Milltown.jpg|Joseph Leeson, later 1st Earl of Milltown, in the typical dress of the English country gentleman in the 1730s. 
File:Charles James Fox00.jpg| Charles James Fox, a leader of the Whig Party in England, wore a blue suit in Parliament in support of George Washington and the American Revolution. Portrait by Joshua Reynolds (1782).
File:BrummellDighton1805.jpg|Beau Brummel introduced the ancestor of the modern blue suit, shaped to the body, with a coat, long trousers, waistcoat, white shirt and elaborate cravat (1805). 
File:Mens fashion plate 1826 2.jpg|Man's suit, 1826. Dark blue suits were still rare; this one is blue-green or teal.
File:Caillebotte Hugot.jpg|Man's blue suit in the 1870s, Paris. Painting by Caillebotte. In the second half of the 19th century the monochrome suit had become the fashion, but most suits were black. 
File:1962 Entrance Hall (Official White House) Christmas tree - Jack and Jacqueline Kennedy.jpg|President John Kennedy popularised the blue two-button business suit, less formal than the suits of his predecessors. (1961)
File:G20 - Cumbre de Cannes - 20011103.jpg| In the 21st century, the dark blue business suit is the most common style worn by world leaders, seen here at the 2011 G-20 Summit in Cannes, France.

===In the 20th and 21st century===
At the beginning of the 20th century, many artists recognised the emotional power of blue, and made it the central element of paintings. During his Blue Period (19011904) Pablo Picasso used blue and green, with hardly any warm colours, to create a melancholy mood. In Russia, the symbolist painter Pavel Kuznetsov and the Blue Rose art group (19061908) used blue to create a fantastic and exotic atmosphere. In Germany, Wassily Kandinsky and other Russian migrs formed the art group called Der Blaue Reiter (The Blue Rider), and used blue to symbolise spirituality and eternity. Wassily Kandinsky, M. T. Sadler (Translator) Concerning the Spiritual in Art. Dover Publ. (Paperback). 80 pp. ISBN 0-486-23411-8. Henri Matisse used intense blues to express the emotions he wanted viewers to feel. Matisse wrote, "A certain blue penetrates your soul." "Un certain bleu pntre votre me." Cited by C.A. Riley, Color Codes, University Press of New England, Hanover, New Hampshire, 1995. 

In the art of the second half of the 20th century, painters of the abstract expressionist movement began to use blue and other colours in pure form, without any attempt to represent anything, to inspire ideas and emotions. Painter Mark Rothko observed that colour was "only an instrument;" his interest was "in expressing human emotions tragedy, ecstasy, doom, and so on." Mark Rothko 19031970. Tate Gallery Publishing, 1987. 

In fashion, blue, particularly dark blue, was seen as a colour which was serious but not grim. In the mid-20th century, blue passed black as the most common colour of men's business suits, the costume usually worn by political and business leaders. Public opinion polls in the United States and Europe showed that blue was the favourite colour of over fifty per cent of respondents. Green was far behind with twenty per cent, while white and red received about eight per cent each. Michel Pastoureau, Bleu - Histoire d'une couleur, pg. 149153. 

In 1873 a German immigrant in San Francisco, Levi Strauss, invented a sturdy kind of work trousers, made of denim fabric and coloured with indigo dye, called blue jeans. In 1935, they were raised to the level of high fashion by Vogue magazine. Beginning in the 1950s, they became an essential part of uniform of young people in the United States, Europe, and around the world.

Blue was also seen as a colour which was authoritative without being threatening. Following the Second World War, blue was adopted as the colour of important international organisations, including the United Nations, the Council of Europe, UNESCO, the European Union, and NATO. United Nations peacekeepers wear blue helmets to stress their peacekeeping role. Blue is used by the NATO Military Symbols for Land Based Systems to denote friendly forces, hence the term "blue on blue" for friendly fire, and Blue Force Tracking for location of friendly units. The People's Liberation Army of China (formerly known as the "Red Army") uses the term "Blue Army" to refer to hostile forces during exercises. 

The 20th century saw the invention of new ways of creating blue, such as chemiluminescence, making blue light through a chemical reaction.

In the 20th century, it also became possible to own your own colour of blue. The French artist Yves Klein, with the help of a French paint dealer, created a specific blue called International Klein blue, which he patented. It was made of ultramarine combined with a resin called Rhodopa, which gave it a particularly brilliant colour. The baseball team the Los Angeles Dodgers developed its own blue, called Dodger blue, and several American universities invented new blues for their colours.

With the dawn of the World Wide Web, blue has become the standard colour for hyperlinks in graphic browsers (though in most browsers links turn purple if you visit their target), to make their presence within text obvious to readers.

File:Old guitarist chicago.jpg|During his Blue Period, Pablo Picasso used blue as the colour of melancholy.
File:Kuznetsov vstepi.jpg|The Russian avant-garde painter Pavel Kuznetsov and his group, the Blue Rose, used blue to symbolise fantasy and exoticism. This is In the Steppe- Mirage (1911). 
File:Kandinsky-Blue Rider.jpg|The Blue Rider (1903), by Wassily Kandinsky, For Kandinsky, blue was the colour of spirituality: the darker the blue, the more it awakened human desire for the eternal. 
File:Matisse Conversation.jpg|The Conversation (19081912) by Henri Matisse used blue to express the emotions he wanted the viewer to feel.
File:Jeans for men.jpg|Blue jeans, made of denim coloured with indigo dye, patented by Levi Strauss in 1873, became an essential part of the wardrobe of young people beginning in the 1950s.
File:UN Soldiers in Eritrea.jpeg|Blue is the colour of United Nations peacekeepers, known as Blue Helmets. These soldiers are patrolling the border between Ethiopia and Eritrea. 
File:Luminol2006.jpg|Vivid blues can be created by chemical reactions, called chemiluminescence. This is luminol, a chemical used in crime scene investigations. Luminol glows blue when it contacts even a tiny trace of blood. 

File:Blaues pferd.jpg|Blue neon lighting, first used in commercial advertising, is now used in works of art. This is Zwei Pferde fr Mnster (Two horses for Mnster), a neon sculpture by Stephan Huber (2002), in Munster, Germany.

==In science and industry==

===Pigments and dyes===
Blue pigments were made from minerals, especially lapis lazuli and azurite (. These minerals were crushed, ground into powder, and then mixed with a quick-drying binding agent, such as egg yolk (tempera painting); or with a slow-drying oil, such as linseed oil, for oil painting. To make blue stained glass, cobalt blue (cobalt(II) aluminate: )pigment was mixed with the glass. Other common blue pigments made from minerals are ultramarine (), cerulean blue (primarily cobalt (II) stanate: ), and Prussian blue (milori blue: primarily ).

Natural dyes to colour cloth and tapestries were made from plants. Woad and true indigo were used to produce indigo dye used to colour fabrics blue or indigo. Since the 18th century, natural blue dyes have largely been replaced by synthetic dyes. 

File:Lapis-lazuli hg.jpg|Lapis lazuli, mined in Afghanistan for more than three thousand years, was used for jewellery and ornaments, and later was crushed and powdered and used as a pigment. The more it was ground, the lighter the blue colour became.
File:Azurite from China.jpg |Azurite, common in Europe and Asia, is produced by the weathering of copper ore deposits. It was crushed and powdered and used as a pigment from ancient times,
File:Natural ultramarine pigment.jpg|Natural ultramarine, made by grinding and purifying lapis lazuli, was the finest available blue pigment in the Middle Ages and the Renaissance. It was extremely expensive, and in Italian Renaissance art, it was often reserved the robes of the Virgin Mary. 
File:Egyptian blue.jpg|Egyptian blue, the first artificial pigment, created in the third millennium BC in Ancient Egypt by grinding sand, copper and natron, and then heating them. It was often used in tomb paintings and funereal objects to protect the dead in their afterlife.
File:Azuritepigment.jpg|Ground azurite was often in Renaissance used as a substitute for the much more expensive lapis lazuli. It made a rich blue, but was unstable and could turn dark green over time. 
File:PB35 Bleu Crulum.JPG| Cerulean was created with copper and cobalt oxide, and used to make a sky blue colour. Like azurite, it could fade or turn green. 
File:Cobalt Blue.JPG|Cobalt blue. Cobalt has been used for centuries to colour glass and ceramics; it was used to make the deep blue stained glass windows of Gothic cathedrals and Chinese porcelain beginning in the T'ang Dynasty. In 1799 a French chemist, Louis Jacques Thnard, made a synthetic cobalt blue pigment which became immensely popular with painters.
File:Prussian blue.jpg|Prussian blue was one of the first synthetic colours, created in Berlin in about 1706 as a substitute for lapis lazuli. It is also the blue used in blueprints.
File:Indigo plant extract sample.jpg|Indigo dye is made from the woad, Indigofera tinctoria, a plant common in Asia and Africa but little known in Europe until the 15th century. Its importation into Europe revolutionized the colour of clothing. It also became the colour used in blue denim and jeans. Nearly all indigo dye produced today is synthetic.
File:Ultramarinepigment.jpg|Synthetic ultramarine pigment, invented in 1826, has the same chemical composition as natural ultramarine. It is more vivid than natural ultramarine because the particles are smaller and more uniform in size, and thus distribute the light more evenly.
File:Bleu phtalo.jpg|A new synthetic blue created in the 1930s is phthalocyanine, an intense colour widely used for making blue ink, dye, and pigment. 

===Optics===

 sRGB rendering of the spectrum of visible light 
 Colour Frequency Wavelength 
 violet 668789 THz 380450 nm 
 blue 606668 THz 450495 nm 
 green 526606 THz 495570 nm 
 yellow 508526 THz 570590 nm 
 orange 484508 THz 590620 nm 
 red 400484 THz 620750 nm 

Human eyes perceive blue when observing light which has a wavelength between 450-495 nanometres. Blues with a higher frequency and thus a shorter wavelength gradually look more violet, while those with a lower frequency and a longer wavelength gradually appear more green. Pure blue, in the middle, has a wavelength of 470 nanometres.

Isaac Newton included blue as one of the seven colours in his first description the visible spectrum, He chose seven colours because that was the number of notes in the musical scale, which he believed was related to the optical spectrum. He included indigo, the hue between blue and violet, as one of the separate colours, though today it is usually considered a hue of blue. Arthur C. Hardy and Fred H. Perrin. The Principles of Optics. McGraw-Hill Book Co., Inc., New York. 1932. 

In painting and traditional colour theory, blue is one of the three primary colours of pigments (red, yellow, blue), which can be mixed to form a wide gamut of colours. Red and blue mixed together form violet, blue and yellow together form green. Mixing all three primary colours together produces a dark grey. From the Renaissance onwards, painters used this system to create their colours. (See RYB colour system.)

The RYB model was used for colour printing by Jacob Christoph Le Blon as early as 1725. Later, printers discovered that more accurate colours could be created by using combinations of magenta, cyan, yellow and black ink, put onto separate inked plates and then overlaid one at a time onto paper. This method could produce almost all the colours in the spectrum with reasonable accuracy.

In the 19th century the Scottish physicist James Clerk Maxwell found a new way of explaining colours, by the wavelength of their light. He showed that white light could be created by combining red, blue and green light, and that virtually all colours could be made by different combinations of these three colours. His idea, called additive colour or the RGB colour model, is used today to create colours on televisions and computer screens. The screen is covered by tiny pixels, each with three fluorescent elements for creating red, green and blue light. If the red, blue and green elements all glow at once, the pixel looks white. As the screen is scanned from behind with electrons, each pixel creates its own designated colour, composing a complete picture on the screen.

File:RGB illumination.jpg|Additive colour mixing. The projection of primary colour lights on a screen shows secondary colours where two overlap; the combination red, green, and blue each in full intensity makes white.
File:RGB pixels.jpg|Blue and orange pixels on an LCD television screen. Closeup of the red, green and blue sub-pixels on left. 

On the HSV colour wheel, the complement of blue is yellow; that is, a colour corresponding to an equal mixture of red and green light. On a colour wheel based on traditional colour theory (RYB) where blue was considered a primary colour, its complementary colour is considered to be orange (based on the Munsell colour wheel). 

===Scientific natural standards===
* Emission spectrum of 
* Electronic spectrum of aqua-ions 

===Why the clear sky and the deep sea are seen as blue===
Of the colours in the visible spectrum of light, blue has a very short wavelength, while red has the longest wavelength. When sunlight passes through the atmosphere, the blue wavelengths are scattered more widely by the oxygen and nitrogen molecules, and more blue comes to our eyes. This effect is called Rayleigh scattering, after Lord Rayleigh, the British physicist who discovered it. It was confirmed by Albert Einstein in 1911. Why is the sky Blue? 

Near sunrise and sunset, most of the light we see comes in nearly tangent to the Earth's surface, so that the light's path through the atmosphere is so long that much of the blue and even green light is scattered out, leaving the sun rays and the clouds it illuminates red. Therefore, when looking at the sunset and sunrise, you will see the colour red more than any of the other colours. "Human color vision and the unsaturated blue color of the daytime sky", Glenn S. Smith, American Journal of Physics, Volume 73, Issue 7, pp. 590597 (2005). 

The sea is seen as blue for largely the same reason: the water absorbs the longer wavelengths of red and reflects and scatters the blue, which comes to the eye of the viewer. The colour of the sea is also affected by the colour of the sky, reflected by particles in the water; and by algae and plant life in the water, which can make it look green; or by sediment, which can make it look brown. Why Is the Ocean Blue? - Blue or Green Color of the Ocean 

===Atmospheric perspective===
The farther away an object is, the more blue it often appears to the eye. For example, mountains in the distance often appear blue. This is the effect of atmospheric perspective; the farther an object is away from the viewer, the less contrast there is between the object and its background colour, which is usually blue. In a painting where different parts of the composition are blue, green and red, the blue will appear to be more distant, and the red closer to the viewer. The cooler a colour is, the more distant it seems. Eva Heller, Psychologie de la coulour (2009), pg. 14, 

File:Top of Atmosphere.jpg|Blue light is scattered more than other wavelengths by the gases in the atmosphere, giving the Earth a blue halo when seen from space.
File:Aerial perspective 1.JPG|An example of aerial, or atmospheric perspective. Objects become more blue and lighter in colour the farther they are from the viewer, because of Rayleigh scattering. 
File:LightningVolt Deep Blue Sea.jpg|Under the sea, red and other light with longer wavelengths is absorbed, so white objects appear blue. The deeper you go, the darker the blue becomes. In the open sea, only about one per cent of light penetrates to a depth of 200 metres. (See underwater and euphotic depth)

===Blue eyes===
Blue eyes actually contain no blue pigment. The colour is caused by an effect called Rayleigh scattering, which also makes the sky appear blue.
Blue eyes do not actually contain any blue pigment. Eye colour is determined by two factors: the pigmentation of the eye's iris and the scattering of light by the turbid medium in the stroma of the iris. In humans, the pigmentation of the iris varies from light brown to black. The appearance of blue, green, and hazel eyes results from the Rayleigh scattering of light in the stroma, an optical effect similar to that which accounts for the blueness of the sky. The irises of the eyes of people with blue eyes contain less dark melanin than those of people with brown eyes, which means that they absorb less short-wavelength blue light, which is instead reflected out to the viewer. Eye colour also varies depending on the lighting conditions, especially for lighter-coloured eyes.

Blue eyes are most common in Ireland, the Baltic Sea area and Northern Europe, and are also found in Eastern, Central, and Southern Europe. Blue eyes are also found in parts of Western Asia, most notably in Afghanistan, Syria, Iraq, and Iran. Distribution of Bodily Characters. Pigmentation, the Pilous System, and Morphology of the Soft Parts In Estonia, 99% of people have blue eyes. statement by Hans Eiberg from the Department of Cellular and Molecular Medicine at the University of Copenhagen Weise, Elizabeth. (2008-02-05) More than meets the blue eye: You may all be related. Usatoday.com. Retrieved on 2011-12-23. In Denmark 30 years ago, only 8% of the population had brown eyes, though through immigration, today that number is about 11%. In Germany, about 75% have blue eyes. 

In the United States, as of 2006, one out of every six people, or 16.6% of the total population, and 22.3% of the white population, have blue eyes, compared with about half of Americans born in 1900, and a third of Americans born in 1950. Blue eyes are becoming less common among American children. In the U.S., boys are 3-5 per cent more likely to have blue eyes than girls. 

===Lasers===
Lasers emitting in the blue region of the spectrum became widely available to the public in 2010 with the release of inexpensive high-powered 445-447 nm Laser diode technology. Previously the blue wavelengths were accessible only through DPSS which are comparatively expensive and inefficient, however these technologies are still widely used by the scientific community for applications including Optogenetics, Raman spectroscopy, and Particle image velocimetry, due to their superior beam quality. Blue Gas lasers are also still commonly used for Holography, DNA sequencing, Optical pumping, and other scientific and medical applications.

==In nature==

File:Lactarius indigo 48568 edit.jpg|Lactarius indigo, or the blue milk mushroom 
Image:Centaurea cyanus b.jpg|Cornflower
Image:Forgetmenotflower.JPG|Myosotis, or Forget-me-not
Image:Ravenala madagascariensis2.jpg|Blue seeds of the Ravenala tree from Madagascar
Image:Blue morpho butterfly.jpg| The Morpho peleides butterfly. The blue is caused by iridescence, the diffraction of light from millions of tiny scales on the wings. The colour is intended to frighten predators.
Image:Alcedo atthis 3 (Marek Szczepanek).jpg|River kingfisher
Image:Linckia.jpg|Linckia Blue starfish 
Image:Logansapphire.jpg| Blue sapphire, a gemstone of the mineral corundum. Trace amounts of iron colour it blue; if there are traces of chromium instead, it has a red tint and is called a ruby. 
Image:Copper sulfate.jpg|Dried crystals of copper sulphate
File:Bunch of blueberries, one unripe.jpg|alt=Group of approximately 20 blue berries|Blueberries
File:Dendrobates azureus (Dendrobates tinctorius) Edit.jpg|alt=A blue frog with black spots sits on a green leaf.|Dendrobates azureus, the poison dart frog from Brazil. Its skin contains alkaloids which can paralyze or kill predators.
File:Cyanocitta cristata blue jay.jpg|alt=A blue and white bird, with a crest on its head.|Blue Jay
File:Bl-4.JPG|A blue whale, the largest known animal to have ever existed, seen from above. The back is a pale blue grey.

===Animals===
*When an animal's coat is described as "blue", it usually refers to a shade of grey that takes on a bluish tint, a diluted variant of a pure black coat. This designation is used for a variety of animals, including dog coats, some rat coats, cat coats, some chicken breeds, some horse coat colours and rabbit coat colours. Some animals, such as giraffes and lizards, also have blue tongues.

==In world culture==
*In the English language, blue often represents the human emotion of sadness, for example, "He was feeling blue".
*In German, to be "blue" (blau sein) is to be drunk. This derives from the ancient use of urine, particularly the urine of men who had been drinking alcohol in dyeing cloth blue with woad or indigo. Heller, Eva. Wie Farben wirken: Farbpsychologie, Farbsymbolik, kreative Farbgestaltung. Berlin: Rowohlt, 2004. It may also be in relation to rain, which is usually regarded as a trigger of depressive emotions. Top 10 weather complaints 
*Blue can sometimes represent happiness and optimism in popular songs, Psychology of Color usually referring to blue skies. "Put on a Happy Face" lyrics 
*In German, a person who regularly looks upon the world with a blue eye is a person who is rather naive. Eva Heller, Psychologie de la couleur - effets et symboliques, (pg. 36) 

*Blue is commonly used in the Western hemisphere to symbolise boys, in contrast to pink used for girls. In the early 1900s, blue was the colour for girls, since it had traditionally been the colour of the Virgin Mary in Western Art, while pink was for boys (as it was akin to the colour red, considered a masculine colour). 
*In China, the colour blue is commonly associated with torment, ghosts, and death. Anne Varichon, Couleurs - Pigments et teintures dans les mains des peuples, pg. 178 In a traditional Chinese opera, a character with a face powdered blue is a villain. Eva Heller, Psychologie de la couleur - effets et symboliques (pg. 38) 
*In Turkey and Central Asia, blue is the colour of mourning. 
*The men of the Tuareg people in North Africa wear a blue turban called a tagelmust, which protects them from the sun and wind-blown sand of the Sahara desert. It is coloured with indigo. Instead of using dye, which uses precious water, the tagelmust is coloured by pounding it with powdered indigo. The blue colour transfers to the skin, where it is seen as a sign of nobility and affluence. Early visitors called them the "Blue Men" of the Sahara. The Sahara's Tuareg - Pictures, More From National Geographic Magazine 
*In the culture of the Hopi people of the American southwest, blue symbolised the west, which was seen as the house of death. A dream about a person carrying a blue feather was considered a very bad omen. 
* In Thailand, blue is associated with Friday on the Thai solar calendar. Anyone may wear blue on Fridays and anyone born on a Friday may adopt blue as their colour.

File:Targui.jpg|A man of the Tuareg people of North Africa wears a tagelmust or turban dyed with indigo. The indigo stains their skin blue; they were known by early visitors as "the blue men" of the desert.

===As a national and international colour===
Various shades of blue are used as the national colours for many nations.
* Azure, a light blue, is the national colour of Italy (from the livery colour of the former reigning family, the House of Savoy). National sport clubs are known as the Azzurri.
* Blue and white are the national colours of Scotland, Argentina, El Salvador, Finland, Greece, Guatemala, Honduras, Israel, Micronesia, Nicaragua and Somalia, are the ancient national colours of Portugal and are the colours of the United Nations.
* Blue, white and yellow are the national colours of Bosnia and Herzegovina, Kosovo and Uruguay.
* Blue, white and green are the national colours of Sierra Leone.
* Blue, white and black are the national colours of Estonia. "Estonia in brief: National Symbols" at Estonica website Estonica.org 
* Blue and yellow are the national colours of Barbados, Kazakhstan, Palau, Sweden, and Ukraine.
* Blue, yellow and green are the national colours of Brazil, Gabon, and Rwanda.
* Blue, yellow and red are the national colours of Chad, Colombia, Ecuador, Moldova, Romania, and Venezuela.
* Blue and red are the national colours of Haiti and Liechtenstein.
* Blue, red and white are the national colours of Cambodia, Costa Rica, Chile, Croatia, Cuba, the Czech Republic, the Dominican Republic, France, Iceland, North Korea, Laos, Liberia, Luxembourg, Nepal, the Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Panama, Paraguay, Puerto Rico, Russia, Samoa, Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia, Thailand, the United Kingdom, and the United States.
* Blue, called St. Patrick's blue, is a traditional colour of Ireland, and appears on the Arms of Ireland.

===Politics===

*In the Byzantine Empire, the Blues and the Greens were the most prominent political factions in the capital. They took their names from the colours of the two most popular chariot racing teams at the Hippodrome of Constantinople. Edward Gibbon, The Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire (abridged edition), Harcourt, Brace and Company, New York, (1960), pg. 554. 
*The word blue was used in England the 17th century as a disparaging reference to rigid moral codes and those who observed them, particularly in blue-stocking, a reference to Oliver Cromwell's supporters in the parliament of 1653.
*In the middle of the 18th century, blue was the colour of Tory party, then the opposition party in England, Scotland and Ireland, which supported the British monarch and power of the landed aristocracy, while the ruling Whigs had orange as their colour. Flags of the two colours are seen over a polling station in the series of prints by William Hogarth called Humours of an election, made in 175455. Blue remains the colour of the Conservative Party of the UK today.

*By the time of the American Revolution, The Tories were in power and blue and buff had become the colours of the opposition Whigs, They were the subject of a famous toast to Whig politicians by Mrs. Crewe in 1784; "Buff and blue and all of you." They also became the colours of the American patriots in the American Revolution, who had strong Whig sympathies, and of the uniforms of Continental Army led by George Washington. | Colour, light and shade blog on political colours 
*During the French Revolution and the revolt in the Vende that followed, blue was the colour worn by the soldiers of the Revolutionary government, while the royalists wore white.
*The Breton blues were members of a liberal, anti-clerical political movement in Brittany in the late 19th century.
*The blueshirts were members of an extreme right paramilitary organization active in Ireland during the 1930s.
*Blue is associated with numerous centre-right liberal political parties in Europe, including the People's Party for Freedom and Democracy (Netherlands), the Reformist Movement and Open VLD (Belgium), the Democratic Party (Luxembourg), Liberal Party (Denmark) and Liberal People's Party (Sweden).
*Blue is the colour of the Conservative Party in Britain and Conservative Party of Canada.
*In the United States, television commentators use the term "blue states" for those states which traditionally vote for the Democratic Party in presidential elections, and "red states" for those which vote Republican. 
*In Qubec Province of Canada, the Blues are those who support sovereignty for Quebec, as opposed to the Federalists. It is the colour of the Parti qubcois and the Parti libral du Qubec.
*Blue is the colour of the New Progressive Party of Puerto Rico.
*In Brazil, blue states are the ones in which the Social Democratic Party has the majority, in opposition to the Workers' Party, usually represented by red.
*A blue law is a type of law, typically found in the United States and Canada, designed to enforce religious standards, particularly the observance of Sunday as a day of worship or rest, and a restriction on Sunday shopping.
*The Blue House is the residence of the President of South Korea. 

File:William Hogarth 031.jpg|An illustration by William Hogarth from 1854 shows a polling station with the blue flag of the Tory party and the orange flag of the Whigs. 
File:David Cameron at the 37th G8 Summit in Deauville 104.jpg| The blue necktie of British Prime Minister David Cameron represents his Conservative Party.
File:Red state, blue state.svg|A map of the U.S. showing the blue states, which voted for the Democratic candidate in all the last four Presidential elections, and the red states, which voted for the Republican.

===Religion===
* Blue is associated in Christianity generally and Catholicism in particular, with the Virgin Mary. Your question answered 
* Blue in Hinduism: Many of the gods are depicted as having blue-coloured skin, particularly those associated with Vishnu, who is said to be the Preserver of the world and thus intimately connected to water. Krishna and Ram, Vishnu's avatars, are usually blue. Shiva, the Destroyer, is also depicted in light blue tones and is called neela kantha, or blue-throated, for having swallowed poison in an attempt to turn the tide of a battle between the gods and demons in the gods' favour. Blue is used to symbolically represent the fifth, throat chakra (Vishuddha). Stevens, Samantha. The Seven Rays: a Universal Guide to the Archangels. Toronto: Insomniac Press, 2004. ISBN 1-894663-49-7. pg. 24. 
* Blue in Judaism: In the Torah, Numbers 15:38. the Israelites were commanded to put fringes, tzitzit, on the corners of their garments, and to weave within these fringes a "twisted thread of blue (tekhelet)". Tekhelet.com, the Ptil Tekhelet Organization In ancient days, this blue thread was made from a dye extracted from a Mediterranean snail called the hilazon. Maimonides claimed that this blue was the colour of "the clear noonday sky"; Rashi, the colour of the evening sky. Mishneh Torah, Tzitzit 2:1; Commentary on Numbers 15:38. According to several rabbinic sages, blue is the colour of God's Glory. Numbers Rabbah 14:3; Hullin 89a. Staring at this colour aids in mediation, bringing us a glimpse of the "pavement of sapphire, like the very sky for purity", which is a likeness of the Throne of God. Exodus 24:10; Ezekiel 1:26; Hullin 89a. (The Hebrew word for glory.) Many items in the Mishkan, the portable sanctuary in the wilderness, such as the menorah, many of the vessels, and the Ark of the Covenant, were covered with blue cloth when transported from place to place. Numbers 4:612. 

File:Western Wall - by Jacob Rask.jpg| Blue stripes on a traditional Jewish tallit. The blue stripes are also featured in the flag of Israel.
File:Munneswaram Vishnu.jpg|Vishnu, the supreme god of Hinduism, is often portrayed as being blue, or more precisely having skin the colour of rain-filled clouds.
File:Gentile, polittico di valle romita, crocefissione, brera, milano.jpg|In Catholicism, blue became the traditional colour of the robes of the Virgin Mary in the 13th century.
File:MedecineBuddha.JPG |The Bhaisajyaguru, or "Medicine Master of Lapis Lazuli Light", is the Buddha of healing and medicine in Mahayana Buddhism. He traditionally holds a lapis lazuli jar of medicine. 
File:Iranian Tiles 1.JPG|In the Islamic World, blue and turquoise tile traditionally decorates the facades and exteriors of mosques and other religious buildings. This mosque is in Isfahan, Iran.

===Gender===
Blue was first used as a gender signifier just prior to World War I (for either girls or boys), and first established as a male gender signifier in the 1940s. Smithsonian, When Did Girls Start Wearing Pink?, April 2011 

===Music===
*The blues is a popular musical form created in the United States in the 19th century by African-American musicians, based on African musical roots. Kunzler's dictionary of Jazz provides two separate entries: blues, an originally African-American genre (p.128), and the blues form, a widespread musical form (p.131). It usually expresses sadness and melancholy.
*A blue note is a musical note sung or played at a slightly lower pitch than the major scale for expressive purposes, giving it a slightly melancholy sound. It is frequently used in jazz and the blues. Benward & Saker (2003). Music: In Theory and Practice, Vol. I, p.359. Seventh Edition. ISBN 978-0-07-294262-0. 

*Bluegrass is a sub-genre of American country music, born in Kentucky and the mountains of Appalachia. It has its roots in the traditional folk music of the Scottish, and Irish. Robert Cantwell, Bluegrass Breakdown: The Making of the Old Southern Sound (University of Illinois Press, 2002), pgs 6566. 

===Associations and sayings===
*Surveys in Europe and the United States regularly find that blue is the favourite colour of respondents, who associate it more than any other colour with sympathy, harmony, faithfulness, friendship and confidence. For example, a survey taken in Germany and published in 2009 found that blue was the favourite colour of 46 per cent of male respondents and 44 per cent of women. 
*True blue is an expression in the United States which means faithful and loyal.
*In Britain, a bride in a wedding is encouraged to wear "Something old, something new, something borrowed, something blue," as a sign of loyalty and faithfulness. A blue sapphire engagement ring is also considered a symbol of fidelity. Eva Heller (2009), Psychologie de la Couleur, pg. 1415. 
*Blue is often associated with excellence, distinction and high performance. The Queen of the United Kingdom and the Chancellor of Germany often wear a blue sash at formal occasions. In the United States, the blue ribbon is usually the highest award in expositions and county fairs. The Blue Riband was a trophy and flag given to the fastest transatlantic steamships in the 19th and 20th century. A blue-ribbon panel is a group of top-level experts selected to examine a subject.
*A blue chip stock is a stock in a company with a reputation for quality and reliability in good times and bad. The term was invented in the New York Stock Exchange in 1923 or 1924, and comes from poker, where the highest value chips are blue. 
*Someone with blue blood is a member of the nobility. The term comes from the Spanish sangre azul, and is said to refer to the pale skin and prominent blue veins of Spanish nobles. Eva Heller, Psychologie de la couleur- effets et symboliques, (pg. 3738) 
*Blue is also associated with labour and the working class. It is the common colour of overalls blue jeans and other working costumes. In the United States "blue collar" workers refers to those who, in either skilled or unskilled jobs, work with their hands and do not wear business suits ("White collar" workers).
*Blue is traditionally associated with the sea and the sky, with infinity and distance. The uniforms of sailors are usually dark blue, those of air forces lighter blue. The expression "The wild blue yonder refers to the sky. 
*Blue is associated with cold water taps which are traditionally marked with blue.
*Bluestocking was an unflattering expression in the 18th century for upper-class women who cared about culture and intellectual life and disregarded fashion. It originally referred to men and women who wore plain blue wool stockings instead of the black silk stockings worn in society. 
*Blue is often associated with melancholy- having the "blues".

File:Carle Vanloo, La Marquise de Pompadour en jardinire (vers 17541755).jpg|Madame Pompadour, the mistress of King Louis XV of France, wore blue myosotis, or forget-me-not flowers in her hair and on her gowns as a symbol of faithfulness to the King.

==Sports==
Many sporting teams make blue their official colour, or use it as detail on kit of a different colour. In addition, the colour is present on the logos of many sports associations.

===The blues of antiquity===
*In the late Roman Empire, during the time of Caligula, Nero and the emperors who followed, the Blues were a popular chariot racing team which competed in the Circus Maximus in Rome against the Greens, the Reds and Whites. 

*In the Byzantine Empire, The Blues and Greens were the two most popular chariot racing teams which competed in the Hippodrome of Constantinople. Each was connected with a powerful political faction, and disputes between the Green and Blue supporters often became violent. After one competition in 532 AD, during the reign of the Emperor Justinian, riots between the two factions broke out, during which the cathedral and much of the centre of Constantinople were burned, and more than thirty thousand people were killed. Edward Gibbon, Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire, Chapter 40, pg. 556559. (See Nika riots)

===Association football===
In international association football, blue is a common colour on kits, as a majority of nations wear the colours of their national flag. A notable exception is four-time FIFA World Cup winners Italy, who wear a blue kit based on the Azzuro Savoia (Savoy blue) of the royal House of Savoy which unified the Italian states. The team themselves are known as Gli Azzurri (the Blues). Another World Cup winning nation with a blue shirt is France, who are known as Les Bleus (the Blues). Two neighbouring countries with two World Cup victories each, Argentina and Uruguay wear a light blue shirt, the former with white stripes. Uruguay are known as the La Celeste, Spanish for 'the sky blue one', while Argentina are known as Los Albicelestes, Spanish for 'the sky blue and whites'. 

Football clubs which have won the European Cup or Champions League and wear blue include FC Barcelona of Spain (red and blue stripes), FC Internazionale Milano of Italy (blue and black stripes) and FC Porto of Portugal (blue and white stripes). Another European Cup-winning club, Aston Villa of England, wear light blue detailing on a mostly claret shirt, often as the colour of the sleeves. Clubs which have won the Copa Libertadores, a tournament for South American clubs, and wear blue include six-time winners Boca Juniors of Buenos Aires, Argentina. They wear a blue shirt with a yellow band across.

Blue features on the logo of football's governing body FIFA, as well as featuring highly in the design of their website. The European governing body of football, UEFA, uses two tones of blue to create a map of Europe in the centre of their logo. The Asian Football Confederation, Oceania Football Confederation and CONCACAF (the governing body of football in North and Central America and the Caribbean) use blue text on their logos.

===North American sporting leagues===

In Major League Baseball, the premier baseball league in the United States of America and Canada, blue is one of the three colours, along with white and red, on the league's official logo. A team from Toronto, Ontario, are the Blue Jays. The Los Angeles Dodgers use blue prominently on their uniforms and the phrase "Dodger Blue" is may be said to describe Dodger fans' "blood". The Texas Rangers also use Blue prominently on their uniforms and logo.

The National Basketball Association, the premier basketball league in the United States and Canada, also has blue as one of the colours on their logo, along with red and white also, as does its female equivalent, the WNBA. The Sacramento Monarchs of the WNBA wear blue. Former NBA player Theodore Edwards was nicknamed "Blue". The only NBA teams to wear blue as first choice are the Charlotte Bobcats and the Indiana Pacers; however, blue is a common away colour for many other franchises.

The National Football League, the premier American football league in the United States, also uses blue as one of three colours, along with white and red, on their official logo. The Seattle Seahawks, New York Giants, Buffalo Bills, Indianapolis Colts, New England Patriots, Tennessee Titans, Denver Broncos, Houston Texans, San Diego Chargers, Dallas Cowboys, Chicago Bears and Detroit Lions feature blue prominently on their uniforms.

The National Hockey League, the premier Ice hockey league in Canada and the United States, uses blue on its official logo. Blue is the main colour of many teams in the league: the Buffalo Sabres, Columbus Blue Jackets, Edmonton Oilers, New York Islanders, New York Rangers, St. Louis Blues, Toronto Maple Leafs, Tampa Bay Lightning, Vancouver Canucks and the Winnipeg Jets.

Image:Italia v Francia Mondiale 1978.jpg|The Italian national football team wear blue in honour of the royal House of Savoy which unified the country.
Image:Chris Paul.jpg|The New Orleans Hornets, a National Basketball Association franchise from New Orleans, Louisiana, United States, wear blue as an away colour.

==See also==
* Blue Flag (disambiguation)
* Blue movie (disambiguation)
* Blue Screen of Death
* Blue (university sport)
* Distinguishing "blue" from "green" in language
* Engineer's blue
* List of colours
* Non-photo blue

==References==

===Notes and citations===

===Bibliography===
* (page numbers refer to the French translation).
*
*Pastoureau, Michel, Bleu- Histoire d'une couleur, (2000), Editions du Seuil, Paris, (ISBN 978-2-02-086991-1)
*
*
*Vachiron, Anne, Couleurs-pigments et teintures dans les mains des peuples Editions du Seuil, Paris, (2005) (ISBN 978-2-02-08469-4)
*Heller, Eva, Psychologie de la coulour -effets at symboliques, (2009), Pyramyd, Munich, ISBN 978-2-35017-156-2
*Mollo, John, Uniforms of The American Revolution in Color. (1991), Illustrated by Malcolm McGregor. Stirling Publications, New York, NY, ISBN 0-8069-8240-3.
*

== External links ==
*
*

 


[[Blind Willie McTell]]

Blind Willie McTell (born William Samuel McTier; May 5, 1898  August 19, 1959) was a Piedmont and ragtime blues singer and guitarist. He played with a fluid, syncopated fingerstyle guitar technique, common among many exponents of Piedmont blues, although, unlike his contemporaries, he came to use twelve-string guitars exclusively. McTell was also an adept slide guitarist, unusual among ragtime bluesmen. His vocal style, a smooth and often laid-back tenor, differed greatly from many of the harsher voice types employed by Delta bluesmen, such as Charley Patton. McTell embodied a variety of musical styles, including blues, ragtime, religious music and hokum.

Born in the town of Thomson, Georgia, McTell learned how to play guitar in his early teens. He soon became a street performer around several Georgia cities including Atlanta and Augusta, and first recorded in 1927 for Victor Records. Although he never produced a major hit record, McTell's recording career was prolific, recording for different labels under different names throughout the 1920s and 30s. In 1940, he was recorded by folklorist John A. Lomax and Ruby Terrill Lomax for the Library of Congress's folk song archive. He would remain active throughout the 1940s and 50s, playing on the streets of Atlanta, often with his longtime associate, Curley Weaver. Twice more he recorded professionally. McTell's last recordings originated during an impromptu session recorded by an Atlanta record store owner in 1956. McTell would die three years later after suffering for years from diabetes and alcoholism. Despite his mainly failed releases, McTell was one of the few archaic blues musicians that would actively play and record during the 1940s and 50s. However, McTell never lived to be "rediscovered" during the imminent American folk music revival, as many other bluesmen would. 

McTell's influence extended over a wide variety of artists, including The Allman Brothers Band, who famously covered McTell's "Statesboro Blues", and Bob Dylan, who paid tribute to McTell in his 1983 song "Blind Willie McTell"; the refrain of which is, "And I know no one can sing the blues, like Blind Willie McTell". Other artists influenced by McTell include Taj Mahal, Alvin Youngblood Hart, Ralph McTell, Chris Smither and The White Stripes.

==Biography==
Born William Samuel McTier Conner, Patrick. "Blind Willie McTell". East Coast Piedmont Blues. University of North Carolina. Retrieved 2011-06-30. in Thomson, Georgia, blind in one eye, McTell had lost his remaining vision by late childhood. He attended schools for the blind in the states of Georgia, New York and Michigan and showed proficiency in music from an early age, first playing harmonica and accordion, learning to read and write music in Braille, and turning to the six-string guitar in his early teens. Jacobs, Hal. "Blind Willie McTell". The New Georgia Encyclopedia. 2009-11-03. Retrieved 2011-06-30. His family background was rich in music, both of his parents and an uncle played guitar; he is also a relation of bluesman and gospel pioneer Thomas A. Dorsey. His father left the family when McTell was still young, and, when his mother died in the 1920s, he left his hometown and became a wandering musician, or "songster". He began his recording career in 1927 for Victor Records in Atlanta. Justin Green  Musical Legends (ISBN 0-86719-587-8) 

McTell married Ruth Kate Williams, now better known as Kate McTell, in 1934. She accompanied him on stage and on several recordings before becoming a nurse in 1939. Most of their marriage from 1942 until his death was spent apart, with her living in Fort Gordon near Augusta and him working around Atlanta.

In the years before World War II, McTell traveled and performed widely, recording for a number of labels under many different names, including Blind Willie McTell (Victor and Decca), Blind Sammie (Columbia), Georgia Bill (Okeh), Hot Shot Willie (Victor), Blind Willie (Vocalion and Bluebird), Barrelhouse Sammie (Atlantic), and Pig & Whistle Red (Regal). The "Pig 'n Whistle" appellation was a reference to a chain of Atlanta barbecue restaurants, one of which was located on the south side of East Ponce de Leon between Boulevard and Moreland Avenue, which later became a Krispy Kreme. McTell would frequently played for tips in the parking lot of this location. He was also known to play behind the nearby building that later became Ray Lee's Blue Lantern Lounge. Like his fellow songster Lead Belly, who began his career as a street artist, McTell favored the somewhat unwieldy and unusual twelve-string guitar, whose greater volume made it suitable for outdoor playing.

In 1940 John A. Lomax and his wife, Ruby Terrill Lomax, Classics professor at the University of Texas at Austin, interviewed and recorded McTell for the Library of Congress's Folk Song Archive in a two-hour session held in their hotel room in Atlanta, Georgia. These recordings document McTell's distinctive musical style, which bridges the gap between the raw country blues of the early part of the 20th century and the more conventionally melodious, Ragtime-influenced East-Coast Piedmont blues sound. Mr. and Mrs. Lomax also elicited from the singer a number of traditional songs (such as "The Boll Weevil" and "John Henry") as well as spirituals (such as "Amazing Grace"), which were not part of his usual commercial repertoire. In the interview, John A. Lomax is heard asking if McTell knows any "complaining" songs (an earlier term for protest songs), to which the singer replies somewhat uncomfortably and evasively that he does not. The Library of Congress paid McTell $10, the equivalent of $154.56 in 2011, for this two-hour session. The material from this 1940 session was issued in 1960 in LP and later in CD form, under the somewhat misleading title of "The Complete Library of Congress Recordings", notwithstanding the fact that it was in fact truncated, in that it omitted some of John A. Lomax's interactions with the singer and cut out entirely the contributions of Ruby Terrill Lomax. McTell's biographer, Michael Gray attributes these omissions to then folklore archivist Rae Korson, who was evidently hostile to his New Deal folklore predecessors at the library: "The widely sold version of the McTell-Lomax sessions deletes conversations and information, removes Ruby Lomax from the room almost entirely  making John Lomax seem to monopolize things and keep her silent, which he doesnt at all  and robs Lomax of several touches of warmth and humanity, including questions asked by Ruby Terrill and John Lomax," see Michael Gray, Hand Me My Travelin Shoes: In Search of Blind Willie McTell (Chicago Review Press, 2009), p. 273. 

Postwar, McTell recorded for Atlantic Records and Regal Records in 1949, but these recordings met with less commercial success than his previous works. He continued to perform around Atlanta, but his career was cut short by ill health, predominantly diabetes and alcoholism. In 1956, an Atlanta record store manager, Edward Rhodes, discovered McTell playing in the street for quarters and enticed him with a bottle of corn liquor into his store, where he captured a few final performances on a tape recorder. These were released posthumously on Prestige/Bluesville Records as Last Session. Beginning in 1957, McTell occupied himself as a preacher at Atlanta's Mt. Zion Baptist Church. 

McTell died in Milledgeville, Georgia, of a stroke in 1959. He was buried at Jones Grove Church, near Thomson, Georgia, his birthplace. A fan paid to have a gravestone erected on his resting place. The name given on his gravestone is Eddie McTier. He was inducted into the Blues Foundation's Hall of Fame in 1981, Blues Foundation :: Inductees and into the Georgia Music Hall of Fame in 1990. 

==Influence==

Label of one of McTell's most notable works, "Statesboro Blues".
One of McTell's most famous songs, "Statesboro Blues," was frequently covered by The Allman Brothers Band and is considered one of their earliest signature songs. A short list of some of the artists who also perform it includes Taj Mahal, David Bromberg, The Devil Makes Three and Ralph McTell, who changed his name on account of liking the song. Hockenhull, Chris. "Streets of London: The Official Biography of Ralph McTell", p. 40. Northdown, 1997. ISBN 1-900711-02-8. Ry Cooder covered McTell's "Married Man's a Fool" on his 1973 album, Paradise and Lunch. Jack White of The White Stripes considers McTell an influence, as their 2000 album De Stijl was dedicated to him and featured a cover of his song "Southern Can Is Mine". The White Stripes also covered McTell's "Lord, Send Me an Angel", releasing it as a single in 2000. In 2013 Jack White's Third Man Records teamed up with Document Records to reissue The Complete Recorded Works in Chronological Order of Charley Patton, Blind Willie McTell and The Mississippi Sheiks.

Bob Dylan has paid tribute to McTell on at least four occasions: Firstly, in his 1965 song "Highway 61 Revisited", the second verse begins with "Georgia Sam he had a bloody nose", referring to one of Blind Willie McTell's many recording names; later in his song "Blind Willie McTell", recorded in 1983 but released in 1991 on The Bootleg Series Volumes 1-3; then with covers of McTell's "Broke Down Engine" and "Delia" on his 1993 album, World Gone Wrong; In his liner notes for World Gone Wrong, Dylan wrote: "'Broke Down Engine' is a Blind Willie McTell masterpiece ... it's about Ambiguity, the fortunes of the privileged elite, flood control  watching the red dawn not bothering to dress.(sic)" also, in his song "Po' Boy", on 2001's "Love & Theft", which contains the lyric, "had to go to Florida dodging them Georgia laws", which comes from McTell's "Kill It Kid". Kill it Kid, Last Session, Bluesville BV 1040, Released 1962 

Also, Bath-based band "Kill It Kid" is named after that song.

A blues bar in Atlanta is named after McTell and regularly features blues musicians and bands. The Blind Willie McTell Blues Festival is held annually in Thomson, Georgia. Blindwillieblues.com 

==Discography==

===Singles===

 Year A-side B-side Label Cat. # Moniker Note 
 1927 \"Stole Rider Blues\" \"Mr. McTell Got The Blues\" Victor 21124 Blind Willie McTell 
 \"Writing Paper Blues\" \"Mamma, Tain't Long Fo' Day\" 21474 
 1928 \"Three Women Blues\" \"Statesboro Blues\" V38001 
 \"Dark Night Blues\" \"Loving Talking Blues\" V38032 
 1929 \"Atlanta Strut\" \"Kind Mama\" Columbia 14657-D Blind Sammie 
 \"Travelin' Blues\" \"Come on Around to My House Mama\" 14484-D 
 \"Drive Away Blues\" \"Love Changing Blues\" Victor V38580 Blind Willie McTell 
 1930 \"Talking To Myself\" \"Razor Ball\" Columbia 14551-D Blind Sammie 
 1931 \"Southern Can Is Mine\" \"Broke Down Engine Blues\" 14632-D 
 \"Low Rider's Blues\" \"Georgia Rag\" OKeh 8924 Georgia Bill 
 \"Stomp Down Rider\" \"Scarey Day Blues\" 8936 
 1932 \"Mama, Let Me Scoop For You\" \"Rollin' Mama Blues\" Victor 23328 Hot Shot Willie *w/Ruby Glaze 
 \"Lonesome Day Blues\" \"Searching The Desert for the Blues\" 23353 
 1933 \"Savannah Mama\" \"B And O Blues No. 2\" Vocalion 02568 Blind Willie 
 \"Broke Down Engine\" \"Death Cell Blues\" 02577 
 \"Warm It Up To Me\" \"Runnin' Me Crazy\" 02595 
 \"It's A Good Little Thing\" \"Southern Can Mama\" 02622 
 \"Lord Have Mercy, If You Please\" \"Don't You See How This World Made A Change\" 02623 *w/\"Partner\" (Curley Weaver) 
 \"My Baby's Gone\" \"Weary Hearted Blues\" 02668 
 1935 \"Bell Street Blues\" \"Ticket Agent Blues\" Decca 7078 Blind Willie McTell *w/Kate McTell 
 \"Dying Gambler\" \"God Don't Like It\" 7093 
 \"Ain't It Grand To Be A Christian\" \"We Got To Meet Death One Day\" 7130 
 \"Your Time To Worry\" \"Hillbilly Willie's Blues\" 7117 
 \"Cold Winter Day\" \"Lay Some Flowers on My Grave\" 7117 
 1950 \"Kill It Kid\" \"Broke-Down Engine Blues\" Atlantic 891 Barrelhouse Sammy 
 \"River Jordan\" \"How About You\" Regal 3260 Blind Willie 
 \"It's My Desire\" \"Hide Me in Thy Bosom\" 3272 
 \"Love Changing Blues\" \"Talkin' To You Mama\" 3277 Willie Samuel McTell *w/Curley Weaver*attributed to \"Pig and Whistle Band\" 

;As an accompanist

 Year Artist A-side B-side Label Cat. # Note 
 1927 Alfoncy and Bethenea Harris \"Teasing Brown\" \"This Is Not The Stove To Brown Your Bread\" Victor V38594 
 1931 Ruth Day \"Experience Blues\" \"Painful Blues\" Columbia 14642-D 
 1931 Mary Willis \"Rough Alley Blues\" \"Low Down Blues\" OKeh 8921 
 \"Talkin' To You Wimmin' About The Blues\" \"Merciful Blues\" 8932 
 1935 Curley Weaver \"Tricks Ain't Walking No More\" \"Early Morning Blues\" Decca 7077 
 \"Sometime Mama\" \"Two-Faced Woman\" 7906 *McTell plays only on B-side 
 \"Oh Lawdy Mama\" \"Fried Pie Blues\" 7664 
 1949 \"My Baby's Gone\" \"Ticket Agent\" Sittin' In With 547 

===Long-plays===

 Year Title Label Cat. # Note 
 1961 Last Session Bluesville BV 1040 *recorded in 1956 
 1966 Blind Willie McTell: 1940 Melodeon MLP 7323 *subtitled The Legendary Library of Congress Session*recorded in 1940 

===Selected compilations===
*Blind Willie McTell 19271933: The Early Years  Yazoo L-1005 (1968)
*Blind Willie McTell 1949: Trying To Get Home  Biograph BLP-12008 (1969)
*King of the Georgia Blues Singers (19291935)  Roots RL-324 (1969)
*Atlanta Twelve String  Atlantic SD-7224 (1972)
*Death Cell Blues  Biograph BLP-C-14 (1973)
*Blind Willie McTell: 19271935  Yazoo L-1037 (1974)
*Blind Willie McTell: 19271949 The Remaining Titles  Wolf WSE 102 (1982)
*Blues in the Dark  MCA 1368 (1983)
*Complete Recorded Works in Chronological Order, Vol. 1  Document DOCD-5006 (1990)
*Complete Recorded Works in Chronological Order, Vol. 2  Document DOCD-5007 (1990)
*Complete Recorded Works in Chronological Order, Vol. 3  Document DOCD-5008 (1990)
**these three albums were issued together as the box-set Statesboro Blues  Document DOCD-5677 (1990)
*Complete Library of Congress Recordings in Chronological Order  RST Blues Documents BDCD-6001 (1990)
*Pig 'n Whistle Red  Biograph BCD 126 (1993)
*The Definitive Blind Willie McTell  Legacy C2K-53234 (1994)
*The Classic Years 19271940  JSP JSP7711 (2003)
*King of the Georgia Blues  Snapper SBLUECD504X (2007)

===Selected compilation inclusions===
*Blind Willie McTell/Memphis Minnie: Love Changin' Blues  Biograph BLP-12035 (1971)
*Atlanta Blues 1933  JEMF 106 (1979)
*Blind Willie McTell and Curley Weaver: The Post-War Years  RST Blues Documents BDCD 6014 (1990)
*Classic Blues Artwork from the 1920's  Vol. 5  Blues Images  BIM-105 (2007)

==Notes==

==Bibliography==
*Bastin, Bruce. Red River Blues: The Blues Tradition in the Southeast. Urbana and Chicago: University of Illinois Press, 1986/1995. ISBN 0-252-06521-2, ISBN 978-0-252-06521-7
*Charters, Samuel, Editor. Sweet as the Showers of Rain. Oak Publications, 1977, pp, 120131.
*Gray, Michael. Hand Me My Travelin' Shoes: In Search of Blind Willie McTell Chicago Review Press, 2009.

==External links==
* New Georgia Encyclopedia  Blind Willie McTell article
* Illustrated Blind Willie McTell discography
* 
* Blind Willie's gravesite
* "Statesboro Blues" MP3 file on the Internet Archive
* David Fulmer, producer "Blind Willie's Blues" Documentary film, 1996
* "The Dying Crapshooter's Blues" Novel by David Fulmer featuring McTell as a character
* John May interviews biographer Michael Gray
* Review of Hand Me My Travelin' Shoes: In Search of Blind Willie McTell by Michael Gray



[[BDSM]]

BDSM is a variety of erotic practices involving dominance and submission, role-playing, restraint, and other interpersonal dynamics. Given the wide range of practices, some of which may be engaged in by people who do not consider themselves as practicing BDSM, inclusion in the BDSM community and/or subculture is usually dependent on self-identification and shared experience. Interest in BDSM can range from one-time experimentation to a lifestyle, and there is debate over whether a BDSM or kink sexual identity also constitutes a form of sexual orientation.

The BDSM initialism
The term BDSM dates back to 1969; however, the origin of the term BDSM is unclear and is believed to have been formed either from joining the term B&D (bondage and discipline) with S&M (sadomasochism or sadism and masochism), or as a compound initialism from B&D, D&S (dominance and submission), and S&M. Regardless of its origin, BDSM is used as a catch-all phrase to include a wide range of activities, forms of interpersonal relationships, and distinct subcultures. BDSM communities generally welcome anyone with a non-normative streak who identifies with the community; this may include cross-dressers, extreme body mod enthusiasts, animal players, latex or rubber aficionados, and others.

Unlike the usual "power neutral" relationships and play styles commonly followed by couples, activities and relationships within a BDSM context are often characterized by the participants' taking on complementary, but unequal roles; thus, the idea of informed consent of both the partners becomes essential. Participants who exert sexual control over their partners are known as dominants or tops while participants who take the passive, receiving, or obedient role are known as submissives or bottoms.

Individuals are also sometimes abbreviated when referred to in writing, so a dominant person may be referred to as a Dom for a man, and a Domme for a woman. Individuals who can change between top/dominant and bottom/submissive roleswhether from relationship to relationship or within a given relationshipare known as switches, though the term switch in this context is occasionally seen as derogatory and is rejected by many who might simplistically fit the definition. The precise definition of roles and self-identification is a common subject of debate, reflection, and discussion within the community. 

== Fundamentals ==

A woman is chained to the wall in bondage.
A man handcuffed to a bed and blindfolded.

BDSM has become an umbrella term for certain kinds of erotic behavior between consenting adults. There are various subcultures under this umbrella term and distinct difference between these subcultures. Terminology for roles varies widely within the various BDSM subcultures. Top and dominant are widely recognized for those partner(s) in the relationship or activity who are, respectively, the physically active or controlling participants. Bottom and submissive are widely recognized terms for those partner(s) in the relationship or activity who are, respectively, the physically receptive or controlled participants. The interaction between tops and bottomswhere physical and/or mental control of the bottom is surrendered to the topis sometimes known as power exchange, whether in the context of an encounter or a relationship.

BDSM actions can often take place during a specific period of time agreed to by both parties, referred to as "play", "a scene" or "a session". Participants usually derive pleasure from this, even though many of the practicessuch as inflicting pain or humiliation or being restrainedwould be unpleasant under other circumstances. Explicit sexual activity, such as sexual penetration, may occur within a session, but is not essential. Phillip Miller, Molly Devon, William A. Granzig : Screw the Roses, Send Me the Thorns: The Romance and Sexual Sorcery of Sadomasochism., page 55, Mystic Rose Books 1995, ISBN 978-0-9645960-0-9 Such explicit sexual interaction is seen only rarely in public play spaces, and it is sometimes specifically banned by the rules of a party or playspace. Whether it is a public "playspace"ranging from a party at an established community dungeon to a hosted play "zone" at a nightclub or social eventthe parameters of allowance can vary. Some restrict a policy of panties/nipple tape for females (underwear for men) and some allow full nudity with explicit sexual interaction allowed.

The fundamental principles for the exercise of BDSM require that it should be performed with the informed consent of all involved parties. Since the 1980s, many practitioners and organizations have adopted the motto (originally from the statement of purpose of GMSMAa gay SM activist organization) "safe, sane and consensual", commonly abbreviated as "SSC", which means that everything is based on safe activities, that all participants be of sufficiently sound/sane mind to consent, and that all participants do consent. Bill Henkin, Sybil Holiday: Consensual Sadomasochism : How to Talk About It and How to Do It Safely, Page 64, Publisher: Daedalus Publishing Company 2006, ISBN 978-1-881943-12-9 It is mutual consent that makes a clear legal and ethical distinction between BDSM and such crimes as sexual assault or domestic violence. 

Some BDSM practitioners prefer a code of behavior that differs from "SSC" and is described as "risk aware consensual kink" (RACK), indicating a preference for a style in which the individual responsibility of the involved parties is emphasized more strongly, with each participant being responsible for his or her own well-being. Advocates of RACK argue that SSC can hamper discussion of risk because no activity is truly "safe", and that discussion of even low-risk possibilities is necessary for truly informed consent. They further argue that setting a discrete line between "safe" and "not-safe" activities ideologically denies consenting adults the right to evaluate risks vs rewards for themselves; that some adults will be drawn to certain activities regardless of the risk; and that BDSM playparticularly higher-risk play or edgeplayshould be treated with the same regard as extreme sports, with both respect and the demand that practitioners educate themselves and practice the higher-risk activities to decrease risk. RACK may be seen as focusing primarily upon awareness and informed consent, rather than accepted safe practices. Consent is the most important criterion here. The consent and compliance for a sadomasochistic situation can be granted only by people who can judge the potential results. For their consent, they must have relevant information (extent to which the scene will go, potential risks, if a safeword will be used, what that is, and so on) at hand and the necessary mental capacity to judge. The resulting consent and understanding is occasionally summarized in a written "contract", which is an agreement of what can and cannot take place. Dossie Easton, Janet W. Hardy: The New Topping Book, Greenery Press (CA) 2002, ISBN 978-1-890159-36-8 

In general, BDSM play is usually structured such that it is possible for the consenting partner to withdraw his or her consent during a scene; Dossie Easton, Janet W. Hardy: The New Topping Book. Page 72, Greenery Press (CA) 2002, ISBN 978-1-890159-36-8 for example, by using a safeword that was agreed on in advance. Dossie Easton, Janet W. Hardy: The New Topping Book. Page 71, Greenery Press (CA) 2002 Use of the agreed safeword (or occasionally a "safe symbol" such as dropping a ball or ringing a bell, especially when speech is restricted) is seen by some as an explicit withdrawal of consent. Failure to honor a safeword is considered serious misconduct and could even change the sexual consent situation into a crime, depending on the relevant law, since the bottom has explicitly revoked his or her consent to any actions that follow the use of the safeword (see Legal status). For other scenes, particularly in established relationships, a safeword may be agreed to signify a warning ("this is getting too intense") rather than explicit withdrawal of consent; and a few choose not to use a safeword at all. This is sometimes the case for "punishment scenes" between master/slave couples or for some extreme or edgeplay scenes which may include abductions, rape play, or interrogation. This scene dynamic may be referred to as "consensual nonconsent". In some scenes and/or relationships it may be impossible for consent to be withdrawn in the middle of a scene, or the bottom may have the ability to revoke consent for a relationship as a whole, but not for a particular scene.

===Safety===

Aside from the general advice related to safe sex, BDSM sessions often require a wider array of safety precautions than vanilla sex (sexual behavior without BDSM elements). In theory, to ensure consent related to BDSM activity, pre-play negotiations are commonplace, especially among partners who do not know each other very well. In practice, pick-up scenes at clubs or parties may sometimes be low in negotiation (much as pick-up sex from singles bars may not involve much negotiation or disclosure). Ideally, these negotiations concern the interests and fantasies of each partner and establish a framework. David Stein: S/M's Copernican Revolution:From a Closed World to the Infinite Universe and Safe Sane Consensual: The Evolution of a Shibboleth available at s/m-leather history This kind of discussion is a typical "unique selling proposition" of BDSM sessions and quite commonplace. Bill Henkin, Sybil Holiday: Consensual Sadomasochism : How to Talk About It and How to Do It Safely, pages 8094, Daedalus Publishing Company 1996, ISBN 978-1-881943-12-9 Additionally, safewords are often arranged to provide for an immediate stop of any activity if any participant should so desire. Deborah Cameron, Don Kulick: Language and Sexuality, Page 24, Cambridge University Press 2003, ISBN 978-0-521-00969-0 

Safewords are, by definition, not commonly used words during any kind of play. Words such as no, stop, and don't, are often not appropriate as a safeword if the roleplaying aspect includes the illusion of non-consent. A safeword is a word or phrase, usually something both parties can remember and recognize and not a word that might be used playfully during a scene (such as stop or don't), that is called out when things are either not going as planned or have crossed a threshold one cannot handle. The most commonly used safewords are red and yellow, with red meaning that play must stop immediately, and "yellow" meaning that the activity needs to slow down. Tristan Taormino (Editor): The Ultimate Guide to Kink: BDSM, Role Play and the Erotic Edge, page 26, Cleis Press 2012, ISBN 978-1573447799 At most clubs and group-organized BDSM parties and events, Dungeon monitors (DMs) provide an additional safety net for the people playing there, ensuring that house rules are followed and safewords respected.

BDSM participants ideally are expected to understand practical safety aspects. For instance, they are expected to recognize that parts of the body can be damaged, such as nerves and blood vessels by contusion, or that skin that can be scarred. Using crops, whips, or floggers, the top's fine motor skills and anatomical knowledge can make the difference between a satisfying session for the bottom and a highly unpleasant experience that may even entail severe physical harm. Joseph W. Bean: Flogging, Greenery Press (CA), 2000, ISBN 978-1-890159-27-6 The very broad range of BDSM "toys" and physical and psychological control techniques often requires a far-reaching knowledge of details related to the requirements of the individual session, such as anatomy, physics, and psychology. Jack Rinella: The Toybag Guide Series, Greenery Press (CA), e.g. The Toybag Guide to Hot Wax and Temperature Play, ISBN 978-1-890159-57-3 Arne Hoffmann, Das Lexikon des Sadomasochismus. Der Inside-Fhrer zur dunklen Erotik: Praktiken und Instrumente, Personen und Institutionen, Literatur und Film, Politik und Philosophie., Page 42, Schwarzkopf & Schwarzkopf 2000, ISBN 978-3-89602-290-5 (German) Phillip Miller, Molly Devon, William A. Granzig : Screw the Roses, Send Me the Thorns: The Romance and Sexual Sorcery of Sadomasochism., PP. 95, Mystic Rose Books 1995, ISBN 978-0-9645960-0-9 Despite these risks, BDSM activities usually result in far less severe injuries than sports like boxing and football, and BDSM practitioners do not visit emergency rooms any more often than the general population. 

It is necessary to be able to identify each person's psychological "squicks" or triggers in advance to avoid them. Such losses of emotional balance due to sensory or emotional overload are a fairly commonly discussed issue. It is important to follow participants' reactions empathetically and continue or stop accordingly. Dossie Easton, Janet W. Hardy: The New Topping Book. Page 111 For some players, sparking "freakouts" or deliberately using triggers may be a desired outcome. Safe words are one way for BDSM practices to protect both parties. However, partners should be aware of each other's psychological states and behaviors to prevent instances where the "freakouts" prevent the use of safewords.

== Aspects ==
The initialism BDSM includes psychological and physiological facets:

* Bondage & Discipline (B&D)
* Dominance & Submission (D&S)
* Sadism & Masochism (or Sadomasochism) (S&M)
* Types of Play

This model for differentiating among these three aspects of BDSM is increasingly used in literature today. Nevertheless, it is only an attempt at phenomenological differentiation. Individual tastes and preferences in the area of sexuality may overlap among these areas, which are discussed separately here.

Two women tapegagged and cuffed to iron bars
Bondage and Discipline are two aspects of BDSM that do not seem to relate to each other because of the type of activities involved, but they have conceptual similarities, and that is why they appear jointly. Contrary to the other two types, B/D does not define the Tops and Bottoms itself, and is used to describe the general activities with either partner being the receiver and the giver. Zakfar, A Professional Dominatrix, 2010, Lulu.com, ISBN 978-0-557-64184-0. 

The term bondage describes the practice of Physical restraining. Bondage is usually, but not always, a sexual practice. Matthias T. J. Grimme: Das Bondage-Handbuch. Anleitung zum erotischen Fesseln. Charon-Verlag, Hamburg 1999, ISBN 978-3-931406-16-5. (German) While bondage is a very popular variation within the larger field of BDSM, it is nevertheless sometimes differentiated from the rest of this field. Lee "Bridgett" Harrington: Shibari You Can Use: Japanese Rope Bondage and Erotic Macram, Mystic Productions 2007, ISBN 978-0-615-14490-0. Studies among BDSM practitioners in the US have shown that about half of all men find the idea of bondage to be erotic; many women do as well. Strictly speaking, bondage means binding the partner by tying their appendages together; for example, by the use of handcuffs or by lashing their arms to an object. Bondage can also be achieved by spreading the appendages and fastening them with chains to a St. Andrews cross or spreader bars. 

The term discipline describes psychological restraining, with the use of rules and punishment to control overt behavior. Punishment can be pain caused physically (such as caning), humiliation caused psychologically (such as a public flagellation) or loss of freedom caused physically (for example, chaining the submissive partner to the foot of a bed). Another aspect is the structured training of the Bottom. Bill Henkin, Sybil Holiday: Consensual Sadomasochism: How to Talk About It and How to Do It Safely, Page 71. Daedalus Publishing Company, 1996, ISBN 978-1-881943-12-9. 

"Dominance and submission" (also known as D&s, Ds or D/s) is a set of behaviors, customs and rituals relating to the giving and accepting of control of one individual over another in an erotic or lifestyle context. It explores the more mental aspect of BDSM. This is also the case in many relationships not considering themselves as sadomasochistic; it is considered to be a part of BDSM if it is practiced purposefully. The range of its individual characteristics is thereby wide. 
Strappado with rope and a spreader bar. This practice has a distinct effect of immobilization and pain.

Examples of mentally oriented practices are education games, during which the dominant requires certain forms of behavior from the submissive. Special forms include erotic roleplay like ageplay, in which a difference in age, either real or enacted, formulates the background; or petplay. Concerted deployed sexual rejection exercised on the partner can be an aspect of Dominance and Submission as well. The most established and probably most clich set form of dominance and submission is Dominance and slavery. These can be administered for the short duration of a session among otherwise-emancipated partners, but also can be integrated into everyday life indefinitely. In a few relationships, it leads as far as total submission of one partner in the truest sense of the phrase total power exchange (frequently abbreviated as TPE). Compensating elements of the total dominance and submission are care and devotion complementing one another, thus facilitating stable relationships. The consensual submission of the submissive is sometimes demonstrated to others by symbols indicating his/her belonging to the dominant, such as wearing a collar, special tattoos, piercings, a very short haircut or a bald head.

Often, "slave contracts" are set out in writing to record the formal consent of the parties to the power exchange, stating their common vision of the relationship dynamic. The purpose of this kind of agreement is primarily to encourage discussion and negotiation in advance, and then to document that understanding for the benefit of all parties. Such documents have not been recognized as being legally binding, nor are they intended to be. These agreements are binding in the sense that the parties have the expectation that the negotiated rules will be followed. Often other friends and community members may witness the signing of such a document in a ceremony, and so parties violating their agreement can result in loss of face, respect or status with their friends in the community.

In general, as compared to conventional relationships, BDSM participants go to great lengths to negotiate the important aspects of their relationships in advance, and to take great care in learning about and following safe practices.

The term sadomasochism is derived from the words sadism and masochism (see Etymology). In the context of consensual erotic activities, sadism and masochism are not strictly accurate terms; there is a significant difference from the medical or psychological usage of both terms. Sadomasochism refers to the aspects of BDSM surrounding the exchange of physical or emotional pain. Sadism describes sexual pleasure derived by inflicting pain, degradation, humiliation on another person or causing another person to suffer. On the other hand, the masochist enjoys being hurt, humiliated, or suffering within the consensual scenario. Sadomasochistic scenes sometimes reach a level that appear more extreme or cruel than other forms of BDSMfor example, when a masochist is brought to tears or is severely bruisedand is occasionally unwelcome at BDSM events or parties. Sadomasochism does not imply enjoyment through causing or receiving pain in other situations (for example, accidental injury, medical procedures).

Discipline often incorporates sadomasochistic aspects, though some sadomasochists distance themselves from D/s practices such as punishment. Sadomasochism is practiced in isolation relatively rarely, though some masochists report biting, pinching, or even stun-gunning themselves as a prelude to, or as part of, masturbation.

In D/S, the Dominant is the Top and the submissive is the Bottom. In S/M, the Sadist is usually the Top and the Masochist the Bottom, but these roles are frequently more complicated or jumbled (as in the case of being dominant, masochists who may arrange for their submissive to carry out s/m activities on them). As in B/D, the declaration of the Top/Bottom may be required, though sadomasochists may also play without any Power Exchange at all, with both partners equally in control of the play.

;Physical aspects
A woman's back covered with different colored waxes.
Use of hand and thumbcuffs on the feet with a Wartenberg wheel

On a physical level, BDSM is commonly misconceived to be "all about pain". Most often, though, BDSM practitioners are primarily concerned with power, humiliation, and pleasure. Of the three categories of BDSM, only sadomasochism specifically requires pain, but this is typically a vehicle for feelings of humiliation, dominance, etc. The aspects of D/s and B/D may not include physical suffering at all, but include the sensations inherited by different emotions of the mind. Dominance & submission of power is an entirely different experience, and is not always psychologically associated with physical pain. Many BDSM activities might not involve any kind of pain or humiliation, but just the exchange of Powers (Power Exchange). During the activities, the practitioners may feel endorphins comparable to the so-called "runner's high" or to the afterglow of orgasm. Goldberg, Jeff (1988). Anatomy of a Scientific Discovery. Bantam Books, 1988. ISBN 978-0-553-34631-2; ISBN 978-0-553-17616-2 (British edition); ISBN 978-0-553-05261-9 The corresponding trance-like mental state is also known as "subspace" for the submissive, or "topspace" for the dominant. Some use the term "body stress" to describe this physiological sensation. Fries, DS (2002). Opioid Analgesics. In Williams DA, Lemke TL. Foye's Principles of Medicinal Chemistry (5th ed.). Philadelphia: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins. ISBN 978-0-683-30737-5 This experience of algolagnia is important, but is not the only motivation for many BDSM practitioners. The philosopher Edmund Burke defines this sensation of pleasure derived from pain by the word sublime. There is a wide array of BDSM practitioners who take part in sessions for which they do not receive any personal gratification. They enter such situations solely with the intention to allow their partners to fulfill their own needs and/or fetishes. They do this in exchange of money for the session activities. 

In some BDSM sessions, the Top exposes the Bottom to a wide range of sensual impressions, for example: pinching, biting, scratching with fingernails, spanking or the use of various objects such as crops, whips, liquid wax, icecubes, Wartenberg wheels, erotic electrostimulation or others. William Brame, Gloria Brame: Different Loving: The World of Sexual Dominance and Submission (Paperback), Villard, 1996, ISBN 978-0-679-76956-9 Fixation by handcuffs, ropes or chains may be used as well. The repertoire of possible "toys" is limited only by the imagination of both partners. To some extent, everyday items like clothes-pins, wooden spoons or plastic wrap are used as pervertables. Claudia Varrin: The Art Of Sensual Female Dominance: A Guide for Women, Citadel, 2000, ISBN 978-0-8065-2089-6 It is commonly considered that a pleasurable BDSM experience during a session is very strongly dependent upon the top's competence and experience and the bottom's physical and mental state at the time of the session. Trust and sexual arousal help the partners enter a shared mindset. John Warren, PhD: The Loving Dominant, Greenery Press (CA), 2nd Rev Ed, ISBN 978-1-890159-20-7 Bill Henkin, Sybil Holiday: Consensual Sadomasochism : How to Talk About It and How to Do It Safely, Daedalus Publishing Company 1996, ISBN 978-1-881943-12-9 Some BDSM practitioners compare related sensations with musical compositions and representation, in which single sensual impressions are the musical notes of the situation. From this point of view, different sensuous impressions are combined to create a total experience leaving a lasting impression.

:Types of play

* Bondage
* Cock and Ball Torture (CBT)
* Erotic electrostimulation
* Flogging
* Golden showers (urinating)
* Medical play
* Sexual roleplay
* Spanking/Whipping
* Strap-on play
* Suspension
* Tickle torture
* Wax play

== Relationships ==

=== Roles ===
;Top and bottom 
A typical slave collar with ring for possible attachment of a leash. Such or comparable models are sometimes used by bottoms as a symbol of ownership to their tops.

In a BDSM relationship, the partner who has the active role in a session or in the entire relationship is described as the "top", a role that often involves inflicting pain, degradation or subjugation. The partner referred to as the "bottom" submits voluntarily to the actions of the top.

Although the top is usually also the dominant partner and the bottom the submissive partner, it is not inevitably so. In some cases the top (known in this case as a service top) follows instructions from the bottom according to the bottom's desires and in a way the bottom expressly requires. If the bondage/discipline aspect of BDSM involves a top actively performing a skill while a bottom willingly submits, then the dominance/submission aspect here is reversed from what is typically expected.

By contrast, a dominant top controls their submissive bottom partner, sometimes by using physical or psychological techniques, although consent is always established first. This power relationship is so common, "bottom" and "submissive" are sometimes used interchangeably. However, most frequently, bottom refers to anyone receiving an act while submissive refers to someone who is obedient to a dominant, i.e.; a dominant receiving a massage from a submissive is considered a bottom while the submissive is the top during the act of giving the massage. The top or bottom actors may change but the roles of dominant and submissive remain the same.

A similar distinction also may apply to bottoms. At one end of the spectrum are those who are indifferent to, or even reject physical stimulation. At the other end of the spectrum are bottoms who enjoy discipline and erotic humiliation but are not willing to be subordinate to the person who applies it. The bottom is frequently the partner who specifies the basic conditions of the session and gives instructions, directly or indirectly, in the negotiation, while the top often respects this guidance. Other bottoms often called "brats" try to incur punishment from their tops by provoking them or "misbehaving". Nevertheless a small, very puristic "school" 5 Ways to Recognize Topping from the Bottom exists within the BDSM community, which regards such "topping from the bottom" as rude or even incompatible with the standards of BDSM relations.

;Switch

BDSM practitioners may also "switch", meaning they play either or both roles. He or she may practice this with one or more specific partners. The many reasons for switching are often very subjective and sometimes situational. A switch may simply enjoy both top and bottom roles or may be experimenting. Sometimes a relationship with a partner of the same primary preference (for example, two tops) requires switching to fulfill various BDSM needs within that relationship. Some change roles but do not regard themselves as switches as they do so irregularly or under specific circumstances only.

=== Types of relationships ===
;Play
A typical BDSM "sling".

BDSM practitioners sometimes regard the practice of BDSM in their sex life as role playing and so often use the terms "Play" and "Playing" to describe activities where in their roles. Play of this sort for a specified period of time is often called a "Session", and the contents and the circumstances of play are often referred to as the "Scene". It is also common in personal relationships to use the term "Kink Play" for BDSM activities, or more specific terms for the type of activity. The relationships can be of varied types.

;Long term
Early writings on BDSM both by the academic and BDSM community spoke little of long-term relationships with some in the Gay Leather community suggesting short-term play relationships to be the only feasible relationship models, and recommending people to get married and "play" with BDSM outside of marriage. In recent times though writers of BDSM and sites for BDSM have been more focused on long-term relationships.

A 2003 study, the first to look at these relationships, fully demonstrated that "quality long-term functioning relationships" exist among practitioners of BDSM, with either sex being the top or bottom (homosexual couples were not looked at). Respondents in the study expressed their BDSM orientation to be built into who they are, but considered exploring their BDSM interests an ongoing task, and showed flexibility and adaptability in order to match their interests with their partners. The "perfect match" where both in the relationship shared the same tastes and desires was rare, and most relationships required both partners to take up or put away some of their desires. The BDSM activities that the couples partook in varied in sexual to nonsexual significance for the partners who reported doing certain BDSM activities for "couple bonding, stress release, and spiritual quests". The most reported issue amongst respondents was not finding enough time to be in role with most adopting a 24/7 lifestyle wherein both partners maintain their dominant or submissive role throughout the day. 

Amongst the respondents it was typically the bottoms who wanted to play harder, and be more restricted into their roles when there was a difference in desire to play in the relationship. The author of the study, Bert Cutler, speculated that tops may be less often in the mood to play due to the increased demand for responsibility on their part: being aware of the safety of the situation and prepared to remove the bottom from a dangerous scenario, being conscious of the desires and limits of the bottom, and so on. The author of the study stressed that successful long-term BDSM relationships came after "early and thorough disclosure" from both parties of their BDSM interests. 

Many of those engaged in long-term BDSM relationships learned their skills from larger BDSM organizations and communities There was a lot of discussion by the respondents on the amount of control the top possessed in the relationships with almost non-existent discussion of the top "being better, or smarter, or of more value" than the bottom. 
Couples were generally of the same mind of whether or not they were in 24/7 relationship, but noted that in such cases the bottom is not locked up 24/7, but that their role in the context of the relationship was always present, even when the top is doing non-dominant activities such as household chores: cleaning, taking out the trash, and so on., or the bottom being in a more dominant position. In its conclusion the study states:

The respondents valued themselves, their partners, and their relationships. All couples expressed considerable good will toward their partners. The power exchange between the cohorts appears to be serving purposes beyond any sexual satisfaction, including experiencing a sense of being taken care of and bonding with a partner. 

The study further goes on to list three aspects that made the successful relationships work: early disclosure of interests and continued transparency, a commitment to personal growth, and the use of the dominant/submissive roles as a tool to maintain the relationship. In his closing remarks the author of the study theorizes that due to the serious potential for harm that couples in BDSM relationships develop increased communication that may be higher than in mainstream relationships 

;Professional services
A professional dominatrix or professional dominant, often referred to within the culture as a "pro-domme", offers services encompassing the range of bondage, discipline, and dominance in exchange for money. The term "Dominatrix" is little-used within the non-professional BDSM scene. A non-professional dominant woman is more commonly referred to simply as a "Domme", "Dominant", or "Femdom". There are also services provided by professional female submissives ("pro-subs"). A professional submissive consents to her client's dominant behavior within negotiated limits, and often works within a professional dungeon. Professional submissives, although far more rare, do exist. Directory of Professional Submssives Most of the people who work as subs normally have tendencies towards such activities, especially when sadomasochism is involved. Males also work as professional "Tops" in BDSM, and are called "Masters" or "Doms". However it is much more rare to find a male in this profession. A male "pro-dom" typically only works with male clientele. 

==BDSM scene==
In BDSM, a scene is the stage or setting where BDSM activity takes place, as well as the activity itself. http://www.xeromag.com/fvbdglossary.html The Kinky Dictionary http://www.domsub.info/glossary.shtml Dom Sub Glossary http://www.7dvt.com/2010kink-101 Lauren Ober http://www.mistresssky.com/terms.html Mistress Sky terms The physical place where a BDSM activity takes place is usually called a dungeon, though some prefer less dramatic terms, including "playspace", or "club". A BDSM activity can, but need not, involve sexual activity or sexual roleplay. A characteristic of many BDSM relationships is the power exchange from the bottom to the dominant partner, and bondage features prominently in BDSM scenes and sexual roleplay.

The term is also used in the BDSM community to refer to the BDSM community as a whole. * P.147-148, 154, 172, 174 

===Types===

File:TwoWomenTiedTogether.png|Two women tied together
Image:Suspension-bb-lorelei-9016-jonwoods.jpg|A bondage scenario using period costumes
Image:Andreaskreuz mit Model Monique.jpg|A model attached by bondage cuffs to a wooden Saint Andrew's Cross

A scene can take place in private between two or more people, and can involve a domestic arrangement, such as servitude or a casual or committed lifestyle master/slave relationship. BDSM elements may involve settings of slave training or punishment for breaches of instructions.

A scene can also take place in a club, where the play can be viewed by others. When a scene takes place in a public setting, it may be because the participants enjoy being watched by others, or because of the equipment available, or because having third parties present adds safety for play partners who have only recently met. http://www.novad.org/Primer/Definitions.html Novad Primer Definitions 

===BDSM etiquette===
A scene takes place within the general conventions and etiquette of BDSM, such as requirements for mutual consent and agreement as to the limits of any BDSM activity. This agreement can be incorporated into a formal contract. In addition, most clubs have additional rules which regulate how onlookers may interact with the actual participants in a scene. http://www.nybondageclub.com/gay-male-bdsm-leather-slave-discipline-scene.html NY Bondage Club guidelines. As is the general rule in BDSM, these are founded on the catchphrase "safe, sane, and consensual". 

== Subculture ==

Spanking with a paddle in a BDSM dungeon in New York City.

Today the BDSM culture exists in most western countries. This offers BDSM practitioners the opportunity to discuss BDSM relevant topics and problems with like-minded people. This culture is often viewed as a subculture, mainly because BDSM is often still regarded as "unusual" by some of the public. Many people hide their leaning from society since they are afraid of the incomprehension and of social exclusion. It is commonly known in the BDSM culture that there are practitioners living on all continents, but there is no documented evidence for many countries (due to restrictive laws and censorship motivated by politics or religion) except their presence in online BDSM communities and dating sites.

This scene appears particularly on the Internet, in publications, and in meetings such as SM parties, gatherings called munches, and erotic fairs. The annual Folsom Street Fair is the world's largest BDSM event. It has its roots in the gay leather movement. There are also conventions like Living in Leather, TESfest, Shibaricon, Spankfest, and Black Rose. North American cities that have large BDSM communities include New York City, Washington D.C., Baltimore, Atlanta, Seattle, Denver, Los Angeles, Boston, Chicago, Houston, Philadelphia, San Francisco, San Diego, Dallas, Minneapolis, Toronto, Winnipeg, and Vancouver. European cities with large BDSM communities include London, Paris, Berlin, Amsterdam, Munich, Cologne, Hamburg, Moscow and Rome.

=== Symbols ===
Triskelion-type BDSM emblem.
The Leather Pride flag, a symbol of the BDSM and Fetish subculture.
One of the most commonly-used symbols of the BDSM community is a derivation of a triskelion shape within a circle. Various forms of triskele (a shape with three-fold rotational symmetry) have had many uses and many meanings in many cultures; its BDSM usage derives from the "Ring of O" in the classic book Story of O. The BDSM Emblem Project claims copyright over one particular specified form of the triskelion symbol; other variants of the triskelion are free from such copyright claims. http://emblemproject.sagcs.net 

The Leather Pride flag is a symbol for the Leather subculture and also widely used within BDSM. In continental Europe the Ring of O is widespread among BDSM practitioners.

alt=BDSM Rights Flag colour
alt=BDSM Rights Flag Black and White.

The BDSM Rights Flag is intended to represent the belief that people whose sexuality or relationship preferences include Bondage and Discipline, Dominance and Submission, or Sadism and Masochism ("BDSM") deserve the same human rights as everyone else, and should not be discriminated against for pursuing BDSM with consenting adults.

The flag is inspired by the Leather Pride Flag and BDSM Emblem, but is specifically intended to represent the concept of BDSM Rights and to be without the other symbols' restrictions against commercial use. It's designed to be recognisable by people familiar with either the Leather Pride Flag or BDSM Triskelion (or Triskele) as "something to do with BDSM"; and to be distinctive whether reproduced in full colour, or in black and white (or another pair of colours). 

BDSM and fetish items and styles have been spread widely in western societies' everyday life by different factors, such as avant-garde fashion, heavy metal, goth subculture, and science fiction TV series, Fuentes Rodrguez, Csar: Mundo Gtico. (Quarentena Ediciones, 2007, ISBN 978-84-933891-6-1) and are often not consciously connected with their BDSM roots by many people. While it was mainly confined to the Punk and BDSM subcultures in the 1990s, it has since spread into wider parts of western societies.

=== Prejudices ===
Exhibition of a male sub in Zentai and chains at the Cologne Gay Pride festival, 2006.
Most common misconceptions about BDSM form when limited understanding become intertwined with prejudices, clichs and stereotypes. Misunderstandings may arise from general lack of knowledge concerning sexuality and sexual practices as well as misconceptions on how one's personal life and public persona can vary greatly. For example, it is sometimes assumed that a submissive would prefer to experience pain and degradation in their everyday life, or conversely, that they would prefer to have exactly the opposite. There is no clear correlation between the position in everyday life and BDSM preferences. Another misconception is the idea of women generally being the dominant party in BDSM relationships. Quite often the picture of BDSM is reduced to the idea of crude corporal punishment, neglecting the broad spectrum of behaviors within the culture. Along with the whip-swinging dominatrix, the sadomasochist in full leather regalia is another common clich. While overlaps between different kinds of fetishism can exist, there is no inevitable connection between BDSM and fetishism (for example: latex, PVC or leather). The frequent occurrence of such clothing can be partly explained by its function as a quasi-formalized dress code.

====Common misconceptions about BDSM====
 Nichols, M. (2006). Psychotherapeutic issues with "kinky" clients: Clinical problems, yours and theirs. Journal of Homosexuality, 50(2-3), 281300. 
# BDSM is mostly about the "dominant" partner getting his/her way with a passive, exploited "submissive": BDSM community emphasizes on negotiation and creation of scripts. This view fails to recognize that submissive individuals consent for pleasure. It also fails to recognize the simple metaphysics that 'fulfilling the masochists needs" is central to finding and keeping the submissive partner. Frequently one hears of Topping from the Bottom, where the submissive partner manipulates the relationship, while appearing passive, submissive and obedient.
# BDSM is about physical pain: Kinky preferences are highly variable and not all forms induce pain. Although pain can be involved, it is in a sexual nature. Pain is experienced in the context of love, trust, and arousal. 
# BDSM activities inevitably escalate to extremes and/or become addictive: We see a "making up for lost time" phenomenon with some individuals who are late in coming out. However, this high level of activity usually levels off, though this level may be "occasional" for some and "24 / 7" for others. 
# BDSM is self-destructive: this is simply inaccurate and not supported by any evidence. Self-destructive behaviours are experienced no more frequently by BDSM practitioners than the general public. On that note, anything pleasurable is subject to abuse and BDSM is no exception. 
# BDSM stems from childhood abuse: There is no evidence for this claim, and it has been disproven by various articles Moser, C. (2002, May). What do we really know about S/M: Myths and realities. Paper presented at the 34th conference of the American Association of Sex Educators, Counselors, and Therapists, Miami, Fla. Richters, J., De Visser, R. O., Rissel, C. E., Grulich, A. E., & Smith, A. (2008). Demographic and psychosocial features of participants in bondage and discipline, "Sadomasochism" or Dominance and Submission (BDSM): Data from a National Survey. The journal of sexual medicine, 5(7), 16601668. 
# BDSM is an avoidance of intimacy: BDSM is no more or less prone to intimacy amplification or aversion than more standard sexual practices. 
# BDSM is separate from "vanilla" sex: for most practitioners, BDSM activities and "regular" intercourse are often combined or intertwined in one way or another.

Since the term BDSM covers a broad range of human behavior, the arising spectrum of individual interests and personalities is large and extremely diverse. Due to the lack of information in the total population and the reluctance with many to come out about matters of an extremely personal nature leads to situations in which actions and statements of individual BDSM practitioners are accredited to the community at large just as the larger LGBT community has been characterized by drag queens and other minority communities similarly mischaracterized.

At least in the western, industrialized countries and Japan, since the 1980s sadomasochists have begun to form information exchange and support groups to counter discriminatory images. This has happened independently in the United States and in several European countries. With the advent of the web, international cooperation has started to developfor example Datenschlag is a joint effort of sadomasochists in the three major German-speaking countries, and the mailing list Schlagworte uses the model of a news agency to connect six countries. Some credit highly publicized events like Operation Spanner and the International leather contests with fostering international cooperation and collaboration.

=== Coming out ===

BDSM Activists at Taiwan Pride 2005, Taipei
Carriage drawn by a Pony-Girl, Petplay at the Folsom Parade 2005.

Some people who feel attracted by the situations usually compiled under the term BDSM reach a point where they decide to come out of the closet, though many sadomasochists keep themselves closeted. Even so, depending upon a survey's participants, about 5 to 25 percent of the US-American population show affinity to the subject. Janus, Samuel S. / Janus, Cynthia L., 1994 The Janus Report on Sexual Behavior, Wiley, New York, ISBN 978-0-471-01614-4 Elliott, Leland / Brantley, Cynthia, Sex on Campus, 1997, Random House, New York Other than a few artists, practically no celebrities are publicly known as sadomasochists.

Public knowledge of one's BDSM lifestyle can have devastating vocational and social effects (Persona non grata) for sadomasochists. The reason for this is seen by some authors as primarily a lack of public educational advertising, exacerbated by overly lurid and sensationalized media coverage.

Within feminist circles the discussion has been split roughly into two camps: some who see BDSM as an aspect or reflection of oppression (for example, Alice Schwarzer) and, on the other side, pro-BDSM feminists, often grouped under the banner of sex-positive feminism (see Samois); both of them can be traced back to the 1970s. Alice Schwarzer: "Weiblicher Masochismus ist Kollaboration!" from EMMA Heft 2, 1991 

Some feminists have criticized BDSM for eroticizing power and violence, and for reinforcing misogyny. They argue that women who engage in BDSM are making a choice that is ultimately bad for women. Alice Schwarzer, Emma Heft 2, 1991 Feminist defenders of BDSM argue that consensual BDSM activities are enjoyed by many women and validate the sexual inclinations of these women. BDSM and Feminism: An Insider's View by Tammy Jo Eckhart They argue that feminists should not attack other woman's sexual desires as being "anti-feminist", and point out that there is no connection between consensual kinky activities and sex crimes. The main point of feminism is giving an individual woman free choices in her life; that includes her sexual desire. While some radical feminists suggest connections between consensual BDSM scenes and non-consensual rape and sexual assault, sex-positive feminists may tend to find this insulting to women. Gayle Rubin: Thinking Sex: Notes for a Radical Theory of the Politics of Sexuality. In Carole S. Vance (Ed.), Pleasure and Danger: exploring female sexuality, pp. 267319. Routledge & Kegan Paul, Boston 1984. ISBN 978-0-04-440867-3 Wendy McElroy: A Woman's Right to Pornography. Saint Martin's Press 1997, ISBN 978-0-312-15245-1 

It is often mentioned that in BDSM, roles are not fixed to gender, but personal preferences. The dominant partner in a heterosexual relationship may be the woman rather than the man; or BDSM may be part of male/male or female/female sexual relationships. Finally, some people switch, taking either a dominant or submissive role on different occasions. Several studies on the correlation of BDSM pornography and the violence against women recapitulate that there is no correlation. Japan is a useful example: a country which has the lowest rate of sexual crimes of all industrialized nations while being well known for its comprehensive BDSM and bondage pornography (see Pornography in Japan). In 1991 a lateral survey came to the conclusion that between 1964 and 1984, despite the increase in amount and availability of sadomasochistic pornography in the US, Germany, Denmark and Sweden there is no correlation with the national number of rapes to be found. Berl Kutchinsky, Pornography and Rape: Theory and Practice? in: International Journal of Law and Psychiatry, Vol. 14, 1991, P. 4766 

Operation Spanner in the UK proves that BDSM practitioners still run the risk of being stigmatized as criminals. In 2003, the media coverage of Jack McGeorge showed that simply participating and working in BDSM support groups poses risks to one's job, even in countries where no law restricts it. Here a clear difference can be seen to the situation of homosexuals. The psychological strain appearing in some individual cases is normally neither articulated nor acknowledged in public. Nevertheless it leads to a difficult psychological situation in which the person concerned can be exposed to high levels of emotional stress. Charles Moser, in Journal of Social Work and Human Sexuality 1988, (7;1, S.4356) 

In the stages of "self awareness", he or she realizes their desires related to BDSM scenarios and/or decides to be open for such. Some authors call this internal coming-out. Two separate surveys on this topic independently came to the conclusion that 58 percent and 67 percent of the sample respectively, had realized their disposition before their 19th birthday. Other surveys on this topic show comparable results. Spengler, Andreas: Sadomasochisten und ihre Subkulturen, Campus Verlag, 1979, Frankfurt am Main / New York (German) Datenschlag survey (German) Independent of age, coming-out can potentially result in a difficult life crisis, sometimes leading to thoughts or acts of suicide. While homosexuals have created support networks in the last decades, sadomasochistic support networks are just starting to develop in most countries. In German speaking countries they are only moderately more developed. Eva Daschek und Axel Konrad: Empirische Untersuchung ber den Zusammenhang zwischen ausgewhlten Faktoren und inklinierendem sexuellem Sadomasochismus, online sm-study (German) The internet is the prime contact point for support groups today, allowing for local and international networking. In the US Kink Aware Professionals (KAP) a privately funded, non-profit service provides the community with referrals to psychotherapeutic, medical, and legal professionals who are knowledgeable about and sensitive to the BDSM, fetish, and leather community. ncsfreedom.org In the US and the UK, the Woodhull Freedom Foundation & Federation, National Coalition for Sexual Freedom (NCSF) and Sexual Freedom Coalition (SFC) have emerged to represent the interests of sadomasochists. The German Bundesvereinigung Sadomasochismus e.V. is committed to the same aim of providing information and driving press relations. In 1996 the website and mailing list Datenschlag went online in German and English providing the largest bibliography, as well as one of the most extensive historical collections of sources related to BDSM.

=== Parties and clubs ===
A woman on a St. Andrew's cross.

BDSM parties are events on which BDSM practitioners and other similarly interested people meet in order to communicate, share experiences and knowledge, and to "play" in an erotic atmosphere. The parties show similarities with ones in the dark culture, being based on a more or less strictly enforced dress code; most often clothing made of latex, leather or vinyl/PVC, lycra and so on., emphasizing the body's shape and the primary and secondary sexual characteristic. The requirement for such dress codes differ. While some events have none, others have a policy in order to create a more coherent atmosphere and to prevent voyeurs from taking part. datenschlag.org (German) 

At these parties, BDSM can be publicly performed on a stage, or more privately in separate "dungeons". Dossie Easton, Janet W. Hardy: The New Topping Book. Page 163 A reason for the relatively fast spread of this kind of event is the opportunity to use a wide range of "playing equipment", which in most apartments or houses is unavailable. Slings, St. Andrews crosses (or similar restraining constructs), spanking benches, and punishing supports or cages are often made available. The problem of noise disturbance is also lessened at these events, while in the home setting many BDSM activities can be limited by this factor. In addition, such parties offer both exhibitionists and voyeurs a forum to indulge their inclinations without social opprobrium. Sexual intercourse is taboo within most public BDSM play spaces or not often seen in others, because it is not the emphasis of this kind of play. In order to ensure the maximum safety and comfort for the participants certain standards of behavior have evolved, these include aspects of courtesy, privacy, respect and safewords among others. Today BDSM parties are taking place in most of the larger cities in the western world.

In some cities there are specialized BDSM clubs with a more or less structured program schedule, in which theme parties alternate with topic-free "play evenings", similar to the business concepts of more conventional nightclubs. Social control of these parties and/or in the clubs is far higher than in a normal discothque. Consensuality in the public BDSM sessions is strictly monitored and enforced. Apart from commercial events there are also privately organized or only moderately profit-oriented parties, which are organized by BDSM groups and individuals. Minors are not allowed at parties or clubs, even though intercourse and drinking are usually not found in these parties.

== Psychology ==

=== Prevalence ===
Flogging-demonstration at the 2004 Folsom Street Fair event for the leather, kink and GLBT communities held in San Francisco.
BDSM is practiced in all social strata and is common in both heterosexual and homosexual men and women in varied occurrences and intensities. Breslow et al. On the Prevalence and Roles of Females in the Sadomasochistic Subculture: Report of an Empirical Study. Archives of Sexual Behavior 14/1985, P. 30317. In Thomas S. Weinberg: S&M: Studies in Dominance and Submission, (Ed.), Prometheus Books, New York, 1995 ISBN 978-0-87975-978-0 Gloria G. Brame, BDSM/Fetish Sex: Overview and Study. Retrieved on 2008-11-09. The spectrum ranges from couples with no connections to the subculture outside of their bedrooms or homes, without any awareness of the concept of BDSM, playing "tie-me-up-games", to public scenes on St. Andrew's crosses at large events such as the Folsom Street Fair in San Francisco. Estimation on the overall percentage of BDSM related sexual behaviour vary but it is no longer assumed to be uncommon. Kolmes, K., Stock, W., & Moser, C. (2006). Investigating bias in psychotherapy with BDSM clients. Journal of homosexuality, 50(2-3), 301-324. 
Two professional dominatrices interviewed by David Shankbone about the psychological aspects of some of their stranger requests. as business: Interviews with Dominatrixesfull transcript. ]

A non-representative survey on the sexual behaviour of American students published in 1997 and based on questionnaires had a response rate of about 89%. Its results showed 15% of openly homosexual males, 21% of openly lesbian and female bisexual students, 11% of heterosexual males and 9% of female heterosexual students committed to BDSM related fantasies. In all groups the level of practical BDSM experiences were around 6%. Within the group of openly lesbian and bisexual females the quote was significantly higher, at 21%. Independent of their sexual orientation, about 12% of all questioned students, 16% of lesbians and female bisexuals and 8% of heterosexual males articulated an interest in spanking. Experience with this sexual behaviour was indicated by 30% of male heterosexuals, 33% of female bisexuals and lesbians, and 24% of the male gay and bisexual men and female heterosexual women. Even though this study was not considered representative, other surveys indicate similar dimensions in a differing target groups. Brokmann, Angela: Macht und Erotik, 1996, Sexologisches Institut e. V. Hamburg, Hamburg (German) Person, Ethel S. / Terestman, Nettie / Myers, Wayne A. / Goldberg, Eugene L. / Salvadori, Carol: Gender differences in sexual behaviors and fantasies in a college population, 1989, in: Journal of Sex and Marital Therapy, Bd. 15, No. 3, 1989, P. 187198 Breslow, Norman: SM Research Report, v1.1, 1999 

A representative study done from 2001 to 2002 in Australia found that 1.8% of sexually active people (2.2% men, 1.3% women but no significant sex difference) had engaged in BDSM activity in the previous year. Of the entire sample, 1.8% men and 1.3% women had been involved in BDSM. BDSM activity was significantly more likely in bisexual and gay men. But among men in general, there was no relationship effect of age, education, language spoken at home, or relationship status. Among women, in this study, activity was most common for those between 16 and 19 years of age and least likely for females over 50 years. Activity was also significantly more likely for bisexual women, lesbians, and women who had a regular partner they did not live with, but was not significantly related with speaking a language other than English or education. 

Richters et al. (2008) study also found that people who engaged in BDSM were more likely to have experienced a wider range of different sexual practices (e.g. oral and/or anal sex, more than one partner, group sex, phone sex, viewed pornography, used a sex toy, fisting, rimming, etc.). They were, however, not any more likely to have been coerced, unhappy, anxious, or experiencing sexual difficulties. On the contrary, men who had engaged in BDSM scored lower on a psychological distress scale than men who did not. 

Another representative study, published in 1999 by the German Institut fr rationale Psychologie, found that about 2/3 of the interviewed women stated a desire to be at the mercy of their sexual partners from time to time. 69% admitted to fantasies dealing with sexual submissiveness, 42% stated interest in explicit BDSM techniques, 25% in bondage. Arne Hoffmann, Lexikon der Tabubrche, Schwarzkopf&Schwarzkopf, 2003, ISBN 978-3-89602-517-3 (German) A 1976 study in the general US population suggests three percent have had positive experiences with Bondage or master-slave role playing. Overall 12% of the interviewed females and 18% of the males were willing to try it. "What's Really Happening on Campus", Playboy October 1976, S. 128131, 160164, 169. (see Charles Moser / Eugene E. Levitt: An Exploratory-Descriptive Study of a Sadomasochistically Oriented Sample, in Journal of Sex Research, Vol. 23, 1987, P. 322-337.) Thomas S. Weinberg (Ed.): S&M: Studies in Dominance and Submission, Prometheus Books, New York 1995, ISBN 978-0-87975-978-0 A 1990 Kinsey Institute report stated that 5% to 10% of Americans occasionally engage in sexual activities related to BDSM. 11% of men and 17% of women reported trying bondage. Walter Lowe: The Playboy Readers' Sex Survey. 1983. Based on the 1983 "Playboy Readers Sex Survey" by Walter Lowe. kinseyinstitute.org Some elements of BDSM have been popularized through increased media coverage since the middle 1990s. Thus both black leather clothing, sexual jewellery such as chains and dominance role play appear increasingly outside of BDSM contexts.

The Ring of O as a finger ring.
According to yet another survey of 317,000 people in 41 countries, about 20% of the surveyed have at least used masks, blindfolds or other bondage utilities once, and 5% explicitly connected themselves with BDSM. Durex Global Sex Survey 2005, P.15 Online Durex Global Sex Survey 2005 In 2004, 19% mentioned spanking as one of their practices and 22% confirmed the use of blindfolds and/or handcuffs. 

A 1985 study found 52 out of 182 female respondents (28%) were involved in sadomasochistic activities. Breslow, N., Evans, L., and Langley, J. (1985). On the prevalence and roles of females in the sadomasochistic subculture: Report Of an empirical study. Arch. Sex. Behav. 14: 303-317. 

=== Psychological categorization ===
In the past, many activities and fantasies related to BDSM were generally attributed to sadism or masochism and were regarded by psychiatrists as an illness. For example, the International Classification of Diseases (ICD-10) categorized 'sadomasochism' as a "Disorder of sexual preference" (Chapter V: Mental and behavioural disorders#.28F60F69.29 Disorders of adult personality and behaviour|F65.5]) and described it as follows: "A preference for sexual activity which involves the infliction of pain or humiliation, or bondage. If the subject prefers to be the recipient of such stimulation this is called masochism; if the provider, sadism. Often an individual obtains sexual excitement from both sadistic and masochistic activities." ICD-10 2007 

With the 1994 publication of the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM-IV) new criteria of diagnosis were added. The DSM-IV asserts that "The fantasies, sexual urges, or behaviors" must "cause clinically significant distress or impairment in social, occupational, or other important areas of functioning" in order for sexual sadism or masochism to be considered a disorder. In an AASECT article providing guidelines for therapists working with BDSM clients, sexologists Charles Allen Moser and Peggy Kleinplatz highlight that distress can occur in BDSM patients due to stigma and discrimination surrounding BDSM, and that in these circumstances the role of the therapist is to "validate the distress rather than to 'cure' the BDSM desires". Kleinplatz, Peggy, and Charles Moser. "Toward Clinical Guidelines for Working with BDSM Clients." Contemporary Sexuality 38.6 (2004): 14. Academic Search Premier. EBSCO. Web. 2 Jan 2011. The DSM-IVs' latest edition (DSM-IV-TR) further requires that the activity must be the sole means of sexual gratification for a period of six (6) months, and either cause "clinically significant distress or impairment in social, occupational, or other important areas of functioning" or involve a violation of "consent" to be diagnosed as a paraphilia. Letter to the Editor of The American Journal of Psychiatry: Change in Criterion for Paraphilias in DSM-IV-TR. Russell B. Hilliard, Robert L. Spitzer. 2002. Retrieved 23 November 2007. 

That said, overlap of sexual preference disorders and the practice of BDSM practices can occur.

In Europe, an organization called ReviseF65 has worked towards this purpose in the International Classification of Diseases (ICD-10). In 1995, Denmark became the first European Union country to have completely removed sadomasochism from its national classification of diseases. This was followed by Sweden in 2009, Norway in 2010 and Finland 2011. Recent surveys on the spread of BDSM fantasies and practices show strong variations in the range of their results. Nevertheless it can be stated that the vast majority of the researchers assume 5 to 25 percent of the population showing sexual behavior related to joyfully experienced pain or dominance and submission. The population with related fantasies is considered even higher. 

There have been few studies on the psychological aspects of BDSM using modern scientific standards. One pivotal survey on the subject was published by US-American psychotherapist Charles Moser in 1988 in the Journal of Social Work and Human Sexuality. His conclusion was that while there is a general lack of data on the psychological problems of BDSM practitioners, some fundamental results are obvious. He emphasizes that there is no evidence for the theory that BDSM has common symptoms or any common psychopathology; Clinical literature, though does not give a consistent picture of BDSM practitioners. Moser emphasizes that there is no evidence at all supporting the theory of BDSM practitioners having any special psychiatric problems or even problems based solely on their preferences.

Problems do sometimes occur in the area of self classification by the person concerned. During the phase of the "coming-out", self questioning related to one's own "normality" is quite common. According to Moser, the discovery of BDSM preferences can result in fear of the current non-BDSM relationship's destruction. This, combined with the fear of discrimination in everyday life, leads in some cases to a double life which can be highly burdensome. At the same time, the denial of BDSM preferences can induce stress and dissatisfaction with one's own "vanilla"-lifestyle, feeding the apprehension of finding no partner. Moser states that BDSM practitioners having problems finding BDSM partners would probably have problems in finding a non-BDSM partner as well. The wish to remove BDSM preferences is another possible reason for psychological problems since it is not possible in most cases. Finally, the scientist states that BDSM practitioners seldom commit violent crimes. From his point of view, crimes of BDSM practitioners usually have no connection with the BDSM components existing in their life. Moser's study comes to the conclusion that there is no scientific evidence, which could give reason to refuse members of this group work- or safety certificates, adoption possibilities, custody or other social rights or privileges. The Swiss psychoanalyst Fritz Morgenthaler shares a similar perspective in his book, Homosexuality, Heterosexuality, Perversion (1988). He states that possible problems result not necessarily from the non-normative behavior, but in most cases primarily from the real or feared reactions of the social environment towards the own preferences. Fritz Morgenthaler: Homosexuality, Heterosexuality, Perversion, Analytic, April 1988, ISBN 978-0-88163-060-2 In 1940 psychoanalyst Theodor Reik reached implicitly the same conclusion in his standard work Aus Leiden Freuden. Masochismus und Gesellschaft. Theodor Reik: Aus Leiden Freuden. Masochismus und Gesellschaft, Fischer, 1983, ISBN 978-3-596-26768-2 (German) 

Moser's results are further supported by Richters et al.'s (2008) study on the demographic and psychosocial features of participants in BDSM done in Australia. Richters et al. (2008) found that BDSM practitioners were no more likely to have experienced sexual assault than the control group, and were not more likely to feel unhappy or anxious. The BDSM males reported higher levels of psychological well-being than the controls. It was concluded that "BDSM is simply a sexual interest or subculture attractive to a minority, not a pathological symptom of past abuse or difficulty with 'normal' sex." Richters, J., De Visser, R. O., Rissel, C. E., Grulich, A. E., & Smith, A. (2008). Demographic and psychosocial features of participants in bondage and discipline, "sadomasochism" or dominance and submission (BDSM): Data from a national survey. The journal of sexual medicine, 5(7), 16601668. 

In contrast to frameworks seeking to explain sadomasochism through psychological, psychoanalytic, medical or forensic approaches, which seek to categorize behaviour and desires and find a root "cause," Romana Byrne suggests that such practices can be seen as examples of "aesthetic sexuality," in which a founding physiological or psychological impulse is irrelevant. Rather, sadism and masochism may be practiced through choice and deliberation, driven by certain aesthetic goals tied to style, pleasure, and identity. These practices, in certain circumstances and contexts, can be compared with the creation of art. Romana Byrne (2013) Aesthetic Sexuality: A Literary History of Sadomasochism, New York: Bloomsbury, pp.1-4. 

===Gender observances in research===

Not much empirical research has been done on gender differences or prevalence rates of categorized roles within BDSM. Though, one Australian demographic study found higher rates of female participants than males, it can not be generalized. 

====Gender differences in masochistic scripts====

One common misconception of BDSM and kink is that women are more likely to take on masochistic roles than men. Roy Baumeister (2010) actually had more male masochists in his study than female, and fewer male dominants than female. The fact that neither of these gender differences were significant, suggests no assumptions should be made regarding gender and masochistic roles in BDSM. One explanation why we might think otherwise lies in our social and cultural ideals about femininity; masochism may emphasize certain stereotypically feminine elements through activities like feminization of men and ultra-feminine clothing for women. But such tendencies of the submissive masochistic role should not be interpreted as a connection between it and the stereotypical female rolemany masochistic scripts do not include any of these tendencies. Baumeister, R. F. (1988). Gender differences in masochistic scripts. Journal of Sex Research, 25(4), 478-499. 

Baumeister (2010) found that masochistic males experienced greater: severity of pain, frequency of humiliation (status-loss, degrading, oral), partner infidelity, active participation by other persons, and cross dressing. Trends also suggested that male masochism included more bondage and oral sex than female (though the data was not significant). Female masochists, on the other hand, experienced greater: frequency in pain, pain as punishment for 'misdeeds' in the relationship context, display humiliation, genital intercourse, and presence of non-participating audiences. The exclusiveness of dominant males in a heterosexual relationship should be noted because, historically, men in power preferred multiple partners. Finally, Baumeister (2010) observes a contrast between the 'intense sensation' focus of male masochism to a more 'meaning and emotion' centred female masochistic script. 

====Women in S/M culture====

Levitt, Moser, & Jamison's 1994 study provides a general, if outdated, description of characteristics of women in the sadomasochistic (S/M) subculture. They state that women in S/M tend to have higher education, become more aware of their desires as a young adult, are less likely to be married than the general population. The researchers found the majority of females identified as heterosexual and submissive, a substantial minority were versatileable to switch between dominant and submissive rolesand a smaller minority identified with the dominant role exclusively. Oral sex, bondage and master-slave script were among the most popular activities, while feces/watersports were the least popular. Levitt, E. E., Moser, C., & Jamison, K. V. (1994). The prevalence and some attributes of females in the sadomasochistic subculture: A second report. Archives of sexual behavior, 23(4), 465-473. 

===Orientation observances in research===

Though BDSM in itself can be considered a sexual orientation or identity, and is considered one by some of its practitioners, the BDSM and kink scene is more often seen as a diverse pansexual community. Ideally, this is a non-judgmental community where gender, sexuality, orientation, preferences are accepted as is and/or worked at to become something a person can be happy with. Weiss, M. D. (2006). Working at play: BDSM sexuality in the San Francisco Bay area. Anthropologica, 229-245. In research, studies have focused on bisexuality and its parallels with BDSM, as well as gay-straight differences between practitioners.

====Differences and similarities between gay and straight men in S/M====

Demographically, Nordling et al.'s (2006) study found no differences in age, but 43% gay male respondents compared to 29% straight males had university level education. The gay men also had higher incomes than the general population, and tended to work in white collar jobs while straight men tended toward blue collar ones. Because there were not enough female respondents (22), no conclusions could be drawn from them.

Sexually speaking, the same 2006 study by Nordling et al. found that gay males were aware of their S/M preferences and took part in them at an earlier age, preferring leather, anal sex, rimming, dildos and special equipment or uniform scenes. In contrast, straight men preferred verbal humiliation, mask and blindfolds, gags, rubber/latex outfits, caning, vaginal sex, and cross-dressing among other activities. From the questionnaire, researchers were able to identify 4 separate sexual themes: hyper-masculinity, giving and receiving pain, physical restriction (i.e. bondage), and psychological humiliation. Gay men preferred activities that tended towards hyper-masculinity while straight men showed greater preference for humiliation. Though there were not enough female respondents to draw a similar conclusion with, the fact that there is a difference in gay and straight men suggests strongly that S/M (and BDSM in general) can not be considered a homogenous phenomenon. As Nordling et al. (2006) puts it, People who identify as sadomasochists mean different things by these identifications. (54) Nordling, N., Sandnabba, N. K., Santtila, P., & Alison, L. (2006). Differences and similarities between gay and straight individuals involved in the sadomasochistic subculture. Journal of Homosexuality, 50(2-3), 41-57 

====Bisexuality and BDSM====

In Steve Lenius' original 2001 paper he explored the acceptance of bisexuality in a supposedly pansexual BDSM community. The reasoning behind this is that 'coming-out' had become primarily the territory of the gay and lesbian, with bisexuals feeling the push to be one or the other (and being right only half the time either way). What he found in 2001, was that people in BDSM were open to discussion about the topic of bisexuality and pansexuality and all controversies they bring to the table, but personal biases and issues stood in the way of actively using such labels. A decade later, Lenius (2011) looks back on his study and considers if anything has changed. He concluded that the standing of bisexuals in the BDSM and kink community was unchanged, and believed that positive shifts in attitude were moderated by society's changing views towards different sexualities and orientations. But Lenius (2011) does emphasize that the pansexual promoting BDSM community helped advance greater acceptance of alternative sexualities. Lenius, S. (2001). Bisexuals and BDSM. Journal of Bisexuality, 1(4), 69-78. Lenius, S. (2011). A Reflection on Bisexuals and BDSM: Bisexual People in a Pansexual CommunityTen Years Later (and a Preview of the Next Sexual Revolution). Journal of Bisexuality, 11(4), 420-425. 

Brandy Lin Simula (2012), on the other hand, argues that BDSM actively resists gender conforming and identified three different types of BDSM bisexuality: gender-switching, gender-based styles (taking on a different gendered style depending on gender of partner when playing), and rejection of gender (resisting the idea that gender matters in their play partners). Simula (2012) explains that practitioners of BDSM routinely challenge our concepts of sexuality by pushing the limits on pre-existing ideas of sexual orientation and gender norms. For some, BDSM and kink provides a platform in creating identities that are fluid, ever-changing. Simula, B. L. (2012). Does Bisexuality UndoGender? Gender, Sexuality, and Bisexual Behavior Among BDSM Participants. Journal of Bisexuality, 12(4), 484-506. 

=== History of psychotherapy and current recommendations ===
Psychiatry has an insensitive history in the area of BDSM. There have been many involvements by institutions of political power to marginalize subgroups and sexual minorities. Mental health professionals have a long history of holding negative assumptions and stereotypes about the BDSM community. Beginning with the DSM-II, Sexual Sadism and Sexual Masochism have been listed as sexually deviant behaviours. Sadism and masochism were also found in the personality disorder section American Psychiatric Association. (1968). Diagnostic and statistical manual of mental disorders (2nd ed.). Washington, DC: American Psychiatric Association. This negative assumption has not changed significantly evident in the continued inclusion of Sexual Sadism and Sexual Masochism as paraphilias in the DSM-IV-TR. American Psychiatric Association. (2000). Diagnostic and statistical manual of mental disorders (4th ed. rev.). Washington, DC: American Psychiatric Association. These said biases and misinformation can result in pathologizing and unintentional harm to clients who identifies as sadists or masochists.

According to Kolmes et al. (2006), major themes of biased and inadequate care to BDSM clients are:

#Considering BDSM to be unhealthy.
#Requiring a client to give up BDSM activities in order to continue in treatment.
#Confusing BDSM with abuse.
#Having to educate the therapist about BDSM.
#Assuming that BDSM interests are indicative of past family/spousal abuse.
#Therapists misrepresenting their expertise by stating that they are BDSM-positive when they are not actually knowledgeable about BDSM practices.

These same researchers suggested that therapists should be open to learning more about BDSM, to show comfort in talking about BDSM issues, and to understand and promote "safe, sane, consensual" BDSM. 

===Clinical issues===
Nichols (2006) compiled some common clinical issues: countertransference, non-disclosure, coming-out, partner/families, and bleed-through 

Countertransference is a common problem in clinical settings. Despite having no evidence, therapists may find themselves believing that their clients pathology is "self-evident". Therapists may feel intense disgust and aversive reactions. Feelings of countertransference can interfere with therapy. Another common problem is when clients conceal their sexual preferences from their therapists. This can compromise any therapy. To avoid non-disclosure, therapists are encouraged to communicate their openness in indirect ways with literatures and artworks in the waiting room. Therapists can also deliberately bring up BDSM topics during the course of therapy. With less informed therapists, sometimes they over-focus on clients sexuality which detracts from original issues such as family relationships, depression, etc. A special subgroup that needs counselling is the "newbie". Individuals just coming out might have internalized shame, fear, and self-hatred about their sexual preferences. Therapists need to provide acceptance, care, and model positive attitude; providing reassurance, Psychoeducation, and bibliotherapy for these clients is crucial. The average age when BDSM individuals realize their sexual preference is around 26 years. Many people hide their sexuality until they can no longer contain their desires. However, they may have married and/or had children by this point. Therefore, therapists need to facilitate couples counselling and disclosure. It is important for therapists to consider fairness to partner and family of clients. In situations when boundaries between roles in the bedroom and roles in the rest of the relationship blurs, a "bleed-through" problem has occurred. Therapists need to help clients resolve distress and deal with any underlying problems that led to the initial bleed-through.

== Spirituality ==
For many people, BDSM practices can lead to profound transcendental experiences, reminiscent of shamanic ordeals. Additionally, many have turned to various spiritual traditions to guide them ethically, or have sought to reconcile their BDSM desires with their chosen religious or spiritual tradition. BDSM spirituality groups have formed within local groups and on the Internet; there have also been BDSM support groups for members of particular religions, such as Defenders (a subgroup of the Roman Catholic DignityUSA), People of Leather Among You (connected with the Metropolitan Community Church), Black Leather Wings (for Neopagans) and Leather & Grace (for Unitarian Universalists).

== History ==

=== Origins ===
A fresco in the Etruscan Tomb of the Whipping, fifth century BC.
Copper engraving, about 1780.
Flagellation scene, illustration to Fanny Hill by douard-Henri Avril.

Practices of BDSM survive from some of the oldest textual records in the world, associated with rituals to the Goddess Inanna (Ishtar in Akkadian). Academic historian and archaeologist Anne O Nomis has undertaken research revealing cuneiform texts dedicated to Inanna which incorporate domination rituals. In particular she points to ancient writings such as Inanna and Ebih (in which the Goddess dominates Ebih), and Hymn to Inanna describing cross-dressing transformations and rituals "imbued with pain and ecstasy, bringing about initation and journeys of altered states of consciousness; punishment, moaning, ecstasy, lament and song, participants exhausting themselves in weeping and grief." Nomis, Anne O. (2013) 'The History & Arts of the Dominatrix' Mary Egan Publishing & Anna Nomis Ltd ISBN 978-0-9927010-0-0 p.59-60 "Lady of the Largest Heart" or "A Hymn to Inana C" available at Electronic Text Corpus of Sumerian Literature, University of Oxford http://etcsl.orinst.ox.ac.uk/section4/tr4073.htm lines 80-90 

During the ninth century BC, ritual flagellations were performed in Artemis Orthia, one of the most important religious areas of ancient Sparta, where the Cult of Orthia, a preolympic religion, was practiced. Here ritual flagellation called diamastigosis took place,in which young adolescent men were whipped in a ceremony overseen by the priestess. Nomis, Anne O. (2013) "The Ancient Dominatrix Goddess and her Priestess Initiates" in "The History & Arts of the Dominatrix" Mary Egan Publishing and Anna Nomis Ltd, pp.61-62 These are referred to by a number of ancient authors, including Pausanius (III, 16: 10-11). Pausanias III, 16: 10-11 viewable at: http://www.theoi.com/Text/Pausanias3B.html#16 

One of the oldest graphical proofs of sadomasochistic activities is found in the Etruscan Tomb of the Whipping near Tarquinia, which dates to the fifth century BC. Inside the tomb there is fresco which portrays two men who flagellate a woman with a cane and a hand during an erotic situation. Mario Moretti/Leonard von Matt: Etruskische Malerei in Tarquinia. Cologne 1974, Page 90, figs. 762-63, ISBN 978-3-7701-0541-0 Another reference related to flagellation is to be found in the sixth book of the Satires of the ancient Roman Poet Juvenal (1st2nd century A.D.), Juvenal: Satires 6, Lines 474511 further reference can be found in Petronius's Satyricon where a delinquent is whipped for sexual arousal. Petronius: Satyricon (lat.) Anecdotal narratives related to humans who have had themselves voluntary bound, flagellated or whipped as a substitute for sex or as part of foreplay reach back to the third and fourth century.

In Pompeii, a Whipstress figure with wings is depicted on the wall of the Villa of Mysteries, as part of an initiation of a young woman into the Mysteries. Nomis notes that the Whipstress role drove the sacred initiation of ceremonial death and rebirth. Nomis, Anne O. (2013) "The Whipstress and the Mysteries" in "The History & Arts of the Dominatrix" Mary Egan Publishing & Anna Nomis Ltd, UK. ISBN 978-0-9927010-0-0 pp.62-64 The archaic Greek Aphrodite may too once have been armed with an implement, with archaeological evidence of armed Aphrodites known as hoplismene known from a number of locations in Cythera, Acrocorinth and Sparta, Pausanias refers to them as being at the sanctuary of Aphrodite Urania in Cythera, a temple of Aphrodite on Acrocorinth's summit, and an ancient temple to Aphrodite with an upper storey in Sparta. See Pausanias III, 23:1, II, 5:1, III, 15:10. and which based on Nomis's study on Eastern Goddesses she notes may well have been a whip. 

The Kama Sutra of India describes four different kinds of hitting during lovemaking, the allowed regions of the human body to target and different kinds of joyful "cries of pain" practiced by bottoms. The collection of historic texts related to sensuous experiences explicitly emphasizes that impact play, biting and pinching during sexual activities should only be performed consensually since only some women consider such behavior to be joyful. From this perspective the Kama Sutra can be considered as one of the first written resources dealing with sadomasochistic activities and safety rules. Further texts with sadomasochistic connotation appear worldwide during the following centuries on a regular basis. Kamasutra by Mallanaga Vatsyayana, translated by Wendy Doniger, Oxford University Press 2003, ISBN 978-0-19-283982-4 Book II: Chapters 4,5,7,8, Pages 4564. 

There are anecdotal reports of people willingly being bound or whipped, as a prelude to or substitute for sex, during the 14th century. The medieval phenomenon of courtly love in all of its slavish devotion and ambivalence has been suggested by some writers to be a precursor of BDSM. Denis de Rougemont (1956), Love in the Western World: Describing the ideal of chast love influenced by the Cathar doctrines Arne Hoffmann: In Leder gebunden. Der Sadomasochismus in der Weltliteratur, Page 11, Ubooks 2007, ISBN 978-3-86608-078-2 (German) Some sources claim that BDSM as a distinct form of sexual behavior originated at the beginning of the 18th century when Western civilization began medically and legally categorizing sexual behavior (see Etymology).

The professional occupation of the Dominatrix has been traced by academic historian Anne O. Nomis from British Library Rare Book sources, which reveals flagellation practiced within an erotic setting recorded from at least the 1590s evidenced by a John Davies epigram, and other references to flogging schools in Shadwell's 'Virtuoso' (1676) and Troth's 'Knavery of Astrology' (1680). Jones, M (2007) "Print of the Month: The Cully Flaug'd" in British Printed Images (BPI) to 1700, Viewable at: http://www.bpi1700.org.uk/research/printOfTheMonth/december2007.html Nomis, Anne O (2013) "Flogging Schools and Their Cullies" in "The History & Arts of the Dominatrix" Mary Egan Publishing and Anna Nomis Ltd, 2013. ISBN 978-0-9927010-0-0 pp.80-81 Visual evidence such as mezzotints and print media is also identified revealing scenes of flagellation, such as "The Cully Flaug'd" from the British Museum collection. Jones, M (2007) "Print of the Month: The Cully Flaug'd" in British Printed Images (BPI) to 1700, Viewable at: http://www.bpi1700.org.uk/research/printOfTheMonth/december2007.html & ibid. 
 
John Cleland's novel Fanny Hill, published in 1749, incorporates a flagellation scene between the character's protagonist Fanny Hill and Mr Barville. John Cleland: Fanny Hill: Memoirs of a Woman of Pleasure, Penguin Classics, (7 January 1986), ISBN 978-0-14-043249-7 Page 180 ff A large number of flagellation publications followed, including "Fashionable Lectures Delivered With Birch Discipline" (c1761), promoting the names of ladies offering the service in a lecture room with rods and cat o' nine tails. Fashionable Lectures Delivered With Birch Discipline (c1761) British Library Rare Books, cited in Nomis (2013) op cit. 

Other sources give a broader definition, citing BDSM-like behavior in earlier times and other cultures, such as the medieval flagellates and the physical ordeal rituals of some Native American societies. European medieval ordeals 

BDSM ideas and imagery have existed on the fringes of Western culture throughout the twentieth century. Robert Bienvenu attributes the origins of modern BDSM to three sources, which he names as "European Fetish" (from 1928), "American Fetish" (from 1934), and "Gay Leather" (from 1950). Robert Bienvenu: Doctoral Dissertation "The Development of Sadomasochism as a Cultural Style in the Twentieth-Century United States" Another source are the sexual games played in brothels, which go back into the 19th century if not earlier. Irving Klaw, during the 1950s and 1960s, produced some of the first commercial film and photography with a BDSM theme (most notably with Bettie Page) and published comics by the now-iconic bondage artists John Willie and Eric Stanton.

Stanton's model Bettie Page became at the same time one of the first successful models in the area of fetish photography and one of the most famous pin-up girls of American mainstream culture. Italian author and designer Guido Crepax was deeply influenced by him, coining the style and development of European adult comics in the second half of the twentieth century. The artists Helmut Newton and Robert Mapplethorpe are the most prominent examples of the increasing use of BDSM-related motives in modern photography and the public discussions still resulting from this. University of Central England in Birmingham: Attempted Confiscation of Mapplethorn book by Officials in 1997 for being obscene. 

Alfred Binet first coined the term erotic fetishism in his 1887 book, Du ftichisme dans lamour Binet, A. (1887). "Du ftichisme dans lamour" in love in: Revue Philosophique, 24, pp. 143167 

Richard von Krafft-Ebing saw BDSM interests as the end of a continuum. von Krafft-Ebing R. Psychopathia sexualis with especial reference to the antipathic sexual instinct: A medico-forensic study. Trans Rebman FJ from 12th German ed. New York: Special Books; 1965:129 218, 533543 

=== Leather movement ===

Start of the Leather contingent at the 2004 San Francisco gay pride parade.
Leather has been a predominantly gay male term to refer to one fetish, but it can stand for many more. Members of the gay male leather community may wear leathers such as Motorcycle leathers, and/or may be attracted to men wearing leather. Leather and BDSM are seen as two parts of one whole. Much of the BDSM culture can be traced back to the gay male leather culture, which formalized itself out of the group of men who were soldiers returning home after World War II (19391945). Robert Bienvenu, The Development of Sadomasochism as a Cultural Style in the Twentieth-Century United States, 2003, Doctoral Dissertation, Online as PDF on Sadomasochism as a Cultural Style WWII was the setting where countless homosexual men and women tasted the life among homosexual peers. Post-war, homosexual individuals congregated in larger cities such as New York, Chicago, San Francisco, and Los Angeles. They formed leather clubs and bike clubs, some were fraternal services. The establishment of Mr. Leather Contest and Mr. Drummer Contest were made around this time. This was the genesis of the gay male leather community. Many of the members were attracted to extreme forms of sexuality, for which peak expression was in the pre-AIDS 1970s. Lenius, S. (2001). Bisexuals and BDSM. Journal of Bisexuality, 1(4), 69-78 This subculture is epitomized by the Leatherman's Handbook by Larry Townsend, published in 1972, which describes in detail the practices and culture of gay male sadomasochists in the late 1960s and early 1970s. Townsend, Larry The Leatherman's Handbook 1972 Olympia Press, seventh edition 2004 available from L.T. Publications P.O. Box 302, Beverly Hills, California 90213-0302 compare Patrick Califia (Edit.), Robin Sweeney (Edit.): The Second Coming: A Leatherdyke Reader. Alyson Pubns, 1996, ISBN 978-1-55583-281-0 
In the early 1980s, lesbians also joined the leathermen as a recognizable element of the gay leather community. They also formed leather clubs, but there were some gender differences such as the absence of leatherwomens bar. In 1981, the publication of Coming to Power by lesbian-feminist group Samois led to a greater knowledge and acceptance of BDSM in the lesbian community. Gayle Rubin: Samois, Leather Times, 21:37., 2004, available from: leatherarchives.org By the 1990s, the gay mens and womens leather communities were no longer underground and played an important role in the kink community. 

Today the Leather Movement is generally seen as a part of the BDSM-culture instead of as a development deriving from gay subculture, even if a huge part of the BDSM-subculture was gay in the past. In the 1990s the so-called New Guard leather subculture evolved. This new orientation started to integrate psychological aspects into their play.

===Internet===
In the late-eighties, the Internet provided a way of finding people with specialized interests around the world as well as on a local level, and communicating with them anonymously. Roy D'Silva, Published 17 September 2007: Alternate Lifestyles: What they had to do with MSN-chat This brought about an explosion of interest and knowledge of BDSM, particularly on the usenet group alt.sex.bondage. When that group became too cluttered with spam, the focus moved to soc.subculture.bondage-bdsm.

In addition to traditional sex shops, which sell sex paraphernalia, there has also been an explosive growth of online adult toy companies that specialize in leather/latex gear and BDSM toys. Once a very niche market, there are now very few sex toy companies that do not offer some sort of BDSM or fetish gear in their catalog. Kinky elements seem to have worked their way into "vanilla" markets. The former niche expanded to an important pillar of the business with adult accessories. Today practically all suppliers of sex toys do offer items which originally found usage in the BDSM subculture. Padded handcuffs, latex and leather garments, as well as more exotic items like soft whips for fondling and TENS for erotic electro stimulation can be found in catalogs aiming on classical vanilla target groups, indicating that former boundaries increasingly seem to shift.

During the last years the Internet also provides a central platform for networking among individuals who are interested in the subject. Besides countless private and commercial choices there is an increasing number of local networks and support groups emerging. These groups often offer comprehensive background and health related information for people who have been unwillingly outed as well as contact lists with information on psychologists, physicians and lawyers who are familiar with BDSM related topics. 

=== Etymology ===
Portrait of Marquis de Sade by Charles-Amde-Philippe van Loo (1761)

The terms sadism and masochism are derived from the names of the Marquis de Sade and Leopold von Sacher-Masoch, based on the content of the authors' works. Although the names of the Sade and Sacher-Masoch are attached to the terms sadism and masochism respectively, the scenes described in Sade's works do not meet modern BDSM standards of informed consent. cp: Marquis de Sade: The 120 Days of Sodom, Pbl. ReadHowYouWant, (1 December 2006), ISBN 978-1-4250-3448-1, pages 407409 "'You'll have no further use for these,' he muttered, casting each article into a large grate. 'No further need for this mantelet, this dress, these stockings, this bodice, no,' said he when all had been consumed, 'all you'll need now is a coffin.'" BDSM is solely based on consensual activities, and based on its system and laws, the concepts presented by Sade are not agreed upon the BDSM culture, even though they are sadistic in nature. In 1843 the Hungarian physician Heinrich Kaan published Psychopathia sexualis ("Psychopathy of Sex"), a writing in which he converts the sin conceptions of Christianity into medical diagnoses. With his work the originally theological terms "perversion", "aberration" and "deviation" became part of the scientific terminology for the first time. The German psychiatrist Richard von Krafft Ebing introduced the terms "Sadism" and "Masochism" to the medical community in his work Neue Forschungen auf dem Gebiet der Psychopathia sexualis ("New research in the area of Psychopathy of Sex") in 1890. Details describing the development of the theoretical construct "Perversion" by Krafft-Ebing and his relation to this terms, see Andrea Beckmann, Journal of Criminal Justice and Popular Culture, 8(2) (2001) 6695 online at Deconstructing Myths 

In 1905, Sigmund Freud described "Sadism" and "Masochism" in his Drei Abhandlungen zur Sexualtheorie ("Three papers on Sexual theory") as diseases developing from an incorrect development of the child psyche and laid the groundwork for the scientific perspective on the subject in the following decades. This led to the first time use of the compound term Sado-Masochism (German "Sado-Masochismus") by the Viennese Psychoanalytic Isidor Isaak Sadger in its work ber den sado-masochistischen Komplex ("Regarding the sadomasochistic complex") in 1913. Isidor Isaak Sadger: ber den sado-masochistischen Komplex. in: Jahrbuch fr psychoanalytische und psychopathologische Forschungen, Bd. 5, 1913, S. 157232 (German) 

In the later 20th century, BDSM activists have protested against these conceptual models. Not only were these models were derived from the philosophies of two singular historical figures. Both Freud and Krafft-Ebing were psychiatrists. Their observations on Sadism and Masochism were dependent on psychiatric patients, and their models were built on the assumption of Psychopathology. Krueger & Kaplan 2001, p. 393: "The DSM nomenclature referring to sexual psychopathology has been criticized as being vague and not having undergone DSM field trials." BDSM activists argues that it is illogical to attribute human behavioural phenomena as complex as sadism and masochism to the 'inventions' of two historic individuals. Advocates of BDSM have sought to distinguish themselves from widely held notions of antiquated psychiatric theory by the adoption of the initialized term, "BDSM" as a distinction from the now common usage of those psychological terms, abbreviated as "S&M".

== Legal status ==

Bondage cuffs
A bit gag used in BDSM made of leather, steel and wood

The legal status of BDSM is entirely dependent on the legal structure of individual countries. Each individual country makes its own determination to whether the practice of BDSM has any criminal relevance or legal consequences. Criminalization of consensually implemented BDSM practices is usually not with explicit reference to BDSM itself (i.e., spanking an adult who specifically requests another to do such action to the requesting person), but results from the fact that such behavior could be considered a breach of personal rights, which in principle constitutes a criminal offense though some jurisdictions especially in the United States do specifically list such acts as flagellation (spanking) between consenting adults as "assault" regardless of consent between such consenting parties.

In Germany, Netherlands, Japan and Scandinavia such behavior is legal in principle. In Austria the legal status is unclear, while in Switzerland certain BDSM practices can be considered criminal. Spectacular incidents like the US-American scandal of People v. Jovanovic and the British Operation Spanner demonstrate the degree to which difficult grey areas can pose a problem for the individuals and authorities involved. For these reasons it is important for practitioners of BDSM to learn the legal status concerning BDSM activities in the country they reside in.

=== Germany ===
The practice of BDSM is not generally penalized in Germany if it is conducted with the mutual consent of the partners involved. To fulfill the charge of coercion the use of violence, or the threat of a "severe mistreatment" must involve an endangerment to life and limb. In cases where the continued application of the treatment could be ended through the use of a safeword, neither coercion nor sexual coercion may be charged. Similar principles apply for charges of sexual abuse of people incapable of resistance. In such cases taking advantage of a person's inability to resist in order to perform sexual acts on that person would be clearly punishable. The potential use of the safeword is considered to be sufficient possibility for resistance since this would lead to the cessation of the act, so a true inability to resist is not considered to be in effect.

According to 194 the charge of insult (slander) can only be prosecuted if the defamed person chooses to press charges. False imprisonment can be charged if the victimwhen applying an objective viewcan be considered to be impaired in his or her rights of free movement. According to 228 of the German criminal code a person inflicting a bodily injury on another person with that person's permission violates the law only in cases where the act can be considered to have violated good morals in spite of permission having been given. On 26 May 2004 the Criminal Panel No. 2 of the Bundesgerichtshof (German Federal Court) ruled that sado-masochistically motivated physical injuries are not per se indecent and thus subject to 228. Decision of the Bundesgerichtshof, 26 May 2004, 2 StR 505/03, which may be found at: BGHSt 49, 166 (bundesgerichtshof.de) 

Still, this ruling makes the question of indecency dependent on the degree to which the bodily injury might be likely to impair the health of the receiving party. According to the BGH, the line of indecency is definitively crossed when "under an objectively prescient consideration of all relevant circumstances the party granting consent could be brought into concrete danger of death by the act of bodily injury". In its ruling, the court overturned a verdict by the Provincial Court of Kassel, according to which a man who had accidentally strangled his partner to death had been sentenced to probation for negligent manslaughter. The court had rejected a conviction on charges of bodily injury leading to death on the grounds that the victim had, in its opinion, consented to the act.

Following cases in which sado-masochistic practices had been repeatedly used as pressure tactics against former partners in custody cases, the Appeals Court of Hamm ruled in February 2006 that sexual inclinations toward sado-masochism are no indication of a lack of capabilities for successful child-raising. Appeals Court of Hamm in its judgement of 1 February 2006, case number 10 UF 147/04, available online at the Portal of the North Rhine-Westfalian Ministry of Justice (German) 

=== United Kingdom ===
In British law, consent is an absolute defence to common assault, but not necessarily to actual bodily harm, where courts may decide that consent is not valid, as occurred in the case of R v Brown. Accordingly consensual activities in the UK may not constitute "assault occasioning actual or grievous bodily harm" in law. The Spanner Trust states that this is defined as activities which have caused injury "of a lasting nature" but that only a slight duration or injury might be considered "lasting" in law. The decision contrasts with the later case of R v Wilson in which conviction for non-sexual consensual branding within a marriage was overturned, the appeal court ruling that R v Brown was not an authority in all cases of consensual injury and criticizing the decision to prosecute. R v Wilson (1996). Text of ruling online at: 

Following Operation Spanner the European Court of Human Rights ruled in January 1999 in Laskey, Jaggard and Brown v. United Kingdom that no violation of Article 8 occurred because the amount of physical or psychological harm that the law allows between any two people, even consenting adults, is to be determined by the jurisdiction the individuals live in, as it is the State's responsibility to balance the concerns of public health and well-being with the amount of control a State should be allowed to exercise over its citizens. In the Criminal Justice and Immigration Bill 2007, the British Government cited the Spanner case as justification for criminalizing images of consensual acts, as part of its proposed criminalization of possession of "extreme pornography". House of Commons: Criminal Justice And Immigration Bill Another contrasting case was that of Stephen Lock in 2013, who was cleared of actual bodily harm on the grounds that the woman consented. In this case, the act was deemed to be sexual. 

===United States===
The United States Federal law does not list a specific criminal determination for consensual BDSM acts. Many BDSM practitioners cite the legal decision of People v. Jovanovic, 95 N.Y.2d 846 (2000), or the "Cybersex Torture Case" which was the first U.S. appellate decision to hold (in effect) one does not commit assault if victim consents. However, many individual states do criminalize specific BDSM actions within their state borders. Some states specifically address the idea of "consent to BDSM acts" within their assault laws such as the state of New Jersey which states "simple assault" to be defined as "a disorderly persons offense unless committed in a fight or scuffle entered into by mutual consent, in which case it is a petty disorderly persons offense". New Jersey NJ Criminal Offenses BDSM activities including flagellation (spanking) specifically without paying for such action (i.e., prostitution) between consenting adults are specifically addressed as illegal in certain individual states.

===Canada===
In 2004 a judge in Canada ruled that videos seized by the police featuring BDSM activities were not obscene, and did not constitute violence, but a "normal and acceptable" sexual activity between two consenting adults. 

In 2011, the Supreme Court of Canada ruled in R. v. J.A. that a person must have an active mind during the specific sexual activity in order to legally consent. The Court ruled that it is a criminal offence to perform a sexual act on an unconscious personwhether or not that person consented in advance. 

=== Italy ===
In Italian law BDSM is right on the border between crime and legality, and everything lies in the interpretation of the legal code by the judge. This concept is that anyone willingly causing "injury" to another person is to be punished. In this context though "injury" is legally defined as "anything causing a condition of illness", and "illness" is ill-defined itself in two different legal ways. The first is "any anatomical or functional alteration of the organism" (thus technically including little scratches and bruises too); The second is "a significant worsening of a previous condition relevant to organic and relational processes, requiring any kind of therapy". This could make it somewhat risky to play with someone as later the "victim" may call foul play citing even an insignificant mark as evidence against the partner. Also any injury requiring over 20 days of medical care must be denounced by the professional medic who discovers it, leading to automatic indictment of the person who caused it. Ayzad, BDSM  Guida per esploratori dell'erotismo estremo, Castelvecchi, 2004 ISBN 978-88-7615-025-8 

=== Austria ===
90 of the criminal code declares bodily injury ( 83, 84) or the endangerment of physical security (89) to not be subject to penalty in cases in which the "victim" has consented and the injury or endangerment does not offend moral sensibilities. Case law from the Austrian Supreme Court has consistently shown that bodily injury is only offensive to moral sensibilities, thus it is only punishable when a "serious injury" (a damage to health or an employment disability lasting more than 24 days) or the death of the "victim" results. A light injury is generally considered permissible when the "victim" has consented to it. In cases of threats to bodily well-being the standard depends on the probability that an injury will actually occur. If serious injury or even death would be a likely result of a threat being carried out, then even the threat itself is considered punishable.

=== Switzerland ===
The age of consent in Switzerland is 16 years which also applies for BDSM play. Minors (i.e. those under 16) are not subject to punishment for BDSM play as long as the age difference between them is less than three years. Certain practices however require granting consent for light injuries with only those over 18 permitted to give consent. On 1 April 2002 Articles 135 and 197 of the Swiss Criminal Code were tightened to make ownership of "objects or demonstrations which depict sexual acts with violent content" a punishable offense. This law amounts to a general criminalization of sado-masochism since nearly every sado-masochist will have some kind of media which fulfills this criterion. Critics also object to the wording of the law which puts sado-masochists in the same category as pedophiles and pederasts. datenschlag.org(Oktober 2001) (German) Interessengemeinschaft BDSM Schweiz (German) 

=== Nordic countries ===
In September 2010 a Swedish court acquitted a 32 year old man of assault for engaging in consensual BDSM play with a 16 year old woman (the age of consent in Sweden is 15). Man freed in landmark S&M case Norway's legal system has likewise taken a similar position, SM og loven (Norwegian) that safe and consensual BDSM play should not be subject to criminal prosecution. This parallels the stance of the mental health professions in the Nordic countries which have removed sadomasochism from their respective lists of psychiatric illnesses.

== BDSM and culture ==

=== Theatre ===
Although it would be possible to establish certain elements related to BDSM in classical theater, not until the emergence of contemporary theatre could you see such topics as the main theme in the performing arts. Exemplifying this are two works: one Austrian, one German, in which BDSM is not only incorporated, but integral to the storyline of the play.

Worauf sich Krper kaprizieren, Austria. Peter Kern directs and writes the script for this comedy which is a present day adaption of Jean Genet's 1950 film, A chant d'amour. A marriage in which the wife (film veteran Miriam Goldschmidt) submits her husband (Heinrich Herkie) and the butler (Gnter Bubbnik) to her sadistic treatment, until two new characters take their places. Der Standard, edicin del 03.09.2006 

Ach, Hilde (Oh, Hilda), Germany. A play by Anna Schwemmer that premiered in Berlin. A young Hilde becomes pregnant, and after being abandoned by her boyfriend she decides to become a professional dominatrix to earn money. The play carefully crafts a playful and frivolous picture of the field of professional dominatrices. BILD-Zeitung, Berln, 15 March 1998 

=== Film ===
:With film, the human being reaches the fullness of their status as voyeur. The film almost needs not mention it, an indivisible part of the human condition since the beginning of the century and millennium. Revista Cinefagia, noviembre 2003 

Apart from films that are part of the commercial pornography circuit, cinema has been treated since its inception with in depth BDSM relationships, from 1909 to the present decade. The current decade in particular has an abundance of examples: Sade, Quills, The Piano Teacher, Beyond Vanilla, Secretary, Wir leben, Bitter Moon, Fifty Shades of Grey among others. The first feature film shown around the world at film festivals and in cinemas that was principally set in the BDSM and fetish lifestyle was the 1997 UK production Preaching to the Perverted (film), written and directed by Stuart Urban and starring Guinevere Turner. Filmed in a cartoon, high camp style, the film was also a political satire inspired by actual prosecutions of BDSM lifestyle practitioners such as Operation Spanner. It encountered censorship problems in the UK and USA and was the last film banned in Ireland in the twentieth century.

Naturally, there are thousands of movies that touch on or contain accents of BDSM or generic sadomasocism, or contain scenes of BDSM scenarios: Last Tango in Paris, Emmanuelle, Personal Services, Basic Instinct, Eyes Wide Shut, not to mention many others, but these are not seen as part of the filmography of BDSM.

=== Literature ===

Although examples of literature catering to BDSM and fetishistic taste was created in earlier periods, BDSM literature as it exists today cannot be found much earlier than World War II. However, such work as The Trial of Gilles de Rais that dates to 1440 with expressions that coincide with S&M refers as easily to sadist and masochist as to slave and master... a revealing and leveling equation: sadist-slave, masochist-master, both alternating as victims.

A central work in BDSM literature is undoubtedly the Story of O (1954) by Anne Desclos (under the pseudonym Pauline Rage) in addition to: 9  weeks (1978) by Elizabeth McNeill, Dezemberkind (2003, 2004) by Leander Sukov, works by Mitchell Joyce, The Third Secret of Fatima (2010), A Breed Apart (2010), and the Master Slave Encyclopaedia (2011), some works of the writer Anne Rice (Exit to Eden, The Claiming of Sleeping Beauty (1983), Beauty's Punishment (1984) and Beauty's Release (1985)), Jeanne de Berg (L'Image (1956) dedicated to Pauline Rage), and the novel Topping from Below(1999) by Laura Reese. Marthe Blau: Submission and Between Your Hands(2005). More recent works include E L James:Fifty Shades of Grey (2011), Fifty Shades Darker (2011) and Fifty Shades Freed (2012). Works from the Gor series by John Norman, and naturally all the works of Patrick Califia, Gloria Brame, the group Samois and many of the writer Georges Bataille (Histoire de l'oeil-Story of the Eye, Madame Edwarda, 1937), as well as Bob Flanagan: Slave Sonnets (1986), Fuck Journal (1987), A Taste of Honey (1990). A common part of many of the poems of Pablo Neruda is a reflection on feelings and sensations arising from the relations of EPE or erotic exchange of power.

=== Art ===

As in the case of literature a list of BDSM art should not include works of the early history depicting sadomasochism, flogging, fetishism, and so on., but should start when the integrative aspects of BDSM become visible. In this sense figures such as those from Venus de Kostienki, Russia (3000 BC) or engraved on the tomb and the sarcophagus of the Egyptian aristocrat Bastret (1376 BC) are not considered BDSM art (as depicting BDSM was not their primary purpose).
For art which is undeniably BDSM art, it follows that the artist has spent most or part of their work dealing with BDSM, so an image of flogging by an artist who does many BDSM works is probably depicting BDSM, while the same image done by a historic maritime artist depicting life aboard a British vessel would probably not be considered BDSM art (although context, and the work itself would usually ultimately determine what the subject matter is discussing). Examples include:

* In photography: Eric Kroll and Irving Klaw (with Bettie Page, the first bondage model), and Japanese photographer Araki Nobuyoshi, whose works are exhibited in several major art museums, galleries and private collections, such as the Baroness Marion Lambert, the world's largest holder of contemporary photographic art. Also Robert Mapplethorpe who has dealt with BDSM themes in many of his works.

* Comic book drawings: Guido Crepax with Histoire d'O (1975), Justine (1979) and Venere in Pelliccia (1984); inspired by the work of Pauline Rage, Sade and Leopold von Sacher-Masoch. John Willie and the Adventures of Sweet Gwendoline(1984) which was the basis for the film Gwendolyn.

* In graphic design: Eric Stanton and his work on dominance and female bondage, as well as Hajime Sorayama, Robert Bishop and Dolcetto.

== See also ==

== References ==

== Further reading ==

* Baldwin, Guy. Ties That Bind: SM/Leather/Fetish Erotic Style: Issues, Communication, and Advice, Daedalus Publishing, 1993. ISBN 978-1-881943-09-9.
* 
* Brame, Gloria G., Brame, William D., and Jacobs, Jon. Different Loving: An Exploration of the World of Sexual Dominance and Submission Villard Books, New York, 1993. ISBN 978-0-679-40873-4
* Brame, Gloria. Come Hither: A Commonsense Guide To Kinky Sex, Fireside, 2000. ISBN 978-0-684-85462-5.
* Califia, Pat. Sensuous Magic. New York, Masquerade Books, 1993. ISBN 978-1-56333-131-2
* 
* Dollie Llama. Diary of an S&M Romance., PEEP! Press (California), 2006, ISBN 978-0-9705392-5-0
* Henkin, Wiliiam A., Sybil Holiday. Consensual Sadomasochism: How to Talk About It and How to Do It Safely, Daedalus Publishing, 1996. ISBN 978-1-881943-12-9.
* Janus, Samuel S., and Janus, Cynthia L. The Janus Report on Sexual Behavior, John Wiley & Sons, 1994. ISBN 978-0-471-01614-4
* Masters, Peter. This Curious Human Phenomenon: An Exploration of Some Uncommonly Explored Aspects of BDSM. The Nazca Plains Corporation, 2008. ISBN 978-1-934625-68-2
* Phillips, Anita. A Defence of Masochism, Faber and Faber, New edition 1999. ISBN 978-0-571-19697-5
* Newmahr, Staci (2011). Playing on the Edge: Sadomasochism, Risk and Intimacy. Bloomington: Indiana University Press. ISBN 0-253-22285-0.
* Nomis, Anne O (2013) The History & Arts of the Dominatrix Mary Egan Publishing & Anna Nomis Ltd, UK. ISBN 978-0-9927010-0-0
* Rinella, Jack. The Complete Slave: Creating and Living an Erotic Dominant/submissive Lifestyle, Daedalus Publishing, 2002. ISBN 978-1-881943-13-6.
* Saez, Fernando y Viuales, Olga, Armarios de Cuero, Ed. Bellaterra, 2007. ISBN 978-84-7290-345-6
* Larry Townsend. Leatherman's Handbook First edition 1972 (This was the first book to publicize BDSM to the general publicit was a paperback book widely available on newsstands and at bookstores throughout the United States.)
* Wiseman, Jay. SM 101: A Realistic Introduction (1st ed., 1992); 2nd ed. Greenery Press, 2000. ISBN 978-0-9639763-8-3
* Byrne, Romana (2013) Aesthetic Sexuality: A Literary History of Sadomasochism, New York: Bloomsbury. ISBN 978-1-4411-0081-8

== External links ==

* BDSM Glossary
* London fetish scenea dedicated BDSM wiki
* KINK on DVD : Intimate stories of sexual lifestyles on the edge. A 63-episode documentary TV series



[[Bash (Unix shell)]]

Bash is a Unix shell written by Brian Fox for the GNU Project as a free software replacement for the Bourne shell (sh). 

 

 Released in 1989, 

 it has been distributed widely as the shell for the GNU operating system and as a default shell on Linux and Mac OS X. It has been ported to Microsoft Windows and distributed with Cygwin and MinGW, to DOS by the DJGPP project, to Novell NetWare and to Android via various terminal emulation applications.

Bash is a command processor, typically run in a text window, allowing the user to type commands which cause actions. Bash can also read commands from a file, called a script. Like all Unix shells, it supports filename wildcarding, piping, here documents, command substitution, variables and control structures for condition-testing and iteration. 
 The keywords, syntax and other basic features of the language were all copied from sh. Other features, e.g., history, were copied from csh and ksh. Bash is a POSIX shell but with a number of extensions.

The name itself is an acronym, a pun, and a description. As an acronym, it stands for Bourne-again shell, referring to its objective as a free replacement for the Bourne shell. C Programming by Al Stevens, Dr. Dobb's Journal, July 1, 2001 
As a pun, it expressed that objective in a phrase that sounds similar to born again, a term for spiritual rebirth. 

 

 The name is also descriptive of what it did, bashing together the features of sh, csh, and ksh. 

 

== History ==
Brian Fox began coding Bash on January 10, 1988 

 after Richard Stallman became dissatisfied with the lack of progress being made by a prior developer. Stallman and the Free Software Foundation (FSF) considered a free shell that could run existing sh scripts so strategic to a completely free system built from BSD and GNU code that this was one of the few projects they funded themselves, with Fox undertaking the work as an employee of FSF. 

 Fox released Bash as a beta, version .99, on June 7, 1989 and remained the primary maintainer until sometime between mid-1992 

 and mid-1994, when he was laid off from FSF 

 and his responsibility was transitioned to another early contributor, Chet Ramey. 

 

 

 

==Features==
The Bash command syntax is a superset of the Bourne shell command syntax. The vast majority of Bourne shell scripts can be executed by Bash without modification, with the exception of Bourne shell scripts stumbling into fringe syntax behavior interpreted differently in Bash or attempting to run a system command matching a newer Bash builtin, etc. Bash command syntax includes ideas drawn from the Korn shell (ksh) and the C shell (csh) such as command line editing, command history, the directory stack, the $RANDOM and $PPID variables, and POSIX command substitution syntax $(). When used as an interactive command shell and pressing the tab key, Bash automatically uses command line completion to match partly typed program names, filenames and variable names. The Bash command-line completion system is very flexible and customizable, and is often packaged with functions that complete arguments and filenames for specific programs and tasks.

Bash's syntax has many extensions lacking in the Bourne shell. Bash can perform integer calculations without spawning external processes. It uses the (()) command and the $(()) variable syntax for this purpose. It syntax simplifies I/O redirection. For example, it can redirect standard output (stdout) and standard error (stderr) at the same time using the &> operator. This is simpler to type than the Bourne shell equivalent 'command > file 2>&1'. Bash supports process substitution using the <(command)syntax, which substitutes the output of (or input to) a command where a filename is normally used.

When using the 'function' keyword, Bash function declarations are not compatible with Bourne/Korn/POSIX scripts (the Korn shell has the same problem when using 'function'), but Bash accepts the same function declaration syntax as the Bourne and Korn shells, and is POSIX-conformant. Because of these and other differences, Bash shell scripts are rarely runnable under the Bourne or Korn shell interpreters unless deliberately written with that compatibility in mind, which is becoming less common as Linux becomes more widespread. But in POSIX mode, 

 Bash conformance with POSIX is nearly perfect.

Bash supports here documents. Since version 2.05b Bash can redirect standard input (stdin) from a "here string" using the <<< operator.

Bash 3.0 supports in-process regular expression matching using a syntax reminiscent of Perl. The syntax matches that shown on the [http://www.tin.org/bin/man.cgi?section=7&topic=regex regex(7)] man page. 

Bash 4.0 introduced support for associative arrays. "The shell provides associative array variables, with the appropriate support to create, delete, assign values to, and expand them." http://tiswww.case.edu/php/chet/bash/NEWS Associative arrays allow a fake support for multi-dimensional (indexed) arrays, in a similar way to AWK:

declare -A a # declare an associative array 'a' faking a bi-dimensional indexed array
i=1; j=2 # initialize some indices
a[$i,$j]=5 # associate value "5" to key "$i,$j" (i.e. "1,2")
echo ${a[$i,$j]} # print the stored value at key "$i,$j"

===Brace expansion===

Brace expansion, also called alternation, is a feature copied from the C shell. It generates a set of alternative combinations. Generated results need not exist as files. The results of each expanded string are not sorted and left to right order is preserved:

echo a{p,c,d,b}e # ape ace ade abe
echo {a,b,c}{d,e,f} # ad ae af bd be bf cd ce cf

Brace expansions should not be used in portable shell scripts, because the Bourne shell will not produce the same output.

#!/bin/sh

# A traditional shell does not produce the same output
echo a{p,c,d,b}e # a{p,c,d,b}e

When brace expansion is combined with wildcards, the braces are expanded first, and then the resulting wildcards are substituted normally. Hence, a listing of JPEG and PNG images in the current directory could be obtained using:

ls *.{jpg,jpeg,png} # expands to *.jpg *.jpeg *.png - after which,
 # the wildcards are processed

===Startup scripts===
When Bash starts, it executes the commands in a variety of dot files. Though similar to Bash shell script commands, which have execute permission enabled and an directive of #!/bin/bash, the default dot files used by Bash require neither.

====Execution order of startup files====

=====When started as an interactive login shell=====
Bash reads and executes /etc/profile (if it exists). (Often this file calls /etc/bash.bashrc.)

After reading that file, it looks for ~/.bash_profile, ~/.bash_login, and ~/.profile in that order, and reads and executes the first one that exists and is readable.

=====When a login shell exits=====
Bash reads and executes ~/.bash_logout (if it exists).

=====When started as an interactive shell (but not a login shell)=====
Bash reads and executes ~/.bashrc (if it exists). This may be inhibited by using the --norc option. The --rcfile file option will force Bash to read and execute commands from file instead of ~/.bashrc.

====Comparison with the Bourne shell and csh startup sequences====

Elements of Bash were derived from the Bourne shell and csh, and allow limited startup file sharing with the Bourne shell and provide some startup features familiar to users of the csh.

=====Setting inheritable environment variables=====
In the Bourne shell, the ~/.profile is used at login for setting environment variables which are then inherited by subprocesses. For Bash, the ~/.profile can still be used in a compatible way, by executing it explicitly from the Bash-specific ~/.bash_profile or ~/.bash_login with the line below. Bash-specific syntax can be kept out of the ~/.profile to keep the latter compatible with the Bourne shell.
. ~/.profile

=====Aliases and Functions=====
These two facilities, aliases from csh and the more general functions largely superseding them from Bourne shell, were not typically inheritable from the login shell and had to be redefined in each subshell spawned from the login shell. Although there is an ENV environment variable that could be applied to the problem, both csh and Bash support per-subshell startup files which address it directly. In Bash, the ~/.bashrc is called for interactive subshells. If user-defined functions from the ~/.bashrc are desired in the login shell as well, the ~/.bash_login can include the line below after any setting up of environment variables:
. ~/.bashrc

=====Commands performed only at login and logout=====
The csh supports a ~/.login file for purposes of tasks performed only during initial login, such as displaying system load, disk status, whether email has come in, logging the login time, etc. The Bourne shell can emulate this in the ~/.profile, but doesn't predefine a file name. To achieve similar semantics to the csh model, the ~/.bash_profile can contain the line below, after the environment setup and function setup:
. ~/.bash_login 
Likewise, the csh has a ~/.logout file run only when the login shell exits. The Bash equivalent is ~/.bash_logout, and requires no special setup. In the Bourne shell, the trap built-in can be used to achieve a similar effect. 

=====Legacy-compatible Bash startup example=====

The skeleton ~/.bash_profile below is compatible with the Bourne shell and gives semantics similar to csh for the ~/.bashrc and ~/.bash_login. The [ -r filename ] are tests to see if the filename exists and is readable, simply skipping the part after the && if it's not.

[ -r ~/.profile ] && . ~/.profile # set up environment, once, Bourn-sh syntax only.
if [ -n "$PS1" ] ; then # are we interactive?
 [ -r ~/.bashrc ] && . ~/.bashrc # tty/prompt/function setup for interactive shells.
 [ -r ~/.bash_login ] && . ~/.bash_login # any at-login tasks for login shell only.
fi

====Operating system issues in Bash startup====

Some versions of Unix and Linux contain Bash system startup scripts, generally under the /etc directories, which are called as part of standard Bash initialization but which themselves may read in other startup files in a different order than that in the documented Bash startup sequence. The default content of the root user's files may also have issues, as well as the skeleton files provided to new user accounts upon setup. The startup scripts that launch the X window system may also do surprising things with the user's Bash startup scripts in an attempt to set up the user's environment variables before launching the window manager, but are often addressable using a ~/.xsession or ~/.xprofile file to read the ~/.profile, which provides the environment variables needed for the Bash shell windows spawned from the window manager, such as xterm or Gnome Terminal.

===Portability===
Invoking Bash with the --posix option or stating set -o posix in a script causes Bash to conform very closely to the POSIX 1003.2 standard. 
Bash shell scripts intended for portability should at least take into account the Bourne shell it intends to replace. 
Bash has certain features that the traditional Bourne shell lacks. Among these are: 
*Certain extended invocation options
*Command substitution using $( ) notation (this feature is part of the POSIX 1003.2 standard though)
*Brace expansion
*Certain array operations, and associative arrays
*The double brackets extended test construct
*The double-parentheses arithmetic-evaluation construct
*Certain string manipulation operations
*Process substitution
*A Regular Expression matching operator
*Bash-specific builtins
*Coprocesses

===Keyboard shortcuts===
The following shortcuts work when using default (Emacs) key bindings. Vi-bindings can be enabled by running set -o vi. 

Note: For shortcuts involving , you may be able to use instead.

Note: Sometimes, you must use instead of , because the shortcut conflicts with another shortcut. For example, in Trisquel 5.0 (a distribution of Linux), pressing will not move the cursor forward one word, but will activate "File" in the menu of the terminal window.

* : Autocompletes from the cursor position.
* : Moves the cursor to the line start (equivalent to the key ).
* : Moves the cursor back one character (equivalent to the key ).
* : Sends the signal SIGINT to the current task, which aborts and closes it.
* 
** Sends an EOF marker, which (unless disabled by an option) closes the current shell (equivalent to the command [[exit (command)|exit]]). (Only if there is no text on the current line)
** If there is text on the current line, deletes the current character (then equivalent to the key ).
* : (end) moves the cursor to the line end (equivalent to the key ).
* : Moves the cursor forward one character (equivalent to the key ).
* : Abort the research and restore the original line.
* : Deletes the previous character (same as backspace).
* : Equivalent to the tab key.
* : Equivalent to the enter key.
* : Clears the line content after the cursor and copies it into the clipboard.
* : Clears the screen content (equivalent to the command [[clear (Unix)|clear]]).
* : (next) recalls the next command (equivalent to the key ).
* : Executes the found command from history, and fetch the next line relative to the current line from the history for editing.
* : (previous) recalls the prior command (equivalent to the key ).
* : (research) recalls the last command including the specified character(s). A second recalls the next anterior command which corresponds to the research
* : Go back to the next more recent command of the research (beware to not execute it from a terminal because this command also launches its XOFF). If you changed that XOFF setting, use to return.
* : Transpose the previous two characters.
* : Clears the line content before the cursor and copies it into the clipboard.
* : If the next input is also a control sequence, type it literally (e. g. * types "^H", a literal backspace.)
* : Clears the word before the cursor and copies it into the clipboard.
* : Edits the current line in the $EDITOR program, or vi if undefined.
* : Read in the contents of the inputrc file, and incorporate any bindings or variable assignments found there.
* : Incremental undo, separately remembered for each line.
* : Display version information about the current instance of bash.
* : Alternates the cursor with its old position. (C-x, because x has a crossing shape).
* : (yank) adds the clipboard content from the cursor position.
* : Sends the signal SIGTSTP to the current task, which suspends it. To execute it in background one can enter bg. To bring it back from background or suspension fg ['process name or job id'] (foreground) can be issued.
* : Incremental undo, separately remembered for each line.
* : (backward) moves the cursor backward one word.
* : Capitalizes the character under the cursor and moves to the end of the word.
* : Cuts the word after the cursor.
* : (forward) moves the cursor forward one word.
* : Lowers the case of every character from the cursor's position to the end of the current word.
* : Cancels the changes and puts back the line as it was in the history.
* : Capitalizes every character from the cursor's position to the end of the current word.
* : Insert the last argument to the previous command (the last word of the previous history entry).

=== Processes management ===
In Bash shell processes can be executed in batch (Unix) or concurrent mode.

To execute commands in batch (i.e., in sequence) they must be separated by the character ";":

command1; command2

in this example, when command1 is finished, command2 is executed.

To have a concurrent execution of command1 and command2, they must be executed in the bash shell in the following way:

command1 &; command2

In this case command1 is executed in background (symbol &), returning immediately the control to the shell that executes command2.

Summarizing:
*Normally a command is executed in foreground (fg). The control of the shell returns to the user after the command finishes its execution.
*with the symbol & after the command, it can be executed in background (bg). The shell is ready to execute other commands, concurrently to the first command.
*A program in the running state and in foreground (fg) can be suspended pressing CTRL-Z
*A suspended program can be restarted in foreground using the command fg or background using the command bg.

==See also==

* Comparison of command shells

==References==

==External links==

* 
* Bash Reference Manual (HTML PS PDF)

* 
* 
* Linux Shell Scripting Tutorial (LSST) v2.0 wiki
* "The Comprehensive List of bash Reference Documentation and Examples"
* Useful Bash History Tips and Tricks
* 2008 interview with GNU Bash's maintainer, Chet Ramey
* Working with BASH environment variables
* Video Tutorial for Creating a Bash Script
* Bash commands and examples
* Colorized Bash prompt - how to set up a colorized Bash prompt based on the current connection method (SSH, telnet, etc.).
* jBash Project is a Java Parser for the Bourne Again Shell
* The 'official' channel FAQ for freenode's #bash channel is BashFAQ.
* BASHDB - Bash with a built-in debugger.
* Bash Quick Reference card <-- Dates from 1999 and version 2.02.0 of BASH. Very old.
* Beginner Linux Command Line Tutorial - Covers the basics, all the way up to scripting.
* Bash tutorial - A quick tutorial about bash shell, with the explanation of the most useful commands. Slides provided.



[[Blizzard]]

Visibility reduced by blowing snow during a blizzard
A blizzard is a severe snowstorm characterized by strong sustained winds of at least 56 km/h and lasting for a prolonged period of time  typically three hours or more. A ground blizzard is a weather condition where snow is not falling but loose snow on the ground is lifted and blown by strong winds.
Blizzard into Tochal Skiing resort, Tehran and involved skiers.

==Definition==
In the United States, the National Weather Service defines a blizzard as a severe snowstorm characterized by strong winds causing blowing snow that results in low visibilities. The difference between a blizzard and a snowstorm is the strength of the wind, not the amount of snow. To be a blizzard, a snow storm must have sustained winds or frequent gusts that are greater than or equal to 56 km/h with blowing or drifting snow which reduces visibility to 400 m or less and must last for a prolonged period of time  typically three hours or more. Blizzards 

Impact of blizzard in Serra da Estrela, Portugal While severe cold and large amounts of drifting snow may accompany blizzards, they are not required. Blizzards can bring whiteout conditions, and can paralyze regions for days at a time, particularly where snowfall is unusual or rare.

A severe blizzard has winds over
72 km/h, near zero visibility, and temperatures of -12 C or lower. "Blizzard" Encyclopdia Britannica Online retrieved 17 March 2012 In Antarctica, blizzards are associated with winds spilling over the edge of the ice plateau at an average velocity of 160 km/h. 

Ground blizzard refers to a weather condition where loose snow or ice on the ground is lifted and blown by strong winds. The primary difference between a ground blizzard as opposed to a regular blizzard is that in a ground blizzard no precipitation is produced at the time, but rather all the precipitation is already present in the form of snow or ice at the surface.
Drifted snow near Burrow-with-Burrow, Lancashire, England, January 1963
The Australia Bureau of Meteorology describes a blizzard as, "Violent and very cold wind which is laden with snow, some part, at least, of which has been raised from snow covered ground."
 

Blizzard conditions of cold temperatures and strong winds can cause wind chill values that can result in hypothermia or frostbite. The wind chill factor is the amount of cooling the human body feels due to the combination of wind and temperature.

==Blizzards in Australia==

Blizzards are not common in mainland Australia, but occur frequently in the Snowy Mountains in New South Wales and Victoria. When blizzards do occur, they can affect the Tasmanian Highlands and, particularly, Mount Wellington, which towers over the Tasmanian capital Hobart. Blizzards do not affect any major towns or cities, because there are no populated areas located in the mountains except for the ski resort towns of New South Wales and Victoria.

==United States storm systems==
Duluth, Minnesota blizzard, March 2007
March blizzard in North Dakota, 1966. Caption jokingly reads "I believe there is a train under here somewhere!"

In the United States, storm systems powerful enough to cause blizzards usually form when the jet stream dips far to the south, allowing cold, dry polar air from the north to clash with warm, humid air moving up from the south. weather.com - Storm Encyclopedia They are most common in the Great Plains, the Great Lakes states, and the northeastern states along the coast, and less common in the Pacific Northwest.

When cold, moist air from the Pacific Ocean moves eastward to the Rocky Mountains and the Great Plains, and warmer, moist air moves north from the Gulf of Mexico, all that is needed is a movement of cold polar air moving south to form potential blizzard conditions that may extend from the Texas panhandle to the Great Lakes.

Another storm system occurs when a cold core low over the Hudson Bay area in Canada is displaced southward over southeastern Canada, the Great Lakes, and New England. When the rapidly moving cold front collides with warmer air coming north from the Gulf of Mexico, strong surface winds, a lot of cold air advection, and extensive wintry precipitation occur.

Conditions approaching a blizzard whiteout in Minnesota, on March 1, 2007. Note the unclear horizon near the center.

Low pressure systems moving out of the Rocky Mountains onto the Great Plains, a broad expanse of flat land, much of it covered in prairie, steppe and grassland, can cause thunderstorms and rain to the south and heavy snows and strong winds to the north. With few trees or other obstructions to reduce wind and blowing, this part of the country is particularly vulnerable to blizzards with very low temperatures and whiteout conditions. In a true whiteout there is no visible horizon. People can become lost in their own front yards, when the door is only 10 ft away, and they would have to feel their way back. Motorists have to stop their cars where they are, as the road is impossible to see.
Nor'easter of 1996 snowdrifts, Yonkers, New York.

===Nor'easter blizzards===

A nor'easter is a macro-scale storm along the East Coast of the United States and Atlantic Canada; it gets its name from the direction the wind is coming from. The usage of the term in North America comes from the wind associated with many different types of storms some of which can form in the North Atlantic Ocean and some of which form as far south as the Gulf of Mexico. The term is most often used in the coastal areas of New England and Atlantic Canada. This type of storm has characteristics similar to a hurricane. More specifically it describes a low-pressure area whose center of rotation is just off the East Coast and whose leading winds in the left-forward quadrant rotate onto land from the northeast. High storm waves may sink ships at sea and cause coastal flooding and beach erosion. Notable nor'easters include The Great Blizzard of 1888, one of the worst blizzards in U.S. history. It dropped 40 - of snow and killed 400 people, mostly in New York.

==Historic events==

===1972 Iran blizzard===
The 1972 Iran Blizzard, which caused approximately 4,000 deaths, was the deadliest blizzard in recorded history. Dropping as much as 10 to 26 feet of snow, it completely covered 200 villages. After a snowfall lasting nearly a week, an area the size of Wisconsin was entirely buried in snow. 40 Years Ago, Iran Was Hit by the Deadliest Blizzard in History | Mental Floss 

===The Snow Winter of 18801881===
A snow blockade in southern Minnesota. On March 29, 1881, snowdrifts in Minnesota were higher than locomotives.

The winter of 18801881 is widely considered the most severe winter ever known in the United States. Many children  and their parents  learned of "The Snow Winter" through the children's book The Long Winter by Laura Ingalls Wilder, in which the author tells of her family's efforts to survive. The snow arrived in October 1880 and blizzard followed blizzard throughout the winter and into March 1881, leaving many areas snowbound throughout the entire winter. Accurate details in Wilder's novel include the blizzards' frequency and the deep cold, the Chicago and North Western Railway stopping trains until the spring thaw because the snow made the tracks impassable, the near-starvation of the townspeople, and the courage of her husband Almanzo and another man, who ventured out on the open prairie in search of a cache of wheat that no one was even sure existed.

The October blizzard brought snowfalls so deep that two-story homes had snow up to the second floor windows. No one was prepared for the deep snow so early in the season and farmers all over the region were caught before their crops had even been harvested, their grain milled, or with their fuel supplies for the winter in place. By January the train service was almost entirely suspended from the region. Railroads hired scores of men to dig out the tracks but it was a wasted effort: As soon as they had finished shoveling a stretch of line, a new storm arrived, filling up the line and leaving their work useless.

There were no winter thaws and on February 2, 1881, a second massive blizzard struck that lasted for nine days. In the towns the streets were filled with solid drifts to the tops of the buildings and tunneling was needed to secure passage about town. Homes and barns were completely covered, compelling farmers to tunnel to reach and feed their stock.

When the snow finally melted in late spring of 1881, huge sections of the plains were flooded. Massive ice jams clogged the Missouri River and when they broke the downstream areas were ravaged. Most of the town of Yankton, in what is now South Dakota, was washed away when the river overflowed its banks. Prologue http://files.usgwarchives.net/sd/history/robinson/liii.txt 

===The Storm of the Century===
Under the weight of snow, a tree falls next to a car in Asheville, North Carolina

The Storm of the Century, also known as the Great Blizzard of 1993, was a large cyclonic storm that formed over the Gulf of Mexico on March 12, 1993, and dissipated in the North Atlantic Ocean on March 15. It is unique for its intensity, massive size and wide-reaching effect. At its height, the storm stretched from Canada towards Central America, but its main impact was on the Eastern United States and Cuba. The cyclone moved through the Gulf of Mexico, and then through the Eastern United States before moving into Canada. Areas as far south as central Alabama and Georgia received 6 to of snow and areas such as Birmingham, Alabama, received up to 12 in with isolated reports of 16 in. Even the Florida Panhandle reported up to 4 in, with hurricane-force wind gusts and record low barometric pressures. Between Louisiana and Cuba, hurricane-force winds produced high storm surges across northwestern Florida, which along with scattered tornadoes killed dozens of people. Record cold temperatures were seen across portions of the South and East in the wake of this storm. In the United States, the storm was responsible for the loss of electric power to over 10 million customers. It is purported to have been directly experienced by nearly 40 percent of the country's population at that time. A total of 310 people, including 10 from Cuba, perished during this storm.

==List of Blizzards==

===United States===
*The Snow Winter of 18801881
*Schoolhouse Blizzard of 1888, North American Great Plains. January 12-13, 1888. What made the storm so deadly was the timing (during work and school hours), the suddenness, and the brief spell of warmer weather that preceded it. In addition, the very strong wind fields behind the cold front and the powdery nature of the snow reduced visibilities on the open plains to zero. People ventured from the safety of their homes to do chores, go to town, attend school, or simply enjoy the relative warmth of the day. As a result, thousands of people  including many schoolchildren  got caught in the blizzard. 

*Great Blizzard of 1888 March 11-13, 1888. One of the most severe recorded blizzards in the history of the United States. On March 12, an unexpected northeaster hit New England and the mid-Atlantic, dropping up to 50 in of snow in the space of two days. Some 400 people died, including many sailors aboard vessels that were beset by gale-force winds and turbulent seas. In parts of New York City, snowdrifts reached up to the second story of some buildings.

*Great Blizzard of 1899 February 11-14, 1899. An extremely unusual blizzard in that it reached into the far southern states of America. It hit in February, and the area around Washington, D.C., experienced 51 hours straight of snowfall. The port of New Orleans was totally iced over; revelers participating in the New Orleans Mardi Gras had to wait for the parade routes to be shoveled free of snow. Concurrent with this blizzard was the extremely cold arctic air. Many city and state record low temperatures date back to this event, including all-time records for locations in the Midwest and South. State record lows: Nebraska reached -47 F, Ohio experienced -39 F, Louisiana bottomed out at -16 F, and Florida dipped below zero to -2 F.

*Great Lakes Storm of 1913 November 7-10, 1913. was the deadliest and most destructive natural disaster ever to hit the Great Lakes Basin in the Midwestern United States and the Canadian province of Ontario. Termed a "November gale", it produced 90 mph wind gusts, waves over 35 ft high, and whiteout snowsqualls. It killed more than 250 people, destroyed 19 ships, and stranded 19 others. Perhaps the most well-known ship to go down in a November gale was the SS Edmund Fitzgerald in 1975.

*1920 North Dakota blizzard March 15-18, 1920
*Knickerbocker Storm January 2728, 1922

*Armistice Day Blizzard November 10-12, 1940. Took place in the Midwest region of the United States on Armistice Day. This "Panhandle hook" winter storm cut a 1000 mi through the middle of the country from Kansas to Michigan. The morning of the storm was unseasonably warm but by mid afternoon conditions quickly deteriorated into a raging blizzard that would last into the next day. A total of 145 deaths were blamed on the storm, almost a third of them duck hunters who had taken time off to take advantage of the ideal hunting conditions. Weather forecasters had not predicted the severity of the oncoming storm, and as a result the hunters were not dressed for cold weather. When the storm began many hunters took shelter on small islands in the Mississippi River, and the 50 mph winds and 5 ft waves overcame their encampments. Some became stranded on the islands and then froze to death in the single-digit temperatures that moved in over night. Others tried to make it to shore and drowned.

*North American blizzard of 1947 December 25-26, 1947. Was a record-breaking snowfall that began on Christmas Day and brought the Northeast United States to a standstill. It was not accompanied by high winds, but the snow fell steadily with drifts reaching 10 ft. Seventy-seven deaths were attributed to the blizzard.

*Great Appalachian Storm of November 1950 November 24-30, 1950
*North American blizzard of 1966 January 27-31, 1966
*Chicago Blizzard of 1967 January 26-27, 1967
*February 1969 nor'easter February 8-10, 1969
*The Great Storm of 1975 known as the Super Bowl Blizzard or Minnesota's Storm of the Century. January 9-12, 1975
*Groundhog Day gale of 1976 February 2, 1976
*Blizzard of 1977 January 28-February 1, 1977

*Great Blizzard of 1978 also called the Cleveland Superbomb. January 25-27, 1978. Was one of the worst snowstorms the Midwest has ever seen. Wind gusts approached 100 mph, causing snowdrifts to reach heights of 25 ft in some areas, making roadways impassable.
*Northeastern United States Blizzard of 1978 - February 6-7, 1978
*Chicago Blizzard of 1979 January 13-14, 1979

*1991 Halloween blizzard Upper Mid-West US, October 31-November 3, 1991 
*December 1992 nor'easter December 10-12, 1992
*1993 Storm of the Century March 12-15, 1993. While the southern and eastern U.S. and Cuba received the brunt of this massive blizzard, the Storm of the Century impacted a wider area than any in recorded history.
*Blizzard of 1996 January 6-10, 1996
*April Fool's Day Blizzard March 31-April 1, 1997. US East Coast
*1997 Western Plains winter storms October 24-26, 1997
*Blizzard of 1999 January 2-4, 1999
*January 25, 2000 Southeastern United States winter storm January 25, 2000. North Carolina and Virginia
*North American blizzard of 2003 February 14-19, 2003 (Presidents' Day Storm II)
*December 2003 nor'easter December 6-7, 2003
*North American blizzard of 2005 January 20-23, 2005
*North American blizzard of 2006 February 11-13, 2006
*Early winter 2006 North American storm complex Late November 2006
*Colorado Holiday Blizzards (200607) December 20-29, 2006 Colorado
*February 2007 North America blizzard February 12-20, 2007
*January 2008 North American storm complex January, 2008 West Coast US
*North American blizzard of 2008 March 6-10, 2008
*North_American_blizzard_of_2009 December 16-20, 2009
*2009 North American Christmas blizzard December 22-28, 2009
*February 56, 2010 North American blizzard February 56, 2010 Referred to at the time as Snowmageddon was a Category 3 ("major") nor'easter and severe weather event.
*February 910, 2010 North American blizzard February 9-10, 2010
*February 2527, 2010 North American blizzard February 25-27, 2010
*October 2010 North American storm complex October 23-28, 2010
*December 2010 North American blizzard December 26-29, 2010
*January 31  February 2, 2011 North American blizzard January 31-February 2, 2011. Groundhog Day Blizzard of 2011
*2011 Halloween nor'easter October 28-Nov 1, 2011
*Hurricane Sandy October 29-31, 2012. West Virginia, western North Carolina, and southwest Pennsylvania received heavy snowfall and blizzard conditions from this hurricane
*November 2012 nor'easter November 7-10, 2012
*December 1722, 2012 North American blizzard December 17-22, 2012
*December 2528, 2012 North American storm complex December 25-28, 2012
*February 2013 nor'easter February 7-20, 2013
*February 2013 Great Plains blizzard February 19-March 6, 2013
*March 2013 nor'easter March 6, 2013
*October 2013 North American storm complex October 3-5, 2013
*February 1117, 2014 North American winter storm February 11-17, 2014

===Canada===
*Saskatchewan blizzard of 2007 - January 10, 2007 Canada

===United Kingdom===

*Winter of 19461947 in the United Kingdom
*Winter of 19621963 in the United Kingdom
*February 2009 Great Britain and Ireland snowfall

===Other Locations===
*1954 Romanian blizzard
*1972 Iran blizzard
*Winter of 19901991 in Western Europe
*2008 Chinese winter storms
*Winter storms of 20092010 in East Asia

==See also==
* Lake effect blizzard
* Nor'easter
* Whiteout (weather)
* Blowing Snow Advisory
* Ground blizzard
* Severe weather terminology (Canada)
* Snowsquall
* Blowing snow

==References==

==External links==

*Digital Snow Museum Photos of historic blizzards and snowstorms.
*Farmers Almanac List of Worst Blizzards in the United States
*United States Search and Rescue Task Force: About Blizzards
*A Historical Review On The Origin and Definition of the Word Blizzard Dr Richard Wild



[[Bikini]]

Woman wearing a bikini at a beach
A bikini is generally a women's two-piece swimsuit. The design is simple: two triangles of fabric on top cover the woman's breasts and two triangles of fabric on the bottom cover the groin and the buttocks, leaving the woman's midriff exposed. What distinguishes the bikini from other swimsuits is its brevity. The size of the panty can range from full coverage to a revealing thong or g-string design.

The modern bikini was introduced by French engineer Louis Rard and separately by fashion designer Jacques Heim in Paris in 1946. Many western countries declared it illegal and the Vatican declared it sinful. Popularized by filmstars like Brigitte Bardot and Ursula Andress it became common in most western countries by the mid-1960s.

Further variants were added to the bikini family of beachwears and bathing costumes, contributing to the popular lexicon a variety of -kinis and -inis: monokini, microkini, tankini, trikini, pubikini, bandeaukini, skirtini and sling bikini. A man's brief swimsuit may also be referred to as a bikini. A variety of men's and women's underwear are known as bikini underwear.

== Etymology ==
While the two-piece swimsuit as a design existed in classical antiquity, the modern design first attracted public notice in Paris on July 5, 1946. French mechanical engineer Louis Rard introduced a design he named the "bikini," taking the name from the Bikini Atoll in the Pacific Ocean, where, four days earlier, the United States had initiated its first peace-time nuclear weapons test as part of Operation Crossroads. The island's English name is derived from the German name Bikini, given to the atoll when it was part of German New Guinea, which itself is transliterated from the Marshallese name for the island, , (), meaning surface of coconuts. Rard hoped his swimsuit's revealing style would create an "explosive commercial and cultural reaction" similar to the explosion at Bikini Atoll. His name for the garment stuck with the media and the public. 

Through analogy with words, like bilingual and bilateral, containing the Latin prefix "bi-" (meaning "two" in Latin), the word bikini was first back-derived as consisting of two parts, + kini by Rudi Gernreich, who introduced the monokini in 1964. "John Ayto, "Movers and Shakers: A Chronology of Words that Shaped Our Age" Later swimsuit designs like the tankini and trikini further cemented this false assumption. Over time the "&ndash;kini family" (as dubbed by author William Safire William Safire, No Uncertain Terms, page 291, Simon & Schuster, 2003, ISBN 0-7432-4955-0 ), including the "&ndash;ini sisters" (as dubbed by designer Anne Cole Trish Donnally, ""Inis" Are In", San Francisco Chronicle, May 18, 1999 ), expanded into a variety of swimwear, often with an innovative lexicon, including the monokini (also numokini or unikini), seekini, tankini, camikini, hikini (also hipkini), minikini, and microkini.

== History ==

=== In antiquity ===
The ancient Roman Villa Romana del Casale (286305 AD) in Sicily contains one of the earliest known illustrations of a bikini.

The origins of the two-piece swimsuit can be traced to antiquity, in atalhyk, where a mother goddes is depicted astride two leopards wearing a costume somewhat like a bikini, and the Greco-Roman world, where bikini-like garments worn by women athletes are depicted on urns and paintings dating back to 1400 BC. In Coronation of the Winner, a mosaic in the floor of a Roman villa in Sicily that dates from the Diocletian period (286305 AD), young women participate in weightlifting, discus throwing, and running ball games dressed in bikini-like garments (technically bandeaukinis in modern lexicon). The mosaic, found in the Sicilian Villa Romana del Casale, features ten maidens who have been anachronistically dubbed the "Bikini Girls". Other Roman archaeological finds depict the goddess Venus in a similar garment. In Pompeii, depictions of Venus wearing a bikini were discovered in the Casa della Venere, in the tablinum of the House of Julia Felix, and in an atrium garden of Via Dell'Abbondanza. 

=== Bikini precursors ===
Annette Kellerman reclines on diving board wearing her self-designed swimwear, 1909

Swimming or bathing outdoors were discouraged in the Christian West, and so there was little demand need for swimming or bathing costume until the 18th century. The bathing gown of the 18th century was an loose ankle-length full-sleeve chemise-type gown made of wool or flannel, so that modesty or decency was not threatened. Claudia B. Kidwell, Women's Bathing and Swimming Costume in the United States, Smithsonian Institution Press, City of Washington, 1968 

During the 1920s and 1930s, people began to shift from "taking in the water" to "taking in the sun," at bathhouses and spas, and swimsuit designs shifted to accommodate this change. Rayon was used in the 1920s to manufacture tight-fitting swimsuits, but its durability, especially when wet, proved problematic; jersey and silk were also sometimes used. By the 1930s, manufacturers had lowered necklines in the back, removed sleeves, and tightened the sides. Hollywood endorsed the new glamor in films like Neptune's Daughter in which Esther Williams wore provocatively named costumes such as "Double Entendre" and "Honey Child". With the development of new clothing materials, particularly latex and nylon, through the 1930s swimsuits gradually began hugging the body, with shoulder straps that could be lowered for tanning. 

Wartime production during World War II required vast amounts of cotton, silk, nylon, wool, leather, and rubber: in 1942 the War Production Board issued Regulation L-85, cutting the use of natural fibers in clothing and mandating a ten percent reduction in the amount of fabric in women's beachwear. To meet the regulations, swimsuit manufacturers produced two-piece suits with bare midriffs. 

=== The modern bikini ===
Micheline Bernardini modeling Rard's bikini. It was so small it could fit into a small 2 by box like the one she is holding. July 5, 1946

The modern bikini was invented in Paris in 1946 separately by engineer Louis Rard, the official inventor, in July and fashion designer Jacques Heim in May. Rard was a car engineer but by 1946 he was running his mother's lingerie boutique near Les Folies Bergre in Paris. Adam Sage, "Happy birthday: the 'shocking and immoral' bikini hits 60", The Times, 2006-04-16 Heim was working on a new kind of beach costume. It comprised two pieces, the bottom large enough to cover its wearer's navel. In May 1946, he advertised it as the world's "smallest bathing suit". Rard sliced the top off the bottoms and advertised it as "smaller than the smallest swimsuit". Paula Cocozza, "A little piece of history", The Guardian, 2006-06-10 The Bikini Turns 60, 1946 to 2006: 60 Years of Bikini Bathing Beauties, Lilith E-Zine The idea struck him when he saw women rolling up their beachwear to get a better tan. Kathryn Westcott, "The Bikini: Not a brief affair", BBC News, 2006-06-05 

Rard could not find a model who was comfortable in front of camera wearing his revealing design. Patrik Alac, Bikini Story, page 72, Parkstone International, 2012, ISBN 9781780429519 He instead hired Micheline Bernardini, a nude dancer from the Casino de Paris. He introduced his string bikini, featuring a g-string back of 30 sqin of cloth with newspaper-type print, on July 5 at Piscine Molitor, a public pool in Paris. The bikini was a hit. Bernardini received 50,000 fan letters, many of them from men. Heim's design was the first worn on the beach, but the design was given its name by Rard. Rard's business soared. In advertisements he declared the swimsuit couldn't be a genuine bikini "unless it could be pulled through a wedding ring." 

French newspaper Le Figaro wrote, "People were craving the simple pleasures of the sea and the sun. For women, wearing a bikini signaled a kind of second liberation. There was really nothing sexual about this. It was instead a celebration of freedom and a return to the joys in life." The early success of Bikini is partly attributed to post-war fabric rationing. Tim Gunn, Tim Gunn's Fashion Bible: The Fascinating History of Everything in Your Closet, page 25, Simon and Schuster, 2013, ISBN 9781451643862 In June 14, 1948 Newsweek wrote about a "1948 countertrend against the skimpy bikini style... which swept French beaches and beauty contests last year."

===Social resistance===

Despite the garment's initial success in France, worldwide women still stuck to traditional one-piece swimsuits, and, his sales stalling, Rard went back to designing and selling orthodox knickers. In a 1950 Time magazine interview, American swimsuit mogul Fred Cole, owner of mass market swimwear firm Cole of California, Christine Schmidt, The Swimsuit: Fashion from Poolside to Catwalk, page 2, Bloomsbury Academic, 2012, ISBN 0857851233 stated that he had "little but scorn for France's famed Bikinis"; Rard himself would late describe it as a "two-piece bathing suit which reveals everything about a girl except for her mother's maiden name." Louise Southerden, Surf's Up: The Girl's Guide to Surfing, page 14, Allen & Unwin, 2008, ISBN 9781741768312 Fashion magazine Modern Girl Magazine in 1957 stated that "it is hardly necessary to waste words over the so-called bikini since it is inconceivable that any girl with tact and decency would ever wear such a thing". 

In 1951 Eric Morley organized the Festival Bikini Contest, a beauty contest and swimwear advertising opportunity at that year's Festival of Britain. The press, welcoming the spectacle, referred to it as Miss World, a name Morley registered as a trademark. When the winner, Kiki Hkansson of Sweden, was crowned in a bikini, several religiously-minded nations threatened to withdraw delegates; to placade them Morley banned bikinis from the pageant, introducing evening gowns instead. Hkansson remains the only Miss World crowned in a bikini, and after the controversy the bikini was explicitly banned from many other beauty pageants worldwide. The swimsuit was declared sinful by the Vatican and banned in the French Atlantic coastline, Patrik Alac, Bikini Story, page, 52, Parkstone International, 2012, ISBN 9781780429519 Spain, Belgium, Italy, Portugal and Australia, and prohibited or discouraged in a number of US states. Lena Lanek and Gideon Bosker, Making Waves: Swimsuits and the Undressing of America, page 90, Cronicle Books, 1989, ISBN 9780877013983 

The National Legion of Decency, a Roman Catholic body guarding over American media content, pressured Hollywood to keep bikinis from being featured in Hollywood movies. The Hays production code for US movies, introduced in 1930s and abandoned in 1960s, allowed two-piece gowns but prohibited the display of navels. As late as 1959, Anne Cole, one of the United State's largest swimsuit designers, said, "It's nothing more than a G-string. It's at the razor's edge of decency." 

===Rise to popularity===

During the 1950s, Hollywood stars such as Ava Gardner, Rita Hayworth, Lana Turner, Elizabeth Taylor, Tina Louise, Marilyn Monroe, Esther Williams, and Betty Grable Suzy Menkes, "Runways: Remembrance of Thongs Past", The New York Times, July 18, 1993 took advantage of the risqu publicity associated with the bikini by posing for photographs wearing them&mdash;pin-ups of Hayworth and Williams in costume were especially widely distributed in the United States. In Europe Brigitte Bardot was photographed wearing a bikini on the beach during the 1953 Cannes Film Festival; similar photographs were taken Anita Ekberg and Sophia Loren, among others. Increasingly common glamour shots of popular actresses and models on either side of the Atlantic played a large part in bringing the bikini into the mainstream. 

According to The Guardian, Bardot's photographs in particular turned Saint-Tropez into the bikini capital of the world, with Bardot identified as the original Cannes bathing beauty. Cari Beauchamp & Henri Bhar, Hollywood on the Riviera: The Inside Story of the Cannes Film Festival, page 165, W. Morrow and Co., 1992, ISBN 0-688-11007-X Bardot's photography helped to enhance the public profile of the festival, and Cannes in turn played a crucial role in her career. Vanessa R. Schwartz, It's So French!: Hollywood, Paris, and the Making of Cosmopolitan Film Culture, page 79, University of Chicago Press, 2007, ISBN 0-226-74243-1 In 1952, she wore a bikini in Manina, the Girl in the Bikini (1952; released in France as Manina, la fille sans voiles), a film which drew considerable attention due to her scanty swimsuit. During the 1953 Cannes Film Festival, working with her husband and agent Roger Vadim she garnered significant attention with photographs of her wearing a bikini on every beach in the south of France. 

Vogue magazine's June 1953 issue featured suits by California companies, including Cole of California, Caltex, Catalina and Rose Marie Reid. Brian Hyland's novelty-song hit "Itsy Bitsy Teenie Weenie Yellow Polka Dot Bikini" became a Billboard No. 1 hit during the summer of 1960: the song tells a story about a young girl who's too shy to wear her new bikini on the beach, thinking it too risqu. Playboy first featured a bikini on its cover in 1962; the Sports Illustrated Swimsuit Issue debut two years later featured Babette March in a white bikini on the cover. 

Ursula Andress as Honey Rider in Dr. No (1962)

Ursula Andress, appearing as Honey Rider in the 1962 James Bond film, Dr. No, wore a white bikini, which became known as the "Dr. No bikini". It is cited as the most famous bikini of all time and an iconic moment in cinematic and fashion history. Andress said that she owed her career to that white bikini, remarking, "This bikini made me into a success. As a result of starring in Dr. No as the first Bond girl, I was given the freedom to take my pick of future roles and to become financially independent." In 2001, Andress sold the Dr. No bikini she wore in the film at auction for 35,000 ($61,500). 

In 1965, a woman told Time that it was "almost square" not to wear a bikini; the magazine wrote two years later that "65% of the young set had already gone over", and in "From Abba to Zoom: a pop culture encyclopedia of the late 20th century", David Mansour went so far as to describe the bikini as a "definitive looks of the 1960s". In One Million Years B.C., released in 1966, Raquel Welch wore a deerskin bikini, featured in studio advertising as "mankind's first bikini", that made her an instant pin-up girl. In 2011, Time listed Welch's B.C. bikini in the "Top Ten Bikinis in Pop Culture". 

The 1967 film An Evening in Paris, Stuff Reporter, "Being Sharmila, all through life", The Hindu, April 3, 2006 is mostly remembered today because in it Bollywood actress Sharmila Tagore became the first Indian actress to wear a bikini on film. Lalit Mohan Joshi & Gulzar, Derek Malcolm, Bollywood, page 20, Lucky Dissanayake, 2002, ISBN 0-9537032-2-3 She also posed in a bikini for the glossy Filmfare magazine. B. K. Karanjia, Blundering in Wonderland, page 18, Vikas Publishing House, 1990, ISBN 0-7069-4961-7 Sharmila Tagore, First Indian actress to wear bikini The costume shocked the conservative Indian audience, Various writers, Rashtriya Sahara, page 28, Sahara India Mass Communication, 2002 but it also set in motion a trend carried forward by Zeenat Aman in Heera Panna (1973) and Qurbani (1980), Dimple Kapadia in Bobby (1973), and Parveen Babi in Yeh Nazdeekiyan (1982). 

===Mass acceptance===
By 1988 the bikini made up nearly 20% of swimsuit sales, though one survey indicates 85% of all bikinis never touch the water.

In 1997 Miss Maryland Jamie Fox became the first contestant in 50 years to compete in a two-piece swimsuit during the Preliminary Swimsuit Competition at the Miss America Pageant. By 1988 the bikini made up nearly 20% of swimsuit sales, more than any other model in the US, though one-piece suits made a comeback during the 1980s and early 1990s. Rard's company folded in 1988, four years after his death. By the end of the century, the bikini had become the most popular beachwear around the globe. According to French fashion historian Olivier Saillard, this was due to "the power of women, and not the power of fashion". As he explains, "The emancipation of swimwear has always been linked to the emancipation of women", though one survey indicates 85% of all bikinis never touch the water. Jayne Dawson, "Sexy at 60", July 25, 2006 Actresses in action films like and Blue Crush made the two-piece "the millennial equivalent of the power suit", according to Gina Bellafonte of The New York Times, 

Huludao City, Liaoning, China set the world record for the largest bikini parade in 2012, with 1,085 participants and a photo shoot involving 3,090 women. Largest Bikini Parade, Official Website: Guinness Book of World Records Largest Bikini Photo Shoot, Official Website: Guinness Book of World Records According to Beth Dincuff Charleston, research associate at the Costume Institute of the Metropolitan Museum of Art, "The bikini represents a social leap involving body consciousness, moral concerns, and sexual attitudes." By the early 2000s, bikinis had become a $811 million business annually, according to the NPD Group, a consumer and retail information company, Sylvia Rubin, "Fashion shocker of '46: the naked belly button", San Francisco Chronicle, July 2, 2006 and had boosted spin-off services like bikini waxing and the sun tanning industries. Lorna Edwards, "You've still got it, babe, The Age, June 3, 2006 

== Bikini variants ==

Different varieties of bikini displayed in Sanok, Poland

While the name "bikini" was at first applied only to beachwear that revealed the wearer's navel, today the fashion industry considers any two-piece swimsuit a bikini. Modern bikini fashions are characterized by a simple, brief design: two triangles of fabric that form a bra and cover the woman's breasts and a third that forms a panty cut below the navel that cover the groin and the buttocks. The coverage offered can vary widely, from revealing pubikini, microkini and string bikinis to a fuller designs such as the tankinis, skirtinis or bandeaukinis. 

Bikinis can and have been made out of almost every possible clothing material, and the fabrics and other materials used to make bikinis are an essential element of their design. The use of cotton makes the swimsuit more practical, and the increased reliance on stretch fabric after 1960 simplified construction; alternative swimwear fabrics such as velvet, leather, and crocheted squares surfaced in the early 1970s. Modern bikinis were first made of cotton and jersey. DuPont's introduction of Lycra (spandex) in the 1960s completely changed how bikinis were designed and worn, as according to Kelly Killoren Bensimon, a former model and author of The Bikini Book, "the advent of Lycra allowed more women to wear a bikini...it didn't sag, it didn't bag, and it concealed and revealed. It wasn't so much like lingerie anymore." 

Bikini variations has grown to include a large number of more or less revealing styles  string bikinis, monokinis (topless), seekinis (transparent), tankinis (tank top, bikini bottom), camikinis (camisole top, bikini bottom), hikinis (also hipkini), "granny bikini" (bikini top, boy shorts bottom), thong, minikinis, microkinis, miniminis, slingshot, tie-side and teardrop. David Diefendorf & James Randi, Amazing ... But False!: Hundreds of "Facts" You Thought Were True, But Aren't, page 33, Sterling, 2007, ISBN 1-4027-3791-2 In one major fashion show in 1985, there were two-piece suits with cropped tank tops instead of the usual skimpy bandeaux, suits that resembled bikinis in front and one-piece in back, suspender straps, ruffles, and daring, navel-baring cutouts. Fashion Correspondent, "Swimsuits take some inspiration from the past", Philadelphia Inquirer, November 10, 1985 Metal and stone jewelery pieces are now also often used to dress up look and style according to tastes, and to meet the fast pace of demands, some manufacturers now offer made-to-order bikinis ready in as few as seven minutes. Siobhan Morrissey, "Bikinis made in teeny-weeny time, Palm Beach Post, page 1D, August 28, 1991 The world's most expensive bikini was designed in February 2006 by Susan Rosen; containing 150 carat of diamond, it was valued at 20 million. 

===Major variants===

 Variant Image First Description 
 Bandeaukini 160px  A bandeaukini (alternatively called a bandini) Kelly Killoren Bensimon, The Bikini Book, Assouline, 2006, ISBN 2-84323-825-0 is any bikini bottom worn with a bandeau as the top (no straps going over the shoulders). Patricia Marx, \"On and Off the Avenue: Itsy Bitsy Teeny Weeny\", page 32, The New Yorker, August 31, 2009, Volume 85, Issues 26, New Yorker Magazine Inc. It is the oldest form of bikini, with earliest examples found in Sicilian Villa Romana del Casale (dubbed the \"Bikini Girls) dating back to 4th century AD. Whitney Friedlander, That's why they're called 'bathing' suits, Los Angeles Times, May 23, 2010 Villa Romana del Casale, UNESCO Reintroduced, its appeal grew fast among young women, \"Just chillin, This season's swimsuits boast new flirty styles, retro looks\", Ocala Star-Banner, June 1, 2005 with bandeau tops edging into the sales of the classic tankini. Rena Fulka, \"Seasonal style\", The Star (Tinley Park), June 14, 2007 Sometimes the same design has been called a bandeaukini and a tankini. Actress Halle Berry wore a skimpy bikini top with matching pants to the MTV Video Music Awards, fueling the trend of wearing a bandeau top as an out-of-home dress. \"Heat relief, what suits are hot - from tops to bottoms\", San Jose Mercury News, page 1E, June 8, 2001 
 Microkini 160px 1995 A microkini is an extremely skimpy bikini. Microkini at Merriam-Webster's Open Dictionary The designs for both women and men typically use only enough fabric to cover the genitals and, for women, the nipples. Any additional straps are merely to keep the garment attached to the wearer's body. Some variations of the microkini use adhesive or wire to hold the fabric in place over the genitals. Microkinis keep the wearer just within legal limits of decency and fill a niche between nudism and conservative swimwear. Mistrk, Erich, Pseudo-Concrete Ideals Of A Good Life, Human Affairs (2/2008), Department of Social & Biological Communication, Slovensk Akadmia Vied, Slovakia 
 Monokini 160px 1964 A monokini (also called unikini or numokini) is a women's one-piece garment equivalent to the lower half of a bikini. The Concise Oxford Dictionary (2004 ed.) The term monokini is also now used for any topless swimsuit, particularly a bikini bottom worn without a top. In 1964, Rudi Gernreich designed the original monokini in the US. His version looked like a bikini bottom suspended from two halter straps between breasts that were left bare. Peggy Moffitt, who modeled the suit for Gernreich, said it was a logical evolution of Gernreich's avant-garde ideas in swimwear design. The modern monokini, which is less racy than Gernreich's original design, and is also described as \"more of a cut-out one-piece swimsuit,\" with designers using various materials to link the top and bottom sections together. 
 Pubikini 1985 Designer Rudi Gernreich unveiled the pubikini, a bathing suit designed to expose the wearer's pubic region, in 1985. Elizabeth Gunther Stewart, Paula Spencer & Dawn Danby, The V Book: A Doctor's Guide to Complete Vulvovaginal Health, page 104, Bantam Books, 2002, ISBN 0-553-38114-8 It featured a thong-style bottom while the front portion of the pubikini is a tiny V-shaped strip of fabric that dips below the woman's mons pubis, exposing her pubic hair and portions of her vulva. Metroland 
 Skirtini 160px  The skirtini, which features a bikini top and a small, skirted bottom, is also an innovation for bikini-style clothes with more coverage. Nada Manley, \"Beauty & the Beach: The perfect swimsuit is out there - honestly\", The Daytona Beach News-Journal, March 17, 2005 Two-piece swimsuits with usual skirt panels were popular the US before the government ordered a 10% reduction in fabric used in woman's swimwear in 1943 as wartime rationing. Bikini Introduced, This Day in History, History Channel In 2011, The Daily Telegraph identified the skirted bikini as one of the top 10 swimwear design of the season. Justine Picardie, The Closet Thinker: bathing beauties, Telegraph Online, July 3, 2011 
 Sling bikini 160px  The sling bikini (also known as sling-kini, suspender bikini or sling swimsuit) is an unbroken suit, technically one-piece, which leaves the entire sides of the torso and, like a thong most of the buttocks uncovered. There are monokini types, too. When designed for or worn by a men, it is has been called a mankini. Usually, a slingshot resembles a bikini bottom with the side straps extending upwards to cover the breasts and go over the shoulders, or encircling the neck while a second set of straps pass around the midriff (also known as pretzel bikini or pretzel swimsuit). Jenny Pate, History of the swimsuit, Article Dashboard Corresponding to the advent of Lycra, sling swimsuits first emerged in the early 1990s, and are more popular on the beaches of Europe. Slingshot Suspender Bikinis: A History, Lve to know swimsuits, Glam Publisher Network Sling bikinis were introduced in the mainstream in 1994, and became an instant hit for New York's major stores. Fashion Correspondent, \"Itsy bitsy teenie weenie ... trivia think swimsuits. If two-pieces and t-backs are all that come to mind ... think again\", Miami Herald, page 1G, July 15, 1995 
 String bikini 160px 1974 A string bikini (or a tie-side) gets its name from its design that consists of two triangular shaped pieces connected at the groin but not at the sides, where a thin \"string\" wraps around the waist tied together to connect the two parts. The first formal presentation of string bikini was done by Glen Tororich, a public relations agent, and his wife Brandi Perret-DuJon, a fashion model, for the opening of Le Petite Centre, a shopping area in the French Quarter of the New Orleans, Louisiana in 1974. String bikinis are one of the most popular variations of bikini. Valerie Steele, Encyclopedia of Clothing and Fashion, page 121, Charles Scribner's Sons, 2005, ISBN 0-684-31396-0 
 Tankini 160px 1998 The tankini is a swimsuit combining a tank top, mostly made of spandex-and-cotton or Lycra-and-nylon, and a bikini bottom introduced in the late 1990s. Becky Homan, \"Tankini goes over the top\", St. Louis Post-Dispatch, April 3, 1999 Alisha Davis, \"It Rhymes With Bikini\", Newsweek, May 4, 1998 Tankini has rendered its name to things ranging from a lemonade-based martini (Tankini Martini) Cornelia Schinharl, Sebastian Dickhaut & Kelsey Lane, Party Basics: Everything You Need for the World's Best Party, page 98, Silverback Books, 2002, ISBN 1-930603-91-6 to server architecture (Tankini HipThread). Don Jones & Mark D. Scott, Using Microsoft Commerce Server 2002, page 211, Que Publishing, 2002, ISBN 0-7897-2763-3 Designer Anne Cole was the originator of this style, Becky Homan, \"Tankini goes over the top\", Page 42, St. Louis Post-Dispatch, April 3, 1999 When her label introduced the tankini in 1998 it became and instant hit, and she scored the biggest hit of her career. Laura Avery & Thomson Gale, Newsmakers: Cumulation, page 118, Thomson Gale, 2007, ISBN 0-7876-8091-5 Tankinis can be made of spandex-and-cotton or Lycra-and-nylon. Anne D'Innocenzio, \"Big fish rule a bigger pond\", Women's Wear Daily, January 24, 2000 A variation is named camkini, with spaghetti straps instead of tank-shaped straps over a bikini bottom. Kathryn Bold, \"Summer Sizzle Top to Bottom\", Los Angeles Times, page 1, March 21, 1996 
 Trikini 160px 1967 The trikini appeared briefly in 1967, defined as \"a handkerchief and two small saucers.\" It reappeared a few years ago as a bikini bottom with a stringed halter of two triangular pieces of cloth covering the breasts. William Safire, No Uncertain Terms, page 291, Simon & Schuster, 2004, ISBN 0-7432-5812-6 The trikini top comes essentially in two separate parts. John Ayto, Ian Crofton & Ebenezer Cobham Brewer, Brewer's Dictionary of Modern Phrase & Fable, page 78, Weidenfeld & Nicolson, 2006, ISBN 0-304-36809-1 The name of this woman's bathing suit is formed from bikini, replacing \"bi-\", meaning \"two\", with \"tri-\", meaning \"three\". Robert L. Chapman & Harold Wentworth, New Dictionary of American Slang, page 446, Harper & Row, 1986, ISBN 0-06-181157-2. Dolce & Gabbana designed trikinis in summer 2005 as three scintillating sequined fabric pieces that barely covered the essentials. Associated Press, \"Free and easy\", The Age (Australia), 2004 -06-29 In a variation the three pieces are sold as part of one continuous garment. John Karl, \"Under cover Designers are wrapping swimsuits with stylish designs, Sarasota Herald Tribune, 200-02-08 A variation called a strapless bikini or a no string bikini by various manufacturers, this swimwear is often a combination of pasties with a matching maebari-style bottom. 

==Bikini underwear==
Bikini underwear

Certain types of underwear worn by both men and women are identified as bikini-style underwear because they are similar in size and form to the bottom half of a bikini bathing suit. For women, bikini underwear can refer to virtually any tight, skimpy, or revealing undergarment that provides less coverage to the midsection than traditional underwear, panties or knickers. For men, a bikini is a type of undergarment that is smaller and more revealing than men's briefs. Bikini briefs can be low- or high-side bikini briefs but are usually lower than true waist, often at hips, and usually have no access pouch or flap, legs bands at tops of thighs. String bikini briefs have front and rear sections that meet in the crotch but not at the waistband, with no fabric on the side of the legs. 

Swimwear and underwear have always had close design connections because of their shared proximity to the body; the primary distinguishing feature between them is that swimwear takes underwear to the public view. Jennifer Craik, The Face of Fashion: Cultural Studies in Fashion, page 133, Routledge, 1993, ISBN 9781134940561 The swimsuit was and is closely aligned to underwear in terms of styling, Christine Schmid, The Swimsuit: Fashion from Poolside to Catwalk, page 6, A&C Black, 2013, ISBN 9780857851246 and at about the same time that attitudes towards the bikini began to change underwear underwent a redesign towards more minimal, unboned design that emphasized comfort first. Dan Parker, The Bathing Suit: Christian Liberty Or Secular Idolatry, page 170, Xulon Press, 2003, ISBN 9781591607533 The 1900 to 1940 decreases in swimsuit length mimicked changes to underwear at the time. Muriel Barbier, Shazia Boucher, The Story of Lingerie, page 139, Parkstone International, 2012, ISBN 9781780429700 Swimwear evolved from weighty wool to high tech second skin, eventually cross-breeding with sportswear, underwear and exercise wear, resulting in the interchangeable fashions of the 1990s. Christine Schmid, The Swimsuit: Fashion from Poolside to Catwalk, page 102, A&C Black, 2013, ISBN 9780857851246 

===History===

As the swimsuit was evolving, the underwear started to change. In the 1920s women started discarding the corset, while the Cadole company of Paris started developing something they called the "breast girdle". Anthony Napoleon, Awakening Beauty", page 130, Virtualbookworm Publishing, 2003, ISBN 9781589393783 During the Great Depression, panties and bras became softly constructed and were made of various elasticized yarns making underwear fit like a second skin. By 1930s underwear styles for both women and men were influenced by the new brief models of swimwear from Europe. Although the waistband was still above the navel, the leg openings of the panty brief were cut in an arc to rise from the crotch to the hip joint. The brief served as a template for most all variations of panties for the rest of the century. Daniel Delis Hill, As Seen in Vogue: A Century of American Fashion in Advertising, page 158, Texas Tech University Press, 2007, ISBN 9780896726161 Warner standardized the concept of Cup size in 1935. The first underwire bra was developed in 1938. Beginning in the late thirties skants, a type of skanty men's briefs, were introduced, featuring very high-cut leg openings and a lower rise to the waistband. Howard Hughes designed the push-up bra worn by Jane Russell in The Outlaw in 1943. In 1950 Maidenform introduced the first official bust enhancing bra. 

By the 1960s, the bikini swimsuit influenced panty styles and coincided with the cut of the new lower rise jeans and pants. In the seventies, with the emergence of skintight jeans, thong versions of the panty became mainstream, since the open, stringed back eliminated any tell-tale panty lines across the rear and hips. By the 1980s the design of the French-cut panty pushed the waistband back up to the natural waistline and the rise of the leg openings was nearly as high (French Cut panties come up to the waist, has a high cut leg, and usually are full in the rear Lisa Cole, Lingerie, the Foundation of a Woman's Life, page 45, Choice Publications, 2005, ISBN 9780971180345 ). As with the bra and other type of lingerie, manufacturers of the last quarter of the century marketed panty styles that were designed primarily for their sexual allure. This decade marks the sexualization and eroticization of the male body through advertising campaigns for brands such as Calvin Klein, particularly by photographers Bruce Weber and Herb Ritts. Male bodies and men's undergarments were commodified and packaged for mass consumption, and swimwear and sportswear were influenced by sports photography and fitness. Christine Schmid, The Swimsuit: Fashion from Poolside to Catwalk, page 19, A&C Black, 2013, ISBN 9780857851246 

==Sports bikini==
There is evidence of ancient Roman women playing Expulsim Ludere, an early version of handball, wearing a costume that has been identified as bikinis. John Anthony Cuddon, The Macmillan Dictionary of Sports and Games, page 393, Macmillan, 1980, ISBN 0-333-19163-3 Bikinis have become a major component of marketing various women's sports, raising some objections.
 Laura Grae Kilborn, "The Marketing Of Female Athletes", Denver Post, August 11, 1998 The bikini is an official uniform for beach volleyball and is widely worn in athletics. Towns like Porto Seguro in Brazil have become tourist attractions because of beach athletics in which bikinis are worn. James Brooke, "In the Land of Lambada", March 10, 1991 

===Beach volleyball===
Kerri Walsh (USA) and Larissa Frana (Brazil) in Semi-final of Women's Beach Volleyball in Beijing Olympics
In 1994, the bikini became the official uniform of women's Olympic beach volleyball, although some sports officials consider it exploitative and impractical in colder weather. Competitors such as Natalie Cook and Holly McPeak agree with the FIVB's statements that the uniforms are practical for a sport played on sand during the heat of summer, but British Olympian Denise Johns argues that the regulation uniform is intended to be "sexy" and to attract attention. 

In 1999, the International Volleyball Federation (FIVB) standardized beach volleyball uniforms, with the swimsuit becoming the required uniform both for men and women. This drew the ire of some athletes. According to FIVB rules, female beach volleyball players have the option of playing in shorts or a one-piece swimsuit, but most players prefer the bikini. In early 2012, the International Volleyball Federation announced it would allow shorts (maximum length 3 cm above the knee) and sleeved tops at the London 2012 Olympics. Richard Baker, the federation spokesperson, said that "many of these countries have religious and cultural requirements so the uniform needed to be more flexible". At the time of the event, the weather at the evening games in London during 2012 was so cold that the players sometimes had to wear shirts and leggings. At the 2006 Asian Games at Doha, Qatar, only one Muslim country fielded a team in the beach volleyball competition because of concerns that the uniform was inappropriate. The Iraqi team refused to wear bikinis. Associated Press, In Doha, beach volleyball bikinis create cultural clash, Ynet News, March 12, 2006; Retrieved: March 12, 2008 

Beach volleyball became the fifth largest television audience of all the sports at the 2000 Summer Olympics at Bondi Beach in Australia owing to the sex appeal of bikini-clad players as well as their athletic ability. Stuff Writer, "Beach volleyball a popular spectator sport", ESPN, August 16, 2004 Kimberly Bissell conducted a study on the camera angles used during the 2004 Summer Olympic Games beach volleyball games. Bissell found that 20% of the camera angles were focused on the women's chests, and 17% on their buttocks. Bissell theorized that the appearance of the players draws fans attention more than their actual athleticism. The popularity of , a video game for Xbox, was attributed to the scantily clad women. Charles Harold, GAME THEORY; It's Hot-Potato Season: Call In the String Bikinis, New York Times, August 7, 2003; Retrieved: March 12, 2008 In 2007, fans voted for contestants in the WWE Diva contest after watching them playing beach volleyball in skimpy bikinis. 

During the 2004 Olympics, an exotic dance team from the Canary Islands entertained fans but drew some criticism from female competitors. Associated Press, Beach volleyball's bikini cheerleaders stir up a storm, NBC sports, August 17, 2004; Retrieved: March 12, 2008 During breaks in between points and matches, the group, wearing bikinis, raced on to the sand and danced to techno-pop music. Australian athlete Nicole Sanderson commented, "It's kind of disrespectful to the female players. I'm sure the male spectators love it, but I find it a little bit offensive." 

===Athletics===

Women in athletics often wear bikinis the same size as those worn in beach volleyball. Amy Acuff, a US high-jumper, wore a black leather bikini instead of a track suit at the 2000 Summer Olympics. Staff Correspondent, "Hype Hopes Today's Olympians need more than athletic prowess to win gold", Fort Worth Star-Telegram, August 6, 2000 Runner Florence Griffith-Joyner mixed bikini bottoms with one-legged tights at the 1988 Summer Olympics, earning her more attention than her record breaking performance in the Women's 200 meters event. Anne Marie Balsamo, Technologies of the gendered body, page 46, Duke University Press, 1996, ISBN 0-8223-1698-6 

In the 2004 and 2008 Olympic Games, inclusion of bikini-clad athletes raised eyebrows. In the 2007 South Pacific Games, the rules were adjusted to allow players to wear less revealing shorts and cropped sports tops instead of bikinis. At the West Asian Games in 2006, organizers banned bikini-bottoms for female athletes and asked them to wear long shorts. 

===Bodybuilding===

During 1950s to mid-1970s men's contest formats was often supplemented with women's beauty contests or bikini shows. The winners earned titles like Miss Body Beautiful, Miss Physical Fitness and Miss Americana, and also presented trophies to the winners of the men's contest. Maria R. Lowe, Women of Steel: Female Bodybuilders and the Struggle for Self-definition, page 57, NYU Press, 1998, ISBN 9780814750940 In the 1980s, the Ms Olympia competition started in the USA and in UK the NABBA (National Amateur Body Building Association) renamed Miss Bikini International to Ms Universe. In 1986, Ms Universe competition was divided in to two sections &ndash; "physique" (for a more muscular physique) and "figure" (traditional feminine presentation in high heels). Sarah Grogan, Body Image: Understanding Body Dissatisfaction in Men, Women and Children, page 63, Routledge, 2007, ISBN 9781134245673 In November 2010 IFBBF (International Federation of BodyBuilding & Fitness) introduced women's bikini contest for women who do not wish to build their muscles to figure competition levels. Tanya Bunsell, Strong and hard women: an ethnography of female body building, Routledge, 2013, ISBN 9781136250859 

Costumes are regulation "posing trunks" (bikini briefs) for both men and bikini for women. Francois Fortin, Sports: The Complete Visual Reference, page 360, Qubec Amerique, 1996, ISBN 9782764408971 Female bodybuilders in America are prohibited from wearing thong or T-back swimsuits in contests filmed for television, though they are allowed to do so by certain fitness organizations in closed events. Maria R. Lowe, Women of steel: female bodybuilders and the struggle for self-definition, page 191, New York University Press, 1998, ISBN 0-8147-5094-X For men, the dress code specifies "swim trunks only (no shorts, cut-off pants, or Speedos)." A similar policy by Virginia FCCLA bans "skimpy bikini or thong type suits" for women and specifies "swim trunks" for men ("no speedos"). VCCS FCCLA website 

===Other sports===
The Bikini Basketball Association is an American women's basketball league, created by Cedric Mitchell and A. J. McArthur in 2012. The players wear sports bras and boy shorts, during games. Commentators found it variously funny, offensive, and smart business. String bikinis and other skimpy clothes are also common in surfing. In 2001, Vicky Botwright, then 16th seeded in women's squash circuit and dubbed as the 'Lancashire Hot Bot', was prohibited by Women's International Squash Players Association (WISPA) from wearing her trademark outfit, a thong and a sports bra, in the British Open Championships. All thong wrong, BBC Sports Online In 2004, Alexander Putnam competed in the London Marathon in a green thong and painted as a tropical tree to protest against logging in Congo. "Mara-thong" Man runs from Congo loggers, Rainforest Foundation 

== Men's bikini ==
Men's bikini

The term men's bikini is used to describe a specific type of men's swimsuit. Men's bikinis can have both high or low side panels, string sides or tie sides, and most lack a button or flap front. Unlike swim briefs, bikinis are not designed for drag reduction and generally lack a visible waistband. Suits less than 1.5 inches wide at the hips are less common for sporting purposes and are most often worn for recreation, fashion, and sun tanning. The posing brief standard to bodybuilding competitions is an example of this style. Male punk rock musicians have performed on the stage wearing women's bikini briefs. A. W. Richard Sipe, A Secret World, page 25, Psychology Press, 1990, ISBN 0-87630-585-0 The 2000 Bollywood film Hera Pheri shows men sunbathing in bikinis, who were mistakenly believed to be girls from a distance. Ruth Vanita, Queering India, page 207, Routledge, 2002, ISBN 0-415-92950-4 

Swimsuits shown in men's wear collections by Giorgio Armani, Dolce & Gabbana and Paul Smith have tended to be black and snug fitting, throwbacks to the designs of the 1930s and '40s. Gianni Versace's ads contain heroic depictions of Miami bathers in contrast to popular, sports-inspired beach wearbright and baggy Bermudas or boxer shorts. The Greek designer Nikos Apostolopoulos put a different spin on his bathing suits (for both sexes, but with the focus on the male), making them anatomical creations, cut and stitched to outline the body and its sexual characteristics. Male bikini tops, a visual gag, also exist. Sarah Karnasiewicz, Here she comes, "Mr. Saugus High School", Salon.com 

A mankini is not a form of a bikini, despite its name, but a type of sling swimsuit worn by men. It was popularized by Sacha Baron Cohen, who donned one in the film Borat. 

==Bikini body==

As early as 1950 American swimsuit mogul Fred Cole, owner of Cole of California, told Time magazine that bikinis were designed for "diminutive Gallic women", as because "French girls have short legs...swimsuits have to be hiked up at the sides to make their legs look longer." The New York Times reported the opinion that the bikini is permissible for people are not "too fat or too thin." Claudia Mitchell, Jacqueline Reid-Walsh, Girl Culture: Studying girl culture : a readers' guide, page 183, ABC-CLIO, 2008, ISBN 978-0-313-33909-7 In the 1960s etiquette writer Emily Post decreed that "bikini is for perfect figures only, and for the very young." In The Bikini Book by Kelly Killoren Bensimon, swimwear designer Norma Kamali says, "Anyone with a tummy" should not wear a bikini. Since then, a number of bikini designers including Malia Mills have encouraged women of all ages and body types to take up the style. The 1970s saw the rise of the lean ideal of female body and figures like Cheryl Tiegs, who possessed the figure that remains in vogue in the 21st century.

The fitness boom of the 1980s led to one of the biggest leaps in the evolution of the bikini. According to Mills, "The leg line became superhigh, the front was superlow, and the straps were superthin." The Bikini turns 60! from the Lilith Gallery of Toronto. Retrieved February 9, 2009. Women's magazines used terms like "Bikini Belly", Alex Kuczynski, "Looking for Health News? A Bikini Belly? There's More to Read", The New York Times, June 21, 2001 and workout programs were launched to develop a "bikini-worthy body". Jennifer Nicole Lee, "Get A Bikini-Worthy Body", CBS News, Feb 1, February 1, 2007 The tiny "fitness-bikinis" made of lycra were launched to cater to this hardbodied ideal, Stuart B. Chirls, "Americans head for the water - in, on and under", Daily News Herald, July 31, 1989 epitomized by six-time Sports Illustrated Swimsuit Issue cover model Elle Macpherson. Movies like Blue Crush and TV reality shows like Surf Girls has merged to concept of bikini model and athletes together, further accentuating the toned body ideal. Claudia Mitchell and Jacqueline Reid-Walsh, Girl Culture: An Encyclopedia (Vol. 1), page 183, Greenwood Publishing Group, 2007, ISBN 9780313084447 

One survey commissioned by Diet Chef, an UK home delivery service, reported by Daily Mail and The Today Show and ridiculed by More magazine showed that women should stop wearing bikinis by the age of 47. Lesley Kennedy, "Are You Too Old to Rock a Bikini?", More, 2011-03-13 Yearly Spring Break festivities, which mark the start of the bikini season, Jacklyn Zeman, Jackie Zeman's Beauty on the Go, page 70, Simon and Schuster, 1986, ISBN 9780671543266 trigger many with eating disorders because of the over-promotion of the bikini body ideal. 

In 1993, Suzy Menkes, then Fashion Editor of the International Herald Tribune, suggested that women had begun to "revolt" against the "body ideal" and bikini "exposure." She wrote, "Significantly, on the beaches as on the streets, some of the youngest and prettiest women (who were once the only ones who dared to bare) seem to have decided that exposure is over." Nevertheless, professional beach volleyball player Gabrielle Reece, who competes in a bikini, claims that "confidence" alone can make a bikini sexy. James Kitchling, "Short History of Bikinis and Swimsuits", Articles Central, August 2, 2008 

==Bikini waxing==

Bikini waxing is the epilation of pubic hair in and around the pubic region (also known as bikini line), commonly by women, by the use of wax. With certain styles of women's swimwear, pubic hair may become visible around the crotch area of a swimsuit. Heinz Tschachler, Maureen Devine, Michael Draxlbauer; The EmBodyment of American Culture; pp 6162; LIT Verlag, Berlin-Hamburg-Mnster; 2003; ISBN 3-8258-6762-5. The bikini line delineates the part of a woman's pubic area which would normally be covered by the bottom part of a swimsuit. In the context of waxing, it is generally understood to describe any pubic hair visible beyond the boundaries of a swimsuit. Visible pubic hair is widely culturally disapproved of and, considered to be embarrassing, is often removed. 

Waxing or shaving pubic hair "removes a cushion against friction, leaves microscopic open wounds and exposes you to infections" - says Emily Gibson, MD. Emily Gibson. "Pubic hair has a job to do  stop shaving and leave it alone", The Guardian (August 7, 2012). People who wax or shave their bikini areas face the risk of folliculitis, commonly caused by Staphylococcus aureus, an infection around the hair follicle, Barbara Hackley, Jan M. Kriebs & Mary Ellen Rousseau, Primary Care of Women: A Guide for Midwives and Women's Health Providers, page 833, Jones & Bartlett Publishers, 2006, ISBN 0-7637-1650-2 

===Bikini line===
The bikini line delineates the part of a woman's pubic area which would normally be covered by the bottom part of a swimsuit. In the context of waxing, it is generally understood to describe any pubic hair visible beyond the boundaries of a swimsuit. With the reduction in the size of swimsuits, especially since the advent of the bikini after 1945, the practice of bikini waxing has also come into vogue. 

==Bikini tan==
Bikini tan lines

The tan lines created by the wearing of a bikini while tanning are known as a bikini tan. These tan lines separate pale breasts, groin, and buttocks from otherwise tanned skin. Bikinis leave the rest of the body to be tanned, thereby exposing large amounts of skin to potentially dangerous UVB light. Overexposure to UVB radiation can cause sunburn and some forms of skin cancer, among other harmful effects. In humans, prolonged exposure to solar UV radiation may result in acute and chronic health effects on the skin, eye, and immune system. Moreover, UVC radiation can cause adverse effects that can be mutagenic or carcinogenic. C.Michael Hogan. 2011. Sunlight. eds. P.saundry & C.Cleveland. Encyclopedia of Earth. As a result, medical organizations recommend that bikini-wearers protect themselves from UV radiation by using sunscreen, which contain ingredients that have been shown to protect mice against skin tumors. However, some sunscreen chemicals produce potentially harmful substances if they are illuminated while in contact with living cells, and the quantity of sunscreen that penetrates the skin may be sufficient to cause damage. Chatelaine, E.; Gabard, B.; Surber, C. (2003) Skin Penetration and Sun Protection Factor of Five UV Filters: Effect of the Vehicle, Skin Pharmacol. Appl. Skin Physiol., 16:2835 R. Bissonnette, MD, FRCPC, Innovaderm Research, Montreal, QC, Canada, Update on Sunscreens Chemical company BASF has incorporated nanotechnology into bikinis for better UV protection as wet clothes have reduced protection against UV light. Made of Day-Glo leopard skin polyamide (nylon)-6 these bikinis have titanium dioxide embedded and provide a variable sunblock factor-80 for the beach and 15 for a spring day. Clodagh O'Brien, "Sunblock without the mess ... wear a nano bikini and hat on the beach", The Daily Telegraph (UK), May 26, 2003 

== References ==

Citations

== External links ==

* Bikini Science: A comprehensive site on the bikini
* Metropolitan Museum of Art exhibitionThe Bikini
* Photos: On this day  July 5, 1946  the first bikini goes on sale (Bikinis from 1946 to 2013.)
* The California Swimsuit
* Two-Piece Be With You: LIFE Celebrates the Bikini

*



[[Babur]]

Zahir-ud-din Muhammad Babur (14 February 148326 December 1530; sometimes also spelt Baber or Babar) was a conqueror from Central Asia who, following a series of setbacks, finally succeeded in laying the basis for the Mughal dynasty in the Indian Subcontinent and became the first Mughal emperor. He was a direct descendant of Timur, from the Barlas clan, through his father, and also a descendant of Genghis Khan through his mother. Culturally, he was greatly influenced by the Persian culture and this affected both his own actions and those of his successors, giving rise to a significant expansion of the Persianate ethos in the Indian subcontinent. F. Lehmann: ahr-al-Dn Moammad Bbor. In Encyclopdia Iranica. Online Ed. December 1988 (updated August 2011). "BBOR, AHR-AL-DN MOAMMAD (6 Moarram 886-6 Jomd I 937/14 February 1483-26 December 1530), Timurid prince, military genius, and literary craftsman who escaped the bloody political arena of his Central Asian birthplace to found the Mughal Empire in India. His origin, milieu, training, and education were steeped in Persian culture and so Bbor was largely responsible for the fostering of this culture by his descendants, the Mughals of India, and for the expansion of Persian cultural influence in the Indian subcontinent, with brilliant literary, artistic, and historiographical results." Robert L. Canfield, Robert L. (1991). Turko-Persia in historical perspective, Cambridge University Press, p.20. "The Mughals-Persianized Turks who invaded from Central Asia and claimed descent from both Timur and Genghis  strengthened the Persianate culture of Muslim India". 

==Etymology==
He was born as ahr-ud-Dn Muammad (), but was more commonly known by his nickname, Bbur (). He had the royal titles Padshah and al-ultnu 'l-azam wa 'l-qn al-mukkarram pdshh-e z. Emperors new names (title) Mirza, the title of Mirza and not Khan or Padishah, which were the titles of the Mongol rulers. ahr-ud-Dn Muammad ("Defender of the faith") was an Arabic name and difficult to pronounce for the Central Asian Turko-Mongols, therefore the name Babur was adopted. According to Babur's cousin, Mirz Muammad Haydar:

According to Stephen Frederic Dale, the name Babur is derived from the Persian word babr, meaning "tiger", a word that repeatedly appears in Firdaws's Shhnma and had also been borrowed by the Turkic languages of Central Asia. Chisholm, Hugh (1910), The Encyclopdia Britannica Thumb, Albert, Handbuch des Sanskrit, mit Texten und Glossar, German original, ed. C. Winter, 1953, Snippet, p.318 This thesis is supported by the explanation that the Turko-Mongol name Timur underwent a similar evolution, from the Sanskrit word cimara ("iron") via a modified version *imr to the final Turkicized version timr, with -r replacing -r due to need to provide vocalic support between m and r. The choice of vowel would nominally be restricted to one of the four front vowels (e, i, &ouml;, &uuml; per the Ottoman vowel harmony rule), hence babr  babr, although the rule is routinely violated for words of Persian or Arabic derivation. Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society of Great Britain & Ireland, Cambridge University Press, 1972. Snippet, p.104. 

Contradicting these views, W.M. Thackston argues that the name cannot be taken from babr and instead must be derived from a word that has evolved out of the Indo-European word for beaver, pointing to the fact that the name is pronounced bh-bor in both Persian and Turkic, similar to the Russian word for beaver (  bobr).

==Background==
The family tree of Babur
Babur wrote his memoirs and these form the main source for details of his life. They are known as the Baburnama and were written in Chaghatai Turkic, his mother-tongue, though his prose was highly Persianized in its sentence structure, morphology and vocabulary. Baburnama was translated in Persian during the rule of Babur's grandson Akbar. 

Umar Sheikh Mirza  Father of Babur, c. 18751900
Babur was born on in the city of Andijan, Andijan Province, Fergana Valley, contemporary Uzbekistan. He was the eldest son of Umar Sheikh Mirza, ruler of the Fergana Valley, the son of Ab Sad Mirza (and grandson of Miran Shah, who was himself son of Timur) and his wife Qutlugh Nigar Khanum, daughter of Yunus Khan, the ruler of Moghulistan (and great-great grandson of Tughlugh Timur, the son of Esen Buqa I, who was the great-great-great grandson of Chaghatai Khan, the second born son of Genghis Khan). Tarikh-i-Rashidi: A History of the Moghuls of Central Asia. Elias and Denison Ross (ed. and trans.). 1898, reprinted 1972. ISBN 0-7007-0021-8 

Although Babur hailed from the Barlas tribe which was of Mongol origin, his tribe had embraced Turkic Babur at Encyclopdia Britannica and Persian culture, converted to Islam and resided in Turkestan and Khorasan. His mother tongue was the Chaghatai language (known to Babur as Turk, "Turkic") and he was equally fluent in Persian, the lingua franca of the Timurid elite. Iran: The Timurids and Turkmen at Encyclopdia Britannica. 

Hence Babur, though nominally a Mongol (or Moghul in Persian language), drew much of his support from the local Turkic and Iranian people of Central Asia, and his army was diverse in its ethnic makeup. It included Persians (known to Babur as "Sarts" and "Tajiks"), ethnic Afghans, Arabs, as well as Barlas and Chaghatayid Turco-Mongols from Central Asia. Babur's army also included Qizilbsh fighters, a militant religious order of Shi'a Sufis from Safavid Persia who later became one of the most influential groups in the Mughal court.

==Rule in Central Asia==

===As ruler of Farghana===
Babur on his throne in Farghana.

In 1495, at twelve years of age, Babur became the ruler of Farghana, present-day Uzbekistan, after Umar Sheikh Mirza died in a freak accident. During this time, two of his uncles from the neighbouring kingdoms, who were hostile to his father, and a group of nobles who wanted his younger brother Jahangir to be the ruler, threatened his succession to the throne. His uncles were relentless in their attempts to dislodge him from this position as well as many of his other territorial possessions to come. Babur was able to secure his throne partly due to help from his maternal grandmother, Aisan Daulat Begum.

Most territories around his kingdom were ruled by his relatives, who were descendants of either Timur or Genghis Khan, and were constantly in conflict. At that time, rival princes were fighting over the city of Samarkand to the west, which was ruled by his paternal cousin. Babur had a great ambition to capture it and in 1497, he besieged Samarkand for seven months before eventually gaining control over it. He was fifteen years old and for him, this campaign was a huge achievement. Babur was able to hold it despite desertions in his army but later fell seriously ill. Meanwhile, a rebellion amongst nobles who favoured his brother, back home approximately 350 km away robbed him of Farghana. As he was marching to recover it, he lost the Samarkand to a rival prince, leaving him with neither Farghana nor Samarkand. He had held Samarkand for 100 days and he considered this defeat as his biggest loss and would obsess over it even later in his life after his conquest of India.

In 1501, he laid siege on Samarkand once more, but was soon defeated by his most formidable rival, Muhammad Shaybani, khan of the Uzbeks. Samarkand, his lifelong obsession, was lost again. He tried to reclaim Farghana but lost it too and escaping with a small band of followers, he wandered to the mountains of central Asia and took refuge with hill tribes. Thus, during the ten years since becoming the ruler of Farghana, Babur suffered many short-lived victories and was without shelter and in exile, aided by friends and peasants. He finally stayed in Tashkent, which was ruled by his maternal uncle. Babur wrote, "During my stay in Tashkent, I endured much poverty and humiliation. No country, or hope of one!" For three years Babur concentrated on building up a strong army, recruiting widely amongst the Tajiks of Badakhshan in particular. By 1502, Babur had resigned all hopes of recovering Farghana, he was left with nothing and was forced to try his luck someplace else. 

===At Kabul===
THe Timurid leader Babur enters Kabul.

Kabul was ruled by Ulugh Begh Mirza of the Arghun Dynasty who died leaving only an infant as heir. Thus, the city was claimed by Mukin Begh, who had a strong opposition from the local populace; they wanted this usurper to be dethroned. In 1504, by using the whole situation to his own advantage, Babur was able to cross the snowy Hindu Kush mountains and capture Kabul; the remaining Arghunids were forced to retreat to Kandahar. With this move, he gained a new kingdom, re-established his fortunes and would remain its ruler until 1526. In 1505, because of the low revenue his new mountain kingdom generated, Babur undertook his first expedition to India and had written before in his memoirs, "My desire for Hindustan had been constant. It was in the month of Shaban, the Sun being in Aquarius, that we rode out of Kabul for Hindustan"; it was a brief raid across the Khyber Pass.

In the same year, Babur united with Sultan Husayn Mirza Bayqarah of Herat, a fellow Timurid and distant relative, against their common enemy, the Uzbek Shaybani. However, this venture did not take place because Husayn Mirza died in 1506 and his two sons were reluctant to go to war. Babur instead stayed at Herat after being invited by the two Mirza brothers. It was then the cultural capital of the eastern Muslim world. Though he was disgusted by the vices and luxuries of the city, he marvelled at the intellectual abundance there, which he stated was "filled with learned and matched men". He became acquainted with the work of the Chagatai poet Mir Ali Shir Nava'i, who encouraged the use of Chagatai as a literary language. Nava'i's proficiency with the language, which he is credited with founding, may have influenced Babur in his decision to use it for his memoirs. He spend two months there before being forced to leave due to diminishing resources; it later was overrun by Shaybani and the Mirzas fled.

Babur became the only reigning ruler of the Timurid dynasty after the loss of Herat, and many princes sought refuge from him at Kabul because of Shaybani's invasion in the west. He thus assumed the title of Padshah (emperor) among the Timuridsthough this tile was insignificant since most of his ancestral lands were taken, Kabul itself was in danger and Shaybani continued to be a threat. He prevailed during a potential rebellion in Kabul, but two years later a revolt among some of his leading generals drove him out of Kabul. Escaping with very few companions, Babur soon returned to the city, capturing Kabul again and regaining the allegiance of the rebels. Meanwhile, Shaybani was defeated and killed by Ismail I, Shah of Shia Safavid Persia, in 1510. 

Babur and the remaining Timurids used this opportunity to reconquer their ancestral territories. Over the following few years, Babur and Shah Ismail would form a partnership in an attempt to take over parts of Central Asia. In return for Ismail's assistance, Babur permitted the Safavids to act as a suzerain over him and his followers. Thus, in 1513, after leaving his brother Nasir Mirza to rule Kabul, he managed to get Samarkand for the third time and Bokhara but lost both again to the Uzbeks. Shah Ismail reunited Babur with his sister Khnzda, who had been imprisoned by and forced to marry the recently deceased Shaybani. He returned to Kabul after three years in 1514. The following 11 years of his rule mainly involved dealing with relatively insignificant rebellions from Afghan tribes, his nobles and relatives, in addition to conducting raids across the eastern mountains. Babur began to modernise and train his army despite it being, for him, relatively peaceful times.

===Relations with the Ottomans===
Babur's early relations with the Ottomans were poor because the Ottoman Sultan Selim I provided his rival Ubaydullah Khan with powerful matchlocks and cannons. In the year 1507, when ordered to accept Selim I as his rightful suzerain Babur refused, and gathered Qizilbash servicemen in order to counter the forces of Ubaydullah Khan during the Battle of Ghazdewan. In the year 1513, Ottoman Sultan Selim I reconciled with Babur (fearing that he would join the Safavids), dispatched Ustad Ali Quli the artilleryman and Mustafa Rumi, the matchlock marksman, and many other Ottoman Turks, in order to assist Babur in his conquests; this particular assistance proved to be the basis of future Mughal-Ottoman relations. From them, he also adopted the tactic of using matchlocks and cannons in field (rather than only in sieges), which would give him an important advantage in India.

==Formation of the Mughal Empire in India==

Timurid conqueror Babur crossing the Son River. 
Babur still wanted to escape from the Uzbeks, and finally chose India as a refuge instead of Badakhshan, which was to the north of Kabul. He wrote, "In the presence of such power and potency, we had to think of some place for ourselves and, at this crisis and in the crack of time there was, put a wider space between us and the strong foeman." After his third loss of Samarkand, Babur gave full attention on conquest of India, launching a campaign, he reached Chenab in 1519. Until 1524, his aim was to only expand his rule to Punjab, mainly to fulfil his ancestor Timur's legacy, since it used to be part of his empire. At the time India was under the rule of Ibrahim Lodi of Lodi dynasty, but the empire was crumbling and there were many defectors. He received invitations from Daulat Khan Lodi, Governor of Punjab and Ala-ud-Din, uncle of Ibrahim. He sent an ambassador to Ibrahim, claiming himself the rightful heir to the throne of the country, however the ambassador was detained at Lahore and released months later. 

Babur started for Lahore, Punjab, in 1524 but found that Daulat Khan Lodi had been driven out by forces sent by Ibrahim Lodi. Satish Chandra, Medieval India:From Sultanat to the Mughals, Vol. 2, (Har-Anand, 2009), 27. When Babur arrived at Lahore, the Lodi army marched out and was his army was routed. Satish Chandra, Medieval India:From Sultanat to the Mughals, Vol. 2, 27. In response, Babur burned Lahore for two days, then marched to Dipalpur, placing Alam Khan, another rebel uncle of Lodi's, as governor. Satish Chandra, Medieval India:From Sultanat to the Mughals, Vol. 2, 27-28. Alam Khan was quickly overthrown and fled to Kabul. In response, Babur supplied Alam Khan with troops who later joined up with Daulat Khan Lodi and together with about 30,000 troops, they besieged Ibrahim Lodi at Delhi. Satish Chandra, Medieval India:From Sultanat to the Mughals, Vol. 2, 28. He easily defeated and drove off Alam's army and Babur realized Lodi would not allow him to occupy the Punjab. 

===First battle of Panipat===

Mughal artillery and troops in action during the Battle of Panipat (1526) .
Babur started his campaign in November 1525, when he reached Peshawar he got the news that Daulat Khan Lodi had switched sides and drove out Ala-ud-Din. Babur then marched onto Lahore to confront Daulat Khan Lodi, only to see Daulat's army melt away at their approach. Daulat surrendered and was pardoned, thus within three weeks of crossing the Indus Babur became the master of Punjab.

Babur marched onto Delhi via Sirhind, he reached the historical field of Panipat on 20 April 1526, where he met Ibrahim Lodi along with his numerically superior army of about 100,000 soldiers and 100 elephants. The battle began on morning of 21 April 1526, Babur utilised the tactic of Tulugma, encircled the Ibrahim Lodi's army and forcing them to face artillery fire directly, and frightening the war elephants utilised by the Delhi's army. 

Ibrahim Lodi died during the battle thus ending the Lodi Dynasty. 

Babur wrote in his memoirs about his victory :

After the battle Babur occupied Delhi and Agra, seated himself on the throne of Lodi and laid the foundation of the Mughal Rule in India, but it was yet to be established and Babur was yet to become the ruler of India, as new contenders for the throne like, Rana Sanga, who rose to challenge his rule. However, Babur was able to take the fortress of Bayana, after sending the commander, Nizam Khan, a convincing poem in Persian:

===Battles with the Rajputs===

Babur and the Mughal Army at the Urvah valley in Gwalior.

Although master of Delhi and Agra, Babur records in his memoirs that he had sleepless nights because of continuing worries over Raja Hasan Khan, Mewatpatti (title, Lord of Mewat), the Khanzada ruler of Mewat, Rana Sanga, the Rajput ruler of Mewar.

In AD 1526 a new power appeared in India. Babur, who claimed to be the representative of Timur Lang, after winning the battle of Panipat, took possession of Delhi and Agra, and determined that his enterprise should not be a mere raid like Timur's, but the foundation of a new and
lasting empire. Then it was that the Rajputs made their last great struggle for independence. They were led by Rana Sanga, a chief of Mewar, who invited the Mewatti chief, Hasan Khan, to aid the nation from which he had sprung in resisting the new horde of Musalmans from the north. Gazetteer of Ulwur 

The political position of Hasan Khan at this time was a very important one. Babur, in his autobiography, speaks of him as the prime mover in all the confusions and insurrections of the period. He had, he states, vainly shown Hasan Khan distinguished marks of favour, but the affections of the infidel lay all on the side of the natives, the Hindus (Indians), and the propinquity of his country to Delhi made his opposition especially dangerous. Hasan Khan's seat at this time was at Ulwur, but local tradition says that he was originally established at Bahadarpur, eight miles from Ulwur.

Babur says that the ancestors of his opponent Hasan Khan had governed Mewat in uninterrupted succession for nearly 200 years, and that Tejara was their capital. Babur's Memoirs, pp. 36869. In another place he calls him Raja Hasan Khan Mewati, an infidel, who was the prime mover and agitator in the insurrection against the Mughals. Babur's Memoirs, p. 335. The title of Raja and the term "infidel" show that Babur was aware of Hasan Khan's Hindu descent, and the period of "nearly 200 years" most probably refers to the date when his ancestor became a Muslim in the reign of Firoz Shah between AH 752 and 790. Archaeological Survey of India Reports 

The Rajput lords had, prior to Babur's intervention, succeeded in conquering some of the Sultanate's territory. They ruled an area directly to the southwest of Babur's new dominions, commonly known as Rajputana as well as fortified dominions in other parts of northern India. It was not a unified kingdom, but rather a confederacy of principalities, under the informal suzerainty of Rana Sanga, head of the senior Rajput dynasty.

The Rajputs had possibly heard word of the heavy casualties inflicted by Lodi on Babur's forces, and believed that they could capture Delhi, and possibly all Hindustan. They hoped to bring it back into Hindu Rajput hands for the first time in almost three hundred and fifty years since Sultan Shah-al Din Muhammad of Ghor defeated the Rajput Chauhan King Prithviraj III in 1192.

Furthermore, the Rajputs were well aware that there was dissent within the ranks of Babur's army. The hot Indian summer was upon them, and many troops wanted to return home to the cooler climes of Central Asia. The Rajputs' reputation for courage preceded them, and their superior numbers no doubt further contributed to the desire of Babur's army to retreat. According to Babur's own calculations the potential strength of the Rajput army was much larger than that deployed by the Lodis at Panipat. Babur resolved to make this an extended battle, and decided to push further into India, into lands never previously claimed by the Timurids. He needed his troops to defeat the Rajputs.

Despite the unwillingness of his troops to engage in further warfare, Babur was convinced he could overcome the Rajputs and gain complete control over Hindustan. He made great propaganda of the fact that for the first time he was to battle non-Muslims, the Kafir, to the extent of taking a vow to abstain from drinking (a common fraction among his people) for the rest of his life to win divine favour, and declared the war against Rana Sanga.

==Personal life and relationships==
right

There no descriptions about Babur's physical appearance, except the paintings from his memoirs which were made during the reign of his grandson Akbar, when he got it translated. Babur claimed to be strong and physically fit, saying to have swam across every major river he encountered, including twice across the Ganges River in North India. Unlike his father, he had ascetic tendencies and did not have any great interest in women. In his first marriage, he was "bashful" towards Aisha Sultan Begum later losing his affection for her. However, he acquired several more wives and concubines over the years, and as required for a prince, he was able to ensure the continuity of his line; Babur treated them and his other women relatives well. In his memoirs, there is a mention of his infatuation for a younger boy when Babur was 16 years old. According to Abraham Eraly, bisexuality and pederasty were common at that time among central Asian rulers.

Babur's first wife, Aisha Sultan Begum, was his cousin and daughter of Sultan Ahmad Mirza. She was betrothed to Babur when he was five years old and they married after eleven years. He had one daughter with her, Fakhr-un-Nissa, who died as an infant within a year in 1500 AD. Three years later and after his first defeat at Farghana, she left Babur. Babur then married Zainad Sultan Begum in 1504 and Mahim Begum in 1506. A year later, he married Maasuma Sultana Begum, Gulrukh Begum and Dildar Begum. Zainad died childless within two years. Babur had four children with Mahim, among which only Humayun survived. Maasuma died during childbirththe year is disputed from 1508 to 1519. With Gulrukh, Babur had two sons, Kamran and Askari, and with Dildar Begum, Hindal. Babur later married Mubarika Yousefzai, who was an Afghan woman of the Yousefzai tribe. Gulnar Aghacha and Nargul Aghacha were two Circassian slaves given as gifts by Tahmasp Shah Safavi of Persia. They became "recognized ladies of the royal household." 

During his rule in Kabul, when there was a relative time of peace, Babur pursued his interests in literature, art, music and gardening. Previously, he never drank alcohol and avoided it when he was in Herat. In Kabul, he first tasted it at the age of thirty. He then began to drink regularly, host wine parties and consume preparations made from opium. Though religion had a central place in his life, Babur also approvingly quoted a line of poetry by one of his contemporaries: "I am drunk, officer. Punish me when I am sober". He quit drinking for health reasons before the Battle of Khanwa, just two years before his death, and demanded that his court do the same. But he did not stop chewing narcotic preparations, and did not lose his sense of irony. He wrote, "Everyone regrets drinking and swears an oath (of abstinence); I swore the oath and regret that." Pope, Hugh (2005). Sons of the Conquerors, Overlook Duckworth, pp.234235. 

==Death and legacy==
The tomb of the first Mughal Emperor Babur in Kabul.

After Babur fell seriously ill, Humayun, his eldest son, was summoned from his Jagir. He died at the age of 47 on , and was succeeded by Humayun. In accordance with his will, his body was moved to Kabul, Afghanistan there it lies in Bagh-e Babur (Babur Gardens). 

It is generally agreed that, as a Timurid, Babur was not only significantly influenced by the Persian culture, but that his empire also gave rise to the expansion of the Persianate ethos in the Indian subcontinent. 

For example, F. Lehmann states in the Encyclopdia Iranica: 

Since he was a patrilineal descendant of Timur, Babur regarded himself a Timurid and a Turk. Some sources therefore claim that Babur's empire was Turkic in nature. But, commenting on Babur's remarks about his father Omar Sheykh Mirz enjoying the Persian poetry of Nezami, Rumi and especially the Shahnama of Ferdowsi, Svat Soucek points out that:

Although all applications of modern Central Asian ethnicities to people of Babur's time are anachronistic, Soviet and Uzbek sources regard Babur as an ethnic Uzbek. At the same time, during the Soviet Union Uzbek scholars were censored for idealizing and praising Babur and other historical figures such as Ali-Shir Nava'i. 

Babur is considered a national hero in Uzbekistan. Many of Babur's poems have become popular Uzbek folk songs, especially by Sherali Jorayev. Some sources claim that Babur is a national hero in Kyrgyzstan too. Dust in the Wind: Retracing Dharma Master Xuanzang's Western Pilgrimage By , Zhihong Wang, pg. 121 

Babur is also held in high esteem in Afghanistan and Iran. In October 2005, Pakistan developed the Babur Cruise Missile, named in his honor.

===Babri mosque===

Babur is popularly believed to have demolished the Rama Temple at Ayodhya and built Babri Mosque in Ayodhya, India. On 6 December 1992, Babri Masjid was demolished by Karsevaks of Ramajanmabhumi movement mobilised by the call given by organisations like VHP and Bajrang Dal. L K Advani of BJP party was a leading figure of the movement, along with several other leaders of Hindu organisations. Uproar over India mosque report: Inquiry into Babri mosque's demolition in 1992 indicts opposition BJP leaders Al-Jazeera English  24 November 2009 Its destruction sparked off communal clashes around the country. The Crisis in Kashmir: Portents of War, Hopes of Peace By umit Ganguly R Page no 94, from Web Archive resulting in the killing of thousands of Muslims and Hindus. Anil das. (28 September 2010) "Chronolgy of Ayodhya's Ram Janambhoomi-Babri Masjid title suit issue", from Web Archive However, from the three inscriptions which once adorned the surface of the mosque it becomes apparent that the mosque was constructed during his reign on the orders of Mir Baqi, who was one of the generals of Babur's forces sent towards this region. In 2003, The Archaeological Survey of India was asked to conduct a more in-depth study and an excavation to ascertain the type of structure that was beneath the rubble of Babri masjid. Ratnagar, Shereen (2004) "CA Forum on Anthropology in Public: Archaeology at the Heart of a Political Confrontation: The Case of Ayodhya" Current Anthropology 45(2): pp. 239259, p. 239 The summary of the ASI report The Week (India), from Web Archive indicated "no mention of a temple, only of evidence of a massive structure, fragments of which speak about their association with temple architecture of the Saivite style." 

==References and sources==
;References

;Sources
*
*Mirza Muhammad Haidar Dughlat Ta'rikh-e Rashidi Trans. & Ed. Elias & Denison Ross (London) 1898.
*Cambridge History of India, Vol. III & IV, "Turks and Afghan" and "The Mughal Period". (Cambridge) 1928
*Muzaffar Alam & Sanjay Subrahmanyan (Eds.) The Mughal State 15261750 (Delhi) 1998
*William Irvine The army of the Indian Moghuls. (London) 1902. (Last revised 1985)
*Bamber Gascoigne The Great Moghuls (London) 1971. (Last revised 1987)
*Jos Gommans Mughal Warfare (London) 2002
*Peter Jackson The Delhi Sultanate. A Political and Military History (Cambridge) 1999
*John F. Richards The Mughal Empire (Cambridge) 1993
*
* Gordon, Stewart. When Asia was the World: Traveling Merchants, Scholars, Warriors, and Monks who created the "Riches of the East" Da Capo Press, Perseus Books, 2008. ISBN 0-306-81556-7.

==Further reading==
*

==External links==

* The Mughals  Babur
*



[[Bernard of Clairvaux]]

Bernard of Clairvaux, O.Cist (1090  August 20, 1153) was a French abbot and the primary builder of the reforming Cistercian order.

After the death of his mother, Bernard sought admission into the Cistercian order. "Three years later, he was sent to found a new abbey at an isolated clearing in a glen known as the Val d'Absinthe, about 15 km southeast of Bar-sur-Aube. According to tradition, Bernard founded the monastery on 25 June 1115, naming it Claire Valle, which evolved into Clairvaux. There Bernard would preach an immediate faith, in which the intercessor was the Virgin Mary." In the year 1128, Bernard assisted at the Council of Troyes, at which he traced the outlines of the Rule of the Knights Templar, who soon became the ideal of Christian nobility.

On the death of Pope Honorius II on 13 February 1130, a schism broke out in the Church. Louis VI of France convened a national council of the French bishops at tampes in 1130, and Bernard was chosen to judge between the rivals for pope. After the council of tampes, Bernard went to speak with the King of England, Henry I, Beauclerc, about the king's reservations regarding Pope Innocent II. Beauclerc was sceptical because most of the bishops of England supported Anacletus II; he convinced him to support Innocent. Germany had decided to support Innocent through Norbert of Xanten, who was a friend of Bernard's. However, Innocent insisted on Bernard's company when he met with Lothair III of Germany. Lothair became Innocent's strongest ally among the nobility. Despite the councils of tampes, Wurzburg, Clermont, and Rheims all supporting Innocent, there were still large portions of the Christian world supporting Anacletus. At the end of 1131, the kingdoms of France, England, Germany, Castile, and Aragon supported Innocent; however, most of Italy, southern France, and Sicily, with the patriarchs of Constantinople, Antioch, and Jerusalem, supported Anacletus. Bernard set out to convince these other regions to rally behind Innocent. The first person whom he went to was Gerard of Angoulme. He proceeded to write a letter known as Letter 126, which questioned Gerard's reasons for supporting Anacletus. Bernard would later comment that Gerard was his most formidable opponent during the whole schism. After convincing Gerard, Bernard traveled to visit the Count of Poitiers. He was the hardest for Bernard to convince. He did not pledge allegiance to Innocent until 1135. After that, Bernard spent most of his time in Italy convincing the Italians to pledge allegiance to Innocent. He traveled to Sicily in 1137 to convince the king of Sicily to follow Innocent. The whole conflict ended when Anacletus died on 25 January 1138. St. Bernard of Clairveaux by Msgr. Leon Cristiani c 1970 In 1139, Bernard assisted at the Second Council of the Lateran.
Bernard denounced the teachings of Peter Abelard to the pope, who called a council at Sens in 1141 to settle the matter. Bernard soon saw one of his disciples elected as Pope Eugenius III. Having previously helped end the schism within the church, Bernard was now called upon to combat heresy. In June 1145, Bernard traveled in southern France and his preaching there helped strengthen support against heresy.

Following the Christian defeat at the Siege of Edessa, the pope commissioned Bernard to preach the Second Crusade. The last years of Bernard's life were saddened by the failure of the crusaders, the entire responsibility for which was thrown upon him. Bernard died at age 63, after 40 years spent in the cloister. He was the first Cistercian placed on the calendar of saints, and was canonized by Pope Alexander III on 18 January 1174. In 1830 Pope Pius VIII bestowed upon Bernard the title "Doctor of the Church".

==Early life (10901113)==
Bernard's parents were Tescelin, Lord of Fontaines, and Aleth of Montbard, both belonging to the highest nobility of Burgundy. Bernard was the third of a family of seven children, six of whom were sons. At the age of nine years, he was sent to school at Chtillon-sur-Seine, run by the secular canons of Saint-Vorles. Bernard had a great taste for literature and devoted himself for some time to poetry. His success in his studies won the admiration of his teachers. He wanted to excel in literature in order to take up the study of the Bible. He had a special devotion to the Virgin Mary, and he would later write several works about the Queen of Heaven. 

The Vision of St Bernard, by Fra Bartolommeo, c. 1504 (Uffizi).
Bernard would expand upon Anselm of Canterbury's role in transmuting the sacramentally ritual Christianity of the Early Middle Ages into a new, more personally held faith, with the life of Christ as a model and a new emphasis on the Virgin Mary. In opposition to the rational approach to divine understanding that the scholastics adopted, Bernard would preach an immediate faith, in which the intercessor was the Virgin Mary.

Bernard was only nineteen years of age when his mother died. During his youth, he did not escape trying temptations and around this time he thought of retiring from the world and living a life of solitude and prayer. Bunson (1998) p.129. 

In 1098 Saint Robert of Molesme had founded Cteaux Abbey, near Dijon, with the purpose of restoring the Rule of St Benedict in all its rigour. Returning to Molesme, he left the government of the new abbey to Saint Alberic, who died in the year 1109. In 1113 Saint Stephen Harding had just succeeded him as third Abbot of Cteaux when Bernard and thirty other young noblemen of Burgundy sought admission into the Cistercian order. McManners (1990) p.204. 

==Abbot of Clairvaux (111528)==
Bernard exorcising a possession, altarpiece by Jrg Breu the Elder, c. 1500.
The little community of reformed Benedictines at Cteaux, which would have so profound an influence on Western monasticism, grew rapidly. Three years later, Bernard was sent with a band of twelve monks to found a new house at Valle d'Absinthe, in the Diocese of Langres. This Bernard named Claire Valle, or Clairvaux, on 25 June 1115, and the names of Bernard and Clairvaux would soon become inseparable. During the absence of the Bishop of Langres, Bernard was blessed as abbot by William of Champeaux, Bishop of Chlons-sur-Marne. From that moment a strong friendship sprang up between the abbot and the bishop, who was professor of theology at Notre Dame of Paris, and the founder of the Abbey of St. Victor. 

The beginnings of Clairvaux Abbey were trying and painful. The regime was so austere that Bernard became ill, and only the influence of his friend William of Champeaux and the authority of the general chapter could make him mitigate the austerities. The monastery, however, made rapid progress. Disciples flocked to it in great numbers and put themselves under the direction of Bernard. His father and all his brothers entered Clairvaux to pursue religious life, leaving only Humbeline, his sister, in the secular world. She, with the consent of her husband, soon took the veil in the Benedictine nunnery of Jully-les-Nonnains. Gerard of Clairvaux, Bernard's older brother, became the cellarer of Citeaux. The abbey became too small for its members and it was necessary to send out bands to found new houses. In 1118 Trois-Fontaines Abbey was founded in the diocese of Chlons; in 1119 Fontenay Abbey in the Diocese of Autun; and in 1121 Foigny Abbey near Vervins, in the diocese of Laon. In addition to these victories, Bernard also had his trials. During an absence from Clairvaux, the Grand Prior of Cluny went to Clairvaux and enticed away Bernard's cousin, Robert of Chtillon. This was the occasion of the longest and most emotional of Bernard's letters. 

The abbey of Cluny as it would have looked in Bernard's time.
In the year 1119, Bernard was present at the first general chapter of the order convoked by Stephen of Cteaux. Though not yet 30 years old, Bernard was listened to with the greatest attention and respect, especially when he developed his thoughts upon the revival of the primitive spirit of regularity and fervour in all the monastic orders. It was this general chapter that gave definitive form to the constitutions of the order and the regulations of the Charter of Charity which Pope Callixtus II confirmed 23 December 1119. In 1120, Bernard authored his first work, De Gradibus Superbiae et Humilitatis, and his homilies which he entitled De Laudibus Mariae. The monks of the abbey of Cluny were unhappy to see Cteaux take the lead role among the religious orders of the Roman Catholic Church. For this reason, the Black Monks attempted to make it appear that the rules of the new order were impracticable. At the solicitation of William of St. Thierry, Bernard defended the order by publishing his Apology which was divided into two parts. In the first part, he proved himself innocent of the charges of Cluny and in the second he gave his reasons for his counterattacks. He protested his profound esteem for the Benedictines of Cluny whom he declared he loved equally as well as the other religious orders. Peter the Venerable, abbot of Cluny, answered Bernard and assured him of his great admiration and sincere friendship. In the meantime Cluny established a reform, and Abbot Suger, the minister of Louis VI of France, was converted by the Apology of Bernard. He hastened to terminate his worldly life and restore discipline in his monastery. The zeal of Bernard extended to the bishops, the clergy, and lay people. Bernard's letter to the archbishop of Sens was seen as a real treatise, "De Officiis Episcoporum." About the same time he wrote his work on Grace and Free Will. 

==Doctor of the Church (112846)==
In the year 1128 AD, Bernard participated in the Council of Troyes, which had been convoked by Pope Honorius II, and was presided over by Cardinal Matthew, Bishop of Albano. The purpose of this council was to settle certain disputes of the bishops of Paris, and regulate other matters of the Church of France. The bishops made Bernard secretary of the council, and charged him with drawing up the synodal statutes. After the council, the bishop of Verdun was deposed. It was at this council that Bernard traced the outlines of the Rule of the Knights Templar who soon became the ideal of Christian nobility. Around this time, he praised them in his Liber ad milites templi de laude novae militiae. Durant (1950) p.593. 

Again reproaches arose against Bernard and he was denounced, even in Rome. He was accused of being a monk who meddled with matters that did not concern him. Cardinal Harmeric, on behalf of the pope, wrote Bernard a sharp letter of remonstrance stating, "It is not fitting that noisy and troublesome frogs should come out of their marshes to trouble the Holy See and the cardinals." 

Bernard answered the letter by saying that, if he had assisted at the council, it was because he had been dragged to it by force. In his response Bernard wrote,

This letter made a positive impression on Harmeric, and in the Vatican.

===Schism===
Bernard's influence was soon felt in provincial affairs. He defended the rights of the Church against the encroachments of kings and princes, and recalled to their duty Henri Sanglier, archbishop of Sens and Stephen of Senlis, bishop of Paris. On the death of Pope Honorius II, which occurred on 14 February 1130, a schism broke out in the Church by the election of two popes, Pope Innocent II and Pope Anacletus II. Innocent II, having been banished from Rome by Anacletus, took refuge in France. King Louis VI convened a national council of the French bishops at tampes, and Bernard, summoned there by consent of the bishops, was chosen to judge between the rival popes. He decided in favour of Innocent II. This caused the pope to be recognized by all the great powers. He then went with him into Italy and reconciled Pisa with Genoa, and Milan with the pope. The same year Bernard was again at the Council of Reims at the side of Innocent II. He then went to Aquitaine where he succeeded for the time in detaching William X of Aquitaine, Count of Poitiers, from the cause of Anacletus. 
St Bernard in a medieval illuminated manuscript

In 1132, Bernard accompanied Innocent II into Italy, and at Cluny the pope abolished the dues which Clairvaux used to pay to that abbey. This action gave rise to a quarrel between the White Monks and the Black Monks which lasted 20 years. In May of that year, the pope, supported by the army of Emperor Lothair III, entered Rome, but Lothair, feeling himself too weak to resist the partisans of Anacletus, retired beyond the Alps, and Innocent sought refuge in Pisa in September 1133. Bernard had returned to France in June and was continuing the work of peacemaking which he had commenced in 1130. Towards the end of 1134, he made a second journey into Aquitaine, where William X had relapsed into schism. Bernard invited William to the Mass which he celebrated in the Church of La Couldre. At the Eucharist, he "admonished the Duke not to despise God as he did His servants". William yielded and the schism ended. Bernard went again to Italy, where Roger II of Sicily was endeavouring to withdraw the Pisans from their allegiance to Innocent. He recalled the city of Milan to obedience to the pope as they had followed the deposed Anselm V, Archbishop of Milan. For this, he was offered, and he refused, the archbishopric of Milan. He then returned to Clairvaux. Believing himself at last secure in his cloister, Bernard devoted himself with renewed vigour to the composition of the works which would win for him the title of "Doctor of the Church". He wrote at this time his sermons on the Song of Songs. In 1137, he was again forced to leave his solitude by order of the pope to put an end to the quarrel between Lothair and Roger of Sicily. At the conference held at Palermo, Bernard succeeded in convincing Roger of the rights of Innocent II. He also silenced the final supporters who sustained the schism. Anacletus died of "grief and disappointment" in 1138, and with him the schism ended. 

In 1139, Bernard assisted at the Second Council of the Lateran, in which the surviving adherents of the schism were definitively condemned. About the same time, Bernard was visited at Clairvaux by Saint Malachy, Primate of All Ireland, and a very close friendship formed between them. Malachy wanted to become a Cistercian, but the pope would not give his permission. Malachy would die at Clairvaux in 1148. 

===Contest with Abelard===
Towards the close of the 11th century, a spirit of independence flourished within schools of philosophy and theology. This led for a time to the exaltation of human reason and rationalism. The movement found an ardent and powerful advocate in Peter Abelard. Abelard's treatise on the Trinity had been condemned as heretical in 1121, and he was compelled to throw his own book into the fire. However, Abelard continued to develop his teachings, which were controversial in some quarters. Bernard, informed of this by William of St-Thierry, is said to have held a meeting with Abelard intending to persuade him to amend his writings, during which Abelard repented and promised to do so. But once out of Bernard's presence, he reneged. Evans (2000) p.115  123. Bernard then denounced Abelard to the pope and cardinals of the Curia. Abelard sought a debate with Bernard, but Bernard initially declined, saying he did not feel matters of such importance should be settled by logical analyses. Bernard's letters to William of St-Thierry also express his apprehension about confronting the preeminent logician. Abelard continued to press for a public debate, and made his challenge widely known, making it hard for Bernard to decline. In 1141, at the urgings of Abelard, the archbishop of Sens called a council of bishops, where Abelard and Bernard were to put their respective cases so Abelard would have a chance to clear his name. Bernard lobbied the prelates on the evening before the debate, swaying many of them to his view. The next day, after Bernard made his opening statement, Abelard decided to retire without attempting to answer. The council found in favour of Bernard and their judgment was confirmed by the pope. Abelard submitted without resistance, and he retired to Cluny to live under the protection of Peter the Venerable, where he died two years later. 

===Cistercian Order and Heresy===
Bernard had occupied himself in sending bands of monks from his overcrowded monastery into Germany, Sweden, England, Ireland, Portugal, Switzerland, and Italy. Some of these, at the command of Innocent II, took possession of Three Fountains Abbey, from which Pope Eugenius III would be chosen in 1145. Pope Innocent II died in the year 1143. His two successors, Pope Celestine II and Pope Lucius II, reigned only a short time, and then Bernard saw one of his disciples, Bernard of Pisa, and known thereafter as Eugenius III, raised to the Chair of Saint Peter. Bunson (1998) p.130. Bernard sent him, at the pope's own request, various instructions which comprise the Book of Considerations, the predominating idea of which is that the reformation of the Church ought to commence with the sanctity of the pope. Temporal matters are merely accessories; the principles according to Bernard's work were that piety and meditation were to precede action. McManners (1990) p.210. 

Having previously helped end the schism within the Church, Bernard was now called upon to combat heresy. Henry of Lausanne, a former Cluniac monk, had adopted the teachings of the Petrobrusians, followers of Peter of Bruys and spread them in a modified form after Peter's death. Henry of Lausanne's followers became known as Henricians. In June 1145, at the invitation of Cardinal Alberic of Ostia, Bernard traveled in southern France. McManners (1990) p.211. His preaching, aided by his ascetic looks and simple attire, helped doom the new sects. Both the Henrician and the Petrobrusian faiths began to die out by the end of that year. Soon afterwards, Henry of Lausanne was arrested, brought before the bishop of Toulouse, and probably imprisoned for life. In a letter to the people of Toulouse, undoubtedly written at the end of 1146, Bernard calls upon them to extirpate the last remnants of the heresy. He also preached against the Cathars. 

==Second Crusade (114649)==
News came at this time from the Holy Land that alarmed Christendom. Christians had been defeated at the Siege of Edessa and most of the county had fallen into the hands of the Seljuk Turks. Riley-Smith (1991) p.48 The Kingdom of Jerusalem and the other Crusader states were threatened with similar disaster. Deputations of the bishops of Armenia solicited aid from the pope, and the King of France also sent ambassadors. The pope commissioned Bernard to preach a Second Crusade and granted the same indulgences for it which Pope Urban II had accorded to the First Crusade. Durant (1950) p.594. 

Bernard of Clairvaux, true effigy by Georg Andreas Wasshuber (16501732)
There was at first virtually no popular enthusiasm for the crusade as there had been in 1095. Bernard found it expedient to dwell upon the taking of the cross as a potent means of gaining absolution for sin and attaining grace. On 31 March, with King Louis present, he preached to an enormous crowd in a field at Vzelay.
James Meeker Ludlow describes the scene in The Age of the Crusades as follows:

 A large platform was erected on a hill outside the city. King and monk stood together, representing the combined will of earth and heaven. The enthusiasm of the assembly of Clermont in 1095, when Peter the Hermit and Urban II launched the first crusade, was matched by the holy fervor inspired by Bernard as he cried, "O ye who listen to me! Hasten to appease the anger of heaven, but no longer implore its goodness by vain complaints. Clothe yourselves in sackcloth, but also cover yourselves with your impenetrable bucklers. The din of arms, the danger, the labors, the fatigues of war, are the penances that God now imposes upon you. Hasten then to expiate your sins by victories over the Infidels, and let the deliverance of the holy places be the reward of your repentance." As in the olden scene, the cry "Deus vult! Deus vult!" rolled over the fields, and was echoed by the voice of the orator: "Cursed be he who does not stain his sword with blood." Ludlow, James Meeker The Age of the Crusades. Christian Literature Co. (1896) pp.164-167 

When Bernard was finished the crowd enlisted en masse; they supposedly ran out of cloth to make crosses. Bernard is said to have given his own outer garments to be cut up to make more. Unlike the First Crusade, the new venture attracted royalty, such as Eleanor of Aquitaine, then Queen of France; Thierry of Alsace, Count of Flanders; Henry, the future Count of Champagne; Louis brother Robert I of Dreux; Alphonse I of Toulouse; William II of Nevers; William de Warenne, 3rd Earl of Surrey; Hugh VII of Lusignan; and numerous other nobles and bishops. But an even greater show of support came from the common people. Bernard wrote to the pope a few days afterwards, "Cities and castles are now empty. There is not left one man to seven women, and everywhere there are widows to still-living husbands." 

Bernard then passed into Germany, and the reported miracles which multiplied almost at his every step undoubtedly contributed to the success of his mission. Conrad III of Germany and his nephew Frederick Barbarossa, received the cross from the hand of Bernard. Pope Eugenius came in person to France to encourage the enterprise. As in the First Crusade, the preaching inadvertently led to attacks on Jews; a fanatical French monk named Radulphe was apparently inspiring massacres of Jews in the Rhineland, Cologne, Mainz, Worms, and Speyer, with Radulphe claiming Jews were not contributing financially to the rescue of the Holy Land. The archbishop of Cologne and the archbishop of Mainz were vehemently opposed to these attacks and asked Bernard to denounce them. This he did, but when the campaign continued, Bernard traveled from Flanders to Germany to deal with the problems in person. He then found Radulphe in Mainz and was able to silence him, returning him to his monastery. Durant (1950) p. 391. 

The last years of Bernard's life were saddened by the failure of the Second Crusade he had preached, the entire responsibility for which was thrown upon him. Bunson (1998) p. 130. Bernard considered it his duty to send an apology to the Pope and it is inserted in the second part of his "Book of Considerations." There he explains how the sins of the crusaders were the cause of their misfortune and failures. When his attempt to call a new crusade failed, he tried to disassociate himself from the fiasco of the Second Crusade altogether. Runciman (1952) pp. 2324 and pg. 277. 

==Final years (114953)==
Bernard receiving milk from the breast of the Virgin Mary. The scene is a legend which allegedly took place at Speyer Cathedral in 1146.
The death of his contemporaries served as a warning to Bernard of his own approaching end. The first to die was Suger in 1152, of whom Bernard wrote to Eugenius III, "If there is any precious vase adorning the palace of the King of Kings it is the soul of the venerable Suger". Conrad III and his son Henry died the same year. From the beginning of the year 1153, Bernard felt his death approaching. The passing of Pope Eugenius had struck the fatal blow by taking from him one whom he considered his greatest friend and consoler. Bernard died at age sixty-three on 20 August 1153, after forty years spent in the cloister. He was buried at the Clairvaux Abbey, but after its dissolution in 1792 by the French revolutionary government, his remains were transferred to the Troyes Cathedral.

==Theology==

St. Bernard of Clairvaux was named a Doctor of the Church in 1830. At the 800th anniversary of his death, Pope Pius XII issued an encyclical on Bernard, Doctor Mellifluus, in which he labeled him "The Last of the Fathers." Bernard did not reject human philosophy which is genuine philosophy, which leads to God; he differentiates between different kinds of knowledge, the highest being theological. Three central elements of Bernard's Mariology are how he explained the virginity of Mary, the "Star of the Sea", how the faithful should pray on the Virgin Mary, and how he relied on the Virgin Mary as Mediatrix.

Bernard also held some doctrines which the Reformers would later rekindle at the beginnings of the Protestant movement. Some people have therefore equated him with a Protestant before there were Protestants. In truth he held to a mix of the Reformers' doctrines and the doctrines of the Roman Catholic Church of his day. Bernard of Clairvaux: The Times, the Man, and His Work Bernard was skeptical of the doctrine of the Immaculate Conception of Mary. Bernard of Clairvaux. "The Letters of St. Bernard of Clairvaux" Epistle 174 Tr. by Bruno Scott James. 1998 Also of great importance to the Reformers would be Bernard's conception of justification. Calvin quotes Bernard several times to show the historical validity of Sola Fide, Calvin, Jean. "Book 3 Ch 2 Sec 25." Institutes of the Christian Religion. Philadelphia: Westminster, 1960. Print. Book 3 Ch 12 Sec 3." Institutes of the Christian Religion. Philadelphia: Westminster, 1960. Print. which Luther described as the article upon which the church stands or falls. Luther, Martin. Luther Werke, Weimar Ausgabe. Herman Boehlau: Weimar, Germany, 1930, Vol.40, p.130. Calvin also quotes him in setting forth his doctrine of a forensic alien righteousness, or as it is commonly called imputed righteousness. Book 3 Ch 11 Sec 22." Institutes of the Christian Religion. Philadelphia: Westminster, 1960. Print. Book 3 Ch 25 Sec 2." Institutes of the Christian Religion. Philadelphia: Westminster, 1960. Print. 

==Spirituality==
Bernard was instrumental in re-emphasizing the importance of Lectio Divina and contemplation on Scripture within the Cistercian order. Bernard had observed that when Lectio Divina was neglected monasticism suffered. Bernard considered Lectio Divina and contemplation guided by the Holy Spirit the keys to nourishing Christian spirituality. Christian spirituality: themes from the tradition by Lawrence S. Cunningham, Keith J. Egan 1996 ISBN 978-0-8091-3660-5 pp. 9192 

==Works==
An engraving of The Lactation of Saint Bernard. The Virgin Mary is shooting milk into the eye of Saint Bernard of Clairvaux from her right breast which allegedly miraculously cured an eye affliction.
The works of Bernard include the following:

* De gradibus humilitatis et superbiae, (The Steps of Humility and Pride) his first treatise, written in the mid-1120s. The Latin text is in PL182 939-972C. 

* Apologia ad Guillelmum Sancti Theoderici Abbatem (Apology to William of St. Thierry), written in the defence of the Cistercians against the claims of the monks of Cluny. The Latin text is in PL182 893-918A. 

* De Conversione Ad Clericos Sermo Seu Liber (On the Conversion of Clerics), a book addressed to the young ecclesiastics of Paris written in 1122. The Latin text is in PL 182:833 -856D. 

* De Gratia et Libero Arbitrio (On Grace and Free Choice), written c1128, in which the Roman Catholic dogma of grace and free will was defended according to the principles of St Augustine. The Latin text is in PL182 999-1030A. 

*De diligendo Dei, (On Loving God), possibly written c1128, The Latin text is in PL182 971-1000B. which outlines seven stages of ascent leading to union with God.

* De Laude Novae Militiae, (In Praise of the New Knighthood) addressed to Hugh de Paynes, first Grand Master and Prior of Jerusalem (1129). This is a eulogy of the Knights Templar order, which had been instituted in 1118, and an exhortation to the knights to conduct themselves with courage in their several stations. The Latin text is in PL182 917-940B. 

* De praecepto et dispensatione libri (Book of Precepts and Dispensations), written c1141&ndash;44, which contains answers to questions upon certain points of the Rule of St Benedict from which the abbot can, or cannot, dispense. The Latin text is in PL 182:857-894C. 
* De Consideratione (On Consideration), written c1148-53, addressed to Pope Eugenius III. The Latin text is in PL182 727-808A, with the title given as De Consideratione Libri Quinque Ad Eugenium Tertium. 

* Liber De Vita Et Rebus Gestis Sancti Malachiae Hiberniae Episcopi (The life and death of Saint Malachy, the Irishman). The Latin text is in PL182 1073 - 1118A. The English translation is The life and death of Saint Malachy, the Irishman translated and annotated by Robert T. Meyer, (Kalamazoo, Mich: Cistercian Publications, 1978). 

* De Moribus Et Officio Episcoporum, which is a letter addressed to Henry, Archbishop of Sens on the duties of bishops. The Latin text is in PL182 807-834A. 

His sermons are also numerous:
* Most famous are his Sermones super Cantica Conticorum (Sermons on the Song of Songs). Although it has at times been suggested that the sermon form is a rhetorical device in a set of works which were only ever designed to be read, since such finely polished and lengthy literary pieces could not accurately have been recorded by a monk while Bernard was preaching, recent scholarship has tended to tend toward the theory that, although what exists in these texts was certainly the product of Bernard's writing, they likely found their origins in sermons preached to the monks of Clairvaux. For a history of the debate over the Sermons, and an attempted solution, see Jean LeClercq, 'Introduction', in Bernard of Clairvaux,On the Song of Songs, vol 2, Cistercian Fathers series no7 (Spencer, MA: Cistercian Publications, 1976), vii-xxx Bernard began to produce these in 1135, and died still not having completed his series, with 86 sermons complete. (These sermons contain an autobiographical passage, sermon 26, mourning the death of his brother, Gerard.) Wim Verbaal, "Preaching the Dead from Their Graves: Bernard of Clairvaux's Lament on His Brother Gerard," in: Speculum Sermonis: Interdisciplinary Reflections on the Medieval Sermon, ed. Georgiana Donavin, Cary J. Nederman, and Richard Utz. Turnhout: Brepols, 2004. pp. 11339 The Latin text is in PL 183:785 - 1198A. (Sometime after Bernard of Clairvaux died, the English Cistercian Gilbert of Hoyland was asked to continue Bernard's incomplete series of 86 sermons on the biblical Song of Songs. Gilbert wrote 47 sermons before he died in 1172, taking the series up to Chapter 5 of the Song of Songs. Another English Cistercian abbot, John of Ford, wrote another 120 sermons on the Song of Songs, so completing the Cistercian sermon-commentary on the book.)

* There are 125 surviving Sermones per annum, or Sermons on the Liturgical Year.

* There are also the Sermones de diversis (Sermons on Different Topics).

* 547 letters survive. These are edited in Sancti Bernardi Opera, ed Jean Leclercq et al., vols 7-8. 

Many letters, treatises, and other works, falsely attributed to him survive, and are now referred to as works by pseudo-Bernard. These include:
* Echelle du Clotre
* Meditations. This was probably written at some point in the thirteenth century. It circulated extensively in the Middle Ages under Bernard's name and was one of the most popular religious works of the later Middle Ages. Its theme is self-knowledge as the beginning of wisdom; it begins with the phrase "Many know much, but do not know themselves". The Latin text is printed in PL 184:485-508. See Thomas H Bestul, Meditatio/Meditation, in Amy Hollywood, ed, The Cambridge Companion to Christian Mysticism, (Cambridge: CUP, 2012), p164 
* L'edification de la Maison intrieure.

==Legacy==
Stained glass representing Bernard. Upper Rhine, ca. 1450.

Bernard's theology and Mariology continue to be of major importance, particularly within the Cistercian and Trappist orders. His texts are prescribed readings in Cistercian congregations Bernard led to the foundation of 163 monasteries in different parts of Europe. At his death, they numbered 343. His influence led Pope Alexander III to launch reforms that would lead to the establishment of canon law. Duffy (1997) p. 101. He was the first Cistercian monk placed on the calendar of saints and was canonized by Pope Alexander III 18 January 1174. Pope Pius VIII bestowed on him the title of Doctor of the Church. He is fondly remembered as the "Mellifluous Doctor" (the Honey-Sweet(-voiced) Doctor) for his eloquence. The Cistercians honour him as only the founders of orders are honoured, because of the widespread activity which he gave to the order. 

Saint Bernard's Prayer to the Shoulder Wound of Jesus is often published in Catholic prayer books.

Dante Alighieri's "Divine Comedy" places him as the last guide for Dante, as he travels through the Empyrean (Paradiso, cantos XXXIXXXIII). Dante's choice appears to be based on Bernard's contemplative mysticism, his devotion to Mary, and his reputation for eloquence. Botterill (1994) 

He is also the attributed author of the poems often translated in English hymnals as "O Sacred Head, Now Wounded" and "Jesus the Very Thought of Thee".

==See also==

*List of Catholic saints
*of Latin nicknames of the Middle Ages#Doctors in theology|List of Latin nicknames of the Middle Ages: Doctors in theology]
*Scholasticism
*Cistercians
*St. Bernard de Clairvaux Church
*Prayer to the shoulder wound of Jesus

==Notes==

==Modern editions==

===Critical edition===
* The modern critical edition is Sancti Bernardi opera, ed J Leclercq, CH Talbot and HM Rochais, 9 vols, (Rome: Editiones Cistercienses, 195777)

===Translations===
* On consideration, trans George Lewis, (Oxford, 1908)
*Select treatises of S. Bernard of Clairvaux: De diligendo Deo & De gradibus humilitatis et superbiae, (Cambridge: CUP, 1926)
*The letters of St. Bernard of Clairvaux, translated by Bruno Scott James, (London: Burns and Oates, 1953) as (Stroud: Sutton, 1998)
*On loving God, and selections from sermons, edited by Hugh Martin, (London: SCM Press, 1959) as (Westport, CO: Greenwood Press, 1981)
*Cistercians and Cluniacs: St. Bernard's Apologia to Abbot William, trans M Casey. Cistercian Fathers series no. 1, (Kalamazoo: Cistercian Publications, 1970)
*The works of Bernard of Clairvaux. Vol.1, Treatises, 1, editedbyM.BasilPennington.CistercianFathersSeries,no. 1.(Spencer,Mass.:CistercianPublications,1970) the treatises Apologia to Abbot William and On Precept and Dispensation, and two shorter liturgical treatises
*Bernard of Clairvaux, On the Song of Songs, 4 vols, Cistercian Fathers series nos 4, 7, 31, 40, (Spencer, MA: Cistercian Publications, 197180)
*Letter of Saint Bernard of Clairvaux on revision of Cistercian chant = Epistola S Bernardi de revisione cantus Cisterciensis, edited and translated by Francis J. Guentner, (American Institute of Musicology, 1974)
*Treatises II : The steps of humility and pride on loving God, Cistercian Fathers series no. 13, (Washington: Cistercian Publications, 1984)
*Five books on consideration: advice to a Pope, translated by John D. Anderson & Elizabeth T. Kennan. Cistercian Fathers Series no. 37. (Kalamazoo, MI: Cistercian Publications, 1976)
*The Works of Bernard of Clairvaux. Volume Seven, Treatises III: On Grace and free choice. In praise of the new knighthood, translated by Conrad Greenia. Cistercian Fathers Series no. 19, (Kalamazoo, Michigan: Cistercian Publications Inc, 1977)
*The life and death of Saint Malachy, the Irishman translated and annotated by Robert T. Meyer, (Kalamazoo, Mich: Cistercian Publications, 1978)
*Bernard of Clairvaux, Homiliae in laudibus Virginis Matris, in Magnificat: homilies in praise of the Blessed Virgin Mary translated by Marie-Bernard Sad and Grace Perigo, Cistercian Fathers Series no. 18, (Kalamazoo, MI: Cistercian Publications, 1979)
*Sermons on Conversion: on conversion, a sermon to clerics and Lenten sermons on the psalm "He Who Dwells"., Cistercian Fathers Series no. 25, (Kalamazoo, MI: Cistercian Publications, 1981)
*Bernard of Clairvaux, Song of Solomon, translated by Samuel J. Eales, (Minneapolis, MN: Klock & Klock, 1984)
*St. Bernard's sermons on the Blessed Virgin Mary, translated from the original Latin by a priest of Mount Melleray, (Chumleigh: Augustine, 1984)
*Bernard of Clairvaux, The twelve steps of humility and pride; and, On loving God, edited by Halcyon C. Backhouse, (London: Hodder and Stoughton, 1985)
*St. Bernard's sermons on the Nativity, translated from the original Latin by a priest of Mount Melleray, (Devon: Augustine, 1985)
*Bernard of Clairvaux : selected works, translation and foreword by G.R. Evans; introduction by Jean Leclercq; preface by Ewert H. Cousins, (New York: Paulist Press, 1987) the treatises On conversion, On the steps of humility and pride, On consideration, and On loving God; extracts from Sermons on The song of songs, and a selection of letters
*Conrad Rudolph, The 'things of greater importance': Bernard of Clairvaux's Apologia and the medieval attitude toward art, (Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press, 1990) the Apologia in both Latin text and English translation
*Love without measure: extracts from the writings of St Bernard of Clairvaux, introduced and arranged by Paul Diemer, Cistercian studies series no. 127, (Kalamazoo, Mich. : Cistercian Publications, 1990)
*Sermons for the summer season: liturgical sermons from Rogationtide and Pentecost, translated by Beverly Mayne Kienzle; additional translations by James Jarzembowski, (Kalamazoo, Mich: Cistercian Publications, 1991)
*Bernard of Clairvaux, On loving God, Cistercian Fathers series no. 13B, (Kalamazoo, MI: Cistercian Publications, 1995)
*Bernard of Clairvaux, The parables & the sentences, edited by Maureen M. O'Brien. Cistercian Fathers Series no. 55, (Kalamazoo, MI: Cistercian Publications, 2000)
*Bernard of Clairvaux, On baptism and the office of bishops, on the conduct and office of bishops, on baptism and other questions: two letter-treatises, translated by Pauline Matarasso. Cistercian Fathers Series no. 67, (Kalamazoo, MI: Cistercian Publications, 2004)
*Bernard of Clairvaux, Sermons for Advent and the Christmas season translated by Irene Edmonds, Wendy Mary Beckett, Conrad Greenia; edited by John Leinenweber; introduction by Wim Verbaal. Cistercian Fathers Series no. 51, (Kalamazoo, MI: Cistercian Publications, 2007)
*Bernard of Clairvaux, Sermons for Lent and the Easter Season, edited by John Leinenweber and Mark Scott, OCSO. Cistercian Fathers Series no. 52, (Kalamazoo, MI: Cistercian Publications, 2013)

==References==
*
*
*
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
*
*

==Ebook==
* Bernard of Clairvaux, On Loving God, London, 2012. limovia.net ISBN 978-1-78336-008-6

==External links==

*The Life and Miracles of St. Bernard of Clairvaux, Doctor of the Church
*"St. Bernard, Abbot", Butler's Lives of the Saints
*Opera omnia Sancti Bernardi Claraevallensis his complete works, in Latin
*
*Audio on the life of St. Bernard of Clairvaux from waysideaudio.com.
*Bernard of Clairvaux at Project Gutenberg
* Saint Bernard of Clairvaux at the Christian Iconography web site.
*"Here Followeth the Life of St. Bernard, the Mellifluous Doctor" from the Caxton translation of the Golden Legend
*"Two Accounts of the Early Career of St. Bernard" by William of Thierry and Arnold of Bonneval
*Saint Bernard of Clairvaux Abbot, Doctor of the Church-1153 at EWTN Global Catholic Network



[[Bishkek]]

Bishkek (in Kyrgyz and Russian: ), formerly Pishpek and Frunze, is the capital and the largest city of Kyrgyz Republic or Kyrgyzstan.
Bishkek is also the administrative centre of Chuy Province which surrounds the city, even though the city itself is not part of the province but rather a province-level unit of Kyrgyzstan.

According to the post-Soviet ideology, the name is thought to derive from a Kyrgyz word for a churn used to make fermented mare's milk (kumis), the Kyrgyz national drink, which is rather debatable.
Founded in 1825 as a Khokand fortress of "Pishpek" to control local caravan routes and to get tribute from Kyrgyz tribes, on 4 September 1860 the fortress was destroyed by Russian forces led by colonel Zimmermann, with approval of the Kyrgyz. 
In 1868 a Russian settlement was founded on the fortress's spot, adopting its original name - Pishpek, within the General Governorship of Russian Turkestan and its Semirechye Oblast. 

In 1925 the Kara-Kirghiz Autonomous Oblast was created in Russian Turkestan, promoting Pishpek as its capital. In 1926 the city was given the name Frunze, after the Bolshevik military leader Mikhail Frunze, who was born here. In 1936 the city of Frunze became the capital of the Kirghiz Soviet Socialist Republic during the final stages of the national delimitation in the Soviet Union.

In 1991, the Kyrgyz parliament changed the capital's name to Bishkek (without quorum though).

Bishkek is situated at about 800 m altitude just off the northern fringe of the Kyrgyz Ala-Too range, an extension of the Tian Shan mountain range, which rises up to 4855 m and provides a spectacular backdrop to the city. North of the city, a fertile and gently undulating steppe extends far north into neighbouring Kazakhstan. The Chui River drains most of the area. Bishkek is connected to the Turkestan-Siberia Railway by a spur line.

Bishkek is a city of wide boulevards and marble-faced public buildings combined with numerous Soviet-style apartment blocks surrounding interior courtyards and, especially outside the city centre, thousands of smaller privately built houses. It is laid out on a grid pattern, with most streets flanked on both sides by narrow irrigation channels that water the innumerable trees which provide shade in the hot summers.

==History==

===Kokhand Rule===

Originally a caravan rest stop (possibly founded by the Sogdians) on one of the branches of the Silk Road through the Tian Shan range, the location was fortified in 1825 by the Uzbek khan of Kokhand with a mud fort. In the last years of Kokhand rule the fortress was led by Atabek, the Datka.

===Tsarist Era===

In 1860, the fort was conquered and razed by the military forces of colonel Zimmermann when Tsarist Russia annexed the area. Colonel Zimmerman rebuilt the town over the destroyed fort and put field poruchik Titov as a head of new Russian garrison. The site was redeveloped from 1877 onward by the Russian government, which encouraged the settlement of Russian peasants by giving them fertile land to develop.

===Soviet Era===
Frunze statue near the railway station
In 1926, the city became the capital of the newly established Kirghiz ASSR and was renamed "Frunze" after Mikhail Frunze, Lenin's close associate who was born in Bishkek and played key roles during the revolutions of 1905 and 1917 and during the Russian civil war of the early 1920s.

===Independence Era===

The early 1990s were tumultuous. In June 1990, a state of emergency was declared following severe ethnic riots in southern Kyrgyzstan which threatened to spread to the capital. The city was renamed Bishkek on 5 February 1991 and Kyrgyzstan achieved independence later that year during the breakup of the Soviet Union. Before independence, the majority of Bishkek's population was ethnic Russians. In 2004, Russians made up approximately 20% of the city's population, and about 78% in 2011. Residential Real Estate Market in Bishkek, Kyrgyzstan: Current Conditions and Prospects 

Today, Bishkek is a modern city, with many restaurants and cafes and with many second-hand European and Japanese cars and minibuses crowding its streets. Streets and sidewalks have fallen into disrepair since the 1990s. At the same time Bishkek still preserves its former Soviet feel, with Soviet-period buildings and gardens prevailing over newer structures.

Bishkek is also the country's financial centre, with all of the country's 21 commercial banks keeping headquarters in the city. During the Soviet era, the city was home to a large number of industrial plants, but most have been shut down since 1991 or operate today on a much reduced scale. One of Bishkek's largest employment centres today is Dordoy Bazaar open market, which is one of the major sale place of Chinese goods imported to CIS countries.

==Geography==

===Orientation===
Though the city is relatively young, the surrounding area has some sites of interest dating from prehistory, the Greco-Buddhist period, the period of Nestorian influence, the era of the Central Asian khanates, and the Soviet period.
Russian Orthodox cathedral of Holy Resurrection.
National Historical Museum

The central part of the city is primarily built on a rectangular grid plan. The city's main street is the eastwest Chui Avenue (Chuy Prospekti), named after the region's main river. In the Soviet era, it was called Lenin Avenue. Along, or within a block or two from it, many of the most important government buildings, universities, the Academy of Sciences compound, and so on, are to be found. The westernmost section of the avenue is known as Deng Xiaoping Avenue.

The main northsouth axis is Yusup Abdrakhmanov Street, still commonly referred to by its old name, Sovietskaya Street. Its northern and southern sections are called, respectively, Yelebesov and Baityk Batyr Streets. Several major shopping centres are located along it, and in the north it provides access to Dordoy Bazaar.

Erkindik ("Freedom") Boulevard runs from north to south, from the main railroad station (Bishkek II) south of Chui Avenue to the museum quarter and sculpture park just north of Chui Avenue, and further north toward the Ministry of Foreign Affairs. In the past, it was called Dzerzhinsky Boulevardnamed after a Communist revolutionary, Felix Dzerzhinskyand its northern continuation is still called Dzerzhinsky Street.

An important eastwest street is Jibek Jolu ('Silk Road'). It runs parallel to Chui Avenue about a mile north of it, and is part of the main eastwest road of Chui Province. Both the Eastern and Western bus terminals are located along Jibek Jolu.

There is a Roman Catholic church located at ul. Vasiljeva 197 (near Rynok Bayat). This is the only Catholic Cathedral in Kyrgyzstan. Catholic Church in Kyrgyzstan. Catholic-kyrgyzstan.org. Retrieved 11 March 2012. 

===City centre===
Ala-Too Square, Bishkek's main square
* State Historical Museum, located in Ala-Too Square, the main city square
* State Museum of Applied Arts, containing examples of Kyrgyz traditional handicrafts
* Frunze House Museum
* Statue of Ivan Panfilov stands in the park near the White House.
* An equestrian statue of Mikhail Frunze still stands in a large park (Boulevard Erkindik) across from the train station.
* The train station itself was built in 1946 by German prisoners of war and has survived since then without further renovation or repairs; most of those who built it perished and were buried in unmarked pits near the station.
* The main government building, the White House, is a huge, seven story marble block and the former headquarters of the Communist Party of the Kirghiz SSR
* At Ala-Too Square, there is an Independence monument where the changing of the guards may be watched.
* Osh bazaar, west of the downtown area, is a large, picturesque produce market

===Outer neighbourhoods===
The Dordoy Bazaar, just inside the bypass highway on the north-eastern edge of the city, is a major retail and wholesale market.

===Outside the city===
The Kyrgyz Ala-Too mountain range, some 40 km away, provides a spectacular backdrop to the city; the Ala Archa National Park is only a 30 to 45 minutes drive away.

===Climate===
Bishkek has a humid continental climate (Kppen climate classification continental climate#Dfa/Dwa/Dsa: Hot (or very warm) summer subtype|Dsa]) averaging 322 clear days annually due to its mountainous location. Average precipitation is around 440 mm per year. Average daily temperatures range from -3 C in January to about 31 C during July. The summer months are dominated by dry periods experiencing the occasional thunderstorm which produces strong gusty winds and rare dust storms. The mountains to the south provide a natural boundary to provide protection from much of the damaging weather along with the smaller chain which runs NW to SE. In the winter months, sparse snow storms and frequent heavy fog are the dominating features. When an inversion sets up, the fog can last for days at a time.

==Demographics==
Bishkek is the most populated city in Kyrgyzstan. Its population, according to the Population and Housing Census of 2009, was 832,500.

==Ecology and environment==

===Air quality===
Emissions of air pollutants in Bishkek amounted to 14,400 tons in 2010. Of all other cities of Kyrgyzstan, the level of air pollution in Bishkek is the highest with occasional exceeding maximum allowable concentrations by several times, especially in the city's center. Web-site of the State Agency on Environment Protection and Forestry: Assessment of Air Pollution. Meteo.ktnet.kg. Retrieved on 11 March 2012. For example, occasionally formaldehyde concentrations exceed maximum allowable ones by four times.

Responsibility for ambient air quality monitoring in Bishkek lies on Kyrgyz State Agency on Hydrometeorology. In total, there are seven air quality monitoring stations in Bishkek, measuring levels of sulfur dioxide, nitrogen oxides, formaldehyde, and ammonia. 

==Economy==

Dordoy Bazaar
Bishkek uses the Kyrgyzstan currency, the som. The Som's value fluctuates regularly, but averages around 47 som per U.S. Dollar as of March 2011. The economy in Bishkek is primarily agricultural with the mass amounts of fruits, vegetables and livestock providing a co-existing system of bartering in the outlying regions. The streets of Bishkek are regularly lined with produce vendors in a market style venue. In the major portions of downtown there is a more urban cityscape with banks, stores, markets and malls. The most sought after of the goods are the prevalent hand-crafted artisan pieces; these include statues, carvings, paintings and many nature based sculptures.

==Government==
Local government is administered by the Bishkek Mayor's Office. Askarbek Salymbekov was mayor until his resignation in August 2005, following which his deputy Arstanbek Nogoev took over the mayorship. Nogoev was in turn removed from his position in October 2007 through a decree of President Kurmanbek Bakiyev and replaced by businessman and former first deputy prime minister Daniar Usenov. In July 2008 former head of the Kyrgyz Railways Nariman Tuleyev was appointed mayor, who was dismissed by the interim government after 7 April 2010. Now interim mayor is Isa Omurkulov, also a former head of the Kyrgyz Railways. 

==Sports==
Bishkek is home to Spartak, the biggest football stadium in Kyrgyzstan and the only one eligible to host international matches. Corporate Japanese companies to renovate Kyrgyzstan football stadium. The-afc.com (9 November 2007). Retrieved on 11 March 2012. Several Bishkek-based football teams play on this pitch, including six-time Kyrgyzstan League champions, Dordoi-Dynamo.

The city is home to the Bandy Federation of Kyrgyzstan Federation of International Bandy-About-About FIB-National Federations-Krygyzstan. Internationalbandy.com. Retrieved on 11 March 2012. which is a member of the IOC recognized Federation of International Bandy-Olympic. Internationalbandy.com (12 August 2004). Retrieved on 11 March 2012. Federation of International Bandy.

Alex Kantrowitz (Russian man), originally from Bishkek, is a noted Olympic swimmer for the Czech Republic.

Bishkek host the 2014 IIHF Challenge Cup of Asia  Division I.

==Education==
Plato University of Management and Design

Educational institutions in Bishkek include:
* American University of Central Asia
* Arabaev Kyrgyz State University October 2009+01:35:14 
* Bishkek Humanities University
* International Ataturk-Alatoo University 
* International University Of Kyrgyzstan 
* Kyrgyz Russian Slavonic University 
* Kyrgyz State Medical Academy
* Kyrgyz State National University 
* Kyrgyz Technical University
* Kyrgyz-Russian State University
* Kyrgyz-Turkish MANAS University 
* Kyrgyz Uzbek University
* Plato University of Management and Design 
In addition, the following international schools serve the expatriate community in Bishkek:
* European School in Central Asia 
* Hope Academy of Bishkek 
* QSI International School of Bishkek 
* Silk Road International School 

==Transportation==
A typical Bishkek passenger van passes by the East Bus Terminal
The electronic board in the main hall of Bishkek-2, the main train station, shows Bishkek and Moscow time
Bishkek Railway Station

===Mass public transport===
There is public transportation available, including buses, electric trolley buses, and public vans (known in Russian as marshrutka). The first bus and trolley bus services in Bishkek were introduced in 1934 and 1951 correspondingly. 

Taxi cabs can be found throughout the city.

There is no subway in Bishkek, but the city is considering designing and building a light rail system (  ).

===Commuter and long-distance buses===
There are two main bus stations in Bishkek. The smaller old Eastern Bus Station is primarily the terminal for minibuses to various destinations within or just beyond the eastern suburbs, such as Kant, Tokmok, Kemin, Issyk Ata, or the Korday border crossing.

Long-distance regular bus and minibus services to all parts of the country, as well as to Almaty (the largest city in neighboring Kazakhstan) and Kashgar, China, run mostly from the newer grand Western Bus Station; only a smaller minority of them runs from the Eastern Station.

The Dordoy Bazaar on the north-eastern outskirts of the city also contains makeshift terminals for frequent minibuses to suburban towns in all directions (from Sokuluk in the west to Tokmak in the east) and to some buses taking traders to Kazakhstan and Siberia.

===Rail===
As of 2007, the Bishkek railway station sees only a few trains a day. It offers a popular three-day train service from Bishkek to Moscow.

There are also long-distance trains that leave for Siberia (Novosibirsk and Novokuznetsk), via Almaty, over the Turksib route, and to Yekaterinburg (Sverdlovsk) in the Urals, via Astana. These services are remarkably slow (over 48 hours to Yekaterinburg), due to long stops at the border and the indirect route (the trains first have to go west for more than a 100 km before they enter the main Turksib line and can continue to the east or north). For example, as of the fall of 2008, train No. 305 Bishkek-Yekaterinburg was scheduled to take 11 hours to reach the Shu junctiona distance of some 269 km by rail, and less than half of that by road. 

===Air===
The city is served by Manas International Airport (IATA code FRU), located approximately 25 km northwest of the city centre, and readily reachable by taxi.

In 2002, the United States obtained the right to use Manas International Airport as an air base for its military operations in Afghanistan and Iraq. Russia subsequently (2003) established an air base of its own (Kant Air Base) near Kant some 20 km east of Bishkek. It is based at a facility that used to be home to a major Soviet military pilot training school; one of its students, Hosni Mubarak, later became president of Egypt.

==Notable people==
*Roza Isakovna Otunbayeva (23 August 1950 -) - Third President Of Kyrgyzstan.
* Chingiz Aitmatov

===In popular culture===
In ,GLA forces held this city,capital of unified Kyrgyzstan and Tajikistan.They reinforced by forces by railways connected to other areas and locals enraged at the Chinese presence in the area.Black Lotus and her strike team must destroy the bridge and a sports stadium before they are overrun,due to the nature of the mission,a covert op,they are reduced to a minimal.

==Sister cities==
Sister cities of Bishkek include:
* Almaty, Kazakhstan
* Astana, Kazakhstan
* Qazvin, Iran
* Colorado Springs, Colorado, United States, since 1994
* Meriden, Connecticut, USA, since 2005
* Ankara, Turkey
* zmir, Turkey
* rmqi, People's Republic of China
* Minsk, Belarus, since 2008 

==References==

Since 23 May 1994 Tehran and Bishkek are twinned cities as well.

==External links==

* The Spektator  Society, culture and travel articles on Kyrgyzstan and Bishkek city guide

 



[[Braveheart]]

Braveheart is a 1995 epic historical drama war film directed by and starring Mel Gibson. Gibson portrays William Wallace, a 13th-century Scottish warrior who led the Scots in the First War of Scottish Independence against King Edward I of England. The story is based on Blind Harry's epic poem The Actes and Deidis of the Illustre and Vallyeant Campioun Schir William Wallace and was adapted for the screen by Randall Wallace. It has been described as one of the most historically inaccurate modern films. 

The film was nominated for ten Academy Awards at the 68th Academy Awards and won five: Best Picture, Best Makeup, Best Cinematography, Best Film Editing, and Best Director.

== Plot ==
In 1280, King Edward "Longshanks" (Patrick McGoohan) invades and conquers Scotland following the death of Alexander III of Scotland who left no heir to the throne. Young William Wallace witnesses the treachery of Longshanks, survives the death of his father and brother, and is taken abroad to Rome by his Uncle Argyle (Brian Cox) where he is educated. Years later, Longshanks grants his noblemen land and privileges in Scotland, including "Prima Nocte", or the right of the lord to have sex with a woman subject on her wedding night. When he returns home, Wallace (Mel Gibson) falls in love with his childhood friend, Murron MacClannough (Catherine McCormack), and they marry in secret so she does not have to spend a night in the bed with the English lord. Wallace rescues Murron from being raped by English soldiers; as a consequence, Murron is captured and publicly executed. In retribution, Wallace slaughters the English garrison and sends the occupying garrison at Lanark back to England.

This enrages Longshanks, who orders his son, Prince Edward, to stop Wallace by any means necessary. Wallace rebels against the English, and as his legend spreads, hundreds of Scots from the surrounding clans join him. On September 11, 1297, Wallace leads his army to victory at Stirling and then sacks the city of York, killing Longshanks' nephew and sending his head back. Wallace seeks the assistance of Robert the Bruce (Angus Macfadyen), the son of nobleman Robert the Elder (Ian Bannen) and a contender for the Scottish crown. Robert is dominated by his father, who wishes to secure the throne for his son by submitting to the English. Worried by the threat of the rebellion, Longshanks sends his son's wife, Isabella of France (Sophie Marceau), to try to negotiate with Wallace hoping that Wallace will kill her in order to draw the French king to declare war. Wallace refuses the bribe sent with Isabella by Longshanks, but after meeting him in person, Isabella becomes enamored with him. Meanwhile, Longshanks prepares an army to invade Scotland.

Warned of the coming invasion by Isabella, Wallace implores the Scottish nobility that immediate action is needed to counter the threat and to take back the country. Leading the English army himself, Longshanks confronts the Scots at Falkirk on July 22, 1298 where noblemen Lochlan and Mornay betray Wallace. The Scots lose the battle, and Hamish's father dies after the battle. As he charges toward the departing Longshanks on horseback, Wallace is intercepted by one of the king's lancers, who turns out to be Robert. Remorseful, he gets Wallace to safety before the English can capture him. Wallace kills Mornay and Lochlan for their betrayal, and wages a guerrilla war against the English for the next seven years, assisted by Isabella, with whom he eventually has an affair. Robert, intending to join Wallace and commit troops to the war, sets up a meeting with him in Edinburgh. However, Robert's father has conspired with other nobles to capture and hand over Wallace to the English. Learning of his treachery, Robert disowns his father. Isabella exacts revenge on the now terminally ill Longshanks by telling him she is pregnant with Wallace's child, intent on ending Longshanks' line and ruling in his son's place.

In London, Wallace is brought before an English magistrate, tried for high treason, and condemned to public torture and beheading. Even whilst being hanged, drawn and quartered, Wallace refuses to beg for mercy and submit to the king. As cries for mercy come from the watching crowd deeply moved by the Scotsman's valor, the magistrate offers him one final chance, asking him only to utter the word "Mercy" and be granted a quick death. Wallace instead shouts the word "Freedom!" and the judge orders his death. Moments before being decapitated, Wallace sees a vision of Murron in the crowd, smiling at him.

In 1314, Robert, now Scotland's king, leads a Scottish army before a ceremonial line of English troops on the fields of Bannockburn where he is to formally accept English rule. As he begins to ride toward the English, he stops and invokes Wallace's memory, imploring his men to fight with him as they did with Wallace. Robert then leads his army into battle against the stunned English, winning the Scots their freedom.

== Cast ==
* Mel Gibson as William Wallace
** James Robinson as young William Wallace
* Sophie Marceau as Princess Isabella of France
* Patrick McGoohan as King Edward "Longshanks"
* Catherine McCormack as Murron MacClannough
* Angus Macfadyen as Robert the Bruce
* Brendan Gleeson as Hamish
** Andrew Weir as young Hamish
* James Cosmo as Campbell
* David O'Hara as Stephen of Ireland
* Peter Hanly as Prince Edward
* Ian Bannen as Bruce's father
* Sen McGinley as MacClannough
* Brian Cox as Argyle Wallace
* Sean Lawlor as Malcolm Wallace
* Sandy Nelson as John Wallace
* Stephen Billington as Phillip
* John Kavanagh as Craig
* Alun Armstrong as Mornay
* Tommy Flanagan as Morrison
* Michael Byrne as Smythe
* Malcolm Tierney as Magistrate
* Peter Mullan as Veteran
* Gerard McSorley as Hugh de Cressingham
* Richard Leaf as Governor of York
* Mark Lees as Old Crippled Scotsman

== Production ==

Gibson's production company, Icon Productions had difficulty raising enough money even if he were to star in the film. Warner Bros. was willing to fund the project on the condition that Gibson sign for another Lethal Weapon sequel, which he refused. Paramount Pictures only agreed to American and Canadian distribution of Braveheart after 20th Century Fox partnered for international rights. 

While the crew spent six weeks shooting on location in Scotland, the major battle scenes were shot in Ireland using members of the Irish Army Reserve as extras. To lower costs, Gibson had the same extras portray both armies. The opposing armies are made up of reservists, up to 1,600 in some scenes, who had been given permission to grow beards and swapped their drab uniforms for medieval garb. Braveheart 10th Chance To Boost Tourism In Trim, Meath Chronicle, 28 August 2003. Retrieved 30 April 2007. 

According to Gibson, he was inspired by the big screen epics he had loved as a child, such as Stanley Kubrick's Spartacus and William Wyler's The Big Country.

The film was shot in the anamorphic format with Panavision C- and E-Series lenses. 

Gibson toned down the film's battle scenes to avoid an NC-17 rating from the MPAA, with the final version being rated R for "brutal medieval warfare." 

In addition to English being the film's primary language, French, Latin, and Scottish Gaelic are also spoken.

==Soundtrack==

The score was composed and conducted by James Horner and performed by the London Symphony Orchestra. It is Horner's second of three collaborations with Mel Gibson as director. The score has gone on to be one of the most commercially successful soundtracks of all time, as well as one of Horner's best works. It received considerable great acclaim from film critics and audiences and was nominated for many awards, including the Academy Award, Saturn Award, BAFTA Award, and Golden Globe Award.

== Release and reception ==

=== Box office ===

On its opening weekend, Braveheart grossed $9,938,276 in the United States and $75.6 million in its box office run in the U.S. and Canada. Worldwide, the film grossed $210,409,945 and was the thirteenth highest-grossing film of 1995. 

=== Reviews ===
Braveheart met with generally positive reviews. Review aggregator Rotten Tomatoes gave the film a score of 81% with an average score of 7.1/10. The film's depiction of the Battle of Stirling Bridge was listed by CNN as one of the best battles in cinema history. 
In his review, Roger Ebert gave the film 3.5 stars out of four, writing: "An action epic with the spirit of the Hollywood swordplay classics and the grungy ferocity of 'The Road Warrior'."

In a 2005 poll by British film magazine Empire, Braveheart was No. 1 on their list of "The Top 10 Worst Pictures to Win Best Picture Oscar". Scottish actor and comedian Billy Connolly claimed Braveheart was "a great piece of work". Leo Suryadinata, Nationalism and Globalism, East and West (Singapore: Institute of Southeast Asia Studies) 2000, pg 248 

=== Effect on tourism ===

In 1996, the year after the film was released, the annual three-day "Braveheart Conference" at Stirling Castle attracted fans of Braveheart, increasing the conference's attendance to 167,000 from 66,000 in the previous year. In the following year, research on visitors to the Stirling area indicated that 55% of the visitors had seen Braveheart. Of visitors from outside Scotland, 15% of those who saw Braveheart said it influenced their decision to visit the country. Of all visitors who saw Braveheart, 39% said the film influenced in part their decision to visit Stirling, and 19% said the film was one of the main reasons for their visit. In the same year, a tourism report said that the "Braveheart effect" earned Scotland 7 million to 15 million in tourist revenue, and the report led to various national organizations encouraging international film productions to take place in Scotland. 

The film generated huge interest in Scotland and in Scottish history, not only around the world, but also in Scotland itself. Fans came from all over the world to see the places in Scotland where William Wallace fought, also to the places in Scotland and Ireland used as locations in the film. At a Braveheart Convention in 1997, held in Stirling the day after the Scottish Devolution vote and attended by 200 delegates from around the world, Braveheart author Randall Wallace, Seoras Wallace of the Wallace Clan, Scottish historian David Ross and Blithn FitzGerald from Ireland gave lectures on various aspects of the film. Several of the actors also attended including James Robinson (Young William), Andrew Weir (Young Hamish), Julie Austin (the young bride) and Mhairi Calvey (Young Murron).

=== Awards and honors ===

Braveheart was nominated for many awards during the 1995 Oscar season, though it wasn't established by many as a major contender such as Apollo 13, , Leaving Las Vegas, Sense and Sensibility, and The Usual Suspects. It wasn't until when the film surprisingly won the Golden Globe Award for Best Director at the 53rd Golden Globe Awards that everyone started to take the film seriously on its prospects of Oscar victory. When the nominations were announced for the 68th Academy Awards, Braveheart received ten Academy Award nominations, and a month later, won five. 

 Year Ceremony Category Recipients Result 
 1995 68th Academy Awards Best Picture Mel Gibson, Alan Ladd, Jr., and Bruce Davey 
 Best Director Mel Gibson 
 Best Original Screenplay Randall Wallace 
 Best Cinematography John Toll 
 Best Costume Design Charles Knode 
 Best Sound Mixing Andy Nelson, Scott Millan, Anna Behlmer, and Brian Simmons 
 Best Sound Editing Lon Bender and Per Hallberg 
 Best Film Editing Steven Rosenblum 
 Best Makeup Peter Frampton, Paul Pattison, and Lois Burwell 
 Best Original Score James Horner 
 53rd Golden Globe Awards Best Motion Picture - Drama Braveheart 
 Best Director Mel Gibson 
 Best Original Score James Horner 
 Best Screenplay Randall Wallace 
 49th British Academy Film Awards Best Director Mel Gibson 
 Best Film Music James Horner 
 Best Production Design Thomas E. Sanders 
 Best Cinematography John Toll 
 Best Costume Design Charles Knode 
 Best Makeup Peter Frampton, Paul Pattison, and Lois Burwell 
 Best Sound Andy Nelson, Scott Millan, Anna Behlmer, and Brian Simmons 

;American Film Institute lists
* AFI's 100 Years...100 Movies  Nominated http://www.afi.com/Docs/100years/movies400.pdf 
* AFI's 100 Years...100 Thrills  No. 91
* AFI's 100 Years...100 Heroes & Villains:
** William Wallace  Nominated Hero AFI's 100 Years...100 Heroes and Villains Nominees 
* AFI's 100 Years...100 Movie Quotes:
** "They may take away our lives, but they'll never take our freedom!"  Nominated 
* AFI's 100 Years of Film Scores  Nominated 
* AFI's 100 Years...100 Cheers  No. 62
* AFI's 100 Years...100 Movies (10th Anniversary Edition)  Nominated 
* AFI's 10 Top 10  Nominated Epic Film 

=== Cultural effects ===

Lin Anderson, author of Braveheart: From Hollywood To Holyrood, credits the film with playing a significant role in affecting the Scottish political landscape in the mid to late 1990s. 

=== Wallace Monument ===
Tom Church's 'Freedom' statue.
In 1997, a 12-ton sandstone statue depicting Mel Gibson as William Wallace in Braveheart was placed in the car park of the Wallace Monument near Stirling, Scotland. The statue, which was the work of Tom Church, a monumental mason from Brechin, included the word "Braveheart" on Wallace's shield. The installation became the cause of much controversy; one local resident stated that it was wrong to "desecrate the main memorial to Wallace with a lump of crap." In 1998 the face on the statue was vandalised by someone wielding a hammer. After repairs were made, the statue was encased in a cage every night to prevent further vandalism. This only incited more calls for the statue to be removed as it then appeared that the Gibson/Wallace figure was imprisoned. The statue was described as "among the most loathed pieces of public art in Scotland." In 2008, the statue was returned to its sculptor to make room for a new visitor centre being built at the foot of the Wallace Monument. 

== Historical inaccuracy ==

Randall Wallace, the writer of the screenplay, has acknowledged Blind Harry's 15th century epic poem The Acts and Deeds of Sir William Wallace, Knight of Elderslie as a major inspiration for the film. Anderson, Lin. Braveheart: From Hollywood to Holyrood. Luath Press Ltd. (2005), p. 27. In defending his script, Randall Wallace has said, "Is Blind Harry true? I don't know. I know that it spoke to my heart and that's what matters to me, that it spoke to my heart." Blind Harry's poem is not now regarded as historically accurate, and although some incidents in the film which are not historically accurate are taken from Blind Harry (e.g. the hanging of Scots nobles at the start) there are large parts which are based neither on history nor Blind Harry (e.g. Wallace's affair with Princess Isabelle).

Elizabeth Ewan describes Braveheart as a film which "almost totally sacrifices historical accuracy for epic adventure". Ewan, Elizabeth. "Braveheart". American Historical Review 100, no. 4 (October 1995): 121921. The "brave heart" refers in Scottish history to that of Robert the Bruce, and an attribution by William Edmondstoune Aytoun, in his poem Heart of Bruce, to Sir James the Good: "Pass thee first, thou dauntless heart, As thou wert wont of yore!", prior to Douglas's demise at the Battle of Teba in Andalusia. 

Sharon Krossa notes that the film contains numerous historical errors, beginning with the wearing of belted plaid by Wallace and his men. In that period "no Scots ... wore belted plaids (let alone kilts of any kind)." Moreover, when Highlanders finally did begin wearing the belted plaid, it was not "in the rather bizarre style depicted in the film." She compares the inaccuracy to "a film about Colonial America showing the colonial men wearing 20th century business suits, but with the jackets worn back-to-front instead of the right way around." "The events aren't accurate, the dates aren't accurate, the characters aren't accurate, the names aren't accurate, the clothes aren't accuratein short, just about nothing is accurate." 
 The belted plaid (feileadh mr line) was not introduced until the 16th century. Peter Traquair has referred to Wallace's "farcical representation as a wild and hairy highlander painted with woad (1,000 years too late) running amok in a tartan kilt (500 years too early)." Traquair, Peter Freedom's Sword, HarperCollins Publishers (1998) 

In 2009, the film was second on a list of "most historically inaccurate movies" in The Times. In the 2007 humorous non-fictional historiography An Utterly Impartial History of Britain, author John O'Farrell notes that Braveheart could not have been more historically inaccurate, even if a "Plasticine dog" had been inserted in the film and the title changed to William Wallace and Gromit. 

Randall Wallace has defended his script from historians who have dismissed the film as a Hollywood perversion of actual events. In the DVD audio commentary of Braveheart, Mel Gibson acknowledges many of the historical inaccuracies but defends his choices as director, noting that the way events were portrayed in the film was much more "cinematically compelling" than the historical fact or conventional mythos.

=== Jus Primae Noctis ===
Edward Longshanks, King of England, is shown invoking the right of Jus Primae Noctis, allowing the Lord of a medieval estate to take the virginity of his serfs' maiden daughters. Critical medieval scholarship regards this supposed right as a myth, "the simple reason why we are dealing with a myth here rests in the surprising fact that practically all writers who make any such claims have never been able or willing to cite any trustworthy source, if they have any." 

=== Occupation and independence ===
The film suggests Scotland had been under English occupation for some time, at least during Wallaces childhood, and in the run-up to the Battle of Falkirk Wallace says to the younger Bruce we can have what we never had before; a country of our own. In fact Scotland had been invaded by England only the year before Wallace's rebellion; prior to the death of King Alexander III it had been a fully separate kingdom. 

=== Portrayal of William Wallace ===
As John Shelton Lawrence and Robert Jewett write, "Because Wallace is one of Scotland's most important national heroes and because he lived in the very distant past, much that is believed about him is probably the stuff of legend. But there is a factual strand that historians agree to", summarized from Scots scholar Matt Ewart:

A.E. Christa Canitz writes about the historical William Wallace further: " was a younger son of the Scottish gentry, usually accompanied by his own chaplain, well-educated, and eventually, having been appointed Guardian of the Kingdom of Scotland, engaged in diplomatic correspondence with the Hanseatic cities of Lbeck and Hamburg". She finds that in Braveheart, "any hint of his descent from the lowland gentry (i.e., the lesser nobility) is erased, and he is presented as an economically and politically marginalized Highlander and 'a farmer'as one with the common peasant, and with a strong spiritual connection to the land which he is destined to liberate." 

Colin McArthur writes that Braveheart "constructs Wallace as a kind of modern, nationalist guerrilla leader in a period half a millennium before the appearance of nationalism on the historical stage as a concept under which disparate classes and interests might be mobilised within a nation state." Writing about Bravehearts "omissions of verified historical facts", McArthur notes that Wallace made "overtures to Edward I seeking less severe treatment after his defeat at Falkirk", as well as "the well-documented fact of Wallace's having resorted to conscription and his willingness to hang those who refused to serve." Canitz posits that depicting "such lack of class solidarity" as the conscriptions and related hangings "would contaminate the movie's image of Wallace as the morally irreproachable primus inter pares among his peasant fighters." 

=== Portrayal of Isabella of France ===
Isabella of France is shown having an affair with Wallace prior to the Battle of Falkirk. She later tells Edward I that she is pregnant, implying that her son, Edward III, was a product of the affair. In reality, Isabella was three years old and living in France at the time of the Battle of Falkirk, was not married to Edward II until he was already king, and Edward III was born seven years after Wallace died. (This aspect of the plot may however have been inspired by the play The Wallace: a triumph in five acts by Sydney Goodsir Smith, which unhistorically has Isabella present at the Battle of Falkirk longing for a "real man".)

At that time it would also have been unusual to send a woman on a diplomatic mission into a war zone, and she would have been risking imprisonment or execution by admitting that she was carrying a child which was not her husband's. (See the Tour de Nesle Affair and the fate of two of Henry VIII's wives.)

=== Portrayal of Robert the Bruce ===

Mel Gibson as William Wallace wearing woad.

Robert the Bruce did change sides between the Scots loyalists and the English more than once in the earlier stages of the Wars of Scottish Independence, but he never betrayed Wallace directly, and he probably did not fight on the English side at the Battle of Falkirk (although this claim is made by one important mediaeval source, John of Fordun's chronicle). Later, the Battle of Bannockburn was not a spontaneous battle; he had already been fighting a guerrilla campaign against the English for eight years. His title before becoming king was Earl of Carrick, not Earl of Bruce.

In the film, Bruce struggles with an ailing father suffering from leprosy, who coaxes him into adopting a more pragmatic, if not Machiavellian view, and ultimately joins the plot to betray Wallace without his son's knowledge, facing disownment from his son in the process. None of this has any basis in any previous account of Bruce's father, who did not play a major role in the events of the time. However, the characters may be interpreted as representing different aspects of Bruce's personality or even a conflict within a single mind; no other character interacts with "father" on screen, and his and Wallace's concurrent demise could mean rather the subjugation of the Bruce's cynical political instincts, having sacrificed his political innocence to become the first of the nobles and leading contender for the crown. Bruce eventually died from an illness often thought to be leprosy, as his father did in the film. Barrow, Robert Bruce, 4th ed., p. 444 

=== Portrayal of Longshanks and Prince Edward ===

The actual Edward I was ruthless and temperamental, but the film exaggerates his character for effect. Edward enjoyed poetry and harp music, was a devoted and loving husband to his wife Eleanor of Castile, and as a religious man he gave generously to charity. The film's scene where he scoffs cynically at Isabella for distributing gold to the poor after Wallace refuses it as a bribe would have been unlikely. Edward died on campaign and not in bed at his home. 

The depiction of the future Edward II as an effeminate homosexual drew accusations of homophobia against Gibson. The actual Edward II, who fathered five children by two different women, was rumoured to have had sexual affairs with men, including Piers Gaveston who lived on into the reign of Edward II. The Prince's male lover Phillip was loosely based on Piers Gaveston.

Gibson defended his depiction of Prince Edward as weak and ineffectual, saying,

In response to Longshank's defenestration of the Prince's male lover Phillip, Gibson replied that "The fact that King Edward throws this character out a window has nothing to do with him being gay ... He's terrible to his son, to everybody." 
Gibson asserted that the reason that Longshanks kills his son's lover is because the king is a "psychopath". Gibson expressed bewilderment that some filmgoers would laugh at this murder.

=== Wallace's military campaign ===
The reference to "MacGregors from the next glen" joining Wallace shortly after the action at Lanark is dubious, since it is questionable whether Clan Gregor existed at that stage, and when they did emerge their traditional home was Glen Orchy, some distance from Lanark. Way, George and Squire, Romily. Collins Scottish Clan & Family Encyclopedia, 1994, pp 220221 

Wallace did win an important victory at the Battle of Stirling Bridge, but the version in Braveheart is highly inaccurate, as it was filmed without a bridge (and without Andrew Moray, joint commander of the Scots army, who was fatally injured in the battle). Later, Wallace did carry out a large-scale raid into the north of England, but he did not get as far south as York, nor did he kill Longshanks' nephew. (However this was not as wide of the mark as Blind Harry, who has Wallace making it to the outskirts of London, and only refraining from attacking the city after an appeal by the Mayor's wife.)

The "Irish conscripts" at the Battle of Falkirk are also unhistorical, there were no Irish troops at Falkirk (although many of the English army were actually Welsh) and it is anachronistic to refer to conscripts in the Middle Ages (although there were feudal levies). 

== Accusations of Anglophobia ==
Sections of the English media accused the film of harbouring Anglophobia. The national publication The Economist called it "xenophobic" and John Sutherland writing in The Guardian stated that: "Braveheart gave full rein to a toxic Anglophobia". According to The Times, MacArthur said "the political effects are truly pernicious. Its a xenophobic film." The Independent has noted, "The Braveheart phenomenon, a Hollywood-inspired rise in Scottish nationalism, has been linked to a rise in anti-English prejudice". Contemporary British writer and commentator Douglas Murray has described the film as "strangely racist and anti-English". 

== References ==

== External links ==

* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* Roger Ebert's review of Braveheart



[[Brian Aldiss]]

Brian Wilson Aldiss, OBE (; born 18 August 1925) is an English writer and anthologies editor, best known for science fiction novels and short stories. His byline reads either Brian W. Aldiss or simply Brian Aldiss, except for occasional pseudonyms during the mid-1960s. Greatly influenced by science fiction pioneer H. G. Wells, Aldiss is a vice-president of the international H. G. Wells Society. He is also (with the late Harry Harrison) co-president of the Birmingham Science Fiction Group. Aldiss was named a Grand Master by the Science Fiction Writers of America in 2000 and inducted by the Science Fiction Hall of Fame in 2004. He has received two Hugo Awards, one Nebula Award, and one John W. Campbell Memorial Award. His influential works include the short story "Super-Toys Last All Summer Long", the basis for the Stanley Kubrick-developed Steven Spielberg film A.I. Artificial Intelligence.

== Life and career ==

Aldiss's father ran a department store that his grandfather had established, and the family lived above it. He started to write stories as a 3 year old which his mother would bind and put on a shelf. At the age of 6, Brian was sent to board at West Buckland School in Devon, which he attended until his late teens. In 1943, he joined the Royal Signals, and saw action in Burma; his Army experience inspired the Horatio Stubbs second and third books.

After World War II, he worked as a bookseller in Oxford. He wrote a number of short pieces for a booksellers trade journal about life in a fictitious bookshop, which attracted the attention of Charles Monteith, an editor at the British publisher Faber and Faber. Brain Aldiss was for some years the literary editor of the "Oxford Mail" which was a position of some high regard. I know this because I interviewed him for a series of articles which were published in Smith's Trade News, the trade magazine of the newsagent W.H. Smith and Son. Probably about 1956. He was well regarded as a writer. As a result Aldiss's first book was The Brightfount Diaries (Faber, 1955), a 200-page novel in diary form about the life of a sales assistant in a bookshop. About this time he also began to write science fiction for various magazines. According to ISFDB his first speculative fiction in print was the short story "Criminal Record", published by John Carnell in the July 1954 number of Science Fantasy. Several of his stories appeared in 1955 including three in monthly issues of New Worlds, a more important magazine also edited by Carnell.

In 1955, The Observer newspaper ran a competition for a short story set in the year 2500, which Aldiss won with a story entitled "Not For An Age". The Brightfount Diaries had been a minor success, and Faber asked Aldiss if he had any more writing that they could look at with a view to publishing. Aldiss confessed to being a science fiction author, to the delight of the publishers, who had a number of science fiction fans in high places, and so his first science fiction book was published, a collection of short stories entitled Space, Time and Nathaniel (Faber, 1957). By this time, his earnings from writing matched his wages in the bookshop, so he made the decision to become a full-time writer.

Aldiss led the voting for Most Promising New Author of 1958 at the next year's World Science Fiction Convention, but finished behind "no award". He was elected President of the British Science Fiction Association in 1960. He was the literary editor of the Oxford Mail newspaper during the 1960s. Around 1964 he and his long-time collaborator Harry Harrison started the first ever journal of science fiction criticism, Science Fiction Horizons, which during its brief span of two issues published articles and reviews by such authors as James Blish, and featured a discussion among Aldiss, C. S. Lewis, and Kingsley Amis in the first issues, and an interview with William S. Burroughs in the second.

Besides his own writings, he has had great success as an anthologist. For Faber he edited Introducing SF, a collection of stories typifying various themes of science fiction, and Best Fantasy Stories. In 1961 he edited an anthology of reprinted short science fiction for the British paperback publisher Penguin Books under the title Penguin Science Fiction. This was remarkably successful, going into numerous reprints, and was followed up by two further anthologies, More Penguin Science Fiction (1963), and Yet More Penguin Science Fiction (1964). The later anthologies enjoyed the same success as the first, and all three were eventually published together as The Penguin Science Fiction Omnibus (1973), which also went into a number of reprints. In the 1970s, he produced several large collections of classic grand-scale science fiction, under the titles Space Opera (1974), Space Odysseys (1975), Galactic Empires (1976), Evil Earths (1976), and Perilous Planets (1978) which were quite successful. Around this time, he edited a large-format volume Science Fiction Art (1975), with selections of artwork from the magazines and pulps.

In response to the results from the planetary probes of the 1960s and 1970s, which showed that Venus was completely unlike the hot, tropical jungle usually depicted in science fiction, he and Harry Harrison edited an anthology Farewell, Fantastic Venus!, reprinting stories based on the pre-probe ideas of Venus. He also edited, with Harrison, a series of anthologies The Year's Best Science Fiction (1968-1976?)

Brian Aldiss also invented a form of extremely short story called the Minisaga. The Daily Telegraph hosted a competition for the best Minisaga for several years and Aldiss was the judge. He has edited several anthologies of the best Minisagas.

'Metropolis' limited edition print by Brian Aldiss
He traveled to Yugoslavia, where he met Yugoslav fans in Ljubljana, Slovenia; he published a travel book about Yugoslavia entitled Cities and Stones (1966), his only work in the genre; http://brianaldiss.co.uk/writing/non-fiction/non-fiction-a-p/cities-stones/ he published an alternative-history fantasy story, "The Day of the Doomed King" (1968), about Serbian kings in the Middle Ages; and he wrote a novel called The Malacia Tapestry, about an alternative Dalmatia.

In addition to a highly successful career as a writer, Aldiss is also an accomplished artist whose abstract compositions or 'isoles' are influenced by the work of Giorgio de Chirico and Wassily Kandinsky. email communication, 2011. His first solo exhibition The Other Hemisphere was held in Oxford, AugustSeptember 2010, and the exhibition's centrepiece 'Metropolis' (see figure) has since been released as a limited edition fine art print. 

==Awards and honours==

He was elected a Fellow of the Royal Society of Literature in 1990.

Aldiss was the "Permanent Special Guest" at the annual International Conference on the Fantastic in the Arts (ICFA) from 1989 through 2008. He was also the Guest of Honor at the conventions in 1986 and 1999. 

The Science Fiction Writers of America made him its 18th SFWA Grand Master in 2000 and the Science Fiction and Fantasy Hall of Fame inducted him in 2004. 

He was awarded the title of Officer of the Order of the British Empire (OBE) for services to literature in Queen Elizabeth II's Birthday Honours list, announced on 11 June 2005. 

In January 2007 he appeared on Desert Island Discs. His choice of record to 'save' was Old Rivers sung by Walter Brennan, his choice of book was John Halpern's biography of John Osborne, and his luxury a banjo. The full selection of eight favourite records is on the BBC website. 

On 1 July 2008 he was awarded an honorary doctorate by the University of Liverpool in recognition of his contribution to literature. 

== Books ==

=== Fiction ===
* The Rain Will Stop (The Pretentious Press, 2000), written in 1942 
* The Brightfount Diaries (1955)
* Space, Time and Nathaniel (1957), collected short fiction  all of his science fiction published to date, including "T", his first published story, and "Not For an Age" (thirteen stories) plus one story hurriedly written to fill out the volume
* Non-Stop (1958), US title Starship  A member of a culturally-primordial tribe investigates the dark, jungle filled corridors that surround him to ultimately uncover the true nature of the universe he inhabits.
* Equator (1958), US title Vanguard from Alpha
* The Canopy of Time (1959), US title Galaxies like Grains of Sand, collected short fiction (US format slightly different)
* No Time Like Tomorrow (1959), collected short fiction  published for the US market by New American Library imprint Signet Books (contents: T, Not for an Age, Poor Little Warrior!, The Failed Men, Carrion Country, Judas Danced, Psyclops, Outside, Gesture of Farewell, The New Father Christmas, Our Kind of Knowledge)
* The Interpreter (1960); US title Bow down to Nul  A short novel about the huge, old galactic empire of Nuls, a giant, three-limbed, civilised alien race. Earth is just a lesser-than-third-class colony ruled by a Nul tyrant whose deceiving devices together with good willing but ineffective attempts of a Nul signatory to clarify the abuses and with the disorganised earthling resistance reflect the complex relationship existing between imperialists and subject races which Aldiss himself had the chance of seeing at first hand when serving in India and Indonesia in the forties.
* The Male Response (US 1959, UK 1961)
* The Primal Urge (1961)
* Hothouse (1962)  Set in a far future Earth, where the earth has stopped rotating, the Sun has increased output, and plants are engaged in a constant frenzy of growth and decay, like a tropical forest enhanced a thousandfold; a few small groups of elvish humans still live on the edge of extinction, beneath the giant banyan tree that covers the day side of the earth. This assemblage of stories, published in abridged form in the American market as The Long Afternoon of Earth, won the Hugo Award for short fiction in 1962. 
* The Airs of Earth (1963), US title Starswarm, collected short fiction
* The Dark Light Years (1964)  The encounter of humans with the utods, gentle aliens whose physical and mental health requires wallowing in mud and filth, who are not even recognised as intelligent by the humans.
* Greybeard (1964)  Set decades after the Earth's population has been sterilised as a result of nuclear bomb tests conducted in Earth's orbit, the book shows an emptying world, occupied by an aging, childless population.
* Best SF stories of Brian Aldiss (1965); US title But who can replace a Man?'
* Earthworks (1965)
* The Impossible Smile (1965), previously a Science Fantasy magazine serial under the pseudonym "Jael Cracken"
* The Saliva Tree and other strange growths (1966), collected short fiction  Title story "The Saliva Tree" was written to mark the centenary of H. G. Wells's birth, and won the Nebula Award for the best novella of 1964. 
* An Age (1967), US title Cryptozoic!  a dystopic time-travel novel
* Report on Probability A (1967)
* Barefoot in the Head (1969)  Perhaps Aldiss's most experimental work, this first appeared in several parts as the 'Acid Head War' series in New Worlds. Set in a Europe some years after a flare-up in the Middle East led to Europe being attacked with bombs releasing huge quantities of long-lived hallucinogenic drugs. Into an England with a population barely maintaining a grip on reality comes a young Serb, who himself starts coming under the influence of the ambient aerosols, and finds himself leading a messianic crusade. The narration and dialogue reflects the shattering of language under the influence of the drugs, in mutating phrases and puns and allusions, in a deliberate echo of Finnegans Wake.
* Neanderthal Planet (1970), collected short fiction
* Horatio Stubbs (omnibus edition, The Horace Stubbs Saga, 1985) 
** The Hand-Reared Boy (1970)
** A Soldier Erect (1971)
** A Rude Awakening (1978)
* The Moment of Eclipse (1971), collected short fiction  British Science Fiction Association (BSFA) Award "BSFA Awards: Past Awards". British Science Fiction Association. Archived 2011-05-19. Retrieved 2013-04-25. 
* The Book of Brian Aldiss (1972), UK title The Comic Inferno, collected short fiction
* Frankenstein Unbound (1973)  A 21st century politician is transported to 19th century Switzerland where he encounters both Frankenstein and Mary Shelley. It was the basis for the 1990 film of the same title, directed by Roger Corman.
* The Eighty Minute Hour (1974)  A weird and ambitious "space opera" whose characters actually sing. The world is in chaos after nuclear war causes time slips and even those that believe they rule the world have trouble knowing where and when they are.
* The Malacia Tapestry (1976)
* Brothers of the Head (1977)  A large-format book, illustrated by Ian Pollock, tells the strange story of the rock stars Tom and Barry Howe, Siamese twins with a third, dormant head that eventually starts to awaken. Adapted for film by Keith Fulton and Lou Pepe, released in 2006.
* Last Orders and Other Stories (1977)
* Enemies of the System (1978)
* Pile (1979) Poem
* New Arrivals, Old Encounters (1979)
* Moreau's Other Island (1980)
* Squire Quartet
** Life In The West (1980)
** Forgotten Life (1988)
** Remembrance Day (1993)
** Somewhere East Of Life (1994)
* Helliconia trilogy 
** Helliconia Spring (1982)  BSFA Award; Campbell Memorial Award; Nebula Award finalist 
** Helliconia Summer (1983)  BSFA finalist; Locus Award, fourth place 
** Helliconia Winter (1985)  BSFA; Nebula finalist; Locus, fifth place 
* Seasons in Flight (1984)
* Courageous New Planet (c. 1984)
* The Year before Yesterday (1987)  Fix-up of Equator (1958) and The Impossible Smile (1965)
* Ruins (1987)
* A Man in His Time (1988) ISBN 0-689-12052-4
* A Romance of the Equator: The Best Fantasy Stories (1989) ISBN 0-689-12053-2
* Dracula Unbound (1990)
* A Tupolev too Far (1994)
* Somewhere East of Life: Another European Fantasia (1994)
* The Secret of This Book (1995), US title Common Clay: 20-Odd Stories
* White Mars or, the Mind Set Free (1999), by Aldiss and Roger Penrose 
* Super-Toys Last All Summer Long and Other Stories of Future Time (2001), collected short fiction  Title story "Super-Toys Last All Summer Long" was the basis for the Steven Spielberg film (movie)|A.I.: Artificial Intelligence]
* Super-State (2002)
* The Cretan Teat (2002)
* Affairs at Hampden Ferrers (2004)
* Cultural Breaks (2005), collected short fiction. Tachyon Publications.
* Jocasta (2005) A re-telling of Sophocles' Theban tragedies concerning Oedipus and Antigone. In Aldiss' novel, myth and magic are vibrantly real, experienced through an evolving human consciousness. Amidst various competing interpretations of reality, including the appearance of a time-travelling Sophocles, Aldiss provides an engaging alternative explanation of the Sphinx's riddle.
* Sanity and the Lady (2005)
* HARM (2007)  Campbell Award nominee The Award recognises second and third-place runners-up. Recent lists of finalists are long, 14 in 2008. 
* Walcot (2010)  Family saga spanning the 20th century
* Finches of Mars (2012) http://www.harpercollins.co.uk/Titles/75944/finches-of-mars-brian-aldiss-9780007478927 
* Comfort Zone (2013) http://www.theguardian.com/books/2013/dec/13/brian-aldiss-science-fiction-author-review 

=== Poetry ===
* Home Life With Cats (1992)
* At The Caligula Hotel (1995)
* Songs From The Steppes Of Central Asia (1995)
* A Plutonian Monologue on His Wife's Death (The Frogmore Papers, 2000)
* At A Bigger House (2002)
* The Dark Sun Rises (2002)
* A Prehistory of Mind (Mayapple Press, 2008)
* Mortal Morning (2011) 

=== Nonfiction ===
* Cities and Stones: A Traveller's Yugoslavia (1966)
* The Shape of Further Things: Speculations on Change (1970)
* Item Eighty Three (1972), by Brian and Margaret Aldiss  A bibliography of Aldiss's published works, this book being number 83
* Billion Year Spree: The History of Science Fiction (1973)  BSFA special award 
* Hell's Cartographers (1975), co-edited with Harry Harrison  A collection of short autobiographical pieces by a number of science fiction writers, including Aldiss. The title is a reference to Kingsley Amis's survey of science fiction, New Maps of Hell.
* This World and Nearer Ones: Essays Exploring the Familiar (1979).
* Trillion Year Spree: The History of Science Fiction (1986), by Aldiss and David Wingrove  A revised and expanded version of Billion Year Spree and winner of the 1987 Hugo Award for the year's best nonfiction. At the 'Conspiracy 87' ceremony, Aldiss began his acceptance speech by holding the Hugo aloft and proclaiming, to general approbation, "It's been a long time since you've given me one of these, you bastards!" David Langford, The Sex Column and Other Misprints, Cosmos Books, 2005, p. 82. The quotation may not be reported exactly. 
* The Pale Shadow Of Science (1985), collected essays
* ... And the Lurid Glare of the Comet (1986), articles and autobiography
* Bury My Heart at W.H. Smith's: A Writing Life (1990), autobiography
* The Detached Retina: Aspects of SF and Fantasy (1995).
* The Twinkling of an Eye, or My Life as an Englishman (1998)
* When the Feast is Finished (1999), by Brian and Margaret Aldiss
* Art After Apogee: The Relationships Between an Idea, a Story, a Painting (2000), by Aldiss and Rosemary Phipps

=== Anthologies edited ===

* Penguin Science Fiction (1961)
* More Penguin Science Fiction (1963)
* Yet More Penguin Science Fiction (1964)
* The Year's Best Science Fiction No. 1 (with Harry Harrison) (1968)
* SF: 1968|The Year's Best Science Fiction No. 2] (with Harry Harrison) (1969)
* The Year's Best Science Fiction No. 3 (with Harry Harrison) (1970)
* The Year's Best Science Fiction No. 4 (with Harry Harrison) (1971)
* The Year's Best Science Fiction No. 5 (with Harry Harrison) (1972)
* The Year's Best Science Fiction No. 6 (with Harry Harrison) (1973)
* The Penguin Science Fiction Omnibus (1973)
* Space Opera (1974)
* Space Odysseys (1974)
* Decade: the 1940's (with Harry Harrison) (1975)
* Decade: the 1950's (with Harry Harrison) (1976)
* Decade: the 1960's (with Harry Harrison) (1979)
* Evil Earths (1976)
* Galactic Empires, Volume 1 (1976)
* Galactic Empires, Volume 2 (1976)
* Mini Sagas from the Daily Telegraph Competition (1998) ISBN 978-0-7509-1594-6
* Mini Sagas From the Daily Telegraph Competition 2001 (2001) ISBN 978-1-900564-77-9
* A Science Fiction Omnibus (2007) ISBN 978-0-14-118892-8

=== Other ===
* "Umwelts for Hire", Doctor Who Brilliant Book 2011 (BBC Books, 2010, ISBN 978-1-84607-991-7), a Doctor Who short story

==See also==
 

==Notes==

==References==

==External links==

* 
* 
* Brian Aldiss at British Council: Literature
* 
* 
* Guardian newspaper profile
* Brian Aldiss's online fiction at Free Speculative Fiction Online
* 'Metropolis' limited edition fine art print by Brian Aldiss
* Supertoys Last All Summer Long story by Brian Aldiss (Jan 1997)
* Brian Aldiss Collection at the University of South Florida



[[Battle of Jutland]]

The Battle of Jutland () was a naval battle fought by the Royal Navy's Grand Fleet (which also included ships and individual personnel from the Royal Australian Navy and Royal Canadian Navy ) against the Imperial German Navy's High Seas Fleet during the First World War. The battle was fought on 31 May and 1 June 1916 in the North Sea near Jutland, Denmark. It was the largest naval battle and the only full-scale clash of battleships in the war. It was only the third-ever fleet action between steel battleships, following the smaller but more decisive battles of the Yellow Sea (1904) and Tsushima (1905) during the Russo-Japanese War.

The Grand Fleet was commanded by British Admiral Sir John Jellicoe, and the High Seas Fleet by German Vice-Admiral Reinhard Scheer. The High Seas Fleet's intention was to lure out, trap and destroy a portion of the Grand Fleet, as the German naval force was insufficient to successfully engage the entire British fleet. This formed part of a larger strategy to break the British blockade of Germany and to allow German mercantile shipping to operate. Meanwhile, the Royal Navy pursued a strategy to engage and destroy the High Seas Fleet, or keep the German force contained and away from Britain's own shipping lanes.

The German plan was to use Vice-Admiral Franz Hipper's fast scouting group of five modern battlecruisers to lure Vice-Admiral Sir David Beatty's battlecruiser squadrons into the path of the main German fleet. Submarines were stationed in advance across the likely routes of the British ships. However, the British learned from signal intercepts that a major fleet operation was likely, so on 30 May Jellicoe sailed with the Grand Fleet to rendezvous with Beatty, passing over the locations of the German submarine picket lines while they were unprepared. The German plan had been delayed, causing further problems for their submarines which had reached the limit of their endurance at sea.

On the afternoon of 31 May, Beatty encountered Hipper's battlecruiser force long before the Germans had expected. In a running battle, Hipper successfully drew the British vanguard into the path of the High Seas Fleet. By the time Beatty sighted the larger force and turned back towards the British main fleet, he had lost two battlecruisers from a force of six battlecruisers and four battleships, against the five ships commanded by Hipper. The battleships, commanded by Rear-Admiral Sir Hugh Evan-Thomas, were the last to turn and formed a rearguard as Beatty withdrew, now drawing the German fleet in pursuit towards the main British positions. Between 18:30, when the sun was lowering on the western horizon, backlighting the German forces, and nightfall at about 20:30, the two fleets  totalling 250 ships between them  directly engaged twice.

Fourteen British and eleven German ships were sunk, with great loss of life. After sunset, and throughout the night, Jellicoe manoeuvered to cut the Germans off from their base, hoping to continue the battle the next morning, but under the cover of darkness Scheer broke through the British light forces forming the rearguard of the Grand Fleet and returned to port. Campbell, Analysis pp. 274 

Both sides claimed victory. The British lost more ships and twice as many sailors, and the British press criticised the Grand Fleet's failure to force a decisive outcome, but Scheer's plan of destroying a substantial portion of the British fleet also failed. The Germans' 'fleet in being' continued to pose a threat, requiring the British to keep their battleships concentrated in the North Sea, but the battle confirmed the German policy of avoiding all fleet-to-fleet contact. At the end of the year, after further unsuccessful attempts to reduce the Royal Navy's numerical advantage, the German Navy turned its efforts and resources to unrestricted submarine warfare and the destruction of Allied and neutral shipping which by April 1917 triggered America's declaration of war on Germany. Protasio, John. (2011). The Day the World was Shocked; The Lusitania Disaster and Its Influence on the Course of World War I pp.200-201, Casemate Publications (US) ISBN 978-1-935149-45-3 

Subsequent reviews commissioned by the Royal Navy generated strong disagreement between supporters of Jellicoe and Beatty concerning the two admirals' performance in the battle. Debate over their performance and the significance of the battle continues today.

==Background and planning==

===German planning===

With 16 dreadnought-class battleships, compared with the Royal Navy's 28, the German High Seas Fleet stood little chance of winning a head-to-head clash. The Germans therefore adopted a divide-and-conquer strategy. They would stage raids into the North Sea and bombard the English coast, with the aim of luring out small British squadrons and pickets, which could then be destroyed by superior forces or submarines.

In January 1916, Admiral von Pohl, commander of the German fleet, fell ill. He was replaced by Scheer, who believed that the fleet had been used too defensively, had better ships and men than the British, and ought to take the war to them. Tarrant p.49 According to Scheer, the German naval strategy should be:

Reinhard Scheer, German fleet commander

On 25 April 1916 a decision was made by the German admiralty to halt indiscriminate attacks by submarine on merchant shipping. This followed protests from neutral countries, notably the United States, that their nationals had been the victims of attacks. Germany agreed that future attacks would only take place in accord with internationally agreed prize rules, which required an attacker to give a warning and allow the crews of vessels time to escape, and not to attack neutral vessels at all. Scheer believed that it would not be possible to continue attacks on these terms, which took away the advantage of secret approach by submarines and left them vulnerable to even relatively small guns on the target ships. Instead, he set about deploying the submarine fleet against military vessels. Tarrant p.55 

It was hoped that, following a successful German submarine attack, fast British escorts, such as destroyers, would be tied down by anti-submarine operations. If the Germans could catch the British in the expected locations, there were thought to be good prospects of at least partially redressing the balance of forces between the fleets. "After the British sortied in response to the raiding attack force", the Royal Navy's centuries-old instincts for aggressive action could be exploited to draw its weakened units towards the main German fleet under Scheer. The hope was that Scheer would thus be able to ambush a section of the British fleet and destroy it. Campbell, p. 2 

====Submarine deployments====
A plan was devised to station submarines offshore from British naval bases, and then stage some action that would draw out the British ships to the waiting submarines. The battlecruiser had been damaged in a previous engagement, but was due to be repaired by mid May, so an operation was scheduled for 17 May 1916. At the start of May, difficulties with condensers were discovered on ships of the third battleship squadron, so the operation was put back to 23 May. Ten submarines  , , , , , , , , , and  were given orders first to patrol in the central North Sea between 17 and 22 May, and then to take up waiting positions. U-43 and U-44 were stationed in the Pentland Firth, which the Grand Fleet was likely to cross leaving Scapa Flow, while the remainder proceeded to the Firth of Forth, awaiting battlecruisers departing Rosyth. Each boat had an allocated area, within which it could move around as necessary to avoid detection, but was instructed to keep within it. During the initial North Sea patrol the boats were instructed to sail only north-south so that any enemy who chanced to encounter one would believe it was departing or returning from operations on the west coast (which required them to pass around the north of Britain). Once at their final positions, the boats were under strict orders to avoid premature detection that might give away the operation. It was arranged that a coded signal would be transmitted to alert the submarines exactly when the operation commenced: 'Take into account the enemy's forces may be putting to sea'. Tarrant p. 56-57 

Additionally, UB-27 was sent out on 20 May with instructions to work its way into the Firth of Forth past May Island. U-46 was ordered to patrol the coast of Sunderland, which had been chosen for the diversionary attack, but because of engine problems it was unable to leave port and U-47 was diverted to this task. On 13 May, U-72 was sent to lay mines in the Firth of Forth; on the 23rd, U-74 departed to lay mines in the Moray Firth; and on the 24th, U-75 was dispatched similarly west of the Orkney Islands. UB-21 and UB-22 were sent to patrol the Humber, where (incorrect) reports had suggested the presence of British warships. U-22, U-46 and U-67 were positioned north of Terschelling to protect against intervention by British light forces stationed at Harwich. Tarrant p.57-58 

On 22 May 1916 it was discovered that Seydlitz was still not watertight after repairs and would not now be ready until the 29th. The ambush submarines were now on station and experiencing difficulties of their own: visibility near the coast was frequently poor due to fog, and sea conditions were either so calm the slightest ripple, as from the periscope, could give away their position, or so rough as to make it very hard to keep the vessel at a steady depth. The British had become aware of unusual submarine activity, and had begun counter patrols that forced the submarines out of position. UB-27 passed Bell Rock on the night of 23 May on its way into the Firth of Forth as planned, but was halted by engine trouble. After repairs it continued to approach, following behind merchant vessels, and reached Largo Bay on 25 May. There the boat became entangled in nets that fouled one of the propellers, forcing it to abandon the operation and return home. U-74 was detected by four armed trawlers on 27 May and sunk 25 mi southeast of Peterhead. U-75 laid its mines off the Orkney Islands, which, although they played no part in the battle, were responsible later for sinking the cruiser carrying Lord Kitchener (head of the army) on a mission to Russia on 5 June. U-72 was forced to abandon its mission without laying any mines when an oil leak meant it was laying a visible surface trail astern. Tarrant p.58-60 

The throat of the Skagerrak, the strategic gateway to the Baltic and North Atlantic, waters off Jutland and Norway

====Zeppelins====
The Germans maintained a fleet of Zeppelins that they used for aerial reconnaissance and occasional bombing raids. The planned raid on Sunderland intended to use Zeppelins to watch out for the British fleet approaching from the north, which might otherwise surprise the raiders.

By 28 May, strong northeasterly winds meant that it would not be possible to send out the Zeppelins, so the raid again had to be postponed. The submarines could only stay on station until 1 June before their supplies would be exhausted and they had to return, so a decision had to be made quickly about the raid.

It was decided to use an alternative plan, abandoning the attack on Sunderland but instead sending a patrol of battlecruisers to the Skagerrak, where it was likely they would encounter merchant ships carrying British cargo and British cruiser patrols. It was felt this could be done without air support, because the action would now be much closer to Germany, relying instead on cruiser and torpedo boat patrols for reconnaissance.

Orders for the alternative plan were issued on 28 May, though still hoping that last-minute improvements in the weather would allow the original plan to go ahead. The German fleet assembled in the Jade River and at Wilhelmshaven and was instructed to raise steam and be ready for action from midnight on 28 May. Tarrant p.61 

Franz Hipper, commander of the German battlecruiser squadron

By 14:00 on 30 May, the wind was still too strong and the final decision was made to use the alternative plan. The coded signal '31 May G.G.2490' was transmitted to the ships of the fleet to inform them the Skagerrak attack would start on 31 May. The pre-arranged signal to the waiting submarines was transmitted throughout the day from the E-Dienst radio station at Brugge, and the U-boat tender Arcona anchored at Emden. Only two of the waiting submarines, and , received the order. Tarrant p.62, 60,65 

===British response===
Unfortunately for the German plan, the British had obtained a copy of the main German codebook from the light cruiser , which had been boarded by the Russian Navy after the ship ran aground in Russian territorial waters in 1914. German naval radio communications could therefore often be quickly deciphered, and the British Admiralty usually knew about German activities.

The British Admiralty's Room 40 maintained direction finding and interception of German naval signals. It had intercepted and decrypted a German signal on 28 May ordering all ships to be ready for sea on the 30th. Further signals were intercepted, and although they were not decrypted it was clear that a major operation was likely. At 11:00 on 30 May, Jellicoe was warned that the German fleet seemed prepared to sail the following morning. By 17:00, the Admiralty had intercepted the signal from Scheer, '31 May G.G.2490', making it clear something significant was imminent. Tarrant p.63-64 

Not knowing the Germans' objective, Jellicoe and his staff decided to position the fleet to head off any attempt by the Germans to enter the North Atlantic, or the Baltic through the Skagerrak, by taking up a position off Norway where they could possibly cut off any German raid into the shipping lanes of the Atlantic, or prevent the Germans from heading into the Baltic. A position further west was unnecessary, as that area of the North Sea could be patrolled by air using blimps and scouting aircraft.

John Jellicoe, British fleet commander

Consequently, Admiral Jellicoe led the 16 dreadnought battleships of the 1st and 4th Battle Squadrons of the Grand Fleet and three battlecruisers of the 3rd Battlecruiser Squadron eastwards out of Scapa Flow at 22:30 on 30 May. He was to meet the 2nd Battle Squadron of eight more dreadnought battleships commanded by Vice-Admiral Martyn Jerram coming from Cromarty. Hipper's raiding force did not leave the Outer Jade Roads until 01:00 on 31 May, heading west of Heligoland Island following a cleared channel through the minefields, heading north at 16 kn. The main German fleet of 16 dreadnought battleships of 1st and 3rd Battle Squadrons left the Jade at 02:30, being joined off Heligoland at 04:00 by the six pre-dreadnoughts of the 2nd Battle Squadron coming from the Elbe River. Beatty's faster force of six ships of the 1st and 2nd Battlecruiser Squadrons plus the 5th Battle Squadron of four fast battleships left the Firth of Forth on the next day; Jellicoe's intention was to rendezvous with him 90 mi west of the mouth of the Skagerrak off the coast of Jutland and wait for the Germans or for their intentions to become clear. The planned position gave him the widest range of responses to likely German intentions. Tarrant p.64 

==Naval tactics in 1916==

The principle of concentration of force was fundamental to the fleet tactics of this time (as in earlier periods). Tactical doctrine called for a fleet approaching battle to be in a compact formation of parallel columns, allowing relatively easy manoeuvering, and giving shortened sight lines within the formation, which simplified the passing of the signals necessary for command and control.

A fleet formed in several short columns could change its heading faster than one formed in a single long column. Since most command signals were made with flags or signal lamps between ships, the flagship was usually placed at the head of the centre column so that its signals might be more easily seen by the many ships of the formation. Wireless telegraphy was in use, though security (radio direction finding), encryption, and the limitation of the radio sets made their extensive use more problematic. Command and control of such huge fleets remained difficult. Sutherland, Cramwell, p.13 

Thus, it might take a very long time for a signal from the flagship to be relayed to the entire formation. It was usually necessary for a signal to be confirmed by each ship before it could be relayed to other ships, and an order for a fleet movement would have to be received and acknowledged by every ship before it could be executed. In a large single-column formation, a signal could take 10 minutes or more to be passed from one end of the line to the other, whereas in a formation of parallel columns, visibility across the diagonals was often better (and always shorter) than in a single long column, and the diagonals gave signal "redundancy", increasing the probability that a message would be quickly seen and correctly interpreted.

However, before battle was joined the heavy units of the fleet would, if possible, deploy into a single column. To form the battle line in the correct orientation relative to the enemy, the commanding admiral had to know the enemy fleet's distance, bearing, heading, and speed. It was the task of the scouting forces, consisting primarily of battlecruisers and cruisers, to find the enemy and report this information in sufficient time, and, if possible, to deny the enemy's scouting forces the opportunity of obtaining the equivalent information.

Ideally, the battle line would cross the intended path of the enemy column so that the maximum number of guns could be brought to bear, while the enemy could fire only with the forward guns of the leading ships, a manoeuvre known as "crossing the T". Admiral Tg, commander of the Japanese battleship fleet, had achieved this against Admiral Zinovy Rozhestvensky's Russian battleships in 1905 at the Battle of Tsushima, with devastating results. Forczyk p. 58-62 Jellicoe was to achieve this twice in one hour against the High Seas Fleet at Jutland, but on both occasions Scheer managed to turn away and disengage, thereby avoiding a decisive action. 

===Ship design===
Within the existing technological limits, a trade-off had to be made between the weight and size of guns, the weight of armour protecting the ship, and the maximum speed. Battleships sacrificed speed for armour and heavy naval guns (11 in or larger). British battlecruisers sacrificed weight of armour for greater speed, while their German counterparts were armed with lighter guns and heavier armour. These weight savings allowed them to escape danger or catch other ships. Generally, the larger guns mounted on British ships allowed an engagement at greater range. In theory, a lightly armoured ship could stay out of range of a slower opponent while still scoring hits. The fast pace of development in the pre-war years meant that every few years a new generation of ships rendered its predecessors obsolete. Thus, fairly young ships could still be obsolete compared to the newest ships, and fare badly in an engagement against them. 'Castles of Steel' p. 666 

Admiral John Fisher, responsible for reconstruction of the British fleet in the pre-war period, favoured large guns and speed. Admiral Tirpitz, responsible for the German fleet, favoured unsinkable ships and chose to sacrifice some gun size for improved armour. The German battlecruiser had belt armour equivalent in thickness  though not in terms of comprehensiveness  to the British battleship , significantly better than on the British battlecruisers such as Tiger. German ships had better internal subdivision and had fewer doors and other weak points in their bulkheads, but with the disadvantage that space for crew was greatly reduced. As they were only designed for cruises in the North Sea, they did not need to be as habitable as the British vessels, and their crews could live in barracks ashore when in harbour. Marder III p.168 

==Order of battle==

 British German 
 Dreadnought Battleships 28 16 
 Pre-Dreadnoughts 0 6 
 Battlecruisers 9 5 
 Armoured Cruisers 8 0 
 Light Cruisers 26 11 
 Destroyers 79 61 
 Seaplane Carrier 1 0 

Jellicoe's Grand Fleet was split into two sections. The dreadnought Battle Fleet with which he sailed formed the main force and was composed of 24 battleships and three battlecruisers. The battleships were formed into three squadrons of eight ships, further subdivided into divisions of four, each led by a flag officer. Accompanying them were eight armoured cruisers (classified by the Royal Navy since 1913 as "cruisers"), eight light cruisers, four scout cruisers, 51 destroyers, and one destroyer-minelayer. Jellicoe, Joe, The Grand Fleet, 19141916, London, Cassell, 1919 

David Beatty, commander of the British battlecruiser fleet

The Grand Fleet sailed without three of its battleships: in refit at Invergordon, drydocked at Rosyth and in refit at Devonport. The brand new Royal Sovereign was left behind, with only three weeks in service, her untrained crew judged unready for battle.

British reconnaissance was provided by the Battlecruiser Fleet under David Beatty: six battlecruisers, four fast s, 14 light cruisers and 27 destroyers. Air scouting was provided for by the attachment of the seaplane tender , one of the first aircraft carriers in history to participate in a naval engagement. 

The German High Seas Fleet under Scheer was also split into a main force and a separate reconnaissance force. Scheer's main battle fleet was composed of 16 battleships and six pre-dreadnought battleships arranged in an identical manner to the British. With them were six light cruisers and 31 torpedo-boats, (the latter being roughly equivalent to a British destroyer).

The German scouting force, commanded by Franz Hipper, consisted of five battlecruisers, five light cruisers and 30 torpedo-boats. The Germans had no equivalent to Engadine, and no heavier-than-air aircraft to operate with the fleet, but had the Imperial German Naval Airship Service's force of rigid airships available to patrol the North Sea.

The British capital ships carried a larger number of guns and a correspondingly larger weight of broadside than their German counterparts: 332360 lb as compared to 134216 lb. Tarrant p.65 All of the battleships and battlecruisers on both sides also carried torpedoes of various sizes, as did the lighter craft. The British battleships carried three or four underwater torpedo tubes. The battlecruisers carried from two to five. All were either 18-inch or 21-inch diameter. The German battleships carried five or six underwater torpedo tubes in three sizes from 18 to 21 inch and the battlecruisers carried four or five tubes.

The German battle fleet was hampered by the slow speed and relatively poor armament of the six pre-dreadnoughts of II Squadron, which limited maximum fleet speed to 18 kn, compared to maximum British fleet speed of 21 kn. On the British side, the eight armoured cruisers were deficient in both speed and armour protection. Both of these obsolete squadrons were notably vulnerable to attacks by more modern enemy ships.

==Battlecruiser action==
The route of the British battlecruiser fleet took it through the patrol sector allocated to U-32. After receiving the order to commence the operation, the U-boat moved to a position 80 mi east of May Island at dawn on 31 May. At 03:40, it sighted the cruisers and leaving the Forth at 18 kn. It launched one torpedo at the leading cruiser at a range of 1000 yd, but its periscope jammed 'up', giving away the position of the submarine as it manoeuvred to fire a second. The lead cruiser turned away to dodge the torpedo, while the second turned towards the submarine, attempting to ram. U-32 crash dived, and on raising its periscope at 04:10 saw two battlecruisers (the 2nd Battlecruiser Squadron) heading southeast. They were too far away to attack, but Kapitnleutnant von Spiegel reported the sighting of two battleships and two cruisers to Germany. Tarrant p.65-66 

U-66 was also supposed to be patrolling off the Firth of Forth, but had been forced north to a position 60 mi off Peterhead by patrolling British vessels. This now brought it into contact with the 2nd Battle Squadron, coming from the Moray Firth. At 05:00, it had to crash dive when the cruiser appeared from the mist heading toward it. It was followed by another cruiser, , and eight battleships. U-66 got within 350 yd of the battleships preparing to fire, but was forced to dive by an approaching destroyer and missed the opportunity. At 06:35, it reported eight battleships and cruisers heading north. Tarrant p. 66-67 

The courses reported by both submarines were incorrect, because they reflected one leg of a zig-zag being used by British ships to avoid submarines. Taken with a wireless intercept of more ships leaving Scapa Flow earlier in the night, they created the impression in the German High Command that the British fleet, whatever it was doing, was split into separate sections moving apart, which was precisely as the Germans wished to meet it. Tarrant p.67 

Jellicoe's ships proceeded to their rendezvous undamaged and undiscovered. However, he was now misled by an Admiralty intelligence report advising that the German main battle fleet was still in port. The Director of Operations Division, Rear Admiral Thomas Jackson, had asked the intelligence division, Room 40, for the current location of German call sign DK, used by Admiral Scheer. They had replied that it was currently transmitting from Wilhelmshaven. It was known to the intelligence staff that Scheer deliberately used a different call sign when at sea, but no one asked for this information or explained the reason behind the query  to locate the German fleet. Marder III p.41-42 

The German battlecruisers cleared the minefields surrounding the Amrum swept channel by 09:00. They then proceeded northwest, passing 35 mi west of the Horn's Reef lightship heading for the Little Fisher Bank at the mouth of the Skagerrak. The High Seas Fleet followed some 50 mi behind. The battlecruisers were in line ahead, with the four cruisers of the II scouting group plus supporting torpedo boats ranged in an arc 8 mi ahead and to either side. The IX torpedo boat flotilla formed close support immediately surrounding the battlecruisers. The High Seas Fleet similarly adopted a line-ahead formation, with close screening by torpedo boats to either side and a further screen of five cruisers surrounding the column 5 - away. The wind had finally moderated so that Zeppelins could be used, and by 11:30 five had been sent out: L14 to the Skagerrak, L23 240 mi east of Noss Head in the Pentland Firth, L21 120 mi off Peterhead, L9 100 mi off Sunderland, and L16 80 mi east of Flamborough Head. Visibility, however, was still bad, with clouds down to 1000 ft. Tarrant p.69-70 

===Contact===
HMS Warspite and Malaya, seen from HMS Valiant at around 14:00 hrs
By around 14:00, Beatty's ships were proceeding eastward at roughly the same latitude as Hipper's squadron, which was heading north. Had the courses remained unchanged, Beatty would have passed between the two German fleets, 40 mi south of the battlecruisers and 20 mi north of the High Seas Fleet at around 16:30, possibly trapping his ships just as the German plan envisioned. However, his orders were to stop his scouting patrol when he reached a point 260 mi east of Britain and then turn north to meet Jellicoe, which he did at this time. Beatty's ships were divided into three columns, with the two battlecruiser squadrons leading in parallel lines 3 mi apart. The 5th Battle Squadron was stationed 5 mi to the northwest, on the side furthest away from any expected enemy contact, while a screen of cruisers and destroyers was spread southeast of the battlecruisers. After the turn, the 5th Battle Squadron was now leading the British ships in the westmost column, and Beatty's squadron was centre and rearmost, with the 2nd BCS to the west. Tarrant p.70-71 

(1) 15:22 hrs, Hipper sights Beatty. (2) 15:48 hrs, First shots fired by Hipper's squadron.(3) 16:00 hrs-16:05 hrs, Indefatigable explodes, leaving two survivors. (4) 16:25 hrs, Queen Mary explodes, nine survive. (5) 16:45 hrs, Beatty's battlecruisers move out of range of Hipper.(6) 16:54 hrs, Evan-Thomas's battleships turn north behind Beatty.

At 14:20 on 31 May, despite heavy haze and scuds of fog giving poor visibility, scouts from Beatty's force reported enemy ships to the southeast; the British light units, investigating a neutral Danish steamer (N J Fjord), which was stopped between the two fleets, had found two German destroyers engaged on the same mission ( and ). The first shots of the battle were fired at 14:28 when and of the British 1st Light Cruiser Squadron opened on the German torpedo boats, which withdrew toward their own approaching light cruisers. At 14:36, the Germans scored the first hit of the battle when , of Rear-Admiral Friedrich Bdicker's Scouting Group II, hit her British counterpart Galatea at extreme range. 

Meanwhile Beatty began to move his battlecruisers and supporting forces southeastwards and then east to cut the German ships off from their base, and ordered Engadine to launch a seaplane to try to get more information about the size and location of the German forces. This was the first time in history that a carrier-based aeroplane was used for reconnaissance in naval combat. Engadines plane did locate and report some German light cruisers just before 15:30, and came under anti-aircraft gunfire, but attempts to relay the plane's reports failed. 

Unfortunately for Beatty, his initial course changes at 14:32 were not received by Sir Hugh Evan-Thomas's 5th Battle Squadron (the distance being too great to read his flags), because the battlecruiser  the last ship in his column  was no longer in a position where she could relay signals by searchlight to Evan-Thomas, as she had previously been ordered to do. Whereas before the north turn, Tiger had been the closest ship to Evan-Thomas, she was now further away than Beatty in Lion. Matters were aggravated because Evan-Thomas had not been briefed regarding standing orders within Beatty's squadron, as his squadron normally operated with the Grand Fleet. Fleet ships were expected to obey movement orders precisely and not deviate from them. Beatty's standing instructions expected his officers to use their initiative and keep station with the flagship. 'Marder' III p.55 As a result, the four Queen Elizabeth-class battleships  which were the fastest and most heavily armed in the world at that time  remained on the previous course for several minutes, ending up 10 mi behind rather than five. Beatty also had the opportunity during the previous hours to concentrate his forces, and no reason not to do so, whereas he steamed ahead at full speed, faster than the battleships could manage. Dividing the force had serious consequences for the British, costing them what would have been an overwhelming advantage in ships and firepower during the first half-hour of the coming battle. 

With visibility favouring the Germans, Hipper's battlecruisers at 15:22, steaming approximately northwest, sighted Beatty's squadron at a range of about 15 mi, while Beatty's forces did not identify Hipper's battlecruisers until 15:30. (position 1 on map). At 15:45, Hipper turned southeast to lead Beatty toward Scheer, who was 46 mi southeast with the main force of the High Seas Fleet. 

===The Run to the South===
Beatty's conduct during the next 15 minutes has received a great deal of criticism, as his ships out-ranged and outnumbered the German squadron, yet he held his fire for over 10 minutes with the German ships in range. He also failed to use the time available to rearrange his battlecruisers into a fighting formation, with the result that they were still manoeuvreing when the battle started. Brooks p. 234-237 

At 15:48, with the opposing forces roughly parallel at 15000 yd, with the British to the southwest of the Germans (i.e., on the right side), Hipper opened fire, followed by the British ships as their guns came to bear upon targets (position 2). Thus began the opening phase of the battlecruiser action, known as the "Run to the South", in which the British chased the Germans, and Hipper intentionally led Beatty toward Scheer. During the first minutes of the ensuing battle, all the British ships except Princess Royal fired far over their German opponents, due to adverse visibility conditions, before finally getting the range. Only Lion and Princess Royal had settled into formation, so the other four ships were hampered in aiming by their own turning. Beatty was to windward of Hipper, and therefore funnel and gun smoke from his own ships tended to obscure his targets, while Hipper's smoke blew clear. Also, the eastern sky was overcast and the grey German ships were indistinct and difficult to range. 

Beatty's flagship Lion burning after being hit by a salvo from Ltzow
HMS Indefatigable sinking after being struck by shells from the German battlecruiser Von der Tann

Beatty had ordered his ships to engage in a line, one British ship engaging with one German and his flagship doubling on the German flagship . However, due to another mistake with signalling by flag, and possibly because the Queen Mary and Tiger were unable to see the German lead ship because of smoke, Brooks p. 239 the second German ship, Derfflinger, was left unengaged and free to fire without disruption. drew fire from two of Beatty's battlecruisers, but still fired with deadly accuracy during this time, putting nine shells into Tiger in the first 12 minutes. The Germans drew first blood. Aided by superior visibility, Hipper's five battlecruisers quickly registered hits on three of the six British battlecruisers. Seven minutes passed before the British managed to score their first hit. 

The first near-kill of the Run to the South occurred at 16:00, when a 12 in shell from Ltzow wrecked the "Q" turret amidships on Beatty's flagship Lion. Dozens of crewmen were instantly killed, but far larger destruction was averted when the mortally wounded turret commander  Major Francis Harvey of the Royal Marines  promptly ordered the magazine doors shut and the magazine flooded. This prevented a magazine explosion at 16:28, when a flash fire ignited ready cordite charges beneath the turret and killed everyone in the chambers outside "Q" magazine. Lion was saved. was not so lucky; at 16:02, just 14 minutes into the slugging match, she was smashed aft by three 11 in shells from , causing damage sufficient to knock her out of line and detonating "X" magazine aft. Soon after, despite the near-maximum range, Von der Tann put another 11 in shell on Indefatigables "A" turret forward. The plunging shells probably pierced the thin upper armour, and seconds later Indefatigable was ripped apart by another magazine explosion, sinking immediately with her crew of 1,019 officers and men, leaving only two survivors. (position 3).

Hipper's position deteriorated somewhat by 16:15 as the 5th Battle Squadron finally came into range, so that he had to contend with gunfire from the four battleships astern as well as Beatty's five remaining battlecruisers to starboard. But he knew his baiting mission was close to completion, as his force was rapidly closing with Scheer's main body. At 16:08, the lead battleship of the 5th Battle Squadron, , caught up with Hipper and opened fire at extreme range, scoring a 15 in hit on Von der Tann within 60 seconds. Still, it was 16:15 before all the battleships of the 5th were able to fully engage at long range. 

At 16:25, the battlecruiser action intensified again when was hit by what may have been a combined salvo from Derfflinger and ; she disintegrated when both forward magazines exploded, sinking with all but nine of her 1,275 man crew lost. (position 4). Commander von Hase, the first gunnery officer aboard Derfflingler, noted:

HMS Queen Mary blowing up

During the Run to the South, from 15:48 to 16:54, the German battlecruisers made an estimated total of forty-two 11 and hits on the British battlecruisers (nine on Lion, six on Princess Royal, seven on Queen Mary, 14 on Tiger, one on New Zealand, five on Indefatigable), and two more on the battleship Barham, compared with only eleven 13.5 in hits by the British battlecruisers (four on Ltzow, four on Seydlitz, two on Moltke, one on von der Tann), and six 15 in hits by the battleships (one on Seydlitz, four on Moltke, one on von der Tann). 

==="Something wrong with our bloody ships"===
Shortly after 16:26, a salvo struck on or around , which was obscured by spray and smoke from shell bursts. A signalman promptly leapt on to the bridge of Lion and announced "Princess Royals blown up, Sir." Beatty famously turned to his flag captain, saying "Chatfield, there seems to be something wrong with our bloody ships today." (In popular legend, Beatty also immediately ordered his ships to "turn two points to port", i.e., two points nearer the enemy, but there is no official record of any such command or course change.) Princess Royal, as it turned out, was still afloat after the spray cleared.

At 16:30, Scheer's leading battleships sighted the distant battlecruiser action; soon after, of Beatty's 2nd Light Cruiser Squadron led by Commodore William Goodenough sighted the main body of Scheer's High Seas Fleet, dodging numerous heavy-calibre salvos to report in detail the German strength: 16 dreadnoughts with six older battleships. This was the first news that Beatty and Jellicoe had that Scheer and his battle fleet were even at sea. Simultaneously, an all-out destroyer action raged in the space between the opposing battlecruiser forces, as British and German destroyers fought with each other and attempted to torpedo the larger enemy ships. Each side fired many torpedoes, but both battlecruiser forces turned away from the attacks and all escaped harm except Seydlitz, which was hit forward at 16:57 by a torpedo fired by the British destroyer . Though taking on water, Seydlitz maintained speed. The destroyer , under the command of Captain Barry Bingham, led the British attacks. The British disabled the German torpedo boat , which the Germans soon abandoned and sank, and Petard then torpedoed and sank , her second score of the day. and rescued the crews of their sunken sister ships. But Nestor and another British destroyer   were immobilised by shell hits, and were later sunk by Scheer's passing dreadnoughts. Bingham was rescued, and won the Victoria Cross for his leadership in the destroyer action. 

===The Run to the North===
As soon as he himself sighted the vanguard of Scheer's distant battleship line 12 mi away, at 16:40, Beatty turned his battlecruiser force 180, heading north to draw the Germans toward Jellicoe. (position 5). Beatty's withdrawal toward Jellicoe is called the "Run to the North", in which the tables turned and the Germans chased the British. Because Beatty once again failed to signal his intentions adequately, the battleships of the 5th Battle Squadron  which were too far behind to read his flags  found themselves passing the battlecruisers on an opposing course and heading directly toward the approaching main body of the High Seas Fleet. At 16:48, at extreme range, Scheer's leading battleships opened fire. 

Meanwhile, at 16:47, having received Goodenough's signal and knowing that Beatty was now leading the German battlefleet north to him, Jellicoe signalled to his own forces that the fleet action they had waited so long for was finally imminent; at 16:51, by radio, he informed the Admiralty so in London. 

The difficulties of the 5th Battle Squadron were compounded when Beatty gave the order to Evan-Thomas to "turn in succession" (rather than "turn together") at 16:48 as the battleships passed him. Evan-Thomas acknowledged the signal, but Lieutenant-Commander Ralph Seymour, Beatty's flag lieutenant, aggravated the situation when he did not haul down the flags (to execute the signal) for some minutes. At 16:55, when the 5BS had moved within range of the enemy battleships, Evan-Thomas issued his own flag command warning his squadron to expect sudden manoeuvres and to follow his lead, before starting to turn on his own initiative. The order to turn in succession would have resulted in all four ships turning in the same patch of sea as they reached it one by one, giving the High Seas Fleet repeated opportunity with ample time to find the proper range. However, the captain of the trailing ship (HMS Malaya) turned early, mitigating the adverse results. Massie, pp. 600601 

For the next hour, the 5th Battle Squadron acted as Beatty's rearguard, drawing fire from all the German ships within range, while by 17:10 Beatty had deliberately eased his own squadron out of range of Hipper's now-superior battlecruiser force to give his damaged ships a respite from the accurate and deadly fire of his foes. Since visibility and firepower now favoured the Germans, there was no incentive for Beatty to risk further battlecruiser losses when his own gunnery could not be effective. Illustrating the imbalance, Beatty's battlecruisers did not score any hits on the Germans in this phase until 17:45, but they had rapidly received five more before he opened the range (four on Lion, of which three were by Ltzow, and one on Tiger by Seydlitz). Now the only targets the Germans could reach, the ships of the 5th Battle Squadron, received simultaneous fire from Hipper's battlecruisers to the east (which HMS Barham and engaged) and Scheer's leading battleships to the southeast (which and engaged). Three took hits: Barham (four by Derfflinger), Warspite (two by Seydlitz), and Malaya (seven by the German battleships). Only Valiant was unscathed. 

The four battleships were far better suited to take this sort of pounding than the battlecruisers, and none were lost, though Malaya suffered heavy damage, an ammunition fire, and heavy crew casualties. At the same time, the 15 in fire of the four British ships was accurate and effective. As the two British squadrons headed north at top speed, eagerly chased by the entire German fleet, the 5th Battle Squadron scored 13 hits on the enemy battlecruisers (four on Ltzow, three on Derfflinger, six on Seydlitz) and five on battleships (although only one, on , did any serious damage). (position 6).

===The fleets converge===
Jellicoe was now aware that full fleet engagement was nearing, but had insufficient information on the position and course of the Germans. To assist Beatty, early in the battle at about 16:05, Jellicoe had ordered Rear-Admiral Horace Hood's 3rd Battlecruiser Squadron to speed ahead to find and support Beatty's force, and Hood was now racing SSE well in advance of Jellicoe's northern force. Rear-Admiral Arbuthnot's 1st Cruiser Squadron patrolled the van of Jellicoe's main battleship force as it advanced steadily to the southeast.

At 17:33, the armoured cruiser of Arbuthnot's squadron, on the far southwest flank of Jellicoe's force, came within view of , which was about 5 mi ahead of Beatty with the 3rd Light Cruiser Squadron, establishing the first visual link between the converging bodies of the Grand Fleet. At 17:38, the scout cruiser , screening Hood's oncoming battlecruisers, was intercepted by the van of the German scouting forces under Rear-Admiral Bdicker. 

Heavily outnumbered by Bdicker's four light cruisers, Chester was pounded before being relieved by Hood's heavy units, which swung westward for that purpose. Hood's flagship disabled the light cruiser shortly after 17:56. Wiesbaden became a sitting target for most of the British fleet during the next hour, but remained afloat and fired some torpedoes at the passing enemy battleships from long range. Meanwhile, Bdicker's other ships fled toward Hipper and Scheer in the mistaken belief that Hood was leading a larger force of British capital ships from the north and east. A chaotic destroyer action in mist and smoke ensued as German torpedo boats attempted to blunt the arrival of this new formation, but Hood's battlecruisers dodged all the torpedoes fired at them. In this action, after leading a torpedo counterattack, the British destroyer was disabled, but continued to return fire at numerous passing enemy ships for the next hour. 

==The fleet action==

===Deployment===
(1) 18:00 Scouting forces rejoin their respective fleets.(2) 18:15 British fleet deploys into battle line (3) 18:30 German fleet under fire turns away(4) 19:00 German fleet turns back(5) 19:15 German fleet turns away for second time (6) 20:00(7) 21:00 Nightfall: Jellicoe assumes night cruising formation

In the meantime, Beatty and Evan-Thomas had resumed their engagement with Hipper's battlecruisers, this time with the visual conditions to their advantage. With several of his ships damaged, Hipper turned back toward Scheer at around 18:00, just as Beatty's flagship Lion was finally sighted from Jellicoe's flagship Iron Duke. Jellicoe twice demanded the latest position of the German battlefleet from Beatty, who could not see the German battleships and failed to respond to the question until 18:14. Meanwhile, Jellicoe received confused sighting reports of varying accuracy and limited usefulness from light cruisers and battleships on the starboard (southern) flank of his force. 

Jellicoe was in a worrying position. He needed to know the location of the German fleet to judge when and how to deploy his battleships from their cruising formation (six columns of four ships each) into a single battle line. The deployment could be on either the westernmost or the easternmost column, and had to be carried out before the Germans arrived; but early deployment could mean losing any chance of a decisive encounter. Deploying to the west would bring his fleet closer to Scheer, gaining valuable time as dusk approached, but the Germans might arrive before the manoeuvre was complete. Deploying to the east would take the force away from Scheer, but Jellicoe's ships might be able to cross the "T", and visibility would strongly favour British gunnery  Scheer's forces would be silhouetted against the setting sun to the west, while the Grand Fleet would be indistinct against the dark skies to the north and east, and would be hidden by reflection of the low sunlight off intervening haze and smoke. Deployment would take twenty irreplaceable minutes, and the fleets were closing at full speed. In one of the most critical and difficult tactical command decisions of the entire war, Jellicoe ordered deployment to the east at 18:15. 

===Windy Corner===
Meanwhile, Hipper had rejoined Scheer, and the combined High Seas Fleet was heading north, directly toward Jellicoe. Scheer had no indication that Jellicoe was at sea, let alone that he was bearing down from the northwest, and was distracted by the intervention of Hood's ships to his north and east. Beatty's four surviving battlecruisers were now crossing the van of the British dreadnoughts to join Hood's three battlecruisers; at this time, Arbuthnot's flagship, the armoured cruiser , and her squadron-mate both charged across Beatty's bows, and Lion narrowly avoided a collision with Warrior. Nearby, numerous British light cruisers and destroyers on the southwestern flank of the deploying battleships were also crossing each other's courses in attempts to reach their proper stations, often barely escaping collisions, and under fire from some of the approaching German ships. This period of peril and heavy traffic attending the merger and deployment of the British forces later became known as "Windy Corner". Massie, p. 614 

Arbuthnot was attracted by the drifting hull of the crippled Wiesbaden. With Warrior, Defence closed in for the kill, only to blunder right into the gun sights of Hipper's and Scheer's oncoming capital ships. Defence was deluged by heavy-calibre gunfire from many German battleships, which detonated her magazines in a spectacular explosion viewed by most of the deploying Grand Fleet; she sank with all hands (903 officers and men). Warrior was also hit badly, but she was spared destruction by a mishap to the nearby battleship Warspite. Warspite had her steering gear overheat and jam under heavy load at high speed as the 5th Battle Squadron made a turn to the north at 18:19. Steaming at top speed in wide circles, Warspite appeared as a juicy target to the German dreadnoughts and took 13 hits, inadvertently drawing fire from the hapless Warrior. Warspite was brought back under control and survived the onslaught, but was badly damaged, had to reduce speed, and withdrew northward; later (at 21:07), she was ordered back to port by Evan-Thomas. Warspite went on to a long and illustrious career, serving also in World War II. Warrior, on the other hand, was abandoned and sank the next day after her crew was taken off at 08:25 on 1 June by Engadine, which towed the sinking armoured cruiser 100 mi during the night. 

Invincible blowing up after being struck by shells from Lutzow and Derfflinger
As Defence sank and Warspite circled, at about 18:19, Hipper moved within range of Hood's 3rd Battlecruiser Squadron, but was still also within range of Beatty's ships. At first, visibility favoured the British: hit Derfflinger three times and Seydlitz once, while Ltzow quickly took 10 hits from Lion, and Invincible, including two below-waterline hits forward by Invincible that would ultimately doom Hipper's flagship. But at 18:30, Invincible abruptly appeared as a clear target before Ltzow and Derfflinger. The two German ships then fired three salvoes each at Invincible, and sank her in 90 seconds. A 12 in shell from the third salvo struck Invincibles Q-turret amidships, detonating the magazines below and causing her to blow up and sink. All but six of her crew of 1,032 officers and men, including Rear-Admiral Hood, were killed. Of the remaining British battlecruisers, only Princess Royal received heavy-calibre hits at this time (two 12 in by the battleship Markgraf). Ltzow, flooding forward and unable to communicate by radio, was now out of action and began to attempt to withdraw; therefore Hipper left his flagship and transferred to the torpedo boat , hoping to board one of the other battlecruisers later.

===Crossing the T===
By 18:30, the main battlefleet action was joined for the first time, with Jellicoe effectively "crossing Scheer's T". The officers on the lead German battleships, and Scheer himself, were taken completely by surprise when they emerged from drifting clouds of smoky mist to suddenly find themselves facing the massed firepower of the entire Grand Fleet main battle line, which they did not know was even at sea. Jellicoe's flagship Iron Duke quickly scored seven hits on the lead German dreadnought, , but in this brief exchange, which lasted only minutes, as few as 10 of the Grand Fleet's 24 dreadnoughts actually opened fire. The Germans were hampered by poor visibility, in addition to being in an unfavourable tactical position, just as Jellicoe had intended. Realizing he was heading into a death trap, Scheer ordered his fleet to turn and flee at 18:33. Under a pall of smoke and mist, Scheer's forces succeeded in disengaging by an expertly executed 180 turn in unison ("battle about turn to starboard"), which was a well-practiced emergency manoeuvre of the High Seas Fleet. 

Conscious of the risks to his capital ships posed by torpedoes, Jellicoe did not chase directly but headed south, determined to keep the High Seas Fleet west of him. Starting at 18:40, battleships at the rear of Jellicoe's line were in fact sighting and avoiding torpedoes, and at 18:54 was hit by a torpedo (probably from the disabled Wiesbaden), which reduced her speed to 16 kn. Meanwhile, Scheer, knowing that it was not yet dark enough to escape and that his fleet would suffer terribly in a stern chase, doubled back to the east at 18:55. In his memoirs he wrote, "the manoeuvre would be bound to surprise the enemy, to upset his plans for the rest of the day, and if the blow fell heavily it would facilitate the breaking loose at night." But the turn to the east took his ships, again, directly towards Jellicoe's fully deployed battle line. 

Simultaneously, the disabled British destroyer HMS Shark fought desperately against a group of four German torpedo boats and disabled with gunfire, but was eventually torpedoed and sunk at 19:02 by the German destroyer . Sharks Captain Loftus Jones won the Victoria Cross for his heroism in continuing to fight against all odds. 

===Gefechtskehrtwendung===
Commodore Goodenough's 2nd Light Cruiser Squadron dodged the fire of German battleships for a second time to re-establish contact with the High Seas Fleet shortly after 19:00. By 19:15, Jellicoe had crossed Scheer's "T" again. This time his arc of fire was tighter and deadlier, causing severe damage to the German battleships, particularly Rear-Admiral Behncke's leading 3rd Squadron (SMS Konig, , Markgraf, and all being hit, along with of the 1st Squadron), while on the British side, only the battleship was hit (twice, by , but with little damage done). 

At 19:17, for the second time in less than an hour, Scheer turned his outnumbered and outgunned fleet to the west using the "battle about turn" (German: Gefechtskehrtwendung), but this time it was executed only with difficulty, as the High Seas Fleet's lead squadrons began to lose formation under concentrated gunfire. To deter a British chase, Scheer ordered a major torpedo attack by his destroyers and a potentially sacrificial charge by Scouting Group I's four remaining battlecruisers. Hipper was still aboard the torpedo boat G39 and was unable to command his squadron for this attack. Therefore, , under Captain Hartog, led the already badly damaged German battlecruisers directly into "the greatest concentration of naval gunfire any fleet commander had ever faced", at ranges down to 4 mi. In what became known as the "death ride", all the battlecruisers except were hit and further damaged, as 18 of the British battleships fired at them simultaneously. Derfflinger had two main gun turrets destroyed. The crews of Scouting Group I suffered heavy casualties, but survived the pounding and veered away with the other battlecruisers once Scheer was out of trouble and the German destroyers were moving in to attack. In this brief but intense portion of the engagement, from about 19:05 to about 19:30, the Germans sustained a total of 37 heavy hits while inflicting only two; Derfflinger alone received 14. 

While his battlecruisers drew the fire of the British fleet, Scheer slipped away, laying smoke screens. Meanwhile, from about 19:16 to about 19:40, the British battleships were also engaging Scheer's torpedo boats, which executed several waves of torpedo attacks to cover his withdrawal. Jellicoe's ships turned away from the attacks and successfully evaded all 31 of the torpedoes launched at them  though, in several cases, only just barely  and sank the German destroyer . British light forces also sank V48, which had previously been disabled by HMS Shark. This action, and the turn away, cost the British critical time and range in the last hour of daylight  as Scheer intended, allowing him to get his heavy ships out of immediate danger.

The last major exchanges between capital ships in this battle took place just after sunset, from about 20:19 to about 20:35, as the surviving British battlecruisers caught up with their German counterparts, which were briefly relieved by Rear-Admiral Mauve's obsolete pre-dreadnoughts (the German 2nd Squadron). The British received one heavy hit on Princess Royal but scored five more on Seydlitz and three on other German ships. As twilight faded to night and exchanged a few final shots with , neither side could have imagined that the only encounter between British and German dreadnoughts in the entire war was already concluded. 

==Night action and German withdrawal==

At 21:00, Jellicoe, conscious of the Grand Fleet's deficiencies in night fighting, decided to try to avoid a major engagement until early dawn. He placed a screen of cruisers and destroyers 5 mi behind his battle fleet to patrol the rear as he headed south to guard Scheer's expected escape route. Massie, p.637 In reality, Scheer opted to cross Jellicoe's wake and escape via Horns Reef. Luckily for Scheer, most of the light forces in Jellicoe's rearguard failed to report the seven separate encounters with the German fleet during the night; Massie, p.645 Marder p.140-145 the very few radio reports that were sent to the British flagship were never received, possibly because the Germans were jamming British frequencies. Many of the destroyers failed to make the most of their opportunities to attack discovered ships, despite Jellicoe's expectations that the destroyer forces would, if necessary, be able to block the path of the German fleet. Marder p.146 Jellicoe and his commanders did not understand that the furious gunfire and explosions to the north (seen and heard for hours by all the British battleships) indicated that the German heavy ships were breaking through the screen astern of the British fleet. Instead, it was believed that the fighting was the result of night attacks by German destroyers. Marder p. 159 The most powerful British ships of all (the 15-inch-gunned 5th Battle Squadron) directly observed German battleships crossing astern of them in action with British light forces, at ranges of 3 mi or less, and gunners on HMS Malaya made ready to fire, but her captain declined, deferring to the authority of Rear-Admiral Evan-Thomas  and neither commander reported the sightings to Jellicoe, assuming that he could see for himself and that revealing the fleet's position by radio signals or gunfire was unwise.

While the nature of Scheer's escape, and Jellicoe's inaction, indicate the overall German superiority in night fighting, the results of the night action were no more clear-cut than were those of the battle as a whole. In the first of many surprise encounters by darkened ships at point-blank range, Southampton, Commodore Goodenough's flagship, which had scouted so proficiently, was heavily damaged in action with a German Scouting Group composed of light cruisers, but managed to torpedo , which went down at 22:23 with all hands (320 officers and men). 

From 23:20 to approximately 02:15, several British destroyer flotillas launched torpedo attacks on the German battle fleet in a series of violent and chaotic engagements at extremely short range (often under 0.5 mi). At the cost of five destroyers sunk and some others damaged, they managed to torpedo the light cruiser , which sank several hours later, and the pre-dreadnought , which blew up and sank with all hands (839 officers and men) at 03:10 during the last wave of attacks before dawn. Three of the British destroyers collided in the chaos, and the German battleship rammed the British destroyer , blowing away most of the British ship's superstructure merely with the muzzle blast of its big guns, which could not be aimed low enough to hit the ship. Nassau was left with a 11 ft hole in her side, reducing her maximum speed to 15 kn, while the removed plating was left lying on Spitfires deck. Marder p. 142 Spitfire survived and made it back to port. Another German cruiser, , was accidentally rammed by the dreadnought and abandoned, sinking early the next day. Of the British destroyers, , , , and were lost during the night fighting.

Just after midnight on 1 June, and other German battleships sank of the ill-fated 1st Cruiser Squadron, which had blundered into the German battle line. Deployed as part of a screening force several miles ahead of the main force of the Grand Fleet, the Black Prince had lost contact in the darkness and took a position near what she thought was the British line. The Germans soon identified the new addition to its line and opened fire. Overwhelmed by point-blank gunfire, the Black Prince blew up, (857 officers and men - all hands - were lost), as her squadron leader Defence had done hours earlier. Lost in the darkness, the battlecruisers and had similar point-blank encounters with the British battle line and were recognized, but were spared the fate of Black Prince when the captains of the British ships, again, declined to open fire, reluctant to reveal their fleet's position. At 01:45, the sinking battlecruiser Ltzow  fatally damaged by Invincible during the main action  was torpedoed by the destroyer on orders of Ltzows Captain Viktor von Harder after the surviving crew of 1,150 transferred to destroyers that came alongside. At 02:15, the German torpedo boat suddenly had its bow blown off; V2 and V6 came alongside and took off the remaining crew, and the V2 then sank the hulk. Since there was no enemy nearby, it was assumed that she had hit a mine or had been torpedoed by a submarine. Tarrant, German Perspective p245 (claimed), p222 (Arms and Armour paperback edition, 1997) 

At 02:15, five British ships of the 13th Destroyer Flotilla under Captain James Uchtred Farie regrouped and headed south. At 02:25, they sighted the rear of the German line. inquired of the leader as to whether he thought they were British or German ships. Answering that he thought they were German, Farie then veered off to the east and away from the German line. All but Moresby in the rear followed, as through the gloom she sighted what she thought were four pre-dreadnought battleships 2 mi away. She hoisted a flag signal indicating that the enemy was to the west and then closed to firing range, letting off a torpedo set for high running at 02:37, then veering off to rejoin her flotilla. The four pre-dreadnought battleships were in fact two pre-dreadnoughts, Schleswig-Holstein and Schlesien, and the battlecruisers Von der Tann and Derfflinger. Von der Tann sighted the torpedo and was forced to steer sharply to starboard to avoid it as it passed close to her bows. Moresby rejoined Champion convinced she had scored a hit. 

Finally, at 05:20, as Scheer's fleet was safely on its way home, the battleship struck a British mine on her starboard side, killing one man and wounding ten, but was able to make port. Seydlitz, critically damaged and very nearly sinking, barely survived the return voyage: after grounding and taking on even more water on the evening of 1 June, she had to be assisted stern first into port, where she dropped anchor at 07:30 on the morning of 2 June. 

The Germans were helped in their escape by the failure of the British Admiralty in London to pass on seven critical radio intercepts obtained by naval intelligence indicating the true position, course and intentions of the High Seas Fleet during the night. One message was transmitted to Jellicoe at 23:15 that accurately reported the German fleet's course and speed as of 21:14. However, the erroneous signal from earlier in the day that reported the German fleet still in port, and an intelligence signal received at 22:45 giving another unlikely position for the German fleet, had reduced his confidence in intelligence reports. Had the other messages been forwarded, which confirmed the information received at 23:15, or had British ships reported accurately sightings and engagements with German destroyers, cruisers and battleships, then Jellicoe could have altered course to intercept Scheer at the Horns Reef. The unsent intercepted messages had been duly filed by the junior officer left on duty that night, who failed to appreciate their significance. Marder p.148-151 By the time Jellicoe finally learned of Scheer's whereabouts at 04:15, the German was too far away to catch and it was clear that the battle could no longer be resumed.

==The outcome==

===Reporting===
At midday on 2 June German authorities released a press statement claiming a victory, including the destruction of a battleship, two battlecruisers, two armoured cruisers, a light cruiser, a submarine and several destroyers, for the loss of Pommern and Wiesbaden. News that Lutzow, Elbing and Rostock had been scuttled was withheld, on the grounds this information would not be known to the enemy. The victory of the Skagerrak was celebrated in the press, children were given a holiday and the nation celebrated. The Kaiser announced a new chapter in world history. Post-war, the official German history hailed the battle as a victory and it continued to be celebrated until after World War II. Tarrant p.274-276 

In Britain the first official news came from German wireless broadcasts. Ships began to arrive in port, their crews sending messages to friends and relatives both of their survival and the loss of some 6,000 others. Authorities considered suppressing the news, but it had already spread widely. Some crews coming ashore found rumours had already reported them dead to relatives, while others were jeered for the defeat they had suffered. At 7 pm on 2 June the Admiralty released a statement based on information from Jellicoe containing the bare news of losses on each side. The following day British newspapers reported a German victory. Steel & Hart p.418-420 The Daily Mirror described the German Director of the Naval Department telling the Reichstag: "The result of the fighting is a significant success for our forces against a much stronger adversary". The British population was shocked that the long anticipated battle had been a victory for Germany. On 3 June the Admiralty issued a further statement expanding on German losses, and another the following day with exaggerated claims. However, on 7 June the German admission of the losses of Lutzow and Rostock started to redress the sense of the battle as a loss. International perception of the battle began to change towards a qualified British victory, the German attempt to change the balance of power in the North Sea having been repulsed. In July, bad news from the Somme campaign swept concern over Jutland from the British consciousness. Steele & Hart p, 421422 

===Assessments===
SMS Seydlitz was heavily damaged in the battle, hit by twenty-one main calibre shells, several secondary calibre and one torpedo. 98 men were killed and 55 injured.

At Jutland, the Germans, with a 99-strong fleet, sank 115000 LT of British ships, while a 151-strong British fleet sank 62000 LT of German ships. The British lost 6,094 seamen; the Germans 2,551. Several other ships were badly damaged, such as and .

As of the summer of 1916, the High Seas Fleet's strategy was to whittle away the numerical advantage of the Royal Navy by bringing its full strength to bear against isolated squadrons of enemy capital ships whilst declining to be drawn into a general fleet battle until it had achieved something resembling parity in heavy ships. In tactical terms, the High Seas Fleet had clearly inflicted significantly greater losses on the Grand Fleet than it had suffered itself at Jutland and the Germans never had any intention of attempting to hold the site of the battle, so some historians support the German claim of victory at Jutland.

However, Scheer seems to have quickly realised that further battles with a similar rate of attrition would exhaust the High Seas Fleet long before it reduced the Grand Fleet. Further, after the 19 August advance was nearly intercepted by the Grand Fleet, he no longer believed that it would be possible to trap a single squadron of Royal Navy warships without having the Grand Fleet intervene before he could return to port. Therefore the High Seas Fleet abandoned its forays into the North Sea and turned its attention to the Baltic for most of 1917 whilst Scheer switched tactics against Britain to unrestricted submarine warfare in the Atlantic.

At a strategic level the outcome has been the subject of a huge amount of literature with no clear consensus. The battle was widely viewed as indecisive in the immediate aftermath and this view remains influential.

Despite numerical superiority, the British had been disappointed in their hopes for a decisive victory comparable to Trafalgar and the objective of the influential strategic doctrines of Alfred Mahan. The High Seas Fleet survived as a fleet in being. Most of its losses were made good within a month  even Seydlitz, the most badly damaged ship to survive the battle, was repaired by October and officially back in service by November. However, the Germans had failed in their objective of destroying a substantial portion of the British Fleet, and no progress had been made towards the goal of allowing the High Seas Fleet to operate in the Atlantic Ocean.

Subsequently there has been considerable support for the view of Jutland as a strategic victory for the British. While the British had not destroyed the German fleet and had lost more ships than their enemy, the Germans had retreated to harbour; at the end of the battle the British were in command of the area. The German fleet would only sortie into the North Sea thrice more, with a raid on 19 August, one in October 1916 and another in April 1918. Apart from these three abortive operations the High Seas Fleet  unwilling to risk another encounter with the British fleet  confined its activities to the Baltic Sea for the remainder of the war. The British, for their part, also abandoned seeking a decisive action following the 19 August operation; Jellicoe issued an order prohibiting the Grand Fleet from steaming south of the line of Horns Reef owing to the threat of mines and U-boats. Massie, Castles, p. 684 A German naval expert, writing publicly about Jutland in November 1918, commented, "Our Fleet losses were severe. On 1 June 1916 it was clear to every thinking person that this battle must, and would be, the last one". Marder III p.206 citing Captain Persius, Berliner Tageblatt, 18 November 1918 

A crew member of SMS Westfalen

At the end of the battle, the British had maintained their numerical superiority and had 23 dreadnoughts ready and four battlecruisers still able to fight, while the Germans had only 10 dreadnoughts. One month after the battle, the Grand Fleet was stronger than it had been before sailing to Jutland. Warspite was drydocked at Rosyth, returning to the fleet on 22 July, while Malaya was repaired in the floating dock at Invergordon, returning to duty on 11 July. Barham was docked for a month at Devenport before undergoing speed trials and returning to Scapa on 8 July. Princess Royal stayed initially at Rosyth but transferred to drydock at Portsmouth before returning to duty at Rosyth 21 July. Tiger was drydocked at Rosyth and ready for service 2 July. Queen Elizabeth, Emperor of India and , which had been undergoing maintenance at the time of the battle, returned to the fleet immediately, followed shortly after by Resolution and Ramillies. Lion initially remained ready for sea duty despite the damaged turret, then underwent a month's repairs in July when Q turret was removed temporarily and replaced in September. Campbell p.335 

A third view, presented in a number of recent evaluations, is that Jutland, the last major fleet action between battleships, illustrated the irrelevance of battleship fleets following the development of the submarine, mine and torpedo. In this view, the most important consequence of Jutland was the decision of the Germans to engage in unrestricted submarine warfare. Although large numbers of battleships were constructed in the decades between the wars, it has been argued that this outcome reflected the social dominance among naval decision-makers of battleship advocates who constrained technological choices to fit traditional paradigms of fleet action. Battleships played a relatively minor role in World War II, in which the aircraft carrier emerged as the dominant offensive weapon of naval warfare. 

===British self-critique===
The official British Admiralty examination of the Grand Fleet's performance recognised two main problems:
* British armour-piercing shells exploded outside the German armour rather than penetrating and exploding within. As a result, some German ships with only 8 in-thick armour survived hits from 15 in projectiles. Had these shells penetrated the armour and then exploded, German losses would probably have been far greater.
* Communication between ships and the British commander-in-chief were comparatively poor. For most of the battle, Jellicoe had no idea where the German ships were, even though British ships were in contact. They failed to report enemy positions, contrary to the Grand Fleet's Battle Plan. Some of the most important signalling was carried out solely by flag instead of wireless or using redundant methods to ensure communicationsa questionable procedure, given the mixture of haze and smoke that obscured the battlefield, and a foreshadowing of similar failures by habit-bound and conservatively minded professional officers of rank to take advantage of new technology in World War II.

====Shell performance====
German armour-piercing shells were far more effective than the British ones, which often failed to penetrate heavy armour. Campbell, pp. 386387 The issue particularly concerned shells striking at oblique angles, which became increasingly the case at long range. Marder III p.170 Germany had adopted trinitrotoluene (TNT) as the explosive filler for artillery shells in 1902, while the United Kingdom was still using a picric acid mixture (Lyddite). The shock of impact of a shell against armour often prematurely detonated Lyddite in advance of fuze function while TNT detonation could be delayed until after the shell had penetrated and the fuze had functioned in the vulnerable area behind the armour plate. Brown, pp.151152 

The issue of poorly performing shells had been known to Jellicoe, who as third sea lord from 1908 to 1910 had ordered new shells to be designed. However, the matter had not been followed through after his posting to sea and new shells had never been thoroughly tested. 'Castles' p.61. Beatty discovered the problem at a party aboard Lion a short time after the battle, when a Swedish Naval officer was present. He had recently visited Berlin, where the German navy had scoffed at how British shells had broken up on their ships' armour. 'Castles' p. 668 The question of shell effectiveness had also been raised after the Battle of Dogger Bank, but no action had been taken. Marder III p.171 Hipper later commented, "It was nothing but the poor quality of their bursting charges which saved us from disaster". 'Castles' p. 671 citing Marder Vol. III p.81 

Admiral Dreyer, writing later about the battle, during which he had been captain of the British flagship Iron Duke, estimated that effective shells as later introduced would have led to the sinking of six more German capital ships, based upon the actual number of hits achieved in the battle. Marder p. 169 The system of testing shells, which remained in use up to 1944, meant that, statistically, a batch of shells of which 70% were faulty stood an even chance of being accepted. Indeed, even shells that failed this relatively mild test had still been issued to ships. Analysis of the test results afterwards by the Ordnance Board suggested the likelihood that 3070% of shells would not have passed the standard penetration test specified by the Admiralty. 

Efforts to replace the shells were initially resisted by the Admiralty, and action was not taken until Jellicoe became First Sea Lord in December 1916. As an initial response, the worst of the existing shells were withdrawn from ships in early 1917 and replaced from reserve supplies. Marder III, p.215 New shells were designed, but did not arrive until April 1918, and were never used in action. 

====Battlecruiser losses====
The British battlecruisers were designed to chase and destroy enemy cruisers from a range at which these ships could not reply. They were not designed to be ships of the line and exchange broadsides with the enemy. Although one German and three British battlecruisers were sunk, none of them were destroyed by enemy shells penetrating the belt armour and detonating the magazines; each of the British battlecruisers was penetrated through a turret roof and her magazines ignited by flash fires passing through the turret and shell-handling rooms. Ltzow sustained 24 hits and her flooding could not be contained. She was eventually sunk by her escorts' torpedoes after her crew had been safely removed. Derfflinger and Seydlitz sustained 22 hits each but reached port (although in Seydlitzs case only just). 

Jellicoe and Beatty, as well as other senior officers, gave an impression that the loss of the battlecruisers was caused by weak armour, despite reports by two committees and earlier statements by Jellicoe and other senior officers that Cordite and its management were to blame. This led to calls for armour to be increased, and an additional 1 in was placed over the relatively thin decks above magazines. To compensate for the increase in weight, ships had to carry correspondingly less fuel, water and other supplies. Whether or not thin deck armour was a potential weakness of British ships, the battle provided no evidence that it was the case. At least amongst the surviving ships, no enemy shell was found to have penetrated deck armour anywhere. Marder III p.218 The design of a new battlecruiser (which had started building at the time of the battle) was altered to give her 5000 LT of additional armour. Marder III p. 219 

====Ammunition handling====
British and German propellant charges differed in packaging, handling, and chemistry. The British propellant was of two types, MK1 and MD. The Mark 1 cordite had a formula of 37% nitrocellulose, 58% nitroglycerine, and 5% petroleum jelly. It was a good propellant but burned hot and caused an erosion problem in gun barrels. The petroleum jelly served as both a lubricant and a stabilizer. Cordite MD was developed to reduce barrel wear, its formula being 65% nitrocellulose, 30% nitroglycerine, and 5% petroleum jelly. While cordite MD solved the gun-barrel erosion issue, it did nothing to improve its storage properties, which were poor. Cordite was very sensitive to variations of temperature, and acid propagation/cordite deterioration would take place at a very rapid rate. Cordite MD also shed micro-dust particles of nitrocellulose and iron pyrite. While cordite propellant was manageable, it required a vigilant gunnery officer, strict cordite lot control, and frequent testing of the cordite lots in the ships' magazines. 

British cordite propellant (when uncased and exposed in the silk bag) tended to burn violently, causing uncontrollable "flash fires" when ignited by nearby shell hits. In 1945, a test was conducted by the U.S.N. Bureau of Ordnance (Bulletin of Ordnance Information, No.245, pp. 5460) testing the sensitivity of Cordite to then-current U.S. Naval propellant powders against a measurable and repeatable flash source. It found that cordite would ignite at 530 mm/22" from the flash and the current U.S. powder at 120 mm, /5" the U.S. flashless powder at 25 mm./1" This meant that about 75 times the propellant would immediately ignite when exposed to flash, as compared to the U.S. powder. British ships had inadequate protection against these flash fires. German propellant (RP C/12, handled in brass cartridge cases) was less vulnerable and less volatile in composition. Campbell, pp. 377378 German propellants show that they were not that different in composition from corditewith one major exception: centralite. This was symmetrical Diethyl Diphenyl Urea, which served as a stabilizer that was superior to the petroleum jelly used in British practice. It stored better and burned but did not explode. Stored and used in brass cases, it proved much less sensitive to flash. RP C/12  64.13% nitrocellulose, 29.77% nitroglycerine, 5.75% centralite, 0.25% magnesium oxide and 0.10% graphite. 

The Royal Navy Battle Cruiser Fleet had also emphasized speed in ammunition handling over established safety protocol. In practice drills, cordite could not be supplied to the guns rapidly enough through the hoists and hatches. To bring up the propellant in good time to load for the next broadside, many safety doors were kept open that should have been shut to safeguard against flash fires. Bags of cordite were also stocked and kept locally, creating a total breakdown of safety design features. By staging charges in the chambers between the gun turret and magazine, the Royal Navy enhanced their rate of fire but left their ships vulnerable to chain reaction ammunition fires and magazine explosions. Campbell, pp. 371372 This 'bad safety habit' carried over into real battle practices. Furthermore, the doctrine of a high rate of fire also led to the decision in 1913 to increase the supply of shells and cordite held on the British ships by 50%, for fear of running out of ammunition. When this exceeded the capacity of the ships' magazines, cordite was stored in insecure places. 

The British cordite charges were stored two silk bags to a metal cylindrical container, with a 16-oz gunpowder igniter charge, which was covered with a thick paper wad, four charges being used on each projectile. The gun crews were removing the charges from their containers and removing the paper covering over the gunpowder igniter charges. The effect of having eight loads at the ready was to have 4 ST of exposed explosive, with each charge leaking small amounts of gunpowder from the igniter bags. In effect, the gun crews had laid an explosive train from the turret to the magazines, and one shell hit to a battlecruiser turret was enough to end a ship. British Battlecruisers 191418, Lawrence Burr, Tony Bryan p.41-42 

A diving expedition during the summer of 2003 provided corroboration of this practice. It examined the wrecks of Invincible, Queen Mary, Defence, and Ltzow to investigate the cause of the British ships' tendency to suffer from internal explosions. From this evidence, a major part of the blame may be laid on lax handling of the cordite propellant for the shells of the main guns. The wreck of the Queen Mary revealed cordite containers stacked in the working chamber of the X turret instead of the magazine. British Battlecruisers 191418, Lawrence Burr, Tony Bryan p.43 

There was a further difference in the propellant itself. While the German RP C/12 burned when exposed to fire, it did not explode, as opposed to cordite. RP C/12 was extensively studied by the British and, after World War I, would form the basis of the later Cordite SC. 

The memoirs of Alexander Grant, Gunner on Lion, suggest that some British officers were aware of the dangers of careless handling of cordite:

Grant had already introduced measures onboard Lion to limit the number of cartridges kept outside the magazine and to ensure doors were kept closed, probably contributing to her survival. marder III p.174 

On 5 June 1916, the First Lord of the Admiralty advised Cabinet Members that the three battlecruisers had been lost due to unsafe cordite management. British Battlecruisers 191418, Lawrence Burr, Tony Bryan p.40 

On 22 November 1916, following detailed interviews of the survivors of the destroyed battlecruisers, the Third Sea Lord, Rear Admiral Tudor, issued a report detailing the stacking of charges by the gun crews in the handling rooms to speed up loading of the guns. 

After the battle, the B.C.F. Gunnery Committee issued a report (at the command of Admiral David Beatty) advocating immediate changes in flash protection and charge handling. It reported, among other things, that:
* Some vent plates in magazines allowed flash into the magazines and should be retro-fitted to a new standard.
* Bulkheads in HMS Lions magazine showed buckling from fire under pressure (overpressure)  despite being flooded and therefore supported by water pressure  and must be made stronger.
* Doors opening inward to magazines were an extreme danger.
* Current designs of turrets could not eliminate flash from shell bursts in the turret from reaching the handling rooms.
* Ignition pads must not be attached to charges but instead be placed just before ramming.
* Better methods must be found for safe storage of ready charges than the current method.
* Some method for rapidly drowning charges already in the handling path must be devised.
* Handling scuttles (special flash-proof fittings for moving propellant charges through ship's bulkheads), designed to handle overpressure, must be fitted. http://www.dreadnoughtproject.org/tfs/index.php/Advance_Report_of_B.C.F._Gunnery_Committee Advance Report of B.C.F. Gunnery Committee 

The United States Navy in 1939 had quantities of Cordite N, a Canadian propellant that was much improved, yet its Bureau of Ordnance objected strongly to its use onboard U.S. warships, considering it unsuitable as a naval propellant due to its inclusion of nitroglycerin. 

====Gunnery====
British gunnery control systems, based on Dreyer tables, were well in advance of the German ones, as demonstrated by the proportion of main calibre hits made on the German fleet. Because of its demonstrated advantages, it was installed on ships progressively as the war went on, had been fitted to a majority of British capital ships by May, 1916, and had been installed on the main guns of all but two of the Grand Fleet's capital ships. Brooks p.224 The Royal Navy used centralised fire control systems on their capital ships, directed from a point high up on the ship where the fall of shells could best be seen, utilising a director sight for both training and elevating the guns. In contrast, the German battlecruisers controlled the fire of turrets using a training-only director, which also did not fire the guns at once. The rest of the German capital ships were without even this innovation. German range-finding equipment was generally superior to the British 9 ft FT24, as its operators were trained to a higher standard due to the complexity of the Zeiss 3 m rangefinders. Their stereoscopic design meant that in certain conditions they could range on a target enshrouded by smoke. Brooks, pp. 221222 The German equipment was not superior in range to the British Barr & Stroud 15 ft rangefinder found in the newest British capital ships, and, unlike the British rangefinders, the German rangetakers had to be replaced as often as every thirty minutes, as their eyesight became impaired, affecting the ranges provided to their gunnery equipment. Brooks, p. 223 

The results of the battle confirmed the value of firing guns by centralised director. The battle prompted the Royal Navy to install director firing systems in cruisers and destroyers, where it had not thus far been used, and for secondary armament on battleships. Marder III p.213-214 

German ships were considered to have been quicker in determining the correct range to targets, thus obtaining an early advantage. The British used a 'bracket system', whereby a salvo was fired at the best-guess range and, depending where it landed, the range was progressively corrected up or down until successive shots were landing in front of and behind the enemy. The Germans used a 'ladder system', whereby an initial volley of three shots at different ranges was used, with the centre shot at the best-guess range. The ladder system allowed the gunners to get ranging information from the three shots more quickly than the bracket system, which required waiting between shots to see how the last had landed. British ships adopted the German system. Marder III p.166, 214 

It was determined that 9 ft rangefinders of the sort issued to most British ships were not adequate at long range and did not perform as well as the 15 ft rangefinders on some of the most modern ships. In 1917, rangefinders of base lengths of 25 and were introduced on the battleships to improve accuracy. Marder p. 215 

====Signalling====
Throughout the battle, British ships experienced difficulties with communications, whereas the Germans did not suffer such problems. The British preferred signalling using ship-to-ship flag and lamp signals, avoiding wireless, whereas the Germans used wireless successfully. One conclusion drawn was that flag signals were not a satisfactory way to control the fleet. Experience using lamps, particularly at night when issuing challenges to other ships, demonstrated this was an excellent way to advertise your precise location to an enemy, inviting a reply by gunfire. Recognition signals by lamp, once seen, could also easily be copied in future engagements. Marder III p.175-176 

British ships both failed to report engagements with the enemy but also, in the case of cruisers and destroyers, failed to actively seek out the enemy. A culture had arisen within the fleet of not acting without orders, which could prove fatal when any circumstances prevented orders being sent or received. Commanders failed to engage the enemy because they believed other, more senior officers must also be aware of the enemy nearby, and would have given orders to act if this was expected. Wireless, the most direct way to pass messages across the fleet (although it was being jammed by German ships), was avoided either for perceived reasons of not giving away the presence of ships or for fear of cluttering up the airwaves with unnecessary reports. Marder III p.176-178 

====Fleet Standing Orders====
Naval operations were governed by standing orders issued to all the ships. These attempted to set out what ships should do in all circumstances, particularly in situations where ships would have to react without referring to higher authority, or when communications failed. A number of changes were introduced as a result of experience gained in the battle.

A new signal was introduced instructing squadron commanders to act independently as they thought best while still supporting the main fleet, particularly for use when circumstances would make it difficult to send detailed orders. The description stressed that this was not intended to be the only time commanders might take independent action, but was intended to make plain times when they definitely should. Similarly, instructions on what to do if the fleet was instructed to take evasive action against torpedoes were amended. Commanders were given discretion that if their part of the fleet was not under immediate attack, they should continue engaging the enemy rather than turning away with the rest of the fleet. In this battle, when the fleet turned away from Scheer's destroyer attack covering his retreat, not all the British ships had been affected, and could have continued to engage the enemy. MarderIII p.222 

A number of opportunities to attack enemy ships by torpedo had presented themselves but had been missed. All ships, not just the destroyers armed principally with torpedoes but also battleships, were reminded that they carried torpedoes intended to be used whenever an opportunity arose. Destroyers were instructed to close the enemy fleet to fire torpedoes as soon as engagements between the main ships on either side would keep enemy guns busy directed at larger targets. Destroyers should also be ready to immediately engage enemy destroyers if they should launch an attack, endeavouring to disrupt their chances of launching torpedoes and keep them away from the main fleet. Marder III p.224-225 

To add some flexibility when deploying for attack, a new signal was provided for deploying the fleet to the centre, rather than as previously only either to left or right of the standard closed-up formation for travelling. The fast and powerful 5th Battle Squadron was moved to the front of the cruising formation so it would have the option of deploying left or right depending upon the enemy position. In the event of engagements at night, although the fleet still preferred to avoid night fighting, a destroyer and cruiser squadron would be specifically detailed to seek out the enemy and launch destroyer attacks. Marder III p.226 

==Controversy==
At the time, Jellicoe was criticised for his caution and for allowing Scheer to escape. Massie, p. 631 Beatty, in particular, was convinced that Jellicoe had missed a tremendous opportunity to annihilate the High Seas Fleet Massie, p. 670 and win what would amount to another Trafalgar. Jellicoe was promoted away from active command to become First Sea Lord, the professional head of the Royal Navy, while Beatty replaced him as commander of the Grand Fleet.

The controversy raged within the navy and in public for about a decade after the war. Criticism focused on Jellicoe's decision at 19:15. Scheer had ordered his cruisers and destroyers forward in a torpedo attack to cover the turning away of his battleships. Jellicoe chose to turn to the southeast, and so keep out of range of the torpedoes. If, instead, he had turned to the west, could his ships have dodged the torpedoes and destroyed the German fleet? Supporters of Jellicoe, including the historian Cyril Falls, pointed to the folly of risking defeat in battle when you already have command of the sea. Jellicoe himself, in a letter to the Admiralty months before the battle, had stated that he intended to turn his fleet away from any mass torpedo attack (that being the universally accepted proper tactical response to such attacks, practiced by all the major navies of the world ), and that in the event of a fleet engagement in which the enemy turned away he would assume that the intention was to draw him over mines or submarines and that he would decline to be so drawn. The Admiralty approved this plan and expressed full confidence in Jellicoe at the time (October 1914). Massie, p. 632 

The stakes were high, the pressure on Jellicoe immense, and his caution certainly understandable. His judgment might have been that even 90% odds in favour were not good enough to bet the British Empire. The former First Lord of the Admiralty Winston Churchill said of the battle that Jellicoe "was the only man on either side who could have lost the war in an afternoon." Jellicoe was aware of the ammunition problem, as he had tried to improve it at an earlier time. He was probably also aware of the ammunition vulnerability and other qualitative differences.

The criticism of Jellicoe also fails to sufficiently credit Scheer, who was determined to preserve his fleet by avoiding the full British battle line, and who showed great skill in effecting his escape. 

===Beatty's actions===
On the other hand, some of Jellicoe's supporters condemned the actions of Beatty for the British failure to achieve a complete victory. Although Beatty was undeniably brave, his mismanagement of the initial encounter with Hipper's squadron and the High Seas Fleet cost considerable advantage in the first hours of the battle. His most glaring failure was in not providing Jellicoe with periodic information on the position, course, and speed of the High Seas Fleet. Beatty, aboard the battlecruiser Lion, left behind the four fast battleships of the 5th Battle Squadron  the most powerful warships in the world at the time  engaging with six ships when better control would have given him 10 against Hipper's five. Though Beatty's larger 13.5 in guns outranged Hipper's 11 and guns by thousands of yards, Beatty held his fire for 10 minutes and closed the enemy squadron until within range of the Germans' superior gunnery, under lighting conditions that favoured the Germans. Most of the British losses in tonnage occurred in Beatty's force.

==Losses==
1916 German propaganda postcard, comparing nearly accurate data of the adversaries' losses. 

The total loss of life was 9,823 men, of which the British losses were 6,784 and German losses were 3,039. Brewers Dictionary of 20th Century Phrase and Fable 

===British===
113,300 tons sunk: 
* Battlecruisers , , 
* Armoured cruisers , , 
* Flotilla leaders 
* Destroyers , , , , , , 

===German===
62,300 tons sunk: 
* Battlecruiser 
* Pre-Dreadnought 
* Light cruisers , , , 
* Destroyers (Heavy torpedo-boats) , , , , 

==Selected honours==
The Victoria Cross is the highest military decoration awarded for valour "in the face of the enemy" to members of the British Empire armed forces. The Ordre pour le Mrite was the Kingdom of Prussia and consequently the German Empire's highest military order until the end of the First World War.

===Pour le Mrite===
* Franz Hipper ()
* Reinhard Scheer ()

===Victoria Cross===
* The Hon. Edward Barry Stewart Bingham ()
* John Travers Cornwell ()
* Francis John William Harvey ()
* Loftus William Jones ()

==Status of the survivors and wrecks==
In the years following the battle the wrecks were slowly discovered. was found by the Royal Navy minesweeper in 1919. After the Second World War some of the wrecks seem to have been commercially salvaged. For instance, the Hydrographic Office record for SMS Ltzow (No.32344) shows that salvage operations were taking place on the wreck in 1960. In 20002001 a series of diving expeditions involving veteran shipwreck historian and archaeologist Innes McCartney located the wrecks of , and . It was discovered that , too had been ripped apart by salvors at some currently unknown time. In 2003 McCartney led a detailed survey of the wrecks for the Channel 4 documentary "Clash of the Dreadnoughts". The film examined the last minutes of the lost ships and revealed for the first time how both 'P' and 'Q' turrets of had been blasted out of the ship and tossed into the sea before she broke in half. On the 90th anniversary of the battle, in 2006, the UK Ministry of Defence belatedly announced that the 14 British vessels lost in the battle were being designated as protected places under the Protection of Military Remains Act.

The last surviving veteran of the battle, Henry Allingham, a British RAF (originally RNAS) airman, died on 18 July 2009, aged 113, by which time he was the oldest documented man in the world and one of the last surviving veterans of the whole war. Also among the combatants was the then 20-year-old Prince Albert, second in the line to the British throne, who would serve as King George VI of the United Kingdom from 1936 until his death in 1952. He served as a junior officer in the Royal Navy. 

In 2013, one ship from the battle survives and is still afloat, the light cruiser . Decommissioned in 2011, she is docked at the Royal Naval Reserve depot in Belfast, Northern Ireland.

==Remembrance==
The Battle of Jutland was annually celebrated as a great victory by the right wing in Weimar Germany. This "victory" was used to repress the memory of the German navy's initiation of the German Revolution of 19181919, as well as the memory of the defeat in World War I in general. (The celebrations of the Battle of Tannenberg played a similar role in the Weimar Republic.) This is especially true for the city of Wilhelmshaven, where wreath-laying ceremonies and torch-lit parades were performed until the end of the 1960s. Gtz: Remembering the Battle, p. 360 

==See also==

* List of the largest artificial non-nuclear explosions

==References==
;Explanatory notes

;Citations

;Bibliography
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* Morison, Samuel E. Leyte, June 1944; History of United States Naval Operations in World War II. 1956. Little & Brown.
* 
* 
* (note:Tarrant makes all time references in German time, one hour ahead of times used in article)

;Further reading

* 
* 
* 
* H.W. Fawcett & G.W.W. Hooper, RN (editors), The fighting at Jutland (abridged edition); the personal experiences of forty-five officers and men of the British Fleet London: MacMillan & Co, 1921
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 

==External links==

* Beatty's official report
* Jellicoe's official despatch
* Jellicoe, extract from The Grand Fleet, published 1919
* World War I Naval Combat - Despatches
* Scheer, Germany's High Seas Fleet in the World War, published 1920
* Henry Allingham Last known survivor of the Battle of Jutland
* Jutland Casualties Listed by Ship
* Some Original Documents from the British Admiralty, Room 40, regarding the Battle of Jutland: Photocopies from The National Archives, Kew, Richmond, UK.

;Notable accounts
* by Rudyard Kipling Retrieved 2009-10-31.
* by Alexander Grant, a gunner aboard HMS Lion
* A North Sea diary, 19141918, by Stephen King-Hall, a junior officer on the light cruiser 
* by Moritz von Egidy, captain of SMS Seydlitz
* by Richard Foerster, gunnery officer on Seydlitz
* by Georg von Hase, gunnery officer on Derfflinger

:(Note: Due to the time difference, entries in some of the German accounts are one hour ahead of the times in this article.)

 



[[Bambara language]]

The historic extent of the Bambara people.

Bambara, also known as Bamana, and Bamanankan by speakers of the language, is a language spoken in Mali, and to a lesser extent Burkina Faso and Senegal, by as many as six million people (including second language users). The Bambara language is the language of people of the Bambara ethnic group, numbering about 4,000,000 people, but serves also as a lingua franca in Mali (it is estimated that about 80 percent of the population speak it as a first or second language). It is a subjectobjectverb language and has two tones.

==Classification==
Bambara is a language/dialect of the Manding language cluster, a cluster of languages whose ethnic-speakers generally trace their cultural history to the ancient city of Manding, where modern-day Kita, Mali now exists. http://mandelang.kunstkamera.ru/files/mandelang/mandekan.pdf Bambara is classified as part of the larger, very broad Mand group. Dialects of Manding are generally considered (among native speakers) to be mutually intelligible &ndash; dependent on exposure or familiarity with dialects between speakers &ndash; and spoken by approximately 20 million people in the countries Burkina Faso, Senegal, Guinea Bissau, Guinea, Liberia, Ivory Coast and the Gambia. http://www.sil.org/SILESR/2000/2000-003/Manding/Manding.htm 

==Alphabet and literature==
It uses seven vowels and (the letters approximate their IPA equivalents).
Writing was introduced during the French occupation and literacy is limited, especially in rural areas. Although written literature is only slowly evolving (due to the predominance of French as the "language of the educated"), there exists a wealth of oral literature, which is often tales of kings and heroes. This oral literature is mainly tradited by the "Griots" (Jliw in Bambara) who are a mixture of storytellers, praise singers and human history books who have studied the trade of singing and reciting for many years. Many of their songs are very old and are said to date back to the old kingdom of Mali.

==Geographical distribution==
Bambara is spoken throughout Mali as a lingua franca. The language is most widely spoken in the areas east, south, and northeast of Bamako, where native speakers and/or those that identify as members of the Bambara ethnic group are most densely populated. These regions are also usually considered to be the historical geographical origin of Bambara people, particularly Segou, Sikasso, after diverging from other Manding groups. http://www.sil.org/SILESR/2000/2000-003/Manding/Bamana.htm 

==Sub-dialects==
The main sub-dialect is standard Bamara, which has significant influence from Western Maninkakan. Bambara has many local dialects. Some dialect variants: Somono, Segou, San, Beledugu, Ganadugu, Wasulu and Sikasso. http://www.ethnologue.com/language/bam 

==Writing==
Since the 1970s Bambara has mostly been written in the Latin script, using some additional phonetic characters. The vowels are a, e, (formerly ), i, o, (formerly ), u; accents can be used to indicate tonality. The former digraph ny is now written or  (in Senegal). The ambiguous digraph "ng" represented both the sound of English "finger" and the sound of "singer". The 1966 Bamako spelling conventions render the latter sound as "".

The N'Ko () alphabet is a script devised by Solomana Kante in 1949 as a writing system for the Manding languages of West Africa; NKo means 'I say' in all Manding languages. Kante created NKo in response to what he felt were beliefs that Africans were a "cultureless people" since prior to this time there had been no indigenous African writing system for his language. N'ko came first into use in Kankan, Guinea as a Maninka alphabet and disseminated from there into other Manding-speaking parts of West Africa. N'ko and the Arabic script are still in use for Bambara, although the Latin script is much more common.

==Grammar==
Bambara belongs to a group of closely related languages called Manding (related to Mandinka, Mande language group). It is an SOV language and has two (mid/standard and high) tones; e.g. sa 'death' vs. s 'snake.' The typical argument structure of the language consists of a subject, followed by an aspectival auxiliary, followed by the direct object, and finally a transitive verb. Naturally, if the verb is intransitive, the direct object is not found.

Bambara does not inflect for gender. Gender for a noun can be specified by adding a suffix, -ce or -ke for male and -muso for female. The plural is formed by attaching -w to words.

Bambara uses postpositions in much the same manner as languages like English and French use prepositions. These postpositions are found after the verb and are used to express direction, location, and in some cases, possession.

===Loan words===
In urban areas, many Bambara conjunctions have been replaced in everyday use by French borrowings that often mark code-switches. The Bamako dialect makes use of sentences like: N taara Kita mais il n'y avait personne l-bas. : I went to Kita but there was no one there . The sentence in Bambara alone would be . The French proposition "est-ce que" is also used in Bambara; however, it is pronounced more slowly and as three syllables, .

Bambara uses many French loan words. For example, some people might say:
: "Your skirt is yellow" (using a derivation of the French word for yellow, jaune.)

However, one could also say:
, also meaning "your skirt is yellow." The original Bambara word for yellow comes from "neremugu," being flour (mugu) made from nr (locust bean), a seed from a long seed pod. Neremugu is often used in sauces in Southern Mali.

Most French loan words are suffixed with the sound 'i'; this is particularly common when using French words which have a meaning not traditionally found in Mali. For example, the Bambara word for snow is niegei, based on the French word for snow neige. As there has never been snow in Mali, there has not been a traditional meaning for the word and thus no unique word in Bambara to describe it.

===Examples===
;
:I understand/hear a little bit of Bambara (lit: I aux positive Bambara hear small-small)

;?
:Aren't you going to eat? (lit: you aux negative future eating do question particle)

;
:Is Dou Mara still living in the USA? (lit: Dou Mara still America in live question particle)
Macire nana MALI la wa ? (did Macire come to Mali?)

; 
:I will beat you (lit:I will beat you)

==Music==
Malian artists such as Oumou Sangar, Rokia Traor, Ali Farka Tour, Salif Keita, Habib Koit, and the blind couple Amadou & Mariam often sing in Bambara. Ada of the band Mtisse often sings in Dioula, as does Mory Kante, born in Guinea to a Malian mother; his most famous song to date is "Yeke Yeke" (Alpha Blondy). Lyrics in Bambara occur on Stevie Wonder's soundtrack Journey through the Secret Life of Plants.
Tiken Jah Fakoly (reggae) often sings in Dioula and French.

Additionally, in 2010, Spanish rock group Dover released their 7th studio album I Ka Ken with the majority of lyrics in the language.

==References==

==Bibliography==
*Bird, Charles, Hutchison, John & Kant, Mamadou (1976) An Ka Bamanankan Kalan: Beginning Bambara. Bloomington: Indiana Univ. Linguistics Club.
*Bird, Charles & Kant, Mamadou (1977) Bambara-English, English-Bambara student lexicon. Bloomington: Indiana Univ. Linguistics Club.
*Kastenholz, Raimund (1998) Grundkurs Bambara (Manding) mit Texten (second revised edition) (Afrikawissenschaftliche Lehrbcher Vol. 1). Kln: Rdiger Kppe.
*Konar, Demba (1998) Je parle bien bamanan. Bamako: Jamana.
*Morales, Jos (2010) J'apprends le bambara. 61 conversations, (book + CD-ROM). Paris: Editions Karthala. ISBN 2-8111-0433-X
*Tour, Mohamed & Leucht, Melanie (1996) Bambara Lesebuch: Originaltexte mit deutscher und franzsischer bersetzung = Chrestomathie Bambara: textes originaux Bambara avec traductions allemandes et franaises (with illustrations by Melanie Leucht) (Afrikawissenschaftliche Lehrbcher Vol. 11) . Kln: Rdiger Kppe.

==External links==

*Map of Bamanakan language (or Bambara) from the LL-Map Project

===Descriptions===
*Mali  History  Language

===Dictionaries===
*Bambara entries (>2300) in the French Wiktionary
*Bambara-French-English dictionary online and downloadable lexicons for language learners
*Bambara tree names (scientific name -> common name)

===Learning materials===
*Online Bambara Course from the Indiana University
* on peacecorps.gov

===Other===
*Bambara at French Wikibooks contains more material
*
*Mandenkan Journal
*PanAfriL10n page on Manding (includes information on Bambara)
*Maneno in Bambara (a blogging platform with a full Bambara interface)



[[Baku]]

Baku (, ) is the capital and largest city of Azerbaijan, as well as the largest city on the Caspian Sea and of the Caucasus region. Baku is located 28 m below sea level, which makes it the lowest lying national capital in the world. Baku is also the largest city in the world located below sea level. It is located on the southern shore of the Absheron Peninsula, which projects into the Caspian Sea. The city consists of two principal parts: the downtown area and the old Inner City (21.5 ha). At the beginning of 2009, Baku's urban population was estimated at just over two million people. Officially, about 25 percent of all inhabitants of the country live in Baku's metropolitan area.

Baku is divided into eleven administrative districts (raions) and 48 townships. Among these are the townships on islands in the Baku Bay and the town of Oil Rocks built on stilts in the Caspian Sea, 60 km away from Baku. The Inner City of Baku along with the Shirvanshah's Palace and Maiden Tower were inscribed as a UNESCO World Heritage Site in 2000. According to the Lonely Planet's ranking, Baku is also among the world's top ten destinations for urban nightlife. 

The city is the scientific, cultural and industrial center of Azerbaijan. Many sizeable Azerbaijani institutions have their headquarters there, including SOCAR, one of the world's top 100 companies and others. The Baku International Sea Trade Port, sheltered by the islands of the Baku Archipelago to the east and the Absheron Peninsula to the north, is capable of handling two million tons of general and dry bulk cargoes per year. Baku hosted the 57th Eurovision Song Contest in 2012 and will host the 2015 European Games.

==Etymology==

The name Baku is widely believed to be derived from the old Persian names of the city - Bd-kube, meaning "Wind-pounded city", in which bd means "wind" and kube is rooted in the verb  kubidan, "to pound", thus referring to a place where wind is strong and pounding. Indeed, the city is renowned for its fierce winter snow storms and harsh winds. This is also reflected in the city's nickname as the "City of Winds". A less probable folk etymology explains the name as deriving from Baghkuy, meaning "God's town". Baga (now  bagh) and kuy) are the Old Persian words for "god" and "town" respectively; the name Baghkuy may be compared with Baghdd ("God-given") in which dd is the Old Persian word for "give". Arabic sources refer to the city as Baku, Bakukh, Bakuya, and Bakuye, all of which seem to come from a Persian name.

Various different politically motivated hypotheses have been also proposed to explain the etymology of the word Baku to suit a given political agenda . According to L.G.Lopatinski  .. O    . , 1909 and Ali Huseynzade, .The Name Baku for example, Baku is derived from Turkic word for "hill". Caucasian history specialist Kerope Patkanov also explains the name as "hill" but in the Lak language. The Turkish Islamic Encyclopedia presents the origin of the word Baku as being derived from the words Bey-Kyoy, which mean "the main city" in Turkic. Another theory suggests that the name Baku is derived from the ancient Caucasian Albanian city which was called Baguan.

==History==

Baku, 1861(Muhammad Mosque)
Baku, 1861(Caspian shore)
Maiden Tower

The first written evidence for Baku dates to the 1st century AD. 

The city became important after an earthquake destroyed Shamakhy in the 12th century, when the ruling Shirvanshah, Akhsitan I, chose Baku as the new capital. In 1501, Safavid Shah Ismail I laid siege to Baku and captured it, making it an integral part of his empire for the next centuries to come. At this time the city was enclosed within the lines of strong walls, which were washed by the sea on one side and protected by a wide trench on land. In 1540 Baku was again captured by the Safavid troops. In 1578 Ottomans captured Baku and held it till 1603, when it was again put under Persian control. Cities of the Middle East and North Africa: A Historical Encyclopedia - Google Books In 1604 the Baku fortress was destroyed by Safavid Shah Abbas I.

On 26 June 1723, after a long siege and cannon fire, Baku surrendered to the Russians. According to Peter the Great's decree the soldiers of two regiments (2,382 people) were left in the Baku garrison under the command of Prince Baryatyanski, the commandant of the city. In 1795, Baku was invaded and it's fortifications raised by Agha Muhammad Khan Qajar to defend against tsarist Russia's ambitions to subjugate the South Caucasus. In the spring of 1796, by Catherine II's order, General Zubov's troops began a major campaign in Transcaucasia. Baku surrendered after the first demand of Zubov, who had sent 6,000 troops to capture the city. On 13 June 1796 the Russian flotilla entered Baku Bay and a garrison of Russian troops was placed in the city. General Pavel Tsitsianov was appointed Baku's commandant. Later, however, Czar Paul I ordered him to cease the campaign and withdraw Russian forces. In March 1797 the tsarist troops left Baku, but a new tsar, Alexander I, began to show a special interest in capturing Baku. In 1803, Tsitsianov reached an agreement with the Baku khan to a compromise, but the agreement was soon annulled. On 8 February 1806, upon the surrendering of Baku, the brother of Huseyngulu khan of Baku stabbed and killed Tsitsianov at the gates of the city.

In 1813, following the Russo-Persian War (1804-1813), Russia signed the Treaty of Gulistan with Persia, which provided for the cession of Baku and most of its territories in the North Caucasus and South Caucasus to Russia.

The Nobel Brothers' oil wells in Balakhani, a suburb of Baku, in the late 19th century
Professor A. V. Williams Jackson of Columbia University wrote in his work From Constantinople to the Home of Omar Khayyam (1911):

Baku is a city founded upon oil, for to its inexhaustible founts of naphtha it owes its very existence, its maintenance, its prosperity.... At present Baku produces one-fifth of the oil that is used in the world, and the immense output in crude petroleum from this single city far surpasses that in any other district where oil is found. Verily, the words of the Scriptures find illustration here: 'the rock poured me out rivers of oil.

Oil is in the air one breathes, in one's nostrils, in one's eyes, in the water of the morning bath (though not in the drinking water, for that is brought in bottles from distant mineral springs), in one's starched linen  everywhere. This is the impression one carries away from Baku, and it is certainly true in the environs. Abraham Valentine Williams Jackson. 

Baku in 1960's

The first oil well was mechanically drilled in the Bibi-Heybat suburb of Baku in 1846, though a number of hand-dug wells predate it. Large-scale oil exploration started in 1872, when Russian imperial authorities auctioned the parcels of oil-rich land around Baku to private investors. Within a short period of time Swiss, British, French, Belgian, German, Swedish and American investors appeared in Baku. Among them were the firms of the Nobel brothers together with the family von Brtzell-Szuch (Carl Knut Brtzell, who also owned the Livadia Palace) and the Rothschild family. An industrial oil belt, better known as Black City, was established near Baku. By the beginning of the 20th century almost half of world production was being extracted in Baku. 

In 1917, after the October revolution and amidst the turmoil of World War I and the breakup of the Russian Empire, Baku came under the control of the Baku Commune, which was led by veteran Bolshevik Stepan Shaumyan. Seeking to capitalize on the existing inter-ethnic conflicts, by spring 1918, Bolsheviks inspired and condoned civil warfare in and around Baku. During the infamous March Days, Bolsheviks and Dashnaks seeking to establish control over the Baku streets, were faced with armed Muslim groups. Muslims suffered a crushing defeat by the united forces of the Baku Soviet and were massacred by Dashnak teams. On 28 May 1918, the Azerbaijani faction of the Transcaucasian Sejm proclaimed the independent Azerbaijan Democratic Republic (ADR) in Ganja. Shortly after, Azerbaijani forces, with support of the Ottoman Army of Islam led by Nuru Pasha, started their advance into Baku, eventually capturing the city from the loose coalition of Bolsheviks, Esers, Dashnaks, Mensheviks and British forces under the command of General Lionel Dunsterville on 15 September 1918. Baku became the capital of the ADR. On 28 April 1920, the 11th Red Army invaded Baku and reinstalled the Bolsheviks, making Baku the capital of the Azerbaijan Soviet Socialist Republic.

During the continuing Nazi German invasion of the southwestern Soviet Union, capturing the oil fields of Baku would have been one of the ultimate goals of Operation Edelweiss, carried out between May and November 1942. The German Army's closest approach to Baku was no closer than some 530 km northwest of Baku in November 1942, falling far short of the city's capture before being driven back during the Soviet Operation Little Saturn in mid-December 1942.

With the initiatives for saving the city in the 21st century, Baku embarked on a process of restructuring on a scale unseen in its history. Thousands of buildings from Soviet period were demolished to make way for a green belt on its shores; parks and gardens were built on the land reclaimed by filling up the beaches of the Baku Bay. Improvements were made in the general cleaning, maintenance, and garbage collection, and these services are now at Western European standards. The city is growing dynamically and developing at full speed on an east-west axis along the shores of the Caspian Sea.

==Geography==
Greater Baku satellite image, Landsat 5, 6 September 2010
Baku is situated on the western coast of Caspian Sea. In the vicinity of the city there are a number of mud volcanoes (Keyraki, Bogkh-bogkha, Lokbatan and others) and salt lakes (Boyukshor, Khodasan and so on).

===Climate===
Baku has a subtropical semi-arid climate (Kppen climate classification: BSk) with warm and dry summers, cool and occasionally wet winters, and strong winds all year long. However, unlike many other cities with this climate, Baku does not see extremely hot summers. This is largely because of its northerly latitude and the fact that it is located on a peninsula on the shore of the Caspian Sea.
Baku and the Absheron Peninsula on which it is situated, is the most arid part of Azerbaijan (precipitation here is around or less than 200 mm a year). The majority of the light annual precipitation occurs in seasons other than summer, but none of these months are particularly wet.
During Soviet times, Baku with its long hours of sunshine and dry healthy climate, was a vacation destination where citizens could enjoy beaches or relax in now-dilapidated spa complexes overlooking the Caspian Sea. The city's past as a Soviet industrial center has left it as one of the most polluted cities in the world. 

At the same time Baku is noted as a very windy city throughout the year, hence the city's nickname the "City of Winds", and gale-force winds, the cold northern wind khazri and the warm southern wind gilavar are typical here in all seasons. Indeed, the city is renowned for its fierce winter snow storms and harsh winds. 
The speed of the khazri sometimes reaches 144 kph (89 mph), which can cause damage to crops, trees and roof tiles. 

The daily mean temperature in July and August averages 26.4 C, and there is very little rainfall during that season. During summer the khazri sweeps through, bringing desired coolness. Winter is cool and occasionally wet, with the daily mean temperature in January and February averaging 4.3 C. During winter the khazri sweeps through, driven by polar air masses; temperatures on the coast frequently drop below freezing and make it feel bitterly cold. Winter snow storms are occasional; snow usually melts within a few days after each snowfall.

The average annual temperature in Baku and that of the Earth differ by less than 0.1 C-change: it is 14.2 C. 

===Administrative divisions===
Today, Baku is divided into 12 raions (administrative districts) and 5 settlements of city type. The mayor, presently Hajibala Abutalybov, embodies the executive power of the city. Territories, number, density of population and territorial units by economic and administrative regions of Azerbaijan Republic by 1 January 2009 

 * Binagadi raion () * Garadagh raion () * Khatai raion () * Khazar raion () * Narimanov raion () * Nasimi raion () * Nizami raion () * Pirallahy raion () * Sabail raion () * Sabunchu raion () * Surakhany raion () * Yasamal raion () 

==Demographics==

 Year Azerbaijanis % Russians % Armenians % Jews % Others % Total 
 1851 Kavkazskii Kalendar na 1852g., pp. 305307 405 5.5% 7,431 
 1886       ,     1886 , . , 1893 37,530 43.3 21,390 24.7 24,490 28.3 391 0.5 2,810 3.2 86,611 
 1897       1897 .  .  40,341 36 37,399 33.4 19,099 17.1 3,369 3 11,696 10.5 111,904 
 1903 The Azerbaijani Turks: Power and Identity Under Russian Rule, Audrey L. Altstadt, page 32, Hoover Press, 1992, ISBN 9780817991838 44,257 28,4 59,955 38,5 26,151 16,8 n.a. n.a. 28,513 18,3 155,876 
 1913 45,962 21,4 76,288 35,5 41,680 19,4 9,690 4,5 41,052 19,1 214,672 
 1926    1926 , . 14,  , . , 1929 118,737 26.2 167,373 36.9 76,656 16.9 19,589 4.3 70,978 15.7 453,333 
 1939 Soviet 1939 census 215,482 27.4 343,064 43.6 118,650 15.1 31,050 3.9 79,377 10.1 787,623 
 1959 Soviet 1959 census 211,372 32.9 223,242 34.7 137,111 21.3 24,057 3.7 56,725 8.7 652,507 
 1970 Soviet 1970 census 586,052 46.3 351,090 27.7 207,464 16.4 29,716 2.3 88,193 6.9 1,262,515 
 1979 Soviet 1979 census 530,556 52.4 229,873 22.7 167,226 16.5 22,916 2.3 62,865 6.2 1,013,436 
 1999 Ethnic composition of Azerbaijan 1999 1,574,252 88 119,371 6.7 378 0.02 5,164 0.3 89,689 5 1,788,854 
 2009 Ethnic composition of Azerbaijan 2009 1,848,107 90.3 108,525 5.3 104 0 6,056 0.6 83,023 4.1 2,045,815 

Until 1988 Baku had very large Russian, Armenian, and Jewish populations which contributed to cultural diversity and added in various ways (music, literature, architecture and progressive outlook) to Baku's history. With the onset of the Karabakh War and the pogrom against Armenians starting in January 1990, the city's large Armenian population was expelled. Azerbaijan: The status of Armenians, Russians, Jews and other minorities, report, 1993, INS Resource Informacion Center, p.10 
Under Communism, the Soviets took over the majority of Jewish property in Baku and Kuba. After the collapse of the Soviet Union, Azerbaijani President Heydar Aliyev returned several synagogues and a Jewish college, nationalized by the Soviets, to the Jewish community. He encouraged the restoration of these buildings and is well liked by the Jews of Azerbaijan. Renovation has begun on seven of the original 11 synagogues, including the Gilah synagogue, built in 1896, and the large Kruei Synagogue. 

===Ethnic groups===
Today the vast majority of the population of Baku are ethnic Azerbaijanis (more than 90%). The intensive growth of the population started in the middle of the 19th century when Baku was a small town with a population of about 7,000 people. The population increased again from about 13,000 in the 1860s to 112,000 in 1897 and 215,000 in 1913, making Baku the largest city in the Caucasus region. 

Baku has been a cosmopolitan city at certain times during its history, meaning ethnic Azerbaijanis did not constitute the majority of population. Audrey Altstadt, Conflict, Cleavage, and Change in Central Asia and the Caucasus, Cambridge University Press, 1997, p. 112, table 4.1, Ethnic composition of Baku, 1897, 1903,1913 In 2003 Baku additionally had 153,400 internally displaced persons and 93,400 refugees. 

===Religion===
The 13th century Bibi-Heybat Mosque. The mosque was built over the tomb of a descendant of the Prophet Muhammad. 

The urban landscape of Baku is shaped by many communities. The religion with the largest community of followers is Islam. The majority of the Muslims are Shia Muslims, and the Republic of Azerbaijan has the second highest Shia population percentage in the world after Iran. Juan Eduardo Campo,Encyclopedia of Islam, p.625 Zoroastrianism had a long history in Azerbaijan, evident in sites such as the Fire Temple of Baku Meena Iyer, Faith & philosophy of Zoroastrianism (2009), p.323 or ceremonies like Nowruz, along with Manichean. The city's notable mosques include Juma Mosque, Bibi-Heybat Mosque, Muhammad Mosque and Taza Pir Mosque.

There are some other faiths practiced among the different ethnic groups within the country. By article 48 of its Constitution, Azerbaijan is a secular state and ensures religious freedom. Religious minorities include Russian Orthodox Christians, Catholic Levantines, Ashkenazi Jews and Sufi Muslims.

==Economy==
The State Oil Fund manages the financial assets generated by oil exploration and development in Azerbaijan. 

Baku's largest industry is petroleum, and its petroleum exports make it a large contributor to Azerbaijan's balance of payments. The existence of petroleum has been known since the 8th century. In the 10th century, the Arabian traveler, Marudee, reported that both white and black oil were being extracted naturally from Baku. By the 15th century, oil for lamps was obtained from hand-dug surface wells.
Commercial exploitation began in 1872, and by the beginning of the 20th century the Baku oil fields were the largest in the world. Towards the end of the 20th century much of the onshore petroleum had been exhausted, and drilling had extended into the sea offshore. By the end of the 19th century skilled workers and specialists flocked to Baku. By 1900 the city had more than 3,000 oil wells, of which 2,000 were producing oil at industrial levels. Baku ranked as one of the largest centres for the production of oil industry equipment before World War II. The World War II Battle of Stalingrad was fought to determine who would have control of the Baku oil fields. Fifty years before the battle, Baku produced half of the world's oil supply. 

Currently the oil economy of Baku is undergoing a resurgence, with the development of the massive Azeri-Chirag-Guneshli field (Shallow water Gunashli by SOCAR, deeper areas by a consortium led by BP), development of the Shah Deniz gas field, the expansion of the Sangachal Terminal and the construction of the BTC Pipeline.

The Baku Stock Exchange is Azerbaijan's largest stock exchange, and largest in the Caucasian region by market capitalization. A relatively large number of transnational companies are headquartered in Baku. One of the more prominent institutions headquartered in Baku is the International Bank of Azerbaijan, which is run by Dr. Jahangir Hajiyev and employs over 1,000 people. International banks with branches in Baku include HSBC, Socit Gnrale and Credit Suisse. 

===Tourism and shopping===
Baku is one of the most important tourist destinations in the Caucasus, with hotels in the city earning 7 million euros in 2009. Many sizable world hotel chains have a presence in the city. Baku has many popular tourist and entertainment spots, such as the downtown Fountains Square, the One and Thousand Nights Beach, Shikhov Beach and Oil Rocks. Baku's vicinities feature Yanar Dag, an ever-blazing spot of natural gas. On 2 September 2010, with the inauguration of National Flag Square, Baku became home to the world's tallest flagpole, according to the Guinness Book of Records. However, on 24 May 2011 Baku lost this record by just 3m to the city of Dushanbe in Tajikistan. http://www.guinnessworldrecords.com/records-1/tallest-unsupported-flagpole 

Baku has several shopping malls; the most famous city center malls are Park Bulvar, Metro Park, 28 MALL, Aygun city and AF MALL. The retail areas contain shops from chain stores up to high-end boutiques.

The city is listed 48th in the 2011 list of the most expensive cities in the world conducted by the Mercer Human Resource Consulting. Its Nizami street is one of the most expensive streets in the world.

==Culture==
The city has many amenities that offer a wide range of cultural activities, drawing both from a rich local dramatic portfolio and an international repertoire. It also boasts many museums such as Baku Museum of Modern Art and Azerbaijan State Museum of History, most notably featuring historical artifacts and art. Many of the city's cultural sites were celebrated in 2009 when Baku was designated an Islamic Culture Capital. Baku was also chosen to host the Eurovision Dance Contest 2010.

Among Baku's prestigious cultural venues are Azerbaijan State Philharmonic Hall, Azerbaijan State Academic Opera and Ballet Theatre. The main movie theatre is Azerbaijan Cinema.
Festivals include the Baku International Film Festival, Baku International Jazz Festival, Novruz Festival, Gl Bayram (Flower Festival) and the National Theater Festival.     . Azerbaycan'da Gl Bayram ve Aliyev'in doum gn kutlanyor International and local exhibitions are presented at the Baku Expo Center.

===Architecture===

Baku has wildly varying architecture, ranging from the Old City core to modern buildings and the spacious layout of the Baku port. Many of the city's most impressive buildings were built during the early 20th Century, when architectural elements of the European styles were combined in eclectic style. Baku thus has an original and unique appearance, earning it a reputation as the 'Paris of the East'.    

Late modern and postmodern architecture began to appear in the early 2000s. With economic development, old buildings such as Atlant House were razed to make way for new ones. Buildings with all-glass shells have appeared around the city, the most prominent examples being the Azerbaijan Tower, Heydar Aliyev Cultural Center, Flame Towers, Baku Crystal Hall, Baku White City and SOCAR Tower. These projects also caught the attention of international media as notable programs such as Discovery Channel's Extreme Engineering did pieces focusing in on changes to the city. 

The Old City of Baku, also known as the Walled City of Baku, refers to the ancient Baku settlement. Most of the walls and towers, strengthened after the Russian conquest in 1806, survived. This section is picturesque, with its maze of narrow alleys and ancient buildings: the cobbled streets past the Palace of the Shirvanshahs, two caravansaries, the baths and the Juma Mosque (which used to house the Azerbaijan National Carpet and Arts Museum but is now a mosque again). The old town core also has dozens of small mosques, often without any particular sign to distinguish them as such.

In 2003, UNESCO placed the Inner City on the List of World Heritage in Danger, citing damage from a November 2000 earthquake, poor conservation as well as "dubious" restoration efforts. 

===Parks and gardens===
Park in Baku

Baku has large sections of greenery either preserved by the National Government or designated as green zones. The city, however, continues to lack a green belt development as economic activity pours into the capital, resulting in massive housing projects along the suburbs.        

Baku Boulevard is a pedestrian promenade that runs parallel to Baku's seafront. The boulevard contains an amusement park, yacht club, musical fountain, statues and monuments. The park is popular with dog-walkers and joggers, and is convenient for tourists. It is adjacent to the newly built International Center of Mugham and the musical fountain.

Other prominent parks and gardens include Heydar Aliyev Park, Samad Vurgun Park, Narimanov Park, Alley of Honor and the Fountains Square. The Martyrs' Lane, formerly the Kirov Park, is dedicated to the memory of those who lost their lives during the Nagorno-Karabakh War and also to the 137 people killed on Black January.

===Nightlife===
Baku boasts a vibrant nightlife. Many clubs that are open until dawn can be found throughout the city. Clubs with an eastern flavor provide special treats from the cuisine of Azerbaijan along with local music. Western-style clubs target younger, more energetic crowds. Most of the public houses and bars are located near Fountains Square and are usually open until the early hours of the morning.

Baku is home to restaurants catering to every cuisine and occasion. Restaurants range from luxurious and expensive to ordinary and affordable. 

In the Lonely Planet "1000 Ultimate Experiences", Baku placed 8th among the top 10 party cities in the world. Beograd na vrhu liste gradova sa najboljim nonim provodom 

===Music and media===
Baku Crystal Hall during Eurovision Song Contest 2012

The music scene in Baku can be traced back to ancient times and villages of Baku, generally revered as the fountainhead of meykhana and mugham in the Azerbaijan. "Meyxana", ya "bdih" sz almi bir-birin qatb QARABA MUAM MKTB 

In recent years, the success of Azerbaijani performers such as AySel, Farid Mammadov, Sabina Babayeva, Safura, Elnur Hseynov and Arash in the Eurovision Song Contest has significantly boosted the profile of the Baku music scene, prompting international attention. Following the victory of Azerbaijan's representative Eldar & Nigar at the Eurovision Song Contest 2011, Baku hosted the Eurovision Song Contest 2012. 

2005 was a landmark in the development of jazz in the city. Its been home to legendary jazz musicians like Vagif Mustafazadeh, Aziza Mustafa Zadeh, Rafig Babayev and Rain Sultanov. Among Baku's prominent annual fairs and festivals is Baku International Jazz Festival, which features some of the world's most identifiable jazz names. 

Baku also has a thriving International Center of Mugham, which is located in Baku Boulevard, Gulustan Palace and Buta Palace, one of the principal performing arts centers and music venues in the city. 

The majority of Azerbaijan's media companies (including television, newspaper and radio, such as ANS, Azad Azerbaijan TV, Ictimai TV and Lider TV) are headquartered in Baku. The films The World Is Not Enough and The Diamond Arm are set in the city, while Amphibian Man includes several scenes filmed in Old City.

Out of the city's radio stations ANS ChM, Ictimai Radio, Radio Antenn, Burc FM, and Lider FM Jazz are some of the more influential competitors with large national audiences. ANS ChM was one of the first private and independent FM radio broadcasting service in the Caucasus and Central Asia regions when it was established in May 1994. 

Some of the most influential Baku newspapers include the daily Zaman (The Time), Bakinskiy Rabochiy (The Baku Worker), Echo and the English-language Baku Today.

Baku is also featured in the Battlefield 4's gameplay mission. 

===Sports===
Heydar Aliyev Sports and Exhibition Complex during 2009 Rhythmic Gymnastics European Championships

Since 2002, Baku has hosted 36 major sporting events and selected to host the 2015 European Games. Baku is also to host the fourth edition of the Islamic Solidarity Games in 2017.

Baku is also one of world's leading chess centres, having produced famous grandmasters like Teimour Radjabov, Vugar Gashimov, Garry Kasparov, and Rauf Mammadov, as well as the arbiter Faik Hasanov. The city also annually hosts the international tournaments such as Baku Chess Grand Prix, President's Cup, Baku Open and currently bidding to host 42nd Chess Olympiad in 2014. 

First class sporting facilities were built for the indoor games, including the Palace of Hand Games and Heydar Aliyev Sports and Exhibition Complex. It hosted many sporting events, including FIFA U-17 Women's World Cup, Rhythmic Gymnastics European Championships in 2007 and 2009, 2005 World Rhythmic Gymnastics Championships, 2007 FILA Wrestling World Championships and 2010 European Wrestling Championships, 2011 World Amateur Boxing Championships, 2009 Women's Challenge Cup and European Taekwondo Championships in 2007. Cev Cup: Final Four femminile a Baku ,   .     ! Since 2011 the city annually hosts WTA tennis event called Baku Cup. In 2012, City Challenge GmbH brought its first motorsports event to the city.

The Synergy Baku Cycling Project participates in the Tour d'Azerbadjan a 2.2 multi-stage bicycle race on the UCI Europe Tour.

Baku made a bid to host the 2016 Summer Olympics and later made a bid for the 2020 Summer Olympics. However, Baku failed to become a Candidate City both times. IOC selects three cities as Candidates for the 2020 Olympic Games 

The largest sport hub in the city is Tofig Bahramov Stadium with 31,200 seating capacity. The city's three main football clubs are Neftchi Baku, FC Baku and Inter Baku of whom first has eight Premier League titles making Neftchi the most successful Azerbaijani football club. Baku also has several clubs in the premier and regional leagues, including AZAL and Ravan Baku in Premier League. The Baku Olympic Stadium, a planned 65,000 seat football stadium, is currently under construction and will be based on Boyuk Shor settlement. 

In the Azerbaijan Women's Volleyball Super League, Baku is represented by Rabita Baku, Azerrail Baku, Lokomotiv Baku and Igtisadchi Baku.

==Transport==
Baku black cab, introduced in 2011
Throughout history the transport system of Baku used the now-defunct horsecars, trams and narrow gauge railways. As of 2011, 1000 black cabs are ordered by Baku Taxi Company, and as part of a programme originally announced by the Transport Ministry of Azerbaijan, there is a plan to introduce London cabs into Baku. The move was part of 16 million agreement between Manganese Bronze and Baku Taxi Company. 

Local transport includes the Baku Metro, a rapid-transit system notable for its art, murals, mosaics and ornate chandeliers. Baku Metro was opened in November 1967 and includes 23 stations at present; 170 million people used Baku Metro over the past five years. In 2008, the Chief of the Baku Metro, Taghi Ahmadov, announced plans to construct 41 new stations over the next 17 years. These will serve the new bus complex as well as the international airport. 

Plans are afoot to introduce a single Smart Card for payment on all types of city transport. The metro is now the only form of transport in Baku to use any type of card-based fare-payment system. 

Baku's Central Railway Station is the terminus for national and international rail links to the city. The KarsTbilisiBaku railway, which will directly connect Turkey, Georgia and Azerbaijan, began to be constructed in 2007 and is scheduled for completion in 2013. The completed branch will connect Baku with Tbilisi in Georgia, and from there trains will continue to Akhalkalaki, and Kars in Turkey. Railway Gazette International February 2009 p54 with map 

Baku Yacht Club
Sea transport is vital for Baku, as the city is practically surrounded by the Caspian Sea to the east. Shipping services operate regularly from Baku across the Caspian Sea to Turkmenbashi (formerly Krasnovodsk) in Turkmenistan and to Bandar Anzali and Bandar Nowshar in Iran. The commuter ferries, along with the high-speed catamaran Seabus (Deniz Avtobusu), also form the main connection between the city and the Absheron peninsula. 

The Baku Port was founded in 1902 and since then has been the largest Caspian Sea port. It has six facilities: the main cargo terminal, the container terminal, the ferry terminal, the oil terminal, the passenger terminal and the port fleet terminal. The port's throughput capacity reaches 15 million tons of liquid bulk and up to 10 million tons of dry cargoes. 
Beginning in 2010, the Baku International Sea Trade Port is being reconstructed. The construction will take place in three stages and will be completed by 2016. The estimated costs are 400 Million US$. From April to November the Baku Port is accessible to ships loading cargoes for direct voyages from Western European and Mediterranean ports.

The State Road M-1 and the European route E60 are the two main motorway connections between Europe and Azerbaijan. The motorway network around Baku is well developed and is constantly being extended.

The Heydar Aliyev International Airport is the only commercial airport serving Baku. The new Baku Cargo Terminal was officially opened in March 2005. It was constructed to be a major cargo hub in the CIS countries and is actually now one of the biggest and most technically advanced in the region. There are also several smaller military airbases near Baku, such as Baku Kala Air Base, intended for private aircraft, helicopters and charters. Fevraln 14- Azrbaycan Hrbi Hava Qvvlrinin (HHQ) yaranma gndr 

==Public services==

===Education===

Baku hosts many universities, junior colleges and vocational schools. Baku State University, the first established university in Azerbaijan was opened in 1919 by the government of the Azerbaijan Democratic Republic. In the early years of the Soviet era, Baku already had Azerbaijan State Oil Academy, Azerbaijan Medical University and Azerbaijan State Economic University. In the post-WWII period, a few more universities were established such as Azerbaijan Technical University, Azerbaijan University of Languages and the Azerbaijan Architecture and Construction University. After 1991 when Azerbaijan gained independence from the Soviet Union, the fall of communism led to the development of a number of private institutions, including Qafqaz University and Khazar University which are currently considered the most prestigious academic institutions. Apart from the private universities, the government established the Academy of Public Administration, the Azerbaijan Diplomatic Academy and various military academies. The largest universities according to the student population are Baku State University and Azerbaijan State Economic University. In addition, there are the Baku Music Academy and the Azerbaijan National Conservatoire in Baku established in early 1920s. Publicly run kindergartens and elementary schools (years 1 through 11) are operated by local wards or municipal offices.

The Azerbaijan National Academy of Sciences, the main state research organization in Azerbaijan is locating in Baku as well. Moreover, Baku has numerous libraries, many of which contain vast collections of historic documents from the Roman, Byzantine, Ottoman and Soviet periods, as well as from other civilisations of the past. The most important libraries in terms of historic document collections include the Nizami Museum of Azerbaijan Literature, the National Library of Azerbaijan, the Mirza Alakbar Central Library, the Samad Vurgun Library and the Baku Presidential Library.

===Health care===
The city has many public and private hospitals, clinics and laboratories within its bounds and numerous medical research centers. Many of these facilities have high technology equipment, which has contributed to the recent upsurge in "medical tourism" to Baku, particularly from post-Soviet countries such as Georgia and Moldova, whose governments send lower-income patients to the city for inexpensive high-tech medical treatments and operations.

==Notable residents==

Because of its intermittent periods of great prosperity as well as being the largest city in the Caucasus and one of the most ethnically and culturally diverse in the Soviet Union, Baku prides itself on having produced a disproportionate number of notable figures in the sciences, arts and other fields. Some of the houses they resided in display commemorative plaques. Some of the many prestigious residents include: Academy Award winners Rustam Ibrahimbeyov and Vladimir Menshov, one of the founders and head of the Soviet space program Kerim Kerimov, Nobel Prize winner and physicist Lev Landau and famous musicians such as Gara Garayev, Uzeyir Hajibeyov, Muslim Magomayev, Vagif Mustafazadeh and Alim Qasimov. World-famous cellist Mstislav Rostropovich was born and raised in Baku, as was world famous chess player, Gary Kasparov.

==International relations==

===Twin towns and sister cities===
Baku is twinned with: chronological order

 Country City State / Province / Region / Governorate Date 
 Senegal 25px Dakar 25px Dakar Region 1967 
 Italy 25px Naples 25px Campania 1972 
 Iraq Basra Basra Governorate 1972 
 Bosnia and Herzegovina 25px Sarajevo 25px Sarajevo Canton 1975 
 United States 25px Christiansted Virgin Islands 1976 
 United States 25px Houston 25px Texas 1976 
 France 25px Bordeaux 25px Aquitaine 1979 
 Brazil 25px Rio de Janeiro 25px state of Rio de Janeiro 2013   --  - - 1NEWS.AZ 
 Iran 25px Tabriz East Azerbaijan Province 1980 
 Turkey zmir zmir Province 1985 
 Vietnam Vng Tu B RaVng Tu Province 1985 
 United States 25px Honolulu County 25px Hawaii 1998 
 Turkey Sivas Sivas Province 2000 Uzaklar Yakinlati - Sivas Twin Towns 

===Partner cities===
* Aberdeen, Scotland
* Mainz, Germany 
* Stavanger, Norway

Partnership relations also exist at different levels with: Berlin, Paris, Vienna, Tbilisi, Astana, Minsk, Moscow, Volgograd, Kizlyar, Tashkent and Chengdu.

==Gallery==

File:City of Baku 2011.jpg| Baku Bay
File:View of Bakucity, 2012.jpg| Old Baku "Icheri Sheher"
File:Nizami street baku.JPG|Nizami Street
File:Azrbaycan Dvlt Opera v Balet Teatr.jpg|Baku Opera and Ballet Theatre
File:smailiyye palace, Baku, 2012.jpg|Ismailiyya building
File:Baku Maiden Tower 2010.jpg| Maiden Tower
File:Icheri sheher 01.JPG| Icheri Sheher
File:Baku philharmony front.JPG|Azerbaijan State Philharmonic Hall
File:Baku Seaside Bulevard.JPG|Baku seaside Boulevard
File:Azneft Square, Baku, 2012.jpg| Azerbaijan's Flag
File:Saadet sarayi 2.jpg| Palace of Happiness
File:Nizami street in Baku, 2010.jpg| Fountains Square
File:View of Baku.JPG|View of Baku
File:Aerial View of Baku, May 2012.jpg|Aerial view of Baku, May 2012
File:Baku, Azerbaijan.jpg|View of Baku taken from the International Space Station

==See also==
* Administrative divisions of Azerbaijan
* Ganja
* List of cities in Azerbaijan
* Mingachevir
* Nakhchivan
* Sumgait

==References==

==External links==

*
* Baku's profile at the Organization of World Heritage Cities website
* UNESCO World Heritage Site listing Walled City of Baku
* Photos of Baku

 
 

 



[[Balalaika]]

The balalaika (, ) is a Russian stringed musical instrument with a characteristic triangular body and three strings.

The balalaika family of instruments includes instruments of various sizes, from the highest-pitched to the lowest: the piccolo balalaika, prima balalaika, secunda balalaika, alto balalaika, bass balalaika, and contrabass balalaika. The prima balalaika is the most common. All have three-sided bodies; spruce, evergreen, or fir tops; and backs made of three to nine wooden sections (usually maple). They are typically strung with three strings.

The prima balalaika, secunda and alto are played either with the fingers or a plectrum (pick), depending on the music being played, and the bass and contrabass (equipped with extension legs that rest on the floor) are played with leather plectra. The rare piccolo instrument is usually played with a pick. 

==Etymology==

The earliest mention of the term balalaika dates back to an AD 1688 Russian document. Belinskiy, Dmitry. "Balalaika". Krymskaya Pravda. Balalaika music, video. The term "balabaika" was widely used in Ukrainian language documents from 1717 to 1732. According to one theory, the term was loaned to Russian, where  in literary language  it first appeared in "Elysei", a 1771 poem by V. Maikov.

==Types==
A contrabass Balalaika

The modern balalaika is found in the following sizes:

* piccolo
* prima
* secunda
* alto
* tenor (rare)
* bass
* contrabass

The most common solo instrument is the prima, which is tuned E-E-A (thus the two lower strings are tuned to the same pitch). Sometimes the balalaika is tuned "guitar style" by folk musicians to G-B-D (mimicking the three highest strings of the Russian guitar), whereby it is easier to play for Russian guitar players, although classically trained balalaika purists avoid this tuning. It can also be tuned to E-A-D, like its cousin, the domra, to make it easier for those trained on the domra to play the instrument, and still have a balalaika sound. The folk (pre-Andreev) tuning D-F#-A was very popular, as this makes it easier to play certain riffs. http://balalaikafr.free.fr/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=18&Itemid=61&lang=us 

Factory-made six-string prima balalaikas with three sets of double courses are also common and popular, particularly in Ukraine. These instruments have three double courses similar to the stringing of the mandolin and often use a "guitar" tuning. Four string alto balalaikas are also encountered and are used in the orchestra of the Piatnistky Folk Choir.

The piccolo, prima, and secunda balalaikas were originally strung with gut with the thinnest melody string made of stainless steel. Today, nylon strings are commonly used in place of gut.

===Technique===
An important part of balalaika technique is the use of the left thumb to fret notes on the lower string, particularly on the prima, where it is used to form chords. Traditionally, the side of the index finger of the right hand is used to sound notes on the prima, while a plectrum is used on the larger sizes. One can play the prima with a plectrum, but it is considered rather unorthodox to do so.

Because of the large size of the contrabass's strings, it is not uncommon to see players using plectrums made from a leather shoe or boot heel. The bass balalaika and contrabass balalaika rest on the ground, on a wooden or metal pin that is drilled into one of its corners. The Stringed Instrument Database 

==History==

===Possible origins of the Balalaika===
The exact origins of the Balalaika are unknown. It is commonly agreed that is came from the Domra, an instrument from the Caucasus region of Russia. Others would argue that its origins come from the pipa, a lute-guitar from nearby China. Both sound and are played similar to that of a Balalaika.

===The pre-Andreyev period===
Early representations of the balalaika show it with anywhere from two to six strings, which resembles certain Central Asian instruments. Similarly, frets on earlier balalaikas were made of animal gut and tied to the neck so that they could be moved around by the player at will (as is the case with the modern saz, which allows for the playing distinctive to Turkish and Central Asian music).

The first known document mentioning the instrument dates back to 1688. A guard's logbook from the kremlin records that two serfs were stopped from playing the Balalika whilst drunk. Further documents from 1700 and 1714 also mention the instrument. In the early 18th century the term appeared in Ukrainian documents, where it sounded like "Balabaika". Balalaika appeared in "Elysei", a 1771 poem by V. Maikov. In the 19th century, the balalaika evolved into a triangular instrument with a neck that was substantially shorter than that of its Asian counterparts. It was popular as a village instrument for centuries, particularly with the skomorokhs, sort of free-lance musical jesters whose tunes ridiculed the Tsar, the Russian Orthodox Church, and Russian society in general.

A popular notion is that the three sides and the strings of the balalaika represent the Holy Trinity. This idea, while whimsical, is quite difficult to fathom when one is confronted with the fact that at various times in Russian history, the playing of the balalaika was banned because of its use by the skomorokhi, who were generally highly irritating to both church and state. Musical instruments are not allowed in Russian Orthodox liturgy. A likelier reason for the triangular shape is given by the writer and historian Nikolai Gogol in his unfinished novel Dead Souls. He states that a balalaika was made by peasants out of a pumpkin. If you quarter a pumpkin, you are left with a balalaika shape.

===The Andreyev period===
In the 1880s, Vasily Vasilievich Andreyev, who was then a professional violinist in the music salons of St Petersburg, developed what became the standardized balalaika, with the assistance of violin maker V. Ivanov. The instrument began to be used in his concert performances. A few years later, St. Petersburg craftsman Paserbsky further refined the instruments by adding a fully chromatic set of frets and also a number of balalaikas in orchestral sizes with the tunings now found in modern instruments. Andreyev patented the design and arranged numerous traditional Russian folk melodies for the orchestra. He also composed a body of concert pieces for the instrument.

==Balalaika orchestra==
A souvenir balalaika
The end result of Andreyev's labours was the establishment of an orchestral folk tradition in Tsarist Russia, which later grew into a movement within the Soviet Union. The balalaika orchestra in its full form  balalaikas, domras, gusli, bayan, kugiklas, Vladimir Shepherd's Horns, garmoshkas and several types of percussion instruments  has a distinctive sound: strangely familiar to the ear, yet decidedly not entirely Western European.

With the establishment of the Soviet system and the entrenchment of a proletarian cultural direction, the culture of the working classes (which included that of village labourers) was actively supported by the Soviet establishment. The concept of the balalaika orchestra was adopted wholeheartedly by the Soviet government as something distinctively proletarian (that is, from the working classes) and was also deemed progressive. Significant amounts of energy and time were devoted to support and foster formal study of the balalaika, from which highly skilled ensemble groups such as the Osipov State Balalaika Orchestra emerged. Balalaika virtuosi such as Boris Feoktistov and Pavel Necheporenko became stars both inside and outside the Soviet Union. The movement was so powerful that even the renowned Red Army Choir, which initially used a normal symphonic orchestra, changed its instrumentation, replacing violins, violas, and violoncellos with orchestral balalaikas and domras.

==Balalaika solo==
Often musicians perform solo on the balalaika. In particular, Alexey Arkhipovsky is well known for his solo performances. In particular, he was invited to play at the opening ceremony of the second semi final of the Eurovision Song Contest 2009 in Moscow because the organizers wanted to give a "more Russian appearance" of the contest. 

==Use of the name==

The Yiddish folk song Tumbalalaika mentions the instrument.

In 1989 Kramer Guitars released an "Electric Balalaika": the Kramer Gorky Park. This was just before the fall of the Berlin wall and the Soviet Union. It was actually just an electric guitar with a triangular shape that was based on the original instrument.

The "Wind of Change" by the Scorpions mentions the instrument.

The MiG-21 is nicknamed Balalaika because of the shape of its wings.

The Beatles' 1968 song "Back in the U.S.S.R" refers to the instrument in its final verse ("Let me hear your balalaikas ringing out/Come and keep your comrade warm"). Lyrics to 'Back in the U.S.S.R' by The Beatles Krymskaya Pravda. Balalaika music, video 

Kusumi Koharu performed a song and dance titled "Balalaika" which has also been flawlessly mirrored in the Hatsune Miku phenomenon.

One of the unofficial slogans of the Jewish Defense League was "Bombs for balalaikas".

Firewater's album Get Off the Cross, We Need the Wood for the Fire seventh track is named "Balalaika" but does not appear to contain one.

In the 2006 anime Black Lagoon, the nickname of the local Russian mob boss is "Balalaika".

The rock band from Pasadena, Ozma plays a balalaika on the song "Flight of Yuri Gagarin"; it is derived from their partially Russian themed album Double Donkey Disc. The album has a mirrored picture of a donkey playing the balalaika on the front cover.

Bob Clampett's 1943 cartoon Book Revue features Daffy Duck dressed as Danny Kaye singing in a Russian accent. He remembers his "native willage", with people " . . . sitting on their balalaikas playing their samovars", a misuse of both words.

Camper Van Beethoven's 1985 album Telephone Free Landslide Victory includes a track called "Balalaika Gap".

===The balalaika outside Russia===
Interest in Russian folk instruments has grown outside of Russia. Orchestras of Russian folk instruments exist in many countries of western Europe, Scandinavia, USA, Canada, Australia and Japan. Some of the groups include ethnic Russians, however in recent times the growth in interest in the Balalaika by non-ethnic Russians has been considerable.

Interests in the balalaika first started after Andreyev's tour of North America in the early 20th century. A number of Andreyev's students also toured the west from 1909 to 1912. In 1957 the Scandinavian Balalaika Association was formed. In 1977 a similar organization was formed in the USA.

Oleg Bernov of the Russian-American rock band the Red Elvises plays a red electrified contrabass balalaika during the band's North American tours.

The Australian band VulgarGrad, fronted by actor Jacek Koman, which plays songs of the Russian criminal underground, uses a contrabass balalaika.

The Norwegian all-girl pop band Katzenjammer uses two contrabass balalaikas, both of which have cat faces painted on the front. They are named Brge and Aker.

The German band Cosmonautix names there music "Russian Balalaika Speedfolk". They plays a prima balalaika, an electric balalaika and a contrabass balalaika.

The balalaika is heard prominently in the score for David Lean's film Doctor Zhivago (1965).

Ian Anderson plays balalaika on two songs from the 1969 Jethro Tull album Stand Up: "Jeffrey Goes To Leicester Square" and "Fat Man".

Balalaikas of all sizes are prominently displayed in the official video for Basement Jaxx's 2006 single "Take Me Back To Your Place".

British singer Kate Bush featured the balalaika, played by her brother Paddy Bush in two of her Top-40 singles, "Babooshka" and "Running Up That Hill".

Oscar Award Winning Indian Composer A.R.Rahman used it in the Tamil movie Sivaji.

The music for Wes Anderson's 2014 film The Grand Budapest Hotel is filled with balalaikas: they are heard in both Alexandre Desplat's original score and several recordings by the Osipov State Russian Folk Orchestra.

==See also==
* List of Russian inventions

==References==

* .    . , 1986.
* . . .     . , 1986.
* .      . , 1987.
* .      . , 2002.
* . . , 1990.
* .    . , 1979.
* .    . , 1984.
* .    . , , 1975.

==External links==

* (en) "Balalaika"article by Dmitry Belinskiy from the newspaper Krymskaya Pravda. Balalaika music, video
* Russian site about Balalaika. History of balalaika, by Georgy Nefyodov
* Chord reference for Prima-Balalaika
* (rus) balalaika.org.ru: music sheets, video, forum, etc.
* 



[[Bank of China Tower (Hong Kong)]]

The Bank of China Tower (abbreviated BOC Tower) is one of the most recognisable skyscrapers in Admiralty, Hong Kong. It houses the headquarters for the Bank of China (Hong Kong) Limited. The building is located at 1 Garden Road, in Central and Western District on Hong Kong Island. 

Designed by I. M. Pei and L.C Pei of I.M Pei and Partners, the building is 315.0 m high with two masts reaching 367.4 m high. 
It was the tallest building in Hong Kong and Asia from 1989 to 1992, and it was the first building outside North America to break the 305 m (1,000 ft) mark. It is now the fourth tallest skyscraper in Hong Kong, after International Commerce Centre, Two International Finance Centre and Central Plaza.

Hung Chen, then the deputy manager of Bank of China (Hong Kong branch) negotiated with Hayden Cave for the land plot, which was not auctioned in the open market; and invited I. M. Pei to design the tower. Pei's father was a former manager of Bank of China; this personal connection was one of the reasons that Pei accepted the project, given the much restricted budget then available for the tower, which&mdash;he understood&mdash;would inevitably be compared with the HSBC building designed by Foster.

==Plot history==
The 6700 m2 site on which the building is constructed was formerly the location of Murray House. After its brick-by-brick relocation to Stanley, the site was sold by the Government for "only HK$1 billion" in August 1982 amidst growing concern over the future of Hong Kong in the run-up to the transfer of sovereignty.

Once developed, gross floor area was expected to be 100,000 m. Philip Bowring & Mary Lee, Dear friends..., pg 114 Far Eastern Economic Review, 13 August 1982 The original project was intended for completion on the auspicious date of 8 August 1988. However, owing to project delays, groundbreaking took place in March 1985, almost two years late. It was topped out in 1989, and occupied on 15 June 1990.

The building was initially built by the Hong Kong Branch of the Bank of China; its Garden Road entrance continues to display the name "Bank of China", rather than BOCHK. The top four and the bottom 19 stories are used by the Bank, while the other floors are leased out. Ownership has since been transferred to BOCHK, although the Bank of China has leased back several floors for use by its own operations in Hong Kong.

===Favouritism controversy===

The Government had apparently given preferential treatment to Chinese companies, and was again criticised for the apparent preferential treatment to the BOCHK. 

The price paid was half the amount of the 6,250 m Admiralty II plot, for which the MTR Corporation paid HK$1.82 billion in cash. The BOC would make initial payment of $60 million, with the rest payable over 13 years at 6% interest. The announcement of the sale was also poorly handled, and a dive in business confidence ensued. The Hang Seng Index fell 80 points, and the HK$ lost 1.5% of its value the next day. 

== Design ==

Designed by Pritzker Prize-winning architect I. M. Pei, the building is 315.0 m high with two masts reaching 367.4 m high. The 72-storey building is located near Central MTR station. This was the tallest building in Hong Kong and Asia from 1990 to 1992, the first building outside the United States to break the 305 m (1,000 ft) mark, and the first composite space frame high-rise building. That also means it was the tallest outside the United States from its completion year, 1990. It is now the fourth tallest skyscraper in Hong Kong, after International Commerce Centre, Two International Finance Centre and Central Plaza.

Massing model showing the shape of the Bank of China Tower. The labels correspond to the number of 'X' shapes on each outward facing side. A small observation deck on the 43rd floor of the building is open to the public. The structural expressionism adopted in the design of this building resembles growing bamboo shoots, symbolising livelihood and prosperity. The whole structure is supported by the five steel columns at the corners of the building, with the triangular frameworks transferring the weight of the structure onto these five columns. It is covered with glass curtain walls. While its distinctive look makes it one of Hong Kong's most identifiable landmarks today, it was the source of some controversy at one time, as the bank is the only major building in Hong Kong to have bypassed the convention of consulting with feng shui masters on matters of design prior to construction. The building has been criticised by some practitioners of feng shui for its sharp edges and its negative symbolism by the numerous 'X' shapes in its original design, though Pei modified the design to some degree before construction following this feedback. The building's profile from some angles resembles that of a meat cleaver. In Feng Shui, this is described as a cleaver building. ==In Popular Culture== * In the movie Battleship, the building is torn in half by a crashing alien spaceship and its spire falls into the streets of Hong Kong, killing many people. * In Star Trek Voyager, the building is used as the exterior of Starfleet Communications Research Center. 

== Pictures ==

Image:Bank of China Tower GF Lobby.jpg|Bank of China Tower Lobby on Ground Floor
Image:HK Bank of China Tower 2008.jpg|Bank of China building in morning
Image:Bank of china night.jpg|Bank of China by night
File:BOC HSBC Cheung Kong Center Jardine House.jpg|The Bank of China Tower (first building from the left) is located in the central business district on Hong Kong Island, next to the HSBC Building, Cheung Kong Center and Jardine House.

== See also ==
* Bank of China Building, the old headquarters of the Bank of China
* List of buildings and structures in Hong Kong
* List of skyscrapers
* List of towers
* List of tallest freestanding structures in the world
* List of the world's tallest structures

== References ==

== External links ==

* About BOC Tower on Bank of China (Hong Kong) website
* Great Buildings Online site on BOC Tower
* Buildable paper model of the tower
* Elevator Layout
* Branch Details for Hong Kong Bank of China Tower



[[Blind Lemon Jefferson]]

"Blind" Lemon Jefferson (Lemon Henry Jefferson; September 24, 1893  December 19, 1929) was an American blues singer and guitarist from Texas. He was one of the most popular blues singers of the 1920s, and has been titled "Father of the Texas Blues". Dicaire, David. Blues Singers: Biographies of 50 Legendary Artists of the Early 20th Century. Jefferson, North Carolina: McFarland and Company, Inc., 1999; ISBN 0-7864-0606-2, pp 140-44. 

Jefferson's singing and self-accompaniment were distinctive as a result of his high-pitched voice and originality on the guitar Although his recordings sold well, he was not so influential on some younger blues singers of his generation, who could not imitate him as they could other commercially successful artists. Charters, Samuel. The Blues Makers. New York: Da Capo Press, 1977; ISBN 0-306-80438-7. Later blues and rock and roll musicians attempted to imitate both his songs and his musical style. 

==Biography==

===Early life===
Lemon Henry Jefferson was blind at birth, born near Coutchman in Freestone County, near present-day Wortham, Texas. He was one of eight children born to sharecroppers Alex and Clarissa Jefferson. Disputes regarding his exact birth date derive from contradictory census records and draft registration records. By 1900, the family was farming southeast of Streetman, Texas, and Lemon Jefferson's birth date is indicated as September 1893 in the 1900 census. 1900 US Census; Census Place: Justice Precinct 5, Freestone, Texas; Roll: T623 1636; Page: 3A; Enumeration District: 37. The 1910 census, taken in May before his birthday, further confirms his year of birth as 1893, and indicated the family was farming northwest of Wortham, near Lemon Jefferson's birthplace. 1910 US Census; Census Place: Justice Precinct 6, Navarro, Texas; Roll: T624_1580; Page: 17B; Enumeration District: 98; Image: 982. 

In his 1917 draft registration, Jefferson gave his birth date as October 26, 1894, further stating that he then lived in Dallas, Texas and had been blind since birth. World War I Draft Registration records; Dallas County, Texas; Roll: 1952850; Draft Board: 2 In the 1920 Census, he is recorded as having returned to Freestone County and was living with his half-brother, Kit Banks, on a farm between Wortham and Streetman. 1920 US Census;Census Place: Kirvin, Freestone, Texas; Roll: T625_1805; Page: 3A; Enumeration District: 24; Image: 231. 

Jefferson began playing the guitar in his early teens, and soon after he began performing at picnics and parties. He became a street musician, playing in East Texas towns, in front of barbershops and on streetcorners. According to his cousin, Alec Jefferson, quoted in the notes for Blind Lemon Jefferson, Classic Sides: 

By the early 1910s, Jefferson began traveling frequently to Dallas, where he met and played with fellow blues musician Lead Belly. In Dallas, Jefferson was one of the earliest and most prominent figures in the blues movement developing in the Deep Ellum section of Dallas. Jefferson likely moved to Deep Ellum in a more permanent fashion by 1917, where he met Aaron Thibeaux Walker, also known as T-Bone Walker. Jefferson taught Walker the basics of blues guitar, in exchange for Walker's occasional services as a guide. By the early 1920s, Jefferson was earning enough money for his musical performances to support a wife, and possibly a child. However, firm evidence for both his marriage and any offspring is unavailable.

===Beginning of recording career===
Prior to Jefferson, very few artists had recorded solo voice and blues guitar, the first of which was vocalist Sara Martin and guitarist Sylvester Weaver. Jefferson's music is uninhibited and represented the classic sounds of everyday life from a honky-tonk to a country picnic to street corner blues to work in the burgeoning oil fields, a further reflection of his interest in mechanical objects and processes. Joe W. Specht, McMurry University, Abilene, Texas, "Oil Well Blues: African-American Oil Patch Songs", joint meeting of East Texas Historical Association and West Texas Historical Association, annual meeting in Fort Worth, February 27, 2010.
 

Jefferson did what very few had ever done - he became a successful solo guitarist and male vocalist in the commercial recording world. Unlike many artists who were "discovered" and recorded in their normal venues, in December 1925 or January 1926, he was taken to Chicago, Illinois, to record his first tracks. Uncharacteristically, Jefferson's first two recordings from this session were gospel songs ("I Want to be like Jesus in my Heart" and "All I Want is that Pure Religion"), released under the name Deacon L. J. Bates. This led to a second recording session in March 1926. His first releases under his own name, "Booster Blues" and "Dry Southern Blues", were hits; this led to the release of the other two songs from that session, "Got the Blues" and "Long Lonesome Blues," which became a runaway success, with sales in six figures. He recorded about 100 tracks between 1926 and 1929; 43 records were issued, all but one for Paramount Records. Unfortunately, Paramount Records' studio techniques and quality were bad, and the resulting recordings sound no better than if they had been recorded in a hotel room. In fact, in May 1926, Paramount had Jefferson re-record his hits "Got the Blues" and "Long Lonesome Blues" in the superior facilities at Marsh Laboratories, and subsequent releases used that version. Both versions appear on compilation albums and may be compared. 

===Success with Paramount Records===
Label of a Blind Lemon Jefferson Paramount record from 1926
Largely due to the popularity of artists such as Blind Lemon Jefferson and contemporaries such as Blind Blake and Ma Rainey, Paramount became the leading recording company for the blues in the 1920s. Dixon, R.M.W. & J. Godrich (1970) Recording the Blues. Reprinted in Oliver, Paul, Tony Russell, Robert M.W. Dixon, John Godrich & Howard Rye (2001) Yonder Come the Blues. Cambridge; ISBN 0-521-78777-7. p. 288. Jefferson's earnings reputedly enabled him to buy a car and employ chauffeurs (although there is debate over the reliability of this as well); he was given a Ford car "worth over $700" by Mayo Williams, Paramount's connection with the black community. This was a frequently seen compensation for recording rights in that market. Jefferson is known to have done an unusual amount of traveling for the time in the American South, which is reflected in the difficulty of pigeonholing his music into one regional category. 

Jefferson's "old-fashioned" sound and confident musicianship made him easy to market. His skillful guitar playing and impressive vocal ranges opened the door for a new generation of male solo blues performers such as Furry Lewis, Charlie Patton, and Barbecue Bob. He sticks to no musical conventions, varying his riffs and rhythm and singing complex and expressive lyrics in a manner exceptional at the time for a "simple country blues singer." According to North Carolina musician Walter Davis, Jefferson played on the streets in Johnson City, Tennessee, during the early 1920s at which time Davis and fellow entertainer Clarence Greene learned the art of blues guitar. Walter Davis: Fist and Skull Banjo, by Wayne Erbsen, Bluegrass Unlimited: March 1981, pp 2226 

Jefferson was reputedly unhappy with his royalties (although Williams said that Jefferson had a bank account containing as much as $1500). In 1927, when Williams moved to OKeh Records, he took Jefferson with him, and OKeh quickly recorded and released Jefferson's "Matchbox Blues" backed with "Black Snake Moan," which was to be his only OKeh recording, probably because of contractual obligations with Paramount. Jefferson's two songs released on Okeh have considerably better sound quality than on his Paramount records at the time. When he had returned to Paramount a few months later, "Matchbox Blues" had already become such a hit that Paramount re-recorded and released two new versions, under producer Arthur Laibly. In 1927, Jefferson recorded another of his now classic songs, the haunting "See That My Grave Is Kept Clean" (once again using the pseudonym Deacon L. J. Bates) along with two other uncharacteristically spiritual songs, "He Arose from the Dead" and "Where Shall I Be". Of the three, "See That My Grave Is Kept Clean" was so successful that it was re-recorded and re-released in 1928. 

===Death and grave===
Jefferson died in Chicago at 10:00 am on December 19, 1929, of what his death certificate called "probably acute myocarditis". For many years, apocryphal rumors circulated that a jealous lover had poisoned his coffee, but a more likely scenario is that he died of a heart attack after becoming disoriented during a snowstorm. Some have said that Jefferson died from a heart attack after being attacked by a dog in the middle of the night. More recently, the book, Tolbert's Texas, claimed that he was killed while being robbed of a large royalty payment by a guide escorting him to Union Station to catch a train home to Texas. Paramount Records paid for the return of his body to Texas by train, accompanied by pianist William Ezell.

Jefferson was buried at Wortham Negro Cemetery (later Wortham Black Cemetery). Far from his grave being kept clean, it was unmarked until 1967, when a Texas Historical Marker was erected in the general area of his plot, the precise location being unknown. By 1996, the cemetery and marker were in poor condition, but a new granite headstone was erected in 1997. In 2007, the cemetery's name was changed to Blind Lemon Memorial Cemetery and his gravesite is kept clean by a cemetery committee in Wortham, Texas. "Jefferson, Blind Lemon", Handbook of Texas Online, Texas State Historical Association, May 30, 2010. Published by the Texas State Historical Association and distributed in partnership with the University of North Texas. "In 2007 the name of the cemetery was changed to Blind Lemon Memorial Cemetery." 

==Discography and awards==

Jefferson had an intricate and fast style of guitar playing and a particularly high-pitched voice. He was a founder of the Texas blues sound and an important influence on other blues singers and guitarists, including Lead Belly and Lightnin' Hopkins. The white North Carolina performer Arthel "Doc" Watson credited listening to Jefferson's recordings as his first exposure to the blues, which would powerfully influence his own style. 

He was the author of many tunes covered by later musicians, including the classic "See That My Grave Is Kept Clean". Another of his tunes, "Matchbox Blues", was recorded more than 30 years later by The Beatles, albeit in a rockabilly version credited to Carl Perkins, who himself did not credit Jefferson on his 1955 recording. Given this influence, it is unfortunate that many of the details of his life remain shrouded in mystery, perhaps forever; even the only known picture of him, shown above, is heavily retouched, with a fake tie painted in by hand. However, at the time, "race music" and its white cousin, "hillbilly music", were not considered to be worthy of consideration as art, rather as a low-cost product to be sold and soon forgotten. 

The Rock and Roll Hall of Fame listed Jefferson's 1927 recording "Matchbox Blues" one of the 500 songs that shaped rock and roll. 500 Songs That Shaped Rock and Roll Jefferson was among the inaugural class of blues musicians inducted into the Blues Hall of Fame in 1980.

==Cover versions==
*Bob Dylan  "See That My Grave Is Kept Clean" on Bob Dylan
*Grateful Dead  "See That My Grave Is Kept Clean" as "One Kind Favor" on Birth of the Dead
*Merl Saunders/Jerry Garcia/John Kahn/Bil Vitt  "See That My Grave Is Kept Clean" as "One Kind Favor" on Keystone Encores Volume I
*John Hammond  "See That My Grave Is Kept Clean" as "One Kind Favor" on John Hammond Live
*B.B. King  "See That My Grave Is Kept Clean" on One Kind Favor
*Peter, Paul & Mary  "See That My Grave is Kept Clean," reworked as "One Kind Favor" on In Concert
*Kelly Joe Phelps  "See That My Grave Is Kept Clean" on Roll Away The Stone
*Counting Crows  "Mean Jumper Blues". Counting Crows lead singer Adam Duritz accidentally claimed credit for "Mean Jumper Blues" in the liner notes of the Deluxe Edition reissue of the album August And Everything After. The cover was featured as part of a selection of early demo tracks. Immediately after the error was brought to his attention, Duritz apologized in his personal blog. Countingcrows.com 
*Laibach  "See That My Grave Is Kept Clean" on SPECTRE SPECTRE by Laibach 2014 
*Pat Donohue - "See that My Grave Is Kept Clean" as One Kind Favor (live on Garrison Keillors A Prairie Home Companion) and later released on the CD Radio Blues.

==In popular culture==
*In 2009 Grammy nominated R&B legends Yarbrough and Peoples were co-produced and were featured in the Off-Broadway production "Blind Lemon Blues". 
*A tribute song, "My Buddy Blind Papa Lemon," was recorded for Paramount Records in 1932 by King Solomon Hill. The record was long considered lost, but one copy was finally located by John Tefteller in 2002.
*Geoff Muldaur refers to Jefferson with the song "Got To Find Blind Lemon" on the album The Secret Handshake.
*Art Evans portrays Blind Lemon in the 1976 film Leadbelly directed by Gordon Parks.
*Nick Cave and the Bad Seeds recorded the song "Blind Lemon Jefferson" on the album The Firstborn Is Dead.
*The 2010 video game , in one of its many downloadable add-ons ('Old World Blues'), features an AI juke-box by the name of 'Blind Diode Jefferson'. The AI claims to have once been a 'blues musician' before his music hard-drives were stripped from him. Voicing of the AI can be characterized as a Southern drawl homage to Blind Lemon Jefferson.
*In the 2003 movie Masked and Anonymous, Bobby Cupid (Luke Wilson) gives his friend Jack Fate (Bob Dylan) Blind Lemon's original guitar, on which he claims Matchbox Blues was first recorded.
*Cheech and Chong parodied Jefferson as "Blind Melon Chitlin'" on their self-titled 1971 album Cheech and Chong (album), their 1985 album Get Out of My Room, and in a stage routine that can be seen in their 1983 movie Still Smokin'.
*Chet Atkins calls Jefferson "one of my first finger-picking influences" in the song "Nine Pound Hammer", on the album The Atkins - Travis Traveling Show
*A practical joke played on Down Beat magazine editor Gene Lees in the late 1950s took on a life of its own and became a long-running hoax when one of his correspondents included a reference to blues legend "Blind Orange Adams" in an article and it was inadvertently published in the magazine. "Blind Orange Adams" is obviously a parody on the name "Blind Lemon Jefferson". References to the non-existent Adams appeared in numerous articles in Down Beat over the next few years. Bill Crow, Jazz Anecdotes, Oxford University Press (1990) pp 175176. 

==See also==

*List of nicknames of blues musicians

==References==

==Sources==
*Govenar, Alan/Brakefield, Jay F. Deep Ellum and Central Track: Where the Black and White Worlds of Dallas Converged. Denton, Texas: University of North Texas Press, 1998; ISBN 1-57441-051-2.

==Further reading==
* Evans, David, "Musical Innovation in the Blues of Blind Lemon Jefferson", Black Music Research Journal, Vol. 20, No. 1, Blind Lemon Jefferson (Spring, 2000), pp. 83116 Published by: Center for Black Music Research  Columbia College Chicago and University of Illinois Press
* Monge, Luigi; Evansy, David, "New Songs of Blind Lemon Jefferson", Journal of Texas Music History, Volume 3, Issue 2, 2003 (Fall 2003)
* Monge, Luigi, "The Language of Blind Lemon Jefferson: The Covert Theme of Blindness", Black Music Research Journal, Vol. 20, No. 1, Blind Lemon Jefferson (Spring, 2000), pp. 3581 Published by: Center for Black Music Research  Columbia College Chicago and University of Illinois Press
* Uzzel, Robert L., Blind Lemon Jefferson: his life, his death, and his legacy, Austin, Tex. : Eakin Press, 2002. ISBN 9781571686565

==External links==
*Blues Foundation Hall of Fame induction
*
* Illustrated Blind Lemon Jefferson discography
*The lyrics of his songs
*



[[Baku (spirit)]]

A baku by Katsushika Hokusai.

 are Japanese supernatural beings that devour dreams and nightmares. They have a long history in Japanese folklore and art, and more recently have appeared in Japanese anime and manga (see examples cited below).

The Japanese term baku has two current meanings, referring to both the traditional dream-devouring creature and to the zoological tapir (e.g., the Malayan Tapir). Nakagawa Masako 1999 "Sankai ibutsu: An early seventeenth-century Japanese illustrated manuscript". Sino-Japanese Studies, 11:24-38. Pages 3334. In recent years, there have been changes in how the baku is depicted.

==History and description==
The traditional Japanese nightmare-devouring baku originates in Chinese folklore and was familiar in Japan as early as the Muromachi period (14th-15th century). Hori Tadao 2005 "Cultural note on dreaming and dream study in the future: Release from nightmare and development of dream control technique," Sleep and Biological Rhythms 3 (2), 4955. Hori Tadao has described the dream-eating abilities attributed to the traditional baku and relates them to other preventatives against nightmare such as amulets. Kaii-Ykai Densh Database, citing a 1957 paper, and Mizuki also describe the dream-devouring capacities of the traditional baku. Mizuki, Shigeru 2004 Mujara 5: Thoku, Kysh-hen (in Japanese). Japan: Soft Garage. page 137. ISBN 4-86133-027-0. 

An early 17th-century Japanese manuscript, the Sankai Ibutsu (), describes the baku as a shy, Chinese mythical chimera with an elephants trunk, rhinoceros eyes, an ox tail, and tiger paws, which protected against pestilence and evil, although eating nightmares was not included among its abilities. However, in a 1791 Japanese wood-block illustration, a specifically dream-destroying baku is depicted with an elephants head, tusks, and trunk, with horns and tigers claws. Kern, Adam L. 2007 Manga from the Floating World: Comicbook culture and the kibyoshi of Edo Japan. Cambridge: Harvard University Asian Center. Page 236, figure 4.26. The elephants head, trunk, and tusks are characteristic of baku portrayed in classical era (pre-Meiji) Japanese wood-block prints (see illustration) and in shrine, temple, and netsuke carvings. . (Accessed September 5, 2007.) Richard Smart, "Delivering men from evil", Japan Times, February 16, 2007. (Accessed September 8, 2007.) http://www.onmarkproductions.com/html/shrine-guide-2.shtml. (Accessed September 8, 2007.) http://collectionsonline.lacma.org/mwebcgi/mweb.exe?request=image;hex=M91_250_104.jpg (Accessed October 12, 2010.) Writing in the Meiji era, Lafcadio Hearn (1902) described a baku with very similar attributes that was also able to devour nightmares. Hearn, Lafcadio 1902 Kott: Being Japanese Curios, with Sundry Cobwebs. Macmillan. Pages 245-248. ISBN 4-86133-027-0. 

== Modern representations ==
Since the 1980s, the baku appears not as a chimera of an elephant and tiger but as a zoologically recognizable tapir. Examples include:

* Oshii Mamorus 1984 animated film Yatsura 2: Beautiful Dreamer|Beautiful Dreamer], Oshii Mamoru 1984 Beautiful Dreamer. New York: US Manga Corp. ASIN: B0001Y4MRW. Ruh, Brian 2004 Stray Dog of Anime: The Films of Mamoru Oshii. New York: Palgrave Macmillan. which is based on an episode of Rumiko Takahashi's manga Urusei Yatsura (19781987) that depicts the baku as a tapir. Takahashi Rumiko 1995 Waking to a nightmare. In: The Return of Lum: Urusei Yatsura. San Francisco: Viz. Pp. 141156. 

* Tapir-type baku appear in Pokmon in the character Drowzee/ Hypno and Munna/ Musharna http://www.pokemon.com/us/pokedex/#96 

* The Digimon franchise features a character called Bakumon (also called Tapirmon). Digimon Dictionary: Bakumon 

* They also appear in Haruhiko Mikimoto's manga Marionette Generation (2001, original 1990). Mikimoto Haruhiko 2001 (original 1990). A Profile of the Heart. In: Marionette Generation, Volume 1, San Francisco: Viz Communications. Pages 159-178. 

Dream-eating, tapir-shaped baku have also entered non-Japanese popular culture:

* The picture book "The Dream Eater" by Christian Garrison tells the story of a young boy, Yukio, who meets a baku and brings it to his village. 

==Gallery==

KonnoHachiman-Sculpture-1.jpg|Baku at the Konnoh Hachimangu Shrine, Shibuya, Tokyo, Japan
KonnoHachiman-Sculpture-3.jpg|Baku and Lion at the Konnoh Hachimangu Shrine, Shibuya, Tokyo, Japan

==See also==
* Dreamcatcher

==Notes==
 

== References ==

* Kaii-Ykai Densh Database. International Research Center for Japanese Studies. Retrieved on 2007-05-12. (Summary of excerpt from Warui Yume o Mita Toki (, When You've Had a Bad Dream?) by Keid Matsushita, published in volume 5 of the journal Shnai Minzoku (, Shnai Folk Customs) on June 15, 1957).

== External links ==
*Baku  The Dream Eater at hyakumonogatari.com (English).
*Netsuke: masterpieces from the Metropolitan Museum of Art, an exhibition catalog from The Metropolitan Museum of Art (fully available online as PDF), which contains many representations of Baku



[[Blackbeard]]

Edward Teach (also Edward Thatch, 168022 November 1718), better known as Blackbeard, was a notorious English pirate who operated around the West Indies and the eastern coast of the American colonies. Although little is known about his early life, he was probably born in Bristol, England. He may have been a sailor on privateer ships during Queen Anne's War before settling on the Bahamian island of New Providence, a base for Captain Benjamin Hornigold, whose crew Teach joined sometime around 1716. Hornigold placed him in command of a sloop he had captured, and the two engaged in numerous acts of piracy. Their numbers were boosted by the addition to their fleet of two more ships, one of which was commanded by Stede Bonnet, but toward the end of 1717 Hornigold retired from piracy, taking two vessels with him.

Teach captured a French merchant vessel, renamed her Queen Anne's Revenge, and equipped her with 40 guns. He became a renowned pirate, his cognomen derived from his thick black beard and fearsome appearance; he was reported to have tied lit fuses under his hat to frighten his enemies. He formed an alliance of pirates and blockaded the port of Charleston, South Carolina. After successfully ransoming its inhabitants, he ran Queen Anne's Revenge aground on a sandbar near Beaufort, North Carolina. He parted company with Bonnet, settling in Bath Town, where he accepted a royal pardon. But he was soon back at sea and attracted the attention of Alexander Spotswood, the Governor of Virginia. Spotswood arranged for a party of soldiers and sailors to try to capture the pirate, which they did on 22 November 1718. During a ferocious battle, Teach and several of his crew were killed by a small force of sailors led by Lieutenant Robert Maynard.

A shrewd and calculating leader, Teach spurned the use of force, relying instead on his fearsome image to elicit the response he desired from those he robbed. Contrary to the modern-day picture of the traditional tyrannical pirate, he commanded his vessels with the permission of their crews and there is no known account of his ever having harmed or murdered those he held captive. He was romanticised after his death and became the inspiration for a number of pirate-themed works of fiction across a range of genres.

==Early life==
Little is known about Blackbeard's early life. It is commonly believed that at the time of his death he was between 35 and 40 years old and thus born in about 1680. In contemporary records his name is most often given as Blackbeard, Edward Thatch or Edward Teach; the latter is most often used today. However, several spellings of his surname existThatch, Thach, Thache, Thack, Tack, Thatche and Theach. One early source claims that his surname was Drummond, but the lack of any supporting documentation makes this unlikely. Pirates habitually used fictitious surnames while engaged in the business of piracy, so as not to tarnish the family name, and this makes it unlikely that Teach's real name will ever be known. 

The 17th-century rise of Britain's American colonies and the rapid 18th-century expansion of the Atlantic slave trade had made Bristol an important international sea port, and Teach was most likely raised in what was the second-largest city in England. He could almost certainly read and write; he communicated with merchants and when killed had in his possession a letter addressed to him by the Chief Justice and Secretary of the Province of Carolina, Tobias Knight. The author Robert Lee speculated that Teach may therefore have been born into a respectable, wealthy family. He may have arrived in the Caribbean in the last years of the 17th century, on a merchant vessel (possibly a slave ship). The 18th-century author Charles Johnson claimed that Teach was for some time a sailor operating from Jamaica on privateer ships during Queen Anne's War, and that "he had often distinguished himself for his uncommon boldness and personal courage". At what point during the war Teach joined the fighting is, in keeping with the record of most of his life before he became a pirate, unknown. 

==New Providence==
With its history of colonialism, trade and piracy, the West Indies was the setting for many 17th and 18th-century maritime incidents. The privateer-turned-pirate Henry Jennings and his followers decided, early in the 18th century, to use the then uninhabited island of New Providence as a base for their operations; it was within easy reach of the Florida Strait and its busy shipping lanes, which were filled with European vessels crossing the Atlantic. New Providence's harbour could easily accommodate hundreds of ships, and was too shallow for the Royal Navy's larger vessels to navigate. The island then was not the popular tourist destination it later became; the author George Woodbury described it as "no city of homes; it was a place of temporary sojourn and refreshment for a literally floating population," continuing, "The only permanent residents were the piratical camp followers, the traders, and the hangers-on; all others were transient." Law and order were unheard of; in New Providence, pirates found a welcome respite. 

Teach was one of those who came to enjoy the island's benefits. Probably shortly after the signing of the Treaty of Utrecht, he moved there from Jamaica, and with most privateers once involved in the war, became involved in piracy. Possibly about 1716, he joined the crew of Captain Benjamin Hornigold, a renowned pirate who operated from New Providence's safe waters. In 1716 Hornigold placed Teach in charge of a sloop he had taken as a prize. In early 1717, Hornigold and Teach, each captaining a sloop, set out for the mainland. They captured a boat carrying 120 barrels of flour out of Havana, and shortly thereafter took 100 barrels of wine from a sloop out of Bermuda. A few days later they stopped a vessel sailing from Madeira to Charleston, South Carolina. Teach and his quartermaster, William Howard, may at this time have struggled to control their crews. By then they had probably developed a taste for Madeira wine, and on 29 September near Cape Charles all they took from the Betty of Virginia was her cargo of Madeira, before they scuttled her with the remaining cargo. 

It was during this cruise with Hornigold that the earliest known report of Teach was made, in which he is recorded as a pirate in his own right, in command of a large crew. In a report made by a Captain Mathew Munthe on an anti-piracy patrol for North Carolina, "Thatch" was described as operating "a sloop 6 gunns and about 70 men". In September Teach and Hornigold encountered Stede Bonnet, a landowner and military officer from a wealthy family who had turned to piracy earlier that year. Bonnet's crew of about 70 were reportedly dissatisfied with his command, so with Bonnet's permission, Teach took control of his ship Revenge. The pirates' flotilla now consisted of three ships; Teach on Revenge, Teach's old sloop and Hornigold's Ranger. By October, another vessel had been captured and added to the small fleet. The sloops Robert of Philadelphia and Good Intent of Dublin were stopped on 22 October 1717, and their cargo holds emptied. 

As a former British privateer, Hornigold attacked only his old enemies, but for his crew, the sight of British vessels filled with valuable cargo passing by unharmed became too much, and at some point toward the end of 1717 he was demoted. Whether Teach had any involvement in this decision is unknown, but Hornigold quickly retired from piracy. He took Ranger and one of the sloops, leaving Teach with Revenge and the remaining sloop. The two never met again, and with many other occupants of New Providence, Hornigold accepted the King's pardon from Woodes Rogers in June the following year. 

===Blackbeard===
Blackbeard, as pictured by Benjamin Cole in the second edition of Charles Johnson's General Historie 
On 28 November Teach's two ships attacked a French merchant vessel off the coast of Saint Vincent. They each fired a broadside across its bulwarks, killing several of its crew, and forcing its captain to surrender. The ship was La Concorde of Saint-Malo, a large French guineaman carrying a cargo of slaves. Teach and his crews sailed the vessel south along Saint Vincent and the Grenadines to Bequia, where they disembarked her crew and cargo, and converted the ship for their own use. The crew of La Concorde were given the smaller of Teach's two sloops, which they renamed Mauvaise Rencontre (Bad Meeting), and sailed for Martinique. Teach may have recruited some of their slaves, but the remainder were left on the island and were later recaptured by the returning crew of Mauvaise Rencontre. 

Teach immediately renamed La Concorde as Queen Anne's Revenge and equipped her with 40 guns. In late November, near Saint Vincent, he attacked the Great Allen. After a lengthy engagement, he forced the large and well-armed merchant ship to surrender. He ordered her to move closer to the shore, disembarked her crew and emptied her cargo holds, and then burned and sank the vessel. The incident was chronicled in the Boston News Letter, which called Teach the commander of a "French ship of 32 Guns, a Briganteen of 10 guns and a Sloop of 12 guns." When or where Teach collected the ten gun Briganteen is unknown, but by that time he may have been in command of at least 150 men split between three vessels. 

On 5 December 1717 Teach stopped the merchant sloop Margaret off the coast of Crab Island, near Anguilla. Her captain, Henry Bostock, and crew, remained Teach's prisoners for about eight hours, and were forced to watch as their sloop was ransacked. Bostock, who had been held aboard Queen Anne's Revenge, was returned unharmed to Margaret and was allowed to leave with his crew. He returned to his base of operations on Saint Christopher Island and reported the matter to Governor Walter Hamilton, who requested that he sign an affidavit about the encounter. Bostock's deposition details Teach's command of two vessels: a sloop and a large French guineaman, Dutch-built, with 36 cannon and a crew of 300 men. The captain believed that the larger ship carried valuable gold dust, silver plate, and "a very fine cup" supposedly taken from the commander of Great Allen. Teach's crew had apparently informed Bostock that they had destroyed several other vessels, and that they intended to sail to Hispaniola and lie in wait for an expected Spanish armada, supposedly laden with money to pay the garrisons. Bostock also claimed that Teach had questioned him about the movements of local ships, but also that he had seemed unsurprised when Bostock told him of an expected royal pardon from London for all pirates. 

Bostock's deposition describes Teach as a "tall spare man with a very black beard which he wore very long". It is the first recorded account of Teach's appearance and is the source of his cognomen, Blackbeard. Later descriptions mention that his thick black beard was braided into pigtails, sometimes tied in with small coloured ribbons. Johnson (1724) described him as "such a figure that imagination cannot form an idea of a fury from hell to look more frightful." Whether Johnson's description was entirely truthful or embellished is unclear, but it seems likely that Teach understood the value of appearances; better to strike fear into the heart of one's enemies, than rely on bluster alone. Teach was tall, with broad shoulders. He wore knee-length boots and dark clothing, topped with a wide hat and sometimes a long coat of brightly coloured silk or velvet. Johnson also described Teach in times of battle as wearing "a sling over his shoulders, with three brace of pistols, hanging in holsters like bandoliers; and stuck lighted matches under his hat", the latter apparently to emphasise the fearsome appearance he wished to present to his enemies. Despite his ferocious reputation though, there are no verified accounts of his ever having murdered or harmed those he held captive. Teach may have used other aliases; on 30 November, the Monserrat Merchant encountered two ships and a sloop, commanded by a Captain Kentish and Captain Edwards (the latter a known alias of Stede Bonnet). 

===Enlargement of Teach's fleet===
Teach's movements between late 1717 and early 1718 are not known. He and Bonnet were probably responsible for an attack off Sint Eustatius in December 1717. Henry Bostock claimed to have heard the pirates say they would head toward the Spanish-controlled Saman Bay in Hispaniola, but a cursory search revealed no pirate activity. Captain Hume of HMS Scarborough reported on 6 February that a "Pyrate Ship of 36 Guns and 250 men, and a Sloop of 10 Guns and 100 men were Said to be Cruizing amongst the Leeward Islands". Hume reinforced his crew with musket-armed soldiers and joined up with HMS Seaford to track the two ships, to no avail, though they discerned that the two ships had sunk a French vessel off St Christopher Island, and reported also that they had last been seen "gone down the North side of Hispaniola". Although no confirmation exists that these two ships were controlled by Teach and Bonnet, author Angus Konstam believes it very likely they were. 

In March 1718, while taking on water at Turneffe Island east of Belize, both ships spotted a sloop from Jamaica, Adventure, making for the harbour. She was quickly stopped and her captain, David Harriot, invited to join the pirates. Harriot and his crew accepted the invitation, and Teach sent over a crew to run Adventure. They sailed for the Bay of Honduras, where they added another ship and four sloops to their flotilla. On 9 April Teach's enlarged fleet of ships looted and burnt Protestant Caesar. His fleet then sailed to Grand Cayman where they captured a "small turtler". Teach probably sailed toward Havana, where he may have captured a small Spanish vessel that had left the Cuban port. They then sailed to the wrecks of the 1715 Spanish fleet, off the western coast of Florida. There Teach disembarked the crew of the captured Spanish sloop, before proceeding north to the port of Charleston, South Carolina, attacking three vessels along the way. 

===Blockade of Charleston===
By May 1718 Teach had awarded himself the rank of Commodore and was at the height of his power. Late that month his flotilla blockaded the port of Charleston (then known as Charles Town) in South Carolina. All vessels entering or leaving the port were stopped, and as the town had no guard ship, its pilot boat was the first to be captured. Over the next five or six days about nine vessels were stopped and ransacked as they attempted to sail past Charleston Bar, where Teach's fleet was anchored. One such ship, headed for London with a group of prominent Charleston citizens which included Samuel Wragg (a member of the Council of the Province of Carolina), was the Crowley. Her passengers were questioned about the vessels still in port and then locked below decks for about half a day. Teach informed the prisoners that his fleet required medical supplies from the colonial government of South Carolina, and that if none were forthcoming, all prisoners would be executed, their heads sent to the Governor and all captured ships burnt. 

Wragg agreed to Teach's demands, and a Mr Marks and two pirates were given two days to collect the drugs. Teach moved his fleet, and the captured ships, to within about five or six leagues from land. Three days later a messenger, sent by Marks, returned to the fleet; Marks's boat had capsized and delayed their arrival in Charleston. Teach granted a reprieve of two days, but still the party did not return. He then called a meeting of his fellow sailors and moved eight ships into the harbour, causing panic within the town. When Marks finally returned to the fleet, he explained what had happened. On his arrival he had presented the pirates' demands to the Governor and the drugs had been quickly gathered, but the two pirates sent to escort him had proved difficult to find; they had been busy drinking with friends and were finally discovered, drunk. 

Teach kept to his side of the bargain and released the captured ships and his prisonersalbeit relieved of their valuables, including the fine clothing some had worn. 

===Beaufort Inlet===
Whilst at Charleston, Teach learned that Woodes Rogers had left England with several men-of-war, with orders to purge the West Indies of pirates. Teach's flotilla sailed northward along the Atlantic coast and into Topsail Inlet (commonly known as Beaufort Inlet), off the coast of North Carolina. There they intended to careen their ships to scrape their hulls, but Queen Anne's Revenge ran aground on a sandbar, cracking her main-mast and severely damaging many of her timbers. Teach ordered several sloops to throw ropes across the flagship in an attempt to free her. A sloop commanded by Israel Hands of Adventure also ran aground, and both vessels appeared to be damaged beyond repair, leaving only Revenge and the captured Spanish sloop. 

Teach had at some stage learnt of the offer of a royal pardon and probably confided in Bonnet his willingness to accept it. The pardon was open to all pirates who surrendered on or before 5 September 1718, but contained a caveat stipulating that immunity was offered only against crimes committed before 5 January. Although in theory this left Bonnet and Teach at risk of being hanged for their actions at Charleston Bar, most authorities could waive such conditions. Teach thought that Governor Charles Eden was a man he could trust, but to make sure, he waited to see what would happen to another captain. Bonnet left immediately on a small sailing boat for Bath Town, where he surrendered to Governor Eden, and received his pardon. He then travelled back to Beaufort Inlet to collect the Revenge and the remainder of his crew, intending to sail to Saint Thomas Island to receive a commission. Unfortunately for him, Teach had stripped the vessel of its valuables and provisions, and had marooned its crew; Bonnet set out for revenge, but was unable to find him. He and his crew returned to piracy and were captured on 27 September 1718 at the mouth of the Cape Fear River. All but four were tried and hanged in Charleston. 

The author Robert Lee surmised that Teach and Hands intentionally ran the ships aground to reduce the fleet's crew complement, increasing their share of the spoils. During the trial of Bonnet's crew, Revenges boatswain Ignatius Pell testified that "the ship was run ashore and lost, which Thatch caused to be done." Lee considers it plausible that Teach let Bonnet in on his plan to accept a pardon from Governor Eden. He suggested that Bonnet do the same, and as war between the Quadruple Alliance of 1718 and Spain was threatening, to consider taking a privateer's commission from England. Lee suggests that Teach also offered Bonnet the return of his ship Revenge. Konstam (2007) proposes a similar idea, explaining that Teach began to see Queen Anne's Revenge as something of a liability; while a pirate fleet was anchored, news of this was sent to neighbouring towns and colonies, and any vessels nearby would delay sailing. It was prudent therefore for Teach not to linger for too long, although wrecking the ship was a somewhat extreme measure. 

===Pardon===
A map of the area around Ocracoke Inlet, 1775
Before sailing northward on his remaining sloop to Ocracoke Inlet, Teach marooned about 25 men on a small sandy island about a league from the mainland. He may have done this to stifle any protest they made, if they guessed their captain's plans. Bonnet rescued them two days later. Teach continued on to Bath, where in June 1718only days after Bonnet had departed with his pardonhe and his much-reduced crew received their pardon from Governor Eden. 

He settled in Bath, on the eastern side of Bath Creek at Plum Point, near Eden's home. During July and August he travelled between his base in the town and his sloop off Ocracoke. Johnson's account states that he married the daughter of a local plantation owner, although there is no supporting evidence for this. Eden gave Teach permission to sail to St Thomas to seek a commission as a privateer (a useful way of removing bored and troublesome pirates from the small settlement), and Teach was given official title to his remaining sloop, which he renamed Adventure. By the end of August he had returned to piracy, and in the same month the Governor of Pennsylvania issued a warrant for his arrest, but by then Teach was probably operating in Delaware Bay, some distance away. He took two French ships leaving the Caribbean, moved one crew across to the other, and sailed the remaining ship back to Ocracoke. In September he told Eden that he had found the French ship at sea, deserted. A Vice Admiralty Court was quickly convened, presided over by Tobias Knight and the Collector of Customs. The ship was judged as a derelict found at sea, and of its cargo 20 hogsheads of sugar were awarded to Knight and sixty to Eden; Teach and his crew were given what remained in the vessel's hold. 

Ocracoke Inlet was Teach's favourite anchorage. It was a perfect vantage point from which to view ships travelling between the various settlements of northeast Carolina, and it was from there that Teach first spotted the approaching ship of Charles Vane, another English pirate. Several months earlier Vane had rejected the pardon brought by Woodes Rogers and escaped the men-of-war the English captain brought with him to Nassau. He had also been pursued by Teach's old commander, Benjamin Hornigold, who was by then a pirate hunter. Teach and Vane spent several nights on the southern tip of Ocracoke Island, accompanied by such notorious figures as Israel Hands, Robert Deal and Calico Jack. 

===Alexander Spotswood===
As it spread throughout the neighbouring colonies, the news of Teach and Vane's impromptu party worried the Governor of Pennsylvania enough to send out two sloops to capture the pirates. They were unsuccessful, but Governor of Virginia Alexander Spotswood was also concerned that the supposedly retired freebooter and his crew were living in nearby North Carolina. Some of Teach's former crew had already moved into several Virginian seaport towns, prompting Spotswood to issue a proclamation on 10 July, requiring all former pirates to make themselves known to the authorities, to give up their arms and to not travel in groups larger than three. As head of a Crown colony, Spotswood viewed the proprietary colony of North Carolina with contempt; he had little faith in the ability of the Carolinians to control the pirates, who he suspected would be back to their old ways, disrupting Virginian commerce, as soon as their money ran out. 
Blackbeard the Pirate: this was published in the General History of the Pyrates, 1725.
Spotswood learnt that William Howard, the former quartermaster of Queen Anne's Revenge, was in the area, and believing that he might know of Teach's whereabouts had the pirate and his two slaves arrested. Spotswood had no legal authority to have pirates tried, and as a result, Howard's attorney, John Holloway, brought charges against Captain Brand of HMS Lyme, where Howard was imprisoned. He also sued on Howard's behalf for damages of 500, claiming wrongful arrest. 

Spotswood's council claimed that Teach's presence was a crisis and that under a statute of William III, the governor was entitled to try Howard without a jury. The charges referred to several acts of piracy supposedly committed after the pardon's cut-off date, in "a sloop belonging to ye subjects of the King of Spain", but ignored the fact that they took place outside Spotswood's jurisdiction and in a vessel then legally owned. Another charge cited two attacks, one of which was the capture of a slave ship off Charleston Bar, from which one of Howard's slaves was presumed to have come. Howard was sent to await trial before a Court of Vice-Admiralty, on the charge of piracy, but Brand and his colleague, Captain Gordon (of HMS Pearl) refused to serve with Holloway present. Incensed, Holloway had no option but to stand down, and was replaced by the Attorney General of Virginia, John Clayton, whom Spotswood described as "an honester man Holloway". Howard was found guilty and sentenced to be hanged, but was saved by a commission from London, which directed Spotswood to pardon all acts of piracy committed by surrendering pirates before 23 July 1718. 

Meanwhile, Spotswood had obtained from Howard valuable information on Teach's whereabouts, and he planned to send his forces across the border into North Carolina to capture him. He gained the support of two men keen to discredit North Carolina's GovernorEdward Moseley and Colonel Maurice Moore. He also wrote to the Lords of Trade, suggesting that the Crown might benefit financially from Teach's capture. Spotswood personally financed the operation, possibly believing that Teach had fabulous treasures hidden away. He ordered Captains Gordon and Brand of HMS Pearl and HMS Lyme to travel overland to Bath. Lieutenant Robert Maynard of HMS Pearl was given command of two commandeered sloops, to approach the town from the sea. An extra incentive for Teach's capture was the offer of a reward from the Assembly of Virginia, over and above any that might be received from the Crown. 

Maynard took command of the two armed sloops on 17 November. He was given 57 men33 from HMS Pearl and 24 from HMS Lyme. Maynard and the detachment from HMS Pearl took the larger of the two vessels and named her Jane; the rest took Ranger, commanded by one of Maynard's officers, a Mister Hyde. Some from the two ships' civilian crews remained aboard. They sailed from Kecoughtan, along the James River, on 17 November. The two sloops moved slowly, giving Brand's force time to reach Bath. Brand set out for North Carolina six days later, arriving within three miles of Bath on 23 November. Included in Brand's force were a number of North Carolinians, including Colonel Moore and Captain Jeremiah Vail, sent to put down any local objection to the presence of foreign soldiers. Moore went into the town to see if Teach was there, reporting back that he was not, but that the pirate was expected at "every minute." Brand then went to Governor Eden's home and informed him of his purpose. The next day, Brand sent two canoes down Pamlico River to Ocracoke Inlet, to see if Teach could be seen. They returned two days later and reported on what eventually transpired. 

===Last battle===
Maynard found the pirates anchored on the inner side of Ocracoke Island, on the evening of 21 November. He had ascertained their position from ships he had stopped along his journey, but unfamiliar with the local channels and shoals he decided to wait until the following morning to make his attack. He stopped all traffic from entering the inletpreventing any warning of his presenceand posted a lookout on both sloops to ensure that Teach could not escape to sea. On the other side of the island, Teach was busy entertaining guests and had not set a lookout. With Israel Hands ashore in Bath with about 24 of Adventures sailors, he also had a much-reduced crew. Johnson (1724) reported that the pirate had "no more than twenty-five men on board" and that he "gave out to all the vessels that he spoke with that he had forty". "Thirteen white and six Negroes", was the number later reported by Brand to the Admiralty. 

At daybreak, preceded by a small boat taking soundings, Maynard's two sloops entered the channel. The small craft was quickly spotted by Adventure and fired at as soon as it was within range of her guns. While the boat made a quick retreat to the Jane, Teach cut the Adventures anchor cable. His crew hoisted the sails and the Adventure manoeuvred to point her starboard guns toward Maynard's sloops, which were slowly closing the gap. Hyde moved Ranger to the port side of Jane and the Union flag was unfurled on each ship. Adventure then turned toward the beach of Ocracoke Island, heading for a narrow channel. What happened next is uncertain. Johnson claimed that there was an exchange of small-arms fire following which Adventure ran aground on a sandbar, while Maynard anchored and then lightened his ship to pass over the obstacle. Another version claimed that Jane and Ranger ran aground, although Maynard made no mention of this in his log. 

What is certain though is that Adventure turned her guns on the two ships and fired. The broadside was devastating; in an instant, Maynard had lost as much as a third of his forces. About 20 on Jane were either wounded or killed and 9 on Ranger. Hyde was dead and his second and third officers either dead or seriously injured. His sloop was so badly damaged that it played no further role in the attack. Again, contemporary accounts of what happened next are confused, but small-arms fire from Jane may have cut Adventures jib sheet, causing her to lose control and run onto the sandbar. In the aftermath of Teach's overwhelming attack, Jane and Ranger may also have been grounded; the battle thenceforth would have become a race to see who could float their ship first. 
Capture of the Pirate, Blackbeard, 1718, Jean Leon Gerome Ferris, painted in 1920

The lieutenant had kept many of his men below deck and in anticipation of being boarded told them to prepare for close fighting. Teach watched as the gap between the vessels closed, and ordered his men to be ready. The two vessels contacted one another as the Adventures grappling hooks hit their target and several grenades, made from powder and shot-filled bottles and ignited by fuses, broke across the sloop's deck. As the smoke cleared, Teach led his men aboard, buoyant at the sight of Maynard's apparently empty ship, his men firing at the small group formed by the lieutenant and his men at the stern. 

The rest of Maynard's men then burst from the hold, shouting and firing. The plan to surprise Teach and his crew worked; the pirates were apparently taken aback at the assault. Teach rallied his men and the two groups fought across the deck, which was already slick with blood from those killed or injured by Teach's broadside. Maynard and Teach fired their flintlocks at each other, then threw them away. Teach drew his cutlass and managed to break Maynard's sword. Against superior training and a slight advantage in numbers, the pirates were pushed back toward the bow, allowing the Janes crew to surround Maynard and Teach, who was by then completely isolated. As Maynard drew back to fire once again, Teach moved in to attack him, but was slashed across the neck by one of Maynard's men. Badly wounded, he was then attacked and killed by several more of Maynard's crew. The remaining pirates quickly surrendered. Those left on the Adventure were captured by the Rangers crew, including one who planned to set fire to the powder room and blow up the ship. Varying accounts exist of the battle's list of casualties; Maynard reported that 8 of his men and 12 pirates were killed. Brand reported that 10 pirates and 11 of Maynard's men were killed. Spotswood claimed ten pirates and ten of the King's men dead. 

Edward Teach's severed head hangs from Maynard's bowsprit, as pictured in Charles Elles's The Pirates Own Book (1837)
Maynard later examined Teach's body, noting that it had been shot no fewer than five times and cut about twenty. He also found several items of correspondence, including a letter to the pirate from Tobias Knight. Teach's corpse was thrown into the inlet while his head was suspended from the bowsprit of Maynard's sloop (so the reward could be collected). 

==Legacy==
Lieutenant Maynard remained at Ocracoke for several more days, making repairs and burying the dead. Teach's lootsugar, cocoa, indigo and cottonfound "in pirate sloops and ashore in a tent where the sloops lay", was sold at auction along with sugar and cotton found in Tobias Knight's barn, for 2,238. Governor Spotswood used a portion of this to pay for the entire operation. The prize money for capturing Teach was to have been about 400, but it was split between the crews of HMS Lyme and HMS Pearl. As Captain Brand and his troops had not been the ones fighting for their lives, Maynard thought this extremely unfair. He lost much of any support he may have had though when it was discovered that he and his crew had helped themselves to about 90 of Teach's booty. The two companies did not receive their prize money for another four years, and despite his bravery Maynard was not promoted; instead, he faded into obscurity. 

The remainder of Teach's crew and former associates were found by Brand, in Bath, and were transported to Williamsburg, Virginia, where they were jailed on charges of piracy. Several were black, prompting Spotswood to ask his council what could be done about "the Circumstances of these Negroes to exempt them from undergoing the same Tryal as other pirates." Regardless, the men were tried with their comrades in Williamsburg's Capitol building, under admiralty law, on 12 March 1719. No records of the day's proceedings remain, but 14 of the 16 accused were found guilty. Of the remaining two, one proved that he had partaken of the fight out of necessity, having been on Teach's ship only as a guest at a drinking party the night before, and not as a pirate. The other, Israel Hands, was not present at the fight. He claimed that during a drinking session Teach had shot him in the knee, and that he was still covered by the royal pardon. The remaining pirates were hanged, then left to rot in gibbets along Williamsburg's Capitol Landing Road (known for some time after as "Gallows Road"). 

Governor Eden was certainly embarrassed by Spotswood's invasion of North Carolina, while Spotswood disavowed himself of any part of the seizure. He defended his actions, writing to Lord Carteret, a shareholder of the Province of Carolina, that he might benefit from the sale of the seized property and reminding the Earl of the number of Virginians who had died to protect his interests. He argued for the secrecy of the operation by suggesting that Eden "could contribute nothing to the Success of the Design", and told Eden that his authority to capture the pirates came from the king. Eden was heavily criticised for his involvement with Teach and was accused of being his accomplice. By criticising Eden, Spotswood intended to bolster the legitimacy of his invasion. Lee (1974) concludes that although Spotswood may have thought that the ends justified the means, he had no legal authority to invade North Carolina, to capture the pirates and to seize and auction their goods. Eden doubtless shared the same view. As Spotswood had also accused Tobias Knight of being in league with Teach, on 4 April 1719, Eden had Knight brought in for questioning. Israel Hands had, weeks earlier, testified that Knight had been on board the Adventure in August 1718, shortly after Teach had brought a French ship to North Carolina as a prize. Four pirates had testified that with Teach, they had visited Knight's home to give him presents. This testimony and the letter found on Teach's body by Maynard appeared compelling, but Knight conducted his defence with competence. Despite being very sick and close to death, he questioned the reliability of Spotswood's witnesses. He claimed that Israel Hands had talked under duress, and that under North Carolinian law, the other witness, an African, was unable to testify. The sugar, he argued, was stored at his house legally, and Teach had visited him only on business, in his official capacity. The board found Knight innocent of all charges. He died later that year. 

Eden was annoyed that the accusations against Knight arose during a trial in which he played no part. The goods which Brand seized were officially North Carolinian property and Eden considered him a thief. The argument raged back and forth between the colonies until Eden's death on 17 March 1722. His will named one of Spotswood's opponents, John Holloway, a beneficiary. In the same year, Spotswood, who for years had fought his enemies in the House of Burgesses and the Council, was replaced by Hugh Drysdale, once Robert Walpole was convinced to act. 

==Modern view==

Official views on pirates were sometimes quite different from those held by contemporary authors, who often described their subjects as despicable rogues of the sea. Privateers who became pirates were generally considered by the English government to be reserve naval forces, and were sometimes given active encouragement; as far back as 1581 Francis Drake was knighted by Queen Elizabeth, when he returned to England from a round-the-world expedition with plunder worth an estimated 1,500,000. Royal pardons were regularly issued, usually when England was on the verge of war, and the public's opinion of pirates was often favourable, some considering them akin to patrons. Economist Peter Leeson believes that pirates were generally shrewd businessmen, far removed from the modern, romanticised view of them as murderous tyrants. After Woodes Rogers' 1718 landing at New Providence and his ending of the pirate republic however, piracy in the West Indies fell into terminal decline. With no easily accessible outlet to fence their stolen goods, pirates were reduced to a subsistence livelihood, and following almost a century of naval warfare between the British, French and Spanishduring which sailors could find easy employmentlone privateers found themselves outnumbered by the powerful ships employed by the British Empire to defend its merchant fleets. The popularity of the slave trade helped bring to an end the frontier condition of the West Indies and in these circumstances, piracy was no longer able to flourish as it once did. 

Since the end of this so-called golden age of piracy, Teach and his exploits have become the stuff of lore, inspiring books, films and even amusement park rides. Much of what is known about him can be sourced to Charles Johnson's A General Historie of the Robberies and Murders of the Most Notorious Pyrates, published in Britain in 1724. A recognised authority on the pirates of his time, Johnson's descriptions of such figures as Anne Bonny and Mary Read were for years required reading for those interested in the subject. Readers were titillated by his stories and a second edition was quickly published, though author Angus Konstam suspects that Johnson's entry on Blackbeard was "coloured a little to make a more sensational story." A General Historie is though generally considered to be a reliable source. Johnson may have been an assumed alias. As Johnson's accounts have been corroborated in personal and official dispatches, Lee (1974) considers that whoever he was, he had some access to official correspondence. Konstam speculates further, suggesting that Johnson may have been the English playwright Charles Johnson, the British publisher Charles Rivington, or the writer Daniel Defoe. In his 1951 work The Great Days of Piracy, author George Woodbury wrote that Johnson is "obviously a pseudonym", continuing "one cannot help suspecting that he may have been a pirate himself." 

Teach's flag depicted a skeleton spearing a heart, while toasting the devil. Flying such a flag was designed to intimidate one's enemies. 
Despite his infamy, Teach was not the most successful of pirates. Henry Every retired a rich man, and Bartholomew Roberts took an estimated five times the amount Teach stole. Treasure hunters have long busied themselves searching for any trace of his rumoured hoard of gold and silver, but nothing found in the numerous sites explored along the east coast of the US has ever been connected to him. Some tales suggest that pirates often killed a prisoner on the spot where they buried their loot, and Teach is no exception in these stories, but that no finds have come to light is not exceptional; buried pirate treasure is often considered a modern myth for which almost no supporting evidence exists. The available records include nothing to suggest that the burial of treasure was a common practice, except in the imaginations of the writers of fictional accounts such as Treasure Island. Such hoards would necessitate a wealthy owner, and their supposed existence ignores the command structure of a pirate vessel, in which the crew often served by free suffrage. The only pirate ever known to bury treasure was William Kidd; the only treasure so far recovered from Teach's exploits is that taken from the wreckage of the Queen Anne's Revenge, which was found and excavated in 1997. As of 2007 more than 15,000 objects have been rescued and preserved, some of which are on display at the North Carolina Maritime Museum. 

Various superstitious tales exist of Teach's ghost. Unexplained lights at sea are often referred to as "Teach's light", and some recitals claim that the notorious pirate now roams the afterlife searching for his head, for fear that his friends, and the Devil, will not recognise him. A North Carolinian tale holds that Teach's skull was used as the basis for a silver drinking chalice; a local judge even claimed to have drunk from it one night in the 1930s. The name of Blackbeard has been attached to many local attractions, such as Charleston's Blackbeard's Cove. His name and persona have also featured heavily in literature. He is the main subject of Matilda Douglas's fictional 1835 work Blackbeard: A page from the colonial history of Philadelphia. Gregory Keyes' fictional The Age of Unreason has him appearing as the governor of a colony, and Tim Powers' 1988 novel On Stranger Tides tells of his forming an alliance of pirates. Film renditions of his life include Blackbeard the Pirate (1952), Blackbeard's Ghost (1968), (2005 film)|Blackbeard: Terror at Sea] (2005), and the 2006 Hallmark Channel miniseries Blackbeard. Parallels have also been drawn between Johnson's Blackbeard and the character of Captain Jack Sparrow in the 2003 adventure film, . 

==References==
Notes

Citations

Bibliography

* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 

===Further reading===

* 
* 
* 

==External links==

* Mike Daniel, discoverer of shipwreck thought to be the Queen Anne's Revenge
* BBC Video about the potential discovery of Teach's ship
* Images of artefacts recovered from the shipwreck thought to be the Queen Anne's Revenge
* National Geographic Magazine Article on Blackbeard
* Blackbeard's Lost Ship Documentary produced by the PBS Series Secrets of the Dead



[[Bugzilla]]

Bugzilla is a Web-based general-purpose bugtracker and testing tool originally developed and used by the Mozilla project, and licensed under the Mozilla Public License.

Released as open source software by Netscape Communications in 1998, it has been adopted by a variety of organizations for use as a bug tracking system for both free and open source software and proprietary projects and products. Bugzilla is used, among others, by Mozilla Foundation, Wikimedia Foundation, WebKit, NASA, Yahoo!, GNOME, KDE, Apache, Red Hat and Novell. Bugzilla Installation List 

== History ==

Bugzilla was originally written by Terry Weissman in 1998 for the nascent Mozilla.org project, as an open source application to replace the in-house system then in use at Netscape Communications for tracking defects in the Netscape Communicator suite. Originally written in Tcl, Terry decided to port Bugzilla to Perl before its release as part of Netscape's early open source code drops, with the hopes that more people would be able to contribute to it as Perl seemed to be a more popular language at the time. 

Bugzilla 2.0 was the result of that port to Perl, and the first version released to the public via anonymous CVS. In April 2000, Weissman handed off control of the Bugzilla project to Tara Hernandez. Under Tara's leadership, some of the regular contributors were coerced into taking more responsibility, and Bugzilla development became more community-driven. In July 2001, facing distraction from her other responsibilities in Netscape, Tara handed off control to Dave Miller, who was still in charge . 

Bugzilla 3.0 was released on May 10, 2007 and brought refreshed UI, XML-RPC interface, custom fields and resolutions, mod_perl support, shared saved searches, improved UTF-8 support and others.

Bugzilla 4.0 was released on February 15, 2011.

=== Timeline ===

Bugzilla's release timeline: 

Define $now = 19/04/2014
Define $width = 556
Define $warning = 436 # $width  120
ImageSize = width:800 height:500
PlotArea = left:40 right:10 bottom:100 top:10
DateFormat = dd/mm/yyyy
Period = from:01/01/1998 till:$now
TimeAxis = orientation:hor
Alignbars = justify
Legend = orientation:vertical position:bottom columns:1

##################################################
# Color definitions #
##################################################
Colors =
 id:col2.0 value:orange Legend:Bugzilla_2.0-2.12
 id:col2.14 value:blue Legend:Bugzilla_2.14
 id:col2.16 value:green Legend:Bugzilla_2.16
 id:col2.18 value:magenta Legend:Bugzilla_2.18
 id:col2.20 value:teal Legend:Bugzilla_2.20
 id:col2.22 value:orange Legend:Bugzilla_2.22
 id:col3.0 value:blue Legend:Bugzilla_3.0
 id:col3.2 value:green Legend:Bugzilla_3.2
 id:col3.4 value:magenta Legend:Bugzilla_3.4
 id:col3.6 value:teal Legend:Bugzilla_3.6
 id:col4.0 value:orange Legend:Bugzilla_4.0
 id:col4.2 value:blue Legend:Bugzilla_4.2
 id:col4.4 value:green Legend:Bugzilla_4.4
 id:col2.0-l1 value:gray(0.2)
 id:col2.0-l2 value:gray(0.3)
 id:colbg value:gray(0.98)
 id:colgrmaj value:gray(0.5)
 id:colgrmin value:gray(0.8)
 id:lighttext value:rgb(0.5,0.5,0.5)

ScaleMajor = gridcolor:colgrmaj unit:year increment:1 start:01/01/1998
ScaleMinor = gridcolor:colgrmin unit:month increment:3 start:01/01/1998
BackgroundColors = canvas:colbg

PlotData=
 ##################################################
 # 2.0 filled bar #
 ##################################################
 bar:2.0 width:35 from:26/08/1998 till:27/04/2001 color:col2.0 mark:(line,col2.0)

 ##################################################
 # 2.0 line & text for first version every year #
 ##################################################
 bar:2.0 mark:(line,col2.0-l1) align:center fontsize:S
 at:26/08/1998 text:"2.0" shift:(0,-15)
 at:20/01/1999 text:"2.2"
 at:09/05/2000 text:"2.10"
 at:27/04/2001 text:"2.12" shift:(0,5)

 ##################################################
 # 2.0 line for all other versions #
 ##################################################
 bar:2.0 mark:(line,col2.0-l2)
 at: 30/04/1999 # 2.4
 at: 30/08/1999 # 2.6
 at: 19/11/1999 # 2.8

 ##################################################
 # 2.14 filled bar #
 ##################################################
 bar:2.14 width:35 from:29/08/2001 till:02/01/2003 color:col2.14 mark:(line,col2.14)

 ##################################################
 # 2.14 line & text for first version every year #
 ##################################################
 bar:2.14 mark:(line,col2.0-l1) align:center fontsize:S
 at:29/08/2001 text:"2.14" shift:(0,-15)
 at:05/01/2002 text:"2.14.1"
 at:02/01/2003 text:"2.14.5" shift:(0,5)

 ##################################################
 # 2.14 line for all other versions #
 ##################################################
 bar:2.14 mark:(line,col2.0-l2)
 at: 07/06/2002 # 2.14.2
 at: 28/07/2002 # 2.14.3
 at: 30/09/2002 # 2.14.4

 ##################################################
 # 2.16 filled bar #
 ##################################################
 bar:2.16 width:35 from:28/07/2002 till:20/02/2006 color:col2.16 mark:(line,col2.16)

 ##################################################
 # 2.16 line & text for first version every year #
 ##################################################
 bar:2.16 mark:(line,col2.0-l1) align:center fontsize:S
 at:28/07/2002 text:"2.16" shift:(0,-15)
 at:02/01/2003 text:"2.16.2"
 at:03/05/2004 text:"2.16.5"
 at:15/01/2005 text:"2.16.8"
 at:20/02/2006 text:"2.16.11" shift:(0,5)

 ##################################################
 # 2.16 line for all other versions #
 ##################################################
 bar:2.16 mark:(line,col2.0-l2)
 at: 30/09/2002 # 2.16.1
 at: 25/04/2003 # 2.16.3
 at: 03/11/2003 # 2.16.4
 at: 10/07/2004 # 2.16.6
 at: 24/10/2004 # 2.16.7
 at: 11/05/2005 # 2.16.9
 at: 18/05/2005 # 2.16.10

 ##################################################
 # 2.18 filled bar #
 ##################################################
 bar:2.18 width:35 from:15/01/2005 till:15/10/2006 color:col2.18 mark:(line,col2.18)

 ##################################################
 # 2.18 line & text for first version every year #
 ##################################################
 bar:2.18 mark:(line,col2.0-l1) align:center fontsize:S
 at: 15/01/2005 text:"2.18" shift:(0,-15)
 at: 20/02/2006 text:"2.18.5"
 at: 15/10/2006 text:"2.18.6" shift:(0,5)

 ##################################################
 # 2.18 line for all other versions #
 ##################################################
 bar:2.18 mark:(line,col2.0-l2)
 at: 11/05/2005 # 2.18.1
 at: 07/07/2005 # 2.18.2
 at: 09/07/2005 # 2.18.3
 at: 30/09/2005 # 2.18.4

 ##################################################
 # 2.20 filled bar #
 ##################################################
 bar:2.20 width:35 from:30/09/2005 till:06/11/2008 color:col2.20 mark:(line,col2.20)

 ##################################################
 # 2.20 line & text for first version every year #
 ##################################################
 bar:2.20 mark:(line,col2.0-l1) align:center fontsize:S
 at: 30/09/2005 text:"2.20" shift:(0,-15)
 at: 20/02/2006 text:"2.20.1"
 at: 02/02/2007 text:"2.20.4"
 at: 04/05/2008 text:"2.20.6"
 at: 06/11/2008 text:"2.20.7" shift:(0,5)

 ##################################################
 # 2.20 line for all other versions #
 ##################################################
 bar:2.20 mark:(line,col2.0-l2)
 at: 22/04/2006 # 2.18.2
 at: 15/10/2006 # 2.18.3
 at: 23/08/2007 # 2.18.5

 ##################################################
 # 2.22 filled bar #
 ##################################################
 bar:2.22 width:35 from:22/04/2006 till:02/02/2009 color:col2.22 mark:(line,col2.22)

 ##################################################
 # 2.22 line & text for first version every year #
 ##################################################
 bar:2.22 mark:(line,col2.0-l1) align:center fontsize:S
 at: 22/04/2006 text:"2.22" shift:(0,-15)
 at: 02/02/2007 text:"2.22.2"
 at: 04/05/2008 text:"2.22.4"
 at: 02/02/2009 text:"2.22.7" shift:(0,5)

 ##################################################
 # 2.22 line for all other versions #
 ##################################################
 bar:2.22 mark:(line,col2.0-l2)
 at: 23/08/2007 # 2.18.3
 at: 12/08/2008 # 2.18.5
 at: 06/11/2008 # 2.18.6

 ##################################################
 # 3.0 filled bar #
 ##################################################
 bar:3.0 width:35 from:09/05/2007 till:31/01/2010 color:col3.0 mark:(line,col3.0)

 ##################################################
 # 3.0 line & text for first version every year #
 ##################################################
 bar:3.0 mark:(line,col2.0-l1) align:center fontsize:S
 at: 09/05/2007 text:"3.0" shift:(0,-15)
 at: 08/01/2008 text:"3.0.3"
 at: 02/02/2009 text:"3.0.7"
 at: 31/01/2010 text:"3.0.11" shift:(0,5)

 ##################################################
 # 3.0 line for all other versions #
 ##################################################
 bar:3.0 mark:(line,col2.0-l2)
 at: 23/08/2007 # 3.0.1
 at: 18/09/2007 # 3.0.2
 at: 04/05/2008 # 3.0.4
 at: 12/08/2008 # 3.0.5
 at: 06/11/2008 # 3.0.6
 at: 03/02/2009 # 3.0.8
 at: 11/09/2009 # 3.0.9
 at: 05/11/2009 # 3.0.10

 ##################################################
 # 3.2 filled bar #
 ##################################################
 bar:3.2 width:35 from:29/11/2008 till:24/01/2011 color:col3.2 mark:(line,col3.2)

 ##################################################
 # 3.2 line & text for first version every year #
 ##################################################
 bar:3.2 mark:(line,col2.0-l1) align:center fontsize:S
 at: 29/11/2008 text:"3.2" shift:(0,-15)
 at: 02/02/2009 text:"3.2.1"
 at: 31/01/2010 text:"3.2.6"
 at: 24/01/2011 text:"3.2.10" shift:(0,5)

 ##################################################
 # 3.2 line for all other versions #
 ##################################################
 bar:3.2 mark:(line,col2.0-l2)
 at: 03/02/2009 # 3.2.2
 at: 30/03/2009 # 3.2.3
 at: 08/07/2009 # 3.2.4
 at: 11/09/2009 # 3.2.5
 at: 24/06/2010 # 3.2.7
 at: 05/08/2010 # 3.2.8
 at: 02/11/2010 # 3.2.9

 ##################################################
 # 3.4 filled bar #
 ##################################################
 bar:3.4 width:35 from:28/07/2009 till:31/01/2012 color:col3.4 mark:(line,col3.4)

 ##################################################
 # 3.4 line & text for first version every year #
 ##################################################
 bar:3.4 mark:(line,col2.0-l1) align:center fontsize:S
 at: 28/07/2009 text:"3.4" shift:(0,-15)
 at: 31/01/2010 text:"3.4.5"
 at: 24/01/2011 text:"3.4.10"
 at: 31/01/2012 text:"3.4.14" shift:(0,5)

 ##################################################
 # 3.4 line for all other versions #
 ##################################################
 bar:3.4 mark:(line,col2.0-l2)
 at: 01/08/2009 # 3.4.1
 at: 11/09/2009 # 3.4.2
 at: 05/11/2009 # 3.4.3
 at: 18/11/2009 # 3.4.4
 at: 08/03/2010 # 3.4.6
 at: 24/06/2010 # 3.4.7
 at: 05/08/2010 # 3.4.8
 at: 02/11/2010 # 3.4.9
 at: 27/04/2011 # 3.4.11
 at: 04/08/2011 # 3.4.12
 at: 28/12/2011 # 3.4.13

 ##################################################
 # 3.6 filled bar #
 ##################################################
 bar:3.6 width:35 from:13/04/2010 till:24/05/2013 color:col3.6 mark:(line,col3.6)

 ##################################################
 # 3.6 line & text for first version every year #
 ##################################################
 bar:3.6 mark:(line,col2.0-l1) align:center fontsize:S
 at: 13/04/2010 text:"3.6" shift:(0,-15)
 at: 24/01/2011 text:"3.6.4"
 at: 31/01/2012 text:"3.6.8"
 at: 31/01/2013 text:"3.6.13"

 ##################################################
 # 3.6 line for all other versions #
 ##################################################
 bar:3.6 mark:(line,col2.0-l2)
 at: 24/06/2010 # 3.6.1
 at: 05/08/2010 # 3.6.2
 at: 02/11/2010 # 3.6.3
 at: 27/04/2011 # 3.6.5
 at: 04/08/2011 # 3.6.6
 at: 28/12/2011 # 3.6.7
 at: 18/04/2012 # 3.6.9
 at: 26/07/2012 # 3.6.10
 at: 30/08/2012 # 3.6.11
 at: 19/02/2013 # 3.6.12

 ##################################################
 # 4.0 filled bar #
 ##################################################
 bar:4.0 width:35 from:15/02/2011 till:$now color:col4.0 mark:(line,col4.0)

 ##################################################
 # 4.0 line & text for first version every year #
 ##################################################
 bar:4.0 mark:(line,col2.0-l1)
 at: 15/02/2011 text:"4.0" shift:(0,-15) # 4.0
 at: 31/01/2012 text:"4.0.4"
 at: 19/02/2013 text:"4.0.10"
 at: 17/04/2014 text:"4.0.12"

 ##################################################
 # 4.0 line for all other versions #
 ##################################################
 bar:4.0 mark:(line,col2.0-l2)
 at: 27/04/2011 # 4.0.1
 at: 04/08/2011 # 4.0.2
 at: 28/12/2011 # 4.0.3
 at: 22/02/2012 # 4.0.5
 at: 18/04/2012 # 4.0.6
 at: 26/07/2012 # 4.0.7
 at: 30/08/2012 # 4.0.8
 at: 13/11/2012 # 4.0.9
 at: 16/10/2013 # 4.0.11

 ##################################################
 # 4.2 filled bar #
 ##################################################
 bar:4.2 width:35 from:22/02/2012 till:$now color:col4.2 mark:(line,col4.2)

 ##################################################
 # 4.2 line & text for first version every year #
 ##################################################
 bar:4.2 mark:(line,col2.0-l1)
 at: 22/02/2012 text:"4.2" shift:(0,-15) # 4.2
 at: 19/02/2013 text:"4.2.5"
 at: 17/04/2014 text:"4.2.8"

 ##################################################
 # 4.2 line for all other versions #
 ##################################################
 bar:4.2 mark:(line,col2.0-l2)
 at: 18/04/2012 # 4.2.1
 at: 26/07/2012 # 4.2.2
 at: 30/08/2012 # 4.2.3
 at: 13/11/2012 # 4.2.4
 at: 24/05/2013 # 4.2.6
 at: 16/10/2013 # 4.2.7

 ##################################################
 # 4.4 filled bar #
 ##################################################
 bar:4.4 width:35 from:24/05/2013 till:$now color:col4.4 mark:(line,col4.4)

 ##################################################
 # 4.4 line & text for first version every year #
 ##################################################
 bar:4.4 mark:(line,col2.0-l1)
 at: 24/05/2013 text:"4.4" shift:(0,-15)
 at: 27/01/2014 text:"4.4.2"

 ##################################################
 # 4.4 line for all other versions #
 ##################################################
 bar:4.4 mark:(line,col2.0-l2)
 at: 16/10/2013 # 4.4.1
 at: 17/04/2014 # 4.4.3

TextData =
 fontsize:S
 textcolor:lighttext
 pos:($warning, 80)
 text:Updated on $now.

== Requirements ==

Bugzilla's system requirements include:

* A compatible database management system
* A suitable release of Perl 5
* An assortment of Perl modules
* A compatible web server
* A suitable mail transfer agent, or any SMTP server

Currently supported database systems are MySQL, PostgreSQL, Oracle, and SQLite. Bugzilla is usually installed on Linux using the Apache HTTP Server, but any web server that supports CGI such as Lighttpd, Hiawatha, Cherokee can be used. Bugzilla's installation process is command line driven and runs through a series of stages where system requirements and software capabilities are checked.

== Design ==
The lifecycle of a Bugzilla bug

While the potential exists in the code to turn Bugzilla into a technical support ticket system, task management tool, or project management tool, Bugzilla's developers have chosen to focus on the task of designing a system to track software defects. Mandated design requirements include: 

* The ability to run on freely available, open source tools. While Bugzilla development includes work to support commercial databases, tools, and operating systems.
* The maintenance of speed and efficiency at all costs. One of Bugzilla's major attractions to developers is its lightweight implementation and speed, so calls into the database are minimized whenever possible, data fetching is kept as light as possible, and generation of heavy HTML is avoided.
* Tickets. For instance, Mozilla.org and the MediaWiki project use it to track feature requests as well. In this case items (called bugs) can be submitted by anybody, and will be assigned to a particular developer. Various status updates for each bug are allowed, together with user notes and bug examples.

In practice, most Bugzilla projects allowing the public to file bugs&mdash;such as the Bugzilla bug database for Bugzilla itself&mdash;assign all bugs to a gatekeeper, whose job it is to assign responsibility and priority level.

== Zarro Boogs ==

By design, Bugzilla is programmed to return the string "zarro boogs found" instead of "0 bugs found" when a search for bugs returns no results. "Zarro Boogs" is a facetious meta-statement about the nature of software debugging. Bug tracking systems like Bugzilla readily describe how many known bugs are outstanding. The response "zarro boogs", Coined by Michael Toy as explained by Tara Hernandez in the PBS documentary is intended as a buggy statement itself (a misspelling of "zero bugs"), implying that even when no bugs have been identified, software is still likely to contain bugs that haven't yet been identified. 

The following comment is provided in the Bugzilla source code to developers who may be confused by this behaviour:

:Zarro Boogs Found
:This is just a goofy way of saying that there were no bugs found matching your query. When asked to explain this message, Terry Weissman (an early Bugzilla developer) had the following to say:

:I've been asked to explain this ... way back when, when Netscape released version 4.0 of its browser, we had a release party. Naturally, there had been a big push to try and fix every known bug before the release. Naturally, that hadn't actually happened. (This is not unique to Netscape or to 4.0; the same thing has happened with every software project I've ever seen.) Anyway, at the release party, T-shirts were handed out that said something like "Netscape 4.0: Zarro Boogs". Just like the software, the T-shirt had no known bugs. Uh-huh. So, when you query for a list of bugs, and it gets no results, you can think of this as a friendly reminder. Of *course* there are bugs matching your query, they just aren't in the bugsystem yet...
: Terry Weissman
:From The Bugzilla Guide  2.16.10 Release: Glossary

== See also ==

* Comparison of issue-tracking systems

== References ==

== External links ==

*



[[Bangor]]

Bangor may refer to:

==Places==
===Canada===
* Bangor, Nova Scotia
* Bangor, Saskatchewan
===United Kingdom===
* Bangor, County Down, Northern Ireland
**Bangor Railway Station
** Bangor (Northern Ireland Parliament constituency)
** Bangor (Parliament of Ireland constituency), until 1800
* Bangor, Gwynedd, Wales, after which some other Bangors are named
** Bangor (Gwynedd) railway station
** Bangor Bus Station
** Bangor University
** Bangor Mountain
* Diocese of Bangor in Wales
* Bangor-on-Dee (also known as Bangor Is-Coed or Bangor-Is-y-Coed), Wrexham, Wales
* Bangors, Cornwall, England

===United States of America===
* Bangor, Alabama
* Bangor, California
* Bangor, Iowa
* Bangor, Maine
** Bangor Air National Guard Base
** Bangor International Airport
** Bangor City Forest
** Bangor Mall
* Bangor, Michigan
** Bangor (Amtrak station)
* Bangor Township, Van Buren County, Michigan
* Bangor Township, Bay County, Michigan
* Bangor, New York
* Bangor, Pennsylvania
* Bangor Base, Washington
* Bangor, Wisconsin, village
* Bangor (town), Wisconsin
* Bangor Township (disambiguation)

===Other===
* Bangor, Morbihan, Brittany, France
* Bangor, New South Wales, Australia
* Bangor Erris, County Mayo, Republic of Ireland

==Other uses==
* City of Bangor (ship), a Great Lakes shipwreck
* City of Bangor, a United States airline with the ICAO code XBG, see Airline codes-C
* Bangor City F.C., a soccer club in Bangor, Gwynedd
** Radio Bangor
* Bangor F.C., a soccer club in Bangor, County Down

==See also==
* 
* Bagnor, a hamlet in England
* Bangor and Aroostook Railroad
* Banger (disambiguation)
* 
* 



[[Ballad]]

Illustration by Arthur Rackham of the ballad "The Twa Corbies"
A ballad is a form of verse, often a narrative set to music. Ballads derive from the medieval French chanson ballade or ballade, which were originally "dancing songs". Ballads were particularly characteristic of the popular poetry and song of the British Isles from the later medieval period until the 19th century and used extensively across Europe and later the Americas, Australia and North Africa. Many ballads were written and sold as single sheet broadsides. The form was often used by poets and composers from the 18th century onwards to produce lyrical ballads. In the later 19th century it took on the meaning of a slow form of popular love song and the term is now often used as synonymous with any love song, particularly the pop or rock power ballad.

==Origins==
The ballad derives its name from medieval French dance songs or "ballares" (L: ballare, to dance), W. Apel, Harvard Dictionary of Music (Harvard, 1944; 2nd edn., 1972), p. 70. from which 'ballet' is also derived, as did the alternative rival form that became the French ballade. A. Jacobs, A Short History of Western Music (1972, Penguin, 1976), p. 21. W. Apel, Harvard Dictionary of Music (1944, Harvard, 1972), pp. 70-72. As a narrative song, their theme and function may originate from Scandinavian and Germanic traditions of storytelling that can be seen in poems such as Beowulf. J. E. Housman, British Popular Ballads (1952, London: Ayer Publishing, 1969), p. 15. Musically they were influenced by the Minnesinger. A. Jacobs, A Short History of Western Music (Penguin 1972, 1976), p. 20. The earliest example of a recognisable ballad in form in England is "Judas" in a 13th-century manuscript. A. N. Bold, The Ballad (Routledge, 1979), p. 5. 

==Ballad form==

Ballads were originally composed to accompany dances, and so were composed in couplets with refrains in alternate lines. These refrains would have been sung by the dancers in time with the dance. "Popular Ballads", The Broadview Anthology of British Literature: The Restoration and the Eighteenth Century, p. 610. Most northern and west European ballads are written in ballad stanzas or quatrains (four-line stanzas) of alternating lines of iambic (an unstressed followed by a stressed syllable) tetrameter (eight syllables) and iambic trimeter (six syllables), known as ballad meter. Usually, only the second and fourth line of a quatrain are rhymed (in the scheme a, b, c, b), which has been taken to suggest that, originally, ballads consisted of couplets (two lines) of rhymed verse, each of 14 syllables. D. Head and I. Ousby, The Cambridge Guide to Literature in English (Cambridge University Press, 2006), p. 66. As can be seen in this stanza from "Lord Thomas and Fair Annet":

The horse | fair Ann | et rode | upon |
He amb | led like | the wind |,
With sil | ver he | was shod | before,
With burn | ing gold | behind |. 

There is considerable variation on this pattern in almost every respect, including length, number of lines and rhyming scheme, making the strict definition of a ballad extremely difficult. In southern and eastern Europe, and in countries that derive their tradition from them, ballad structure differs significantly, like Spanish romanceros, which are octosyllabic and use consonance rather than rhyme. T. A. Green, Folklore: An Encyclopedia of Beliefs, Customs, Tales, Music, and Art (ABC-CLIO, 1997), p. 81. 

Ballads usually use the common dialect of the people and are heavily influenced by the region in which they originate. Scottish ballads in particular are distinctively un-English, even showing some pre-Christian influences in the inclusion of supernatural elements such as the fairies in the Scottish ballad "Tam Lin". "Popular Ballads" The Broadview Anthology of British Literature: The Restoration and the Eighteenth Century, pp. 610-17. The ballads do not have any known author or correct version; instead, having been passed down mainly by oral tradition since the Middle Ages, there are many variations of each. The ballads remained an oral tradition until the increased interest in folk songs in the 18th century led collectors such as Bishop Thomas Percy to publish volumes of popular ballads. 

In all traditions most ballads are narrative in nature, with a self-contained story, often concise and rely on imagery, rather than description, which can be tragic, historical, romantic or comic. Themes concerning rural laborers and their sexuality are common, and there are many ballads based on the Robin Hood legend. http://www.history.ac.uk/reviews/review/980 Another common feature of ballads is repetition, sometimes of fourth lines in succeeding stanzas, as a refrain, sometimes of third and fourth lines of a stanza and sometimes of entire stanzas. 

==Composition==
Scholars of ballads are often divided into two camps: the communalists who, following the line established by the German scholar Johann Gottfried Herder (17441803) and the Brothers Grimm, argue that ballads arose by a combined communal effort and did not have a single author, and individualists, following the thinking of English collector Cecil Sharp, who assert that there was a single original author. The communalist position tends to lead to the view that more recent, particularly printed broadside ballads, where the author is known, are a debased form of the genre. The individualists' position has tended to lead to the view that later changes in the words of ballads are corruptions of an original text. M. Hawkins-Dady, Reader's Guide to Literature in English (Taylor & Francis, 1996), p. 54. More recently scholars have pointed to the interchange of oral and written forms of the ballad. T. A. Green, Folklore: An Encyclopedia of Beliefs, Customs, Tales, Music, and Art (ABC-CLIO, 1997), p. 353. 

==Transmission==
The transmission of ballads comprises a key stage in their re-composition. In romantic terms this process is often dramatized as a narrative of degeneration away from the pure 'folk memory' or 'immemorial tradition.' Ruth Finnegan, Oral Poetry: Its Nature, Significance and Social Context (Cambridge University Press, 1977), p. 140. In the introduction to The Minstrelsy of the Scottish Border (1802) the romantic writer Walter Scott noted the need to 'remove obvious corruptions' in order to attempt to restore the original. For Scott, the process of multiple recitations 'incurs the risk of impertinent interpolations from the conceit of one rehearser, unintelligible blunders from the stupidity of another, and omissions equally to be regretted, from the want of memory of a third.' Similarly, John Robert Moore noted 'a natural tendency to oblivescence'. "The Influence of transmission on the English Ballads", Modern Language Review 11 (1916), p. 387. According to Scott, transcribed ballads often have a 'flatness and insipidity' compared to their oral counterparts.

==Classification==
Illustration by Arthur Rackham to Young Bekie. European Ballads have been generally classified into three major groups: traditional, broadside and literary. In America a distinction is drawn between ballads that are versions of European, particularly British and Irish songs, and 'native American ballads', developed without reference to earlier songs. A further development was the evolution of the blues ballad, which mixed the genre with Afro-American music. For the late 19th century the music publishing industry found a market for what are often termed sentimental ballads, and these are the origin of the modern use of the term 'ballad' to mean a slow love song.

===Traditional ballads===

The traditional, classical or popular (meaning of the people) ballad has been seen as with the wandering minstrels of late medieval Europe. From the end of the 15th century there are printed ballads that suggest a rich tradition of popular music. A reference in William Langland's Piers Plowman indicates that ballads about Robin Hood were being sung from at least the late 14th century and the oldest detailed material is Wynkyn de Worde's collection of Robin Hood ballads printed about 1495. B. Sweers, Electric Folk: The Changing Face of English Traditional Music (Oxford University Press, 2005), p. 45. 

Early collections of English ballads were made by Samuel Pepys (16331703) and in the Roxburghe Ballads collected by Robert Harley, 1st Earl of Oxford and Mortimer (16611724). In the 18th century there were increasing numbers of such collections, including Thomas d'Urfey's Wit and Mirth: or, Pills to Purge Melancholy (171920) and Bishop Thomas Percy's Reliques of Ancient English Poetry (1765). The last of these also contained some oral material and by the end of the 18th century this was becoming increasingly common, with collections including John Ritson's, The Bishopric Garland (1784), which paralleled the work of Walter Scott and Robert Burns who, in Scotland, collected and compiled major collections of Border ballad and Scottish song in Scott's Minstrelsy and through Burns' contributions to James Johnson's Scots Musical Museum and George Thomson's Scottish Airs.

It has been suggested that the increasing interest in traditional popular ballads during the eighteenth century was prompted by social issues such as the enclosure movement as many of the ballads deal with themes concerning rural laborers. Robin Ganev,Songs of Protest, Songs of Love: Popular Ballads in 18th Century Britain James Davey has suggested that the common themes of sailing and naval battles may also have prompted the use (at least in England) of popular ballads as naval recruitment tools. 

Key work on the traditional ballad was undertaken in the late 19th century in Denmark by Svend Grundtvig and for England and Scotland by the Harvard professor Francis James Child. They attempted to record and classify all the known ballads and variants in their chosen regions. Since Child died before writing a commentary on his work it is uncertain exactly how and why he differentiated the 305 ballads printed that would be published as The English and Scottish Popular Ballads. T. A. Green, Folklore: An Encyclopedia of Beliefs, Customs, Tales, Music, and Art (ABC-CLIO, 1997), p. 352. There have been many different and contradictory attempts to classify traditional ballads by theme, but commonly identified types are the religious, supernatural, tragic, love ballads, historic, legendary and humorous. 

===Broadsides===

An 18th-century broadside ballad: The tragical ballad: or, the lady who fell in love with her serving-man.
Broadside ballads (also known as 'roadsheet, stall, vulgar or come all ye ballads) were a product of the development of cheap print in the 16th century. They were generally printed on one side of a medium to large sheet of poor quality paper. In their heyday of the first half of the 17th century, they were printed in black-letter or gothic type and included multiple, eye-catching illustrations, a popular tune tile, as well as an alluring poem. E. Nebeker, "The Heyday of the Broadside Ballad", English Broadside Ballad Archive, University of California-Santa Barbara, retrieved 15 August 2011. By the 18th century, they were printed in white letter or roman type and often without much decoration (as well as tune title). These later sheets could include many individual songs, which would be cut apart and sold individually as "slipsongs." Alternatively, they might be folded to make small cheap books or "chapbooks" which often drew on ballad stories. G. Newman and L. E. Brown, Britain in the Hanoverian Age, 1714-1837: An Encyclopedia (Taylor & Francis, 1997), pp. 39-40. They were produced in huge numbers, with over 400,000 being sold in England annually by the 1660s. B. Capp, Popular literature, in B. Reay, ed., Popular Culture in Seventeenth-Century England (Routledge, 1985), p. 199. Tessa Watt estimates the number of copies sold may have been in the millions. T. Watt, Cheap Print and Popular Piety, 1550-1640 (Cambridge University Press, 1991), p. 11. Many were sold by travelling chapmen in city streets or at fairs. M. Spufford, Small Books and Pleasant Histories: Popular Fiction and Its Readership in Seventeenth-Century England (Cambridge University Press, 1985), pp. 111-28. The subject matter varied from what has been defined as the traditional ballad, although many traditional ballads were printed as broadsides. Among the topics were love, religion, drinking-songs, legends, and early journalism, which included disasters, political events and signs, wonders and prodigies. B. Capp, Popular literature, in B. Reay, ed., Popular Culture in Seventeenth-Century England (Routledge, 1985), p. 204. 

===Literary ballads===
Literary or lyrical ballads grew out of an increasing interest in the ballad form among social elites and intellectuals, particularly in the Romantic movement from the later 18th century. Respected literary figures like Robert Burns and Sir Walter Scott in Scotland both collected and wrote their own ballads, using the form to create an artistic product. Similarly in England William Wordsworth and Samuel Taylor Coleridge produced a collection of Lyrical Ballads in 1798, including Coleridges The Rime of the Ancient Mariner. The Romantics such as Wordsworth, Coleridge, and Keats were attracted to the simple and natural style of these folk ballads, encouraging them to imitate the style "Popular Ballads", The Broadview Anthology of British Literature, p. 610. At the same time in Germany Goethe cooperated with Schiller on a series of ballads, some of which were later set to music by Schubert. J. R. Williams, The Life of Goethe (Blackwell Publishing, 2001), pp. 106-8. Later important examples of the poetic form included Rudyard Kiplings Barrack-Room Ballads (1892-6) and Oscar Wildes The Ballad of Reading Gaol (1897). S. Ledger, S. McCracken, Cultural Politics at the Fin de Sicle (Cambridge University Press, 1995), p. 152. Victorian and late Romantic poets such as Christina Rossetti deployed ballad forms to explore spiritual and moral issues and used the form to discuss the stereotypical treatment and representation of men and women's roles in society.

==Ballad operas==

Painting based on The Beggar's Opera, Act III Scene 2, William Hogarth, c. 1728
In the 18th century ballad operas developed as a form of English stage entertainment, partly in opposition to the Italian domination of the London operatic scene. M. Lubbock, The Complete Book of Light Opera (New York: Appleton-Century-Crofts, 1962) pp. 467-68. It consisted of racy and often satirical spoken (English) dialogue, interspersed with songs that are deliberately kept very short to minimize disruptions to the flow of the story. Rather than the more aristocratic themes and music of the Italian opera, the ballad operas were set to the music of popular folk songs and dealt with lower-class characters. http://www.britannica.com/EBchecked/topic/50485/ballad-opera Subject matter involved the lower, often criminal, orders, and typically showed a suspension (or inversion) of the high moral values of the Italian opera of the period. The first, most important and successful was The Beggar's Opera of 1728, with a libretto by John Gay and music arranged by John Christopher Pepusch, both of whom probably influenced by Parisian vaudeville and the burlesques and musical plays of Thomas d'Urfey (16531723), a number of whose collected ballads they used in their work. F. Kidson, The Beggar's Opera: Its Predecessors and Successors (Cambridge University Press, 1969), p. 71. Gay produced further works in this style, including a sequel under the title Polly. Henry Fielding, Colley Cibber, Arne, Dibdin, Arnold, Shield, Jackson of Exeter, Hook and many others produced ballad operas that enjoyed great popularity. M. Lubbock, The Complete Book of Light Opera (New York: Appleton-Century-Crofts, 1962), pp. 467-68. Ballad opera was attempted in America and Prussia. Later it moved into a more pastoral form, like Isaac Bickerstaffe's Love in a Village (1763) and Shields Rosina (1781), using more original music that imitated, rather than reproduced, existing ballads. Although the form declined in popularity towards the end of the 18th century its influence can be seen in light operas like that of Gilbert and Sullivan's early works like The Sorcerer as well as in the modern musical. G. Wren, A Most Ingenious Paradox: The Art of Gilbert and Sullivan (Oxford University Press, 2006), p. 41. In the 20th century, one of the most influential plays, Kurt Weill and Bertolt Brecht's (1928) The Threepenny Opera was a reworking of The Beggar's Opera, setting a similar story with the same characters, and containing much of the same satirical bite, but only using one tune from the original. K. Lawrence, Decolonizing Tradition: New Views of Twentieth-century "British" Literary Canons (University of Illinois Press, 1992), p. 30. The term ballad opera has also been used to describe musicals using folk music, such as The Martins and the Coys in 1944, and Peter Bellamy's The Transports in 1977. A. J. Aby and P. Gruchow, The North Star State: A Minnesota History Reader, (Minnesota Historical Society Press, 2002), p. 461. The satiric elements of ballad opera can be seen in some modern musicals such as Chicago and Cabaret. L. Lehrman, Marc Blitzstein: A Bio-bibliography (Greenwood, 2005), p. 568. 

==Beyond Europe==
===Native American Ballads===
Statue of John Henry outside the town of Talcott in Summers County, West Virginia
Native American ballads are ballads that are native to North America (not to be confused with ballads performed by native Americans). Some 300 ballads sung in North America have been identified as having origins in British traditional or broadside ballads. N. Cohen, Folk Music: a Regional Exploration (Greenwood, 2005), pp. 14-29. Examples include The Streets of Laredo, which was found in Britain and Ireland as The Unfortunate Rake; however, a further 400 have been identified as originating in North America, including among the best known, The Ballad of Davy Crockett' and 'Jesse James'. They became an increasing area of interest for scholars in the 19th century and most were recorded or catalogued by George Malcolm Laws, although some have since been found to have British origins and additional songs have since been collected. They are usually considered closest in form to British broadside ballads and in terms of style are largely indistinguishable, however, they demonstrate a particular concern with occupations, journalistic style and often lack the ribaldry of British broadside ballads. 

===Blues ballads===

The blues ballad has been seen as a fusion of Anglo-American and Afro-American styles of music from the 19th century. Blues ballads tend to deal with active protagonists, often anti-heroes, resisting adversity and authority, but frequently lacking a strong narrative and emphasising character instead. They were often accompanied by banjo and guitar which followed the blues musical format. The most famous blues ballads include those about John Henry and Casey Jones. 

===Bush ballads===

Cover to Banjo Paterson's seminal 1905 collection of bush ballads, entitled The Old Bush Songs
The ballad was taken to Australia by early settlers from Britain and Ireland and gained particular foothold in the rural outback. The rhyming songs, poems and tales written in the form of ballads often relate to the itinerant and rebellious spirit of Australia in The Bush, and the authors and performers are often referred to as bush bards. Kerry O'Brien December 10, 2003 7:30 Report, abc.net.au The 19th century was the golden age of bush ballads. Several collectors have catalogued the songs including John Meredith whose recording in the 1950s became the basis of the collection in the National Library of Australia. The songs tell personal stories of life in the wide open country of Australia. Typical subjects include mining, raising and droving cattle, sheep shearing, wanderings, war stories, the 1891 Australian shearers' strike, class conflicts between the landless working class and the squatters (landowners), and outlaws such as Ned Kelly, as well as love interests and more modern fare such as trucking. G. Smith, Singing Australian: A History of Folk and Country Music (Pluto Press Australia, 2005), p. 2. The most famous bush ballad is "Waltzing Matilda", which has been called "the unofficial national anthem of Australia". Who'll come a waltzing Matilda with me?", The National Library of Australia, retrieved 14 March 2008. 

==Sentimental ballads==
Sentimental ballads, sometimes called "tear-jerkers" or "drawing-room ballads" owing to their popularity with the middle classes, had their origins in the early Tin Pan Alley music industry of the later 19th century. They were generally sentimental, narrative, strophic songs published separately or as part of an opera (descendants perhaps of broadside ballads, but with printed music, and usually newly composed. Such songs include "Little Rosewood Casket" (1870), "After the Ball" (1892) and "Danny Boy". By the Victorian era, ballad had come to mean any sentimental popular song, especially so-called "royalty ballads", which publishers would pay popular singers to perform in Britain and the United States in "ballad concerts." Some of Stephen Foster's songs exemplify this genre. Temperley (II,2). By the 1920s, composers of Tin Pan Alley and Broadway used ballad to signify a slow, sentimental tune or love song, often written in a fairly standardized form (see below). Jazz musicians sometimes broaden the term still further to embrace all slow-tempo pieces. Witmer. See also Middleton (I,4,i). 

===Jazz, blues and traditional pop===
As new genres of music, such as ragtime, blues and jazz, began to emerge in the early 20th century the popularity of the genre faded, but the association with sentimentality led to the term ballad being used for a slow love song from the 1950s onwards. Most pop standard and jazz ballads are built from a single, introductory verse; usually around 16 bars in length, and ending on the dominant; the chorus or refrain, usually it is 16 or 32 bars long, and in AABA form (though other forms such as ABAC are not uncommon). In AABA forms, the B section is usually referred to as the bridge; often a brief coda, sometimes based on material from the bridge, was added as in "Over the Rainbow". Randel 1986, p. 68. Other key traditional pop and jazz ballads include: "Body and Soul" by Johnny Green; "Misty" by Erroll Garner; "The Man I Love" by George Gershwin; "My Funny Valentine" by Rodgers and Hart, "God Bless the Child" by Billie Holiday, "Ev'ry Time We Say Goodbye" by Cole Porter, the instrumental ballad "Naima" by John Coltrane, "In a Sentimental Mood" by Duke Ellington and "Always" by Irving Berlin. A. Forte, The American Popular Ballad of the Golden Era, 1924-1950 (Princeton University Press, 1995). 

===Pop and rock ballads===
010.jpg|thumb|To emphasize the emotional aspect of a power ballad, crowds customarily hold up lighters adjusted to produce a large flame. [http://query.nytimes.com/gst/fullpage.html?res=9E07E4D8173AF932A35751C0A96E958260&sec=&spon=&pagewanted=print "POP VIEW; The Male Rock Anthem: Going All to Pieces". The New York Times. Published February 1, 1998. "Rock Concert Question: Are Lighter Salutes Bad for the Environment?" Live Science, July 15, 2006. ]]
The most common use of the term ballad in modern pop music is for an emotional love song. N. Cohen, Folk Music: a Regional Exploration (Greenwood, 2005), p. 297. When the word ballad appears in the title of a song, as for example in The Beatles' "The Ballad of John and Yoko" or Billy Joel's "The Ballad of Billy the Kid", the folk-music sense is generally implied. Ballad is also sometimes applied to strophic story-songs more generally, such as Don McLean's "American Pie". D. R. Adams, Rock 'n' roll and the Cleveland Connection Music of the Great Lakes (Kent State University Press, 2002), ISBN 0-87338-691-4, p. 70. 

===Power ballads===
Simon Frith, the British sociomusicologist and former rock critic, identifies the origins of the power ballad in the emotional singing of soul artists, particularly Ray Charles, and the adaptation of this style by performers such as Eric Burdon, Tom Jones and Joe Cocker to produce slow-tempo songs often building to a loud and emotive chorus backed by drums, electric guitars and sometimes choirs. According to Charles Aaron, power ballads came into existence in the early 1970s, when rock stars attempted to convey profound messages to audiences. 

Aaron argues that the power ballad broke into the mainstream of American consciousness in 1976 as FM radio gave a new lease of life to earlier songs such as Led Zeppelin's "Stairway to Heaven" (1971), Aerosmith's "Dream On" (1973), and Lynyrd Skynyrd's "Free Bird" (1974). The Carpenters' "Goodbye to Love", (1972), has also been identified as a prototype of the power ballad. Notable power ballad examples include Nazareth's version of "Love Hurts" (1975), Kiss' "I Still Love You" (1982), Foreigner's "I Want to Know What Love Is" (1984), S. Frith, "Pop Music" in S. Frith, W. Straw and J. Street, The Cambridge Companion to Pop and Rock (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press), pp. 100-1. Scorpions' "Still Loving You" (1984), Heart's "What About Love" (1985), P. Buckley, The Rough Guide o Rock: the definitive guide to more than 1200 artists and bands (Rough Guides, 2003) and Whitesnake's "Is This Love" (1987). H. George-Warren, P. Romanowski and J. Pareles, The Rolling Stone Encyclopedia of Rock & Roll (Fireside, 3rd edn., 2001), p. 1060. 

==See also==
* Border ballad
* Corridoa form of ballad originating in northern Mexico and the U.S. Southwest
* Graves, Alfred Perceval
* List of the Child Ballads
* List of folk song collections
* List of Irish ballads
* List of rock ballads
* Murder ballad
* Roud Folk Song Index
* Song structure (popular music)
* Torch song
* Vaar

==Notes==

==References and further reading==
* Middleton, Richard. "Popular Music (I)". Grove Music Online ed. L. Macy (subscription required). Accessed 2007-04-06.
* Randel, Don (1986). The New Harvard Dictionary of Music. Cambridge: Harvard University Press. ISBN 0-674-61525-5.
* Temperley, Nicholas. "Ballad (II, 2)". Grove Music Online ed. L. Macy (subscription required). Accessed 2007-04-06.
* Witmer, Robert. "Ballad (jazz)". Grove Music Online ed. L. Macy (subscription required). Accessed 2007-04-06.
* Marcello Sorce Keller, "Sul castel di mirabel: Life of a Ballad in Oral Tradition and Choral Practice", Ethnomusicology, XXX(1986), no. 3, 449- 469.

==External links==

* The British Literary Ballads Archive
* The Bodleian Library Ballad Collection: view facsimiles of printed ballads
* The English Broadside Ballad Archive: searchable database of ballad images, citations, and recordings
* Welsh Ballads Website
* The Traditional Ballad Index
* Black-letter Broadside Ballads Of The years 1595-1639 From the Collection of Samuel Pepys
* Smithsonian Global Sound: The Music of Poetryaudio samples of poems, hymns and songs in ballad meter.
* The Oxford Book of Ballads, complete 1910 book by Arthur Quiller-Couch
* English Broadside Ballad Archivean archive of images and recordings of over 4,000 pre-1700 broadside ballads

 



[[Blue yster Cult]]

Blue yster Cult (often abbreviated BC) is an American rock band from Long Island, New York, best known for such hard rock and heavy metal songs as "(Don't Fear) The Reaper", "Godzilla" and "Burnin' for You". Since the release of their self-titled debut album in 1972, the band has sold over 24 million albums worldwide, including 7 million in the United States alone. The band's music videos, especially "Burnin' for You", received heavy rotation on MTV when the music television network premiered in 1981, cementing the band's contribution to the development and success of the music video in modern pop culture. Today, BC's music continues to be played on AOR-friendly radio stations as well as in movies, television shows, and commercials, and during sporting events.

Blue yster Cult's longest lasting and most commercially successful lineup included Donald "Buck Dharma" Roeser (lead guitar, vocals), Eric Bloom (lead vocals, stun guitar), Allen Lanier (keyboards, rhythm guitar, backing vocals), Joe Bouchard (bass, backing vocals) and Albert Bouchard (drums, percussion, backing vocals). The band's current lineup includes Roeser and Bloom, as well as Jules Radino (drums, percussion), Richie Castellano (keyboard, rhythm guitar, backing vocals), and Kasim Sulton (bass, backing vocals). 

==History==

===Early years as Soft White Underbelly (1967-1971)===
The band originated as a group called Soft White Underbelly (a name the band would later occasionally use in the 1970s and 1980s to play small club gigs around the U.S.) in 1967 in the vicinity of Stony Brook University on Long Island, New York, at the prompting of critic and manager Sandy Pearlman consisting of guitarist Buck Dharma, drummer Albert Bouchard, keyboardist Allen Lanier, singer Les Braunstein and bassist Andrew Winters. Pearlman wanted the group to be the American answer to Black Sabbath. Pearlman was important to the bandhe was able to get them gigs and recording contracts with Elektra and Columbia, and he provided them with his poetry for use as lyrics for many of their songs, including "Astronomy". Writer Richard Meltzer also provided the band with lyrics from their early days up through their most recent studio album. The band recorded an album's worth of material for Elektra Records in 1968. When Braunstein departed in early 1969, Elektra shelved the album.

Eric Bloom (formerly the band's acoustic engineer) replaced Braunstein, and the band continued to perform as Soft White Underbelly. However, a bad review of a 1969 Fillmore East show caused Pearlman to change the name of the band - first to Oaxaca, then to the Stalk-Forrest Group. The band recorded yet another album's worth of material for Elektra, but only one single ("What Is Quicksand?" b/w "Arthur Comics") was released (and only in a promo edition of 300 copies) on Elektra Records. (This album was eventually released, with additional outtakes, by Rhino Handmade Records as in 2001). After a few more temporary band names, including the Santos Sisters, the band settled on Blue yster Cult in 1971. (see "band name" section below for its origin).

New York producer and jingle writer David Lucas saw the band perform and took them into his Warehouse Recording Studio and produced a demo, with which Pearlman was able to get the renamed band another audition with Columbia Records. Clive Davis liked what he heard, and signed the band to the label. The first album was subsequently recorded on eight track at Lucas' studio. Winters would leave the band and be replaced by Bouchard's brother, Joe Bouchard.

Lyricists for Blue yster Cult include band members Donald Roeser, Albert Bouchard, producer Sandy Pearlman, and writers Richard Meltzer, Patti Smith, Michael Moorcock, Eric Van Lustbader, Jim Carroll, Broadway Blotto and John Shirley.

===Black and white years (1971-1975)===
Their debut album Blue yster Cult was released in January 1972, with a black and white cover designed by artist Bill Gawlik. The album featured the songs "Cities on Flame with Rock and Roll", "Stairway to the Stars," and "Then Came the Last Days of May". The album sold well, and Blue yster Cult toured with artists such as The Byrds, Mahavishnu Orchestra, and Alice Cooper. 

Their next album Tyranny and Mutation, released in 1973, was written while the band was on tour for their first LP. It contained songs such as "The Red and The Black" (an ode to the Royal Canadian Mounted Police and basically a sped-up rewrite of "I'm On The Lamb", from the debut album), "Hot Rails To Hell", and "Baby Ice Dog", the first of the band's many collaborations with Patti Smith.

The band's third album, Secret Treaties (1974) received positive reviews, featuring songs such as "Career of Evil" (also co-written by Patti Smith), "Dominance and Submission" and "Astronomy". As a result of constant touring, the band was now capable of headlining arenas.

===Commercial success (1975-1981)===
The band's first live album On Your Feet or on Your Knees (1975) achieved greater success and went gold, and was followed up by their first platinum album, Agents of Fortune (1976). It contained the hit single "(Don't Fear) The Reaper", which reached number 12 on the Billboard charts and has become a classic of the genre. Other major songs on the album were "(This Ain't) The Summer of Love," "E.T.I. (Extra-Terrestrial Intelligence)," and "The Revenge of Vera Gemini." For the tour, the band added lasers to their light show, for which they became known. 

Their next album, Spectres (1977), had the FM radio hit "Godzilla", but its sales were not as strong as those for the previous album.

The band then released another live album, Some Enchanted Evening (1978). Though it was intended as another double-live album in the vein of On Your Feet Or On Your Knees, Columbia insisted that it be edited down to single-album length. It became Blue yster Cult's most popular album, eventually selling over 2 million copies.

It was followed by the studio album Mirrors (1979). For Mirrors, instead of working with previous producers Pearlman (who instead went on to manage Black Sabbath) and Krugman, Blue yster Cult chose Tom Werman, who had worked with acts such as Cheap Trick and Ted Nugent. However, the resulting album sales were disappointing.

Pearlman's association with Black Sabbath was tapped for the next Blue yster Cult album, which resulted in Sabbath's Heaven and Hell producer Martin Birch being hired for the next Blue yster Cult record. The result was positive, with Cultsaurus Erectus (1980) receiving good reviews. The album went to number 12 in the UK, but did not do as well in the U.S. One of the notable songs on the album was "Black Blade," which was written by Bloom with lyrics by sci-fi and fantasy author Michael Moorcock. The song is a kind of retelling of Moorcock's epic Elric of Melnibon-Saga. The band also did a co-headlining tour with Black Sabbath in support of the album, calling the tour "Black and Blue".

Birch produced the band's next album as well, Fire of Unknown Origin (1981). The biggest hit on this album was the Top 40 hit "Burnin' for You", a song Dharma had written with a Richard Meltzer lyric. He had intended to use it on his 1982 solo album, Flat Out, but he was convinced to use it on the Blue yster Cult album instead. The album went platinum, and contained other fan favorites such as "Joan Crawford" (inspired by the book and film Mommie Dearest) and "Veteran of the Psychic Wars", another song co-written by Moorcock. Several of the songs had been written for the animated film Heavy Metal, but only "Veteran of the Psychic Wars" (which, ironically, was not written for Heavy Metal) was actually used in the movie. After this album, Albert Bouchard had a falling out with the others and left the band, and Rick Downey (formerly the band's lighting designer) replaced him on drums.

At the height of their popularity, the band's success spurred a host of cult-like activities, such as a Marshfield, MA Blue Oyster Cult themed summer camp which featured competitive air guitar and lip synching contests.

===Decline and fall (1981-1987)===
After leaving the band, Albert Bouchard spent five years working on a solo album based on Sandy Pearlman's poem "Imaginos." Blue yster Cult released a live album Extraterrestrial Live, then went to the studio for the next album, with Bruce Fairbairn as producer, the 1983 release The Revlution by Night. Its highest-charting single was "Shooting Shark," co-written by Patti Smith, which reached number 83 on the charts. "Shooting Shark" also featured Randy Jackson on bass. After Revlution, Rick Downey left, leaving Blue yster Cult without a drummer.

The band re-united with Albert Bouchard for a California tour in February 1985, infamously known as the "Albert Returns" Tour. This arrangement was only temporary, and caused more tensions between the band and Bouchard, as he had thought he would be staying on permanently, which was not the case. The band had only intended to use him as a last-minute fill-in until another drummer could come on board, which resulted in Bouchard's leaving after the tour. Allen Lanier also quit the band shortly thereafter, leaving the band without a keyboardist.

Blue yster Cult hired drummer Jimmy Wilcox and keyboardist Tommy Zvoncheck to finish the Club Ninja album, which was poorly received, with only "Dancing In The Ruins"one of several songs on the record written entirely by outside songwritersenjoying minimal success on radio and MTV. The highlight of the album was "Perfect Water" written by Dharma and Jim Carroll (noted author of The Basketball Diaries).

The band toured in Germany, after which bassist Joe Bouchard left, leaving only two members of the classic lineup, Eric Bloom and Donald Roeser  some referred to the band as "Two yster Cult" during this period. Jon Rogers was hired to replace Joe, and this version of the band finished out the 1986 tour. After the tour wound up that year, the band took a temporary break from recording and touring.

===Imaginos and continued touring (1987-present)===
Blue yster Cult performing at the Sweden Rock Festival, 2008.
When Blue yster Cult received an offer to tour in Greece in the early summer of 1987, the band sprang back into action. The new line-up contained founding members Eric Bloom, Donald "Buck Dharma" Roeser and Allen Lanier, with Jon Rogers returning on bass, and Ron Riddle on drums. Columbia Records was not interested in releasing the Imaginos project as an Albert Bouchard solo album, so Pearlman arranged for it to be released in 1988 by Columbia as a Blue yster Cult album, with some new vocal and instrumental overdubs from Bloom and Roeser. The album did not sell well (despite a positive review in Rolling Stone magazine), and though Blue yster Cult did tour to promote Imaginos, promotion by the label was virtually non-existent. When Columbia Records' parent company CBS Records was purchased by Sony and became Sony Music Entertainment, Blue yster Cult were dropped from the label.

The band spent the next 11 years touring without releasing an album, though they did contribute two new songs to the Bad Channels movie soundtrack, released in 1992. Riddle quit in 1991 and was followed by a series of other drummers including
Chuck Burgi (19911992, 19921995, 19961997), John Miceli (1992, 1995), John O'Reilly (19951996) and Bobby Rondinelli (19972004). Jules Radino joined in 2004, and is the band's current drummer. Rogers left in 1995, and was replaced by Danny Miranda. Miranda left in 2004 and ended up as the bassist for Queen + Paul Rodgers - and Richie Castellano replaced him.

Blue yster Cult live in 2006
Allen Lanier retired from live performances in 2007 after not appearing with the band since late 2006. Castellano has switched to rhythm guitar and keyboards (Castellano also filled in on lead guitar and vocals for an ailing Buck Dharma in two shows in 2005), and the position of bassist was taken up by Rudy Sarzo (previously a member of Quiet Riot, Whitesnake, and Dio), with the band employing Danny Miranda and Jon Rogers as guest bassists to fill in when Sarzo was unavailable. Sarzo then joined the band as an official member of the band, although since then Rogers has occasionally filled in when Sarzo has been busy.

In December 2008, BC management announced that Roeser had fallen down a staircase in his Florida home and injured his shoulder. As a result, several tour dates in December 2008 and January 2009 were canceled or postponed. The band returned to touring by the fall of 2009.

In June 2012, the band announced that bassist Rudy Sarzo was leaving the band and was being replaced by former Utopia bassist Kasim Sulton.

Founding keyboardist/guitarist Allen Lanier died of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease on August 14, 2013. Allen Lanier of Blue Oyster Cult Dead At 66 | News | Music News. Noise11 (2013-08-15). Retrieved on 2013-09-03. 

===CMC/Sanctuary years (1998-2002)===
In the late 1990s, Blue yster Cult secured a recording contract with CMC Records (later purchased by Sanctuary Records), and continued to tour frequently. Two studio albums were released, 1998's Heaven Forbid and Curse of the Hidden Mirror from 2001. Both albums featured songs co-written by cyberpunk/horror novelist John Shirley. Another live record, A Long Day's Night and DVD (same title), followed in 2002, both drawn from one concert in Chicago.

Blue yster Cult have since had a falling out with Sanctuary Records, and currently have no record deal.

===Sony Legacy remasters (2001, 2007) and box set (2012)===
Blue yster Cult performs in Edmonton, Canada on August 18, 2012.

In 2001, Sony/Columbia's reissue arm, Legacy Records issued expanded versions of the first four Blue yster Cult studio albums, including some previously unreleased demos and outtakes from album sessions, live recordings (from the Live 72 EP), and post-St. Cecilia tunes from the Stalk-Forrest Group era.

In February 2007, the Sony Legacy remaster series continued, releasing expanded versions of studio album Spectres and live album Some Enchanted Evening.

In August 2012 it was announced that Sony Legacy would be releasing a 17-disc boxed set entitled The Complete Columbia Albums Collection on October 30, 2012. The set includes the first round of the remastered series plus the long awaited remastered versions of; "On Your Feet Or On Your Knees" (1975), Mirrors, Cultsaurus Erectus, Fire Of Unknown Origin, Extraterrestrial Live, The Revlution By Night, Club Ninja and Imaginos. Also exclusive to this set are two discs of rare and unreleased B-sides, demos and radio broadcasts.

==Band name and logo==
The hook-and-cross logo
The Saturn symbol in alchemy

The name "Blue yster Cult" came from a 1960s poem written by manager Sandy Pearlman. It was part of his "Imaginos" poetry, later used more extensively in their 1988 album Imaginos. Pearlman had also come up with the band's earlier name, "Soft White Underbelly", from a phrase used by Winston Churchill in describing Italy during World War II. In Pearlman's poetry, the "Blue Oyster Cult" was a group of aliens who had assembled to secretly guide Earth's history. "Initially, the band was not happy with the name, but settled for it, and went to work preparing to record their first release..." 

In a 1976 interview published in the U.K. music magazine Zig Zag, Pearlman told the story explaining the origin of the band's name was an anagram of "Cully Stout Beer".

The addition of the umlaut was suggested by Allen Lanier, but rock critic Richard Meltzer claims to have suggested it just after Pearlman came up with the name, reportedly "because of the Wagnerian aspect of Metal". Other bands later copied the practice of using umlauts or diacritic marks in their own band names, such as Motrhead, Mtley Cre, Queensrche, Amon Dl, and Spal Tap. 

The hook-and-cross logo was designed by Bill Gawlik in January 1972, and appears on all of the band's albums. In Greek mythology, "...the hook-and-cross symbol is that of Kronos (Cronus), the king of the Titans and father of Zeus... and is the alchemical symbol for lead (a heavy metal), one of the heaviest of metals." Sandy Pearlman considered this, combined with the heavy and distorted guitar sound of the band and decided the description "heavy metal" The term "heavy metal" was first used by Mike Saunders in 1970. would be aptly applied to Blue yster Cult's musical sound. The hook-and-cross symbol also resembled the astrological symbol for Saturn, the Roman god of agriculture, and the sickle, which is associated with both Kronos (Cronus) and Saturn (both the planet and the Roman god). The logo's "...metaphysical, alchemical and mythological connotations, combined with its similarity to some religious symbols gave it a flair of decadence and mystery...". 

The band was billed, for the only time, as The Blue yster Cult on the cover and label of their second album, Tyranny and Mutation.

==Legacy and influence==

Because of their unique sound and diversity, Blue yster Cult has been influential to many modern bands that span many genres, and are often viewed as important pioneers of several different styles of rock music that came to prominence in the 1980s and 1990s. Many heavy metal bands have cited them as a major influence, and bands such as Metallica and Iced Earth have covered their songs on studio recordings and during live performances. The song "(Don't Fear) The Reaper" has also been covered by many diverse artists, notably Evanescence, HIM, The Goo Goo Dolls, The Beautiful South, Wilco, Big Country, and singer-songwriter Elliott Smith. The bands The Minutemen and Firehose, featuring bassist Mike Watt, frequently performed versions of "The Red & The Black" during their career. The song "Burnin' for You" was covered by Shiny Toy Guns for a 2010 Lincoln MKS commercial. They were also quite influential to several early punk rock bands. They are seen as one of the main influences by rock noir bands such as the genre originators Belladonna,. The Australian punk band Radio Birdman named their debut album Radios Appear after a Blue yster Cult lyric from the song "Dominance and Submission". Blue yster Cult's song "Godzilla" has been covered by a wide variety of bands, including Racer X, Fu Manchu, The Smashing Pumpkins, Sebastian Bach, and more.

Blue yster Cult has also been an influence on many of the harder-edged, psychedelic bands in the modern jam band scene because of their intimate live shows and extended improvisations. Out of these bands, fellow New Yorkers moe. have cited Blue yster Cult as one of their primary influences. They have been greatly influenced by Blue yster Cult in their style of guitar-driven jamming, their elaborate light shows, slightly tongue-in-cheek and eclectic songwriting, and the intimate atmosphere of their live performances. moe. also frequently covers Blue yster Cult classics in their sets, and members of Blue yster Cult have appeared on-stage with the band several times in the past few years, including the 2002 Jammy Awards. A photo of the performance can be seen here. 

The un-authored Allmusic page for stoner metal states: '"Stoner metal bands updated the long, mind-bending jams and ultra-heavy riffs of bands like Black Sabbath, Blue Cheer, Blue Oyster Cult, and Hawkwind by filtering their psychedelia-tinged metal and acid rock through the buzzing sound of early Sub Pop-style grunge."' 

Heavy metal journalist Martin Popoff has stated that Blue yster Cult is one of his favorite bands. He has written a book titled Blue yster Cult: Secrets Revealed about the discography. It is a compiled track-by-track analysis of the entire output of the group that uses period and recent interviews with band members and those close to the band. It is complete up to Curse of the Hidden Mirror.

Their hit single "(Don't Fear) The Reaper" was featured in the famous Saturday Night Live sketch, "More cowbell". The original recording was produced at The Record Plant in New York by David Lucas, who sang background vocals with Roeser and played the now famous cowbell part. Manager Sandy Pearlman mixed the record.

The band's influence has extended beyond the musical sphere. The lyrics of "Astronomy" have been named by author Shawn StJean as inspirational to the later chapters of his fantasy novel Clotho's Loom, "Intertwining High and Low Culture". Clotho's Loom. Retrieved 2013-05-03. wherein Sandy Pearlman's "Four Winds Bar" provides the setting for a portion of the action.

==Personnel==

===Members===
;Current members
* Donald "Buck Dharma" Roeser - lead guitar, vocals (1967present)
* Eric Bloom - lead vocals, stun guitar (1969present)
* Richie Castellano - keyboards, rhythm guitar, backing vocals (2007present), bass guitar (2004-2007)
* Jules Radino - drums, percussion (2004present)
* Kasim Sulton - bass guitar, backing vocals (2012present)

;Former members

* Allen Lanier - keyboards, guitars, backing vocals (1967-1985, 1987-2007; died 2013)
* Albert Bouchard - drums, percussion, backing vocals (1967-1981, 1985)
* Andrew Winters - bass guitar, backing vocals (1967-1971)
* Les Braunstein - lead vocals, stun guitar (1967-1969)
* Joe Bouchard - bass guitar, backing vocals (1971-1986)
* Rick Downey - drums, percussion (1981-1985)
* Jimmy Wilcox - drums, percussion (1985-1987)
* Tommy Zvoncheck - keyboards, guitars, backing vocals (1985-1987)
* Jon Rogers - bass guitar, backing vocals (1986-1995, guest: 2007-2012)

* Ron Riddle - drums, percussion (1987-1991)
* Chuck Burgi - drums, percussion (1991-1992, 1992-1995, 1996-1997)
* John Miceli - drums, percussion (1992, 1995)
* Greg Smith - bass guitar, backing vocals (1995)
* Danny Miranda - bass guitar, backing vocals (1995-2004, guest: 2007-2013)
* John O'Reilly - drums, percussion (1995-1996)
* Bobby Rondinelli - drums, percussion (1997-2004)
* Rudy Sarzo - bass guitar, backing vocals (2007-2012)

===Lineups===

 1967-1969Soft White Underbelly 1969-1971 1971-1981Blue yster Cult 1981-1985 
 * Les Braunstein - lead vocals, stun guitar * Donald \"Buck Dharma\" Roeser - lead guitar, vocals * Allen Lanier - keyboards, guitars, backing vocals * Andrew Winters - bass, backing vocals * Albert Bouchard - drums, percussion, backing vocals * Eric Bloom - lead vocals, stun guitar * Donald \"Buck Dharma\" Roeser - lead guitar, vocals * Allen Lanier - keyboards, rhythm guitar, backing vocals * Andrew Winters - bass, backing vocals * Albert Bouchard - drums, percussion, backing vocals * Eric Bloom - lead vocals, stun guitar * Donald \"Buck Dharma\" Roeser - lead guitar, vocals * Allen Lanier - keyboards, rhythm guitar, backing vocals * Joe Bouchard - bass, backing vocals * Albert Bouchard - drums, percussion, backing vocals * Eric Bloom - lead vocals, stun guitar * Donald \"Buck Dharma\" Roeser - lead guitar, vocals * Allen Lanier - keyboards, rhythm guitars, backing vocals * Joe Bouchard - bass, backing vocals * Rick Downey - drums, percussion 
 1985 1985-1986 1986-1987 1987-1991 
 * Eric Bloom - lead vocals, stun guitar * Donald \"Buck Dharma\" Roeser - lead guitar, vocals * Allen Lanier - keyboards, rhythm guitar, backing vocals * Joe Bouchard - bass, backing vocals * Albert Bouchard - drums, percussion, backing vocals * Eric Bloom - lead vocals, stun guitar * Donald \"Buck Dharma\" Roeser - lead guitar, vocals * Tommy Zvoncheck - keyboards, rhythm guitar, backing vocals * Joe Bouchard - bass, backing vocals * Jimmy Wilcox - drums, percussion * Eric Bloom - lead vocals, stun guitar * Donald \"Buck Dharma\" Roeser - lead guitar, vocals * Tommy Zvoncheck - keyboards, rhythm guitar, backing vocals * Jon Rogers - bass, backing vocals * Jimmy Wilcox - drums, percussion * Eric Bloom - lead vocals, stun guitar * Donald \"Buck Dharma\" Roeser - lead guitar, vocals * Allen Lanier - keyboards, rhythm guitar, backing vocals * Jon Rogers - bass, backing vocals * Ron Riddle - drums, percussion 
 1991-1992 1992 1992-1995 1995 
 * Eric Bloom - lead vocals, stun guitar * Donald \"Buck Dharma\" Roeser - lead guitar, vocals * Allen Lanier - keyboards, rhythm guitar, backing vocals * Jon Rogers - bass, backing vocals * Chuck Burgi - drums, percussion * Eric Bloom - lead vocals, stun guitar * Donald \"Buck Dharma\" Roeser - lead guitar, vocals * Allen Lanier - keyboards, rhythm guitar, backing vocals * Jon Rogers - bass, backing vocals * John Miceli - drums, percussion * Eric Bloom - lead vocals, stun guitar * Donald \"Buck Dharma\" Roeser - lead guitar, vocals * Allen Lanier - keyboards, rhythm guitar, backing vocals * Jon Rogers - bass, backing vocals * Chuck Burgi - drums, percussion * Eric Bloom - lead vocals, stun guitar * Donald \"Buck Dharma\" Roeser - lead guitar, vocals * Allen Lanier - keyboards, rhythm guitar, backing vocals * Greg Smith - bass, backing vocals * John Miceli - drums, percussion 
 1995-1996 1996-1997 1997-2004 2004-2007 
 * Eric Bloom - lead vocals, stun guitar * Donald \"Buck Dharma\" Roeser - lead guitar, vocals * Allen Lanier - keyboards, rhythm guitar, backing vocals * Danny Miranda - bass, backing vocals * John O'Reilly - drums, percussion * Eric Bloom - lead vocals, stun guitar * Donald \"Buck Dharma\" Roeser - lead guitar, vocals * Allen Lanier - keyboards, rhythm guitar, backing vocals * Danny Miranda - bass, backing vocals * Chuck Burgi - drums, percussion * Eric Bloom - lead vocals, stun guitar * Donald \"Buck Dharma\" Roeser - lead guitar, vocals * Allen Lanier - keyboards, rhythm guitar, backing vocals * Danny Miranda - bass, backing vocals * Bobby Rondinelli - drums, percussion * Eric Bloom - lead vocals, stun guitar * Donald \"Buck Dharma\" Roeser - lead guitar, vocals * Allen Lanier - keyboards, rhythm guitar, backing vocals * Richie Castellano - bass, backing vocals * Jules Radino - drums, percussion 
 2007-2012 2012present 
 * Eric Bloom - lead vocals, stun guitar * Donald \"Buck Dharma\" Roeser - lead guitar, vocals * Richie Castellano - keyboards, rhythm guitar, backing vocals * Rudy Sarzo - bass, backing vocals * Jules Radino - drums, percussion ;Guests * Jon Rogers - bass, backing vocals * Danny Miranda - bass, backing vocals * Eric Bloom - lead vocals, stun guitar * Donald \"Buck Dharma\" Roeser - lead guitar, vocals * Richie Castellano - keyboards, rhythm guitar, backing vocals * Kasim Sulton - bass, backing vocals * Jules Radino - drums, percussion ;Guests * Danny Miranda - bass, backing vocals 

===Timeline===

ImageSize = width:1050 height:auto barincrement:18
PlotArea = left:100 bottom:110 top:0 right:0
Alignbars = justify
DateFormat = mm/dd/yyyy
Period = from:01/01/1967 till:12/31/2013
TimeAxis = orientation:horizontal format:yyyy

Colors =
 id:vocals value:brightgreen legend:Lead_vocals,_stun_guitar
 id:guitar value:green legend:Lead_guitar,_vocals
 id:bass value:blue legend:Bass_guitar,_backing_vocals
 id:keyboards value:purple legend:Keyboards,_rhythm_guitar,_backing_vocals
 id:drums value:orange legend:Drums,_percussion
 id:lines value:black legend:Studio_Albums
 id:lines2 value:gray(0.7) legend:Recording_of_Live_Albums
 id:bars value:gray(0.92)

Legend = orientation:vertical position:bottom columns:2
BackgroundColors = bars:bars
ScaleMajor = increment:2 start:1968
ScaleMinor = increment:1 start:1967

LineData =
 at:01/01/1975 color:lines2 layer:back
 at:09/10/1976 color:lines2 layer:back
 at:03/17/1978 color:lines2 layer:back
 at:09/01/1980 color:lines2 layer:back
 at:11/19/1981 color:lines2 layer:back
 at:06/21/2002 color:lines2 layer:back

 at:05/16/1970 color:black layer:back
 at:01/16/1972 color:black layer:back
 at:02/11/1973 color:black layer:back
 at:04/15/1974 color:black layer:back
 at:05/21/1976 color:black layer:back
 at:10/16/1977 color:black layer:back
 at:06/15/1979 color:black layer:back
 at:06/14/1980 color:black layer:back
 at:06/15/1981 color:black layer:back
 at:10/16/1983 color:black layer:back
 at:01/30/1986 color:black layer:back
 at:07/16/1988 color:black layer:back
 at:06/16/1994 color:black layer:back
 at:03/24/1998 color:black layer:back
 at:06/05/2001 color:black layer:back

BarData =
 bar:Les text:Les Braunstein
 bar:Eric text:Eric Bloom

 bar:Buck text:Buck Dharma

 bar:Andrew text:Andrew Winters
 bar:Joe text:Joe Bouchard
 bar:Jon text:Jon Rogers
 bar:Greg text:Greg Smith
 bar:Danny text:Danny Miranda
 bar:Rudy text:Rudy Sarzo
 bar:Kasim text:Kasim Sulton

 bar:Allen text:Allen Lanier
 bar:Tommy text:Tommy Zvoncheck
 bar:Richie text:Richie Castellano

 bar:Albert text:Albert Bouchard
 bar:Rick text:Rick Downey
 bar:Jimmy text:Jimmy Wilcox
 bar:Ron text:Ron Riddle
 bar:Chuck text:Chuck Burgi
 bar:JohnM text:John Miceli
 bar:JohnO text:John O'Reilly
 bar:Bobby text:Bobby Rondinelli
 bar:Jules text:Jules Radino

PlotData=
 width:10 textcolor:black align:left anchor:from shift:(10,-4)
 bar:Les from:01/01/1967 till:04/01/1969 color:vocals text: 
 bar:Eric from:04/01/1969 till:end color:vocals
 bar:Buck from:01/01/1967 till:end color:guitar
 bar:Andrew from:01/01/1967 till:07/01/1971 color:bass
 bar:Joe from:07/01/1971 till:10/01/1986 color:bass
 bar:Jon from:10/01/1986 till:05/01/1995 color:bass
 bar:Greg from:05/01/1995 till:09/01/1995 color:bass
 bar:Danny from:09/01/1995 till:07/01/2004 color:bass
 bar:Richie from:07/01/2004 till:07/01/2007 color:bass
 bar:Jon from:07/01/2007 till:12/31/2007 color:bass
 bar:Danny from:07/01/2007 till:12/31/2007 color:bass
 bar:Rudy from:07/01/2007 till:07/01/2012 color:bass
 bar:Kasim from:07/01/2012 till:end color:bass
 bar:Allen from:01/01/1967 till:07/01/1985 color:keyboards
 bar:Allen from:07/01/1987 till:07/01/2007 color:keyboards
 bar:Tommy from:07/01/1985 till:07/01/1987 color:keyboards
 bar:Richie from:07/01/2007 till:end color:keyboards
 bar:Albert from:01/01/1967 till:07/01/1981 color:drums
 bar:Albert from:02/01/1985 till:07/01/1985 color:drums
 bar:Rick from:07/01/1981 till:02/01/1985 color:drums
 bar:Jimmy from:07/01/1985 till:07/01/1987 color:drums
 bar:Ron from:07/01/1987 till:07/01/1991 color:drums
 bar:Chuck from:07/01/1991 till:05/01/1992 color:drums
 bar:Chuck from:09/01/1992 till:05/01/1995 color:drums
 bar:Chuck from:07/01/1996 till:07/01/1997 color:drums
 bar:JohnM from:05/01/1992 till:09/01/1992 color:drums
 bar:JohnM from:05/01/1995 till:09/01/1995 color:drums
 bar:JohnO from:09/01/1995 till:07/01/1996 color:drums
 bar:Bobby from:07/01/1997 till:07/01/2004 color:drums
 bar:Jules from:07/01/2004 till:end color:drums

==Lead vocals==
While Eric Bloom has always been the band's official lead singer, other members of the band have contributed lead vocals throughout its history.
* Donald "Buck Dharma" Roeser
"Then Came the Last Days of May", "Before the Kiss, a Redcap", "Teen Archer", "(Don't Fear) The Reaper", "Godzilla", "Golden Age of Leather", "I Love the Night", "In Thee", "Mirrors", "The Vigil", "Lonely Teardrops", "Deadline", "Burnin' for You", "Don't Turn Your Back", "Shooting Shark", "Veins", "Dragon Lady", "Dancin' in the Ruins", "Perfect Water", "Spy in the House of the Night", "Madness to the Method", "Astronomy (Imaginos version)", "Les Invisibles", "Magna of Illusion", "Harvest Moon", "X-Ray Eyes", "Damaged", "Real World", "Live for Me", "Still Burnin'", "Dance on Stilts", "Pocket", "Here Comes That Feeling", "Stone of Love", "Night Flyer" (out-take from "Spectres"), "Summa Cum Laude"
* Joe Bouchard
"Screams", "Hot Rails to Hell", "Wings Wetted Down", "Morning Final", "Celestial The Queen", "Nosferatu", "Moon Crazy", "Fallen Angel", "Vengeance (The Pact)", "Light Years of Love", "When the War Comes" (duet with Donald Roeser), "Boorman The Chaffeur" (out-take from "Secret Treaties"), "Double Talk" 
* Albert Bouchard
"You're Not the One (I Was Looking For)", "Cities on Flame with Rock and Roll", "Dominance and Submission", "The Revenge of Vera Gemini", "Sinful Love", "Debbie Denise", "Death Valley Nights", "Cagey Cretins" (duet with Eric Bloom), "Fireworks", "Hungry Boys" (duet with Joe Bouchard), "Blue yster Cult" (duet with Donald Roeser), "Sally" (out-take from "Agents of Fortune"), "Fire Of Unknown Origin" (original version; out-take from "Agents of Fortune")
* Allen Lanier
"True Confessions", "Dance The Night Away" (demo), "Please Hold" (out-take)
* Jon Rogers
"I Am the One You Warned Me Of", "Imaginos"
* Joey Cerisano
"The Siege and Investiture of Baron Von Frankenstein's Castle at Weisseria"

==Album certifications==
* Secret Treaties: RIAA (USA) Gold 500,000+
* On Your Feet or on Your Knees: RIAA (USA) Gold 500,000+
* Agents of Fortune: RIAA (USA) Platinum 1,000,000+; CRIA (Canada) Gold 50,000+
* Spectres: RIAA (USA) Gold 500,000+
* Some Enchanted Evening: RIAA (USA) Platinum 1,000,000+
* Fire of Unknown Origin: RIAA (USA) Gold 500,000+; CRIA (Canada) Gold 50,000+

==Discography==

Blue yster Cult has released fourteen studio albums, the most recent one being released in 2001 entitled Curse of the Hidden Mirror (released 30 years after their debut in 1971). Sixteen of the song lyrics in the final two Blue yster Cult albums to date, Heaven Forbid and Curse of the Hidden Mirror, were written by novelist John Shirley.

===Studio albums===
*Blue yster Cult (1972)
*Tyranny and Mutation (1973)
*Secret Treaties (1974)
*Agents of Fortune (1976)
*Spectres (1977)
*Mirrors (1979)
*Cultsaurus Erectus (1980)
*Fire of Unknown Origin (1981)
*The Revlution by Night (1983)
*Club Ninja (1985)
*Imaginos (1988)
*Cult Classic (1994)
*Heaven Forbid (1998)
*Curse of the Hidden Mirror (2001)

In 2012, the Blue yster Cult albums released by Columbia were re-released in a massive box set of sixteen CDs and one DVD.

==Bibliography==
* BLUE YSTER CULT : Secrets revealed!, by Martin Popoff, 303 pages(Canada, 2009) 
* BLUE YSTER CULT : La Carrire du mal, by Mathieu Bollon and Aurlien Lemant, Camion Blanc publishing, 722 pages (France, 2013)

==References==

==External links==

* Official website

===Members websites===
* Official Donald "Buck Dharma" Roeser website
* Official Eric Bloom website
* Official Albert Bouchard website
* Official Ron Riddle website
* Official Richie Castellano website
* Official Rudy Sarzo website
* Official Jules Radino website
* Official Joe Bouchard website
* Official Tommy Zvoncheck website

 



[[Battery Park City]]

Location of Battery Park City, which is marked in yellow
The esplanade of Battery Park City
South End Avenue

Battery Park City is a 92 acre planned community at the southwestern tip of Lower Manhattan in New York City, United States. The land upon which it stands was created by land reclamation on the Hudson River using over 3 million cubic yards of soil and rock excavated during the construction of the World Trade Center, the New York City Water Tunnel, and certain other construction projects, as well as from sand dredged from New York Harbor off Staten Island. Howe, Arthur. "IN N.Y.C., A $1 BILLION DREAM RISES", The Philadelphia Inquirer, June 6, 1982. Accessed August 4, 2007. "Construction already is under way on the southern tip of Manhattan, at Battery Park City, land named for the British fort built there in 1693. The area was expanded by 1.2 million cubic yards of earth and rock excavated for the foundations of the World Trade Center nearby." The neighborhood, which is the site of Brookfield Place (New York City) along with numerous housing, commercial and retail buildings, is named for adjacent Battery Park.

Battery Park City is owned and managed by the Battery Park City Authority (BPCA), a public-benefit corporation created by New York State under the authority of the Urban Development Corporation. Excess revenue from the area was to be contributed to other housing efforts, typically low-income projects in the Bronx and Harlem. 

Under the 1989 agreement between the BPCA and the City of New York, $600 million was transferred by the BPCA to the city. Charles J. Urstadt, the first Chairman and CEO of the BPCA, noted in an August 19, 2007 op-ed piece in the New York Post that the aggregate figure of funds transferred to the City of New York is above $1.4 billion, with the BPCA continuing to contribute $200 million a year. 

Much of this funding has historically been diverted to general city expenses, under section 3.d of the 1989 agreement. However, in July 2006, Mayor Michael Bloomberg, Governor George Pataki, and Comptroller William C. Thompson, Jr. announced the final approval for the New York City Housing Trust Fund derived from $130 million in Battery Park City revenues. The fund aimed to preserve or create 4,300 units of low- and moderate-income housing by 2009. Scott, Janny (August 1, 2006). "Manhattan: Housing Plan Approved." It also provided seed financing for the New York Acquisition Fund, a $230 million initiative that aims to serve as a catalyst for the construction and preservation of more than 30,000 units of affordable housing citywide by 2016. The Acquisition Fund has since established itself as a model for similar funds in cities and states across the country. 

==Geography==
Greenery at South Cove
NYPL branch library

Battery Park City is bounded on the east by West Street, which separates the area from the Financial District of downtown Manhattan. To the west, north and south, the area is surrounded by the tidal estuary of the Hudson River.

The development consists of roughly five major sections. Traveling north to south, the first neighborhood, "Elephant" or Land Fill Near TriBeCa, has high-rise residential buildings, a large hotel, Stuyvesant High School, a movie theater and a modern branch of the New York Public Library. Existing restaurants located in the hotel have been closed following a take over of the property by Goldman Sachs with new development planned for Joe Weisenthal in Business Insider 08/02/2010. "...a trio of restaurants run by Danny Meyer  the New York City restaurant wunderkind  as well as a new ballroom and conference centre, attached to the hotel which will be upgraded. In addition, the bank Sachs plans 5,000 square feet of retail units". Former undeveloped lots in the area have been developed into high-rise buildings. Goldman Sachs has completed building a new headquarters at 200 West Street. 

Immediately to the south lies Brookfield Place (New York), a complex of several commercial buildings occupied by tenants including American Express, Dow Jones & Company, Merrill Lynch, Nomura Holdings, RBC Capital Markets, and Deloitte & Touche. Brookfield Place's ground floor and portions of the second floor are occupied by a mall; its center point is a steel-and-glass atrium known as the Winter Garden. Outside of the Winter Garden lies a sizeable yacht harbor on the Hudson known as North Cove.

South of Brookfield Place lies the majority of Battery Park City's residential areas, in three sections: "Gateway Plaza", a high-rise building complex; the "Rector Place Residential Neighborhood" and the "Battery Place Residential Neighborhood". These neighborhoods contain most of the area's residential buildings, along with park space and various types of supporting businesses (supermarkets, restaurants, movie theaters.) Construction of residential buildings began north of the World Financial Center in the late 1990s and completion of the final lots scheduled to be completed by spring 2011.

==Demographics==
As of the 2000 census, there were 7,951 people residing in Battery Park City. The population density was 41,032 people per square mile (15,855/km). The racial makeup of the neighborhood was 75% White, 17.93% Asian, 0.04% Pacific Islander, 2.97% African American, 0.06% Native American, 1.58% from other races, and 2.42% from two or more races. 5.32% of the population were Hispanic of any race. 27.7% of the population was foreign born, 51.8% came from Asia, 30.8% from Europe, 8.2% from Latin America and 9.2% from other (mostly Canada).

As of 2007, about 10,000 people live in Battery Park City, most of whom are upper middle class and upper class (54.0% of households have incomes over $100,000). When fully built out, the neighborhood is projected to have 14,000 residents. 

Population history:
*1980: -
*1990: 5,574
*2000: 7,951
*2010: 13,386

==History==
Throughout the 19th century and early 20th century, the area adjoining today's Battery Park City was known as Little Syria with Lebanese, Greeks, Armenians, and other ethnic groups; a long-standing reminder of the ethnic past was the former St. Nicholas Greek Orthodox Church, which was destroyed in the September 11, 2001 terrorist attacks. An additional historic church, St. George's Syrian Catholic Church, still stands at 103 Washington Street.

At the corner of Vesey Street and North End Avenue is the Irish Hunger Memorial
North End Avenue toward Stuyvesant High School
Yacht harbor at North Cove, next to the World Financial Center

By the late 1950s, the once-prosperous port area of downtown Manhattan was occupied by a number of dilapidated shipping piers, casualties of the rise of container shipping which drove sea traffic to Port Elizabeth, New Jersey. The initial proposal to reclaim this area through landfill was offered in the early 1960s by private firms and supported by the mayor. That plan became complicated when Governor Nelson Rockefeller announced his desire to redevelop a part of the area as a separate project. The various groups reached a compromise, and in 1966 the governor unveiled the proposal for what would become Battery Park City. The creation of architect Wallace K. Harrison, the proposal called for a 'comprehensive community' consisting of housing, social infrastructure and light industry. The landscaping of the park space and later the Winter Garden was designed by M. Paul Friedberg. 

In 1968, the New York State Legislature created the Battery Park City Authority (BPCA) to oversee development. The New York State Urban Development Corporation and ten other public agencies were also involved in the development project. For the next several years, the BPCA made slow progress. In 1969, it unveiled a master plan for the area, and in 1972 issued $200 million in bonds to fund construction efforts. Landfill material from construction of the World Trade Center was used to add fill for the southern portion. Cellular cofferdams were constructed to retain the material. After removal of the piers, wooden piles and overburden of silt, the northern portion (north of, and including the marina) was filled with sand dredged from areas adjacent to Ambrose Channel in the Atlantic Ocean. By 1976, the landfill was completed. Seating stands for viewing the American Bicentennial "Operation Sail" flotilla parade were set up on the completed landfill in July 1976. Construction efforts ground to a halt for nearly two years beginning in 1977, as a result of city-wide financial hardships. In 1979, the title to the landfill was transferred from the city to the Battery Park City Authority, which financially restructured itself and created a new, more viable master plan, designed by Alex Cooper and Stanton Eckstut. The design of BPC to some degree reflects the values of vibrant city neighborhoods championed by Jane Jacobs. The Urban Land Institute (ULI) awarded the Battery Park City Master Plan its 2010 Heritage Award, for having "facilitated the private development of 9.3 million square feet of commercial space, 7.2 million square feet of residential space, and nearly 36 acres of open space in lower Manhattan, becoming a model for successful large-scale planning efforts and marking a positive shift away from the urban renewal mindset of the time." http://www.uli.org/News/MediaCenter/PressReleases/2010%20archives/Content/AwardsforExcellenceAmericas2010Winners.aspx 

During the late 1970s and early 1980s, the site hosted Creative Time's landmark Art on the Beach sculpture exhibitions. On September 23, 1979, the landfill was the site of an anti-nuclear rally attended by 200,000 people. 

Construction began on the first residential building in 1980, followed in 1981 with the start of construction on the World Financial Center. Olympia and York, of Toronto, was named as the developer for the World Financial Center in 1981, who then hired Cesar Pelli as the lead architect. By 1985, construction was completed and the World Financial Center (later renamed Brookfield Place New York) saw its first tenants.

Throughout the 1980s, the Battery Park City Authority oversaw a great deal of construction, including the entire Rector Place neighborhood and the river esplanade. It was during that period that current City Planning Department Director Amanda Burden worked on Battery Park City. During the 1980s, a total of 13 buildings were constructed. The Vietnam Veterans Plaza was established by Edward I. Koch in 1985. In the early 1990s, Battery Park City became the new home of the Stuyvesant High School. During the 1990s, an additional six buildings were added to the neighborhood. By the turn of the 21st century, Battery Park City was mostly completed, with the exception of some ongoing construction on West Street.

Current residential neighborhoods of Battery Park City are divided into a north and south section, separated by the World Financial Center Complex. The southern section, extending down from the Winter Garden, is the more densely populated region, containing Gateway Plaza, and Rector Place apartment buildings. The northern section, although still under very large construction, consists entirely of large, 2045-story buildings which are all various shades of orange brick. 

The September 11, 2001 terrorist attacks had a major impact on Battery Park City. The residents of lower Manhattan and particularly of Battery Park City were displaced for an extended period of time. Parts of the community were an official crime-scene and therefore residents were unable to return to live or even collect property. Many of the displaced residents were not allowed to return to the area for months and none were given government guidance of where to live temporarily on the already crowded island of Manhattan. With most hotel rooms booked, residents, including young children and the elderly were forced to fend for themselves. When they were finally allowed to return to Battery Park City, some found that their homes had been looted. Upon return the air in the area was still filled with toxic smoke from the World Trade Center fires that persisted until January 2002.

More than half of the area's residents moved away permanently from the community after the adjacent World Trade Center towers collapsed and spread toxic dust, debris, and smoke. Gateway Plaza's 600 building, Hudson View East and, the then Parc Place, now Rector Square were punctured by airplane parts. The Winter Garden and other portions of the World Financial Center were severely damaged. Environmental concerns regarding dust from the Trade Center are a continuing source of concern for many residents, scientists, and elected officials. Since the attacks, the damage has been repaired. Temporarily reduced rents and government subsidies helped restore residential occupancy in the years following the attacks.

Northernmost part of Battery Park City
View from Hudson River

After the events of 2001, residents of Battery Park City and Tribeca formed the TriBattery Pops Tom Goodkind Conductor. The Pops have been Grammy nominated and are the first lower Manhattan all volunteer community band in a century.

Since then, real estate development in the area has continued robustly. Commercial development includes the 2100000 sqft Goldman Sachs Global Headquarters, which opened for occupancy in October 2009. Goldman Sachs is seeking gold-level certification under the United States Green Building Councils Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design (LEED) program by incorporating various water and energy conservation features. Several residential projects are underway, including LEED buildings which cater to the environmentally conscious.

Construction history: Emporis NYC Districts and Zones: Battery Park City 
*1910s: 1 building
*1980s: 23 buildings
*1990s: 9 buildings
*2000s: 11 buildings
*2010s: 3 buildings

==Transportation==
Currently, the Metropolitan Transportation Authority provides bus service to the area. , the , , and bus lines service parts of Battery Park City. Additionally, the Downtown Alliance provides a free bus service http://www.downtownny.com/getting-around/downtown-connection that runs along North End Avenue and South End Avenue, connecting the various residential complexes with subway stations on the other side of West Street. There is currently no subway access in Battery Park City proper. However, the West Street pedestrian bridges provide the residents and workers of Battery Park City connectivity to subway stations and the PATH station in the nearby Financial District. A tunnel under West Street also provides access from Battery Park City to the World Trade Center PATH station. The Battery Park City Ferry Terminal is at the foot of Vesey Street opposite the New York Mercantile Exchange and provides ferry transportation to various points in New Jersey.

==See also==
* Millennium Point
* The Solaire

==References==
Notes

Further reading
* Gordon, David L.A. (1997) Battery Park City: Politics and Planning on the New York Waterfront, Gordon and Breach Publishers

== External links ==

*Battery Park Blog - Covering Battery Park City, the Financial District, and Tribeca
*Battery Park City News, Events & Food
*Battery Park City Authority
*North Cove Marina

 


[[Bacterial vaginosis]]

Bacterial vaginosis (BV) or very uncommonly vaginal bacteriosis is a disease of the vagina caused by bacteria. According to the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), risk factors for BV include douching and having new or multiple sex partners, although it is unclear what role sexual activity plays in the development of BV. BV is caused by an imbalance of naturally occurring bacterial flora and is often confused with yeast infection (candidiasis) or infection with Trichomonas vaginalis (trichomoniasis), which are not caused by bacteria. 

==Signs and symptoms==
The most common symptom of BV is an abnormal homogeneous off-white vaginal discharge (especially after vaginal intercourse) that may be accompanied by an unpleasant (usually fishy) smell. http://www.fda.gov/downloads/Drugs/GuidanceComplianceRegulatoryInformation/Guidances/ucm070969.pdf This malodorous discharge coats the walls of the vagina, and is usually without significant irritation, pain, or erythema (redness), although mild itching can sometimes occur. By contrast, the normal vaginal discharge will vary in consistency and amount throughout the menstrual cycle and is at its clearest at ovulation - about 2 weeks before the period starts. Some practitioners claim that BV can be asymptomatic in almost half of affected women, though others argue that this is often a misdiagnosis. 

==Causes==

A healthy vagina normally contains many microorganisms; some of the most common ones are Lactobacillus species, including L. crispatus, L. gasseri, L. jensenii, and L. iners. Lactobacilli, particularly hydrogen peroxide-producing species, appear to help prevent other vaginal microorganisms from multiplying to a level where they cause symptoms. The microorganisms involved in BV are very diverse, and include Gardnerella vaginalis, Mycoplasma hominis, Ureaplasma urealyticum, and species of the genuses Peptostreptococcus and Mobiluncus, as well as anaerobic Gram-negative rod-shaped species such as Prevotella and Bacteroides. A change in normal bacterial flora including the reduction of Lactobacilli, which may be due to the use of antibiotics or pH imbalance, allows more resistant bacteria to gain a foothold and multiply.

One of the most direct causes of BV is douching, which alters the vaginal flora and predisposes women to developing BV. Douching is strongly discouraged by the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services and various medical authorities, for this and other reasons. 

Although BV can be associated with sexual activity, there is no clear evidence of sexual transmission. http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2334/10/81 It is possible for sexually inactive persons to get infected with bacterial vaginosis. Rather, BV is a disordering of the chemical and biological balance of the normal flora. Recent research is exploring the link between sexual partner treatment and eradication of recurrent cases of BV. Pregnant women and women with sexually transmitted infections are especially at risk for getting this infection.

Bacterial vaginosis may sometimes affect women after menopause. A 2005 study by researchers at Ghent University in Belgium showed that subclinical iron deficiency (anemia) was a strong predictor of bacterial vaginosis in pregnant women. A longitudinal study published in February 2006 in the American Journal of Obstetrics and Gynecology showed a link between psychosocial stress and bacterial vaginosis persisted even when other risk factors were accounted for. 

== Diagnosis==
To make a diagnosis of bacterial vaginosis, a swab from inside the vagina should be obtained. These swabs should be tested for:
* A characteristic "fishy" odor on wet mount. This test, called the whiff test, is performed by adding a small amount of potassium hydroxide to a microscopic slide containing the vaginal discharge. A characteristic fishy odor is considered a positive whiff test and is suggestive of bacterial vaginosis.
* Loss of acidity. To control bacterial growth, the vagina is normally slightly acidic with a pH of 3.84.2. A swab of the discharge is put onto litmus paper to check its acidity. A pH greater than 4.5 is considered alkaline and is suggestive of bacterial vaginosis.
* The presence of clue cells on wet mount. Similar to the whiff test, the test for clue cells is performed by placing a drop of sodium chloride solution on a slide containing vaginal discharge. If present, clue cells can be visualized under a microscope. They are so-named because they give a clue to the reason behind the discharge. These are epithelial cells that are coated with bacteria.

Two positive results in addition to the discharge itself are enough to diagnose BV. If there is no discharge, then all three criteria are needed. 
Differential diagnosis for bacterial vaginosis includes the following:
*Normal discharge.
*Candidiasis (thrush, or a yeast infection).
*Trichomoniasis, an infection caused by Trichomonas vaginalis.

=== In clinical practice ===
In clinical practice BV can be diagnosed using the Amsel criteria: 

# Thin, white, yellow, homogeneous discharge
# Clue cells on microscopy
# pH of vaginal fluid >4.5
# Release of a fishy odor on adding alkali10% potassium hydroxide (KOH) solution.

At least three of the four criteria should be present for a confirmed diagnosis. 
The modified Amsel Criteria is equally diagnostic of BV as the Amsel's. The modified Amsel Criteria says two instead of the three out of the four criteria is diagnostic of BV.

BV can also be diagnosed with BVBLUE, a CLIA-waived rapid diagnostic that tests for sialidase enzyme activity. Studies have shown this test to be more accurate, specific, and comprehensive than the Amsel criteria.

===Gram stain===
An alternative is to use a Gram-stained vaginal smear, with the Hay/Ison criteria or the Nugent criteria. The Hay/Ison criteria are defined as follows: 
* Grade 1 (Normal): Lactobacillus morphotypes predominate.
* Grade 2 (Intermediate): Mixed flora with some Lactobacilli present, but Gardnerella or Mobiluncus morphotypes also present.
* Grade 3 (Bacterial Vaginosis): Predominantly Gardnerella and/or Mobiluncus morphotypes. Few or absent Lactobacilli. (Hay et al., 1994)
NB: Gardnerella vaginalis is the main culprit in BV. Gardnerella vaginalis is a short rod, therefore, it is a coccobacillus. The bacteria that have covered the squamous epithelial cells making the epithelial cells have obsured ends are not bacilli, they are coccobacilli. Hence, the presence of clue cells and gram variable coccobacilli are indicative or diagnostic of Bacterial Vaginosis.

The standards for research are the Nugent Criteria. In this scale, a score of 0-10 is generated from combining three other scores. This method is time consuming and requires trained staff, but it has high interobserver reliability. The scores are as follows:
* 03 is considered negative for BV
* 46 is considered intermediate
* 7+ is considered indicative of BV.
At least 1020 high power (1000 oil immersion) fields are counted and an average determined.

 Lactobacillus morphotypes  average per high powered (1000 oil immersion) field. View multiple fields. Gardnerella / Bacteroides morphotypes  average per high powered (1000 oil immersion) field. View multiple fields. Curved Gram variable rods  average per high powered (1000 oil immersion) field. View multiple fields (note that this factor is less important  scores of only 02 are possible) 
 * Score 0 for >30 * Score 1 for 1530 * Score 2 for 14 * Score 3 for 0, yet <1) * Score 4 for 0 * Score 0 for 0 * Score 1 for 0, yet 30 * Score 0 for 0 * Score 1 for <5 * Score 2 for 5+ 

A recent study compared the Gram stain using the Nugent criteria and the DNA hybridization test Affirm VPIII in diagnosing BV. The Affirm VPIII test detected Gardnerella in 107 (93.0%) of 115 vaginal specimens positive for BV diagnosed by Gram stain. The Affirm VPIII test has a sensitivity of 87.7% and specificity of 96% and may be used for the rapid diagnosis of BV in symptomatic women. However Affirm VPIII does have some drawbacks: 1) It requires a very expensive proprietary piece of equipment to read results, and 2) it does not detect other pathogens that cause BV, including Prevotella spp, Bacteroides spp, & Mobiluncus spp.

==Treatment==

===Antibiotics===
Metronidazole or clindamycin either orally or vaginally are effective treatment. However, there is a high rate of recurrence. Recurrence rates are increased with sexual activity with the same pre-/posttreatment partner and inconsistent condom use although estrogen-containing contraceptives decrease recurrence 

The usual medical regimen for treatment is the antibiotic Metronidazole (500 mg twice a day, once every 12 hours) for 7 days. Diseases Characterized by Vaginal Discharge, from Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Page last updated: April 12, 2007 A one-time 2g dose is no longer recommended by the CDC because of low efficacy. Extended release metronidazole is an alternative recommendation.

Alternatively, antibiotics may be applied topically (vaginally). 

Bacterial vaginosis is not considered a sexually transmitted infection, and treatment of a male sexual partner of a woman with bacterial vaginosis is not recommended. 

===Probiotics===
Several studies have found probiotics (containing Lactobacillus bacteria species, including L. rhamnosus, L. reuteri, L. acidophilus, and L. fermentum) to be highly effective (8890% cure rate at 1 month) either alone or in combination with antibiotics, either taken orally or applied topically (vaginally), and significantly superior to antibiotics alone. 

Some studies have also found probiotics useful in maintenance therapy, preventing recurrence. One Italian study found that once-weekly application of probiotics for 6 months almost completely prevented recurrence at 6 months (96%), and was still effective at 12 months. 

In 2009 one Cochrane review was neutral about the role of probiotics usefulness in the treatment of BV. 

===Dietary intake===
One study in 2007 focused on the occurrence of BV and a person's dietary intake. Research showed that ingestion of folate, calcium and vitamin E has an inverse effect on severe BV (increased ingestion of these nutrients decreases the risk of BV). The conclusions in the same study suggests that fat intake was a predictor for acquiring BV. Women who had higher ratios of fats had the risk for severe BV increase twofold. 

==Complications==
Although previously considered a mere nuisance infection, untreated bacterial vaginosis may cause complications, such as increased susceptibility to sexually transmitted infections including HIV and pregnancy complications. 

It has been shown that HIV-infected women with bacterial vaginosis (BV) have higher HIV concentrations in their vaginal secretions. J Acquir Immune Defic Syndr. 2005 Jul 1;39(3):340-6. Diagnostic criteria for BV have also been associated with a female genital tract factor that induces expression of HIV. AIDS. 1999 Oct 1;13(14):1905-12. The elevated HIV copy number in vaginal secretions of women with BV has been associated with an increased risk of heterosexual transmission of HIV. PLoS Med. 2012;9(6):e1001251. doi: 10.1371/journal.pmed.1001251. Epub 2012 Jun 26. 

Also, clinical studies have shown that BV-associated bacterial microbiota can activate HIV replication leading to significant increase in HIV production in the female genital tract, as detected in the vaginal secretions. J Acquir Immune Defic Syndr. 1999 Jul 1;21(3):194-202. Moreover, bacterial extracts of the leading causes of BV (i.e. Gardenella vaginalis and some vaginal anareobic bacteria) may increase HIV production. Extracts from these bacterial cultures increased HIV production by more than 100 fold, as measured by HIV antigen (p24) production. J Infect Dis. 1999 Apr;179(4):924-30. J Infect Dis. 2000 May;181(5):1574-80. Epub 2000 May 15. Interestingly, pathogenic strains of G vaginalis were shown to be stronger inducers of HIV production, than the less pathogenic G vaginalis strains, which have weaker association with BV. J Infect Dis. 2001 Jul 1;184(1):22-7. Epub 2001 May 22. 

In addition, Bacterial vaginosis an intercurrent disease in pregnancy may increase the risk of pregnancy complications, most notably premature birth or miscarriage. Bacterial vaginosis from National Health Service, UK. Page last reviewed: 03/10/2013 

==Epidemiology==
It is estimated that 1 in 3 women will develop the condition at some point in their lives. 

==References==



[[Bud Selig]]

Allan Huber "Bud" Selig 
 
 
 (; born July 30, 1934) is the ninth and current Commissioner of Major League Baseball (MLB), having served in that capacity since 1992 as the acting commissioner, and as the official commissioner since 1998. Selig oversaw baseball through the 1994 strike, the introduction of the wild card, interleague play, and the merging of the National and American Leagues under the Office of the Commissioner. He was instrumental in organizing the World Baseball Classic in 2006. Selig also introduced revenue sharing. He is credited for the financial turnaround of baseball during his tenure with a 400 percent increase in the revenue of MLB and annual record breaking attendance. Selig enjoys a high level of support from baseball owners. Jerome Holtzman, MLB's official historian from 1999 until his death in 2008, believed Selig to be the best commissioner in baseball history. 

During Selig's term of service, the use of steroids and other performance enhancing drugs became a public issue. The Mitchell Report, commissioned by Selig, concluded that the MLB commissioners, club officials, the Players Association, and the players all share "to some extent in the responsibility for the steroid era." Following the release of the Mitchell Report, Congressman Cliff Stearns called publicly for Selig to step down as commissioner, citing his "glacial response" to the "growing stain on baseball." Selig has pledged on numerous occasions to rid baseball of performance enhancing drugs, and has overseen and instituted many rule changes and penalties to that end. 

Selig was previously the team owner and team president of the Milwaukee Brewers. As a Milwaukee native, he is credited for keeping baseball in Milwaukee. In 1970, he purchased the Seattle Pilots in bankruptcy court and renamed them the Milwaukee Brewers after the minor league team of the same name he had watched in his youth, which existed until the arrival of the Braves in Milwaukee in 1952. The Brewers went to the 1982 World Series and won seven organization of the year awards during his tenure. Selig remains a resident of Milwaukee.

On January 17, 2008, Selig's contract was extended through 2012, after which he planned to retire, but he then decided to stay as commissioner until the end of the 2014 season, a move approved by the owners on January 12, 2012, which would take his leadership past his 80th birthday. Selig made $14.5 million in the 12-month period ending October 31, 2005. Selig announced on September 26, 2013, that he would retire in January 2015. 

== Early life ==

Selig was born in Milwaukee, Wisconsin, and grew up in a Jewish family. His father, Ben Selig, had come to the United States from Romania with his family when he was four years old. Selig graduated from the University of Wisconsin-Madison with a B.A. in American history and political science in 1956. He served two years in the U.S. Army before working with his father who owned a car leasing business in Milwaukee. 
 
Selig continues to be involved in the automotive industry, serving as president of the Selig Executive Lease Company. 

Selig's interest in baseball came from his mother. An immigrant from Ukraine, Marie Selig attended college, a rare accomplishment for a woman in the early 20th century, and became a school teacher. When Selig was only three, Marie began taking him and his older brother, Jerry, to Borchert Field, where the minor league Milwaukee Brewers played. When the Boston Braves relocated to Milwaukee in 1953, Selig switched allegiances, and eventually became the team's largest public stockholder. Selig was devastated when he learned that the Braves were going to leave Milwaukee in favor of Atlanta. In 1965, when the Braves left Milwaukee, he divested his stock in the team.

== Milwaukee Brewers owner ==

As a minority owner of the Milwaukee Braves, Selig founded the organization Teams, Inc, in an attempt to prevent the majority owners (based out of Chicago) from moving the club to a larger television market. This was challenged legally on the basis that no prior team relocations (in the modern era) left a city without a team. Prior movements had all originated in cities which were home to at least two teams. When his quest to keep the team in Milwaukee finally failed after the 1965 season, he changed the group's name to Milwaukee Brewers Baseball Club, Inc., after the minor league baseball team he grew up watching, and devoted himself to returning Major League Baseball to Milwaukee.

Selig arranged for major league games to be played at Milwaukee County Stadium. The first, a pre-season match-up between the Chicago White Sox and Minnesota Twins, drew more than 51,000 spectators. Selig followed this up by hosting nine White Sox regular-season games in 1968 and eleven in 1969. One of the games played in Milwaukee that year was against the expansion Seattle Pilots, the team that would become the Brewers. Those Milwaukee "home" games were phenomenally successful, with the handful of games accounting for about one-third of total White Sox home attendance.

To satisfy that fanbase, Selig decided to purchase the White Sox (with the intention of moving them to Milwaukee) in 1969. He entered into an agreement to buy the club, but the American League vetoed the sale, preferring to keep an American League team in Chicago to compete with the crosstown Cubs. Selig turned his attention to other franchises.

In 1970, he purchased the bankrupt Seattle Pilots franchise, moving them to his hometown and officially renaming the team the Brewers.

During Selig's tenure as club president, the Brewers participated in postseason play in 1981, when the team finished first in the American League East during the second half of the season, and in 1982, when the team made it to the World Series, under the leadership of future Hall of Famers Robin Yount and Paul Molitor. Under Selig's watch, the Brewers also won seven Organization of the Year awards, although they posted one of the worst winning percentages in the history of Major League Baseball, over periods of ten years or more. Selig was part of the owners' collusion in 19851987, resulting in the owners paying $280 million in damages to the players.

Upon his assumption of the commissioner's role, Selig transferred his ownership interest in the Brewers to his daughter Wendy Selig-Prieb in order to remove any technical conflicts of interest, though it was widely presumed he maintained some hand in team operations. Although the team has been sold to Los Angeles investor Mark Attanasio, questions remain regarding Selig's past involvement. Selig's defenders point to the poor management of the team after Selig-Prieb took control as proof that Selig was not working behind the scenes.

Selig was elected to the Wisconsin Athletic Hall of Fame in 2001.

On August 24, 2010, a statue of Selig, commissioned by Brewers owner Mark Attanasio and designed by artist Brian Maughan, was unveiled outside Miller Park in Milwaukee.

== Acting Commissioner (19921998) ==

Selig became an increasingly vocal opponent of Commissioner Fay Vincent, and soon became the leader of a group of owners seeking his removal. Selig has never stated that the owners colluded, while Vincent has:

Following an 18-9 no-confidence vote, Vincent resigned. Selig had by this time become chairman of the Executive Council of Major League Baseball, and as such became de facto acting commissioner.

His first major act was to institute the Wild Card and divisional playoff play, which has created much controversy amongst baseball fans. Those against the Wild Card see it as diminishing the importance of the pennant race and the regular season, with the true race often being for second rather than first place, while those in favor of it view it as an opportunity for teams to have a shot at the playoffs even when they have no chance of a first-place finish in their division, thus maintaining fan interest later in the season.

Selig suspended Cincinnati Reds owner Marge Schott for a year in 1993 for repeated racially insensitive and prejudicial remarks and actions. The same year, New York Yankees owner George Steinbrenner was reinstated from a lifelong suspension that was instituted by Selig's predecessor Fay Vincent. Pete Rose has claimed that he applied for reinstatement over the years and received no such consideration. Rose, along with his close friend and former teammate Mike Schmidt (who is a strong supporter of Rose's reinstatement into baseball), met with Selig in 2002, where Rose privately admitted to Selig (two years before going public with his admission) about betting on baseball. Bud Selig was a close friend of the late Bart Giamatti, who was the commissioner when Rose was first banned from the sport in 1989.

As acting commissioner, Selig represented MLB during the 1994 players strike and cancelled the World Series, marking the first time the annual event had not been staged since 1904.

== Commissioner (1998present) ==

After a six-year search for a new commissioner, the owners voted to give Selig the title on a permanent basis midway through the 1998 season.

During his tenure the game avoided a third work stoppage in 2002, and has seen the implementation of interleague play.

Whereas in the past, the National and American leagues had separate administrative organizations (which, for example, allowed for the introduction of different rules such as the designated hitter), under Selig, Major League Baseball consolidated the administrative functions of both leagues into the Commissioner's Office in 2000. The last official presidents of the NL and AL were Leonard S. Coleman, Jr. and Dr. Gene Budig respectively.

=== Reaction after September 11, 2001 ===

On September 11, 2001, Selig ordered all baseball games postponed for a week because of the terror attacks on New York and Washington. The games were postponed not only out of respect and mourning for the victims, but also out of concern for the safety and security of fans and players.

After a dramatic conclusion of the 2001 World Series, less than 48 hours later, Selig held a vote on contracting two teams, reportedly the Minnesota Twins and Montreal Expos. 
This action led to Selig (along with former Expos owner Jeffrey Loria) being sued for racketeering and conspiring with Loria to deliberately defraud the Expos minority owners. If found liable, the league could have been ordered to pay as much as $300 million in punitive damages. Selig was eager to settle the case because the judge had previously ruled that the Expos could not be moved or contracted until the case was over. The case eventually went to arbitration and was settled out of court for an undisclosed sum.

=== Changes to the MLB All-Star Game ===

The 2002 All-Star Game, played in Selig's hometown of Milwaukee, was tied 7-7 after 9 innings, and remained tied after the bottom of the 11th inning. Due to the recent managerial trend of granting playing time to as many available players as possible within the regulation nine innings, both managers had used their entire roster. Concerned for the arms of the pitchers currently on the mound, Selig made the controversial decision to declare the game a tie, to the dissatisfaction of the Milwaukee fans. Selig later said that this call was "embarrassing" and that he was "tremendously saddened" by the outcome of the game. 

Since 2002, Selig subsequently tried to reinvigorate the All-Star Game by awarding the winning league home-field advantage in the World Series. The 2003 All-Star Game had the same U.S. viewership as 2002 (9.5 rating; 17 share) and the ratings declined in 2004 (8.8 rating; 15 share) and 2005 (8.1 rating; 14 share). The American television audience increased in 2006 (9.3 rating; 16 share). 

=== Disciplinary actions ===

On July 1, 2005, Selig suspended Texas Rangers pitcher Kenny Rogers for 20 games and fined him $50,000. Rogers got in trouble when on June 29, 2005, he purposely grabbed the camera of a cameraman, resulting in one camera falling to the ground. When the cameraman proceeded to pick up his camera, Rogers went back to him in an arguably threatening way. One of the reporters then resumed filming and Rogers knocked him down again. 
While an appeal of his suspension was pending, Rogers appeared at the 2005 All-Star Game in Detroit, where fans loudly booed him. On July 22, 2005, Selig heard Rogers' appeal of his suspension. Selig decided to uphold the 20 games, however, an independent arbitrator ruled that Selig had exceeded his authority and reduced it to 13 games, but upheld the fine.

=== Performance-enhancing drugs ===

In 2005, Selig faced Congress on the issue of steroids. After the Congressional hearings in early 2005, and with the scrutiny of the sports and national media upon this issue, Selig put forth a proposal for a stricter performance-enhancing drug testing regime to replace the current system. This proposal also included the banning of amphetamines, a first for the major North American sports leagues. The MLB Players Association and MLB reached an agreement in November on the new policy. 

Selig's testimony on the subject has been contradictory. In 2005, Selig told reporters, I never even heard about them until 1998 or 1999. I ran a team and nobody was closer to their players and I never heard any comment from them. It wasnt until 1998 or 99 that I heard the discussion. Bashing Bush: Jose Canseco Comes Clean But a year later, testifying to Congress in 2006, Selig claimed personal credit for spotting the problem early: "In 1994, before anybody was really talking about steroids in baseball, we proposed a program of testing for such substances to the MLBPA. As early as 1998, I began formulating a strategic plan to eliminate the use of performance enhancing substances from the game." Independent Investigation | Statement Of Commissioner Allan H. (Bud) Selig During the 1988 ALCS, Oakland's Jose Canseco had been repeatedly taunted by Boston fans with a chant of "ster-oids, ster-oids, ster-oids." Baseballs Steroid Era Was No Surprise, So Hall of Fame Voters Should Accept It - U.S. News & World Report Speaking at the 2013 All-Star Game, Selig complained, People say, Well, you were slow to react. We were not slow to react. In fact, I heard that this morning, and it aggravated me all over again. MLB commissioner Bud Selig knows drugs bans may define his legacy | Evan Weiner | Sport | theguardian.com 

By early 2006, Selig was forced to deal with the issue of steroid use. On March 30, 2006, as a response to the controversy of the use of performance-enhancing drugs and the anticipated career home run record to be set by Barry Bonds, Selig asked former senator George Mitchell to lead an independent investigation into the use of steroids in baseball's recent past. Joe Sheehan from Baseball Prospectus wrote that the commission has been focusing "blame for the era exclusively on uniformed personnel", and failing to investigate any role played by team ownership and management. 

Much controversy surrounded Selig and his involvement in Barry Bonds' all-time home run record chase. For months, speculation surrounded Selig and the possibility that he and Hank Aaron would not attend Bonds' games as he closed in on the record. Selig announced in July 2007 when Bonds was near 755 home runs that he would attend the games. Selig was in attendance for Bonds' record-tying home run against the San Diego Padres, sitting in Padres owner John Moores' private suite. When Bonds hit his 755th home run, Selig refused to applaud Bonds' accomplishment, instead choosing to keep his hands in his pockets and have a look of disdain on his face. Bud Selig also did not attend the San Francisco Giants' baseball game on August 7 when Barry Bonds hit his record-breaking 756th home run; after the event, Selig released a statement congratulating Bonds.

On December 13, 2007, former U.S. Senator George J. Mitchell released his report on the use of performance-enhancing substances by MLB players. The report names many current and former players who allegedly used performance-enhancing drugs during their career.

Selig has been widely criticized for not taking an active enough role to stem the tide of steroid use in baseball until it had blossomed into a debilitating problem for the industry. Chicago Sun Times columnist Jay Mariotti called Selig the "The Steroids Commissioner." Selig's only legacy: S-T-E-R-O-I-D-S Selig has been called to Congress several times to testify on performance enhancing drug use. Congressman Cliff Stearns said in December 2007 that Selig should resign because of use of performance enhancing drugs in baseball during his tenure. 

=== Post-season schedule ===
Selig's decision to extend the traditional post-season schedule into November in an attempt to increase Nielsen ratings was met with widespread disdain, both inside and outside the baseball community. Mike Scioscia, manager of the American League West Division Champion Los Angeles Angels, dismissed the decision as Ridiculous. I dont know. Can I say it any clearer than that? We should have never had a day off last Wednesday. We should never have three days off after the season. You shouldnt even have two days off after the season." Another Day Off for Yankees and Angels, and Its Not Exactly Welcome New York Times, October 25, 2009 

=== Controversies ===

Related to the contraction controversy in 2001, Rob Dibble posted an open letter to Bud Selig, criticizing his actions for benefiting only the Milwaukee Brewers. Dibble cites that the contraction of the Twins would benefit the Brewers, as they would potentially claim the Twins' share of the upper Midwest market.

Selig has made some decisions involving the Houston Astros that were unpopular with their supporters. He ordered the roof at Minute Maid Park to be opened for games three and four of the 2005 World Series, pre-empting the authority held by the Astros. The roof was closed for all prior playoff games and similar weather conditions. For Hurricane Ike in 2008, Selig mandated that the Astros play two home games against the Chicago Cubs in his hometown of Milwaukee despite proximity to the visiting Cubs. The Astros subsequently were victims of a no-hitter by Carlos Zambrano and recorded a single hit in the following game. In the midst of the playoff race, this decision and its impact deeply affected the playoff race and seedings with eight teams holding winning records at the moment. The Milwaukee Brewers benefited from these events by qualifying in the playoffs as a Wild Card team, to lose to the Philadelphia Phillies, the eventual World Series winner. The home ballparks for the Texas Rangers and Atlanta Braves were both available to host the games. In 2011, Selig also demanded that the Astros move to the American League West as a condition of the sale of the franchise to businessman Jim Crane; the team switched leagues in 2013 in return for $70 million discount in the purchase price. 

United States bankruptcy judge Kevin Gross rendered a stern warning to Selig in regards to the 2011 Los Angeles Dodgers ownership dispute. Treating other teams differently in regards to their media contracts drew accusations that Selig did not act in good faith with respect to the Los Angeles Dodgers. Selig rejected the television deal that Frank McCourt negotiated that intended to bring the franchise out of bankruptcy, claiming McCourt violated the Baseball Agreements although no action taken against New York Mets owner Fred Wilpon despite being in a similar position. Gross stated, "Should the Commissioner falter in proving alleged wrongdoing, the Court may allow LAD (Los Angeles Dodgers) to take further, limited discovery." Some critics have used Selig's handling of the Dodgers to point out a double standard in treatment of MLB owners. More specifically in regards to the Mets, critics point out that with Selig's personal relationship with Wilpon has allowed him to stall any possible removal of Wilpon as that club's principal owner.

=== Term of service ===

On December 1, 2006, Selig announced that he would be retiring as commissioner of baseball upon the expiration of his contract in 2009. Selig earned $14.5 million from MLB over the timespan October 31, 2005 to October 31, 2006. However, in January 2008, Selig agreed to a three-year contract extension, announcing he planned to retire after the 2012 season. 
He further decided against retirement, and after a two-year extension for the previous deal was agreed to on January 12, 2012, it was announced that Selig would remain commissioner until the end of the 2014 season. 

== Notable changes to Major League Baseball ==
Bud Selig has overseen the following changes in Major League Baseball:

* Realignment of teams into three divisions per league, and the introduction of playoff wild card teams (1994)
* Interleague play (1997)
* Two additional franchises: the Arizona Diamondbacks and the Tampa Bay Devil Rays, now the Tampa Bay Rays (1998)
* Transfer of the Milwaukee Brewers from the American League to the National League (1998)
* Abolition of the American and National league offices and presidencies, and inclusion of all umpiring crews into a common pool for AL and NL games, instead of having separate pools per league (2000)
* Unbalanced schedule (2001) Division Race Just Got Harder For Mets New York Times 
* Home field advantage in the World Series granted to the winner of the All Star Game in the same season (2003)
* Transfer of Montreal Expos franchise to Washington, D.C., becoming the Washington Nationals (2004)
* Dedicating April 15 as Jackie Robinson Day (2004)
* Stricter Major League Baseball performance-enhancing drug testing policy (2005)
* World Baseball Classic (2006)
* Introduction of instant replay in the event of a disputed home run call (2008)
* Addition of a second wild card playoff team in each league (2012)
* Transfer of the Houston Astros to the American League (2013), as a condition of the sale of the team to Jim Crane, resulting in each league having the same number of teams (15) and interleague play throughout the season
* Expanded instant replay (2014) and the institution of the manager challenge system

During Selig's terms as Executive Council Chairman (from 19921998) and Commissioner, new stadiums have opened in Arizona, Atlanta, Cincinnati, Cleveland, Colorado, Detroit, Houston, Milwaukee, Philadelphia, Pittsburgh, San Diego, San Francisco, Seattle, Arlington, St. Louis, Washington, D.C., New York City (Flushing, Queens and the Bronx), Minneapolis, and Miami.

== Israel Baseball League ==

Selig and his family served a supportive role on the Advisory Board of the Israel Baseball League during its inaugural season in 2007. In response to issues with the league's financial management, after the season, the Selig family requested that their names be removed from the list of board members. 

== Family ==

Selig is married to his second wife, Sue Selig. He has two daughters from his previous marriage, Wendy Selig-Prieb and Sari Selig-Kramer, as well as a stepdaughter, Lisa Steinman. Selig-Prieb used to work for the Brewers, and Steinman currently works for MLB. He has five granddaughters: Emily Markenson, Alyssa Markenson, Marissa Savitch, Andria Savitch, and Natalie Prieb.

== Teaching ==

Since 2009, Selig has been an adjunct professor of sports law and policy at Marquette University Law School. Selig Named Adjunct Law Professor At Marquette His classes have covered numerous topics, including "the history of collective bargaining and free agency, baseballs antitrust exemption, revenue sharing - as well as finer points of sports law like intellectual property rights, ambush marketing, and why baseball does not allow game footage on YouTube." Selig Finally Finds Peace as He Looks Toward Next Job 

In 2010, Selig endowed the Allan H. Selig Chair in the History of Sport and Society in the United States, as well as a Distinguished Lecture Series in Sport and Society at his alma mater, the University of Wisconsin - Madison. The inaugural lecture was given by Adrian Burgos and the search for the chair is ongoing, with an appointment scheduled to begin in August, 2013. 

== See also ==

* Selig Monument

== References ==

== External links ==

* Official website
* MLB.com: Official info
* Bud Selig Biography by Baseball Almanac
* Bud Selig at Notable Names Database
* The Commissioner of Baseball Is on Deck www.nytimes.com
* Video Of MLB Commissioner's Speech On The State Of Baseball, February 8, 2007
* "Bud Selig: A baseball hero. Really." - Nicholas Thompson, Slate.com, May 5, 2005
* Selig elected Commissioner in unanimous vote



[[Bison]]

Bison are large, even-toed ungulates in the genus Bison within the subfamily Bovinae.

There are two extant and four extinct species recognized. Of the four extinct species, three were North American: Bison antiquus, B. latifrons, and B. occidentalis. The fourth, Bison priscus, ranged across steppe environments from Western Europe, through Central Asia, and onto North America.

There are two surviving species: the American bison, Bison bison, found only in North America, is the most numerous. (Although sometimes referred to as a "buffalo," it is only distantly related to the true buffalo.) The North American species is composed of two subspecies, the plains bison, Bison bison bison, and the wood bison, Bison bison athabascae, which is the namesake of Wood Buffalo National Park in Canada. The European bison Bison bonasus, or wisent is found in Europe and the Caucasus, re-introduced after being extinct in the wild.

While all bison species are usually grouped into their own genus, they are sometimes included in the closely related genus Bos, Systematic relationships in the Bovini (Artiodactyla, Bovidae). In Zeitschrift fr Zoologische Systematik und Evolutionsforschung, 4:264278., Groves, C. P., 1981. Quoted in Mammal Species of the World. A Taxonomic and Geographic Reference (3rd ed), Don E. Wilson & DeeAnn M. Reeder (editors). 2005. Johns Hopkins University Press: "Bison". together with cattle, gaur, kouprey and yaks, with which bison have a limited ability to interbreed.

==Description==
Magdalenian bison on plaque, 17,0009,000 BCE, Bdeilhac grottoe, Arige.

The American bison and the European wisent are the largest terrestrial animals in North America and Europe. Bison are good swimmers and can cross rivers over half a mile (1 km) wide. Bison are nomadic grazers and travel in herds. The bulls leave the herds of females at two or three years of age, and join a male herd which is generally smaller than the female herds. Mature bulls rarely travel alone. Towards the end of the summer, for the reproductive season, the sexes necessarily commingle. American bison are known for living in the Great Plains. Both species were hunted close to extinction during the 19th and 20th centuries, but have since rebounded. The American plains bison is no longer listed as endangered, but the wood bison is on the endangered species list in Canada. 

Although superficially similar, there are physical and behavioural differences between the American and European bison. The American species has 15 ribs, while the European bison has 14. The American bison has four lumbar vertebrae, while the European has five. The Penny Cyclopdia of the Society for the Diffusion of Useful Knowledge by Society for the Diffusion of Useful Knowledge (Great Britain), published by C. Knight, 1835 (The difference in this case is that what would be the first lumbar vertebra in wisent has ribs attached to it in American bison and is thus counted as the 15th thoracic vertebra, compared to 14 thoracic vertebrae in wisent.) Adult American bison are less slim in build and have shorter legs. American bison tend to graze more, and browse less than their European cousins. Their anatomies reflect this behavioural difference; the American bison's head hangs lower than the European's. The body of the American bison is typically hairier, though its tail has less hair than that of the European bison. The horns of the European bison point through the plane of their faces, making them more adept at fighting through the interlocking of horns in the same manner as domestic cattle, unlike the American bison, which favours butting. American bison are more easily tamed than their European cousins, and breed with domestic cattle more readily. 

==Evolution and genetic history==

The bovine family (Taurids and Bisonids) diverged from the common ancestral line with water buffalo and African buffalo about 5 to 10 million years ago. Thereafter, the family lineage of bison and taurine cattle does not appear to be a straightforward "tree" structure as is often depicted in much evolution, because there is evidence of interbreeding and crossbreeding between different species and members within this family, even many millions of years after their ancestors separated into different species. This crossbreeding was not sufficient to conflate the different species back together, but it has resulted in unexpected relationships between many members of this group, such as yak being related to American bison, when such relationships would otherwise not be apparent.

A 2003 study of mitochondrial DNA indicated four distinct maternal lineages in tribe Bovini:
#Taurine cattle and zebu,
#Wisent,
#American bison and yak, and
#Banteng, gaur, and gayal.
However, Y chromosome analysis associated wisent and American bison. An earlier study using amplified fragment length polymorphism (AFLP) fingerprinting showed a close association of wisent and American bison and probably with yak, but noted that the interbreeding of Bovini species made determining relationships problematic. 

The Steppe bison (Bison priscus) diverged from the lineage that led to cattle (Bos taurus) approximately 2 to 5 million years ago. The Bison genus is clearly in the fossil record by 2 million years ago. McDonald, J., 1981. North American Bison, Their classification and Evolution. University of California Press, Berkeley, Los Angeles, London. The Steppe bison spread across Eurasia and was the bison that was pictured in the ancient cave drawings of Spain and Southern France.

The European bison or wisent arose from the Steppe bison, without fossil evidence of other ancestral species between the Steppe bison and the European bison, though the European bison might have arisen from the lineage that led to American bison if that lineage backcrossed with the Steppe bison. Again, the web of relationships is confusing, but there is some evidence that the European bison is descended from bison that had migrated from Asia to North America, and then back to Europe, where they crossbred with existing Steppe bison. 

At one point, some Steppe bison crossbred with the ancestors of the modern yak. After that crossbreeding, a population of Steppe bison (Bison priscus) crossed the Bering Land Bridge to North America. There is evidence of multiple crossings of bison to and from Asia starting before 500,000 years ago and continuing until at least 220,000 years ago. The Steppe bison spread through the northern parts of North America and lived in Eurasia until approximately 11,000 years ago Guthrie, R. D., 1990. Frozen Fauna of the Mammoth Steppe: the Story of Blue Babe. University of Chicago Press: Chicago. and North America until 4,000 to 8,000 years ago. 

Bison latifrons (the "giant" or "longhorn" bison) is thought to have evolved in midcontinent North America from B. priscus, after the Steppe bison crossed into North America. Giant bison (Bison latifrons) appeared in the fossil record approximately 500,000 years ago. B. latifrons was one of many species of North American megafauna which became extinct during the transition from the Pleistocene to the Holocene epoch (an event referred to as the Quaternary extinction event). It is thought to have disappeared some 21,00030,000 years ago, during the late Wisconsin glaciation. 

The Bison latifrons species was replaced by the smaller Bison antiquus. B. antiquus appeared in the North American fossil record approximately 250,000 years ago. Jefferson, G., 2001. "Rancho La Brea Bison". In: J. Harris (ed), Rancho La Brea: Death Trap and Treasure Trove. Terra 30(2): 33. Los Angeles Natural History Museum Foundation. p. 33. B. antiquus in turn evolved into the Bison occidentalis, then into the yet smaller Bison bisonthe modern American bisonsome 5,000 to 10,000 years ago. Some researchers consider B. occidentalis to be a sub-species of B. antiquus. 

Skulls of European bison (left) and American bison (right)

During the population bottleneck, after the great slaughter of American bison during the nineteenth century, the number of bison remaining alive in North America declined to as low as 541. During that period, a handful of ranchers gathered remnants of the existing herds to save the species from extinction. These ranchers bred some of the bison with cattle in an effort to produce "cattleo" (today called "beefalo") Accidental crossings were also known to occur. Generally, male domestic bulls were crossed with buffalo cows, producing offspring of which only the females were fertile. The crossbred animals did not demonstrate any form of hybrid vigor, so the practice was abandoned. The proportion of cattle DNA that has been measured in introgressed individuals and bison herds today is typically quite low, ranging from 0.56 to 1.8%. In the United States, many ranchers are now utilizing DNA testing to cull the residual cattle genetics from their bison herds. The U.S. National Bison Association has adopted a code of ethics which prohibits its members from deliberately crossbreeding bison with any other species.

Some cattle breeds are intentionally bred with bison to produce, for instance, beefalo hybrids. Wisent-American bison hybrids were briefly experimented with in Germany (and found to be fully fertile) and a herd of such animals is maintained in Russia all the time. A herd of cattle-wisent crossbreeds (Zubron) is maintained in Poland. First-generation crosses do not occur naturally, requiring caesarean delivery. First-generation males are infertile.

==Behavior==

Wallowing is a common behavior of bison. A bison wallow is a shallow depression in the soil, either wet or dry. Bison roll in these depressions, covering themselves with mud or dust. Possible explanations suggested for wallowing behavior include grooming behavior associated with moulting, male-male interaction (typically rutting behavior), social behavior for group cohesion, play behavior, relief from skin irritation due to biting insects, reduction of ectoparasite load (ticks and lice), and thermoregulation. In the process of wallowing, bison may become infected by the fatal disease anthrax, which may occur naturally in the soil. 

A group of images by Eadweard Muybridge, set to motion to illustrate the movement of the bison

The bison's temperament is often unpredictable. They usually appear peaceful, unconcerned, even lazy, yet they may attack anything, often without warning or apparent reason. They can move at speeds of up to 35 mph and cover long distances at a lumbering gallop. American Bison. nps.gov 

Their most obvious weapons are the horns borne by both males and females, but their massive heads can be used as battering rams, effectively using the momentum produced by 2000 lb moving at 30 mph. The hind legs can also be used to kill or maim with devastating effect. At the time bison ran wild, they were rated second only to the Alaska brown bear as a potential killer, more dangerous than the grizzly bear. In the words of early naturalists, they were a dangerous, savage animal that feared no other animal and in prime condition could best any foe (except for wolves and brown bears ).

The rutting, or mating, season lasts from June through September, with peak activity in July and August. At this time, the older bulls rejoin the herd, and fights often take place between bulls. The herd exhibits much restlessness during breeding season. The animals are belligerent, unpredictable and most dangerous. 

==Habitat==
"Last of the Canadian Buffaloes", 1902, photograph: Steele and CompanyAmerican bison live in river valleys, and on prairies and plains. Typical habitat is open or semi-open grasslands, as well as sagebrush, semi-arid lands and scrublands. Some lightly wooded areas are also known historically to have supported bison. Bison will also graze in hilly or mountainous areas where the slopes are not steep. Though not particularly known as high altitude animals, bison in the Yellowstone Park bison herd are frequently found at elevations above 8,000 feet and the Henry Mountains bison herd is found on the plains around the Henry Mountains, Utah, as well as in mountain valleys of the Henry Mountains to an altitude of 10,000 feet.

European bison (Wisent) tend to live in lightly wooded to fully wooded areas and areas with increased shrubs and bushes, though they can also live on grasslands and plains.

===Restrictions===
Throughout most of their historical range, free-ranging bison are not tolerated by landowners or state governments. Herds on private land must be fenced in. In the U.S. state of Montana, free-ranging bison on public land may be shot, citing concerns of spreading disease and damage to public property. Legislation surrounding the bison continues to be proposed and vetoed by the governor of Montana, and remains an issue of contention between Native American tribes and the American government. 

==Diet==

Bison are herbivores and eat simple foods. The bison's main foodstuff is grass, though they will eat any available low-lying shrubbery as well as sedges. In the winter, bison forage for grass under the snow. If there is little grass available, they will eat the twigs of shrubs. Bison are notably better browsers than cattle, since cattle are more obligate grazers, even though wood bison have also been described as "obligate grazers". Wisent tend to browse on shrubs and low hanging trees more often than do their cousins, the American bison. American bison prefer grass to shrubbery and trees.

==Predators==

Due to their size, bison have few predators. Five notable exceptions are the grey wolf, human, brown bear, coyote, and grizzly bear. The grey wolf generally takes down a bison while in a pack, but there have been cases of a single wolf killing bison. Brown bear also prey on bison calves, often by driving off the pack and consuming the wolves' kill. 

==Infections and illness==
For the American bison, the main cause of illness is malignant catarrhal fever (MCF), though brucellosis is a serious concern in the Yellowstone Park bison herd. Bison in the Antelope Island bison herd are regularly inoculated against brucellosis, parasites, clostridium, infectious bovine rhino tracheitis and bovine vibriosis. 

The major concerns for illness in European bison are foot-and-mouth disease and balanoposthitis, which affects the male sex organs; a number of parasitic diseases have also been cited as threats. The inbreeding of the species caused by the small population plays a role in a number of genetic defects and immunity to diseases, which in turn poses greater risks to the population. 

==Name==
The term "buffalo" is sometimes considered to be a misnomer for this animal, as it is only distantly related to either of the two "true buffalo", the Asian water buffalo and the African buffalo. However, "bison" is a Greek word meaning ox-like animal, while "buffalo" originated with the French fur trappers who called these massive beasts , meaning ox or bullockso both names, "bison" and "buffalo", have a similar meaning. Though the name "bison" might be considered more scientifically correct, as a result of standard usage the name "buffalo" is also considered correct and is listed in many dictionaries as an acceptable name for American buffalo or bison. In reference to this animal, the term "buffalo" dates to 1635 in North American usage when the term was first recorded for the American mammal. It thus has a much longer history than the term "bison", which was first recorded in 1774. The American Heritage Dictionary of the English Language, Fourth Edition. 

==Human impact==

The extinction of four species of bison (Bison antiquus, Bison latifrons, Bison occidentalis, and Bison priscus) is linked to natural selection. Humans were almost exclusively accountable for the near-extinction of the American bison in the 1800s. At the beginning of the 19th century, tens of millions of bison roamed North America. Humans slaughtered an estimated 50 million bison, generally for their meat or pelts. This practice of over-hunting the bison reduced their population to hundreds. Attempts to revive the American bison, however, have been highly successful. Farming of bison has increased their population to nearly 150,000. The American bison is therefore no longer considered an endangered species. 

== Meat industry ==
In America, the commercial industry for bison has been slow to develop despite individuals like Ted Turner, who have long marketed bison meat. In the 1990s, Turner found limited success with restaurants for high quality cuts of meat which include bison steaks and tenderloin. Haddad, Charles. "Bison Meat Slow to Catch On, But Turner Sees Promise". Knight Ridder/Tribune Business News. McClatchy-Tribune Information Services. 1999. Retrieved June 18, 2013 from HighBeam Research: http://www.highbeam.com/doc/1G1-54342001.html Lower quality cuts suitable for hamburger and hot dogs have been described as "almost non-existent". This created a marketing problem for commercial farming because the majority of usable meat, about 400 pounds for each bison, are suitable for these products. In 2003, the United States Department of Agriculture purchased of $10 million worth of frozen overstock to save the industry which would later recover through better use of marketing to consumers. Bone, Eugenia. "Bison's back: bravo for buffalo. We're saving the Western icon by eating it (again).(The next frontier)." Sunset. Sunset Publishing Corp. 2008. Retrieved June 18, 2013 from HighBeam Research: http://www.highbeam.com/doc/1G1-174197007.html Restaurants have played a role in popularizing bison meat like Ted's Montana Grill and other restaurants which added bison to their menus, such as Ruby Tuesday, which first offered bison on their menus in 2005. According to USDAs Agricultural Research Service,100 grams of raw bison (separable lean only) contains 109 calories and 1.8 grams fat. The same amount of raw beef (separable lean only, Choice grade) contains 291 calories, and 24 grams fat. Bison from Farm to Table United States Department of Agriculture 

In Canada, commercial bison farming began in the mid 1980s, concerning an unknown number of animals at that time. Terry Kremeniuk. "Bison Farming". Canadian Encyclopedia. Historica-Dominion. 2012. Retrieved June 18, 2013 from HighBeam Research: http://www.highbeam.com/doc/1P1-215985740.html The first census of the bison occurred in 1996, which recorded 45,235 bison on 745 farms and would grow to 195,728 bison on 1,898 farms for the 2006 census. 

Several pet food companies use bison as a red meat alternative in dog foods. The companies producing these formulas include Natural Balance Pet Foods, Freshpet, The Blue Buffalo Company, Solid Gold, Canidae, and Taste of the Wild.

==See also==
* American bison (Bison bison)
* European bison (Bison bonasus)
* Bison hunting
* Yellowstone Park bison herd

==References==

==Further reading==
*Boyd, D (2003) "Conservation of North American Bison: Status and Recommendations." Masters dissertation, University of Calgary
*Halbert, N, and Derr, J (1995) "A Comprehensive Evaluation of Cattle Introgression into US Federal Bison Herds," Journal of Heredity, Vol 98, Issue 1.
* Nesheim, David A., Profit, Preservation, and Shifting Definitions of Bison in American, Environmental History, 17 (July 2012), 54777.
*Ward, T. J.; Bielawski, J. P.; Davis, S. K.; Templeton, J. W.; and Derr, J. N. (1999) "Identification of Domestic Cattle Hybrids in Wild Cattle and Bison Species: A General Approach Using mtDNA Markers and the Parametric Bootstrap," Animal Conservation

==External links==

* History of Bison Blend Cattle
* "European bison / Wisent online" from Browsk Forest District in Biaowiea National Park, Poland
* 

 



[[Baryon]]

A baryon is a composite subatomic particle made up of three quarks (as distinct from mesons, which comprise one quark and one antiquark). Baryons and mesons belong to the hadron family, which are the quark-based particles. The name "baryon" comes from the Greek word for "heavy" (, barys), because, at the time of their naming, most known elementary particles had lower masses than the baryons.

As quark-based particles, baryons participate in the strong interaction, whereas leptons, which are not quark-based, do not. The most familiar baryons are the protons and neutrons that make up most of the mass of the visible matter in the universe. Electrons (the other major component of the atom) are leptons. Each baryon has a corresponding antiparticle (antibaryon) where quarks are replaced by their corresponding antiquarks. For example, a proton is made of two up quarks and one down quark; and its corresponding antiparticle, the antiproton, is made of two up antiquarks and one down antiquark.

Until recently, it was believed that some experiments showed the existence of pentaquarks  "exotic" baryons made of four quarks and one antiquark. H. Muir (2003) K. Carter (2003) The particle physics community as a whole did not view their existence as likely in 2006, W.-M. Yao et al. (2006): Particle listings  &Theta;+ and in 2008, considered evidence to be overwhelmingly against the existence of the reported pentaquarks. C. Amsler et al. (2008): Pentaquarks 

==Background==
Baryons are strongly interacting fermions  that is, they experience the strong nuclear force and are described by FermiDirac statistics, which apply to all particles obeying the Pauli exclusion principle. This is in contrast to the bosons, which do not obey the exclusion principle.

Baryons, along with mesons, are hadrons, meaning they are particles composed of quarks. Quarks have baryon numbers of B = and antiquarks have baryon number of B = . The term "baryon" usually refers to triquarks  baryons made of three quarks (B = + + = 1). Other exotic baryons have been proposed, such as pentaquarks  baryons made of four quarks and one antiquark (B = + + +  = 1), but their existence is not generally accepted. In theory, heptaquarks (5 quarks, 2 antiquarks), nonaquarks (6 quarks, 3 antiquarks), etc. could also exist.

==Baryonic matter==
Baryonic matter is matter composed mostly of baryons (by mass), which includes atoms of any sort (and thus includes nearly all matter that may be encountered or experienced in everyday life). Non-baryonic matter, as implied by the name, is any sort of matter that is not composed primarily of baryons. This might include such ordinary matter as neutrinos or free electrons; however, it may also include exotic species of non-baryonic dark matter, such as supersymmetric particles, axions, or black holes. The distinction between baryonic and non-baryonic matter is important in cosmology, because Big Bang nucleosynthesis models set tight constraints on the amount of baryonic matter present in the early universe.

The very existence of baryons is also a significant issue in cosmology because it is assumed that the Big Bang produced a state with equal amounts of baryons and antibaryons. The process by which baryons come to outnumber their antiparticles is called baryogenesis (in contrast to a process by which leptons account for the predominance of matter over antimatter, leptogenesis).

==Baryogenesis==

Experiments are consistent with the number of quarks in the universe being a constant and, to be more specific, the number of baryons being a constant ; in technical language, the total baryon number appears to be conserved. Within the prevailing Standard Model of particle physics, the number of baryons may change in multiples of three due to the action of sphalerons, although this is rare and has not been observed under experiment. Some grand unified theories of particle physics also predict that a single proton can decay, changing the baryon number by one; however, this has not yet been observed under experiment. The excess of baryons over antibaryons in the present universe is thought to be due to non-conservation of baryon number in the very early universe, though this is not well understood.

==Properties==

===Isospin and charge===

Combinations of three u, d or s quarks forming baryons with a spin- form the uds baryon decuplet
Combinations of three u, d or s quarks forming baryons with a spin- form the uds baryon octet

The concept of isospin was first proposed by Werner Heisenberg in 1932 to explain the similarities between protons and neutrons under the strong interaction. W. Heisenberg (1932) Although they had different electric charges, their masses were so similar that physicists believed they were actually the same particle. The different electric charges were explained as being the result of some unknown excitation similar to spin. This unknown excitation was later dubbed isospin by Eugene Wigner in 1937. E. Wigner (1937) 

This belief lasted until Murray Gell-Mann proposed the quark model in 1964 (containing originally only the u, d, and s quarks). M. Gell-Mann (1964) The success of the isospin model is now understood to be the result of the similar masses of the u and d quarks. Since the u and d quarks have similar masses, particles made of the same number then also have similar masses. The exact specific u and d quark composition determines the charge, as u quarks carry charge + while d quarks carry charge . For example the four Deltas all have different charges ( (uuu), (uud), (udd), (ddd)), but have similar masses (~1,232 MeV/c2) as they are each made of a combination of three u and d quarks. Under the isospin model, they were considered to be a single particle in different charged states.

The mathematics of isospin was modeled after that of spin. Isospin projections varied in increments of 1 just like those of spin, and to each projection was associated a "charged state". Since the "Delta particle" had four "charged states", it was said to be of isospin I = . Its "charged states" , , , and , corresponded to the isospin projections I3 = +, I3 = +, I3 = , and I3 = , respectively. Another example is the "nucleon particle". As there were two nucleon "charged states", it was said to be of isospin . The positive nucleon (proton) was identified with I3 = + and the neutral nucleon (neutron) with I3 = . S.S.M. Wong (1998a) It was later noted that the isospin projections were related to the up and down quark content of particles by the relation:
:
where the ns are the number of up and down quarks and antiquarks.

In the "isospin picture", the four Deltas and the two nucleons were thought to be the different states of two particles. However in the quark model, Deltas are different states of nucleons (the N++ or N are forbidden by Pauli's exclusion principle). Isospin, although conveying an inaccurate picture of things, is still used to classify baryons, leading to unnatural and often confusing nomenclature.

===Flavour quantum numbers===

The strangeness flavour quantum number S (not to be confused with spin) was noticed to go up and down along with particle mass. The higher the mass, the lower the strangeness (the more s quarks). Particles could be described with isospin projections (related to charge) and strangeness (mass) (see the uds octet and decuplet figures on the right). As other quarks were discovered, new quantum numbers were made to have similar description of udc and udb octets and decuplets. Since only the u and d mass are similar, this description of particle mass and charge in terms of isospin and flavour quantum numbers works well only for octet and decuplet made of one u, one d, and one other quark, and breaks down for the other octets and decuplets (for example, ucb octet and decuplet). If the quarks all had the same mass, their behaviour would be called symmetric, as they would all behave in exactly the same way with respect to the strong interaction. Since quarks do not have the same mass, they do not interact in the same way (exactly like an electron placed in an electric field will accelerate more than a proton placed in the same field because of its lighter mass), and the symmetry is said to be broken.

It was noted that charge (Q) was related to the isospin projection (I3), the baryon number (B) and flavour quantum numbers (S, C, B&prime;, T) by the Gell-MannNishijima formula: 
:

where S, C, B&prime;, and T represent the strangeness, charm, bottomness and topness flavour quantum numbers, respectively. They are related to the number of strange, charm, bottom, and top quarks and antiquark according to the relations:
:
:
:
:

meaning that the Gell-MannNishijima formula is equivalent to the expression of charge in terms of quark content:
:

===Spin, orbital angular momentum, and total angular momentum===

Spin (quantum number S) is a vector quantity that represents the "intrinsic" angular momentum of a particle. It comes in increments of  (pronounced "h-bar"). The  is often dropped because it is the "fundamental" unit of spin, and it is implied that "spin 1" means "spin 1 ". In some systems of natural units,  is chosen to be 1, and therefore does not appear anywhere.

Quarks are fermionic particles of spin (S = ). Because spin projections varies in increments of 1 (that is 1 ), a single quark has a spin vector of length , and has two spin projections (Sz = + and Sz = ). Two quarks can have their spins aligned, in which case the two spin vectors add to make a vector of length S = 1 and three spin projections (Sz = +1, Sz = 0, and Sz = 1). If two quarks have unaligned spins, the spin vectors add up to make a vector of length S = 0 and has only one spin projection (Sz = 0), etc. Since baryons are made of three quarks, their spin vectors can add to make a vector of length S = , which has four spin projections (Sz = +, Sz = +, Sz = , and Sz = ), or a vector of length S = with two spin projections (Sz = +, and Sz = ). R. Shankar (1994) 

There is another quantity of angular momentum, called the orbital angular momentum, (azimuthal quantum number L), that comes in increments of 1 , which represent the angular moment due to quarks orbiting around each other. The total angular momentum (total angular momentum quantum number J) of a particle is therefore the combination of intrinsic angular momentum (spin) and orbital angular momentum. It can take any value from J L  S to J L + S, in increments of 1.

+Baryon angular momentum quantum numbers for L = 0, 1, 2, 3 
 Spin (S) Orbital angular momentum (L) Total angular momentum (J) Parity (P)(See below) Condensed notation (J'P) 
 0 + + 
 1 ,  ,  
 2 , + +, + 
 3 ,  ,  
 0 + + 
 1 , ,  , ,  
 2 , , , + +, +, +, + 
 3 , , ,  , , ,  

Particle physicists are most interested in baryons with no orbital angular momentum (L = 0), as they correspond to ground statesstates of minimal energy. Therefore the two groups of baryons most studied are the S = ; L = 0 and S = ; L = 0, which corresponds to J = + and J = +, respectively, although they are not the only ones. It is also possible to obtain J = + particles from S = and L = 2, as well as S = and L = 2. This phenomenon of having multiple particles in the same total angular momentum configuration is called degeneracy. How to distinguish between these degenerate baryons is an active area of research in baryon spectroscopy. H. Garcilazo et al. (2007) D.M. Manley (2005) 

===Parity===

If the universe were reflected in a mirror, most of the laws of physics would be identical  things would behave the same way regardless of what we call "left" and what we call "right". This concept of mirror reflection is called intrinsic parity or parity (P). Gravity, the electromagnetic force, and the strong interaction all behave in the same way regardless of whether or not the universe is reflected in a mirror, and thus are said to conserve parity (P-symmetry). However, the weak interaction does distinguish "left" from "right", a phenomenon called parity violation (P-violation).

Based on this, one might think that, if the wavefunction for each particle (in more precise terms, the quantum field for each particle type) were simultaneously mirror-reversed, then the new set of wavefunctions would perfectly satisfy the laws of physics (apart from the weak interaction). It turns out that this is not quite true: In order for the equations to be satisfied, the wavefunctions of certain types of particles have to be multiplied by 1, in addition to being mirror-reversed. Such particle types are said to have negative or odd parity (P = 1, or alternatively P = ), while the other particles are said to have positive or even parity (P = +1, or alternatively P = +).

For baryons, the parity is related to the orbital angular momentum by the relation: S.S.M. Wong (1998b) 
:

As a consequence, baryons with no orbital angular momentum (L = 0) all have even parity (P = +).

==Nomenclature==
Baryons are classified into groups according to their isospin (I) values and quark (q) content. There are six groups of baryonsnucleon (), Delta (), Lambda (), Sigma (), Xi (), and Omega (). The rules for classification are defined by the Particle Data Group. These rules consider the up (), down () and strange () quarks to be light and the charm (), bottom (), and top () quarks to be heavy. The rules cover all the particles that can be made from three of each of the six quarks, even though baryons made of t quarks are not expected to exist because of the t quark's short lifetime. The rules do not cover pentaquarks. C. Amsler et al. (2008): Naming scheme for hadrons 
* Baryons with three and/or quarks are 's (I = ) or 's (I = ).
* Baryons with two and/or quarks are 's (I = 0) or 's (I = 1). If the third quark is heavy, its identity is given by a subscript.
* Baryons with one or quark are 's (I = ). One or two subscripts are used if one or both of the remaining quarks are heavy.
* Baryons with no or quarks are 's (I = 0), and subscripts indicate any heavy quark content.
* Baryons that decay strongly have their masses as part of their names. For example, 0 does not decay strongly, but ++(1232) does.

It is also a widespread (but not universal) practice to follow some additional rules when distinguishing between some states that would otherwise have the same symbol. 
* Baryons in total angular momentum J = configuration that have the same symbols as their J = counterparts are denoted by an asterisk ( * ).
* Two baryons can be made of three different quarks in J = configuration. In this case, a prime ( &prime; ) is used to distinguish between them.
** Exception: When two of the three quarks are one up and one down quark, one baryon is dubbed  while the other is dubbed .

Quarks carry charge, so knowing the charge of a particle indirectly gives the quark content. For example, the rules above say that a contains a c quark and some combination of two u and/or d quarks. The c quark has a charge of (Q = +), therefore the other two must be a u quark (Q = +), and a d quark (Q = ) to have the correct total charge (Q = +1).

== See also ==

* Eightfold way
* List of baryons
* List of particles
* Meson
* Timeline of particle discoveries

== Notes ==

== References ==

* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 

== External links ==
* Particle Data GroupReview of Particle Physics (2008).
* Georgia State UniversityHyperPhysics
* Baryons made thinkable, an interactive visualisation allowing physical properties to be compared

 


[[Braille embosser]]

A braille embosser is an impact printer that renders text as tactile braille cells. Using braille translation software, a document can be embossed with relative ease, making braille production efficient and cost-effective.

Blind users tend to call other printers "ink printers," to distinguish them from their braille counterparts. This is often the case regardless of the type of printer being discussed (e.g., thermal printers being called "ink printers" even though they use no ink).

As with ink printers and presses, embossers range from those intended for consumers to those used by large publishers. Thus, an embosser can cost roughly anywhere from US$2,000 to $150,000.

The fastest industrial braille embosser is probably the $77,000 Belgian-made NV Interpoint 55, first produced in 1991, which uses a separate air compressor to drive the embossing head and can output up to 800 braille characters per second. Adoption was slow at first; in 2000 the National Federation of the Blind said there were only three of these in the USA, one owned by the NFB itself and the other two by the Watchtower Bible and Tract Society. http://nfb.org/legacy/bm/bm00/bm0005/brlm0005.htm As of 2008 there are more than 60 in use across the world. http://www.givengain.com/unique/blindsa/upload/blindsa1008.doc 

Smaller desktop braille embossers are more common and can be found in libraries, universities, and specialist education centers, as well as being privately owned by blind individuals. Particularly with some lower-priced embossers, it may be necessary to use an acoustic cabinet or hood to dampen the noise level.

Braille embossers usually need special braille paper which is thicker and more expensive than normal paper. Some high-end embossers are capable of printing on normal paper. Embossers can be either one-sided or two-sided. Duplex embossing requires lining up the dots so they do not overlap (called "interpoint" because the points on the other side are placed in between the points on the first side).

Once one copy of a document has been produced, printing further copies is often quicker by means of a device called a thermoform, which produces copies on soft plastic. However the resulting braille is not as easily readable as braille that has been freshly embossed, in much the same way that a poor-quality photocopy is not as readable as the original. Hence large publishers do not generally use thermoforms.

== References ==

==External links==

* Braille embossers by Blista-Brailletec GmbH
* Braille embossers by Braillo, Norway AS
* Braille embossers by Enabling Technologies
* Braille embossers by Index Braille
* Braille embossers by Interpoint NV (Elekul)
* Embossers by Nippon Telesoft Co., Ltd
* Embossers by Interpoint NV ONCE - CIDAT (Thiel Embossers)
* Embossers by Technol Eight Co Ltd
* Braille Embossers by ViewPlus



[[Basic Role-Playing]]

Basic Role-Playing (BRP) is a role-playing game system which originated in the fantasy-oriented RuneQuest role-playing game rules. A percentile skill-based system, BRP was used as the basis for most of the games published by Chaosium, including Stormbringer, Worlds of Wonder, Call of Cthulhu, Superworld, Ringworld, Elfquest, Hawkmoon, Elric!, and Nephilim. Pendragon (acquired in 1998 by Green Knight Publishing, and 2005 by White Wolf), while related, has sufficiently different mechanics that it can be seen as a separate system. The BRP standalone booklet was first released in 1980. Two years later it became part of the Worlds of Wonder boxed set. The first edition boxed set of Call of Cthulhu included the booklet as its character creation rules. Greg Stafford and Lynn Willis are credited as the authors.

BRP is similar to other generic systems such as GURPS, Hero System or Savage Worlds in that it uses a simple resolution method which can be broadly applied, in this case an attempt to roll under a certain number with percentile dice. Each incarnation of the BRP rules has changed or added to the core ideas and mechanics, so that games are not identical. For example, in Call of Cthulhu, skills may never be over 100%, while in Stormbringer skills in excess of 100% are within reach for all characters. 

In 2004, Chaosium published the Basic Roleplaying monographs (the hyphen was dropped in the later products). Books with a quick and inexpensive printed format of tape binding and printed cardstock covers, the four monographs (Players Book, Magic Book, Creatures Book, and Gamemaster Book) were printed in order to assert Chaosium's copyrights in the run-up to the publishing and distribution of Deluxe Basic Roleplaying, a game system that is essentially RuneQuest 3rd Edition but with additions to allow play in other genres.

Chaosium released a new version of BRP on June 24, 2008 as single comprehensive book. Currently they are selling both a printed and pdf version of the game.

== History ==

The core rules were originally written by Steve Perrin as part of his game RuneQuest. It was Greg Stafford's idea to simplify the rules (eliminating such things as Strike Ranks and Hit Locations) and issue them in a 16 page booklet called Basic Role Playing. Over the years several others, including Sandy Petersen, Lynn Willis, and Steve Henderson, contributed to their final form.

The BRP was notable for being the first role-playing game system to introduce a full skill system to characters regardless of their profession. This was developed in RuneQuest but was also later adopted by the more skill-oriented Call of Cthulhu 
and the dark fantasy saga of Elric in Stormbringer. 

BRP was conceived of as a genre-generic engine around which any sort of RPG could be played, much like GURPS and the d20 system have become today. In order to underscore this, Chaosium produced the Worlds of Wonder supplement, which contained the generic rules and several specific applications of those rules to given genres. Superworld, specifically, began as a portion of the Worlds of Wonder product.

The fantasy game supplement Thieves World, based on the popular series of books by Robert Lynn Asprin, used both the system for Advanced Dungeons & Dragons as well as the RuneQuest variation of the BRP for character statistics, representing the two most popular game systems of the time. 

== Rules system ==
BRP was developed from a core set of attributes similar to the original Dungeons & Dragons (D&D). Size, Strength, Dexterity, Constitution, Intelligence, Power, and Appearance (or Charisma) replaced the D&D norms. From that was evolved a structurally simulationist system. Therefore hit points (which increase with experience in D&D) were based on the average of Size and Constitution and were functionally static for the life of the character. Skills, using a d100, rather than the D&D d20, were used to simulate the way that people learn skills. Experience points were replaced by an experience check, rolling higher than your current skill on a d100. This created a learning curve that leveled out the higher a skill was. 

Whereas D&D merged armor with defense, BRP treated them as separate functions: the act of parrying was a defensive skill that reduced an opponent's chance to successfully land an attack, and the purpose of armor was to absorb damage. The last major element of many BRP games is that there is no difference between the player character race systems and that of the monster or opponents. This element is shared with and originated in Tunnels and Trolls. By varying ability scores, the same system is used for a human hero as a trollish villain. This approach also led quickly, as it did in T&T, to players playing a wide range of non-human characters and game worlds that were deeply pluralist.

== Licensed games ==
Chaosium was an early adopter of licensing out its BRP system to other companies, something that was unique at the time they began but rather commonplace now thanks to the d20 licenses. This places the BRP in the notable position of being one of the first products to allow other game companies to develop games or game aids for their work. Companies such as Green Knight and Pagan Publishing earliest works were built to support Chaosium's games.

Other, non-Chaosium games have used BRP for its core rules. Other Suns, published by Fantasy Games Unlimited (FGU), used them under license. In addition, Corum, a supplement to the Stormbringer rules, was published in the fall of 2001 by Darcsyde Productions. 

BRP was used (through a special arrangement with Swedish Fredrik Malmberg) as the base for the highly successful Swedish game Drakar och Demoner from Target Games.

BRP was also licensed to Oriflam in France to create a French language second edition of the Hawkmoon game called Hawkmoon, Nouvelle Edition. This version was an adaptation of the mechanics seen in the newer Elric! game, adding new rule systems specific to the setting (e.g. Mutations and 'Weird Science').

BRP was also licensed to Japanese companies. BRP games in Japanese are Houkago Kaiki Club (1997, school life and horror, Hobby Japan), Genom Seed (2004, mutant action, Shinkigensha) and Taitei no Ken RPG (2007, SciFi-jidaigeki, based on movie of the same title, Shinkigensha).

== Awards ==
The BRP itself has been the recipient, via its games, of many awards. Most notable was the 1981 Origins Award for Best Roleplaying Rules for Call of Cthulhu. Other editions of Call of Cthulhu have also won Origins Awards including the Hall of Fame award. The BRP Character Generation software has also won awards for its design.

== References ==
 

== External links ==
* Chaosium's Basic Role-Playing Catalog Page
* Basic Roleplaying Central - The community fansite for Chaosium's Basic Roleplaying game system. BRP Central hosts the basic roleplaying forum, a wiki, downloads, an open fan art gallery, freshly updated brp news & a link list.
* www.basicrps.com

 

[[Block cipher]]

In cryptography, a block cipher is a deterministic algorithm operating on fixed-length groups of bits, called blocks, with an unvarying transformation that is specified by a symmetric key. Block ciphers are important elementary components in the design of many cryptographic protocols, and are widely used to implement encryption of bulk data.

The modern design of block ciphers is based on the concept of an iterated product cipher. Product ciphers were suggested and analyzed by Claude Shannon in his seminal 1949 publication Communication Theory of Secrecy Systems as a means to effectively improve security by combining simple operations such as substitutions and permutations. Iterated product ciphers carry out encryption in multiple rounds, each of which uses a different subkey derived from the original key. One widespread implementation of such ciphers is called a Feistel network, named after Horst Feistel, and notably implemented in the DES cipher. , p. 455. Many other realizations of block ciphers, such as the AES, are classified as substitution-permutation networks.

The publication of the DES cipher by the U.S. National Bureau of Standards (now National Institute of Standards and Technology, NIST) in 1977 was fundamental in the public understanding of modern block cipher design. In the same way, it influenced the academic development of cryptanalytic attacks. Both differential and linear cryptanalysis arose out of studies on the DES design. Today, there is a palette of attack techniques against which a block cipher must be secure, in addition to being robust against brute force attacks.

Even a secure block cipher is suitable only for the encryption of a single block under a fixed key. A multitude of modes of operation have been designed to allow their repeated use in a secure way, commonly to achieve the security goals of confidentiality and authenticity. However, block ciphers may also be used as building blocks in other cryptographic protocols, such as universal hash functions and pseudo-random number generators.

==Definition==
A block cipher consists of two paired algorithms, one for encryption, E, and the other for decryption, D. Both algorithms accept two inputs: an input block of size n bits and a key of size k bits; and both yield an n-bit output block. The decryption algorithm D is defined to be the inverse function of encryption, i.e., D = E1. More formally, 
 , chapter 3. a block cipher is specified by an encryption function
:
which takes as input a key K of bit length k, called the key size, and a bit string P of length n, called the block size, and returns a string C of n bits. P is called the plaintext, and C is termed the ciphertext. For each K, the function E'K(P) is required to be an invertible mapping on {0,1}n. The inverse for E is defined as a function
:
taking a key K and a ciphertext C to return a plaintext value P, such that
:

For example, a block cipher encryption algorithm might take a 128-bit block of plaintext as input, and output a corresponding 128-bit block of ciphertext. The exact transformation is controlled using a second input  the secret key. Decryption is similar: the decryption algorithm takes, in this example, a 128-bit block of ciphertext together with the secret key, and yields the original 128-bit block of plain text. 

For each key K, EK is a permutation (a bijective mapping) over the set of input blocks. Each key selects one permutation from the possible set of .

==Design==

===Iterated block ciphers===
Most block cipher algorithms are classified as iterated block ciphers which means that they transform fixed-size blocks of plain-text into identical size blocks of ciphertext, via the repeated application of an invertible transformation known as the round function, with each iteration referred to as a round. 
 

Usually, the round function R takes different round keys Ki as second input, which are derived from the original key:
:
where is the plaintext and the ciphertext, with r being the round number.

Frequently, key whitening is used in addition to this. At the beginning and the end, the data is modified with key material (often with XOR, but simple arithmetic operations like adding and subtracting are also used):
:
:
:

Given one of the standard iterated block cipher design schemes, it is fairly easy to construct a block cipher that is cryptographically secure, simply by using a large number of rounds. However, this will make the cipher inefficient. Thus, efficiency is the most important additional design criterion for professional ciphers. Further, a good block cipher is designed to avoid side-channel attacks, such as input-dependent memory accesses that might leak secret data via the cache or execution time.

===Substitution-permutation networks===
A sketch of a Substitution-Permutation Network with 3 rounds, encrypting a plaintext block of 16 bits into a ciphertext block of 16 bits. The S-boxes are the Sis, the P-boxes are the same P, and the round keys are the Kis.

One important type of iterated block cipher known as a substitution-permutation network (SPN) takes a block of the plaintext and the key as inputs, and applies several alternating rounds consisting of a substitution stage followed by a permutation stageto produce each block of ciphertext output. The non-linear substitution stage mixes the key bits with those of the plaintext, creating Shannon's confusion. The linear permutation stage then dissipates redundancies, creating diffusion. 

A substitution box (S-box) substitutes a small block of input bits with another block of output bits. This substitution must be one-to-one, to ensure invertibility (hence decryption). A secure S-box will have the property that changing one input bit will change about half of the output bits on average, exhibiting what is known as the avalanche effecti.e. it has the property that each output bit will depend on every input bit. , pages 166-167. 

A permutation box (P-box) is a permutation of all the bits: it takes the outputs of all the S-boxes of one round, permutes the bits, and feeds them into the S-boxes of the next round. A good P-box has the property that the output bits of any S-box are distributed to as many S-box inputs as possible.

At each round, the round key (obtained from the key with some simple operations, for instance, using S-boxes and P-boxes) is combined using some group operation, typically XOR.

Decryption is done by simply reversing the process (using the inverses of the S-boxes and P-boxes and applying the round keys in reversed order).

===Feistel ciphers===
Many block ciphers, such as DES and Blowfish utilize structures known as Feistel ciphers

In a Feistel cipher, the block of plain text to be encrypted is split into two equal-sized halves. The round function is applied to one half, using a subkey, and then the output is XORed with the other half. The two halves are then swapped.

Let be the round function and let
 be the sub-keys for the rounds respectively.

Then the basic operation is as follows:

Split the plaintext block into two equal pieces, (, )

For each round , compute

:
:.

Then the ciphertext is . 

Decryption of a ciphertext is accomplished by computing for 

:
:.

Then is the plaintext again.

One advantage of the Feistel model compared to a substitution-permutation network is that the round function does not have to be invertible.

===Lai-Massey ciphers===
The Lai-Massey scheme. The archetypical cipher utilizing it is IDEA.

The Lai-Massey scheme offers security properties similar to those of the Feistel structure. It also shares its advantage that the round function does not have to be invertible. Another similarity is that is also splits the input block into two equal pieces. However, the round function is applied to the difference between the two, and the result is then added to both half blocks.

Let be the round function and a half-round function and let be the sub-keys for the rounds respectively.

Then the basic operation is as follows:

Split the plaintext block into two equal pieces, (, )

For each round , compute

:

where and 

Then the ciphertext is .

Decryption of a ciphertext is accomplished by computing for 

:

where and 

Then is the plaintext again.

=== Operations ===

Many modern block ciphers and hashes are ARX algorithmstheir round function involves only three operations: modular addition, rotation with hardwired rotation amounts, and XOR (ARX).
Many authors draw an ARX network, a kind of data flow diagram, to illustrate such a round function. 
 

These ARX operations are popular because they are relatively fast and cheap in hardware and software,
and also because they run in constant time, and are therefore immune to timing attacks.
The rotational cryptanalysis technique attempts to attack such round functions.

Other operations often used in block ciphers include
data-dependent rotations as in RC5 and RC6,
a substitution box implemented as a lookup table as in Data Encryption Standard and Advanced Encryption Standard,
a permutation box,
and multiplication as in IDEA.

==Modes of operation==

Insecure encryption of an image as a result of electronic codebook mode encoding.
A block cipher by itself allows encryption only of a single data block of the cipher's block length. For a variable-length message, the data must first be partitioned into separate cipher blocks. In the simplest case, known as the electronic codebook (ECB) mode, a message is first split into separate blocks of the cipher's block size (possibly extending the last block with padding bits), and then each block is encrypted and decrypted independently. However, such a naive method is generally insecure because equal plaintext blocks will always generate equal ciphertext blocks (for the same key), so patterns in the plaintext message become evident in the ciphertext output.

To overcome this limitation, several so-called block cipher modes of operation have been designed and specified in national recommendations such as NIST 800-38A and BSI TR-02102 and international standards such as ISO/IEC 10116. ISO/IEC 10116:2006 Information technology &mdash; Security techniques &mdash; Modes of operation for an n-bit block cipher The general concept is to use randomization of the plaintext data based on an additional input value, frequently called an initialization vector, to create what is termed probabilistic encryption. In the popular cipher block chaining (CBC) mode, for encryption to be secure the initialization vector passed along with the plaintext message must be a random or pseudo-random value, which is added in an exclusive-or manner to the first plaintext block before it is being encrypted. The resultant ciphertext block is then used as the new initialization vector for the next plaintext block. In the cipher feedback (CFB) mode, which emulates a self-synchronizing stream cipher, the initialization vector is first encrypted and then added to the plaintext block. The output feedback (OFB) mode repeatedly encrypts the initialization vector to create a key stream for the emulation of a synchronous stream cipher. The newer counter (CTR) mode similarly creates a key stream, but has the advantage of only needing unique and not (pseudo-)random values as initialization vectors; the needed randomness is derived internally by using the initialization vector as a block counter and encrypting this counter for each block. 

From a security-theoretic point of view, modes of operation must provide what is known as semantic security. Informally, it means that given some ciphertext under an unknown key one cannot practically derive any information from the ciphertext (other than the length of the message) over what one would have known without seeing the ciphertext. It has been shown that all of the modes discussed above, with the exception of the ECB mode, provide this property under so-called chosen plaintext attacks.

==Padding==

Some modes such as the CBC mode only operate on complete plaintext blocks. Simply extending the last block of a message with zero-bits is insufficient since it does not allow a receiver to easily distinguish messages that differ only in the amount of padding bits. More importantly, such a simple solution gives rise to very efficient padding oracle attacks. A suitable padding scheme is therefore needed to extend the last plaintext block to the cipher's block size. While many popular schemes described in standards and in the literature have been shown to be vulnerable to padding oracle attacks, a solution which adds a one-bit and then extends the last block with zero-bits, standardized as "padding method 2" in ISO/IEC 9797-1, has been proven secure against these attacks. 

==Cryptanalysis==

===Brute force attacks===

Due to a block cipher's characteristic as an invertible function, its output becomes distinguishable from a truly random output string over time due to the birthday problem. This property results in the cipher's security degrading quadratically, and needs to be taken into account when selecting a block size. There is a trade-off though as large block sizes can result in the algorithm becoming inefficient to operate. Earlier block ciphers such as the DES have typically selected a 64-bit block size, while newer designs such as the AES support block sizes of 128 bits or more, with some ciphers supporting a range of different block sizes. 

===Differential cryptanalysis===

===Linear cryptanalysis===

Linear cryptanalysis is a form of cryptanalysis based on finding affine approximations to the action of a cipher. Linear cryptanalysis is one of the two most widely used attacks on block ciphers; the other being differential cryptanalysis. 

The discovery is attributed to Mitsuru Matsui, who first applied the technique to the FEAL cipher (Matsui and Yamagishi, 1992). 

===Integral cryptanalysis===

Integral cryptanalysis is a cryptanalytic attack that is particularly applicable to block ciphers based on substitution-permutation networks. Unlike differential cryptanalysis, which uses pairs of chosen plaintexts with a fixed XOR difference, integral cryptanalysis uses sets or even multisets of chosen plaintexts of which part is held constant and another part varies through all possibilities. For example, an attack might use 256 chosen plaintexts that have all but 8 of their bits the same, but all differ in those 8 bits. Such a set necessarily has an XOR sum of 0, and the XOR sums of the corresponding sets of ciphertexts provide information about the cipher's operation. This contrast between the differences of pairs of texts and the sums of larger sets of texts inspired the name "integral cryptanalysis", borrowing the terminology of calculus.

===Other techniques===

The development of the boomerang attack enabled differential cryptanalysis techniques to be applied to many ciphers that had previously been deemed secure against differential attacks
In addition to linear and differential cryptanalysis, there is a growing catalog of attacks: truncated differential cryptanalysis, partial differential cryptanalysis, integral cryptanalysis, which encompasses square and integral attacks, slide attacks, boomerang attacks, the XSL attack, impossible differential cryptanalysis and algebraic attacks. For a new block cipher design to have any credibility, it must demonstrate evidence of security against known attacks.

==Provable security==
When a block cipher is used in a given mode of operation, the resulting algorithm should ideally be about as secure as the block cipher itself. ECB (discussed above) emphatically lacks this property: regardless of how secure the underlying block cipher is, ECB mode can easily be attacked. On the other hand, CBC mode can be proven to be secure under the assumption that the underlying block cipher is likewise secure. Note, however, that making statements like this requires formal mathematical definitions for what it means for an encryption algorithm or a block cipher to "be secure". This section describes two common notions for what properties a block cipher should have. Each corresponds to a mathematical model that can be used to prove properties of higher level algorithms, such as CBC.

This general approach to cryptography---proving higher-level algorithms (such as CBC) are secure under explicitly stated assumptions regarding their components (such as a block cipher)---is known as provable security.

===Standard model===
Informally, a block cipher is secure in the standard model if an attacker cannot tell the difference between the block cipher (equipped with a random key) and a random permutation. 

To be a bit more precise, let E be an n-bit block cipher. We imagine the following game:
# The person running the game flips a coin.
#* If the coin lands on heads, he chooses a random key K and defines the function f = EK.
#* If the coin lands on tails, he chooses a random permutation on the set of n-bit strings, and defines the function f = .
# The attacker chooses an n-bit string X, and the person running the game tells him the value of f(X).
# Step 2 is repeated a total of q times. (Each of these q interactions is a query.)
# The attacker guesses how the coin landed. He wins if his guess is correct.

The attacker, which we can model as an algorithm, is called an adversary. The function f (which the adversary was able to query) is called an oracle.

Note that an adversary can trivially ensure a 50% chance of winning simply by guessing at random (or even by, for example, always guessing "heads"). Therefore let PE(A) denote the probability that the adversary A wins this game against E, and define the advantage of A as 2(PE(A) - 1/2). It follows that if A guesses randomly, its advantage will be 0; on the other hand, if A always wins, then its advantage is 1. The block cipher E is a pseudo-random permutation (PRP) if no adversary has an advantage significantly greater than 0, given specified restrictions on q and the adversary's running time. If in Step 2 above adversaries have the option of learning f -1(X) instead of f(X) (but still have only small advantages) then E is a strong PRP (SPRP). An adversary is non-adaptive if it chooses all q values for X before the game begins (that is, it does not use any information gleaned from previous queries to choose each X as it goes).

These definitions have proven useful for analyzing various modes of operation. For example, one can define a similar game for measuring the security of a block cipher-based encryption algorithm, and then try to show (through a reduction argument) that the probability of an adversary winning this new game is not much more than PE(A) for some A. (The reduction typically provides limits on q and the running time of A.) Equivalently, if PE(A) is small for all relevant A, then no attacker has a significant probability of winning the new game. This formalizes the idea that the higher-level algorithm inherits the block cipher's security.

===Ideal cipher model===

==Practical evaluation==

Block ciphers may be evaluated according to multiple criteria in practice. Common factors include: 
*Key parameters, such as its key size and block size, both which provide an upper bound on the security of the cipher.
*The estimated security level, which is based on the confidence gained in the block cipher design after it has largely withstood major efforts in cryptanalysis over time, the design's mathematical soundness, and the existence of practical or certificational attacks.
*The cipher's complexity and its suitability for implementation in hardware or software. Hardware implementations may measure the complexity in terms of gate count or energy consumption, which are important parameters for resource-constrained devices.
*The cipher's performance in terms of processing throughput on various platforms, including its memory requirements.
*The cost of the cipher, which refers to licensing requirements that may apply due to intellectual property rights.
*The flexibility of the cipher, which includes its ability to support multiple key sizes and block lengths.

==Notable block ciphers==

===Lucifer / DES===

Lucifer is generally considered to be the first civilian block cipher, developed at IBM in the 1970s based on work done by Horst Feistel. A revised version of the algorithm was adopted as a U.S. government Federal Information Processing Standard: FIPS PUB 46 Data Encryption Standard (DES). FIPS PUB 46-3 Data Encryption Standard (DES) (This is the third edition, 1999, but includes historical information in the preliminary section 12.) It was chosen by the U.S. National Bureau of Standards (NBS) after a public invitation for submissions and some internal changes by NBS (and, potentially, the NSA). DES was publicly released in 1976 and has been widely used.

DES was designed to, among other things, resist a certain cryptanalytic attack known to the NSA and rediscovered by IBM, though unknown publicly until rediscovered again and published by Eli Biham and Adi Shamir in the late 1980s. The technique is called differential cryptanalysis and remains one of the few general attacks against block ciphers; linear cryptanalysis is another, but may have been unknown even to the NSA, prior to its publication by Mitsuru Matsui. DES prompted a large amount of other work and publications in cryptography and cryptanalysis in the open community and it inspired many new cipher designs.

DES has a block size of 64 bits and a key size of 56 bits. 64-bit blocks became common in block cipher designs after DES. Key length depended on several factors, including government regulation. Many observers in the 1970s commented that the 56-bit key length used for DES was too short. As time went on, its inadequacy became apparent, especially after a special purpose machine designed to break DES was demonstrated in 1998 by the Electronic Frontier Foundation. An extension to DES, Triple DES, triple-encrypts each block with either two independent keys (112-bit key and 80-bit security) or three independent keys (168-bit key and 112-bit security). It was widely adopted as a replacement. As of 2011, the three-key version is still considered secure, though the National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) standards no longer permit the use of the two-key version in new applications, due to its 80-bit security level. NIST Special Publication 800-57 Recommendation for Key Management &mdash; Part 1: General (Revised), March, 2007 

===IDEA===
The International Data Encryption Algorithm (IDEA) is a block cipher designed by James Massey of ETH Zurich and Xuejia Lai; it was first described in 1991, as an intended replacement for DES.

IDEA operates on 64-bit blocks using a 128-bit key, and consists of a series of eight identical transformations (a round) and an output transformation (the half-round). The processes for encryption and decryption are similar. IDEA derives much of its security by interleaving operations from different groups &mdash; modular addition and multiplication, and bitwise exclusive or (XOR) &mdash; which are algebraically "incompatible" in some sense.

The designers analysed IDEA to measure its strength against differential cryptanalysis and concluded that it is immune under certain assumptions. No successful linear or algebraic weaknesses have been reported. , the best attack which applies to all keys can break full 8.5 round IDEA using a narrow-bicliques attack about four times faster than brute force.

===RC5===
One round (two half-rounds) of the RC5 block cipher

RC5 is a block cipher designed by Ronald Rivest in 1994 which, unlike many other ciphers, has a variable block size (32, 64 or 128 bits), key size (0 to 2040 bits) and number of rounds (0 to 255). The original suggested choice of parameters were a block size of 64 bits, a 128-bit key and 12 rounds.

A key feature of RC5 is the use of data-dependent rotations; one of the goals of RC5 was to prompt the study and evaluation of such operations as a cryptographic primitive. RC5 also consists of a number of modular additions and XORs. The general structure of the algorithm is a Feistel-like network. The encryption and decryption routines can be specified in a few lines of code. The key schedule, however, is more complex, expanding the key using an essentially one-way function with the binary expansions of both e and the golden ratio as sources of "nothing up my sleeve numbers". The tantalising simplicity of the algorithm together with the novelty of the data-dependent rotations has made RC5 an attractive object of study for cryptanalysts.

12-round RC5 (with 64-bit blocks) is susceptible to a differential attack using 244 chosen plaintexts. Biryukov A. and Kushilevitz E. (1998). Improved Cryptanalysis of RC5. EUROCRYPT 1998. 18&ndash;20 rounds are suggested as sufficient protection.

===Rijndael / AES===

DES has been superseded as a United States Federal Standard by the AES, adopted by NIST in 2001 after a 5-year public competition. The cipher was developed by two Belgian cryptographers, Joan Daemen and Vincent Rijmen, and submitted under the name Rijndael.

AES has a fixed block size of 128 bits and a key size of 128, 192, or 256 bits, whereas Rijndael can be specified with block and key sizes in any multiple of 32 bits, with a minimum of 128 bits. The blocksize has a maximum of 256 bits, but the keysize has no theoretical maximum. AES operates on a 44 column-major order matrix of bytes, termed the state (versions of Rijndael with a larger block size have additional columns in the state).

===Blowfish===

Blowfish is a block cipher, designed in 1993 by Bruce Schneier and included in a large number of cipher suites and encryption products. Blowfish has a 64-bit block size and a variable key length from 1 bit up to 448 bits. It is a 16-round Feistel cipher and uses large key-dependent S-boxes. Notable features of the design include the key-dependent S-boxes and a highly complex key schedule.

Schneier designed Blowfish as a general-purpose algorithm, intended as an alternative to the ageing DES and free of the problems and constraints associated with other algorithms. At the time Blowfish was released, many other designs were proprietary, encumbered by patents or were commercial/government secrets. Schneier has stated that, "Blowfish is unpatented, and will remain so in all countries. The algorithm is hereby placed in the public domain, and can be freely used by anyone." Blowfish provides a good encryption rate in software and no effective cryptanalysis of the full-round version has been found to date.

==Generalizations==

===Tweakable block ciphers===

M. Liskov, R. Rivest, and D. Wagner have described a generalized version of block ciphers called "tweakable" block ciphers. A tweakable block cipher accepts a second input called the tweak along with its usual plaintext or ciphertext input. The tweak, along with the key, selects the permutation computed by the cipher. If changing tweaks is sufficiently lightweight (compared with a usually fairly expensive key setup operation), then some interesting new operation modes become possible. The disk encryption theory article describes some of these modes.

===Format-preserving encryption===

==Relation to other cryptographic primitives==

Block ciphers can be used to build other cryptographic primitives, such as those below. For these other primitives to be cryptographically secure, care has to be taken to build them the right way.

* Stream ciphers can be built using block ciphers. OFB-mode and CTR mode are block modes that turn a block cipher into a stream cipher.

* Cryptographic hash functions can be built using block ciphers. ISO/IEC 10118-2:2010 Information technology &mdash; Security techniques &mdash; Hash-functions &mdash; Part 2: Hash-functions using an n-bit block cipher See one-way compression function for descriptions of several such methods. The methods resemble the block cipher modes of operation usually used for encryption.

* Cryptographically secure pseudorandom number generators (CSPRNGs) can be built using block ciphers. NIST Special Publication 800-90A Recommendation for Random Number Generation Using Deterministic Random Bit Generators 

* Secure pseudorandom permutations of arbitrarily sized finite sets can be constructed with block ciphers; see Format-Preserving Encryption.

* Message authentication codes (MACs) are often built from block ciphers. CBC-MAC, OMAC and PMAC are such MACs.

* Authenticated encryption is also built from block ciphers. It means to both encrypt and MAC at the same time. That is to both provide confidentiality and authentication. CCM, EAX, GCM and OCB are such authenticated encryption modes.

Just as block ciphers can be used to build hash functions, hash functions can be used to build block ciphers. Examples of such block ciphers are SHACAL, BEAR and LION.

==See also==

*Block cipher security summary
*Topics in cryptography

==References==

==Further reading==

* 

==External links==
* A list of many symmetric algorithms, the majority of which are block ciphers.
* The block cipher lounge
* What is a block cipher? from RSA FAQ

*


[[Wireless broadband]]

Three fixed wireless dishes with (protective covers) on top of 307 W. 7th Street, Fort Worth, Texas around 2001

Wireless broadband is technology that provides high-speed wireless Internet access or computer networking access over a wide area.

==The term broadband==
Originally the word "broadband" had a technical meaning, but became a marketing term for any kind of relatively high-speed computer network or Internet access technology.
According to the 802.16-2004 standard, broadband means "having instantaneous bandwidths greater than 1 MHz and supporting data rates greater than about 1.5 Mbit/s." Coexistence of Fixed Broadband Wireless Access Systems 

==Technology and speeds==

A typical WISP Customer Premises Equipment (CPE) installed on a residence

Wireless networks can feature data rates roughly equivalent to some wired networks, such as that of asymmetric digital subscriber line (ADSL) or a cable modem. Wireless networks can also be symmetrical, meaning the same rate in both directions (downstream and upstream), which is most commonly associated with fixed wireless networks. A fixed wireless network link is a stationary terrestrial wireless connection, which can support higher data rates for the same power as mobile or satellite systems.

Few wireless Internet service providers (WISPs) provide download speeds of over 100 Mbit/s; most broadband wireless access (BWA) services are estimated to have a range of 50 km from a tower. Technologies used include LMDS and MMDS, as well as heavy use of the ISM bands and one particular access technology was standardized by IEEE 802.16, with products known as WiMAX. 

WiMAX is highly popular in Europe but has not met full acceptance in the United States because cost of deployment does not meet return on investment figures. In 2005 the Federal Communications Commission adopted a Report and Order that revised the FCCs rules to open the 3650 MHz band for terrestrial wireless broadband operations. 

==Development of Wireless Broadband in the United States==

On November 14, 2007 the Commission released Public Notice DA 07-4605 in which the Wireless Telecommunications Bureau announced the start date for licensing and registration process for the 36503700 MHz band. 
In 2010 the FCC adopted the TV White Space Rules (TVWS) and allowed some of the better no line of sight frequency (700 MHz) into the FCC Part-15 Rules. The Wireless Internet Service Providers Association, a national association of WISPs, petitioned the FCC and won.

Initially, WISPs were only found in rural areas not covered by cable or DSL. These early WISPs would employ a high-capacity T-carrier, such as a T1 or DS3 connection, and then broadcast the signal from a high elevation, such as at the top of a water tower. To receive this type of Internet connection, consumers mount a small dish to the roof of their home or office and point it to the transmitter. Line of sight is usually necessary for WISPs operating in the 2.4 and 5 GHz bands with 900 MHz offering better NLOS (non-line-of-sight) performance.

===Residential Wireless Internet===
Providers of fixed wireless broadband services typically provide equipment to customers and install a small antenna or dish somewhere on the roof. This equipment is usually deployed as a service and maintained by the company providing that service. Fixed wireless services have become particularly popular in many rural areas where Cable, DSL or other typical home Internet services are not available.

===Business Wireless Internet===
Many companies in the US and worldwide have started using wireless alternatives to incumbent and local providers for internet and voice service. These providers tend to offer competitive services and options in areas where there is a difficulty getting affordable Ethernet connections from terrestrial providers such as ATT, Comcast, Verizon and others. Also, companies looking for full diversity between carriers for critical uptime requirements may seek wireless alternatives to local options.

===Demand for spectrum===

To cope with increased demand for wireless broadband, increased spectrum would be needed. Studies began in 2009, and while some unused spectrum was available, it appeared broadcasters would have to give up at least some spectrum. This led to strong objections from the broadcasting community. In 2013, auctions are planned, and for now any action by broadcasters is voluntary.

==Mobile wireless broadband==
Called mobile broadband, wireless broadband technologies include services from mobile phone service providers such as Verizon Wireless, Sprint Corporation, and AT&T Mobility, which allow a more mobile version of Internet access. Consumers can purchase a PC card, laptop card, or USB equipment to connect their PC or laptop to the Internet via cell phone towers. This type of connection would be stable in almost any area that could also receive a strong cell phone connection. These connections can cost more for portable convenience as well as having speed limitations in all but urban environments.

On June 2, 2010, after months of discussion, AT&T became the first wireless Internet provider in the USA to announce plans to charge according to usage. As the only iPhone service in the United States, AT&T experienced the problem of heavy Internet use more than other providers. About 3 percent of AT&T smart phone customers account for 40 percent of the technology's use. 98 percent of the company's customers use less than 2 gigabytes (4000 page views, 10,000 emails or 200 minutes of streaming video), the limit under the $25 monthly plan, and 65 percent use less than 200 megabytes, the limit for the $15 plan. For each gigabyte in excess of the limit, customers would be charged $10 a month starting June 7, 2010, though existing customers would not be required to change from the $30 a month unlimited service plan. The new plan would become a requirement for those upgrading to the new iPhone technology later in the summer. 

==Licensing==

A wireless connection can be either licensed or unlicensed. In the US, licensed connections use a private spectrum the user has secured rights to from the Federal Communications Commission (FCC). In other countries, spectrum is licensed from the country's national radio communications authority (such as the ACMA in Australia or Nigerian Communications Commission in Nigeria (NCC)). Licensing is usually expensive and often reserved for large companies who wish to guarantee private access to spectrum for use in point to point communication. Because of this, most wireless ISP's use unlicensed spectrum which is publicly shared.

==See also==
* Clearwire
* CorDECT
* HIPERMAN
* Skyriver, provider in California
* WiBro, provider in South Korea
* iBurst
* 802.20
* Connect card
* Policies promoting wireless broadband

==References==

==External links==

 

* Wireless Internet Service Provider Association



[[Bjrn Borg]]

Bjrn Rune Borg (; born 6 June 1956) is a former World No. 1 tennis player from Sweden. Between 1974 and 1981 he won 11 Grand Slam singles titles. He won five consecutive Wimbledon singles titles and six French Open singles titles, a record he held until it was broken by Rafael Nadal. "Compare and contrast", Jon Wertheim, Sports Illustrated, 23 September 2002 "Borg still making the shots", Douglas Robson, USA Today, 25 May 2006 He is considered by many to be one of the greatest tennis players of all time. "Navratilova joins Laver and Borg on the shortlist (as voted for by . . . Navratilova)", Alastair Campbell, The Times, 3 July 2004 "When he was king", Tim Pears, The Observer, 5 June 2005 

During his relatively brief pro career, Borg won 41% of the Grand Slam singles tournaments he entered (11 of 27) and 89.81% (14116) of the Grand Slam singles matches he played. His winning rate across all surfaces (carpet, clay, hard, and grass) was 82.74% (609127), and his winning percentage at Wimbledon was 92.73% (514); all are records. He is one of four players in the open era to win both Wimbledon and the French Open in the same year and the only player to do so for three consecutive years. He is the only player to win three majors without dropping a set. He was the first male player to win more than 10 majors during the Open era (since surpassed by Pete Sampras's 14, Roger Federer's 17, and Rafael Nadal's 14 titles). He also won three year-end championship titles, including two Masters Grand Prix titles and one WCT Final title. In addition, he won 15 Championship Series titles (19741980) the precursors to the current Masters 1000.

Borg was the first player to earn more than one million dollars in prize money in a single season, in 1979.

==Early life==
Borg was born in Stockholm, Sweden, on 6 June 1956, and grew up in nearby Sdertlje. As a child, Borg became fascinated with a golden tennis racquet that his father won at a table-tennis tournament. His father gave him the racquet, beginning his tennis career. 

A player of great athleticism and endurance, he had a distinctive style and appearancebowlegged and very fast. His muscularity allowed him to put heavy topspin on both his forehand and two-handed backhand. He followed Jimmy Connors in using the two-handed backhand. By the time he was 13 he was beating the best of Sweden's under-18 players, and Davis Cup captain Lennart Bergelin cautioned against anyone trying to change Borg's rough-looking, jerky strokes. They were effective.

==Career==
Borg joined the professional circuit at age 14. In 1972, at the age of 15, Borg became one of the youngest players ever to represent his country in the Davis Cup and won his debut singles rubber in five sets against seasoned professional Onny Parun of New Zealand. Later that year, he won the Wimbledon junior singles title, recovering from a 52 deficit in the final set to overcome Britain's Buster Mottram.

In 1973, Borg reached the Wimbledon main draw quarterfinals in his first attempt. Just before his 18th birthday in 1974, Borg won his first top-level singles title at the Italian Open, becoming its youngest winner. Two weeks later he became the then-youngest winner of the French Open defeating Manuel Orantes in the final in five sets. Barely 18 at the time, Borg was the youngest-ever male French Open champion (the record was later lowered by Mats Wilander in 1982 and Michael Chang in 1989).

In early 1975, Borg defeated Rod Laver, then 36 years old, in a semifinal of the World Championship Tennis (WCT) finals in Dallas, Texas, in five sets. Borg subsequently lost to Arthur Ashe in the final.

Borg retained his French Open title in 1975, beating Guillermo Vilas in the final in straight sets. Borg then reached the Wimbledon quarterfinals, where he lost to eventual champion Ashe. Borg did not lose another match at Wimbledon until 1981.

Borg won two singles and one doubles rubber in the 1975 Davis Cup final, as Sweden beat Czechoslovakia 32. With these singles wins, Borg had won 19 consecutive Davis Cup singles rubbers since 1973. That was already a record at the time. However, Borg never lost another Davis Cup singles rubber, and, by the end of his career, he had stretched that winning streak to 33a Davis Cup record that still stands. 

In early 1976, Borg won the World Championship Tennis year-end WCT Finals in Dallas, Texas, with a four-set victory over Guillermo Vilas in the final.

At the 1976 French Open, Borg lost to the Italian Adriano Panatta, who remains the only player to defeat Borg at this tournament. Panatta did it twice: in the fourth round in 1973, and in the 1976 quarterfinals.

Borg won Wimbledon in 1976 without losing a set, defeating the favored Ilie Nstase in the final. Borg became the youngest male Wimbledon champion of the modern era at 20 years and 1 month (a record subsequently broken by Boris Becker, who won Wimbledon aged 17 in 1985). It would be the last time Borg played Wimbledon as an underdog. Nstase later exclaimed, "We're playing tennis, he's playing something else."

Borg also reached the final of the 1976 US Open, which was then being played on clay courts. Borg lost in four sets to world no. 1 Jimmy Connors.

Borg skipped the French Open in 1977 because he was under contract with WTT, but he repeated his Wimbledon triumph, although this time he was pushed much harder. He defeated his good friend Vitas Gerulaitis in a semifinal in five sets. "Classic Matches: Borg v Gerulaitis", BBC Sport, 31 May 2004 In the final, Borg was pushed to five sets for the third time in the tournament, this time by Connors. The win propelled Borg to the no. 1 ranking on the computer, albeit for just one week in August. Prior to the 1977 US Open, Borg aggravated a shoulder injury while waterskiing with Vitas Gerulaitis. This injury ultimately forced him to retire during a fourth round match vs Dick Stockton.

Through 1977, he had never lost to a player younger than himself.

Borg was at the height of his career from 1978 through 1980, completing the difficult French Open-Wimbledon double all three years.

In 1978, Borg won the French Open with a win over Vilas in the final. Borg did not drop a set during the tournament, a feat only he, Nstase (in 1973), and Rafael Nadal (in 2008 and 2010) have accomplished at the French Open during the open era.

Borg defeated Connors in straight sets at the 1978 Wimbledon. At the US Open, now held on hard courts in Flushing Meadow, New York, he lost the final in straight sets to Connors. That autumn, Borg faced John McEnroe for the first time in a semifinal of the Stockholm Open, and lost to McEnroe.
Bjrn Borg at the 1979 ABN Tennis Tournament

Borg lost to McEnroe again in four sets in the final of the 1979 WCT Finals but was now overtaking Connors for the top ranking. Borg established himself firmly in the top spot with his fourth French Open singles title and fourth straight Wimbledon singles title, defeating Connors in a straight-set semifinal at the latter tournament. At the French Open, Borg defeated big-serving Victor Pecci in a four-set final, and at Wimbledon, Borg took five sets to overcome an even bigger server, Roscoe Tanner. Borg was upset by Tanner at the US Open, in a four-set quarterfinal played under the lights.

At the season-ending Masters tournament in January 1980, Borg survived a close semifinal against McEnroe. He then beat Gerulaitis in straight sets, winning his first Masters and first title in New York. In June, he overcame Gerulaitis, again in straight sets, for his fifth French Open title. Again, he did not drop a set.

Borg won his fifth consecutive Wimbledon singles title, the 1980 Wimbledon Men's Singles final, by defeating McEnroe in a five-set match, often cited as the best Wimbledon final ever played - the only comparable match being the Federer - Nadal final in 2008. Having lost the opening set to an all-out McEnroe assault, Borg took the next two and had two championship points at 54 in the fourth. However, McEnroe averted disaster and went on to level the match in Wimbledon's most memorable 34-point tiebreaker, which he won 1816. In the fourth-set tiebreak, McEnroe saved five match points, and Borg six set points, before McEnroe won the set. Bjrn served first to begin the 5th set and fell behind 1540. Borg then won 19 straight points on serve in the deciding set and prevailed after 3 hours, 53 minutes. Borg himself commented years later that this was the first time that he was afraid that he would lose, as well as feeling that it was the beginning of the end of his dominance. 

He defeated McEnroe in the final of the 1980 Stockholm Open, and faced him one more time that year, in the round-robin portion of the year-end Masters, played in January 1981. With 19,103 fans in attendance, Borg won a deciding third-set tie-break for the second year in a row. Borg then defeated Ivan Lendl for his second Masters title.

Borg won his last Grand Slam title at the French Open in 1981, defeating Lendl in a five-set final. Borg has a six French Open Grand Slam titles record bettered only by Rafael Nadal in 2012.

In reaching the Wimbledon final in 1981, Borg stretched his winning streak at the All England Club to a record 41 matches. In a semifinal, Borg was down to Connors by two sets to love, before coming back to win the match. However, Borg's streak was brought to an end by McEnroe, who defeated him in four sets.

Borg went on to lose to McEnroe at the 1981 US Open. After that defeat, Borg walked off the court and out of the stadium before the ceremonies and press conference had begun. There are reports that Borg received threats after his semifinal win over Connors. In later years, Borg apologized to McEnroe. The 1981 US Open would be the Swede's last Grand Slam final. Major tournaments and tour organizers were enforcing a new rule by 1982, that players had to play at least 10 official tournaments per year. However, Borg wanted to curtail his schedule after many years of winning so often. Although he felt in good condition physically, he recognized that the relentless drive to win and defy tour organizers had begun to fade. 

Borg failed to win the US Open in 10 tries, losing four finals, 1976 and 1978 to Jimmy Connors, and 1980 and 1981 to McEnroe. He played on hard courts at the US Open from 1978 to 1981 and reached the final there on three occasions, in 1978, 1980 and 1981. He led 32 in the fifth set of the 1980 final, before losing. That match followed Borg's classic encounter with McEnroe at the 1980 Wimbledon. In 1978, 1979 and 1980, Borg was halfway to a Grand Slam after victories at the French and Wimbledon (the Australian Open being the last Grand Slam tournament of each year at the time) only to falter at Flushing Meadow, lefty Tanner his conqueror in 1979.

He appeared only once at the Australian Open, at the age of 17, at which he lost in an early round.

In 1982, Borg played only one tournament, losing to Yannick Noah in the quarterfinals of Monte Carlo in April. Nevertheless, Borg's announcement in January 1983 that he was retiring from the game at the age of 26 was a shock to the tennis world. McEnroe tried unsuccessfully to persuade Borg to continue. (He did, however, play Monte Carlo again in March 1983, reaching the second round, and Stuttgart in July 1984.)

===Retirement===
When he retired, Borg had a choice of homes, a penthouse in Monte Carlo, not far from his successful pro shop, and a small island off the Swedish coast.

Borg later bounced back as the owner of the Bjrn Borg fashion label, one of whose advertising campaigns asked Swedes in the pages of a leading national newspaper to "Fuck for the Future." His label has since become extremely successful, second only to Calvin Klein in his home country. 

==Personal life==
Borg married Romanian tennis pro Mariana Simionescu in Bucharest on 24 July 1980.
The marriage ended in divorce. He fathered a child by the Swedish model Jannike Bjrling, and he was briefly married to the Italian singer Loredana Bert. There were rumours of a drug overdose and an attempted suicide, which Borg denied. He narrowly avoided personal bankruptcy when business ventures failed. 

===Failed comeback===
In the early-1990s, Borg attempted a comeback on the men's professional tennis tour. In doing so, he grew his hair out as it had been when he retired and returned to using a wooden racket; he had kept his hair cut and used modern graphite rackets in exhibitions he played during the later 1980s. This time around, however, he was completely unsuccessful. In fact, Borg failed to win a single match. He faced Jordi Arrese in his first match back, again at Monte Carlo but without practising or playing any exhibition matches, and fell in two sets. In his first nine matches, played in 1991 and 92, Borg failed to win a single set. He fared slightly better in 1993, taking a set off his opponent in each of the three matches he played. He came closest to getting a win in what turned out to be his final tour match, falling to Alexander Volkov.

In 1992, Borg, 35, using a Donnay Graphite Midsize racket strung at 85 lbs. tension, defeated John Lloyd, 37, at the Inglewood Forum Tennis Challenge.

Borg later joined the champions tour, returning to shorter hair and using modern racquets.

==Memorabilia preserved==
In March 2006, Bonhams Auction House in London announced that it would auction Borg's Wimbledon trophies and two of his winning rackets on 21 June 2006. Several players then called Borg in an attempt to make him reconsider. Jimmy Connors and Andre Agassi volunteered to buy them to keep them together, and according to Dagens Nyheter  who had talked to Borg  McEnroe called from New York and asked, "What's up? Have you gone mad?" The conversation, paired with Connors and Agassi's plea, eventually persuaded Borg to buy out the trophies from Bonhams at an undisclosed amount.

==Distinctions and honors==
*Borg was ranked by the ATP rankings world no. 1 in six different stretches between 1977 and 1981, totaling 109weeks.
*During his career, he won a total of 77 (61 listed on the Association of Tennis Professionals website) top-level singles and four doubles titles.
*Borg won the BBC Sports Personality of the Year Overseas Personality Award in 1979.
*Borg was inducted into the International Tennis Hall of Fame in 1987.
*On 10 December 2006, the British Broadcasting Corporation gave Borg a Lifetime Achievement Award, which was presented by Boris Becker. 
*Borg was named one of the 10 Most Superstitious Athletes by Men's Fitness 

==Place among the all-time greats==
With 11 Grand Slam titles, Borg ranks fifth in the list of male tennis players who have won the most Grand Slam singles titles behind Roger Federer (17), Pete Sampras (14), Rafael Nadal (14) and Roy Emerson (12). The French OpenWimbledon double he achieved three times consecutively was called by Wimbledon officials "the most difficult double in tennis" and "a feat considered impossible among today's players." "Strokes for Agassi: He belongs among the 10 greatest ever", Bruce Jenkins, San Francisco Chronicle, 13 September 2006 Only Chris Evert (in 1974), Martina Navratilova (in 1982 and 1984), Steffi Graf (in 1988, 1993, 1995 and 1996), Serena Williams (2002), Rafael Nadal (in 2008 and 2010) and Roger Federer (in 2009) have managed to achieve this double since, and Rafael Nadal, Andre Agassi and Roger Federer are the only male players since Borg to have won the French Open and Wimbledon men's singles titles over their career. Ilie Nstase once said about Borg, "We're playing tennis, and he's playing something else".

In his 1979 autobiography, Jack Kramer, the long-time tennis promoter and great player himself, had already included Borg in his list of the 21 greatest players of all time. And in 2003, Bud Collins chose Borg as one of his top-five male players of all time. "Top Stars of Tennis", Bud Collins, MSNBC 

In 2008, ESPN.com asked tennis analysts, writers, and former players to build the perfect open era player. Borg was the only player mentioned in four categoriesdefense, footwork, intangibles, and mental toughnesswith his mental game and footwork singled out as the best in open era history. 

Borg never won the US Open or the Australian Open, losing in the final at the US Open four times. The only players to defeat Borg in a Grand Slam final were fellow World No. 1 tennis players John McEnroe and Jimmy Connors. Even though it was then played on grass, a surface where he enjoyed much success, Borg chose to play the Australian Open only once, in 1974, where he lost in the third round. Phil Dent, a contemporary of Borg, has pointed out that skipping Grand Slam tournamentsespecially the Australian Openwas not unusual then, before counting Grand Slam titles became the norm. Additionally, another contemporary Arthur Ashe told Sports Illustrated, "I think Bjorn could have won the U.S. Open. I think he could have won the Grand Slam. But by the time he left, the historical challenge didn't mean anything. He was bigger than the game. He was like Elvis or Liz Taylor or somebody." 

==Playing style==

Borg had one of the most distinctive playing styles in the Open Era. He played from the baseline, with powerful ground-strokes. His highly unorthodox backhand involved taking his racquet back with both hands but actually generating his power with his dominant right hand, letting go of the grip with his left hand around point of contact, and following through with his swing as a one-hander. He hit the ball hard and high from the back of the court and brought it down with considerable topspin, which made his ground strokes very consistent. There had been other players, particularly Rod Laver and Arthur Ashe, who played with topspin on both the forehand and backhand. Yet Laver and Ashe used topspin only as a way to mix up their shots and pass their opponents at the net easily. Borg was one of the first top players to use heavy topspin on his shots consistently.

Complementing his consistent ground-strokes was his fitness. Both of these factors allowed Borg to be dominant at the French Open.

One of the factors that made Borg unique was his dominance on the grass courts of Wimbledon, where baseliners since World War II did not usually succeed. Some experts attributed his dominance on this surface to his consistency, an underrated serve, and his adaptation to grass courts. Against the best players, he almost always served-and-volleyed on his first serves (but he naturally played from the baseline after his second serves).

Another trait usually associated with Borg is his grace under pressure. His calm court demeanor earned him the nickname of the "Ice Man" or "Ice-Borg." 

Borg's physical conditioning was legendary and unrivalled. He could outlast most of his opponents under the most grueling conditions. Contrary to popular belief, however, this wasn't due to his exceptionally low resting heart rate, often reported to be near 35 beats per minute. In his introduction to Borg's autobiography My Life and Game, Eugene Scott relates that this rumor arose from a medical exam the 18-year-old Borg once took for military service, where his pulse was recorded as 38. Scott goes on to reveal Borg's true pulse rate as "about 50 when he wakes up and around 60 in the afternoon." Borg, Bjrn, and Eugene L. Scott. My Life and Game (1980), page 11 Borg is credited with helping to develop the style of play that has come to dominate the game today. 

==Career statistics==

===Grand Slam tournament and Year-End Championship performance timeline===

 Tournament 1973 1974 1975 1976 1977 1978 1979 1980 1981 SR WL Win % 
 Grand Slam tournaments 
 Australian Open A 3R A A A A A A A 0 / 1 11 50.00 
 French Open 4R W W QF A W W W W 6 / 8 492 96.08 
 Wimbledon QF 3R QF W W W W W F 5 / 9 514 92.73 
 US Open 4R 2R SF F 4R F QF F F 0 / 9 409 81.63 
 WinLoss 103 113 162 172 101 201 181 201 192 11 / 27 14116 89.81 
 Year-end championship 
 The Masters A RR F A F A W W A 2 / 5 157 68.18 
 WCT Finals A F F W A SF F A A 1 / 5 103 76.92 
 
 Year end rankings 18 3 3 2 3 2 1 1 2 $ 3,655,751 

===Records===

====All-time records====

 Tournament Since Record accomplished Players matched 
 All Slams 1877 89.80%, (141-16) Major winning percentage overall Stands alone 
 Grand Slam 1877 Won 3 Major titles without losing a set overall Fred Perry 
 Wimbledon 1877 92.73%, (51-4) career match win percentage (197381) Stands alone 
 Wimbledon 1877 41 consecutive match wins (197681) Stands alone 
 Grand Slam 1877 14 consecutive victories in semifinal matches Stands alone 

*These records were attained in the Open Era of tennis.
*Records in bold indicate peer-less achievements.
*^ Denotes consecutive streak.

 Time span Selected Grand Slam tournament records Players matched 
 1974 French Open  1981 French Open 5+ titles at 2 different Majors Pete SamprasRoger Federer 
 1976 Wimbledon  1981 French Open 41% (11/27) title winning percentage Stands alone 
 1976 Wimbledon  1981 French Open 89.8% (14116) career match winning percentage Stands alone 
 1976 Wimbledon  1980 French Open 3 titles won without losing a set Stands alone 
 1974 French Open  1981 French Open 5 titles won over 5 sets Stands alone 
 1974 French Open  1981 French Open 6 finals played over 5 sets Stands alone 
 1976 Wimbledon  1981 French Open 4 slam finals reached (no-sets lost) Rafael Nadal 
 19771981 5years with match winning percentage of 90%+ Stands alone 
 19771981 5 consecutive years with match winning percentage of 90%+ Stands alone 
 1976 Wimbledon  1980 French Open 60.8% (30661973) career games winning percentage Stands alone 
 1978 French Open  1978 US Open 66.5% (380191) games winning percentage in 1 season Stands alone 
 1976 Wimbledon  1980 Wimbledon 6 existing Grand Slam champions defeated in finals Stands alone 

 Grand Slam tournaments Time span Records at each Grand Slam tournament Players matched 
 French Open 1978, 1980 2 titles won without losing a set Rafael Nadal 
 French Open 19791981 41 consecutive sets won Stands alone 
 French Open 1978 81.4% (12729) games winning percentage in 1 tournament Stands alone 
 French OpenWimbledon 19781980 Accomplished a \"Channel Slam\": Winning both tournaments in the same year Rod LaverRafael NadalRoger Federer 
 French OpenWimbledon 19781980 3 \"Channel Slams\"^: Winning both tournaments in the same year Stands alone 
 French OpenWimbledon 19741981 French Open (6) & Wimbledon (5) titles combination Stands alone 
 Wimbledon 19761980 5 consecutive titles Roger Federer 
 Wimbledon 1976 Won title without losing a set Stands alone 
 Wimbledon 19761981 41 consecutive match wins Stands alone 
 Wimbledon 19731981 92.72% (514) match winning percentage Stands alone 

 Time span Other selected records Players matched 
 19731981 70.52% (6728) career winning percentage against top 10 players Stands alone 
 19731981 95.50% (525-25) career winning percentage after taking the 1st set of a match Stands alone 
 19731981 74.80% (119-40) career winning percentage in the deciding set (3rd or 5th) of a match Stands alone 
 19771980 4 consecutive years with match winning percentage of 90%+ Stands alone 
 1978 49 consecutive matches won in 1 season Stands alone 
 19781980 2 winning streaks of 35+ matches Roger Federer 
 19781980 2 winning streaks of 40+ matches Stands alone 
 19741981 59 titles before age 25 Stands alone 
 19751976 16 titles won as a teenager Rafael Nadal 
 19731980 33 consecutive Davis Cup match wins Stands alone 

==Professional awards==
*ITF World Champion: 1978, 1979, 1980
*ATP Player of the Year: 1976, 1977, 1978, 1979, 1980

==See also==

*BorgMcEnroe rivalry
*BorgConnors rivalry
*List of Grand Slam Men's Singles champions
*List of Swedish sportspeople
*Tennis male players statistics
*Tennis records of All Time - Men's Singles
*Tennis records of the Open Era  Men's Singles
*World number one male tennis player rankings
*Bjrn Borg (brand)

==Notes==

==References==

==Bibliography==
*
*
*John Barrett, editor, World of Tennis Yearbooks, London, from 1976 through 1983.
*Michel Sutter, Vainqueurs Winners 19462003, Paris, 2003. Sutter has attempted to list all tournaments meeting his criteria for selection beginning with 1946 and ending in the fall of 1991. For each tournament, he has indicated the city, the date of the final, the winner, the runner-up, and the score of the final. A tournament is included in his list if: (1) the draw for the tournament included at least eight players (with a few exceptions, such as the Pepsi Grand Slam tournaments in the second half of the 1970s which included only players that had won a Grand Slam tournament); and (2) the level of the tournaments was at least equal to the present day challenger tournaments. Sutter's book is probably the most exhaustive source of tennis tournament information since World War II, even though some professional tournaments held before the start of the open era are missing. Later, Sutter issued a second edition of his book, with only the players, their wins, and years for the 1946 through 27 April 2003, period.

==Video==
*The Wimbledon Collection  Legends of Wimbledon  Bjorn Borg Standing Room Only, DVD Release Date: 21 September 2004, Run Time: 52minutes, ASIN: B0002HODA4.
*The Wimbledon Collection  The Classic Match  Borg vs. McEnroe 1981 Final Standing Room Only, DVD Release Date: 21 September 2004, Run Time: 210minutes, ASIN: B0002HODAE.
*The Wimbledon Collection  The Classic Match  Borg vs. McEnroe 1980 Final Standing Room Only, DVD Release Date: 21 September 2004, Run Time: 240minutes; ASIN: B0002HOEK8.
*Wimbledon Classic Match: Gerulaitis vs Borg Standing Room Only, DVD Release Date: 31 October 2006, Run Time: 180minutes, ASIN: B000ICLR8O.

==External links==

*
*
*
*
*Official Wimbledon website profile
*BBC profile
*Sunday Times article 5 July 2009
*On-line video interview for Czech TV (9. 1. 2011)



[[Booch method]]

Class diagram

The Booch method is a technique used in software engineering. It is an object modeling language and methodology that was widely used in object-oriented analysis and design. It was developed by Grady Booch, while at Rational Software (now part of IBM).

The notation aspect of the Booch method has now been superseded by the Unified Modeling Language (UML), which features graphical elements from the Booch method along with elements from the object-modeling technique (OMT) and object-oriented software engineering (OOSE).

Methodological aspects of the Booch method have been incorporated into several methodologies and processes, the primary such methodology being the Rational Unified Process (RUP).

The Booch design methodology, like OMT, is extensively used and has ample documentation and support tools.

==References==
*
*

==External links==
*Class diagrams, Object diagrams, State Event diagrams and Module diagrams.



[[Battle of the Nile]]

The Battle of the Nile (also known as the Battle of Aboukir Bay, in French as the Bataille d'Aboukir or in Egyptian Arabic as    ) was a major naval battle fought between the British Royal Navy and the Navy of the French Republic at Aboukir Bay on the Mediterranean coast off Egypt from 1 to 3 August 1798. The battle was the climax of a naval campaign that had ranged across the Mediterranean during the previous three months, as a large French convoy sailed from Toulon to Alexandria carrying an expeditionary force under then General Napoleon Bonaparte. In the battle, the British forces, led by Rear-Admiral Sir Horatio Nelson (later Lord Nelson), defeated the French.

Bonaparte sought to invade Egypt as the first step in a campaign against British India in an effort to drive Britain out of the French Revolutionary Wars. As Bonaparte's fleet crossed the Mediterranean, it was pursued by a British force under Nelson, who had been sent from the British fleet in the Tagus to learn the purpose of the French expedition and defeat it. For more than two months, he chased the French, on several occasions only missing them by a matter of hours. Bonaparte, aware of Nelson's pursuit, enforced absolute secrecy about his destination and was able to capture Malta and then land in Egypt without interception by the British naval forces.

With the French army ashore, the French fleet anchored in Aboukir Bay, 20 mi northeast of Alexandria. Commander Vice-Admiral Franois-Paul Brueys d'Aigalliers believed he had established a formidable defensive position. When the British fleet arrived off Egypt on 1 August and discovered Brueys's dispositions, Nelson ordered an immediate attack. His ships advanced on the French line and split into two divisions as they approached. One cut across the head of the line and passed between the anchored French and the shore while the other engaged the seaward side of the French fleet. Trapped in a crossfire, the leading French warships were battered into surrender during a fierce three-hour battle, while the centre succeeded in repelling the initial British attack. As British reinforcements arrived, the centre came under renewed assault and at 22:00 the French flagship Orient exploded. With Brueys dead, and his vanguard and centre defeated, the rear division of the French fleet attempted to break out of the bay, but ultimately only two ships of the line and two frigates escaped, from a total of 17 ships engaged.

The battle reversed the strategic situation between the two nations' forces in the Mediterranean, and entrenched the Royal Navy in the dominant position it would retain for the rest of the war. It also encouraged other European countries to turn against France, and was a factor in the outbreak of the War of the Second Coalition. Bonaparte's army was trapped in Egypt, and Royal Navy dominance off the Syrian coast contributed significantly to its defeat at the Siege of Acre in 1799 that preceded Bonaparte's return to Europe. Nelson, who had been wounded in the battle, was proclaimed a hero across Europe and was subsequently made Baron Nelson, although he was privately dissatisfied with his rewards. His captains were also highly praised, and would go on to form the nucleus of the legendary Nelsonic Band of Brothers. The legend of the battle has remained prominent in the popular consciousness, with perhaps the best-known representation being Felicia Hemans' 1826 poem Casabianca.

==Background==
Following Napoleon Bonaparte's victories over the Austrian Empire in northern Italywhich helped secure victory for the French in the War of the First Coalition in 1797Great Britain remained the only major European power still at war with the French Republic. Maffeo, p. 224 The French Directory investigated a number of strategic options to counter British opposition, including projected invasions of Ireland and Britain and the expansion of the French Navy to challenge the Royal Navy at sea. James, p. 113 Despite significant efforts, British control of Northern European waters rendered these ambitions impractical in the short term, Padfield, p. 116 and the Royal Navy remained firmly in control of the Atlantic Ocean. However, the French navy was dominant in the Mediterranean, following the withdrawal of the British fleet after the outbreak of war between Britain and Spain in 1796. Keegan, p. 36 This allowed Bonaparte to propose an invasion of Egypt as an alternative to confronting Britain directly, believing that the British would be too distracted by an imminent Irish uprising to intervene in the Mediterranean. Rose, p. 141 

Bonaparte believed that by establishing a permanent presence in Egypt (nominally part of the neutral Ottoman Empire) the French would obtain a staging point for future operations against British India, possibly in conjunction with the anglophobic Tipu Sultan of Seringapatam, that might successfully drive the British out of the war. Adkins, p. 7 The campaign would sever the chain of communication that connected Britain with India, an essential part of her empire whose trade generated the wealth Britain required to prosecute the war successfully. Maffeo, p. 230 The French Directory agreed with Bonaparte's plans, although a major factor in their decision was a desire to see the politically ambitious Bonaparte and the fiercely loyal veterans of his Italian campaigns travel as far from France as possible. Rodger, p. 457 During the spring of 1798, Bonaparte assembled more than 35,000 soldiers in Mediterranean France and Italy and developed a powerful fleet at Toulon. He also formed the Commission des Sciences et des Arts, a body of scientists and engineers intended to establish a French colony in Egypt. Cole, p. 17 Napoleon kept the destination of the expedition top secretmost of the army's officers did not know of its target, and Bonaparte did not publicly reveal his goal until the first stage of the expedition was complete. Cole, p. 11 

===Mediterranean campaign===

alt=Portrait of a man in an ornate naval uniform festooned with medals and awards.

Bonaparte's armada sailed from Toulon on 19 May 1798, making rapid progress through the Ligurian Sea and collecting more ships at Genoa, before sailing southwards along the Sardinian coast and passing Sicily on 7 June. Clowes, p. 353 On 9 June, the fleet arrived off Malta, then under the ownership of the Knights of St. John of Jerusalem, ruled by Grand Master Ferdinand von Hompesch zu Bolheim. Cole, p. 8 Bonaparte demanded that his fleet be permitted entry to the fortified harbour of Valletta. When the Knights refused, the French general responded by ordering a large scale invasion of the Maltese Islands, overrunning the defenders after 24 hours of skirmishing. Gardiner, p. 21 The Knights formally surrendered on 12 June and, in exchange for substantial financial compensation, handed the islands and all of their resources over to Bonaparte, including the extensive property of the Roman Catholic Church on Malta. James, p. 151 Within a week, Bonaparte had resupplied his ships, and on 19 June, his fleet departed for Alexandria in the direction of Crete, leaving 4,000 men at Valletta under General Claude-Henri Vaubois to ensure French control of the islands. Adkins, p. 13 

While Bonaparte was sailing to Malta, the Royal Navy re-entered the Mediterranean for the first time in more than a year. Alarmed by reports of French preparations on the Mediterranean coast, Lord Spencer at the Admiralty sent a message to Vice-Admiral Earl St. Vincent, commander of the Mediterranean Fleet based in the Tagus River, to despatch a squadron to investigate. Maffeo, p. 233 This squadron, consisting of three ships of the line and three frigates, was entrusted to Rear-Admiral Sir Horatio Nelson.

Nelson was a highly experienced officer who had been blinded in one eye during fighting in Corsica in 1794 and subsequently commended for his capture of two Spanish ships of the line at the Battle of Cape St. Vincent in February 1797. In July 1797, he lost an arm at the Battle of Santa Cruz de Tenerife and had been forced to return to Britain to recuperate. Padfield, p. 109 Returning to the fleet at the Tagus in late April 1798, he was ordered to collect the squadron stationed at Gibraltar and sail for the Ligurian Sea. James, p. 148 On 21 May, as Nelson's squadron approached Toulon, it was struck by a fierce gale and Nelson's flagship, HMS Vanguard, lost its topmasts and was almost wrecked on the Corsican coast. Keegan, p. 44 The remainder of the squadron was scattered. The ships of the line sheltered at San Pietro Island off Sardinia; the frigates were blown to the west and failed to return. Adkins, p. 9 

On 7 June, following hasty repairs to his flagship, a fleet consisting of ten ships of the line and a fourth-rate joined Nelson off Toulon. The fleet, under the command of Captain Thomas Troubridge, had been sent by Earl St. Vincent to reinforce Nelson, with orders that he was to pursue and intercept the Toulon convoy. Maffeo, p. 241 Although he now had enough ships to challenge the French fleet, Nelson suffered two great disadvantages: He had no intelligence regarding the destination of the French, and no frigates to scout ahead of his force. Clowes, p. 354 Striking southwards in the hope of collecting information about French movements, Nelson's ships stopped at Elba and Naples, where the British ambassador, Sir William Hamilton, reported that the French fleet had passed Sicily headed in the direction of Malta. Gardiner, p. 29 Despite pleas from Nelson and Hamilton, King Ferdinand of Naples refused to lend his frigates to the British fleet, fearing French reprisals. Bradford, p. 176 On 22 June, a brig sailing from Ragusa brought Nelson the news that the French had sailed eastwards from Malta on 16 June. Mostert, p. 254 After conferring with his captains, the admiral decided that the French target must be Egypt and set off in pursuit. Keegan, p. 55 Incorrectly believing the French to be five days ahead rather than two, Nelson insisted on a direct route to Alexandria without deviation. Rodger, p. 459 

On the evening of 22 June, Nelson's fleet passed the French in the darkness, overtaking the slow invasion convoy without realising how close they were to their target. Maffeo, p. 258 Making rapid time on a direct route, Nelson reached Alexandria on 28 June and discovered that the French were not there. James, p. 154 After a meeting with the suspicious Ottoman commander, Sayyid Muhammad Kurayyim, Nelson ordered the British fleet northwards, reaching the coast of Anatolia on 4 July and turning westwards back towards Sicily. Keegan, p. 59 Nelson had missed the French by less than a daythe scouts of the French fleet arrived off Alexandria in the evening of 29 June. Gardiner, p. 26 

Concerned by his near encounter with Nelson, Bonaparte ordered an immediate invasion, his troops coming ashore in a poorly managed amphibious operation in which at least 20 drowned. Adkins, p. 17 Marching along the coast, the French army stormed Alexandria and captured the city, Cole, p. 22 after which Bonaparte led the main force of his army inland. Clowes, p. 356 He instructed his naval commander, Vice-Admiral Franois-Paul Brueys D'Aigalliers, to anchor in Alexandria harbour, but naval surveyors reported that the channel into the harbour was too shallow and narrow for the larger ships of the French fleet. Adkins, p. 21 As a result, the French selected an alternative anchorage at Aboukir Bay, 20 mi northeast of Alexandria. Mostert, p. 257 

Nelson's fleet reached Syracuse in Sicily on 19 July and took on essential supplies. James, p. 155 There the admiral wrote letters describing the events of the previous months: "It is an old saying, 'the Devil's children have the Devil's luck.' I cannot find, or at this moment learn, beyond vague conjecture where the French fleet are gone to. All my ill fortune, hitherto, has proceeded from want of frigates." Adkins, p. 19 By 24 July, his fleet was resupplied and, having determined that the French must be somewhere in the Eastern Mediterranean, Nelson sailed again in the direction of the Morea. Maffeo, p. 265 On 28 July, at Coron, Nelson finally obtained intelligence describing the French attack on Egypt and turned south across the Mediterranean. His scouts, HMS Alexander and HMS Swiftsure, sighted the French transport fleet at Alexandria on the afternoon of 1 August. Clowes, p. 355 

===Aboukir Bay===
When Alexandria harbour had proved inadequate for his fleet, Brueys had gathered his captains and discussed their options. Bonaparte had ordered the fleet to anchor in Aboukir Bay, a shallow and exposed anchorage, but had supplemented the orders with the suggestion that, if Aboukir Bay was too dangerous, Brueys could sail north to Corfu, leaving only the transports and a handful of lighter warships at Alexandria. Rose, p. 142 Brueys refused, in the belief that his squadron could provide essential support to the French army on shore, and called his captains aboard his 120-gun flagship Orient to discuss their response should Nelson discover the fleet in its anchorage. Despite vocal opposition from Counter-Admiral Armand Blanquet, Bradford, p. 199 who insisted that the fleet would be best able to respond in open water, the rest of the captains agreed that anchoring in a line of battle inside the bay presented the strongest tactic for confronting Nelson. James, p. 159 It is possible that Bonaparte envisaged Aboukir Bay as a temporary anchorage: on 27 July, he expressed the expectation that Brueys had already transferred his ships to Alexandria, and three days later, he issued orders for the fleet to make for Corfu in preparation for naval operations against the Ottoman territories in the Balkans, Rose, p. 143 although Bedouin partisans Bradford, p. 192 intercepted and killed the courier carrying the instructions. 
alt=A man in an ornate naval uniform with long grey hair stands on a ship's quarterdeck.
Aboukir Bay is a coastal indentation 16 nmi across, stretching from the village of Abu Qir in the west to the town of Rosetta to the east, where one of the mouths of the River Nile empties into the Mediterranean. Maffeo, p. 268269 In 1798, the bay was protected at its western end by extensive rocky shoals which ran 3 mi into the bay from a promontory guarded by Aboukir Castle. A small fort situated on an island among the rocks protected the shoals. Clowes, p. 357 The fort was garrisoned by French soldiers and armed with at least four cannon and two heavy mortars. James, p. 160 Brueys had augmented the fort with his bomb vessels and gunboats, anchored among the rocks to the west of the island in a position to give support to the head of the French line. Further shoals ran unevenly to the south of the island and extended across the bay in a rough semicircle approximately 1650 yd from the shore. Clowes, p. 358 These shoals were too shallow to permit the passage of larger warships, and so Brueys ordered his thirteen ships of the line to form up in a line of battle following the northeastern edge of the shoals to the south of the island, a position that allowed the ships to disembark supplies from their port sides while covering the landings with their starboard batteries. Gardiner, p. 31 Orders were issued for each ship to attach strong cables to the bow and stern of their neighbours, which would effectively turn the line into a long battery forming a theoretically impregnable barrier. Warner, p. 66 Brueys positioned a second, inner line of four frigates approximately 350 yd west of the main line, roughly halfway between the line and the shoal. The van of the French line was led by Guerrier, positioned 2400 yd southeast of Aboukir Island and about 1000 yd from the edge of the shoals that surrounded the island. The line stretched southeast, with the centre bowed seawards away from the shoal. The French ships were spaced at intervals of 160 yd and the whole line was 2850 yd long, Clowes, p. 359 with the flagship Orient at the centre and two large 80-gun ships anchored on either side. Mostert, p. 260 The rear division of the line was under the command of Counter-Admiral Pierre-Charles Villeneuve in Guillaume Tell. 

In deploying his ships in this way, Brueys hoped that the British would be forced by the shoals to attack his strong centre and rear, allowing his van to use the prevailing northeasterly wind to counterattack the British once they were engaged. Padfield, p. 120 However, he had made a serious misjudgement: he had left enough room between Guerrier and the shoals for an enemy ship to cut across the head of the French line and proceed between the shoals and the French ships, allowing the unsupported vanguard to be caught in a crossfire by two divisions of enemy ships. Compounding this error, the French only prepared their ships for battle on their starboard (seaward) sides, from which they expected the attack would have to come; their landward port sides were unprepared. George A. Henty, At Aboukir and Acre: A Story of Napoleon's Invasion of Egypt, Fireship Press, 2008, p. 295. 
The port side gun ports were closed, and the decks on that side were uncleared, with various stored items blocking access to the guns. R.G. Grant, Battle at Sea: 3,000 Years of Naval Warfare, DK Publications, 2011, p. 180. Brueys' dispositions had a second significant flaw: The 160-yard gaps between ships were large enough for a British ship to push through and break the French line. Gardiner, p. 13 Furthermore, not all of the French captains had followed Brueys' orders to attach cables to their neighbours' bow and stern, which would have prevented such a manoeuvre. Keegan, p. 63 The problem was exacerbated by orders to only anchor at the bow, which allowed the ships to swing with the wind and widened the gaps. It also created areas within the French line not covered by the broadside of any ship. British vessels could anchor in those spaces and engage the French without reply. In addition, the deployment of Brueys' fleet prevented the rear from effectively supporting the van due to the prevailing winds. Clowes, p. 372 

A more pressing problem for Brueys was a lack of food and water for the fleet: Bonaparte had unloaded almost all of the provisions carried aboard and no supplies were reaching the ships from the shore. To remedy this, Brueys sent foraging parties of 25 men from each ship along the coast to requisition food, dig wells, and collect water. Constant attacks by Bedouin partisans, however, required escorts of heavily armed guards for each party. Hence, up to a third of the fleet's sailors were away from their ships at any one time. Mostert, p. 261 Brueys wrote a letter describing the situation to Minister of Marine tienne Eustache Bruix, reporting that "Our crews are weak, both in number and quality. Our rigging, in general, out of repair, and I am sure it requires no little courage to undertake the management of a fleet furnished with such tools." Adkins, p. 22 

==Order of battle==

==Battle==

===Nelson's arrival===
alt=An engraved print showing a tightly packed line of 13 warships flying the French flag. The ships are firing on eight ships flying the British flag that are steadily approaching them from the right of the picture.
Although initially disappointed that the main French fleet was not at Alexandria, Nelson knew from the presence of the transports that they must be nearby. At 14:00 on 1 August, lookouts on HMS Zealous reported the French anchored in Aboukir Bay, its signal lieutenant just beating the lieutenant on HMS Goliath with the signal, but inaccurately describing 16 French ships of the line instead of 13. Padfield, p. 118 At the same time, French lookouts on Heureux, the ninth ship in the French line, sighted the British fleet approximately nine nautical miles off the mouth of Aboukir Bay. The French initially reported just 11 British ships  Swiftsure and Alexander were still returning from their scouting operations at Alexandria, and so were 3 nmi to the west of the main fleet, out of sight. Adkins, p. 23 Troubridge's ship, HMS Culloden, was also some distance from the main body, towing a captured merchant ship. At the sight of the French, Troubridge abandoned the vessel and made strenuous efforts to rejoin Nelson. Due to the need for so many sailors to work onshore, Brueys had not deployed any of his lighter warships as scouts, which left him unable to react swiftly to the sudden appearance of the British. Rodger, p. 460 

As his ships readied for action, Brueys ordered his captains to gather for a conference on Orient and hastily recalled his shore parties, although most had still not returned by the start of the battle. To replace them, large numbers of men were taken out of the frigates and distributed among the ships of the line. Brueys also hoped to lure the British fleet onto the shoals at Aboukir Island, sending the brigs Alerte and Railleur to act as decoys in the shallow waters. By 16:00, Alexander and Swiftsure were also in sight, although some distance from the main British fleet. Brueys gave orders to abandon the plan to remain at anchor and instead for his line to set sail. Mostert, p. 265 Blanquet protested the order on the grounds that there were not enough men aboard the French ships to both sail the ships and man the guns. Warner, p. 72 Nelson gave orders for his leading ships to slow down, to allow the British fleet to approach in a more organised formation. This convinced Brueys that rather than risk an evening battle in confined waters, the British were planning to wait for the following day. He rescinded his earlier order to sail. Bradford, p. 200 Brueys may have been hoping that the delay would allow him to slip past the British during the night and thus follow Bonaparte's orders not to engage the British fleet directly if he could avoid it. James, p. 161 

Nelson ordered the fleet to slow down at 16:00 to allow his ships to rig "springs" on their anchor cables, a system of attaching the bow anchor that increased stability and allowed his ships to swing their broadsides to face an enemy while stationary. It also increased manoeuvrability and therefore reduced the risk of coming under raking fire. Clowes, p. 360 Nelson's plan, shaped through discussion with his senior captains during the return voyage to Alexandria, was to advance on the French and pass down the seaward side of the van and centre of the French line, so that each French ship would face two British ships and the massive Orient would be fighting against three. James, p. 162 The direction of the wind meant that the French rear division would be unable to join the battle easily and would be cut off from the front portions of the line. To ensure that in the smoke and confusion of a night battle his ships would not accidentally open fire on one another, Nelson ordered that each ship prepare four horizontal lights at the head of their mizenmast and hoist an illuminated White Ensign, which was different enough from the French tricolour that it would not be mistaken in poor visibility, reducing the risk that British ships might fire on one another in the darkness. James, p. 166 As his ship was readied for battle, Nelson held a final dinner with Vanguard's officers, announcing as he rose: "Before this time tomorrow I shall have gained a peerage or Westminster Abbey," Padfield, p. 119 in reference to the rewards of victory or the traditional burial place of British military heroes.

alt=A broad view of a bay. Running vertically from the foreground to the background is a line of 14 anchored ships flying red, white and blue tricolour flags. to their left are four more anchored ships and to the left of these vessels is a distant shoreline. In the foreground of this shore is a hillside on which several men in turbans watch the scene below. To the right of the line a number of ships with all sails set are grouped around the head of the line, as smoke rises from many of the ships on both sides.
Shortly after the French order to set sail was abandoned, the British fleet began rapidly approaching once more. Brueys, now expecting to come under attack on that night, ordered each of his ships to place springs on their anchor cables and prepare for action. He sent the Alerte ahead, which passed close to the leading British ships and then steered sharply to the west over the shoal, in the hope that the ships of the line might follow and become grounded. None of Nelson's captains fell for the ruse and the British fleet continued undeterred. At 17:30, Nelson hailed one of his two leading ships, HMS Zealous under Captain Samuel Hood, which had been racing Goliath to be the first to fire on the French. The admiral ordered Hood to establish the safest course into the harbour. The British had no charts of the depth or shape of the bay, except a rough sketch map Swiftsure had obtained from a merchant captain, an inaccurate British atlas on Zealous, Maffeo, p. 269 and a 35-year-old French map aboard Goliath. Adkins, p. 24 Hood replied that he would take careful soundings as he advanced to test the depth of the water, Clowes, p. 361 and that, "If you will allow the honour of leading you into battle, I will keep the lead going." Bradford, p. 202 Shortly afterwards, Nelson paused to speak with the brig HMS Mutine, whose commander, Lieutenant Thomas Hardy, had seized some maritime pilots from a small Alexandrine vessel. Padfield, p. 123 As Vanguard came to a stop, the following ships slowed. This caused a gap to open up between Zealous and Goliath and the rest of the fleet. To counter this effect, Nelson ordered HMS Theseus under Captain Ralph Miller to pass his flagship and join Zealous and Goliath in the vanguard. By 18:00, the British fleet was again under full sail, Vanguard sixth in the line of ten ships as Culloden trailed behind to the north and Alexander and Swiftsure hastened to catch up to the west. James, p. 163 Following the rapid change from a loose formation to a rigid line of battle both fleets raised their colours; each British ship added additional Union Flags in its rigging in case its main flag was shot away. James, p. 164 At 18:20, as Goliath and Zealous rapidly bore down on them, the leading French ships Guerrier and Conqurant opened fire. Gardiner, p. 33 

alt=Plan illustrating a line of shoals running roughly north to south. Following the direction of the shoal is a line of 13 large blue "ship" symbols, with two more large symbols and four smaller ones inside this line. Clustered around the head of the "ship" line are 14 red ship symbols, with tracks showing their movements during the engagement.
Ten minutes after the French opened fire Goliath, ignoring fire from the fort to starboard and from Guerrier to port, most of which was too high to trouble the ship, crossed the head of the French line. Captain Thomas Foley had noticed as he approached that there was an unexpected gap between Guerrier and the shallow water of the shoal. On his own initiative, Foley decided to exploit this tactical error and changed his angle of approach to sail through the gap. As the bow of Guerrier came within range, Goliath opened fire, inflicting severe damage with a double-shotted raking broadside as the British ship turned to port and passed down the unprepared port side of Guerrier. Foley's Royal Marines and a company of Austrian grenadiers joined the attack, firing their muskets. Warner, p. 102 Foley had intended to anchor alongside the French ship and engage it closely, but his anchor took too long to descend and his ship passed Guerrier entirely. Mostert, p. 266 Goliath eventually stopped close to the bow of Conqurant, opening fire on the new opponent and using the unengaged starboard guns to exchange occasional shots with the frigate Srieuse and bomb vessel Hercule, which were anchored inshore of the battle line. 

Foley's attack was followed by Hood in Zealous, who also crossed the French line and successfully anchored next to Guerrier in the space Foley had intended, engaging the lead ship's bow from close range. Adkins, p. 25 Within five minutes Guerrier's foremast had fallen, to cheers from the crews of the approaching British ships. Clowes, p. 362 The speed of the British advance took the French captains by surprise; they were still aboard Orient in conference with the admiral when the firing started. Hastily launching their boats, they returned to their vessels. Captain Jean-Franois-Timothe Trullet of Guerrier shouted orders from his barge for his men to return fire on Zealous. 

The third British ship into action was HMS Orion under Captain Sir James Saumarez, which rounded the engagement at the head of the battle line and passed between the French main line and the frigates that lay closer inshore. Padfield, p. 124 As he did so, the frigate Srieuse opened fire on Orion, wounding two men. The convention in naval warfare of the time was that ships of the line did not attack frigates when there were ships of equal size to engage, but in firing first French Captain Claude-Jean Martin had negated the rule. Saumarez waited until the frigate was at close range before replying. Adkins, p. 26 Orion needed just one broadside to reduce the frigate to a wreck, and Martin's disabled ship drifted away over the shoal. During the delay this detour caused, two other British ships joined the battle: Theseus, which had been disguised as a first-rate ship, Warner, p. 109 followed Foley's track across Guerrier's bow. Miller steered his ship through the middle of the melee between the anchored British and French ships until he encountered the third French ship, Spartiate. Anchoring to port, Miller's ship opened fire at close range. HMS Audacious under Captain Davidge Gould crossed the French line between Guerrier and Conqurant, anchoring between the ships and raking them both. Orion then rejoined the action further south than intended, firing on the fifth French ship, Peuple Souverain, and Admiral Blanquet's flagship, Franklin. James, p. 165 

The next three British ships, Vanguard in the lead followed by HMS Minotaur and HMS Defence, remained in line of battle formation and anchored on the starboard side of the French line at 18:40. Nelson focused his flagship's fire on Spartiate, while Captain Thomas Louis in Minotaur attacked the unengaged Aquilon and Captain John Peyton in Defence joined the attack on Peuple Souverain. With the French vanguard now heavily outnumbered, the following British ships, HMS Bellerophon and HMS Majestic, passed by the melee and advanced on the so far unengaged French centre. Padfield, p. 127 Both ships were soon fighting enemies much more powerful than they and began to take severe damage. Captain Henry Darby on Bellerophon missed his intended anchor near Franklin and instead found his ship underneath the main battery of the French flagship. Adkins, p. 28 Captain George Blagdon Westcott on Majestic also missed his station and almost collided with Heureux, coming under heavy fire from Tonnant. Unable to stop in time, Westcott's jib boom became entangled with Tonnant's shroud. Bradford, p. 204 

The French suffered too. Admiral Brueys on Orient was severely wounded in the face and hand by flying debris during the opening exchange of fire with Bellerophon. The final ship of the British line, Culloden under Troubridge, sailed too close to Aboukir Island in the growing darkness and became stuck fast on the shoal. Despite strenuous efforts from the Culloden's boats, the brig Mutine and the 50-gun HMS Leander under Captain Thomas Thompson, the ship of the line could not be moved, and the waves drove Culloden further onto the shoal, inflicting severe damage to the ship's hull. Clowes, p. 363 

===Surrender of the French van===
At 19:00 the identifying lights in the mizenmasts of the British fleet were lit. By this time, Guerrier had been completely dismasted and heavily battered. Zealous by contrast was barely touched: Hood had situated Zealous outside the arc of most of the French ship's broadsides, and in any case Guerrier was not prepared for an engagement on both sides simultaneously, with its port guns blocked by stores. Although their ship was a wreck, the crew of Guerrier refused to surrender, continuing to fire the few functional guns whenever possible despite heavy answering fire from Zealous. Mostert, p. 267 In addition to his cannon fire, Hood called up his marines and ordered them to fire volleys of musket shot at the deck of the French ship, driving the crew out of sight but still failing to secure the surrender from Captain Trullet. It was not until 21:00, when Hood sent a small boat to Guerrier with a boarding party, that the French ship finally surrendered. Conqurant was defeated more rapidly, after heavy broadsides from passing British ships and the close attentions of Audacious and Goliath brought down all three masts before 19:00. With his ship immobile and badly damaged, the mortally wounded Captain Etienne Dalbarade struck his colours and a boarding party seized control. Unlike Zealous, these British ships suffered relatively severe damage in the engagement. Goliath lost most of its rigging, suffered damage to all three masts and suffered more than 60 casualties. James, p. 167 With his opponents defeated, Captain Gould on Audacious used the spring on his cable to transfer fire to Spartiate, the next French ship in line. To the west of the battle the battered Srieuse sank over the shoal. Its masts protruded from the water as survivors scrambled into boats and rowed for the shore. 
alt=Four ships flying the British flag advance in the foreground towards an anchored battle line in which the only clear detail is a huge burning ship.
The transfer of Audacious's broadside to Spartiate meant that Captain Maurice-Julien Emeriau now faced three opponents. Within minutes all three of his ship's masts had fallen, but the battle around Spartiate continued until 21:00, when the badly wounded Emeriau ordered his colours struck. Although Spartiate was outnumbered, it had been supported by the next in line, Aquilon, which, uniquely of the French van squadron, was fighting only one opponent, Minotaur. Captain Antoine Ren Thvenard used the spring on his anchor cable to angle his broadside into a raking position across the bow of Nelson's flagship, which consequently suffered more than 100 casualties, including the admiral. At approximately 20:30, an iron splinter fired in a langrage shot from Spartiate struck Nelson over his blinded right eye. Warner, p. 92 The wound caused a flap of skin to fall across his face, rendering him temporarily completely blind. James, p. 175 Nelson collapsed into the arms of Captain Edward Berry and was carried below. Certain that his wound was fatal, he cried out "I am killed, remember me to my wife", and called for his chaplain, Stephen Comyn. Bradford, p. 205 The wound was immediately inspected by Vanguard's surgeon Michael Jefferson, who informed the admiral that it was a simple flesh wound and stitched the skin together. Adkins, p. 31 Nelson subsequently ignored Jefferson's instructions to remain inactive, returning to the quarterdeck shortly before the explosion on Orient to oversee the closing stages of the battle. Although Thvenard's manoeuvre was successful, it placed his own bow under Minotaurs guns and by 21:25 the French ship was dismasted and battered, Captain Thvenard killed and his junior officers forced to surrender. James, p. 168 With his opponent defeated, Captain Thomas Louis then took Minotaur south to join the attack on Franklin. Clowes, p. 365 
alt=the quarterdeck of a ship, with many sailors moving about. In the centre stands a man in an officer's uniform with a bandage around his head. He is looking to the left of the picture, where in the background a large ship is on fire.
Defence and Orion attacked the fifth French ship, Peuple Souverain, from either side and the ship rapidly lost the fore and main masts. Aboard the Orion, a wooden block was smashed off one of the ship's masts, killing two men before wounding Captain Saumarez in the thigh. On Peuple Souverain, Captain Pierre-Paul Raccord was badly wounded and ordered his ship's anchor cable cut in an effort to escape the bombardment. Peuple Souverain drifted south towards the flagship Orient, which mistakenly opened fire on the darkened vessel. Germani, p. 59 Orion and Defence were unable to immediately pursue. Defence had lost its fore topmast and an improvised fireship that drifted through the battle narrowly missed Orion. The origin of this vessel, an abandoned and burning ship's boat laden with highly flammable material, is uncertain, but it may have been launched from Guerrier as the battle began. Peuple Souverain anchored not far from Orient, but took no further part in the fighting. The wrecked ship surrendered during the night. Franklin remained in combat, but Blanquet had suffered a severe head wound and Captain Gillet had been carried below unconscious with severe wounds. Shortly afterwards, a fire broke out on the quarterdeck after an arms locker exploded, which was eventually extinguished with difficulty by the crew. Warner, p. 94 

To the south, HMS Bellerophon was in serious trouble as the huge broadside of Orient pounded the ship. At 19:50 the mizen mast and main mast both collapsed and fires broke out simultaneously at several points. Clowes, p. 366 Although the blazes were extinguished, the ship had suffered more than 200 casualties. Captain Darby recognised that his position was untenable and ordered the anchor cables cut at 20:20. The battered ship drifted away from the battle under continued fire from Tonnant as the foremast collapsed as well. Gardiner, p. 34 Orient had also suffered significant damage and Admiral Brueys had been struck in the midriff by a cannonball that almost cut him in half. He died fifteen minutes later, remaining on deck and refusing to be carried below. Germani, p. 58 Orient's captain, Luc-Julien-Joseph Casabianca, was also wounded, struck in the face by flying debris and knocked unconscious, Padfield, p. 129 while his twelve-year-old son had a leg torn off by a cannonball as he stood beside his father. Warner, p. 88 The most southerly British ship, Majestic, had become briefly entangled with the 80-gun Tonnant, Padfield, p. 128 and in the resulting battle, suffered heavy casualties. Captain George Blagdon Westcott was among the dead, killed by French musket fire. Mostert, p. 268 Lieutenant Robert Cuthbert assumed command and successfully disentangled his ship, allowing the badly damaged Majestic to drift further southwards so that by 20:30 it was stationed between Tonnant and the next in line, Heureux, engaging both. James, p. 169 To support the centre, Captain Thompson of Leander abandoned the futile efforts to drag the stranded Culloden off the shoal and sailed down the embattled French line, entering the gap created by the drifting Peuple Souverain and opening a fierce raking fire on Franklin and Orient. Clowes, p. 364 

While the battle raged in the bay, the two straggling British ships made strenuous efforts to join the engagement, focusing on the flashes of gunfire in the darkness. Warned away from the Aboukir shoals by the grounded Culloden, Captain Benjamin Hallowell in Swiftsure passed the melee at the head of the line and aimed his ship at the French centre. Shortly after 20:00, a dismasted hulk was spotted drifting in front of Swiftsure and Hallowell initially ordered his men to fire before rescinding the order, concerned for the identity of the strange vessel. Hailing the battered ship, Hallowell received the reply "Bellerophon, going out of action disabled." Relieved that he had not accidentally attacked one of his own ships in the darkness, Hallowell pulled up between Orient and Franklin and opened fire on them both. Adkins, p. 29 Alexander, the final unengaged British ship, which had followed Swiftsure, pulled up close to Tonnant, which had begun to drift away from the embattled French flagship. Captain Alexander Ball then joined the attack on Orient. James, p. 170 

===Destruction of Orient===
The Battle of the Nile: Destruction of 'L'Orient', 1 August 1798, Mather Brown, 1825, National Maritime Museum
At 21:00, the British observed a fire on the lower decks of the Orient. Keegan, p. 64 Identifying the danger this posed to the French flagship, Captain Hallowell directed his gun crews to fire their cannon directly into the blaze. Sustained British cannon fire spread the flames throughout the ship's stern and prevented all efforts to extinguish it. Within minutes the flames had ascended the rigging and set the vast sails alight. The nearest British ships, Swiftsure, Alexander, and Orion, all stopped firing, closed their gunports, and began edging away from the blazing ship in anticipation of the detonation of the enormous ammunition supplies stored on board. In addition, they took crew away from the guns to form fire parties and soak the sails and decks in seawater to help contain any resulting blazes. Likewise the French ships Tonnant, Heureux and Mercure all cut their anchor cables and drifted southwards away from the blazing ship. Keegan, p. 65 At 22:00 the fire reached the magazines and the Orient was almost completely destroyed by a massive explosion. The concussion of the blast alone was sufficient to rip open the seams of the nearest ships, and flaming wreckage landed in a huge circle, much of it flying directly over the surrounding ships into the sea beyond. James, p. 171 Swiftsure, Alexander, and Franklin were all set alight by falling wreckage, although in each case teams of sailors with water buckets succeeded in extinguishing the flames, despite a secondary explosion on Franklin. Mostert, p. 271 
alt=A confused naval battle. Two battered ships drift in the foreground while smoke and flame boil from a third. In the background smoke rises from a confused melee of battling ships.
It has never been firmly established how the fire on Orient broke out, but one common account is that jars of oil and paint had been left on the poop deck, rather than properly stowed away after paintwork on the ship's hull had been completed shortly before the battle. Burning wadding from one of the British ships is believed to have floated onto the poop deck and ignited the paint. The fire rapidly spread through the admiral's cabin and into a ready magazine that stored carcass ammunition, which was designed to burn more fiercely in water than in air. Conversely, Fleet Captain Honor Ganteaume later reported the cause as an explosion on the quarterdeck, preceded by a series of minor fires on the main deck among the ship's boats. Adkins, p. 34 Whatever its origin, the fire spread rapidly through the ship's rigging, unchecked by the fire pumps aboard, which had been smashed by British shot. Adkins, p. 35 A second blaze then began at the bow, trapping hundreds of sailors in the ship's waist. Mostert, p. 270 Subsequent archaeological investigation found debris scattered over 500 m of seabed and evidence that the ship was wracked by two huge explosions one after the other. Hundreds of men dived into the sea to escape the flames, but fewer than 100 survived the blast. British boats picked up approximately 70 survivors, including the wounded staff officer Lonard-Bernard Motard. A few others, including Ganteaume, managed to reach the shore on rafts. The remainder of the crew, numbering more than 1,000 men, were killed, including Captain Luc-Julien-Joseph Casabianca and his twelve-year-old son, Giocante. Mostert, p. 269 
Battle of the Nile, Augt 1st 1798, Thomas Whitcombe, 1816, National Maritime Museum  the climax of the battle, as Orient explodes
For ten minutes after the explosion there was no firing; sailors from both sides were either too shocked by the blast or desperately extinguishing fires aboard their own ships to continue the fight. During the lull, Nelson gave orders that boats be sent to pull survivors from the water around the remains of Orient. At 22:10, Franklin restarted the engagement by firing on Swiftsure. Gardiner, p. 36 Isolated and battered, Blanquet's ship was soon dismasted and the admiral, suffering a severe head wound, was forced to surrender by the combined firepower of Swiftsure and Defence. Clowes, p. 367 More than half of Franklin's crew had been killed or wounded. 

By 24:00 only Tonnant remained engaged, as Commodore Aristide Aubert Du Petit Thouars continued his fight with Majestic and fired on Swiftsure when the British ship moved within range. By 03:00, after more than three hours of close quarter combat, Majestic had lost its main and mizzen masts while Tonnant was a dismasted hulk. Although Captain Du Petit Thouars had lost both legs and an arm he remained in command, insisting on having the tricolour nailed to the mast to prevent it from being struck and giving orders from his position propped up on deck in a bucket of wheat. Under his guidance, the battered Tonnant gradually drifted southwards away from the action to join the southern division under Villeneuve, who failed to bring these ships into effective action. James, p. 172 Throughout the engagement the French rear had kept up an arbitrary fire on the battling ships ahead. The only noticeable effect was the smashing of Timolons rudder by misdirected fire from the neighbouring Gnreux. Germani, p. 60 

===Morning===
As the sun rose at 04:00 on 2 August, firing broke out once again between the French southern division of Guillaume Tell, Tonnant, Gnreux and Timolon and the battered Alexander and Majestic. Clowes, p. 368 Although briefly outmatched, the British ships were soon joined by Goliath and Theseus. As Captain Miller manoeuvred his ship into position, Theseus briefly came under fire from the frigate Artmise. Miller turned his ship towards Artmise, but Captain Pierre-Jean Standelet struck his flag and ordered his men to abandon the frigate. Miller sent a boat under Lieutenant William Hoste to take possession of the empty vessel, but Standelet had set fire to his ship as he left and Artmise blew up shortly afterwards. Warner, p. 111 The surviving French ships of the line, covering their retreat with gunfire, gradually pulled to the east away from the shore at 06:00. Zealous pursued, and was able to prevent the frigate Justice from boarding Bellerophon, which was anchored at the southern point of the bay undergoing hasty repairs. 

Two other French ships still flew the tricolour, but neither was in a position to either retreat or fight. When Heureux and Mercure had cut their anchor cables to escape the exploding Orient, their crews had panicked and neither captain (both of whom were wounded) had managed to regain control of his ship. As a result, both vessels had drifted onto the shoal. Germani, p. 61 Alexander, Goliath, Theseus and Leander attacked the stranded and defenceless ships, and both surrendered within minutes. The distractions provided by Heureux, Mercure and Justice allowed Villeneuve to bring most of the surviving French ships to the mouth of the bay at 11:00. On the dismasted Tonnant, Commodore Du Petit Thouars was now dead from his wounds and thrown overboard at his own request. Adkins, p. 30 As the ship was unable to make the required speed it was driven ashore by its crew. Timolon was too far south to escape with Villeneuve and, in attempting to join the survivors, had also grounded on the shoal. The force of the impact dislodged the ship's foremast. Mostert, p. 272 The remaining French vessels: the ships of the line Guillaume Tell and Gnreux and the frigates Justice and Diane, formed up and stood out to sea, pursued by Zealous. Gardiner, p. 38 Despite strenuous efforts, Captain Hood's isolated ship came under heavy fire and was unable to cut off the trailing Justice as the French survivors escaped seawards. James, p. 173 Zealous was struck by a number of French shot and lost one man killed. Allen, p. 212 

For the remainder of 2 August Nelson's ships made improvised repairs and boarded and consolidated their prizes. Culloden especially required assistance. Troubridge, having finally dragged his ship off the shoal at 02:00, found that he had lost his rudder and was taking on more than 120 LT of water an hour. Emergency repairs to the hull and fashioning a replacement rudder from a spare topmast took most of the next two days. James, p. 178 On the morning of 3 August, Nelson sent Theseus and Leander to force the surrender of the grounded Tonnant and Timolon. The Tonnant, its decks crowded with 1,600 survivors from other French vessels, surrendered as the British ships approached while Timolon was set on fire by its remaining crew who then escaped to the shore in small boats. Adkins, p. 37 Timolon exploded shortly after midday, the eleventh and final French ship of the line destroyed or captured during the battle. 

==Aftermath==

alt=A map showing a line of 13 ships, mostly dismasted and two on fire. On either side are six ships flying British flags, some in a state of disrepair. Four other ships sit along the coastline, one on fire while a large ship and a small ship are grounded on a shoal which is surmounted by a burning fort.
British casualties in the battle were recorded with some accuracy in the immediate aftermath as 218 killed and approximately 677 wounded, although the number of wounded who subsequently died is not known. The ships that suffered most were Bellerophon with 201 casualties and Majestic with 193. Other than Culloden the lightest loss was on Zealous, which had one man killed and seven wounded. 

The casualty list included Captain Westcott, five lieutenants and ten junior officers among the dead, and Admiral Nelson, Captains Saumarez, Ball and Darby, and six lieutenants wounded. Other than Culloden, the only British ships seriously damaged in their hulls were Bellerophon, Majestic, and Vanguard. Bellerophon and Majestic were the only ships to lose masts: Majestic the main and mizzen and Bellerophon all three. Clowes, p. 369 

French casualties are harder to calculate but were significantly higher. Estimates of French losses range from 2,000 to 5,000, with a suggested median point of 3,500, which includes more than 1,000 captured wounded and nearly 2,000 killed, half of whom died on Orient. In addition to Admiral Brueys killed and Admiral Blanquet wounded, four captains died and seven others were seriously wounded. The French ships suffered severe damage: Two ships of the line and two frigates were destroyed (as well as a bomb vessel scuttled by its crew), Warner, p. 121 and three other captured ships were too battered ever to sail again. Of the remaining prizes, only three were ever sufficiently repaired for frontline service. For weeks after the battle, bodies washed up along the Egyptian coast, decaying slowly in the intense, dry heat. 

Nelson, who on surveying the bay on the morning of 2 August said, "Victory is not a name strong enough for such a scene", Warner, p. 95 remained at anchor in Aboukir Bay for the next two weeks, preoccupied with recovering from his wound, writing dispatches, and assessing the military situation in Egypt using documents captured on board one of the prizes. Maffeo, p. 273 Nelson's head wound was recorded as being "three inches long" with "the cranium exposed for one inch". He suffered pain from the injury for the rest of his life and was badly scarred, styling his hair to disguise it as much as possible. Warner, p. 104 As their commander recovered, his men stripped the wrecks of useful supplies and made repairs to their ships and prizes. 

Throughout the week, Aboukir Bay was surrounded by bonfires lit by Bedouin tribesmen in celebration of the British victory. Cole, p. 110 On 5 August, Leander was despatched to Cadiz with messages for Earl St. Vincent carried by Captain Edward Berry. James, p. 182 Over the next few days the British landed all but 200 of the captured prisoners on shore under strict terms of parole, although Bonaparte later ordered them to be formed into an infantry unit and added to his army. James, p. 183 The wounded officers taken prisoner were held on board Vanguard, where Nelson regularly entertained them at dinner. Historian Joseph Allen recounts that on one occasion Nelson, whose eyesight was still suffering following his wound, offered toothpicks to an officer who had lost his teeth and then passed a snuff-box to an officer whose nose had been torn off, causing much embarrassment. Allen, p. 213 On 8 August the fleet's boats stormed Aboukir Island, which surrendered without a fight. The landing party removed four of the guns and destroyed the rest along with the fort they were mounted in, renaming the island "Nelson's Island". 

On 10 August, Nelson sent Lieutenant Thomas Duval from Zealous with messages to the government in India. Duval travelled across the Middle East overland via Aleppo and took a ship from Basra to Bombay, acquainting Governor-General of India Viscount Wellesley with the situation in Egypt. On 12 August the frigates HMS Emerald under Captain Thomas Moutray Waller, HMS Alcmene under Captain George Johnstone Hope, and HMS Bonne Citoyenne under Captain Robert Retalick arrived off Alexandria. Initially the British mistook the frigate squadron for French warships and Swiftsure chased them away. They returned the following day once the error had been realised. The same day as the frigates arrived, Nelson sent Mutine to Britain with dispatches, under the command of Lieutenant Thomas Bladen Capel, who had replaced Hardy after the latter's promotion to captain of Vanguard. On 14 August, Nelson sent Orion, Majestic, Bellerophon, Minotaur, Defence, Audacious, Theseus, Franklin, Tonnant, Aquilon, Conqurant, Peuple Souverain, and Spartiate to sea under the command of Saumarez. Many ships had only jury masts and it took a full day for the convoy to reach the mouth of the bay, finally sailing into open water on 15 August. On 16 August the British burned and destroyed the grounded prize Heureux as no longer fit for service and on 18 August also burned Guerrier and Mercure. On 19 August, Nelson sailed for Naples with Vanguard, Culloden, and Alexander, leaving Hood in command of Zealous, Goliath, Swiftsure, and the recently joined frigates to watch over French activities at Alexandria. James, p. 184 

The first message to reach Bonaparte regarding the disaster that had overtaken his fleet arrived on 14 August at his camp on the road between Salahieh and Cairo. The messenger was a staff officer sent by the Governor of Alexandria General Jean Baptiste Klber, and the report had been hastily written by Admiral Ganteaume, who had subsequently rejoined Villeneuve's ships at sea. One account reports that when he was handed the message, Bonaparte read it without emotion before calling the messenger to him and demanding further details. When the messenger had finished, the French general reportedly announced "Nous n'avons plus de flotte: eh bien. Il faut rester en ces contres, ou en sortir grands comme les anciens" ("We no longer have a fleet: well, we must either remain in this country or quit it as great as the ancients"). Another story, as told by the general's secretary, Bourienne, claims that Bonaparte was almost overcome by the news and exclaimed "Unfortunate Brueys, what have you done!" Bonaparte later placed much of the blame for the defeat on the wounded Admiral Blanquet, falsely accusing him of surrendering Franklin while his ship was undamaged. Protestations from Ganteaume and Minister tienne Eustache Bruix later reduced the degree of criticism Blanquet faced, but he never again served in a command capacity. Bonaparte's most immediate concern however was with his own officers, who began to question the wisdom of the entire expedition. Inviting his most senior officers to dinner, Bonaparte asked them how they were. When they replied that they were "marvellous," Bonaparte responded that it was just as well, since he would have them shot if they continued "fostering mutinies and preaching revolt." Cole, p. 111 To quell any uprising among the native inhabitants, Egyptians overheard discussing the battle were threatened with having their tongues cut out. Cole, p. 112 

===Reaction===
Nelson's first set of dispatches were captured when Leander was intercepted and defeated by Gnreux in a fierce engagement off the western shore of Crete on 18 August 1798. As a result, reports of the battle did not reach Britain until Capel arrived in Mutine on 2 October, Clowes, p. 373 entering the Admiralty at 11:15 and personally delivering the news to Lord Spencer, Warner, p. 147 who collapsed unconscious when he heard the report. Although Nelson had previously been castigated in the press for failing to intercept the French fleet, rumours of the battle had begun to arrive in Britain from the continent in late September and the news Capel brought was greeted with celebrations right across the country. Maffeo, p. 277 Within four days Nelson had been elevated to Baron Nelson of the Nile and Burnham Thorpe, a title with which he was privately dissatisfied, believing his actions deserved better reward. Jordan, p. 219 King George III addressed the Houses of Parliament on 20 November with the words:

Saumarez's convoy of prizes stopped first at Malta, where Saumarez provided assistance to a rebellion on the island among the Maltese population. Gardiner, p. 67 It then sailed to Gibraltar, arriving on 18 October to the cheers of the garrison. Saumarez wrote that, "We can never do justice to the warmth of their applause, and the praises they all bestowed on our squadron." On 23 October, following the transfer of the wounded to the military hospital and provision of basic supplies, the convoy sailed on towards Lisbon, leaving Bellerophon and Majestic behind for more extensive repairs. Musteen, p. 20 Peuple Souverain also remained at Gibraltar: The ship was deemed too badly damaged for the Atlantic voyage to Britain and so was converted to a guardship under the name of HMS Guerrier. The remaining prizes underwent basic repairs and then sailed for Britain, spending some months at the Tagus and joining with the annual merchant convoy from Portugal in June 1799 under the escort of a squadron commanded by Admiral Sir Alan Gardner, James, p. 265 before eventually arriving at Plymouth. Their age and battered state meant that neither Conqurant nor Aquilon were considered fit for active service in the Royal Navy and both were subsequently hulked, although they had been bought into the service for 20,000 (the equivalent of  as of ) each as HMS Conquerant and HMS Aboukir to provide a financial reward to the crews that had captured them. James, p. 185 Similar sums were also paid out for Guerrier, Mercure, Heureux and Peuple Souverain, while the other captured ships were worth considerably more. Constructed of Adriatic oak, Tonnant had been built in 1792 and Franklin and Spartiate were less than a year old. Tonnant and Spartiate, both of which later fought at the Battle of Trafalgar, joined the Royal Navy under their old names while Franklin, considered to be "the finest two-decked ship in the world", was renamed HMS Canopus. The total value of the prizes captured at the Nile and subsequently bought into the Royal Navy was estimated at just over 130,000 (the equivalent of  as of ). 

Additional awards were presented to the British fleet: Nelson was awarded 2,000 ( as of ) a year for life by the Parliament of Great Britain and 1,000 per annum by the Parliament of Ireland, although the latter was inadvertently discontinued after the Act of Union dissolved the Irish Parliament. Warner, p. 146 Both parliaments gave unanimous votes of thanks, each captain who served in the battle was presented with a specially minted gold medal and the first lieutenant of every ship engaged in the battle was promoted to commander. Troubridge and his men, initially excluded, received equal shares in the awards after Nelson personally interceded for the crew of the stranded Culloden, even though they did not directly participate in the engagement. The Honourable East India Company presented Nelson with 10,000 ( as of ) in recognition of the benefit his action had on their holdings and the cities of London, Liverpool and other municipal and corporate bodies made similar awards. James, p. 187 Nelson's own captains presented him with a sword and a portrait as "proof of their esteem." Nelson publicly encouraged this close bond with his officers and on 29 September 1798 described them as "We few, we happy few, we band of brothers", echoing William Shakespeare's play Henry V. From this grew the notion of the Nelsonic Band of Brothers, a cadre of high-quality naval officers that served with Nelson for the remainder of his life. Nearly five decades later the battle was among the actions recognised by a clasp attached to the Naval General Service Medal, awarded upon application to all British participants still living in 1847. 

alt=An engraved print showing a man in a distinctive naval uniform dragging two crocodiles with human heads. To the right of the image a man in a peasant's smock cheers approvingly.
'Victors of the Nile', a celebratory engraving published five years after the Battle of the Nile, depicting Nelson and his 15 captains.
Other rewards were bestowed by foreign states, particularly the Ottoman Emperor Selim III, who made Nelson the first Knight Commander of the newly created Order of the Crescent, and presented him with a chelengk, a diamond studded rose, a sable fur and numerous other valuable presents. Tsar Paul I of Russia sent, among other rewards, a gold box studded with diamonds, and similar gifts in silver arrived from other European rulers. Gardiner, p. 40 On his return to Naples, Nelson was greeted with a triumphal procession led by King Ferdinand IV and Sir William Hamilton and was introduced for only the third time to Sir William's wife Emma, Lady Hamilton, who fainted violently at the meeting, Adkins, p. 40 and apparently took several weeks to recover from her injuries. Bradford, p. 212 Lauded as a hero by the Neapolitan court, Nelson was later to dabble in Neapolitan politics and become the Duke of Bront, actions for which he was criticised by his superiors and his reputation suffered. Gardiner, p. 41 British general John Moore, who met Nelson in Naples at this time, described him as "covered with stars, medals and ribbons, more like a Prince of Opera than the Conqueror of the Nile." Padfield, p. 135 

Rumours of a battle first appeared in the French press as early as 7 August, although credible reports did not arrive until 26 August, and even these claimed that Nelson was dead and Bonaparte a British prisoner. Germani, p. 56 When the news became certain, the French press insisted that the defeat was the result both of an overwhelmingly large British force and unspecified "traitors." Among the anti-government journals in France, the defeat was blamed on the incompetence of the French Directory and on supposed lingering Royalist sentiments in the Navy. Germani, p. 63 Villeneuve came under scathing attack on his return to France for his failure to support Brueys during the battle. In his defence, he pleaded that the wind had been against him and that Brueys had not issued orders for him to counterattack the British fleet. Mostert, p. 275 Writing many years later, Bonaparte commented that if the French Navy had adopted the same tactical principles as the British:

By contrast, the British press were jubilant; many newspapers sought to portray the battle as a victory for Britain over anarchy, and the success was used to attack the supposedly pro-republican Whig politicians Charles James Fox and Richard Brinsley Sheridan. Germani, p. 67 

There has been extensive historiographical debate over the comparative strengths of the fleets, although they were ostensibly evenly matched in size, each containing 13 ships of the line. Cole, p. 108 However, the loss of Culloden, the relative sizes of Orient and Leander and the participation in the action by two of the French frigates and several smaller vessels, as well as the theoretical strength of the French position, leads most historians to the conclusion that the French were marginally more powerful. This is accentuated by the weight of broadside of several of the French ships: Spartiate, Franklin, Orient, Tonnant and Guillaume Tell were each significantly larger than any individual British ship in the battle. However the French ships were hampered by their inadequate deployment, reduced crews, and the failure of the rear division under Villeneuve to meaningfully participate, all of which contributed to their defeat. James, p. 179 

===Effects===
The Battle of the Nile has been called "arguably, the most decisive naval engagement of the great age of sail", Maffeo, p. 272 and "the most splendid and glorious success which the British Navy gained." Clowes, p. 371 Historian and novelist C. S. Forester, writing in 1929, compared the Nile to the great naval actions in history and concluded that "it still only stands rivalled by Tsu-Shima as an example of the annihilation of one fleet by another of approximately equal material force". Forester, p. 120 The effect on the strategic situation in the Mediterranean was immediate, reversing the balance of the conflict and giving the British control at sea that they maintained for the remainder of the war. Mostert, p. 274 The destruction of the French Mediterranean fleet allowed the Royal Navy to return to the sea in force, as British squadrons set up blockades off French and allied ports. In particular, British ships cut Malta off from France, aided by the rebellion among the native Maltese population that forced the French garrison to retreat to Valletta and shut the gates. James, p. 189 The ensuing Siege of Malta lasted for two years before the defenders were finally starved into surrender. Gardiner, p. 70 In 1799, British ships harassed Bonaparte's army as it marched east and north through Palestine, and played a crucial part in Bonaparte's defeat at the Siege of Acre, when the barges carrying the siege train were captured and the French storming parties were bombarded by British ships anchored offshore. Rose, p. 144 It was during one of these latter engagements that Captain Miller of Theseus was killed in an ammunition explosion. James, p. 294 The defeat at Acre forced Bonaparte to retreat to Egypt and effectively ended his efforts to carve an empire in the Middle East. Gardiner, p. 62 The French general returned to France without his army late in the year, leaving Klber in command of Egypt. Chandler, p. 226 

The Ottomans, with whom Bonaparte had hoped to conduct an alliance once his control of Egypt was complete, were encouraged by the Battle of the Nile to go to war against France. Rodger, p. 461 This led to a series of campaigns that slowly sapped the strength from the French army trapped in Egypt. The British victory also encouraged the Austrian Empire and the Russian Empire, both of whom were mustering armies as part of a Second Coalition, which declared war on France in 1799. With the Mediterranean undefended, a Russian fleet entered the Ionian Sea, while Austrian armies recaptured much of the Italian territory lost to Bonaparte in the previous war. Gardiner, p. 14 Without their best general and his veterans, the French suffered a series of defeats and it was not until Bonaparte returned to become First Consul that France once again held a position of strength on mainland Europe. Maffeo, p. 275 In 1801 a British Expeditionary Force defeated the demoralised remains of the French army in Egypt. The Royal Navy used its dominance in the Mediterranean to invade Egypt without the fear of ambush while anchored off the Egyptian coast. Gardiner, p. 78 

In spite of the overwhelming British victory in the climactic battle, the campaign has sometimes been considered a strategic success for France. Historian Edward Ingram noted that if Nelson had successfully intercepted Bonaparte at sea as ordered, the ensuing battle could have annihilated both the French fleet and the transports. As it was, Bonaparte was free to continue the war in the Middle East and later to return to Europe personally unscathed. Ingram, p. 142 The potential of a successful engagement at sea to change the course of history is underscored by the list of French army officers carried aboard the convoy who later formed the core of the generals and marshals under Emperor Napoleon. In addition to Bonaparte himself, Louis-Alexandre Berthier, Auguste de Marmont, Jean Lannes, Joachim Murat, Louis Desaix, Jean Reynier, Antoine-Franois Androssy, Jean-Andoche Junot, Louis-Nicolas Davout and Dumas were all passengers on the cramped Mediterranean crossing. Maffeo, p. 259 

===Legacy===
The Battle of the Nile remains one of the Royal Navy's most famous victories, Jordan & Rogers, p. 216 and has remained prominent in the British popular imagination, sustained by its depiction in a large number of cartoons, paintings, poems, and plays. Germani, p. 69 One of the best known poems about the battle is Casabianca, which was written by Felicia Dorothea Hemans in 1826 and describes a fictional account of the death of Captain Casabianca's son on Orient. Monuments were raised, including Cleopatra's Needle in London. Muhammad Ali of Egypt gave the monument in 1819 in recognition of the battle of 1798 and the campaign of 1801 but Great Britain did not erect it on the Victoria Embankment until 1878. Baker, p. 93 Another memorial, the Nile Clumps near Amesbury, consists of stands of beech trees purportedly planted by Lord Queensbury at the bequest of Lady Hamilton and Thomas Hardy after Nelson's death. The trees form a plan of the battle; each clump represents the position of a British or French ship. A similar arboreal memorial is thought to have been planted near Alnwick by Nelson's agent Alexander Davison. The Royal Navy commemorated the battle with the ship names HMS Aboukir and HMS Nile, and in 1998 commemorated the 200th anniversary of the battle with a visit to Aboukir Bay by the modern frigate HMS Somerset, whose crew laid wreaths in memory of those who lost their lives in the battle. 

Although Nelson biographer Ernle Bradford assumed in 1977 that the remains of Orient "are almost certainly unrecoverable," Bradford, p. 208 the first archaeological investigation into the battle began in 1983, when a French survey team under Jacques Dumas discovered the wreck of the French flagship. Franck Goddio later took over the work, leading a major project to explore the bay in 1998. He found that material was scattered over an area 500 m in diameter. In addition to military and nautical equipment, Goddio recovered a large number of gold and silver coins from countries across the Mediterranean, some from the 17th century. It is likely that these were part of the treasure taken from Malta that was lost in the explosion aboard Orient. In 2000, Italian archaeologist Paolo Gallo led an excavation focusing on ancient ruins on Nelson's Island. It uncovered a number of graves that date from the battle, as well as others buried there during the 1801 invasion. These graves, which included a woman and three children, were relocated in 2005 to a cemetery at Shatby in Alexandria. The reburial was attended by sailors from the modern frigate HMS Chatham and a band from the Egyptian Navy, as well as a descendant of the only identified burial, Commander James Russell. 

==Notes==

==References==

==Bibliography==

* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 

==External links==
* 

Nile
Nile
Nile



[[Barnabas]]

Barnabas (), born Joseph, was an early Christian, one of the earliest Christian disciples in Jerusalem. Harris names him as a "prominent leader" of the early church in Jerusalem. Harris, Stephen L., Understanding the Bible. Palo Alto: Mayfield. 1985. According to Barnabas was a Cypriot Jew. Named an apostle in , he and Paul the Apostle undertook missionary journeys together and defended Gentile converts against the Judaizers. They traveled together making more converts (c 45-47), and participated in the Council of Jerusalem (c 50). Durant, Will. Caesar and Christ. New York: Simon and Schuster. 1972 Barnabas and Paul successfully evangelized among the "God-fearing" Gentiles who attended synagogues in various Hellenized cities of Anatolia. Harris, Stephen L., Understanding the Bible. Palo Alto: Mayfield. 1985. 

Barnabas' story appears in the Acts of the Apostles, and Paul mentions him in some of his epistles. "Barnabas." Cross, F. L., ed. The Oxford dictionary of the Christian church. New York: Oxford University Press. 2005 Tertullian named him as the author of the Epistle to the Hebrews, but this and other attributions are conjecture. "Hebrews, Epistle to the" Cross, F. L., ed. The Oxford dictionary of the Christian church. New York: Oxford University Press. 2005 Clement of Alexandria ascribed the Epistle of Barnabas to him, but that is highly improbable. "Epistle of Barnabas." Cross, F. L., ed. The Oxford dictionary of the Christian church. New York: Oxford University Press. 2005 

Although the date, place, and circumstances of his death are historically unverifiable, Christian tradition holds that Barnabas was martyred at Salamis, Cyprus, in 61 AD. He is traditionally identified as the founder of the Cypriot Orthodox Church. The feast day of Barnabas is celebrated on June 11. 

Barnabas is usually identified as the cousin of Mark the Evangelist on the basis of Colossians 4. Mark: Images of an Apostolic Interpreter p55 C. Clifton Black - 2009 "infrequent occurrence in the Septuagint (Num 36:11; Tob 7:2) to its presence in Josephus (JW 1.662; Ant 1.290, 15.250) and Philo (On the Embassy to Gaius 67), anepsios consistently carries the connotation of "cousin," though ..." Some traditions hold that Aristobulus of Britannia, one of the Seventy Disciples, was the brother of Barnabas.

== Name and etymologies ==
His Hellenic Jewish parents called him Joseph (although the Byzantine text-type calls him , Iss, 'Joses', a Greek variant of 'Joseph'), but when he sold all his goods and gave the money to the apostles in Jerusalem, they gave him a new name: Barnabas. This name appears to be from the Aramaic , , meaning 'the son (of the) prophet'. However, the Greek text of the explains the name as , hyios paraklses, meaning "son of consolation" or "son of encouragement". A similar link between prophecy and encouragement is found in Pauls letter to the Corinthians ().

== Biblical narrative ==
Barnabas curing the sick by Paolo Veronese, Muse des Beaux-Arts de Rouen.
Barnabas appears mainly in Acts, a Christian history of the early Christian church. He also appears in several of Paul's epistles.

Barnabas is one of the first teachers of the church at Antioch (Acts 13:1). Barnabas was a Levite. He was a native of Cyprus, where he possessed land (Acts 4:36, 37), which he sold, giving the proceeds to the church in Jerusalem. When the Apostle Paul returned to Jerusalem after his conversion, Barnabas took him and introduced him to the apostles (9:27). Easton, in his Bible Dictionary, supposes that they had been fellow students in the school of Rabbi Gamaliel. "Barnabas", Easton, Matthew George, Eastons's Bible Dictionary, (new and revised edition),(1897), T. Nelson and Sons 

The prosperity of the church at Antioch led the apostles and brethren at Jerusalem to send Barnabas there to superintend the movement. He found the work so extensive and weighty that he went to Tarsus in search of Paul, "an admirable colleague", to assist him. F.F. Bruce,New Testament History,p.233, New York: Doubleday, 1969 Paul returned with him to Antioch and labored with him for a whole year (Acts 11:25, 26). At the end of this period, the two were sent up to Jerusalem (AD 44) with the contributions the church at Antioch had made for the poorer members of the Jerusalem church.

Shortly after they returned, bringing John Mark with them, they were appointed as missionaries to Asia Minor, and in this capacity visited Cyprus and some of the principal cities of Pamphylia, Pisidia, and Lycaonia (Acts 13:14). With the conversion of Sergius Paulus, Paul begins to gain prominence over Barnabas from the point where the name "Paul," his Roman name, is substituted for "Saul" (13:9); instead of "Barnabas and Saul" as heretofore (11:30; 12:25; 13:2, 7) we now read "Paul and Barnabas" (13:43, 46, 50; 14:20; 15:2, 22, 35); only in 14:14 and 15:12, 25 does Barnabas again occupy the first place, in the first passage with recollection of 14:12, in the last two, because Barnabas stood in closer relation to the Jerusalem church than Paul. St. Paul appears as the preaching missionary (13:16; 14:8-9, 19-20), whence the Lystrans regarded him as Hermes, St. Barnabas as Zeus Covenantseminary.edu Note that the King James version uses Jupiter instead of Zeus (14:12). Returning from this first missionary journey to Antioch, they were again sent up to Jerusalem to consult with the church there regarding the relation of Gentiles to the church (Acts 15:2; ). According to Gal. 2:9-10, Barnabas was included with Paul in the agreement made between them, on the one hand, and James, Peter, and John, on the other, that the two former should in the future preach to the pagans, not forgetting the poor at Jerusalem. This matter having been settled, they returned again to Antioch, bringing the agreement of the council that Gentiles were to be admitted into the church.

It is quite likely, however, that the epistle of Galatians was written prior to the Jerusalem council, and that it refers to a meeting between Paul, Barnabas, and Peter, James, and John that happened earlier. Much of the scholarship of the 1800s assumes that Galatia was a province to the north of the first missionary journey churches started through Paul and Barnabas' ministry as described in Acts 13-14. But archaeology and recent scholarship accepts the fact that the province of Galatia included many of the first missionary journey churches. It would have been very strange indeed for Paul to have omitted the fact that the apostles and elders of the Jerusalem church had not laid circumcision as a requirement upon the Gentiles considering the topic of the epistle after it became a controversy in Galatia. It is more likely that the epistle was written some time before the Jerusalem council, and that teachers came from Jerusalem to Antioch teaching the need for it after Paul wrote his epistle to the Galatians, churches from the first missionary journey, addressing this issue.

After they had returned to Antioch from the Jerusalem council and after spending some time there (15:35), Paul asked Barnabas to accompany him on another journey (15:36). Barnabas wished to take John Mark along, but Paul did not, as he had left them on the former journey (15:37-38). The dispute ended by Paul and Barnabas taking separate routes. Paul took Silas as his companion, and journeyed through Syria and Cilicia; while Barnabas took John Mark to visit Cyprus (15:36-41). According to Hippolytus of Rome, John Mark is not Mark the Cousin of Barnabas, and Barnabas did not dispute with Paul because of personal favor to a blood relative, but due to his character as his nickname Barnabas ("Son of Encouragement") indicates.

Barnabas is not mentioned again by Luke in the Acts of the Apostles. However, Gal. 2:11-13 says, "And when Kephas came to Antioch, I opposed him to his face because he clearly was wrong. For, until some people came from James, he used to eat with the Gentiles; but when they came, he began to draw back and separated himself, because he was afraid of the circumcised. And the rest of the Jews (also) acted hypocritically along with him, with the result that even Barnabas was carried away by their hypocrisy." Barnabas is also mentioned in the First Epistle to the Corinthians, in which it is mentioned that he and Paul funded their missions by working side jobs and (it is implied) went without some of the benefits other apostles received, such as female companionship or food and drink (1 Cor. 9:6); Paul states that he and Barnabas forsook those benefits "that we may cause no hindrance to the Good News of Christ" (1 Cor. 9:12).

== Barnabas and Antioch ==
Antioch, the third-most important city of the Roman Empire, Cross, F. L., ed. The Oxford Dictionary of the Christian Church. New York: Oxford University Press. 2005, article Antioch then the capital city of Syria province, today Antakya, Turkey, was where Christians were first called thus. It was indeed the site of an early Christian community, traditionally said to be founded by Peter . A considerable minority of the Antioch church of Barnabas's time belonged to the merchant class, and they provided support to the poorer Jerusalem church. 

== Council of Jerusalem ==

Barnabas participated in the Council of Jerusalem, which dealt with the admission of gentiles into the Christian community, a crucial problem in early Christianity. Paul and Barnabas proposed that gentiles be allowed into the community without being circumcised.

== Martyrdom ==

Church tradition developed outside of the canon of the New Testament describes the martyrdom of many saints, including the legend of the martyrdom of Barnabas. It relates that certain Jews coming to Syria and Salamis, where Barnabas was then preaching the gospel, being highly exasperated at his extraordinary success, fell upon him as he was disputing in the synagogue, dragged him out, and, after the most inhumane tortures, stoned him to death. His kinsman, John Mark, who was a spectator of this barbarous action, privately interred his body. "The Life of our Blessed Lord and Savior Jesus Christ: And the Lives and Sufferings of His Holy Evangelists and Apostles," p.455, 1857 AD, Miller, Orton & Co., 25 Park Row, New York. 

Although it is believed he was martyred of faith by being stoned, the Catholic-Apocryphal Acts of Barnabas states that he was bounded with a rope by the neck, and then being dragged only to the site where he would be burned to death. This is highly unlikely since the apocryphal Acts states that his bones were burnt to dust and that relics of some of his bones are stored in a church today; on the other hand, the fire in the apocryphal Acts could have cremated only some of his bones.

According to the History of the Cyprus Church, Church of Cyprus, History of Cyprus Church, The Autocephaly of the Cyprus Church churchofcyprus.org in 478 Barnabas appeared in a dream to the Archbishop of Constantia (Salamis, Cyprus) Anthemios and revealed to him the place of his sepulchre beneath a carob-tree. The following day Anthemios found the tomb and inside it the remains of Barnabas with a manuscript of Matthew's Gospel on his breast. Anthemios presented the Gospel to Emperor Zeno at Constantinople and received from him the privileges of the Greek Orthodox Church of Cyprus, that is, the purple cloak which the Greek Archbishop of Cyprus wears at festivals of the church, the imperial sceptre and the red ink with which he affixes his signature.

Anthemios then placed the venerable remains of Barnabas in a church which he founded near the tomb. Excavations near the site of a present day church and monastery, have revealed an early church with two empty tombs, believe to be that of St. Barnabas and Anthemios. Cyprus Commemorative Stamp issue: 1900th Death Anniversary of Apostle Barnabas, philatelism.com 

St. Barnabas is venerated as the Patron Saint of Cyprus.

== Other sources ==
Although many assume that the biblical Mark the Cousin of Barnabas (Colossians 4:10) is the same as John Mark (Acts 12:12, 25; 13:5, 13; 15: 37) and Mark the Evangelist, the traditionally believed author of the Gospel of Mark, according to Hippolytus of Rome, Ante-Nicean Fathers, ed. Alexander Roberts, James Donaldson and A. Cleaveland Coxe, vol. 5 (Peabody MA: Hendrickson Publishers, 1999), 255-6 the three "Mark"s are distinct persons. They were all members of the Seventy Apostles of Christ, including Barnabas himself. There are two people named Barnabas among Hippolytus' list of Seventy Disciples, one (#13) became the bishop of Milan, the other (#25) the bishop of Heraclea. Most likely one of these two is the biblical Barnabas; the first one is more likely, because the numbering by Hippolytus seems to indicate a level of significance. Clement of Alexandria (Stromata, ii, 20) also makes Barnabas one of the Seventy Disciples that are mentioned in the Gospel of Luke 10:1ff.

Other sources bring Barnabas to Rome and Alexandria. In the "Clementine Recognitions" (i, 7) he is depicted as preaching in Rome even during Christ's lifetime.

Not older than the 3rd century is the tradition of the later activity and martyrdom of Barnabas in Cyprus, where his remains are said to have been discovered under the Emperor Zeno. The Cypriot Church claimed Barnabas as its founder in order to rid itself of the supremacy of the Patriarch of Antioch, as did the Archbishop of Milan afterwards, to become more independent of Rome. Catholic Encyclopedia: St. Barnabas In this connection, the question whether Barnabas was an apostle became important, and was often discussed during the Middle Ages. Compare C. J. Hefele, Das Sendschreiben des Apostels Barnabas, Tbingen, 1840; Otto Braunsberger, "Der Apostel Barnabas," Mainz, 1876. The statements as to the year of Barnabas's death are discrepant and untrustworthy.

== Alleged writings ==
Tertullian and other Western writers regard Barnabas as the author of the Letter to the Hebrews. This may have been the Roman traditionwhich Tertullian usually followsand in Rome the epistle may have had its first readers. But the tradition has weighty considerations against it.

Photius of the ninth century, refers to some in his day who were uncertain whether the Acts was written by Clement of Rome, Barnabas, or Luke. Yet Photius is certain that the work must be ascribed to Luke. Commentary on the Acts Edwin Wilbur Rice, 1900, p.7. Adolf Harnack mistakenly wrote that Photius believed Barnabas was the author in the 1908 Schaff-Herzog Encyclopedia of Religious Knowledge, Volume 1, p. 487 

He is also traditionally associated with the Epistle of Barnabas, although modern scholars think it more likely that that epistle was written in Alexandria in the 130s. The 5th century Decretum Gelasianum includes a Gospel of Barnabas amongst works condemned as apocryphal; but no certain text or quotation from this work has been identified.

Another book using that same title, the Gospel of Barnabas, survives in two post-medieval manuscripts in Italian and Spanish. Compare T. Zahn, Geschichte des neutestamentlichen Kanons, ii, 292, Leipsig, 1890. Contrary to the canonical Christian Gospels, and in accordance with the Islamic view of Jesus, this later Gospel of Barnabas states that Jesus was not the son of God, but a prophet and messenger. The book also says Jesus rose alive into Heaven without having been crucified and mentions Muhammad by name. Numerical119.tripod.com Though the exact dating is disputed, there is also a dispute among scholars as to the work being pseudepigraphical or apocryphal. Cyril Glass. The Concise Encyclopedia of Islam, Harper & Row, 1989, p. 64. Quoted at http://answering-islam.org/Barnabas/ 

== See also ==
* Lectionary 214 - apocryphal Apodemia of Barnabas

== Notes ==

== References ==
* Attwater, Donald and Catherine Rachel John. "The Penguin Dictionary of Saints," 3rd edition, New York: Penguin Books, 1993. ISBN 0-14-051312-4.

=== Literature: Epistle of Barnabas ===
* Die Apostolischen Vter. Griechisch-deutsche Parallelausgabe. J.C.B. Mohr Tbingen 1992. ISBN 3-16-145887-7
* Der Barnabasbrief. bersetzt und erklrt von Ferdinand R. Prostmeier. Series: Kommentar zu den Apostolischen Vtern (KAV, Vol. 8). Vandenhoeck & Ruprecht: Gttingen 1999. ISBN 3-525-51683-5

== External links ==

*Biography of St Barnabas
*Gospel of Barnabas
*
*
*
*The Ecole Glossary about Barnabas
*The Epistle of Barnabas
*St. Barnabas the Apostle
*Jewish Encyclopedia: Barnabas
*Parish of St Barnabas in Tunbridge Wells, England, UK
*Barnabas Community Church, Shrewsbury, England, UK
*St Barnabas Monastery and Icon Museum, Famagusta, Cyprus
*St. Barnabas, Patron Against Hailstorms, Invoked as Peacemaker
*St. Barnabas at the Christian Iconography web site.
*The Life of St. Barnabas the Apostle in Caxton's translation of the Golden Legend



[[Birka]]

:This is about a Viking-age trading center in Sweden. For other meanings see Birka (disambiguation).
During the Viking Age, Birka (Birca in medieval sources), on the island of Bjrk (literally: "Birch Island") in present day Sweden, was an important trading center which handled goods from Scandinavia as well as Central and Eastern Europe and the Orient. Bjrk is located in Lake Mlaren, 30 kilometers west of contemporary Stockholm, in the municipality of Eker. The archaeological sites of Birka and Hovgrden, on the neighbouring island of Adels, make up an archaeological complex which illustrates the elaborate trading networks of Viking Scandinavia and their influence on the subsequent history of Europe. Generally regarded as Sweden's oldest town, 2006 Encyclopdia Britannica, article "Sweden". Birka (along with Hovgrden) has been a UNESCO World Heritage Site since 1993.

==History==
Location in Sweden
Reconstruction of housing
Reconstruction of boats
Map of Bjrk and Birka today
Map of Bjrk, late 17th century, from Suecia antiqua et hodierna. Engraving by Willem Swidde.
Established in the middle of the 8th century Helle, K. et al., Norsk Byhistorie, Pax forlag, Oslo 2006, ISBN 13: 978-82-530-2882-8. and thus being one of the earliest urban settlements in Scandinavia, Birka was the Baltic link in the river and portage route through Ladoga (Aldeigja) and Novgorod (Holmsgard) to the Byzantine Empire and the Abbasid Califate. 2006 Encyclopdia Britannica. Article "Birca". Birka was also important as the site of the first known Christian congregation in Sweden, founded in 831 by Saint Ansgar.

Sources are mainly archeological remains. No texts survive from this area, though the written text Vita Ansgari ("The life of Ansgar") by Rimbert (c. 865) describes the missionary work of Ansgar around 830 at Birka, and Gesta Hammaburgensis Ecclesiae Pontificum (Deeds of Bishops of the Hamburg Church) by Adam of Bremen in 1075 describes the archbishop Unni, who died at Birka in 936. St Ansgar's work was the first attempt to convert the inhabitants from the Norse religion to Christianity, and it was unsuccessful.

Both Rimbert and Adam were German clergymen writing in Latin. There are no known Norse sources mentioning the name of the settlement, or even the settlement itself, and the original Norse name of Birka is unknown. Birca is the Latinised form given in the sources and Birka its contemporary, unhistorical Swedish form. The Latin name is probably derived from an Old Norse word "birk" which probably meant a market place. Related to this was the Bjrka law (bjrkartt) which regulated the life on market places in Denmark, Norway and Sweden. Both terms in different forms are very common in Scandinavian place names still today leading to speculation that all references to Birca especially by Adam of Bremen were not about the same location.

Both publications are silent on Birca's size, layout and appearance. Based on Rimbert's account, Birca was significant because it had a port and it was the place for the regional ting. Adam only mentions the port, but otherwise Birca seems to have been significant to him because it had been the bridgehead of Ansgar's Christian mission and because archbishop Unni had been buried there.

Vita Ansgari and Gesta are sometimes ambiguous, which has caused some controversy as to whether Birca and the Bjrk settlement were the same location. Many other locations have been suggested through the years. Some of them being Linkping, Kpingsvik and even Saltvik in land. However, Bjrk is the only location that can show remains of a town of Birca's significance, which is why the vast majority of scholars regard Bjrk as the location of Birca. Harrison, Dick, Sveriges historia -- medeltiden (Falkping, 2002), p.51 

Birka was abandoned during the later half of the 10th century. Based on the coin finds, the city seems to have silenced around 960. Lindqvist, Herman. Historien om Sverige. Islossning till kungarike. 1996. See page 165. Roughly around the same time, the nearby settlement of Sigtuna supplanted Birka as the main trading centre in the Mlaren area. The reasons for Birka's decline are disputed. A contributing factor may have been the post-glacial rebound, which lowered the water level of Mlaren changing it from an arm of the sea into a lake and cut Birka off from the nearest (southern) access to the Baltic Sea. The Baltic island of Gotland was also in a better strategic position for Russian-Byzantine trade, and was gaining eminence as a mercantile stronghold. 2006 Encyclopdia Britannica. Article "Birka". Historian Neil Kent has speculated that the area may have been the victim of an enemy assault. 

The Varangian trade stations in Russia suffered a serious decline at roughly the same date.

==Rimbert's Birka==
In Vita Ansgari ("The life of Ansgar") Vita Ansgarii. Translation in English. monk and later archbishop of Hamburg-Bremen Rimbert gives the first known description of Birka. The town was the center of Catholic missionary activities in the 9th century Sweden. Rimbert's interests were in the Christian faith, not so much in the Swedish geopolicy, so his descriptions of Birka remain approximate at best.

===Bridgehead of Christian missionaries===
This is how it all started in 829:

:"Meanwhile it happened that Swedish ambassadors had come to the Emperor Louis the Pious, and, amongst other matters which they had been ordered to bring to the attention of the emperor, they informed him that there were many belonging to their nation who desired to embrace the Christian religion, and that their king so far favoured this suggestion that lie would permit God's priests to reside there, provided that they might be deemed worthy of such a favour and that the emperor would send them suitable preachers." (Chapter IX)

:"Ansgar then undertook the mission committed to him by the emperor, who desired that he should go to the Swedes and discover whether this people was prepared to accept the faith as their messengers had declared." (Chapter X)

Ansgar was already experienced in the missionary work in Denmark, and set forth to Sweden. Rimbert describes the trip very generally:

:"It may suffice for me to say that while they were in the midst of their journey they fell into the hands of pirates. The merchants with whom they were travelling, defended themselves vigorously and for a time successfully, but eventually they were conquered and overcome by the pirates, who took from them their ships and all that they possessed, whilst they themselves barely escaped on. foot to land. -- With great difficulty they accomplished their long journey on foot, traversing also the intervening seas (maria), where it was possible, by ship, and eventually arrived at the Swedish port called Birka." (Chapters X and XI)

Rimbert does not say where Ansgar sailed off or where he landed. Noteworthy is just his note about several "seas" that they had to cross to get to Birka from the place they had landed to. Since Rimbert mentions them to have crossed the seas by ship "where it was possible" they clearly had the alternative of going around them as well, meaning that the seas were probably the numerous lakes in southern Sweden. When Ansgar again travelled to Birka from Germany about 852, it went easier:

:"Ansgar accomplished the journey on which he had set out, and after spending nearly twenty days in a ship, he arrived at Birka --" (Chapter XXVI)

This might mean that he sailed off from Hamburg or Bremen instead of some port in Baltic Sea, since the later account by Adam of Bremen gives the distance of Scania and Birka to be only 5 days at sea.

===King in Birka===
Several Swedish kings of the 9th century, Bjrn, Anund and Olof, are all mentioned in Vita to have spent time in Birka. None of them is however said to have had his residence there, as the Swedish king and his retinue routinely moved between the Husbys, parts of the network of royal estates called Uppsala d.

King Bjrn met Ansgar in Birka when he arrived there in 829 (Chapter XI). Later king Olof met him there as well during his last trip in 852 (Chapter XXVI).

===Church in Birka===
Ansgar's missionary work resulted in first churches to be built in Sweden. Talking about Herigar, the prefect of Birka:

:"A little later he built a church on his own ancestral property and served God with the utmost devotion." (Chapter XI)

Herigar's church was not far from the place where tings were held:

:"On one occasion lie himself was sitting in an assembly of people, a stage having been arranged for a council on an open plain. -- He then summoned his servants and told them to carry him to his church." (Chapter XIX)

Another church was also built in Sweden, however location is left open:

:"This Gautbert, who at his consecration received the honoured name of the apostle Simeon, went to Sweden, and was honourably received by the king and the people ; and he began, amidst general goodwill and approval, to build a church there --" (Chapter XIV)

The exiled Swedish King Anund Uppsale confirms that either one of the churches was in Birka itself when he ponders if Birka should be plundered:

:""There are there," he said, " many great and powerful gods, and in former time a church was built there, and there are many Christians there who worship Christ --"" (Chapter XIX)

===Fortress in Birka?===
Danes attacked Birka, accompanied with the deposed king Anund, which caused great distress in the town.

:"Being in great difficulty they fled to a neighbouring city (ad civitatem, qu iuxta erat, confugerunt) and began to promise and offer to their gods -- But inasmuch as the city was not strong and there were few to offer resistance, they sent messengers to the Danes and asked for friendship and alliance. -- Hergeir, the faithful servant of the Lord, was angry with them and said, -- "They will lead away your wives and sons as captives, they will burn our city (urbs) and town (vicus) The Latin word vicus which Rimbert uses about Birka can also be translated as "market place" or "village". and will destroy you with the sword --"" (Chapter XIX)

As the neighbouring "city" is not mentioned in any other context than during the Danish attack as a place where people took refuge, it probably meant a nearby fortress. Eventually Danes left, sparing Birka from destruction.

===Ting in Birka===
When Ansgar asked if King Olof Scandinavian sources omit King Olof from the list of kings that reigned in Uppsala. would permit him to establish the Christian religion in the kingdom during his second visit in 852, the king said to him:

:"On this account I have not the power, nor do I dare, to approve the objects of your mission until I can consult our gods by the casting of lots and until I can enquire the will of the people in regard to this matter. Let your messenger attend with me the next assembly --" (Chapter XXVI)

:"When the day for the assembly which was held in the town of Birka drew near, in accordance with their national custom the king caused a proclamation to be made to the people by the voice of a herald, in order that they might be informed concerning the object of their mission. -- The king then rose up from amongst the assembly and forthwith directed one of his own messengers to accompany the bishop's messenger, and to tell him that the people were unanimously inclined to accept his proposal and at the same time to tell him that, whilst their action was entirely agreeable to him, he could not give his full consent until, in another assembly, which was to be held in another part of his kingdom, he could announce this resolution to the people who lived in that district." (Chapter XXVII)

Tings were huge open air events, which required plenty of space. The more important ting that king Olof talked about was probably the Ting of all Swedes, which was held at the end of February in Uppsala, during the Disting. The king was obliged to obey the common decisions made at this ting, and the most powerful man at this assembly was not the king, but the lawspeaker of Tiundaland. Locally important tings were the Westrogothic Ting of all Geats in Skara and the Ostrogothic Lionga ting in the vicinity of today's Linkping.

==Adam of Bremen's Birka==
In Gesta Hammaburgensis ecclesiae pontificum (Deeds of Bishops of the Hamburg Church), Adam of Bremen, Gesta Hammaburgensis ecclesiae pontificum, online text in Latin. Note that Scholias at the end of the text are later supplements, possibly by Adam himself or copyists. English translation of Gesta is not available in public domain, and the translation of the selected parts is by Wikipedia editors. Adam of Bremen mentions Birka many times, and the book is the main source of information on the city. After its initial release in 1075/6, Gesta was complemented with supplementary Scholias until the death of Adam in the 1080s. Birca is described as an existing city in the original version, but then as destroyed in Scholia 138.

One of Adam's main sources had been the German bishop Adalvard the Younger of Sigtuna and later of Skara as hinted in Scholia 119. He was also very familiar with Rimbert's work. Adam himself never visited Birka.

===Birka's location and port===
Adam described Birka as a Geatish port town and had gathered many details about it.

:"Birka is the main Geatish town (oppidum Gothorum), situated in the middle of Sweden (Suevoniae), not far (non longe) from the temple called Uppsala (Ubsola) which the Swedes (Sueones) held in the highest esteem when it comes to the worship of the gods; here forms an inlet of the Baltic or the Barbaric Sea a port facing north which welcomes all the wild peoples all around this sea but which is risky for those who are careless or ignorant of such places ... they have therefore blocked this inlet of the troubled sea with hidden masses of rocks along more than 100 stadions (18 km). On this anchorage, being the best sheltered within the maritime region of Sweden (Suevoniae), all the ships belonging to Danes (Danorum) known as Norwegians (Nortmannorum) as well as to Slavs (Sclavorum), Sembrians (Semborum) and other Scythian (Scithiae) peoples use to convene every year for sundry necessary commerce." (I 62)

:"Turning from the northern parts to the mouth of the Baltic Sea we first meet the Norwegians (Nortmanni), then the Danish region of Skne (Sconia) stands out, and beyond these live the Geats (Gothi) for a long stretch all the way to Birka." (IV 14)

Having described Vstergtland and Skara, Adam writes:

:"Beyond it stergtland (Ostrogothia) extends along the sea, that is called the Baltic Sea, all the way to Birka." (IV 23)

Noteworthy in the following statement is the usage of the term "not far" (non longe) which was also used to describe the distance between Birka and the Uppsala temple:

:"Furthermore we have been told that there are many more islands in that sea, one of which is called the Great Estland (Aestland) -- And this island is told to be quite close to the Woman Land (terrae feminarum), which Note that Adam's words "cum illa superior" may also refer to Courland discussed in Chapter IV 16 just before Estland thus meaning that Birka was not far away from Courland. Compare with Rimbert's story about an attack to Courland, Vita Ansgari Chapter XXX. is not far (non longe) away from Birka of the Swedes." (IV 17)

Adam also had travel instructions from Skne to Sigtuna:

:"From Skne (Sconia) of the Danes one reaches Sigtuna (Sictonam) or Birka after five days at sea, for they are indeed alike. The word iuxta can also be translated "close by". But by land from Skne across the Geatish people (Gothorum populos) and cities Skara (Scaranem), Telgas and Birka, one reaches Sigtuna only after a full month." (IV 28)

"Telgas" is not mentioned anywhere else, and it remains as speculative as Birka. The most popular identification among many telge names in Sweden is Sdertlje. Assuming Birka and Bjrk settlement were the same, Adam's travel instructions were latest from the 10th century when Bjrk settlement still existed. Sdertlje is mentioned as "Tlgia" etc in medieval sources. Gesta excluded, it is mentioned for the first time in 1281. However, it is considered possible that Sdertlje was already established in the 11th century, but dating the city to be contemporary to the Bjrk settlement is unlikely. Scholia 121 of IV 20 tells also:

:"For those who sail from Skne (Sconia) of the Danes to Birka, the journey takes five days, from Birka to Russia (Ruzziam) likewise five days at sea." (Scholia 121)

The following definition remains even more mysterious:

:"In pity of their errors, our archbishop ordained as their diocesan capital Birka, which is in the middle of Sweden (Sueoniae) facing Jumne (Iumnem), the capital of the Slavs, and equally distant from all the coasts of the surrounding sea." (IV 20)

Since it is physically impossible for any Swedish town to face Jumne, the latter being situated along River Oder, Adam's statement is probably a misunderstanding. No place having a similar name to Birka is known to have situated on the opposite shore of Oder, so it may be possible that something similar to Jumne was located opposite to Birka.

===Bishop in Birka===
Archbishopric of Hamburg-Bremen that oversaw the missionary work in Scandinavia until 1103, had appointed bishops to Sweden at least from 1014 onwards, the first see being in Skara. Several bishops were appointed for Sweden in 1060s, one also for Birka.

:"For Sweden, six were consecrated: Adalvard the Elder (Adalwardum) and Acilinum, also Adalvard the Younger (Adalwardum) and Tadicum, and furthermore Simeon (Symeonem) and the monk John (Iohannem)." (III 70)

Scholia 94 appends this as follows:

:"Adalvard the Elder (Adalwardus senior) was to superintend both lands of the Geats (uterque praefectus est Gothiae), Adalvard the Younger Sigtuna (Sictunam) and Uppsala (Ubsalam), Simeon (Symon) the Sami people (Scritefingos), John (Iohannes) the islands of the Baltic Sea." (Scholia 94)

Furthermore, the following was said about John's location after talking about Birka:

:"For this city he ordained, as the first among our people, the abbot Hiltin, whom he wanted to call John." (IV 20)

John seems to have been situated in Birka in order to prepare for the missionary work among the many heathen people that flooded to Birca from around the Baltic coasts. This was a logical continuation to Birka's position as the first missionary town in Sweden. Noteworthy here is that the biggest islands in the Baltic Sea, land and Gotland, were part of the diocese of Linkping in the Middle Ages, covering also stergtland and eastern Smland.

===Location of Unni's tomb===
Scholia 122 of IV 20 locates the tomb of Hamburg's archbishop Unni in Birka:

:"There is the port of Saint Ansgar and the tomb of the holy Archbishop Unni, and a familiar haven, it is said, for the holy confessors of our diocese." (Scholia 122)

According to Gesta, Unni had died in 936 (I 64). Unni's head was taken to the Bremen Cathedral where it still today is. Date 17.9.936 is written in the lead plate attached to the saint's skull. Lindqvist, Herman. Historien om Sverige., 1992. ISBN 91-1-931502-3. See page 226. 

===Birka's destruction===
After having consistently described Birka as an existing city, Scholia 138 of IV 29 describes Birka's sudden demise. Talking about Adalvard the Younger, the bishop of Sigtuna and later that of Skara, Adam or a later copyist has written:

:"During his journey he seized the opportunity to make a detour to Birka, which is now reduced to loneliness so that one can hardly find vestiges of the city; therefore impossible to come upon the tomb of the holy Archbishop Unni." (Scholia 138)

The remark does not make it clear if Adalvard found the city destroyed or if that had happened after his visit and the later remark was just to warn the future pilgrims not to go there anymore in vain. As Adalvard was back in Bremen already by 1069 and is mentioned as one of Adam's sources of information, it would have been expected that word about Birka's destruction had reached also Adam before he published his work half a decade later.

==Bjrk archaeological site==
Excavation in "Black soil" 1991
Excavation of Birka
The exact location of Birca was also lost during the centuries, leading to speculation from Swedish historians. However, the island of Bjrk was first claimed to have been Birka already about 1450 in the so-called "Chronicle of Sweden" (Prosaiska krnikan):

:"And there were three capitals in Sweden two of which were not long away from Uppsala (vpsala). The one was called Sigtuna (siktuna) and the other Birka (birka). Birka was on an island in Lake Mlaren (mlar) that is called Bjrk (birk). The third was in Westgtaland (westergtlandh) and was called Skara (skara)." Prosaiska krnikan. Original text. Translation in English is by Wikipedia editors. 

In search of Birka, National Antiquarian Johan Hadorph was the first to attempt excavations on Bjrk in the late 17th century.

In the late 19th century, Hjalmar Stolpe, an entomologist by education, arrived on Bjrk to study fossilized insects found in amber on the island. Stolpe found very large amounts of amber on the island, which is unusual since amber is not normally found in lake Mlaren. Stolpe speculated that the island may have been an important trading post, prompting him to conduct a series of archeological excavations between 1871-95. The excavations soon indicated that a major settlement had been located on the island and eventually Stolpe spent two decades excavating the island. After Bjrk came to be identified with ancient Birka, it has been assumed that the original name of Birka was simply Bierk (sometimes spelt Bjrk), an earlier form of Bjrk.

Ownership of Bjrk is today mainly in private hands, and used for farming. The settlement site, however is an archaeological site, and a museum has been built nearby for exhibition of finds (mostly replicas), models and reconstructions. It is a popular site to visit during the summer times. The complete collection of archaeological finds from the excavations on Bjrk are held by The Swedish History Museum in Stockholm, and many of the artefacts are on display there.

The archaeological remains are located in the north part of Bjrk and span an area of about 7 hectares (17 acres). The remains are both burial-sites and buildings, and in the south part of this area, there is also a hill fort called "Borgen" ("The Fortress"). The construction technique of the buildings is still unknown, but the main material was wood. An adjacent island holds the remains of Hovgrden, an estate which housed the King's retinue during visits.

Approximately 700 people lived at Birka when it was at its largest, and about 3,000 graves have been found. Ambrosiani, Bjrn, Birka, in: Pulsiano, Phillip (ed.), Madieval Scandinavia. An Encyclopedia, Garland Publishing, New York / London 1993, 43 Its administrative center was supposedly located outside of the settlement itself, on the nearby island of Adels.

The most recent large excavation was undertaken between 1990-95 in a region of "black earth", believed to be the site of the main settlement. Bjrk is today mainly agricultural, and shipping lines carry tourists to the island, where a museum showcases a view of life during the Viking era.

== References ==

==External links==

*Birka and Hovgrden at the Swedish National Heritage Board
*Birka at the Swedish National Heritage Board
*Birka and Hovgrden - at UNESCO
* Reconstructions of Bone Flutes like the ones from Birka
* The Swedish History Museum



[[Beta-lactamase]]

Core structure of penicillins (top) and cephalosporins (bottom). -Lactam ring in red.
Escherichia coli bacteria on the right are sensitive to two beta-lactam antibiotics, and do not grow in the semi-circular regions surrounding the antibiotics. E. coli bacteria on the left are resistant to beta-lactam antibiotics, and grow next to one antibiotic (bottom) and are less inhibited by another antibiotic (top).
Beta-lactamases are enzymes () produced by some bacteria that provide resistance to -Lactam antibiotics like penicillins, cephamycins, and carbapenems (ertapenem), although carbapenems are relatively resistant to beta-lactamase. Beta-lactamase provides antibiotic resistance by breaking the antibiotics' structure. These antibiotics all have a common element in their molecular structure: a four-atom ring known as a -Lactam. Through hydrolysis, the lactamase enzyme breaks the -Lactam ring open, deactivating the molecule's antibacterial properties.

Beta-lactam antibiotics are typically used to treat a broad spectrum of Gram-positive and Gram-negative bacteria. 

Beta-lactamases produced by Gram-negative organisms are usually secreted, especially when antibiotics are present in the environment. 

== Structure ==

The structure of a Streptomyces -lactamase is given by .

== Penicillinase ==
Penicillinase is a specific type of -lactamase, showing specificity for penicillins, again by hydrolysing the -Lactam ring. Molecular weights of the various penicillinases tend to cluster near 50 kiloDaltons.

Penicillinase was the first -lactamase to be identified: It was first isolated by Abraham and Chain in 1940 from Gram-negative E. coli even before penicillin entered clinical use, but penicillinase production quickly spread to bacteria that previously did not produce it or produced it only rarely. Penicillinase-resistant beta-lactams such as methicillin were developed, but there is now widespread resistance to even these.

== Classification ==

=== Functional classification ===

The following functional classification for beta lactamases has been proposed: 

====Group 1====
;CEPHALOSPORINASE, Molecular Class C (not inhibited by clavulanic acid)
:Group 1 are cephalosporinases not inhibited by clavulanic acid, belonging to the molecular class C

====Group 2====
Group 2 are penicillinases, cephalosporinases, or both inhibited by clavulanic acid, corresponding to the molecular classes A and D reflecting the original TEM and SHV genes. Additionally, many class A TEM -lactamases are inhibited by -Lactamase inhibitor protein (BLIP). Because of the increasing number of TEM- and SHV-derived -lactamases, they were divided into two subclasses, 2a and 2b.

;GROUP 2a: PENICILLINASE, Molecular Class A
:The 2a subgroup contains just penicillinases.

;GROUP 2b: BROAD-SPECTRUM, Molecular Class A
:2b Opposite to 2a, 2b are broad-spectrum -lactamases, meaning that they are capable of inactivating penicillins and cephalosporins at the same rate. Furthermore, new subgroups were segregated from subgroup 2b:

;GROUP 2be: EXTENDED-SPECTRUM, Molecular Class A
:Subgroup 2be, with the letter "e" for extended spectrum of activity, represents the ESBLs, which are capable of inactivating third-generation cephalosporins (ceftazidime, cefotaxime, and cefpodoxime) as well as monobactams (aztreonam)

;GROUP 2br: INHIBITOR-RESISTANT, Molecular Class A (diminished inhibition by clavulanic acid)
:The 2br enzymes, with the letter "r" denoting reduced binding to clavulanic acid and sulbactam, are also called inhibitor-resistant TEM-derivative enzymes; nevertheless, they are commonly still susceptible to tazobactam, except where an amino acid replacement exists at position met69.

;GROUP 2c: CARBENICILLINASE, Molecular Class A
:Latersubgroup 2c was segregated from group 2 because these enzymes inactivate carbenicillin more than benzylpenicillin, with some effect on cloxacillin.

;GROUP 2d: CLOXACILANASE, Molecular Class D or A
:Subgroup 2d enzymes inactivate cloxacillin more than benzylpenicillin, with some activity against carbenicillin; these enzymes are poorly inhibited by clavulanic acid, and some of them are ESBLs

:the correct term is "OXACILLINASE". These enzymes are able to inactivate the oxazolylpenicillins like oxacillin, cloxacillin, dicloxacillin. The enzymes belong to the molecular class D not molecular class A.

;GROUP 2e: CEPHALOSPORINASE, Molecular Class A
:Subgroup 2e enzymes are cephalosporinases that can also hydrolyse monobactams, and they are inhibited by clavulanic acid

;GROUP 2f: CARBAPENEMASE, Molecular Class A
:Subgroup 2f was added because these are serine-based carbapenemases, in contrast to the zinc-based carbapenemases included in group 3

====Group 3====
;METALLOENZYME, Molecular Class B (not inhibited by clavulanic acid)
:Group 3 are the zinc-based or metallo {beta}-lactamases, corresponding to the molecular class B, which are the only enzymes acting by the metal ion zinc, as discussed above. Metallo B-lactamases are able to hydrolyse penicillins, cephalosporins, and carbapenems. Thus, carbapenems are inhibited by both group 2f (serine-based mechanism) and group 3 (zinc-based mechanism)

====Group 4 (no longer current)====
;PENICILLINASE, No Molecular Class (not inhibited by clavulanic acid)
:Group 4 are penicillinases that are not inhibited by clavulanic acid, and they do not yet have a corresponding molecular class.
:This group has been omitted from the current scheme, as when it was described originally it included enzymes not classifiable into other groups. It has been concluded that the enzymes that made up this classification in 1995 would be included in one of the other groups once more information becomes available on them and that it was not informative to have a separate group for them. 

=== Molecular classification ===

The molecular classification of -lactamases is based on the nucleotide and amino acid sequences in these enzymes. To date, four classes are recognised (A-D), correlating with the functional classification. Classes A, C, and D act by a serine-based mechanism, whereas class B or metallo--lactamases need zinc for their action 

"Penicillinase" was discovered in 1940 and renamed Beta-lactamase when the structure of the Beta-lactam ring was finally elucidated.

==Resistance in Gram-negative bacteria==
Among Gram-negative bacteria, the emergence of resistance to expanded-spectrum cephalosporins has been a major concern. It appeared initially in a limited number of bacterial species (E. cloacae, C. freundii, S. marcescens, and P. aeruginosa) that could mutate to hyperproduce their chromosomal class C -lactamase. A few years later, resistance appeared in bacterial species not naturally producing AmpC enzymes (K. pneumoniae, Salmonella spp., P. mirabilis) due to the production of TEM- or SHV-type ESBLs. Characteristically, such resistance has included oxyimino- (for example ceftizoxime, cefotaxime, ceftriaxone, and ceftazidime, as well as the oxyimino-monobactam aztreonam), but not 7-alpha-methoxy-cephalosporins (cephamycins; in other words, cefoxitin and cefotetan); has been blocked by inhibitors such as clavulanate, sulbactam, or tazobactam, and did not involve carbapenems. Chromosomal-mediated AmpC -lactamases represent a new threat, since they confer resistance to 7-alpha-methoxy-cephalosporins (cephamycins) such as cefoxitin or cefotetan are not affected by commercially available -lactamase inhibitors, and can, in strains with loss of outer membrane porins, provide resistance to carbapenems. 

===Extended-spectrum beta-lactamase (ESBL)===
Members of the family Enterobacteriaceae commonly express plasmid-encoded -lactamases (e.g., TEM-1, TEM-2, and SHV-1). which confer resistance to penicillins but not to expanded-spectrum cephalosporins. In the mid-1980s, a new group of enzymes, the extended-spectrum b-lactamases (ESBLs), was detected (first detected in 1979). ESBLs are beta-lactamases that hydrolyze extended-spectrum cephalosporins with an oxyimino side chain. These cephalosporins include cefotaxime, ceftriaxone, and ceftazidime, as well as the oxyimino-monobactam aztreonam. Thus ESBLs confer resistance to these antibiotics and related oxyimino-beta lactams. In typical circumstances, they derive from genes for TEM-1, TEM-2, or SHV-1 by mutations that alter the amino acid configuration around the active site of these -lactamases. A broader set of -lactam antibiotics are susceptible to hydrolysis by these enzymes. An increasing number of ESBLs not of TEM or SHV lineage have recently been described. The ESBLs are frequently plasmid encoded. Plasmids responsible for ESBL production frequently carry genes encoding resistance to other drug classes (for example, aminoglycosides). Therefore, antibiotic options in the treatment of ESBL-producing organisms are extremely limited. Carbapenems are the treatment of choice for serious infections due to ESBL-producing organisms, yet carbapenem-resistant isolates have recently been reported. ESBL-producing organisms may appear susceptible to some extended-spectrum cephalosporins. However, treatment with such antibiotics has been associated with high failure rates.

=== Types ===

==== TEM beta-lactamases (class A) ====
TEM-1 is the most commonly encountered beta-lactamase in Gram-negative bacteria. Up to 90% of ampicillin resistance in E. coli is due to the production of TEM-1. Also responsible for the ampicillin and penicillin resistance that is seen in H. influenzae and N. gonorrhoeae in increasing numbers. Although TEM-type beta-lactamases are most often found in E. coli and K. pneumoniae, they are also found in other species of Gram-negative bacteria with increasing frequency. The amino acid substitutions responsible for the ESBL phenotype cluster around the active site of the enzyme and change its configuration, allowing access to oxyimino-beta-lactam substrates. Opening the active site to beta-lactam substrates also typically enhances the susceptibility of the enzyme to b-lactamase inhibitors, such as clavulanic acid. Single amino acid substitutions at positions 104, 164, 238, and 240 produce the ESBL phenotype, but ESBLs with the broadest spectrum usually have more than a single amino acid substitution. Based upon different combinations of changes, currently 140 TEM-type enzymes have been described. TEM-10, TEM-12, and TEM-26 are among the most common in the United States. 

====SHV beta-lactamases (class A)====
SHV-1 shares 68 percent of its amino acids with TEM-1 and has a similar overall structure. The SHV-1 beta-lactamase is most commonly found in K. pneumoniae and is responsible for up to 20% of the plasmid-mediated ampicillin resistance in this species. ESBLs in this family also have amino acid changes around the active site, most commonly at positions 238 or 238 and 240. More than 60 SHV varieties are known. SHV-5 and SHV-12 are among the most common. 

==== CTX-M beta-lactamases (class A) ====
These enzymes were named for their greater activity against cefotaxime than other oxyimino-beta-lactam substrates (e.g., ceftazidime, ceftriaxone, or cefepime). Rather than arising by mutation, they represent examples of plasmid acquisition of beta-lactamase genes normally found on the chromosome of Kluyvera species, a group of rarely pathogenic commensal organisms. These enzymes are not very closely related to TEM or SHV beta-lactamases in that they show only approximately 40% identity with these two commonly isolated beta-lactamases. More than 80 CTX-M enzymes are currently known. Despite their name, a few are more active on ceftazidime than cefotaxime. They have mainly been found in strains of Salmonella enterica serovar Typhimurium and E. coli, but have also been described in other species of Enterobacteriaceae and are the predominant ESBL type in parts of South America. (They are also seen in eastern Europe) CTX-M-14, CTX-M-3, and CTX-M-2 are the most widespread. CTX-M-15 is currently (2006) the most widespread type in E. coli the UK and is widely prevalent in the community. An example of beta-lactamase CTX-M-15, along with ISEcp1, has been found to have recently transposed onto the chromosome of Klebsiella pneumoniae ATCC BAA-2146. 

==== OXA beta-lactamases (class D) ====
OXA beta-lactamases were long recognized as a less common but also plasmid-mediated beta-lactamase variety that could hydrolyze oxacillin and related anti-staphylococcal penicillins. These beta-lactamases differ from the TEM and SHV enzymes in that they belong to molecular class D and functional group 2d . The OXA-type beta-lactamases confer resistance to ampicillin and cephalothin and are characterized by their high hydrolytic activity against oxacillin and cloxacillin and the fact that they are poorly inhibited by clavulanic acid. Amino acid substitutions in OXA enzymes can also give the ESBL phenotype. While most ESBLs have been found in E. coli, K. pneumoniae, and other Enterobacteriaceae, the OXA-type ESBLs have been found mainly in P. aeruginosa. OXA-type ESBLs have been found mainly in Pseudomonas aeruginosa isolates from Turkey and France. The OXA beta-lactamase family was originally created as a phenotypic rather than a genotypic group for a few beta-lactamases that had a specific hydrolysis profile. Therefore, there is as little as 20% sequence homology among some of the members of this family. However, recent additions to this family show some degree of homology to one or more of the existing members of the OXA beta-lactamase family. Some confer resistance predominantly to ceftazidime, but OXA-17 confers greater resistance to cefotaxime and cefepime than it does resistance to ceftazidime.

==== Others ====
Other plasmid-mediated ESBLs, such as PER, VEB, GES, and IBC beta-lactamases, have been described but are uncommon and have been found mainly in P. aeruginosa and at a limited number of geographic sites. PER-1 in isolates in Turkey, France, and Italy; VEB-1 and VEB-2 in strains from Southeast Asia; and GES-1, GES-2, and IBC-2 in isolates from South Africa, France, and Greece. PER-1 is also common in multiresistant acinetobacter species in Korea and Turkey. Some of these enzymes are found in Enterobacteriaceae as well, whereas other uncommon ESBLs (such as BES-1, IBC-1, SFO-1, and TLA-1) have been found only in Enterobacteriaceae.

====Treatment====
While ESBL-producing organisms were previously associated with hospitals and institutional care, these organisms are now increasingly found in the community. CTX-M-15-positive E. coli are a cause of community-acquired urinary infections in the UK, and tend to be resistant to all oral -lactam antibiotics, as well as quinolones and sulfonamides. Treatment options may include nitrofurantoin, fosfomycin, mecillinam and chloramphenicol. In desperation, once-daily ertapenem or gentamicin injections may also be used.

=== Inhibitor-resistant -lactamases ===
Although the inhibitor-resistant -lactamases are not ESBLs, they are often discussed with ESBLs because they are also derivatives of the classical TEM- or SHV-type enzymes. These enzymes were at first given the designation IRT for inhibitor-resistant TEM -lactamase; however, all have subsequently been renamed with numerical TEM designations. There are at least 19 distinct inhibitor-resistant TEM -lactamases. Inhibitor-resistant TEM -lactamases have been found mainly in clinical isolates of E. coli, but also some strains of K. pneumoniae, Klebsiella oxytoca, P. mirabilis, and Citrobacter freundii. Although the inhibitor-resistant TEM variants are resistant to inhibition by clavulanic acid and sulbactam, thereby showing clinical resistance to the beta-lactamlactamase inhibitor combinations of amoxicillin-clavulanate (co-amoxiclav), ticarcillin-clavulanate (co-ticarclav), and ampicillin/sulbactam, they normally remain susceptible to inhibition by tazobactam and subsequently the combination of piperacillin/tazobactam, although resistance has been described. This is no longer a primarily European epidemiology, it is found in northern parts of America often and should be tested for with complex UTI's. 

===AmpC-type -lactamases (Class C)===
AmpC type -lactamases are commonly isolated from extended-spectrum cephalosporin-resistant Gram-negative bacteria. AmpC -lactamases (also termed class C or group 1) are typically encoded on the chromosome of many Gram-negative bacteria including Citrobacter, Serratia and Enterobacter species where its expression is usually inducible; it may also occur on Escherichia coli but is not usually inducible, although it can be hyperexpressed. AmpC type -lactamases may also be carried on plasmids. AmpC -lactamases, in contrast to ESBLs, hydrolyse broad and extended-spectrum cephalosporins (cephamycins as well as to oxyimino--lactams) but are not inhibited by -lactamase inhibitors such as clavulanic acid.

===Carbapenemases===
Carbapenems are famously stable to AmpC -lactamases and extended-spectrum--lactamases. Carbapenemases are a diverse group of -lactamases that are active not only against the oxyimino-cephalosporins and cephamycins but also against the carbapenems. Aztreonam is stable to the metallo--lactamases,
but many IMP and VIM producers are resistant, owing to other mechanisms. Carbapenemases were formerly believed to derive only from classes A, B, and D, but a class C carbapenemase has been described.

====IMP-type carbapenemases (metallo--lactamases) (Class B)====
Plasmid-mediated IMP-type carbapenemases, 17 varieties of which are currently known, became established in Japan in the 1990s both in enteric Gram-negative organisms and in Pseudomonas and Acinetobacter species. IMP enzymes spread slowly to other countries in the Far East, were reported from Europe in 1997, and have been found in Canada and Brazil.

====VIM (Verona integron-encoded metallo--lactamase) (Class B)====
A second growing family of carbapenemases, the VIM family, was reported from Italy in 1999 and now includes 10 members, which have a wide geographic distribution in Europe, South America, and the Far East and have been found in the United States. VIM-1 was discovered in P. aeruginosa in Italy in 1996; since then, VIM-2 - now the predominant variant - was found repeatedly in Europe and the Far East; VIM-3 and -4 are minor variants of VIM-2 and -1, respectively. VIM enzymes occur mostly in P. aeruginosa, also P. putida and, very rarely, Enterobacteriaceae.

Amino acid sequence diversity is up to 10% in the VIM family, 15% in the IMP family, and 70% between VIM and IMP. Enzymes of both the families, nevertheless, are similar. Both are integron-associated, sometimes within plasmids. Both hydrolyse all -lactams except monobactams, and evade all -lactam inhibitors.

==== OXA (oxacillinase) group of -lactamases (Class D) ====
The OXA group of -lactamases occur mainly in Acinetobacter species and are divided into two clusters. OXA carbapenemases hydrolyse carbapenems very slowly in vitro, and the high MICs seen for some Acinetobacter hosts (>64 mg/L) may reflect secondary mechanisms. They are sometimes augmented in clinical isolates by additional resistance mechanisms, such as impermeability or efflux. OXA carbapenemases also tend to have a reduced hydrolytic efficiency towards penicillins and cephalosporins. 

====KPC (K. pneumoniae carbapenemase) (Class A)====
A few class A enzymes, most noted the plasmid-mediated KPC enzymes, are effective carbapenemases as well. Ten variants, KPC-2 through KPC-11 are known, and they are distinguished by one or two amino acid substitutions (KPC-1 was re-sequenced in 2008 and found to be 100% homologous to published sequences of KPC-2). KPC-1 was found in North Carolina, KPC-2 in Baltimore and KPC-3 in New York. They have only 45% homology with SME and NMC/IMI enzymes and, unlike them, can be encoded by self-transmissible plasmids.

The class A Klebsiella pneumoniae carbapenemase (KPC) is currently the most common carbapenemase, which was first detected in North Carolina, US, in 1996 and has since spread worldwide. A later publication indicated that Enterobacteriaceae that produce KPC were becoming common in the United States. 

====CMY (Class C)====
The first class C carbapenemase was described in 2006 and was isolated from a virulent strain of Enterobacter aerogenes. It is carried on a plasmid, pYMG-1, and is therefore transmissible to other bacterial strains. 

====SME, IMI, NMC and CcrA ====
In general, these are of little clinical significance.

CcrA (CfiA). Its gene occurs in c. 1-3% of B. fragilis isolates, but fewer produce the enzyme since expression demands appropriate migration of an insertion sequence. CcrA was known before imipenem was introduced, and producers have shown little subsequent increase.

====NDM-1 (New Delhi metallo--lactamase) (Class B)====

Originally described from New Delhi in 2009, this gene is now widespread in Escherichia coli and Klebsiella pneumoniae from India and Pakistan. As of mid-2010, NDM-1 carrying bacteria have been introduced to other countries (including the United States and UK), most probably due to the large number of tourists travelling the globe, who may have picked up the strain from the environment, as strains containing the NDM-1 gene have been found in environmental samples in India. 

==Treatment of ESBL/AmpC/carbapenemases==

===General overview===

In general, an isolate is suspected to be an ESBL producer when it shows in vitro susceptibility to the second-generation cephalosporins (cefoxitin, cefotetan) but resistance to the third-generation cephalosporins and to aztreonam. Moreover, one should suspect these strains when treatment with these agents for Gram-negative infections fails despite reported in vitro susceptibility. Once an ESBL-producing strain is detected, the laboratory should report it as "resistant" to all penicillins, cephalosporins, and aztreonam, even if it is tested (in vitro) as susceptible. Associated resistance to aminoglycosides and trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole, as well as high frequency of co-existence of fluoroquinolone resistance, creates problems. Beta-lactamase inhibitors such as clavulanate, sulbactam, and tazobactam in vitro inhibit most ESBLs, but the clinical effectiveness of beta-lactam/beta-lactamase inhibitor combinations cannot be relied on consistently for therapy. Cephamycins (cefoxitin and cefotetan) are not hydrolyzed by majority of ESBLs, but are hydrolyzed by associated AmpC-type -lactamase. Also, -lactam/-lactamase inhibitor combinations may not be effective against organisms that produce AmpC-type -lactamase. Sometimes these strains decrease the expression of outer membrane proteins, rendering them resistant to cephamycins. In vivo studies have yielded mixed results against ESBL-producing K. pneumoniae. (Cefepime, a fourth-generation cephalosporin, has demonstrated in vitro stability in the presence of many ESBL/AmpC strains.) Currently, carbapenems are, in general, regarded as the preferred agent for treatment of infections due to ESBL-producing organisms. Carbapenems are resistant to ESBL-mediated hydrolysis and exhibit excellent in vitro activity against strains of Enterobacteriaceae expressing ESBLs.

=== According to genes ===

====ESBLs====

Strains producing only ESBLs are susceptible to cephamycins and carbapenems in vitro and show little if any inoculum effect with these agents.

For organisms producing TEM and SHV type ESBLs, apparent in vitro sensitivity to cefepime and to piperacillin/tazobactam is common, but both drugs show an inoculum effect, with diminished susceptibility as the size of the inoculum is increased from 105 to 107 organisms.

Strains with some CTX-Mtype and OXA-type ESBLs are resistant to cefepime on testing, despite the use of a standard inoculum.

====Inhibitor-Resistant -Lactamases====

Although the inhibitor-resistant TEM variants are resistant to inhibition by clavulanic acid and sulbactam, thereby showing clinical resistance to the beta-lactambeta lactamase inhibitor combinations of amoxicillin-clavulanate (Co-amoxiclav), ticarcillin-clavulanate, and ampicillin/sulbactam, they remain susceptible to inhibition by tazobactam and subsequently the combination of piperacillin/tazobactam.

====AmpC====

AmpC-producing strains are typically resistant to oxyimino-beta lactams and to cephamycins and are susceptible to carbapenems; however, diminished porin expression can make such a strain carbapenem-resistant as well.

====Carbapenemases====

Strains with IMP-, VIM-, and OXA-type carbapenemases usually remain susceptible. Resistance to non-beta-lactam antibiotics is common in strains making any of these enzymes, such that alternative options for non-beta-lactam therapy need to be determined by direct susceptibility testing. Resistance to fluoroquinolones and aminoglycosides is especially high.

===According to species===

====Escherichia coli or Klebsiella====

For infections caused by ESBL-producing Escherichia coli or Klebsiella species, treatment with imipenem or meropenem has been associated with the best outcomes in terms of survival and bacteriologic clearance. Cefepime and piperacillin/tazobactam have been less successful. Ceftriaxone, cefotaxime, and ceftazidime have failed even more often, despite the organism's susceptibility to the antibiotic in vitro. Several reports have documented failure of cephamycin therapy as a result of resistance due to porin loss. Some patients have responded to aminoglycoside or quinolone therapy, but, in a recent comparison of ciprofloxacin and imipenem for bacteremia involving an ESBL-producing K. pneumoniae, imipenem produced the better outcome

====Pseudomonas aeruginosa====

There have been few clinical studies to define the optimal therapy for infections caused by ESBL producing Pseudomonas aeruginosa strains.

== Detection ==

Beta-lactamase enzymatic activity can be detected using nitrocefin, a chromogenic cephalosporin substrate which changes color from yellow to red upon beta-lactamase mediated hydrolysis. 

==Evolution==

Beta-lactamases are ancient bacterial enzymes. The class B beta-lactamases (the metallo-beta-lactamases) are divided into three subclasses: B1, B2 and B3. Subclass B1+B2 evolved about ) ago and subclass B3 evolved before the divergence of the Gram positive and Gram negative eubacteria about . 

The other three groups are serine enzymes that show little homology to each other. Structural studies have shown that group A and D are sister taxa and that group C diverged before A and D. These serine based enzymes like the group B betalactamases are of ancient origin having evolved about . 

The OXA group (in class D) in particular evolved on chromosomes and moved to plasmids on at least two separate occasions. 

==See also==
* ESBL-producing E. coli
* -Lactamase inhibitor
* Nitrocefin

==References==

==External links==
* Online ESBL genotyping tool (EGT)
* Online Amino Acid Sequences for ESBL enzymes
* 



[[Burhanuddin Rabbani]]

Burhanuddin Rabbani (Dari:    Burhnuddn Rabbn; 20 September 1940 &ndash; 20 September 2011) was President of the Islamic State of Afghanistan from 1992 to 1996. After the Taliban government was toppled during Operation Enduring Freedom, Rabbani returned to Kabul and served as a temporary President from November to December 20, 2001, when Hamid Karzai was chosen at the Bonn International Conference on Afghanistan. Rabbani was also the leader of Jamiat-e Islami Afghanistan (Islamic Society of Afghanistan), which has close ties to Pakistan's Jamaat-e-Islami. 

He was one of the earliest founders and movement leaders of the Mujahideen in the late 1970s, right before the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan. He served as the political head of the United Islamic Front for the Salvation of Afghanistan (UIFSA), an alliance of various political groups who fought against the Taliban in Afghanistan. His government was recognized by many countries, as well as the United Nations. He later became head of Afghanistan National Front (known in the media as United National Front), the largest political opposition to Hamid Karzai's government. On 20 September 2011, Rabbani was assassinated by a suicide bomber entering his home in Kabul. As suggested by the Afghan parliament, Afghanistan's President Hamid Karzai gave him the title of "Martyr of Peace". Afghan Peace Council Chief Killed in Attack on His Home. New York Times. September 21, 2011. His son Salahuddin Rabbani was chosen in April 2012 to lead efforts to forge peace in Afghanistan with the Taliban. Karzai appoints slain leader's son April 14, 2012 McClatchy 

==Early years==
Rabbani, son of Muhammed Yousuf, was born in the northern province of Badakhshan in 1940. He was a Persian-speaking ethnic Tajik. After finishing school in his native province, he went to Darul-uloom-e-Sharia (Abu-Hanifa), a religious school in Kabul. When he graduated from Abu-Hanifa, he attended Kabul University to study Islamic Law and Theology, graduating in 1963. 

Soon after his graduation in 1963, he was hired as a professor at Kabul University. In order to enhance himself, Rabbani went to Egypt in 1966, and he entered the Al-Azhar University in Cairo where he developed close ties to the Muslim Brotherhood leadership. In two years, he received his masters degree in Islamic Philosophy. Rabbani was one of the first Afghans to translate the works of Sayyid Qutb into Persian. Later he returned to Egypt to complete his PhD in Islamic philosophy and his thesis was titled "The Philosophy and Teachings of Abd al-Rahman Muhammad Jami." In 2004 he received Afghanistan's highest academic and scientific title "Academician" from the Academy of Sciences of Afghanistan.

==Political career==
Rabbani returned to Afghanistan in 1968, where the High Council of Jamiat-e Islami gave him the duty of organizing the University students. Due to his knowledge, reputation, and active support for the cause of Islam, in 1972, a 15-member council selected him as head of Jamiat-e Islami of Afghanistan; the founder of Jamiat-e Islami of Afghanistan, Ghulam M. Niyazi was also present. Jamiat-e Islami was primarily composed of Tajiks. 

In the spring of 1974, the police came to Kabul University to arrest Rabbani for his pro-Islamic stance, but with the help of his students the police were unable to capture him, and he managed to escape to the countryside. In Pakistan, Rabbani gathered important people and established the party. Sayed Noorullah Emad, who was then a young Muslim in the University of Kabul, became the General Secretary of the party and, later, its deputy chief.

When the Soviets supported the 1979 coup, Rabbani helped lead Jamiat-e Islami in resistance to the People's Democratic Party of Afghanistan regime. Rabbani's forces were the first Mujahideen elements to enter Kabul in 1992 when the PDPA government fell from power. He took over as President from 1992 until the Taliban's conquest of Kabul in 1996. For the next five years, he and the Northern Alliance were busy fighting the Taliban until the 2001 US-led Operation Enduring Freedom in which the Taliban government was toppled. Rabbani was head of Afghanistans High Peace Council, which had been formed in 2010 to initiate peace talks with the Taliban and other groups in the insurgency, until his death. 

===Assassination===

Rabbani was killed in a suicide bombing at his home in Kabul on 20 September 2011, his 71st birthday. Two men posing as Taliban representatives approached him to offer a hug and detonated their explosives. At least one of them had hidden the explosives in his turban. The suicide bomber claimed to be a Taliban commander and said he wanted to "discuss peace" with Rabbani. Four other members of Afghanistans High Peace Council were also killed in the blast. 

Afghan officials blamed the Quetta Shura, which is the leadership of the Afghan Taliban hiding in the affluent Satellite Town of Quetta in Pakistan. Kabul, Islamabad spar over Rabbani murder probe The Pakistani government confirmed that Rabbani's assassination was linked to Afghan refugees in Pakistan. A senior Pakistani official stated that over 90% of terrorist attacks in Pakistan are traced back to Afghan elements and that their presence in the country was "an important issue for Pakistan" and "a problem for Afghanistan". Pakistani foreign minister Hina Rabbani Khar said that "We are not responsible if Afghan refugees crossed the border and entered Kabul, stayed in a guest house and attacked Professor Rabbani". 

In 2011, just days before he died, Rabbani was trying to persuade Islamic scholars to issue a religious edict banning suicide bombings. The former president's 29-year-old daughter said in an interview that her father died shortly after he spoke at a conference on "Islamic Awakening" in Tehran. "Right before he was assassinated, he talked about the suicide bombing issue," Fatima Rabbani told Reuters. "He called on all Islamic scholars in the conference to release a fatwa" against the tactic. 

United States President Barack Obama and several NATO military leaders condemned the assassination. Japan also offered its condolences at the Sixty-sixth session of the United Nations General Assembly. Afghan President Hamid Karzai cut short his trip for the General debate of the sixty-sixth session of the United Nations General Assembly following his assassination. Rabbani's son Salahuddin then took over chairmanship of the High Peace Council from his father. http://gadebate.un.org/67/afghanistan 

==See also==

*Badaber Uprising
*Qadria Yazdanparast
*Mullah Dadullah Front

==References==

==External links==
*Burhanuddin Rabbani, President of the Islamic State of Afghanistan webcast at the United Nations Millennium Summit, 8 September 2000
*Biography at Afghan-web.com
*Afghanistan's Powerbrokers: Burhanuddin Rabbani at BBC News, with link to November 2001 profile
*
*Hundreds mourn Rabbani RFI English
*Who killed Burhanuddin Rabbani ... and why? RFI English
*Bibi Mahru Hill & Burhanuddin Rabbani's grave - Kabul

|-

|-



[[Boeing 747]]

The Boeing 747 is a wide-body commercial airliner and cargo transport aircraft, often referred to by its original nickname, Jumbo Jet, or Queen of the Skies. It is among the world's most recognizable aircraft and was the first wide-body produced. Manufactured by Boeing's Commercial Airplane unit in the United States, the original version of the 747 was two and a half times larger in capacity than the Boeing 707, Branson, Richard. "Pilot of the Jet Age." Time, December 7, 1998. Retrieved: December 13, 2007. one of the common large commercial aircraft of the 1960s. First flown commercially in 1970, the 747 held the passenger capacity record for 37 years. "A380 superjumbo lands in Sydney." BBC, October 25, 2007. Retrieved: August 3, 2010. Quote: "The superjumbo's advent ends a reign of nearly four decades by the Boeing 747 as the world's biggest airliner." 

The four-engine 747 uses a double deck configuration for part of its length. It is available in passenger, freighter and other versions. Boeing designed the 747's hump-like upper deck to serve as a first class lounge or (as is the general rule today) extra seating, and to allow the aircraft to be easily converted to a cargo carrier by removing seats and installing a front cargo door. Boeing did so because the company expected supersonic airliners (development of which was announced in the early 1960s) to render the 747 and other subsonic airliners obsolete, while the demand for subsonic cargo aircraft would be robust well into the future. Orlebar 2002, p. 50. The 747 was expected to become obsolete after 400 were sold, Haenggi 2003, pp. 1415. but it exceeded critics' expectations with production passing the 1,000 mark in 1993. Sutter 2006, p. 259. By April 2014, 1,487 aircraft had been built, with 51 of the 747-8 variants remaining on order. "747 Model Orders and Deliveries data." The Boeing Company, April 2014. Retrieved: May 26, 2014. 

The 747-400, the most common passenger version in service, is among the fastest airliners in service with a high-subsonic cruise speed of Mach 0.850.855 (up to 570 mph). It has an intercontinental range of 7,260 nautical miles (8,350 mi or 13,450 km). "Technical Characteristics  Boeing 747-400", The Boeing Company. Retrieved: April 29, 2006. The 747-400 passenger version can accommodate 416 passengers in a typical three-class layout, 524 passengers in a typical two-class layout, or 660 passengers in a high density one-class configuration. The newest version of the aircraft, the 747-8, is in production and received certification in 2011. Deliveries of the 747-8F freighter version to launch customer Cargolux began in October 2011; deliveries of the 747-8I passenger version to Lufthansa began in May 2012. The 747 is to be replaced by the Boeing Y3 (part of the Boeing Yellowstone Project) in the future.

==Development==

===Background===
In 1963, the United States Air Force started a series of study projects on a very large strategic transport aircraft. Although the C-141 Starlifter was being introduced, they believed that a much larger and more capable aircraft was needed, especially the capability to carry outsized cargo that would not fit in any existing aircraft. These studies led to initial requirements for the CX-Heavy Logistics System (CX-HLS) in March 1964 for an aircraft with a load capacity of 180000 lb and a speed of Mach 0.75 (500 mph), and an unrefueled range of 5000 nmi with a payload of 115000 lb. The payload bay had to be 17 ft wide by 13.5 ft high and 100 ft long with access through doors at the front and rear. Norton 2003, pp. 512. 

Featuring only four engines, the design also required new engine designs with greatly increased power and better fuel economy. On May 18, 1964, airframe proposals arrived from Boeing, Douglas, General Dynamics, Lockheed and Martin Marietta; while engine proposals were submitted by General Electric, Curtiss-Wright, and Pratt & Whitney. After a downselect, Boeing, Douglas and Lockheed were given additional study contracts for the airframe, along with General Electric and Pratt & Whitney for the engines. 

All three of the airframe proposals shared a number of features. As the CX-HLS needed to be able to be loaded from the front, a door had to be included where the cockpit usually was. All of the companies solved this problem by moving the cockpit above the cargo area; Douglas had a small "pod" just forward and above the wing, Lockheed used a long "spine" running the length of the aircraft with the wing spar passing through it, while Boeing blended the two, with a longer pod that ran from just behind the nose to just behind the wing. "Lockheed C-5 Galaxy, Partners in Freedom." NASA, 2000, see images in "Langley Contributions to the C-5". Retrieved: December 17, 2007. In 1965 Lockheed's aircraft design and General Electric's engine design were selected for the new C-5 Galaxy transport, which was the largest military aircraft in the world at the time. The nose door and raised cockpit concepts would be carried over to the design of the 747. Jenkins 2000, pp. 1213. 

===Airliner proposal===
The 747 was conceived while air travel was increasing in the 1960s. Norris and Wagner 1997, p. 13. The era of commercial jet transportation, led by the enormous popularity of the Boeing 707 and Douglas DC-8, had revolutionized long-distance travel. "Boeing Multimedia Image Gallery 707". The Boeing Company. Retrieved: December 8, 2007. Even before it lost the CX-HLS contract, Boeing was pressed by Juan Trippe, president of Pan American World Airways (Pan Am), one of their most important airline customers, to build a passenger aircraft more than twice the size of the 707. During this time, airport congestion, worsened by increasing numbers of passengers carried on relatively small aircraft, became a problem that Trippe thought could be addressed by a large new aircraft. "Innovators: Juan Trippe." PBS. Retrieved: December 17, 2007. 

In 1965, Joe Sutter was transferred from Boeing's 737 development team to manage the design studies for a new airliner, already assigned the model number 747. Sutter 2006, pp. 8084. Sutter initiated a design study with Pan Am and other airlines, to better understand their requirements. At the time, it was widely thought that the 747 would eventually be superseded by supersonic transport aircraft. "Air travel, a supersonic future?." BBC News, July 17, 2001. Retrieved: December 9, 2007. Boeing responded by designing the 747 so that it could be adapted easily to carry freight and remain in production even if sales of the passenger version declined. In the freighter role, the clear need was to support the containerized shipping methodologies that were being widely introduced at about the same time. Standard containers are 8 ft square at the front (slightly higher due to attachment points) and available in 20 and lengths. This meant that it would be possible to support a 2-wide 2-high stack of containers two or three ranks deep with a fuselage size similar to the earlier CX-HLS project.

alt= A view of an early-production 747 cockpit

In April 1966, Pan Am ordered 25 747-100 aircraft for US$525 million. During the ceremonial 747 contract-signing banquet in Seattle on Boeing's 50th Anniversary, Juan Trippe predicted that the 747 would be "... a great weapon for peace, competing with intercontinental missiles for mankind's destiny", according to Malcolm T. Stamper, who led the 747 program. "Great Planes-Boeing 747." Discovery Channel. Retrieved: October 28, 2007. As launch customer, Rumerman, Judy. "The Boeing 747." U.S. Centennial of Flight Commission, 2003. Retrieved: April 30, 2006. Noland, David. "Passenger Planes: Boeing 747." "Info please." (Pearson Education). Retrieved: April 30, 2006. and because of its early involvement before placing a formal order, Pan Am was able to influence the design and development of the 747 to an extent unmatched by a single airline before or since. Irving 1994, p. 359. 

===Design effort===
Ultimately, the high-winged CX-HLS Boeing design was not used for the 747, although technologies developed for their bid had an influence. "Lockheed C-5 Galaxy, Partners in Freedom." NASA, 2000. Retrieved: December 17, 2007. The original design included a full-length double-deck fuselage with eight-across seating and two aisles on the lower deck and seven-across seating and two aisles on the upper deck. Irving 1994, p. 282. However, concern over evacuation routes and limited cargo-carrying capability caused this idea to be scrapped in early 1966 in favor of a wider single deck design. The cockpit was, therefore, placed on a shortened upper deck so that a freight-loading door could be included in the nose cone; this design feature produced the 747's distinctive "bulge". In early models it was not clear what to do with the small space in the pod behind the cockpit, and this was initially specified as a "lounge" area with no permanent seating. Jenkins 2000, p. 17. 

alt=The Pratt & Whitney JT9D turbofan suspended under the wing pylon of the 747 prototype. It is stripped of its outer casing, revealing the engine's core at The Museum of Flight in Seattle, WA

One of the principal technologies that enabled an aircraft as large as the 747 to be conceived was the high-bypass turbofan engine. Mecham, M. "In review: 747, Creating the World's First Jumbo Jet and Other Adventures from a Life in Aviation." Aviation Week and Space Technology, Vol. 165, No. 9, September 4, 2006, p. 53. The engine technology was thought to be capable of delivering double the power of the earlier turbojets while consuming a third less fuel. General Electric had pioneered the concept but was committed to developing the engine for the C-5 Galaxy and did not enter the commercial market until later. "GE Aviation: CF6." GE Aviation. Retrieved: December 9, 2007. Colson, Michael S. "Mechanical Engineering 100 Years of Flight." memagazine.org. Retrieved: December 9, 2007. Pratt & Whitney was also working on the same principle and, by late 1966, Boeing, Pan Am and Pratt & Whitney agreed to develop a new engine, designated the JT9D to power the 747. 

The project was designed with a new methodology called fault tree analysis, which allowed the effects of a failure of a single part to be studied to determine its impact on other systems. To address concerns about safety and flyability, the 747's design included structural redundancy, redundant hydraulic systems, quadruple main landing gear and dual control surfaces. Sutter 2006, pp. 121, 128131. Additionally, some of the most advanced high-lift devices used in the industry were included in the new design, to allow it to operate from existing airports. These included leading edge flaps running almost the entire length of the wing, as well as complex three-part slotted flaps along the rear. Guy and Wagner 1997, pp. 2526. The wing's complex three-part flaps increase wing area by 21 percent and lift by 90 percent when fully deployed compared to their non-deployed configuration. Jenkins 2000, p. 19. 

Boeing agreed to deliver the first 747 to Pan Am by the end of 1969. The delivery date left 28 months to design the aircraft, which was two-thirds of the normal time. Sutter 2006, pp. 9697. The schedule was so fast paced that the people who worked on it were given the nickname "The Incredibles". Guy and Wagner 1997, p. 19. Developing the aircraft was such a technical and financial challenge that management was said to have "bet the company" when it started the project. 

===Production plant===
alt=Airplane assembly hall, featuring heavy machinery. Large cylindrical airplane sections and wings are readied for mating with other major components. Above are the cranes which ferry heavy and outsize parts of the 747.

As Boeing did not have a plant large enough to assemble the giant airliner, they chose to build a new plant. The company considered locations in about 50 cities, Pascall, Glenn R. "Everett and Renton react differently to Boeing." Puget Sound Business Journal, September 26, 2003. Retrieved: December 17, 2007. and eventually decided to build the new plant some 30 miles (48 km) north of Seattle on a site adjoining a military base at Paine Field near Everett, Washington. "Major Production Facilities  Everett, Washington." The Boeing Company. Retrieved: April 28, 2007. It bought the 780 acre site in June 1966. 

Developing the 747 had been a major challenge, and building its assembly plant was also a huge undertaking. Boeing president William M. Allen asked Malcolm T. Stamper, then head of the company's turbine division, to oversee construction of the Everett factory and to start production of the 747. Boyer, Tom. "Boeing legend Malcolm Stamper dies." Seattle Times, June 17, 2005. Retrieved: December 17, 2007. To level the site, more than 4 e6cuyd of earth had to be moved. Irving 1994, p. 310. Time was so short that the 747's full-scale mock-up was built before the factory roof above it was finished. Irving 1994, p. 365. The plant is the largest building by volume ever built, and has been substantially expanded several times to permit construction of other models of Boeing wide-body commercial jets. 

===Development and testing===
Before the first 747 was fully assembled, testing began on many components and systems. One important test involved the evacuation of 560 volunteers from a cabin mock-up via the aircraft's emergency chutes. The first full-scale evacuation took two and a half minutes instead of the maximum of 90 seconds mandated by the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA), and several volunteers were injured. Subsequent test evacuations achieved the 90-second goal but caused more injuries. Most problematic was evacuation from the aircraft's upper deck; instead of using a conventional slide, volunteer passengers escaped by using a harness attached to a reel. Irving 1994, p. 383. Tests also involved taxiing such a large aircraft. Boeing built an unusual training device known as "Waddell's Wagon" (named for a 747 test pilot, Jack Waddell) that consisted of a mock-up cockpit mounted on the roof of a truck. While the first 747s were still being built, the device allowed pilots to practice taxi maneuvers from a high upper-deck position. "History  "747 Commercial Transport." The Boeing Company. Retrieved: April 29, 2006. 

alt= A side view of the nose of 747 prototype, which is painted white, with a red wide cheatline, and a metallic underside

On September 30, 1968, the first 747 was rolled out of the Everett assembly building before the world's press and representatives of the 26 airlines that had ordered the airliner. "All but off the Ground." TIME, October 4, 1968. Retrieved: December 17, 2007. Over the following months, preparations were made for the first flight, which took place on February 9, 1969, with test pilots Jack Waddell and Brien Wygle at the controls "The Giant Takes Off." TIME. Retrieved: December 13, 2007. "Boeing 747, the "Queen of the Skies," and "Celebrates 35th Anniversary." The Boeing Company, February 9, 2004. Retrieved: December 17, 2007. and Jess Wallick at the flight engineer's station. Despite a minor problem with one of the flaps, the flight confirmed that the 747 handled extremely well. The 747 was found to be largely immune to "Dutch roll", a phenomenon that had been a major hazard to the early swept-wing jets. Irving 1994, pp. 417418. 

During later stages of the flight test program, flutter testing showed that the wings suffered oscillation under certain conditions. This difficulty was partly solved by reducing the stiffness of some wing components. However, a particularly severe high-speed flutter problem was solved only by inserting depleted uranium counterweights as ballast in the outboard engine nacelles of the early 747s. Irving 1994, p. 428. This measure caused anxiety when these aircraft crashed, as did China Airlines Flight 358 at Wanli in 1991 and El Al Flight 1862 at Amsterdam in 1992 which had 282 kg of uranium in the tailplane. Uijt de Haag, P.A. et al. "Evaluating the risk from depleted uranium after the Boeing 747-258F crash in Amsterdam, 1992." Journal of Hazardous Materials, Volume 76, issue 1. (August 28, 2000), pp. 3958." Retrieved: May 16, 2007. van der Keur, Henk. "Uranium Pollution from the Amsterdam 1992 Plane Crash." Laka Foundation, May 1999. Retrieved: May 16, 2007. 

alt= A view of the 747's four main landing gear, each with four wheels 

The flight test program was hampered by problems with the 747's JT9D engines. Difficulties included engine stalls caused by rapid movements of the throttles and distortion of the turbine casings after a short period of service. Irving 1994, pp. 441446. The problems delayed 747 deliveries for several months and stranded up to 20 aircraft at the Everett plant while they awaited engine installation. "The Trouble with Jumbo." Time, September 26, 1969. The program was further delayed when one of the five test aircraft suffered serious damage during a landing attempt at Renton Municipal Airport, site of the company's Renton factory. On December 13, 1969 the test aircraft was being taken to have its test equipment removed and a cabin installed when pilot Ralph C. Cokely undershot the airport's short runway. The 747's right, outer landing gear was torn off and two engine nacelles were damaged. Irving 1994, p. 436. Aircraft Incident Report 5-0046 National Transportation Safety Board, August 20, 1970. Retrieved September 26, 2011. However, these difficulties did not prevent Boeing from taking one of the test aircraft to the 28th Paris Air Show in mid-1969, where it was displayed to the general public for the first time. "The Paris Air Show in facts and figures." Reuters, June 14, 2007. Retrieved: June 3, 2011. The 747 achieved its FAA airworthiness certificate in December 1969, making it ready for introduction into service. "Boeing 747-400." Jane's All the World's Aircraft, October 31, 2000. Retrieved: July 15, 2011. 

alt= The First Lady Pat Nixon sitting in the cockpit of the first commercial 747 during the christening ceremony in 1970 

The huge cost of developing the 747 and building the Everett factory meant that Boeing had to borrow heavily from a banking syndicate. During the final months before delivery of the first aircraft, the company had to repeatedly request additional funding to complete the project. Had this been refused, Boeing's survival would have been threatened. Irving 1994, pp. 437438. The company's debt exceeded $2 billion, with the $1.2 billion owed to the banks setting a record for all companies. Allen later said, "It was really too large a project for us." Ultimately, the gamble succeeded, and Boeing held a monopoly in very large passenger aircraft production for many years. "Jumbo challenge" Flightglobal.com, November 6, 1997. Retrieved: July 15, 2011. 

===Entry into service===
On January 15, 1970, First Lady of the United States Pat Nixon christened Pan Am's first 747, Clipper Victor, at Dulles International Airport (later renamed Washington Dulles International Airport) in the presence of Pan Am chairman Najeeb Halaby. Instead of champagne, red, white, and blue water was sprayed on the aircraft. The 747 entered service on January 22, 1970, on Pan Am's New YorkLondon route; Norris 1997, p. 48. the flight had been planned for the evening of January 21, but engine overheating made the original aircraft unusable. Finding a substitute delayed the flight by more than six hours to the following day. "Jumbo and the Gremlins." TIME, February 2, 1970. Retrieved: December 20, 2007. 

alt= A helical staircase on 747-100s and 200s that leads to the upper deck

The 747 enjoyed a fairly smooth introduction into service, overcoming concerns that some airports would not be able to accommodate an aircraft that large. "Breaking the Ground Barrier." TIME, September 8, 1967. Retrieved: December 19, 2007. Although technical problems occurred, they were relatively minor and quickly solved. "Jumbo Beats the Gremlins." TIME, July 13, 1970. Retrieved: December 20, 2007. After the aircraft's introduction with Pan Am, other airlines that had bought the 747 to stay competitive began to put their own 747s into service. "Ready or Not, Here Comes Jumbo." TIME, January 19, 1970. Retrieved: December 19, 2007. Boeing estimated that half of the early 747 sales were to airlines desiring the aircraft's long range rather than its payload capacity. Smith, Bruce A. "Boeing Shuns Very Large Jets While Aiming for Longer Range." Aviation Week and Space Technology, January 1, 2001, pp. 2829. 747X vs A380 "How to Reduce Congestion (PDF)." Department of Aerospace and Ocean Engineering, Virginia Tech. Retrieved: December 10, 2007. While the 747 had the lowest potential operating cost per seat, this could only be achieved when the aircraft was fully loaded; costs per seat increased rapidly as occupancy declined. A moderately loaded 747, one with only 70 percent of its seats occupied, used more than 95 percent of the fuel needed by a fully occupied 747. "Airline reporting on fuel consumption." Miljominsteriet (Danish Environmental Protection Agency). Retrieved: December 13, 2007. 

The recession of 1969-1970 greatly affected Boeing. For the year and a half after September 1970 it only sold two 747s in the world, and did not sell any to an American carrier for almost three years. When economic problems in the United States and other countries after the 1973 oil crisis led to reduced passenger traffic, several airlines found they did not have enough passengers to fly the 747 economically, and they replaced them with the smaller and recently introduced McDonnell Douglas DC-10 and Lockheed L-1011 TriStar trijet wide bodies "Planes for Rough Weather." TIME, August 3, 1970. Retrieved: December 20, 2007. (and later the 767 and A300 twinjets). Having tried replacing coach seats on its 747s with piano bars in an attempt to attract more customers, American Airlines eventually relegated its 747s to cargo service and in 1983 exchanged them with Pan Am for smaller aircraft; "American Airlines History." American Airlines. Retrieved: June 3, 2011. Delta Air Lines also removed its 747s from service after several years. Davies 1990, p. 96. Delta would later merge with Northwest Airlines, which operates 747s. "Aircraft Fleet." Delta Air Lines. Retrieved: July 31, 2011. 

alt= A forward-looking view in the stretched upper deck cabin of later 747s

International flights that bypassed traditional hub airports and landed at smaller cities became more common throughout the 1980s, and this eroded the 747's original market. "Turning Today's Challenges into Opportunities for Tomorrow." The Boeing Company. Retrieved: December 10, 2007. However, many international carriers continued to use the 747 on Pacific routes. Aboulafia, Richard. "Commercial Transport Market Still in Rough Shape." Aviation Week and Space Technology, March 1, 2004. Retrieved: December 10, 2007. In Japan, 747s on domestic routes are configured to carry close to the maximum passenger capacity. Wallace, James. "A380 buyer keeps mum about possible luxuries aboard cruise ship of the skies." Seattle Post-Intelligencer, January 24, 2005. Retrieved: June 3, 2011. 

===Improved 747 versions===
After the initial 747-100 model, Boeing developed the 100B, a higher maximum takeoff weight (MTOW) variant, and the 100SR (Short Range), with higher passenger capacity. "Boeing 747 Classics." The Boeing Company. Retrieved: December 15, 2007. Increased maximum takeoff weight allows aircraft to carry more fuel and have longer range. "Solutions Center." The Boeing Company. Retrieved: December 13, 2007. The 200 model followed in 1971, featuring more powerful engines and a higher MTOW. Passenger, freighter and combination passenger-freighter versions of the 200 were produced. The shortened 747SP (special performance) with a longer range was also developed, and entered service in 1976. "Boeing 747SP." Airliners.net. Retrieved: November 23, 2007. 

The 747 line was further developed with the launch of the 747-300 in 1980. The 300 series resulted from Boeing studies to increase the seating capacity of the 747, during which modifications such as fuselage plugs and extending the upper deck over the entire length of the fuselage were rejected. The first 747-300, completed in 1983, included a stretched upper deck, increased cruise speed, and increased seating capacity. The -300 variant was previously designated 747SUD for stretched upper deck, then 747-200 SUD, "Aircraft Owner's and Operator's Guide: 747-200/300 (PDF)."Aircraft Commerce. Retrieved: July 15, 2011. followed by 747EUD, before the 747-300 designation was used. "Boeing 747-300." Airliners.net. Retrieved: June 3, 2011. Passenger, short range and combination freighter-passenger versions of the 300 series were produced. 

alt= An Air New Zealand 747-400 with its landing gear down and flaps down. The aircraft is mostly white and blue aircraft and in-flight against a blue sky. On each of the two wings are two engines.

In 1985, development of the longer range 747-400 began. Lawrence and Thornton 2005, p. 54. The variant had a new glass cockpit, which allowed for a cockpit crew of two instead of three, Salpukas, Agis. "J.A.L. Orders 15 More of Boeing's 747-400's." Time, July 1, 1988. Retrieved: December 17, 2007. new engines, lighter construction materials, and a redesigned interior. Development cost soared, and production delays occurred as new technologies were incorporated at the request of airlines. Insufficient workforce experience and reliance on overtime contributed to early production problems on the 747-400. The 400 entered service in 1989. Norris 1997, p. 88. 

In 1991, a record-breaking 1,087 passengers were airlifted aboard a 747 to Israel as part of Operation Solomon. "El Al History page." El Al Airlines. Retrieved: October 18, 2007. The 747 remained the heaviest commercial aircraft in regular service until the debut of the Antonov An-124 Ruslan in 1982; variants of the 747-400 would surpass the An-124's weight in 2000. The Antonov An-225 Mriya cargo transport, which debuted in 1988, remains the world's largest aircraft by several measures (including the most accepted measures of maximum takeoff weight and length); one aircraft has been completed and is in service . The Hughes H-4 Hercules is the largest aircraft by wingspan, but it only completed a single flight. "Ask Us  Largest Plane in the World." Aerospaceweb.org, November 11, 2005. Retrieved: April 29, 2006. 

===Further developments===
alt=Interior view. Seats are separated by two aisles, in 3-4-3 configuration. A TV is positioned towards the front of aircraft.

Since the arrival of the 747-400, several stretching schemes for the 747 have been proposed. Boeing announced the larger 747-500X and -600X preliminary designs in 1996. "Boeing Outlines the "Value" of Its 747 Plans." The Boeing Company, September 2, 1996. Retrieved: June 7, 2011. The new variants would have cost more than US$5 billion to develop, and interest was not sufficient to launch the program. "BA warms to A3XX plan." Flight International, March 19, 1997. Retrieved: December 17, 2007. In 2000, Boeing offered the more modest 747X and 747X stretch derivatives as alternatives to the Airbus A3XX. However, the 747X family was unable to attract enough interest to enter production. A year later, Boeing switched from the 747X studies to pursue the Sonic Cruiser, "Boeing Shelves 747X to Focus on Faster Jet." People's Daily, March 30, 2001. Retrieved: December 17, 2007. and after the Sonic Cruiser program was put on hold, the 787 Dreamliner. Taylor, Alex III. "Boeing's Amazing Sonic Cruiser..." Fortune, December 9, 2002. Retrieved: December 17, 2007. Some of the ideas developed for the 747X were used on the 747-400ER, a longer range variant of the 747-400. "Boeing Launches New, Longer-Range 747-400." The Boeing Company, November 28, 2000. Retrieved: December 17, 2007. 

After several variants were proposed but later abandoned, some industry observers became skeptical of new aircraft proposals from Boeing. Holmes, Stanley. "Boeing's Reborn 747." Business Week, November 16, 2005. However, in early 2004, Boeing announced tentative plans for the 747 Advanced that were eventually adopted. Similar in nature to the 747-X, the stretched 747 Advanced used technology from the 787 to modernize the design and its systems. The 747 remained the largest passenger airliner in service until the Airbus A380 began airline service in 2007. "A380 superjumbo lands in Sydney." BBC News. Retrieved: December 10, 2007. 

On November 14, 2005, Boeing announced it was launching the 747 Advanced as the Boeing 747-8. "Boeing Launches New 747-8 Family." The Boeing Company, November 14, 2005. Retrieved: December 17, 2007. The last 747-400s were completed in 2009. "Downhill for the jumbo." The Sydney Morning Herald, January 9, 2009. Retrieved: February 9, 2009. , most orders of the 747-8 have been for the freighter variant. On February 8, 2010, the 747-8 Freighter made its maiden flight. Ostrower, Jon. "Boeing's 747-8F lifts off on maiden flight". Flightglobal.com, February 8, 2010. The first scheduled delivery of the 747-8 went to Cargolux in 2011. "Boeing Sets 747-8 Freighter Delivery Schedule for Mid-Year 2011". The Boeing Company, September 30, 2010. Trimble, Stephen. "Boeing pushes 747-8F delivery back to mid-2011/" Air Transport Intelligence News via flightglobal.com, September 30, 2010. Retrieved: February 22, 2011. Eventually, the 747 may be replaced in Boeing's lineup by a new design named "Y3". "Airbus A350 XWB puts pressure on Boeing 777." Flight International. November 27, 2007. 

==Design==
alt=Cutaway rendering of a 747, showing internal seating and landing gear.

The Boeing 747 is a large, wide-body (two-aisle) airliner with four wing-mounted engines. The wings have a high sweep angle of 37.5 degrees for a fast, efficient cruise Sutter 2006, p. 93. of Mach 0.84 to 0.88, depending on the variant. The sweep also reduces the wingspan, allowing the 747 to use existing hangars. Bowers 1989, p. 508. Seating capacity is more than 366 with a 343 seat arrangement (a cross section of 3 seats, an aisle, 4 seats, another aisle, and 3 seats) in economy class and a 232 arrangement in first class on the main deck. The upper deck has a 33 seat arrangement in economy class and a 22 arrangement in first class. "Boeing 747-400 Airport Planning report, section 2.0, Boeing, December 2002 (PDF)." The Boeing Company. Retrieved: December 13, 2007. 

alt=Cargolux 747-400F with the nose loading door open

Raised above the main deck, the cockpit creates a hump. The raised cockpit allows front loading of cargo on freight variants. The upper deck behind the cockpit provides space for a lounge or extra seating. The "stretched upper deck" became available as an option on the 747-100B variant and later as standard on the 747-300. The 747 cockpit roof section also has an escape hatch from which crew can exit in the event of an emergency if they cannot exit through the cabin.

The 747's maximum takeoff weight ranges from 735,000 pounds (333,400 kg) for the 100 to 970,000 lb (439,985 kg) for the 8. Its range has increased from 5,300 nautical miles (6,100 mi, 9,800 km) on the 100 to 8,000 nmi (9,200 mi, 14,815 km) on the 8I. "Boeing 747-100/200/300 Technical Specifications." The Boeing Company. Retrieved: December 13, 2007. "Boeing 747-8 Technical Specifications." The Boeing Company. Retrieved: December 13, 2007. 

The 747 has multiple structural redundancy including four redundant hydraulic systems and four main landing gears with four wheels each, which provide a good spread of support on the ground and safety in case of tire blow-outs. The redundant main gear allows for landing on two opposing landing gears if the others do not function properly. Sutter 2006, pp. 128131. In addition, the 747 has split control surfaces and was designed with sophisticated triple-slotted flaps that minimize landing speeds and allow the 747 to use standard-length runways. Sutter 2006, pp. 121122. For transportation of spare engines, 747s can accommodate a non-functioning fifth-pod engine under the port wing of the aircraft between the inner functioning engine and the fuselage. "Special Report:Air India Flight 182." airdisaster.com. Retrieved: December 13, 2007. "Her Majesty the Queen Against Ripudaman Singh Malik and Ajaib Singh Bagri." Supreme Court of British Columbia. Retrieved: December 13, 2007. 

==Variants==
The 747-100 was the original variant launched in 1966. The 747-200 soon followed, with its launch in 1968. The 747-300 was launched in 1980 and was followed by the 747-400 in 1985. Ultimately, the 747-8 was announced in 2005. Several versions of each variant have been produced, and many of the early variants were in production simultaneously. The International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO) classifies variants using a shortened code formed by combining the model number and the variant designator (e.g. "B741" for all 100 models). "ICAO Document 8643." International Civil Aviation Organization. Retrieved: April 13, 2013. 

===747-100===
alt=Side view of aircraft on taxiway. Grassy surfaces in foreground; hills and sky in background.

The first 747-100s were built with six upper deck windows (three per side) to accommodate upstairs lounge areas. Later, as airlines began to use the upper deck for premium passenger seating instead of lounge space, Boeing offered a ten-window upper deck as an option. Some early 100s were retrofitted with the new configuration. "Boeing 747." Aircraft Spotting. Retrieved: December 7, 2007. The 100 was equipped with Pratt & Whitney JT9D-3A engines. No freighter version of this model was developed, but many 747-100s have been converted into freighters. "FAA Regulatory and Guidance Library (PDF)." FAA. Retrieved: December 12, 2007. See reference to Supplementary Type Certificates for freighter conversion. A total of 167 747-100s were built.

====747SR====
Responding to requests from Japanese airlines for a high-capacity aircraft to serve domestic routes between major cities, Boeing developed the 747SR as a short range variant of the 747-100 with lower fuel capacity and greater payload capability. With increased economy class seating, up to 498 passengers could be carried in early versions and more than 550 in later models. The 747SR had an economic design life objective of 52,000 flights during 20 years of airline operation, compared to 24,600 flights in 20 years for the standard 747. Jenkins 2000, p. 40. The initial 747SR model, the 100SR, had a strengthened body structure and landing gear to accommodate the added stress accumulated from a greater number of takeoffs and landings. Kane 2004, p. 534. Extra structural support was built into the wings, fuselage, and the landing gear along with a 20 percent reduction in fuel capacity. Itabashi et al. 1995, p. 155. 

alt=Side view of aircraft on airport tarmac.

The initial order for the 100SR, four aircraft for Japan Air Lines (JAL, later Japan Airlines), was announced on October 30, 1972; rollout occurred on August 3, 1973, and the first flight took place on August 31, 1973. The type was certified by the FAA on September 26, 1973, with the first delivery on the same day. The 100SR entered service with JAL, the type's sole customer, on October 7, 1973, and typically operated Japanese domestic flights. "747 Milestones." The Boeing Company. Retrieved: December 17, 2007. Seven 100SRs were built from 1973 and 1975, each with a 520000 lb MTOW and Pratt & Whitney JT9D-7A engines derated to 43000 lbf of thrust. Bowers 1989, pp. 516517. 

Following the 100SR, Boeing produced the 100BSR, a 747SR variant with increased takeoff weight capability. Debuting in 1978, the 100BSR also incorporated structural modifications for a high cycle-to-flying hour ratio; a related standard 100B model debuted in 1979. The 100BSR first flew on November 3, 1978, with first delivery to All Nippon Airways (ANA) on December 21, 1978. A total of 20 100BSRs were produced for ANA and JAL. Airclaims Jet Programs 1995 The 100BSR had a 600,000 lb MTOW and was powered by the same JT9D-7A engines used on the 100SR. ANA operated the type on domestic Japanese routes with 455 or 456 seats until retiring its last aircraft on March 10, 2006. "Truth of NANJING must be known."Japan Corporate News Network. Retrieved: December 15, 2007. 

In 1986, two 100BSR SUD models, featuring the stretched upper deck (SUD) of the 300, were produced for JAL. "Boeing 747-146B/SR/SUD aircraft", Airliners.net. The type's maiden flight occurred on February 26, 1986, with FAA certification and first delivery on March 24, 1986. "JAL Aircraft Collection." Japan Airlines. Retrieved: December 15, 2007. JAL operated the 100BSR SUD with 563 seats on domestic routes until their retirement in the third quarter of 2006. While only two 100BSR SUDs were produced, in theory, standard 100Bs can be modified to the SUD certification. Overall, 29 747SRs were built, consists of seven 100SRs, twenty 100BSRs, and two 100BSR SUDs.

alt=Side view of quadjet on final approach.

====747-100B====
The 747-100B model was developed from the 100SR, using its stronger airframe and landing gear design. The type had an increased fuel capacity of 48070 USgal, allowing for a 5000 nmi range with a typical 452-passenger payload, and an increased MTOW of 750000 lb was offered. The first 100B order, one aircraft for Iran Air, was announced on June 1, 1978. This aircraft first flew on June 20, 1979, received FAA certification on August 1, 1979, and was delivered the next day. Airclaims Jet program 1995 Nine 100Bs were built, one for Iran Air and eight for Saudi Arabian Airlines. "Saudia Orders 4 Boeing 747's." The New York Times. Retrieved: December 12, 2007. Norris and Wagner 1997, pp. 5253. Unlike the original 100, the 100B was offered with Pratt & Whitney JT9D-7A, General Electric CF6-50, or Rolls-Royce RB211-524 engines. However, only RB211-524 (Saudia) and JT9D-7A (Iran Air) engines were ordered. Airclaims Jet Programs 1995, p. 111. 

===747SP===

alt=Ventral view of quadjet climbing in the sky.

The development of the 747SP stemmed from a joint request between Pan American World Airways and Iran Air, who were looking for a high-capacity airliner with enough range to cover Pan Am's New YorkMiddle Eastern routes and Iran Air's planned TehranNew York route. The TehranNew York route, when launched, was the longest non-stop commercial flight in the world. The 747SP is 48 ft shorter than the 747-100. Fuselage sections were eliminated fore and aft of the wing, and the center section of the fuselage was redesigned to fit mating fuselage sections. The SP's flaps used a simplified single-slotted configuration. Norris and Wagner 1997, p. 71. "The Story of the Baby 747." 747sp.com. Retrieved: December 15, 2007. The 747SP, compared to earlier variants, had a tapering of the aft upper fuselage into the empennage, a double-hinged rudder, and longer vertical and horizontal stabilizers. Kane 2003, p. 546. Power was provided by Pratt & Whitney JT9D-7(A/F/J/FW) or Rolls-Royce RB211-524 engines. 

The 747SP was granted a supplemental certificate on February 4, 1976 and entered service with launch customer Pan Am and Iran Air that same year. The aircraft was chosen by airlines wishing to serve major airports with short runways. "Red, White And Q Farewell For Qantas Aircraft." Qantas, March 4, 2003. Retrieved: June 4, 2008. A total of 45 747SPs were built, with the 44th 747SP delivered on August 30, 1982. In 1987, Boeing re-opened the 747SP production line after five years to build one last 747SP for an order by the United Arab Emirates government. In addition to airline use, one 747SP was modified for NASA Dryden Flight Research Center's SOFIA experiment. "The SOFIA Boeing 747SP." NASA SOFIA Science Center. Retrieved: December 31, 2009. 

===747-200===
alt=Side view of quad-jet aircraft in flight. 

While the 747-100 powered by Pratt & Whitney JT9D-3A engines offered enough payload and range for US domestic operations, it was marginal for long international route sectors. The demand for longer range aircraft with increased payload quickly led to the improved 200, which featured more powerful engines, increased MTOW, and greater range than the 100. A few early 200s retained the three-window configuration of the 100 on the upper deck, but most were built with a ten-window configuration on each side. "747 windows." Plexoft. Retrieved: December 15, 2007. The 747-200 was produced in passenger (200B), freighter (200F), convertible (200C), and combi (200M) versions. Norris and Wagner 1997, pp. 6061. 

The 747-200B was the basic passenger version, with increased fuel capacity and more powerful engines; it entered service in February 1971. In its first three years of production, the 200 was equipped with Pratt & Whitney JT9D-7 engines (initially the only engine available). Range with a full passenger load started at over 5000 nmi and increased to 6000 nmi with later engines. Most 200Bs had an internally stretched upper deck, allowing for up to 16 passenger seats. Jenkins 2000, p. 43. The freighter model, the 747-200F, could be fitted with or without a side cargo door, and had a capacity of 105 tons (95.3 tonnes) and an MTOW of up to 833,000 lb (378,000 kg). It entered service in 1972 with Lufthansa. "Boeing 747  About the 747 Family." The Boeing Company. Retrieved: December 6, 2007. The convertible version, the 747-200C, could be converted between a passenger and a freighter or used in mixed configurations, and featured removable seats and a nose cargo door. The 200C could also be fitted with an optional side cargo door on the main deck. "Boeing 747-200." CivilAviation.eu. Retrieved: December 15, 2007. 

alt=Side view of quadjet landing against a mountain backdrop.

The combi model, the 747-200M, could carry freight in the rear section of the main deck via a side cargo door. A removable partition on the main deck separated the cargo area at the rear from the passengers at the front. The 200M could carry up to 238 passengers in a three-class configuration with cargo carried on the main deck. The model was also known as the 747-200 Combi. As on the 100, a stretched upper deck (SUD) modification was later offered. A total of 10 converted 747-200s were operated by KLM. Union des Transports Ariens (UTA) also had two of these aircraft converted. "Air France F-BTDG Airfleets." Airfleets. Retrieved: December 6, 2007. "747-2B3BM(SUD) Aircraft Pictures." Airliners.net. Retrieved: December 6, 2007. 

After launching the 200 with Pratt & Whitney JT9D-7 engines, on August 1, 1972 Boeing announced that it had reached an agreement with General Electric to certify the 747 with CF6-50 series engines to increase the aircraft's market potential. Rolls-Royce followed 747 engine production with a launch order from British Airways for four aircraft. The option of RB211-524B engines was announced on June 17, 1975. The 200 was the first 747 to provide a choice of powerplant from the three major engine manufacturers. Jenkins 2000, pp. 46, 5053. 

A total of 393 of the 747-200 versions had been built when production ended in 1991. "747 background." The Boeing Company. Retrieved: December 13, 2007. Of these, 225 were 200s, 73 were 200F, 13 were 200C, 78 were 200M, and 4 were military. "747 Classics Technical Specifications." The Boeing Company. Retrieved: December 6, 2007. Many 747-200s remain in operation, although most large carriers have retired them from their fleets and sold them to smaller operators. Large carriers have sped up fleet retirement following the September 11 attacks and the subsequent drop in demand for air travel, scrapping some or turning others into freighters. "British Airways. (will accelerate the retirement of five 747-200s)". Air Transport World, October 10, 2001, p. 14. "Qantas (will retire its fleet of five Boeing 747-200 aircraft)." Taipei Times, November 16, 2001. Retrieved: June 4, 2008. 

===747-300===
alt= A Corsair 747-300 in white, blue and green livery during landing with its landing gear down, flying over a beach with people directly underneath.

The 747-300 features a 23 ft longer upper deck than the 200. The stretched upper deck has two emergency exit doors and is the most visible difference between the 300 and previous models. Before being made standard on the 747-300, the stretched upper deck was previously offered as a retrofit, and first appeared on two Japanese 747-100SR aircraft. "Boeing 747-300." airliners.net. The 300 introduced a new straight stairway to the upper deck, instead of a spiral staircase on earlier variants, which creates room above and below for more seats. Minor aerodynamic changes allowed the 300's cruise speed to reach Mach 0.85 compared with Mach 0.84 on the 200 and 100 models, while retaining the same takeoff weight. The 300 could be equipped with the same Pratt & Whitney and Rolls-Royce powerplants as on the 200, as well as updated General Electric CF6-80C2B1 engines. 

Swissair placed the first order for the 747-300 on June 11, 1980. "Seven Series." The Boeing Company. Retrieved: December 15, 2007. The variant revived the 747-300 designation, which had been previously used on a design study that did not reach production. The 747-300 first flew on October 5, 1982, and the type's first delivery went to Swissair on March 23, 1983. Besides the passenger model, two other versions (300M, 300SR) were produced. The 747-300M features cargo capacity on the rear portion of the main deck, similar to the 200M, but with the stretched upper deck it can carry more passengers. Jenkins 2000, p. 97. The 747-300SR, a short range, high-capacity domestic model, was produced for Japanese markets; Japan Airlines operated the type with more than 600 seats on the OkinawaTokyo route and elsewhere. No production freighter version of the 747-300 was built, but Boeing began modifications of used passenger 300 models into freighters in 2000. "Boeing Delivers First 747-300 Special Freighter To Atlas Air." The Boeing Company. Retrieved: December 17, 2007. 

A total of 81 aircraft of the 747-300 series were delivered, 56 for passenger use, 21 300M and 4 300SR versions. "Technical Specifications  747 Classics", The Boeing Company. Retrieved: July 11, 2008 In 1985, just two years after the 300 entered service, the type was superseded by the announcement of the more advanced 747-400. Lawrence and Thornton 2005 The last 747-300 was delivered in September 1990 to Sabena. "Seven series." The Boeing Company. Retrieved: December 17, 2007. While some 300 customers continued operating the type, several large carriers replaced their 747-300s with 747-400s. Air France, Air India, Pakistan International Airlines, and Qantas were some of the last major carriers to operate the 747-300. On December 29, 2008, Qantas flew its last scheduled 747-300 service, operating from Melbourne to Los Angeles via Auckland. "Qantas's final Boeing 747-300 heads for graveyard." The Age. Retrieved: January 21, 2009. 

===747-400===
alt=Underside planform view of an in-flight 747. Under each of the two wings are two engines.

The 747-400 is an improved model with increased range. It has wingtip extensions of 6 ft and winglets of 6 ft, which improve the type's fuel efficiency by four percent compared to previous 747 versions. "Assessment of Wingtip Modifications to Increase the Fuel Efficiency of Air Force Aircraft." National Academies Press, 2007, p. 33. The 747-400 introduced a new glass cockpit designed for a flight crew of two instead of three, with a reduction in the number of dials, gauges and knobs from 971 to 365 through the use of electronics. The type also features tail fuel tanks, revised engines, and a new interior. The longer range has been used by some airlines to bypass traditional fuel stops, such as Anchorage. "JAL 2007." Japan Airlines. Retrieved: December 14, 2007. Powerplants include the Pratt & Whitney PW4062, General Electric CF6-80C2, and Rolls-Royce RB211-524. 

The 400 was offered in passenger (400), freighter (400F), combi (400M), domestic (400D), extended range passenger (400ER), and extended range freighter (400ERF) versions. Passenger versions retain the same upper deck as the 300, while the freighter version does not have an extended upper deck. "Boeing 747-400 Freighter Family." The Boeing Company. Retrieved: December 17, 2007. The 747-400D was built for short range operations and does not include winglets, but can be retrofitted with them. "Japan Airlines To Receive 100th Boeing 747 Aircraft." Japan Airlines, November 19, 1998. Retrieved: December 17, 2007. Cruising speed is up to Mach 0.855 on different versions of the 747-400. "747-400 performance summary (PDF)." The Boeing Company, May 2010. Retrieved: December 21, 2010. 

alt=Side view of quadjet in flight.

The passenger version first entered service in February 1989 with launch customer Northwest Airlines on the Minneapolis to Phoenix route. The combi version entered service in September 1989 with KLM, while the freighter version entered service in November 1993 with Cargolux. The 747-400ERF entered service with Air France in October 2002, while the 747-400ER entered service with Qantas, "Boeing 747-400ER Family." The Boeing Company. Retrieved: October 16, 2007. its sole customer, in November 2002. In January 2004, Boeing and Cathay Pacific launched the Boeing 747-400 Special Freighter program, "Boeing and Cathay Pacific Airways Launch 747-400 Special Freighter." The Boeing Company. Retrieved: July 15, 2011. later referred to as the Boeing Converted Freighter (BCF), to modify passenger 747-400s for cargo use. The first 747-400BCF was redelivered in December 2005. "First 747-400 Boeing Converted Freighter Redelivered to Cathay Pacific." The Boeing Company, December 19, 2005. Retrieved: June 7, 2011. 

In March 2007, Boeing announced that it had no plans to produce further passenger versions of the 400. Wallace, James. "747-400 passenger is no more." Seattlepi.com, March 17, 2007. Retrieved June 7, 2011. However, orders for 36 400F and 400ERF freighters were already in place at the time of the announcement. The last passenger version of the 747-400 was delivered in April 2005 to China Airlines. Some of the last built 747-400s were delivered with Dreamliner livery along with the modern Signature interior from the Boeing 777. A total of 694 of the 747-400 series aircraft were delivered. At various times, the largest 747-400 operator has included Singapore Airlines, "Singapore Airlines Boeing 747-400 Fleet World's Largest." The Boeing Company, October 13, 1994. Retrieved: December 14, 2007. Japan Airlines, and British Airways with 57 as of June 2013. "British Airways set for fleet revamp." The Boeing Company, August 2005. Retrieved: December 14, 2007. 

====747 LCF Dreamlifter====
alt=Side view of quadjet lifting above grassy airport against ocean backdrop.

The 747-400 Dreamlifter "Final Boeing 747 Dreamlifter Enters Service." The Boeing Company. Retrieved: July 15, 2011. (originally called the 747 Large Cargo Freighter or LCF "Evergreen Aviation press releases." Evergreen Aviation, July 20, 2007. Retrieved: December 17, 2007. ) is a Boeing-designed modification of existing 747-400s to a larger configuration to ferry 787 Dreamliner sub-assemblies. Evergreen Aviation Technologies Corporation of Taiwan was contracted to complete modifications of 747-400s into Dreamlifters in Taoyuan. The aircraft flew for the first time on September 9, 2006 in a test flight. "Boeing 747 Large Cargo Freighter Completes First Flight." The Boeing Company, September 9, 2006. Modification of four aircraft was completed by February 2010. Mecham, Michael. "Boeing Puts Last Dreamlifter In Service". Aviation Week, February 16, 2010. The Dreamlifters have been placed into service transporting sub-assemblies for the 787 program to the Boeing plant in Everett, Washington, for final assembly. The aircraft is certified to carry only essential crew and not passengers. "Boeing 747 Dreamlifter Achieves FAA Certification." The Boeing Company, June 4, 2007. Retrieved: December 17, 2007. 

===747-8===

Boeing announced a new 747 variant, the 747-8, on November 14, 2005. Referred to as the 747 Advanced prior to its launch, the 747-8 uses the same engine and cockpit technology as the 787, hence the use of the "8". The variant is designed to be quieter, more economical, and more environmentally friendly. The 747-8's fuselage is lengthened from 232 to 251 feet (70.8 to 76.4 m), Steinke, Sebastian. "Boeing launches 747-8." Flug Revue, January 2006. Retrieved: July 15, 2011. marking the first stretch variant of the aircraft. Power is supplied by General Electric GEnx-2B67 engines. 

alt=Quarter view of quadjet on approach over clouds.

The 747-8 Freighter, or 747-8F, is derived from the 747-400ERF. The variant has 16 percent more payload capacity than its predecessor, allowing it to carry seven additional standard air cargo containers, with a maximum payload capacity of 154 tons (140 tonnes) of cargo. "Boeing 747-8 Freighter." Deagel. Retrieved: December 8, 2007. As on previous 747 freighters, the 747-8F features an overhead nose-door and a side-door on the main deck plus a side-door on the lower deck ("belly") to aid loading and unloading. The 747-8F made its maiden flight on February 8, 2010. "Boeing 747-8 Freighter Successfully Completes First Flight". The Boeing Company. Retrieved: July 15, 2011 "Pictures & Video: Boeing's 747-8F lifts off on maiden flight." Flight International, February 8, 2010. Retrieved: February 9, 2010. The variant received its amended type certificate jointly from the FAA and the European Aviation Safety Agency (EASA) on August 19, 2011. Ostrower, Jon. "747-8F and 787 delivery dates come into focus". Air Transport Intelligence news via Flightglobal.com, August 24, 2011. The 8F was first delivered to Cargolux on October 12, 2011. Ostrower, Jon. "Boeing delivers first 747-8F". Flightglobal.com, October 12, 2011. 

The passenger version, named 747-8 Intercontinental or 747-8I, is designed to carry up to 467 passengers in a 3-class configuration and fly more than 8000 nmi at Mach 0.855. As a derivative of the already common 747-400, the 747-8 has the economic benefit of similar training and interchangeable parts. Norris, G. "Boeing freezes the 747-8I design." Aviation Week, 2007. Retrieved: December 8, 2007. The type's first test flight occurred on March 20, 2011. "First 747-8I Takes to the Air" AINOnline, March 20, 2011. Retrieved: March 26, 2011. At its introduction, the 747-8 surpassed the Airbus A340-600 as the world's longest airliner. The first 8I was delivered in May 2012 to Lufthansa. Norris, Guy. "Boeing 747-8I Set For Lufthansa Evaluation" Aviation Week, December 6, 2011. Retrieved: March 26, 2011. The 747-8 has received 120 total orders, including 69 for the 8F and 51 for the 8I, as of the end of April 2014. 

===Government, military, and other variants===
alt=Presidential aircraft taxiing in front of silhouetted crowd.

* C-19  The U.S. Air Force gave this designation to the 747-100s used by some U.S. airlines and modified for use in the Civil Reserve Airlift Fleet. "Boeing C-19." Global Security. Retrieved: December 16, 2007. 
* VC-25  This aircraft is the U.S. Air Force very important person (VIP) version of the 747-200B. The U.S. Air Force operates two of them in VIP configuration as the VC-25A. Tail numbers 28000 and 29000 are popularly known as Air Force One, which is technically the air-traffic call sign for any United States Air Force aircraft carrying the U.S. President. Although based on the 747-200B design, they include several innovations introduced on the 747-400. Partially completed aircraft from Everett, Washington, were flown to Wichita, Kansas, for final outfitting.
* E-4B  Formerly known as the National Emergency Airborne Command Post (referred to colloquially as "Kneecap"), this aircraft is now referred to as the National Airborne Operations Center (NAOC).

alt=Wide-body airliner in flight with space shuttle mounted on upper fuselage.
* YAL-1  This is the experimental Airborne Laser, a component of the National Missile Defense plan.
* Shuttle Carrier Aircraft  Two 747s were modified to carry the Space Shuttle. One is a 747-100 (N905NA), and the other is a 747-100SR (N911NA). An SCA carried the Space Shuttle Enterprise in the late 1970s, and has since carried all Space Shuttle Orbiters.
* C-33  This aircraft was a proposed U.S. military version of the 747-400 intended to augment the C-17 fleet. The plan was canceled in favor of additional C-17 military transports.

alt=Parked VIP aircraft with red carpet and assembled entourage.
* KC-33A  A proposed 747 was also adapted as an aerial refueling tanker and was bid against the DC-10-30 during the 1970s Advanced Cargo Transport Aircraft (ACTA) program that produced the KC-10A Extender. Before the Khomeini-led revolution, Iran bought four 747-100 aircraft with air-refueling boom conversions to support its fleet of F-4 Phantoms. "KC-33A: Closing the Aerial Refuelling and Strategic Air Mobility Gaps (PDF)." Air Power Australia Analysis APA-2005-02, April 16, 2005. Retrieved: December 17, 2007. Hamilton, S. "Boeing advanced 747 as tanker (PDF)." Leeham Company, September 11, 2007. Retrieved: December 17, 2007. It is unknown whether these aircraft remain usable as tankers. Since then, other proposals have emerged for adaptation of later 747-400 aircraft for this role. 
* 747 CMCA  This "Cruise Missile Carrier Aircraft" variant was considered by the U.S. Air Force during the development of the B-1 Lancer strategic bomber. It would have been equipped with 50 to 100 AGM-86 ALCM cruise missiles on rotary launchers. This plan was abandoned in favor of more conventional strategic bombers. Jenkins, Dennis R. B-1 Lancer, The Most Complicated Warplane Ever Developed. New York: McGraw-Hill, 1999. ISBN 0-07-134694-5. 

alt=Silhouette diagram of 747 airborne aircraft carrier aircraft
* 747 AAC  Boeing also considered developing the 747 into an aerial aircraft carrier for up to 10 "microfighters". With a double-decker hangar and two launching bays, it was believed that the scheme might actually be cheaper than establishing a short-term land base. However nothing came of the scheme, or its complementary 747 AWACS version, which would have carried two of the "microfighters" for reconnaissance. "The Parasite Fighters, The Boeing 747 AAC". VectorSite, July 1, 2013. 
* Evergreen 747 Supertanker  A Boeing 747-200 modified as an aerial application platform for fire fighting using 20000 USgal of firefighting chemicals. "Supplementary Type Certificate ST01912LA Installation and removal of internal tanks, associated systems and support structure for the aerial dispersant of liquids". US Federal Aviation Administration, October 27, 2006. 
* Stratospheric Observatory for Infrared Astronomy (SOFIA) - A former Pan Am Boeing 747SP modified to carry a large infrared-sensitive telescope, in a joint venture of NASA and DLR. High altitudes are needed for infrared astronomy, so as to rise above infrared-absorbing water vapor in the atmosphere.
* A number of other governments also use the 747 as a VIP transport, including Bahrain, Brunei, India, Iran, Japan, Kuwait, Oman, Pakistan, Qatar, Saudi Arabia and United Arab Emirates. Several new Boeing 747-8s have been ordered by Boeing Business Jet for conversion to VIP transport for several unidentified customers. "Boeing nets 57 new orders, including big VIP planes." Seattle Times. Retrieved: December 14, 2007. 

===Undeveloped variants===
Boeing has studied a number of 747 variants that have not gone beyond the concept stage.

====747 trijet====
During the late 1960s and early 1970s, Boeing studied the development of a shorter 747 with three engines, to compete with the smaller L-1011 TriStar and DC-10. The 747 trijet would have had more payload, range, and passenger capacity than the L-1011 and DC-10. The center engine would have been fitted in the tail with an S-duct intake similar to the L-1011's. However, engineering studies showed that a total redesign of the 747 wing would be necessary. Maintaining the same 747 handling characteristics would be important to minimize pilot retraining. Boeing decided instead to pursue a shortened four-engine 747, resulting in the 747SP. Jenkins 2000, pp. 6971. 

====747 ASB====
Boeing announced the 747 ASB (Advanced Short Body) in 1986 as a response to the Airbus A340 and the McDonnell Douglas MD-11. This aircraft design would have combined the advanced technology used on the 747-400 with the foreshortened 747SP fuselage. The aircraft was to carry 295 passengers a range of 8000 nmi. However, airlines were not interested in the project and it was cancelled in 1988 in favor of the 777.

====747-500X, 600X, and 700X====
alt=Aircraft comparison diagram.

Boeing announced the 747-500X and 600X at the 1996 Farnborough Airshow. The proposed models would have combined the 747's fuselage with a new 251 ft (77 m) span wing derived from the 777. Other changes included adding more powerful engines and increasing the number of tires from two to four on the nose landing gear and from 16 to 20 on the main landing gear. Patterson, James W. "Impact of New Large Aircraft on Airport Design (PDF)." Federal Aviation Administration, March 1998. Retrieved: December 17, 2007. 

The 747-500X concept featured an increased fuselage length of 18 ft (5.5 m) to 250 ft (76.2 m) long, and the aircraft was to carry 462 passengers over a range up to 8,700 nautical miles (10,000 mi, 16,100 km), with a gross weight of over 1.0 Mlb (450 tonnes). The 747-600X concept featured a greater stretch to 279 ft (85 m) with seating for 548 passengers, a range of up to 7,700 nmi (8,900 mi, 14,300 km), and a gross weight of 1.2 Mlb (540 tonnes). A third study concept, the 747-700X, would have combined the wing of the 747-600X with a widened fuselage, allowing it to carry 650 passengers over the same range as a 747-400. The cost of the changes from previous 747 models, in particular the new wing for the 747-500X and 600X, was estimated to be more than US$5 billion. Boeing was not able to attract enough interest to launch the aircraft. 

====747X and 747X Stretch====
As Airbus progressed with its A3XX study, Boeing in 2000 offered the market a 747 derivative as an alternative. This was a more modest proposal than the previous 500X and 600X that would retain the 747's overall wing design and add a segment at the root, increasing the span to 229 ft. "Boeing 747 Celebrates 30 Years In Service." The Boeing Company, September 2, 1996. Retrieved: December 17, 2007. Power would have been supplied by either the Engine Alliance GP7172 or the Rolls-Royce Trent 600, which were also proposed for the 767-400ERX. "Boeing Commits To Produce New Longer-Range 767-400ER." The Boeing Company, September 13, 2000. Retrieved: December 17, 2007. A new flight deck based on the 777's would be used. The 747X aircraft was to carry 430 passengers over ranges of up to 8,700 nmi (10,000 mi, 16,100 km). The 747X Stretch would be extended to 263 ft long, allowing it to carry 500 passengers over ranges of up to 7,800 nmi (9,000 mi, 14,500 km). Both would feature an interior based on the 777's signature architecture. "Customer Symposium Highlights Future Boeing 747 Models." The Boeing Company, June 29, 2000. Retrieved: December 17, 2007. Freighter versions of the 747X and 747X Stretch were also studied. Morris, J. "Boeing In No Hurry to Launch 747X." Aviation Week, July 24, 2000. Retrieved: December 18, 2007. 

alt=Side view of quadjet in flight.

Like its predecessor, the 747X family was unable to garner enough interest to justify production, and it was shelved along with the 767-400ERX in March 2001, when Boeing announced the Sonic Cruiser concept. Though the 747X design was less costly than the 747-500X and 600X, it was criticized for not offering a sufficient advance from the existing 747-400. The 747X did not make it beyond the drawing board, but the 747-400X being developed concurrently moved into production to become the 747-400ER. "Boeing Launches New, Longer-Range 747-400." The Boeing Company. Retrieved: December 17, 2007. 

====747-400XQLR====
After the end of the 747X program, Boeing continued to study improvements that could be made to the 747. The 747-400XQLR (Quiet Long Range) was meant to have an increased range of 7,980 nmi (9,200 mi, 14,800 km), with improvements to boost efficiency and reduce noise. "Boeing Offers New 747-400X Quiet Longer Range Jetliner." The Boeing Company, February 26, 2002. Retrieved: December 17, 2007. "GE's CF6 Engine Models Tailored For Boeing's 747-400XQLR Wide-Body." GE Aviation, March 25, 2002. Improvements studied included raked wingtips similar to those used on the 767-400ER and a sawtooth engine nacelle for noise reduction. Steinke, Sebastian. "Boeing Proposes 747-400X Quiet Longer Range." Flug Revue Online, May 2002. Retrieved: July 15, 2011. Although the 747-400XQLR did not move to production, many of its features were used for the 747 Advanced, which has now been launched as the 747-8.

==Operators==

===Orders and deliveries===

 Year Total 2014 2013 2012 2011 2010 2009 2008 2007 2006 2005 2004 2003 2002 2001 2000 1999 1998 1997 1996 1995 1994 1993 1992 1991 1990 
 Orders 1538 1 12 1 -1 -1 2 3 21 72 43 10 4 17 16 26 35 15 36 56 32 16 2 23 31 122 
 Deliveries 1487 5 24 31 9 0 8 14 16 14 13 15 19 27 31 25 47 53 39 26 25 40 56 61 64 70 

 Year 1989 1988 1987 1986 1985 1984 1983 1982 1981 1980 1979 1978 1977 1976 1975 1974 1973 1972 1971 1970 1969 1968 1967 1966 
 Orders 56 49 66 84 42 23 24 14 23 49 72 76 42 14 20 29 29 18 7 20 30 22 43 83 
 Deliveries 45 24 23 35 24 16 22 26 53 73 67 32 20 27 21 22 30 30 69 92 4    

* Boeing data through end of April 2014. "Recent Orders." The Boeing Company, April 2014. Retrieved: May 26, 2014. "Orders and Deliveries search page." The Boeing Company, April 2014. Retrieved: May 26, 2014. 

===Model summary===

 Model series Orders Deliveries Unfilled 
 747-100 167 167 
 747-100B 9 9 
 747-100SR 29 29 
 747-200B 225 225 
 747-200C 13 13 
 747-200F 73 73 
 747-200M 78 78 
 747-300 56 56 
 747-300M 21 21 
 747-300SR 4 4 
 747-400 442 442 
 747-400D 19 19 
 747-400ER 6 6 
 747-400ERF 40 40 
 747-400F 126 126 
 747-400M 61 61 
 747-8 51 20 31 
 747-8F 69 48 21 
 747-E4A 3 3 
 747-E4B 1 1 
 747SP 45 45 
 747 Total 1538 1486 52 

* Boeing data through end of April 2014. 

 
 ICAO code \"ICAO Document 8643.\" International Civil Aviation Organization. Retrieved: February 6, 2011. Model series 
 B741 747-100747-100B 
 B742 747-200747-200B747-200C747-200F747-200ME-4AE-4BVC-25 
 B743 747-300747-300M 
 B744 747-400747-400ER747-400ERF747-400F747-400M 
 B74D 747-400D 
 B74S 747SP 
 B74R 747-100SR747-100BSR747-100BSR SUD 
 BLCF 747-400LCF Dreamlifter 
 BSCA 747 Shuttle Carrier Aircraft 
 B748 747-8F747-8I 

alt=A comparison of the different 747 variants

==Accidents and incidents==

As of September 2010, the 747 has been involved in 124 accidents or incidents, "Boeing 747 incidents." Aviation-Safety.net, September 3, 2010. Retrieved: September 3, 2010. including 49 hull-loss accidents, "Boeing 747 hull-loss occurrences." Aviation-Safety.net, September 3, 2010. Retrieved: September 3, 2010. resulting in 2,852 fatalities. The 747 has been in 31 hijackings, which caused 25 fatalities. "Boeing 747 Accident Statistics." Aviation-Safety.net, Retrieved: December 16, 2009. 

Few crashes have been attributed to design flaws of the 747. The Tenerife airport disaster resulted from pilot error, air traffic control (ATC) error, and communications failure, while the Japan Airlines Flight 123 and China Airlines Flight 611 crashes stemmed from improper aircraft repair. United Airlines Flight 811, which suffered an explosive decompression mid-flight on February 24, 1989, led the National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB) to issue a recommendation that 747-200 cargo doors similar to those on the Flight 811 aircraft be modified. Korean Air Lines Flight 007 was shot down by the Soviets in 1983 after it had strayed into Soviet territory, causing U.S. President Ronald Reagan to authorize the then-strictly military global positioning system (GPS) for civilian use. "United States Updates Global Positioning System Technology." america.gov, February 3, 2006. Retrieved: January 9, 2012. 

Accidents due to design errors included TWA Flight 800, where a 747-100 exploded in mid-air on July 17, 1996, probably due to sparking electricity wires inside the fuel tank; this finding led the FAA to propose a rule requiring installation of an inerting system in the center fuel tank of most large aircraft that was adopted in July 2008, after years of research into solutions. At the time, the new safety system was expected to cost US$100,000 to $450,000 per aircraft and weigh approximately 200 lb. "Airlines Ordered to Cut Fuel-Tank Explosion Risk." Wall Street Journal, July 17, 2008, p. B5. Note: Cargo aircraft and smaller regional jets and commuter aircraft are not subject to this rule. El Al Flight 1862 crashed after the fuse pins of engine number 3 broke off shortly after take-off due to metal fatigue. Instead of dropping away from the wing, engine #3 knocked off engine #4 as well as damaging the wing. 

==Aircraft on display==

As increasing numbers of "classic" 747-100 and 747-200 series aircraft have been retired, some have found their way into museums or other uses. The City of Everett, the first 747 and prototype, is at the Museum of Flight, Seattle, Washington, USA where it is sometimes leased to Boeing for test purposes. "Aircraft and Space Craft, Boeing 747121." Museum of Flight. Retrieved: July 15, 2011. 

Other 747s in museums include those at the National Aviation Theme Park Aviodrome, Lelystad, The Netherlands; the Qantas Founders Outback Museum, Longreach, Queensland, Australia; Rand Airport, Johannesburg, South Africa; Technikmuseum Speyer, Speyer, Germany; Muse de l'Air et de l'Espace, Paris, France; Tehran Aerospace Exhibition, Tehran, Iran; Jeongseok Aviation Center, Jeju, South Korea, "The Blue Sky." thebluesky.info. Retrieved: December 17, 2007. Evergreen Aviation & Space Museum, McMinnville, Oregon, and the National Air and Space Museum, Washington, D.C. "Historic Aircraft Lands at Air and Space Museum." WTOP News, January 16, 2007. 

===Other uses===
Upon its retirement from service, the 747 number two in the production line was dismantled and shipped to Hopyeong, Namyangju, Gyeonggi-do, South Korea where it was re-assembled, repainted in a livery similar to that of Air Force One and converted into a restaurant. Originally flown commercially by Pan Am as N747PA, Clipper Juan T. Trippe, and repaired for service following a tailstrike, it stayed with the airline until its bankruptcy. The restaurant closed by 2009, "Dark Roasted Blend: Abandoned Boeing 747 Restaurant (and Other Plane Conversions)." darkroastedblend.com, April 21, 2009. Retrieved: April 22, 2009. and the aircraft was scrapped in 2010. "Historic 747 reaches grim end in South Korea". chicagotribune.com, December 13, 2010. Retrieved: December 13, 2010. 

A former British Airways 747-200B, G-BDXJ, Wastnage, Justin. "James Bond Casino Royale modified Boeing 747-XXX on show ahead of movie premire." Flight International, August 29, 2006. Retrieved: January 2, 2012. is parked at the Dunsfold Aerodrome in Surrey, England and has been used as a movie set for productions such as the 2006 James Bond film, Casino Royale. "747 is Airbourne". Dunsfold Park, March 2011. Retrieved January 2, 2012. 

The Jumbohostel, using a converted 747-200, opened at Arlanda Airport, Stockholm on January 15, 2009. Swedish Hotel Fashioned From An Old Jumbo Jet Tayfun King, Fast Track, BBC World News (November 23, 2008) Finighan, Adrian. "Jumbo Jet Hostel" CNN Money (February 11, 2009) 

The wings of a 747 have been recycled as roofs of a house in Malibu, California. Amelar, Sarah. "The 747 Wing House" Architectural Record, April 2012. Retrieved: August 21, 2012. Tuzee, Michelle. "Malibu 'Wing House' made of 747 plane parts" KABC-TV, May 17, 2011. Retrieved: August 21, 2012. Istook, Marc. "The wing house  a house made out of an old Boeing 747" Yahoo! News, March 3, 2012. Retrieved: August 21, 2012. Derringer, Jaime. "The 747 wing house" Design Milk, September 7, 2011. Retrieved: August 21, 2012. 

==Specifications==
alt= An illustration comparing the size of four large aircraft: Hughes H-4 Hercules (Spruce Goose), Antonov An-225 Mriya, Airbus A380, and Boeing 747-8

 Measurement 747-100B 747-200B 747-300 747-400747-400ER 747-8I 
 Cockpit crew Three Two 
 Typical seating capacity SR: 550 (1-class)539 (1-class) 452 (2-class) 366 (3-class) 565 (1-class)496 (2-class) \"Boeing 747-300 Technical Specifications.\" The Boeing Company. Retrieved: April 13, 2013. 412 (3-class) 660 (1-class) \"747.\" The Boeing Company. Retrieved: January 9, 2012. 524 (2-class) 416 (3-class) 605 (maximum) \"747-8.\" Federal Register. Retrieved: April 29, 2012. 467 (3-class) 
 Length 231 ft 10 in (70.6 m) 250 ft 2 in (76.25 m) 
 Interior cabin width 20 ft 
 Wingspan 195 ft 8 in (59.6 m) 211 ft 5 in (64.4 m) 224 ft 7 in (68.5 m) 
 Wing area 5,500 ft2 (510.95 m2) 5,650 ft2 (525 m2) 5963 ft2 (554 m2) 
 Wing sweep 37.5 
 Aspect ratio 6.9 7.9 8.5 
 Tail height 63 ft 5 in (19.3 m) 63 ft 8 in (19.4 m) 63 ft 6 in (19.4 m) 
 Maximum cargo capacity 6,190 ft3 (175.3 m3) = 30xLD1 6,025 ft3 (170.5 m3) ER: 5,599 ft3 (158.6 m3) 5,705 ft3 (161.5 m3) 
 Operating empty weight 358,000 lb (162,400 kg) 383,000 lb (174,000 kg) 392,800 lb (178,100 kg) 393,263 lb (178,756 kg) ER: 406,900 lb (184,600 kg) 472,900 lb (214,503 kg) 
 Maximum takeoff weight 735,000 lb (333,390 kg) 833,000 lb (377,842 kg) 875,000 lb (396,890 kg) ER: 910,000 lb (412,775 kg) 975,000 lb (442,253 kg) 
 Cruising speed (at 35000 ft altitude) Mach 0.84 (555 mph, 893 km/h, 481 knots ) Mach 0.85 (567 mph, 913 km/h, 493 kn) ER: Mach 0.855 (570 mph, 918 km/h, 495 kn) Mach 0.855 (570 mph, 918 km/h, 495 kn) 
 Maximum speed Mach 0.89 (594 mph, 955 km/h, 516 kn) Mach 0.92 (614 mph, 988 km/h, 533 kn) 
 Required runway at MTOW* 10,466 ft (3,190 m) 10,893 ft (3,320 m) 9,902 ft (3,018 m) ER: 10,138 ft (3,090 m) 10,138 ft (3,090 m) 
 Maximum range at MTOW(with max payload) 5300 nmi 6850 nmi 6700 nmi 7260 nmi ER: 7670 nmi 8000 nmi 
 Maximum fuel capacity 48,445 U.S. gal (40,339 imp gal/183,380 L) 52,410 U.S. gal (43,640 imp gal/199,158 L) 57,285 U.S. gal (47,700 imp gal/216,840 L) ER: 63,705 U.S. gal (53,045 imp gal/241,140 L) 64,225 U.S. gal (53,478 imp gal/243,120 L) 
 Engine models (x 4) PW JT9D-7A/-7F/-7J RR RB211-524B2 GE CF6-45A2 (747SR) PW JT9D-7R4G2 GE CF6-50E2 RR RB211-524D4 PW JT9D-7R4G2 GE CF6-80C2B1 RR RB211-524D4 PW 4062 GE CF6-80C2B5F RR RB211-524G/H ER: GE CF6-80C2B5F GEnx-2B67 
 Engine thrust (per engine) PW 46,500 lbf (207 kN) RR 50,100 lbf (223 kN) PW 54,750 lbf (244 kN) GE 52,500 lbf (234 kN) RR 53,000 lbf (236 kN) PW 54,750 lbf (244 kN) GE 55,640 lbf (247 kN) RR 53,000 lbf (236 kN) PW 63,300 lbf (282 kN) GE 62,100 lbf (276 kN) RR 59,500/60,600 lbf (265/270 kN) ER: GE 62,100 lbf (276 kN) 66,500 lbf (296 kN) 

Sources: Boeing 747 specifications, "747 specifications", The Boeing Company. Retrieved December 16, 2007. 747 airport planning report, "747 Airplane Characteristics for Airport Planning." The Boeing Company. Retrieved: December 15, 2007. 747-8 airport brochure, "Preliminary 747-8 Airport Compatibility." The Boeing Company. Retrieved: July 8, 2009. Lufthansa 747-8 data "Lufthansa - Boeing 747-8 Roll out: 747-8 I vs. 747-400." Lufthansa. Retrieved: October 5, 2011. 

* The 747 parasitic drag, CDP, is 0.022, and the wing area is 5500 sqft, so that f equals about 121 sqft. The parasitic drag is given by  f air v in which f is the product of drag coefficient CDp and the wing area. "Calculating and Plotting Parasite Drag." Aerodynamics Text. Retrieved: July 15, 2011. 
* Cruising speed shown at altitude. See NASA Mach number calculator page for Mach number explanation and example calculations.
* "Required runway" length allows for emergency factors. Actual takeoff distances will normally be considerably shorter than those listed here. See Balanced field takeoff.

==Notable appearances in media==

Following its debut, the 747 rapidly achieved iconic status, appearing in numerous film productions such as the Airport series of disaster films, Air Force One, and Executive Decision. "Executive Decision." Movie Ramblings. Retrieved: December 17, 2007. "Air Force One." Rotten Tomatoes. Retrieved: December 17, 2007. Appearing in over 300 film productions http://www.impdb.org/index.php?title=Category:Boeing_747 the 747 is one of the most widely depicted civilian aircraft and is considered by many as one of the most iconic in film history. http://www.chapman-freeborn.com/blog/the-most-iconic-aircraft-in-film-history/ The aircraft entered the cultural lexicon as the original Jumbo Jet, a term coined by the aviation media to describe its size, Haenggi 2003, p. 9. and was also nicknamed Queen of the Skies. Sutter 2006, p. 279. 

==See also==

==References==

=== Notes ===

=== Bibliography ===

* Baum, Brian. Boeing 747-SP (Great Airliners, Vol. 3). Osceola, WI: Motorbooks International. ISBN 0-9626730-7-2.
* Birtles, Philip. Boeing 747-400. Hersham, Surrey: Ian Allen, 2000. ISBN 0-7110-2728-5.
* Bowers, Peter M. Boeing Aircraft Since 1916. London: Putnam Aeronautical Books, 1989. ISBN 0-85177-804-6.
* Bowman, Martin. Boeing 747 (Crowood Aviation Series). Marlborough, Wilts.: Crowood, 2000. ISBN 1-86126-242-6
* Davies, R.E.G. Delta - An Airline and Its Aircraft: The Illustrated History of a Major U.S. Airline and the People Who Made It. McLean, VA: Paladwr Press, 1990. ISBN 0-9626483-0-2.
* Dorr, Robert F. Boeing 747-400 (AirlinerTech Series, Vol. 10). North Branch, MN: Specialty Press, 2000. ISBN 1-58007-055-8.
* Falconer, Jonathan. Boeing 747 in Color. Hersham, Surrey: Ian Allen, 1997. ISBN 1-882663-14-4.
* Gesar, Aram. Boeing 747: The Jumbo. New York: Pyramid Media Group, 2000. ISBN 0-944188-02-8.
* Gilchrist, Peter. Boeing 747-400 (Airliner Color History). Osceola, WI: Motorbooks International, 1998. ISBN 0-7603-0616-8.
* Gilchrist, Peter. Boeing 747 Classic (Airliner Color History). Osceola, WI: Motorbooks International, 2000. ISBN 0-7603-1007-6.
* Graham, Ian. In Control: How to Fly a 747. Somerville, MA: Candlewick, 2000. ISBN 0-7636-1278-2.
* Haenggi, Michael. Boeing Widebodies. St. Paul, MN: MBI Publishing Co., 2003. ISBN 0-7603-0842-X.
* Henderson, Scott. Boeing 747-100/200 In Camera. Minneapolis, MN: Scoval Publishing, 1999. ISBN 1-902236-01-7.
* Ingells, Douglas J. 747: Story of the Boeing Super Jet. Fallbrook, CA: Aero Publishers, 1970. ISBN 0-8168-8704-7.
* Irving, Clive. Wide Body: The Making of the Boeing 747. Philadelphia: Coronet, 1994. ISBN 0-340-59983-9.
* Itabashi, M., K. Kawata and S. Kusaka. "Pre-fatigued 2219-T87 and 6061-T6 aluminium alloys." Structural Failure: Technical, Legal and Insurance Aspects. Milton Park, Abingdon, Oxon.: Taylor & Francis, 1995. ISBN 978-0-419-20710-8.
* Jenkins, Dennis R. Boeing 747-100/200/300/SP (AirlinerTech Series, Vol. 6). North Branch, MN: Specialty Press, 2000. ISBN 1-58007-026-4.
* Kane, Robert M. Air Transportation: 19032003. Dubuque, IA: Kendall Hunt Publishing Co., 2004. ISBN 0-7575-3180-6.
* Lucas, Jim. Boeing 747 - The First 20 Years. Browcom Pub. Ltd. ISBN 0-946141-37-1.
* Lawrence, Philip K. and David Weldon Thornton. Deep Stall: The Turbulent Story of Boeing Commercial Airplanes. Burlington, VT: Ashgate Publishing Co., 2005, ISBN 0-7546-4626-2.
* March, Peter. The Boeing 747 Story. Stroud, Glos.: The History Press, 2009. ISBN 0-7509-4485-4.
* Norris, Guy and Mark Wagner. Boeing 747: Design and Development Since 1969. St. Paul, MN: MBI Publishing Co., 1997. ISBN 0-7603-0280-4.
* Minton, David H. The Boeing 747 (Aero Series 40). Fallbrook, CA: Aero Publishers, 1991. ISBN 0-8306-3574-2.
* Nicholls, Mark. The Airliner World Book of the Boeing 747. New York: Osprey Publishing, 2002. ISBN 0-946219-61-3.
* Norton, Bill. Lockheed Martin C-5 Galaxy. North Branch, MN: Specialty Press, 2003. ISBN 1-58007-061-2.
* Orlebar, Christopher. The Concorde Story. Oxford: Osprey Publishing, Fifth edition, 2002. ISBN 1-85532-667-1.
* Pealing, Norman, and Savage, Mike. Jumbo Jetliners: Boeing's 747 and the Widebodies (Osprey Color Classics). Osceola, WI: Motorbooks International, 1999. ISBN 1-85532-874-7.
* Seo, Hiroshi. Boeing 747. Worthing, West Sussex: Littlehampton Book Services Ltd., 1984. ISBN 0-7106-0304-5.
* Shaw, Robbie. Boeing 747 (Osprey Civil Aircraft series). London: Osprey, 1994. ISBN 1-85532-420-2.
* Shaw, Robbie. Boeing 747-400: The Mega-Top (Osprey Civil Aircraft series)/ London: Osprey, 1999. ISBN 1-85532-893-3.
* Sutter, Joe. 747: Creating the World's First Jumbo Jet and Other Adventures from a Life in Aviation. Washington, DC: Smithsonian Books, 2006. ISBN 978-0-06-088241-9.
* Wilson, Stewart. Boeing 747 (Aviation Notebook Series). Queanbeyan, NSW: Wilson Media Pty. Ltd. ISBN 1-876722-01-0 .
* Wilson, Stewart. Airliners of the World. Fyshwick, Australia: Aerospace Publications Pty Ltd., 1999. ISBN 1-875671-44-7.
* Wright, Alan J. Boeing 747. Hersham, Surrey: Ian Allen, 1989. ISBN 0-7110-1814-6.
* The Great Gamble: The Boeing 747. The Boeing - Pan Am Project to Develop, Produce, and Introduce the 747. Tuscaloosa: University of Alabama Press, 1973. ISBN 0-8173-8700-5.

==External links==

* Boeing 747 product page
* Boeing 747-8 page on Boeing's newairplane.com site
* Boeing 747 profile on FlightGlobal.com
* Boeing 747 Archive
* Video of 1968 rollout of 747 from British Movietone Digital Archive
* Flight International 747-100 cutaway and 747-100 hi-res cutaway diagrams



[[Battle of Agincourt]]

The Battle of Agincourt was a major English victory in the Hundred Years' War. The battle occurred on Friday, 25 October 1415 (Saint Crispin's Day), near modern-day Azincourt, in northern France. Henry V's victory at Agincourt, against a numerically superior French army, crippled France and started a new period in the war during which Henry married the French king's daughter and then Henry's son, Henry VI, was made heir to the throne of France.

Henry V led his troops into battle and participated in hand-to-hand fighting. The French king of the time, Charles VI, did not command the French army himself as he suffered from severe, repeating illnesses and moderate mental incapacitation. Instead, the French were commanded by Constable Charles d'Albret and various prominent French noblemen of the Armagnac party.

The battle is notable for the use of the English longbow, which Henry used in very large numbers, with English and Welsh archers forming most of his army. The battle is also the centrepiece of the play Henry V, by William Shakespeare.

==Contemporary accounts of the battle==
The battle of Agincourt is well documented from at least seven contemporary accounts, three of them by eye-witnesses. The approximate location of the battle has never been in dispute and the place remains relatively unaltered even after almost 600 years. Immediately after the battle, Henry summoned the heralds of the two armies who had watched the battle together and with the principal French herald, Montjoie, settled on the name of the battle, Agincourt, after the nearest fortified place. Two of the most frequently cited accounts come from Burgundian sources: one from Jean Le Fevre de Saint-Remy, who was present at the battle, and the other from Enguerrand de Monstrelet. The English eyewitness account comes from the anonymous Gesta Henrici Quinti, believed to have been written by a chaplain in the King's household, who would have been in the baggage train at the battle.

==Campaign==

Henry V invaded France following the failure of negotiations with the French. He claimed the title of King of France through his great-grandfather Edward III, although in practice the English kings were generally prepared to renounce this claim if the French would acknowledge the English claim on Aquitaine and other French lands (the terms of the Treaty of Bretigny). Barker (2005) p. 13. He initially called a Great Council in the spring of 1414 to discuss going to war with France, but the lords insisted that he should negotiate further and moderate his claims. In the following negotiations Henry said that he would give up his claim to the French throne if the French would pay the 1.6 million crowns outstanding from the ransom of John II (who had been captured at the Battle of Poitiers in 1356), and concede English ownership of the lands of Normandy, Touraine, Anjou, Brittany and Flanders, as well as Aquitaine. Henry would marry Princess Catherine, the young daughter of Charles VI, and receive a dowry of 2 million crowns. The French responded with what they considered the generous terms of marriage with Princess Catherine, a dowry of 600,000 crowns, and an enlarged Aquitaine. By 1415, negotiations had ground to a halt, with the English claiming that the French had mocked their claims and ridiculed Henry himself. Barker (2005) pp. 6769. In December 1414, the English parliament was persuaded to grant Henry a "double subsidy", a tax at twice the traditional rate, to recover his inheritance from the French. On 19 April 1415, Henry again asked the Great Council to sanction war with France, and this time they agreed. Barker (2005) pp. 107, 114. 

Henry's army landed in northern France on 13 August 1415 and besieged the port of Harfleur with an army of about 12,000. The siege took longer than expected. The town surrendered on 22 September, and the English army did not leave until 8 October. The campaign season was coming to an end, and the English army had suffered many casualties through disease. Rather than retire directly to England for the winter, with his costly expedition resulting in the capture of only one town, Henry decided to march most of his army (roughly 9,000) through Normandy to the port of Calais, the English stronghold in northern France, to demonstrate by his presence in the territory at the head of an army that his right to rule in the duchy was more than a mere abstract legal and historical claim. Hibbert (1971) p. 67 He also intended the manoeuvre as a deliberate provocation to battle aimed at the dauphin, who had failed to respond to Henry's personal challenge to combat at Harfleur. Barker (2005) p. 219 

The French had raised an army during the siege which assembled around Rouen. This was not strictly a feudal army, but an army paid through a system similar to the English. The French hoped to raise 9,000 troops, but the army was not ready in time to relieve Harfleur. After Henry V marched to the north the French moved to blockade them along the River Somme. They were successful for a time, forcing Henry to move south, away from Calais, to find a ford. The English finally crossed the Somme south of Pronne, at Bthencourt and Voyennes and resumed marching north. Without the river protection, the French were hesitant to force a battle. They shadowed Henry's army while calling a semonce des nobles, calling on local nobles to join the army. By 24 October both armies faced each other for battle, but the French declined, hoping for the arrival of more troops. The two armies spent the night of 24 October on open ground. The next day the French initiated negotiations as a delaying tactic, but Henry ordered his army to advance and to start a battle that, given the state of his army, he would have preferred to avoid, or to fight defensively: that was how Crcy and the other famous longbow victories had been won. The English had very little food, had marched 260 mi in two and a half weeks, were suffering from sickness such as dysentery, and faced much larger numbers of well equipped French men at arms. The French army blocked Henry's way to the safety of Calais, however, and delaying battle would only further weaken his tired army and allow more French troops to arrive. Mortimer, 2009, pp.436437 

==The Battle==

===Preparation for battle===
The battle was fought in the narrow strip of open land formed between the woods of Tramecourt and Agincourt (close to the modern village of Azincourt). The French army was positioned at the northern exit so as to bar the way to Calais.

The battle of Agincourt.

====English deployment====
Early on the 25th, Henry deployed his army (approximately 1,500 men-at-arms and 7,000 longbowmen; see Numbers at Agincourt) across a 750 yd part of the defile. The army was organised into three "battles" or divisions: the vanguard led by the Duke of York; the main battle led by Henry himself; and the rearguard, led by Lord Camoys. In addition, Sir Thomas Erpingham, one of Henry's most experienced household knights, had a role in marshalling the archers. Barker 2005, p.271,290 It is likely that the English adopted their usual battle line of longbowmen on either flank, men-at-arms and knights in the centre. They may also have deployed some archers in the centre of the line. The English men-at-arms in plate and mail were placed shoulder to shoulder four deep. The English and Welsh archers on the flanks drove pointed wooden stakes, or palings, into the ground at an angle to force cavalry to veer off. This use of stakes may have been inspired by the Battle of Nicopolis of 1396, where forces of the Ottoman Empire used the tactic against French cavalry.

The English made their confessions before the battle, as was customary. Curry, 2006, p.166 Henry, worried about the enemy launching surprise raids, and wanting his troops to remain focused, ordered all his men to spend the night before the battle in silence, on pain of having an ear cut off. He told his men that he would rather die in the coming battle than be captured and ransomed. Barker, 2005, pp.267268 The men-at-arms on both sides were high-ranking men who knew that if captured they could expect to be ransomed. As "commoners", on the other hand, the English archers knew they could expect to be killed out of hand by the French if they were defeated, as they were not worth ransoming.

Henry made a speech, emphasising the justness of his cause, and reminding his army of previous great defeats the kings of England had inflicted on the French. The Burgundian sources have him concluding the speech by telling his men that the French had boasted that they would cut off two fingers from the right hand of every archer, so that he could never draw a longbow again. Whether this was true is open to question; as previously noted, death was the normal fate of any soldier who could not be ransomed. Barker, 2005, pp. 283284 

====French deployment====
The French force was not only larger than the English, their noble men-at-arms would have considered themselves superior to the large number of archers in the English army, whom the French (based on their experience in recent memory of using and facing archers) considered relatively insignificant. Mortimer(2009) p. 422 For example, the chronicler Edmond de Dyntner stated that there were "ten French nobles against one English", ignoring the archers completely. Several French accounts emphasise that the French leaders were so eager to defeat the English (and win the ransoms of the English men-at-arms) that they insisted on being in the first line; as one of the contemporary accounts put it: "All the lords wanted to be in the vanguard, against the opinion of the constable and the experienced knights."

The French were arrayed in three lines or "battles". The first line was led by Constable D'Albret, Marshal Boucicault, and the Dukes of Orlans and Bourbon, with attached cavalry wings under the Count of Vendme and Sir Clignet de Brebant. The second line was commanded by the Dukes of Bar and Alenon and the Count of Nevers. The third line was under the Counts of Dammartin and Fauconberg. Barker 2005, pp. 2768 The Burgundian chronicler, Jean de Wavrin, writes that there were 8,000 men-at-arms, 4,000 archers and 1,500 crossbowmen in the vanguard, with two wings of 600 and 800 mounted men-at-arms, and the main battle having "as many knights, esquires and archers as in the vanguard", with the rearguard containing "all of the rest of the men-at-arms". Battle of Agincourt 1415, Wavrin The Herald of Berry uses somewhat different figures of 4,800 men-at-arms in the first line, 3,000 men in the second line, with two "wings" containing 600 mounted men-at-arms each, and a total of "10,000 men-at-arms", Quoted in Curry (2000), p. 181. but does not mention a third line.

Approximately 8,000 of the heavily armoured French men-at-arms fought on foot, and needed to close the distance to the English army to engage them in hand-to-hand fighting. If they could close the distance, however, they outnumbered the English men-at-arms by more than 5-to-1, and the English longbowmen would not be able to shoot into a mle without risking hitting their own troops.
 
Thousands of troops appear to have been in the rearguard, containing servants and commoners whom the French were either unable or unwilling to deploy. Wavrin gives the total French army size as 50,000: "They had plenty of archers and crossbowmen but nobody wanted to let them fire . The reason for this was that the site was so narrow that there was only enough room for the men-at-arms." Quoted in Curry (2000), p.159 A different source says that the French did not even deploy 4,000 of the best crossbowmen on the pretext they had no need of their help". Quoted in Curry (2000), p.106 
The rearguard played little part in the battle; English and French accounts agree that many in the French army fled after seeing so many French nobles killed and captured in the fighting.

===Terrain===
The field of battle was arguably the most significant factor in deciding the outcome. The recently ploughed land hemmed in by dense woodland favoured the English, both because of its narrowness, and because of the thick mud through which the French knights had to walk. An analysis by Battlefield Detectives has looked at the crowd dynamics of the battlefield. The 1,0001,500 English men-at-arms are described as shoulder to shoulder and four deep, which implies a tight line about 250300 men long (perhaps split in two by a central group of archers). The remainder of the field would have been filled with the longbowmen behind their palings. The French first line contained men-at-arms who had no way to outflank the English line. The French, divided into the three battles, one behind the other at their initial starting position, could not bring all their forces to bear: the initial engagement was between the English army and the first battle line of the French. When the second French battle line started their advance, the soldiers were pushed closer together and their effectiveness was reduced. Casualties in the front line from longbow arrows would also have increased the congestion, as the following men would have to walk around (or over) the fallen.

The Battlefield Detectives episode states that when the density reached four men per square metre, soldiers would not even be able to take full steps forward, lowering the speed of the advance by 70%. Accounts of the battle describe the French engaging the English men-at-arms before being rushed from the sides by the longbowmen as the mle developed. The English account in the Gesta Henrici says: "For when some of them, killed when battle was first joined, fall at the front, so great was the undisciplined violence and pressure of the mass of men behind them that the living fell on top of the dead, and others falling on top of the living were killed as well." Curry, 2000, p.37 

Although the French initially pushed the English back, they became so closely packed that they are described as having trouble using their weapons properly. The French monk of St. Denis says: "Their vanguard, composed of about 5,000 men, found itself at first so tightly packed that those who were in the third rank could scarcely use their swords," Quoted in Curry, 2000, p. 107. and the Burgundian sources have a similar passage. In practice there was not enough room for all these men to fight, and they were unable to respond effectively when the English longbowmen joined the hand-to-hand fighting. By the time the second French line arrived, for a total of about eight thousand men (depending on the source), the crush would have been even worse. The press of men arriving from behind actually hindered those fighting at the front.

As the battle was fought on a recently ploughed field, and there had recently been heavy rain leaving it very muddy, it proved very tiring to walk through in full plate armour. The French monk of St. Denis describes the French troops as "marching through the middle of the mud where they sank up to their knees. So they were already overcome with fatigue even before they advanced against the enemy". The deep, soft mud particularly favoured the English force because, once knocked to the ground, the heavily armoured French knights had a hard time getting back up to fight in the mle. Barker states that some knights, encumbered by their armour, actually drowned in their helmets. Barker (2005), p.300 Their limited mobility made them easy targets for the volleys from the English archers. The mud also increased the ability of the much more lightly armoured English archers to join in hand-to-hand fighting against the French men-at-arms.

===Fighting===

====Opening moves====
"Morning of the Battle of Agincourt, 25th October 1415", painted by Sir John Gilbert.
On the morning of 25 October, the French were still waiting for additional troops to arrive. The Duke of Brabant (about 2,000 men), Mortimer, 2009, p. 449 the Duke of Anjou (about 600 men), and the Duke of Brittany (6,000 men, according to Monstrelet), Mortimer, 2009, p. 416 were all marching to join the army. This left the French with a question of whether or not to advance towards the English.

For three hours after sunrise there was no fighting. Military textbooks of the time stated: "Everywhere and on all occasions that foot soldiers march against their enemy face to face, those who march lose and those who remain standing still and holding firm win." Barker (2005) p. 287 On top of this, the French were expecting thousands of men to join them if they waited. They were blocking Henry's retreat, and were perfectly happy to wait for as long as it took. There had even been a suggestion that the English would run away rather than give battle when they saw that they would be fighting so many French princes. Barker (2005) p.288 

Henry's men, on the other hand, were already very weary from hunger, illness and marching. Even though he knew as well as the French did that his army would perform better on the defensive, Henry was eventually forced to take a calculated risk, and move his army further forward to start the battle. Mortimer (2009) pp.436437 This entailed abandoning his chosen position and pulling out, advancing, and then re-installing the long sharpened wooden stakes pointed outwards toward the enemy which helped protect the longbowmen from cavalry charges. Keegan (1978) pp.9091 (The use of stakes was an innovation for the English: during the Battle of Crcy, for example, the archers were instead protected by pits and other obstacles. ) If the French cavalry had charged before the stakes had been hammered back in, the result would probably have been disastrous for the English, as it was at the Battle of Patay. However, the French seem to have been caught off guard by the English advance.

The tightness of the terrain also seems to have restricted the planned deployment of the French forces. The French had originally drawn up a battle plan that had archers and crossbowmen in front of their men-at-arms, with a cavalry force at the rear specifically designed to "fall upon the archers, and use their force to break them," Barker (2005) p. 273. but in the event, the French archers and crossbowmen were deployed behind and to the sides of the men-at-arms (where they seem to have played almost no part, except possibly for an initial volley of arrows at the start of the battle). The cavalry force, which could have devastated the English line if it had attacked while they moved their stakes, charged only after the initial volley of arrows from the English. It is unclear whether the delay occurred because the French were hoping the English would launch a frontal assault (and were surprised when the English instead started shooting from their new defensive position), or whether the French mounted knights instead did not react quickly enough to the English advance. French chroniclers agree that when the mounted charge did come, it did not contain as many men as it should have; Gilles le Bouvier states that some had wandered off to warm themselves and others were walking or feeding their horses. Barker, (2005) p. 291. 

In any case, within extreme bowshot from the French line (approximately 300 yd), the longbowmen dug in their stakes and then opened the engagement with a long range barrage of arrows.

====The French cavalry attack====
The French cavalry, despite being somewhat disorganised and not at full numbers, charged the longbowmen, but it was a disaster, with the French knights unable to outflank the longbowmen (because of the encroaching woodland) and unable to charge through the forest of sharpened stakes that protected the archers. John Keegan argues that the longbows' main influence on the battle at this point was injuries to horses: armoured only on the head, many horses would have become dangerously out of control when struck in the back or flank from the high-elevation long range shots used as the charge started. Keegan (1976), pp.926 The mounted charge and subsequent retreat churned up the already muddy terrain between the French and the English. Juliet Barker quotes a contemporary account by a monk of St. Denis who reports how the wounded and panicking horses galloped through the advancing infantry, scattering them and trampling them down in their headlong flight from the battlefield. Barker (2005), p.293 The Burgundian sources also say that the mounted cavalry retreated back into the forward ranks of French men-at-arms advancing on foot.

====The main French assault====
The Constable of France himself led the attack of the dismounted French men-at-arms. French accounts describe their vanguard alone as containing about 5,000 men-at-arms, which would have outnumbered the English men-at-arms by more than 3 to 1, but before they could engage in hand-to-hand fighting they had to cross the muddy field under a bombardment of arrows.

The plate armour of the French men-at-arms allowed them to close the 300 yards or so to the English lines while being under what the French monk of Saint Denis described as "a terrifying hail of arrow shot". A complete coat of plate was considered such good protection that shields were generally not used, Nicholson (2004) p. 109 although the Burgundian contemporary sources specifically distinguish between Frenchmen who used shields and those who did not, and Rogers has suggested that the front elements of the French force may have used axes and shields. Rogers (2008) p. 90 Modern historians are somewhat divided on how effective the longbow fire would have been against plate armour of the time, with some modern tests suggesting that arrows could not penetrate, especially the better quality steel armour, but others suggesting arrows could penetrate, especially the worse quality wrought iron armour. Rogers suggests that the longbow could penetrate a wrought iron breastplate at short range and penetrate the thinner armour on the limbs even at 220 yd. He considers a knight in the best quality steel armour would have been more or less invulnerable to an arrow on the breastplate or top of the helmet, but would still have been vulnerable to shots hitting the limbs, particularly at close range. Rogers (2008), pp. 110-113 In any case, to protect themselves as much as possible from the arrows the French had to lower their visors and bend their helmeted heads to avoid being shot in the facethe eye and air-holes in their helmets were among the weakest points in the armour. This head lowered position restricted both their breathing and their vision. Then they had to walk a few hundred yards through thick mud, a press of comrades and wearing armour weighing 50 . Increasingly they had to walk around or over fallen comrades. Barker (2005) pp. 297298. 

King Henry V at the Battle of Agincourt, 1415, by Sir John Gilbert.
The surviving French men-at-arms reached the front of the English line and pushed it back, with the longbowmen on the flanks continuing to shoot at point blank range. When the archers ran out of arrows they dropped their bows and using hatchets, swords and the mallets they had used to drive their stakes in, attacked the now disordered, fatigued and wounded French men-at-arms massed in front of them. The French could not cope with the thousands of lightly armoured longbowmen assailants (who were much less hindered by the mud and weight of their armour) combined with the English men-at-arms. The impact of thousands of arrows, combined with the slog in heavy armour through the mud, the heat and lack of oxygen in plate armour with the visor down, and the crush of their numbers meant the French men-at-arms could "scarcely lift their weapons" when they finally engaged the English line. Curry (2000) p. 159 The exhausted French men-at-arms are described as being knocked to the ground by the English and then unable to get back up. As the mle developed, the French second line also joined the attack, but they too were swallowed up, with the narrow terrain meaning the extra numbers could not be used effectively. Rogers suggests that the French at the back of their deep formation would have been attempting to push forward and quite literally add their weight to the advance, without realising that they were hindering the ability of those at the front to manoeuvre and fight, actually pushing them into the English formation of lancepoints. After the inital wave, the French would have had to fight over and on the bodies of those who had fallen before them. In such a "press" of thousands of men, Rogers finds it plausible that a significant number could have suffocated in their armour, as is described by several sources, and is also known to have happened in other battles. Rogers (2008), pp. 95-98 

The French men-at-arms were taken prisoner or killed in their thousands. The fighting lasted about three hours, but eventually the leaders of the second line were killed or captured, as those of the first line had been. The English Gesta Henrici describes three great heaps of the slain around the three main English standards. Curry (2000) p. 37 
According to contemporary English accounts, Henry was directly involved in the hand-to-hand fighting. Upon hearing that his youngest brother Humphrey, Duke of Gloucester had been wounded in the groin, Henry took his household guard and stood over his brother, in the front rank of the fighting, until Humphrey could be dragged to safety. The king received an axe blow to the head which knocked off a piece of the crown that formed part of his helmet. Mortimer (2009) p. 443 

====The attack on the English baggage train====
Henry V at the Battle of Agincourt : The King wears on this surcoat the 
Royal Arms of England, quartered with the Fleur de Lys of France as a symbol of his claim to the throne of France.
The only French success was an attack on the lightly protected English baggage train, with Ysembart d'Azincourt (leading a small number of men-at-arms and varlets plus about 600 peasants) seizing some of Henry's personal treasures, including a crown. Curry (2005), pp. 2079 Whether this was part of a deliberate French plan or an act of local brigandage is unclear from the sources. Certainly, d'Azincourt was a local knight but he may have been chosen to lead the attack because of his local knowledge and the lack of availability of a more senior soldier. Barker (2005), p.308 In some accounts the attack happened towards the end of the battle, and led the English to think they were being attacked from the rear. Barker, following the Gesta Henrici, believed to have been written by an English chaplain who was actually in the baggage train, concludes that the attack happened at the start of the battle. 

====Henry orders the killing of the prisoners====
Regardless of when the baggage assault happened, at some point after the initial English victory Henry became alarmed that the French were regrouping for another attack. The Gesta Henrici places this after the English had overcome the onslaught of the French men-at-arms and the weary English troops were eyeing the French rearguard ("in incomparable number and still fresh" Curry (2000) p.37 ). Le Fevre and Wavrin similarly say that it was signs of the French rearguard regrouping and "marching forward in battle order" which made the English think they were still in danger. Curry (2000) p.163 

In any event, Henry ordered the slaughter of what were perhaps several thousand French prisoners, sparing only the most high ranked (presumably those most likely to fetch a large ransom under the chivalric system of warfare). According to most chroniclers, Henry's fear was that the prisoners (who, in an unusual turn of events, actually outnumbered their captors) would realize their advantage in numbers, rearm themselves with the weapons strewn about the field and overwhelm the exhausted English forces. Although ruthless, Henry's decision was thus arguably justifiable given the situation of the battle; even the French chroniclers do not criticise him for it. Barker (2005) pp. 302305. In his study of the battle, John Keegan Keegan (1976) pp. 107-112. argued that the main aim was not to actually kill the French knights but rather to terrorise them into submission and quell any possibility they might resume the fight, which would probably have caused the uncommitted French reserve forces to join the fray, as well. Such an event would have posed a mortal risk to the still-outnumbered English and could have easily turned a stunning victory into a mutually-destructive defeat, as the English forces were now largely intermingled with the French and would have suffered grievously from the arrows of their own longbowmen had they needed to resume shooting. Keegan also speculated that due to the relatively low number of archers actually involved in killing the French knights (roughly 200 by his estimate), together with the refusal of the English knights to assist in a duty they saw as distastefully unchivalrous and combined with the sheer difficulty of killing such a large number of prisoners in such a short space of time, the actual number of French knights killed might not have even reached the hundreds before the reserves fled the field and Henry called an end to the slaughter.

This action marked the end of the battle, as the French reserves, having seen so many of their nobility captured and killed, lost all hope of victory and promptly fled the battlefield.

===Aftermath===
Due to a lack of reliable sources it is impossible to give a precise figure for the French and English casualties. However, it is clear that though the English were outnumbered, their losses were far lower than those of the French. The French sources all give 4,00010,000 French dead, with up to 1,600 English dead. The lowest ratio in these French sources has the French losing six times more men than the English. The English sources vary between about 1,500 and 11,000 for the French dead, with English dead put at no more than 100. All figures on number of dead from table in Curry, 2000, p. 12 

Barker identifies from the available records "at least" 112 Englishmen who died in the fighting (including Edward of Norwich, 2nd Duke of York, a grandson of Edward III), Barker, 2005, p.320 but this excludes the wounded. One widely used estimate puts the English casualties at 450, not an insignificant number in an army of about 8,500, but far fewer than the thousands the French lost, nearly all of whom were killed or captured. Using the lowest French estimate of their own dead of 4,000 would imply a ratio of nearly 9 to 1 in favour of the English, or over 10 to 1 if the prisoners are included.

The French suffered heavily. Three dukes, at least eight counts, a viscount, and an archbishop died, along with numerous other nobles. Of the great royal office holders, France lost her Constable, Admiral, Master of the Crossbowmen and prvt of the marshals. Barker (2005), pp.x,321,323 The baillis of nine major northern towns were killed, often along with their sons, relatives and supporters. In the words of Juliet Barker, the battle "cut a great swath through the natural leaders of French society in Artois, Ponthieu, Normandy, Picardy." Barker (2005), pp. 3223 Estimates of the number of prisoners vary between 700 and 2,200, amongst them the Duke of Orlans (the famous poet Charles d'Orlans) and Jean Le Maingre (known as Boucicault) Marshal of France. Barker (2005) pp. 337, 367, 368. Almost all these prisoners would have been nobles, as the less valuable prisoners were slaughtered.

Although the victory had been militarily decisive, its impact was complex. It did not lead to further English conquests immediately as Henry's priority was to return to England, which he did on 16 November, to be received in triumph in London on the 23rd. Mortimer (2009) pp. 475, 479 Henry returned a conquering hero, in the eyes of his subjects and European powers outside of France, blessed by God. It established the legitimacy of the Lancastrian monarchy and the future campaigns of Henry to pursue his "rights and privileges" in France. Mortimer (2009), pp.5478 Other benefits to the English were longer term. Very quickly after the battle, the fragile truce between the Armagnac and Burgundian factions broke down. The brunt of the battle had fallen on the Armagnacs and it was they who suffered the majority of senior casualties and carried the blame for the defeat. The Burgundians seized on the opportunity and within 10 days of the battle had mustered their armies and marched on Paris. Barker (2005), p.354 This lack of unity in France would allow Henry eighteen months to prepare militarily and politically for a renewed campaign. When that campaign took place, it was made easier by the damage done to the political and military structures of Normandy by the battle. Barker (2005), p.381 

It took several years' more campaigning, but Henry was eventually able to fulfil all his objectives. He was recognised by the French in the Treaty of Troyes (1420) as the regent and heir to the French throne. This was cemented by his marriage to Catherine of Valois, the daughter of King Charles VI. However, Henry died at the age of thirty-six, two months before King Charles, thus he never actually became King of France. His infant son Henry VI technically became King of France on the death of Charles two months later, but the English regency only had effective control of the north of the country, with the Dauphin based in the south and also claiming the throne.

===Notable casualties===

====French====
Notable casualties (most named by Enguerrand de Monstrelet The Chronicles of Enguerrad de Monstrelet, (Ch. 147) ) include: For a fuller list of French casualties, see 

Leading officers:

* Charles I d'Albret, Count of Dreux, the Constable of France 
* Jacques de Chtillon, Lord of Dampierre, the Admiral of France
* David de Rambures, the Grand Master of Crossbowmen
* Guichard Dauphin, Master of the Royal Household

Three dukes:
* Antoine of Burgundy, Duke of Brabant and Limburg, and consort Duke of Luxembourg (a brother of John the Fearless, Duke of Burgundy)
* John I, Duke of Alenon-Perche, the second-in-command after d'Albret.
* Edward III, Duke of Bar (along with his brother and nephew)

Seven counts (eight with d'Albret):

* Philip of Burgundy, Count of Nevers and Rethel (another brother of John the Fearless)
* Frederick of Lorraine, Count of Vaudmont (brother of Charles II, Duke of Lorraine)
* Robert of Bar, Count of Marle and Soissons (nephew of Edward III, Duke of Bar).
* John VI, Count of Roucy
* Waleran III of Luxembourg, Count of Ligny and Saint-Pol (called "Count of Fauqemberg" in the chronicles)
* Edward II, Count of Grandpr
* Henry II, Count of Blmont

and some 90 bannerets and others, including:

* Jean de Montaigu, Archbishop of Sens
* John of Bar, Lord of Puisaye (brother of Edward III of Bar)
* Jean I de Cro, Lord of Cro-d'Araines and two of his sons, John and Archambaud
* Jean de Bthune, Lord of Marueil.
* Jan I van Brederode

====English and Welsh====
Notable casualties included 
* Edward of Norwich, 2nd Duke of York (b. 1373) Rosemary Horrox, Edward, second duke of York (c.13731415), Oxford Dictionary of National Biography, Oxford University Press, 2004 accessed 14 March 2011 
* Michael de la Pole, 3rd Earl of Suffolk Simon Walker, Pole, Michael de la, second earl of Suffolk (1367/81415), Oxford Dictionary of National Biography, Oxford University Press, 2004; online edn, Jan 2008 accessed 14 March 2011 
* Dafydd Gam (Davy Gam) Welsh hero who reputedly saved Henry V's life at Agincourt T. F. Tout, Dafydd Gam (d. 1415), rev. R. R. Davies, Oxford Dictionary of National Biography, Oxford University Press, 2004 ;online edn, Jan 2008 accessed 14 March 2011 

====Prisoners====

Among the circa 1,500 prisoners taken by the English, were the following French notables:

* Jean Le Maingre ("Boucicaut"), the Marshal of France.

* Charles of Artois (Count of Eu), the French Lieutenant of Normandy and Guyenne.

* John of Bourbon (Duke of Bourbon-Auvergne-Forez), probably the greatest lord of southern France

* Charles of Orleans (Duke of Orleans-Blois-Valois), a great lord of central France, titular head of the "Armagnac" party. (his brother, John of Orleans (Count of Angoulme-Prigord), another great lord, had been in English captivity since 1412).

* Louis de Bourbon (Count of Vendme)

* Arthur de Richemont, brother of John VI, Duke of Brittany, step-brother of Henry V (he was the son of Joan of Navarre, dowager-queen of England).

The matter of the French captives would prove to be a troublesome point, as Henry V refused to accept ransoms unless the prisoners pledged to recognize his claims on the French crown. This was generally rejected, and many of the prisoners would remain in English captivity for decades. The onerous conditions for release may have been calculated to be unacceptable. By the laws of chivalry, the property of a prisoner cannot be seized (it mars his ability to raise his own ransom). This meant that (in theory) great swathes of France - notably the vast dominions of John of Bourbon in the south and Charles of Orleans in the center - could not be tapped for military resources so long as they remained in captivity, a prospect that Henry V might have calculated would work more in his favor in the long run than the immediate cash injection of a ransom. In practice, however, some of the captive lords allowed their relatives to draw resources from their lands to contribute to the continuing war.

==Numbers at Agincourt==
Anne Curry in her 2005 book Agincourt: A New History, argues (based on research into the surviving administrative records) that the French army was about 12,000 strong, and the English army about 9,000, giving odds of 43. Curry (2005), p.192 By contrast, Juliet Barker in her Agincourt: The King, the Campaign, the Battle (also published in 2005) argues the English and Welsh were outnumbered "at least four to one and possibly as much as six to one". Barker, 2005 p.x She suggests figures of about 6,000 for the English and 36,000 for the French, based on the Gesta Henricis figures of 5,000 archers and 900 men-at-arms for the English, and Jean de Wavrin's statement "that the French were six times more numerous than the English". Barker, 2005 p.274 The 2009 Encyclopdia Britannica uses the figures of about 6,000 for the English and 20,000 to 30,000 for the French. The 1911 Britannica used somewhat different figures of 6,000 archers, 1,000 men-at-arms and "a few thousands of other foot" for the English, with the French outnumbering them by "at least four times".

With one of the lowest estimates for the size of the French army and also one of the highest estimates for the size of the English army, Curry is currently in a minority in suggesting that the odds were as near equal as 43. While not necessarily agreeing with the exact numbers Curry uses, some historians have however given support to her assertion that the French army was much smaller than traditionally thought, and the English somewhat bigger. Bertrand Schnerb, a professor of medieval history at the University of Lille, has said that he thinks the French probably had 12,00015,000 troops. Ian Mortimer, in his 2009 book 1415: Henry V's Year of Glory, notes how Curry "minimises French numbers (by limiting her figures to those in the basic army and a few specific additional companies) and maximises English numbers (by assuming the numbers sent home from Harfleur were no greater than sick lists)", but agrees that previous estimates have exaggerated the odds, and suggests that "the most extreme imbalance which is credible is fifteen thousand French troops against 8,100 English: a ratio of about two-to-one". 

However, Clifford J. Rogers, professor of history at the United States Military Academy at West Point, has recently argued that archival records are too incomplete to substantially change his view that the English were outnumbered about 41. Juliet Barker also disagrees with Curry's arguments in the acknowledgements section of her 2005 book on Agincourt, saying: "Surviving administrative records on both sides, but especially the French, are simply too incomplete to support assertion that nine thousand English were pitted against an army only twelve thousand strong. And if the differential really was as low as three to four then this makes a nonsense of the course of the battle as described by eyewitnesses and contemporaries." Barker, 2005, p. xvi 

Those supporting a greater imbalance have generally put more store by contemporary (and especially eyewitness) accounts. The Gesta Henrici gives plausible figures for the English of 5,000 archers and 900 men-at-arms, but Mortimer notes it is "wildly inaccurate" in stating the English were outnumbered 301, and there have also been doubts as to how much it was written as propaganda for Henry V. The proportions also seem incorrect, as from surviving records we know that Henry set out with about four times as many archers as men-at-arms, not five and a half times as many. Those who have supported the Gesta figures for the English army have generally thought that although the English army may have left Harfleur with eight or nine thousand men, it is plausible that after weeks of campaigning and disease in hostile territory they would have lost two or three thousand fighting men; however Mortimer states: "Despite the trials of the march, Henry had lost very few men to illness or death; and we have independent testimony that no more than 160 had been captured on the way." Mortimer, 1415: Henry V's Year of Glory, p.565. 

As Mortimer notes, the Burgundian numbers for the size of the French vanguard of 8,000 men-at-arms in the vanguard with 1,400 (or 2,400) men-at-arms in the wings correspond roughly with the figures of ten thousand men-at-arms recorded by the duke of Berry's herald. The Burgundians also recorded 4,000 archers and 1,500 crossbowmen in the "vanguard", which would suggest "fourteen or fifteen thousand fighting men". Mortimer, 2009, p.565 (It should be noted that the Burgundians actually give the total size of the French army as an implausible 50,000, Curry, 2000, p.12 and the numbers they use do not correspond closely to the odds they describe. Using very similar numbers, Jean Le Fevre states that the English were outnumbered 31, whereas Wavrin states that the English were outnumbered 61. Curry, 2000, p.157 )

One particular cause of confusion may have been the number of servants on both sides. Mortimer suggests that because there was a much higher proportion of men-at-arms on the French side, the number of non-combatants was much higher. Each man-at-arms could be expected to have a page, who would have ridden one of his spare horses. If the French army had an extra 10,000 mounted men (as opposed to only 1,500 extra for the English), then "the English probably did see an army about three times the size of their own fighting force". Mortimer, 1415: Henry V's Year of Glory, pp.4212. 

It is open to debate whether these should all be counted as non-combatants; Rogers (for example) accepts that the French probably had about 10,000 men-at-arms, but explicitly includes one "gros valet" (an armed, armoured and mounted military servant) per French man-at-arms in his calculation of the odds. Rogers (2008), pp 602 There may therefore be less difference between some of these different historians' positions on the numerical odds than there initially appears, given that the various accounts generally agree that the battle was almost entirely fought between the French men-at-arms and the English army, with French crossbowmen, archers, and other infantry playing little or no part.

==Popular representations==
The 15th century Agincourt Carol
Soon after the English victory at Agincourt, a number of popular folk songs were created about the battle, the most famous being the Agincourt Carol, produced in the first half of the 15th century. Curry (2000), pp.280283. Other ballads followed, including King Henry Fifth's Conquest of France, raising the popular prominence of particular events mentioned only in passing by the original chroniclers, such as the gift of tennis balls before the campaign. Woolf, p.323. 

The most famous cultural depiction of the battle today, however, is through William Shakespeare's Henry V, written in 1599. The play focuses on the pressures of kingship, the tensions between how a king should appear  chivalric, honest and just  and how a king must sometimes act  Machiavellian and ruthless. Cantor, p.15. These tensions are illustrated in the play by Shakespeare's depiction of Henry's decision to kill some of the French prisoners, whilst attempting to justify it and distance himself from the event  this moment of the battle is portrayed both as a break with the traditions of chivalry, and as key example of the paradox of kingship. Cantor, pp.212. Shakespeare's depiction of the battle also plays on the theme of modernity  Shakespeare contrasts the modern, English king and his army with the medieval, chivalric, older model of the French. Cantor, p.20. Shakespeare's play presented Henry as leading a truly British force into battle, playing on the importance of the link between the monarch and the common soldiers in the fight. Cantor, p.16. The original play does not, however, feature any scenes of the actual battle itself, leading critic Rose Zimbardo to characterise it as "full of warfare, yet empty of conflict." Hatchuel, p.193. 

The play introduced the famous St Crispin's Day Speech; Shakespeare has Henry give a moving narration to his soldiers just before the battle, urging his "band of brothers" to stand together in the forthcoming fight. Margolies, p.149. One of Shakespeare's most heroic speeches, critic David Margolies describes how it "oozes honour, military glory, love of country and self-sacrifice", and it forms one of the first instances of English literature linking solidarity and comradeship to success in battle. Margolies, p.149; Adam, p.31. Partially as a result, the battle was used as a metaphor at the beginning of the First World War, when the British Expeditionary Force's attempts to stop the German advances were widely likened to it. Adams, p.183. 

Shakespeare's version of the battle of Agincourt has been turned into (several minor and) two major films  by Laurence Olivier in 1944, and by Kenneth Branagh in 1989. Made just prior to the invasion of Normandy, Olivier's gives the battle what Sarah Hatchuel has termed an "exhilarating and heroic" tone, with an artificial, cinematic look to the battle scenes. Hatchuel, pp.1945. Branagh's version gives a longer, more Realist portrayal of the battle itself, drawing on both historical sources and images from the Vietnam and Falkland Wars. Hatchuel, p.195. Babakitis uses digital effects to exaggerate realist features during his battle scenes, producing a more avant-garde interpretation of the fighting at Agincourt. Hatchuel, p.200. 

The battle remains an important symbol in popular culture. For example, a mock trial of Henry V for the crimes associated with the slaughter of the prisoners was held in Washington, D.C. in March 2010, drawing from both the historical record and Shakespeare's play. Participating as judges were Justices Samuel Alito and Ruth Bader Ginsburg. The trial ranged widely over whether there was just cause for war and not simply the prisoner issue. Although an audience vote was "too close to call", Henry was unanimously found guilty by the court on the basis of "evolving standards of civil society". link to video 

==See also==
* V sign, for more on the "two-finger salute" which some claim derives from the gestures of longbowmen fighting in the English army at the battle of Agincourt.

==Notes==
* a. Pronunciation: The story of the battle has been retold many times in English, from the fifteenth-century Agincourt song onwards, and an English pronunciation of has become established. Merriam-Webster has a small audio file here. http://www.merriam-webster.com/cgi-bin/audio.pl?ggazin02.wav=Agincourt The modern tendency, however, is to use a style closer to the original , such as or , as exampled in this interview with Juliet Barker on Meet the Author, here. http://www.meettheauthor.co.uk/bookbites/915.html 
* b. Dates in the fifteenth century are difficult to reconcile with modern calendars: see for the way the date of the battle was established.
* c. The first known use of angled stakes to thwart a mounted charge was at the Battle of Nicopolis, an engagement between European states and Turkish forces in 1396, twenty years before Agincourt. French knights, charging uphill, were unseated from their horses, either because their mounts were injured on the stakes or because they dismounted to uproot the obstacles, and overpowered. News of the contrivance circulated within Europe and was described in a book of tactics written in 1411 by Boucicault, Marshal of France. 

==References==
* Adams, Michael C. (2002) Echoes of War: a thousand years of military history in popular culture. Kentucky: University of Kentucky Press. ISBN 978-0-8131-2240-3.
* 
* 
* 
* Cantor, Paul A. (2006) "Shakespeare's Henry V: From the Medieval to the Modern World," in Murley and Sutton (ed) (2006).
* Curry, Anne (2000). The Battle of Agincourt: Sources and Interpretations. The Boydell Press. ISBN 0-85115-802-1.
* Curry, Anne (2005) (paperback edition 2006) . Agincourt: A New History. Pub: Tempus UK. ISBN 978-0-7524-2828-4
* 
* Dupuy, Trevor N. (1993). Harper Encyclopedia of Military History. Pub: New York: HarperCollins. ISBN 978-0-06-270056-8
* Hatchuel, Sarah. (2008) "The Battle of Agincourt in Shakespeare's, Laurence Olivier's, Kenneth Branagh's and Peter Babakitis's Henry V," in Hatchuel and Vienne-Guerrin (eds) (2008).
* Hatchuel, Sarah and Nathalie Vienne-Guerrin. (eds) (2008) Shakespeare on Screen: the Henriad. Rouen, France: Laboratoire ERIAC. ISBN 978-2-87775-454-5.
* 
* 
* 
* 
* Margolies, David. (2006) "Henry V and ideology," in Hatchuel and Vienne-Guerrin (eds) (2008).
* Murley, John Albert and Sean D. Sutton. (eds) (2006) Perspectives on politics in Shakespeare. Oxford: Lexington Press. ISBN 978-0-7391-1684-5.
* 
* Nicolas, Harris. History of the Battle of Agincourt, and of the expedition of Henry the Fifth into France in 1415; to which is added the Roll of the men at arms in the English army. London: Johnson & Co (1833).
* 
* 
* 
* 
* Rogers, Clifford J. "Henry Vs Military Strategy in 1415," The Hundred Years War: A Wider Focus, ed. L. J. Andrew Villalon and Donald J. Kagay (Leiden: Brill, 2005): 399427.
* 
* 
* 
* Woolf, Daniel. (2003) The Social Circulation of the Past: English historical culture, 15001730. Oxford: Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-925778-2.
* 

=== Articles ===
* Azincourt Museum, The Azincourt Museum, Azincourt, France Accessed 15 April 2008.(The site is in French and English).
* Beck, Steve (2005). The Battle of Agincourt, www.militaryhistoryonline.com.
* Bragg, Melvyn (presenter). Agincourt with Anne Curry, Michael Jones and John Watts from In Our Time (BBC Radio 4), 16 September 2004
* Family Chronicle.com, The Agincourt Honor Roll, Family Chronicle, March/April 1997.
* Glanz, James (25 October 2009). Henry V's Greatest Victory is Besieged by Academia. The New York Times. Accessed 24 October 2009.
* Grummitt, David. (Oxford University), A review of Agincourt 1415: Henry V, Sir Thomas Erpingham and the triumph of the English archers ed. Anne Curry, Pub: Tempus UK, 2000 ISBN 0-7524-1780-0. Accessed 15 April 2008.
* Hansen, Mogens Herman (Copenhagen Polis Centre) The Little Grey Horse --Henry V's Speech at Agincourt and the Battle Exhortation in Ancient Historiography Histos volume 2 (March 1998), website of the Department of Classics and Ancient History, University of Durham
* 
* "Battle of Agincourt" in Military Heritage, October 2005, Volume 7, No. 2, pp. 36 to 43. ISSN 1524-8666.
* Sutherland, T.L. 2006 'The Battle of Agincourt: An Alternative Location?' Journal of Conflict Archaeology 1, 245265.

=== Other ===

* The Fitzwilliam Museum, University of Cambridge Macclesfield Psalter CD

==External links==

* 
* Contemporary account of battle written by Enguerrand de Monstrelet (d.1453), governor of Cambrai and supporter of the French crown.
* "Historians Reassess Battle of Agincourt" by James Glanz, The New York Times, 24 October 2009
* Battle of Agincourt on Medieval Archives Podcast

Agincourt 1415



[[Burgundian]]

Burgundian can refer to any of the following:

*Someone from Burgundy.
*Burgundians, an East Germanic tribe, who first appear in history in South East Europe. Later Burgundians colonised the area of Gaul that is now known as Burgundy (French Bourgogne).
*The Old Burgundian language, an East Germanic language spoken by the Burgundians.
*The Modern Burgundian language, an Ol language also known as Bourguignon spoken in the region of Burgundy, France. The neighbouring dialect of Franc-Comtois is sometimes regarded as part of the Burgundian group.
*Burgundian (party), a political faction in early 15th century during the Hundred Years' War.



[[Bronze Age]]

Diffusion of metallurgy in Europe and Asia Minor. The darkest areas are the oldest.

The Bronze Age is a time period characterized by the use of bronze, proto-writing, and other early features of urban civilization.

The Bronze Age is the second principal period of the three-age Stone-Bronze-Iron system, as proposed in modern times by Christian Jrgensen Thomsen, for classifying and studying ancient societies. An ancient civilization is defined to be in the Bronze Age either by smelting its own copper and alloying with tin, or by trading for bronze from production areas elsewhere. Copper-tin ores are rare, as reflected in the fact that there were no tin bronzes in western Asia before the trading in bronze began in the third millennium BC. Worldwide, the Bronze Age generally followed the Neolithic period, but in some parts of the world, the Copper Age served as a transition from the Neolithic to the Bronze Age. Although the Iron Age generally followed the Bronze Age, in some areas, the Iron Age intruded directly on the Neolithic from outside the region, with the exception of Sub-Saharan Africa where it was developed independently. Iron In Africa: Revising The History : Unesco. Portal.unesco.org. Retrieved on 2013-07-28. 

Bronze Age cultures differed in their development of the first writing. According to archaeological evidence, cultures in Mesopotamia (cuneiform) and Egypt (hieroglyphs) developed the earliest viable writing systems.

==History==
The overall period is characterized by the full adoption of bronze in many regions, though the place and time of the introduction and development of bronze technology was not universally synchronous. Bronze was independently discovered in the Maykop culture of the North Caucasus as early as the mid-4th millennium BC, which makes them the producers of the oldest known bronze. However, the Maykop culture only had arsenical bronze, a naturally occurring alloy. Other regions developed bronze and the associated technology at different periods. Man-made tin bronze technology requires set production techniques. Tin must be mined (mainly as the tin ore cassiterite) and smelted separately, then added to molten copper to make the bronze alloy. The Bronze Age was a time of heavy use of metals and of developing trade networks (See Tin sources and trade in ancient times).

===Near East===
Southwest Asia / Middle East

The Bronze Age in the ancient Near East began with the rise of Sumer in the 4th millennium BC. Cultures in the ancient Near East (often called, "the cradle of civilization") practised intensive year-round agriculture, developed a writing system, invented the potter's wheel, created a centralized government, law codes, and empires, and introduced social stratification, slavery, and organized warfare. Societies in the region laid the foundations for astronomy and mathematics.

====Near East timeline====
:Dates are approximate, consult particular article for details

ImageSize = width:800 height:115
PlotArea = width:720 height:90 left:65 bottom:20
AlignBars = justify

Colors = 
 id:period value:rgb(1,0.7,0.5) #
 id:age value:rgb(0.95,0.85,0.5) #
 id:era value:rgb(1,0.85,0.5) #

Period = from:-3300 till:-300
TimeAxis = orientation:horizontal
ScaleMajor = unit:year increment:500 start:-3300
ScaleMinor = unit:year increment:100 start:-3300
PlotData =
 align:center textcolor:black fontsize:8 mark:(line,black) width:15 shift:(0,-5)

 bar: color:period
 from: -3300 till: -1200 text:Classic Bronze Age
 bar:NEast color:era
 from: -3300 till: -1200 shift:(0,5) text:Ancient Near East
 from: -3300 till: -2100 text:Early Bronze Age
 from: -2100 till: -1550 text:Intermediate Bronze Age
 from: -1550 till: -1200 text:Late Bronze Age
 bar:Mesop. color:age
 from: -2900 till: -2350 text:Sumerian city-states
 from: -2350 till: -2193 text:Akkadia
 from: -2119 till: -2000 text:Ur
 from: -2000 till: -1700 shift:(0,5) text:Babylonia
 from: -2000 till: -1800 text:Assyria
 from: -1600 till: -1200 text:Kassites
 bar:Egyptian color:era
 from: -3200 till: -1070 shift:(0,5) text:Ancient Egypt
 from: -3200 till: -3000 text:Protodynastic
 from: -3000 till: -2700 text:Archaic
 from: -2700 till: -2180 text:Old Kingdom
 from: -2050 till: -1700 text:Middle Kingdom
 from: -1550 till: -1070 text:New Kingdom

====Age sub-divisions====
The Ancient Near East Bronze Age can be divided as follows:

 ;Near East Bronze Age Divisions 
 The archetypal Bronze Age divisions of the Near East have a well-established triadic clearness of expression. The period dates and phase ranges are solely applicable to the Near East, but not applicable universally. The Near East period dates and phase ranges being unrelated to the bronze chronology of other regions of the world. Piotr Bienkowski, Alan Ralph Millard (editors). Dictionary of the ancient Near East. Page 60. Amlie Kuhr. The Ancient Near East, c. 3000330 BC. Page 9. ;Early Bronze Age (EBA) 33002100 BC : 33003000: EBA I : 30002700: EBA II : 27002200: EBA III : 22002100: EBA IV ;Middle Bronze Age (MBA) : Also, Intermediate Bronze Age (IBA) 21001550 BC : 21002000: MBA I : 20001750: MBA II A : 17501650: MBA II B : 16501550: MBA II C ;Late Bronze Age (LBA) 15501200 BC : 15501400: LBA I : 14001300: LBA II A : 13001200: LBA II B (Bronze Age collapse) 

ImageSize = width:400 height:665
PlotArea = width:300 height:640 left:80 bottom:20
AlignBars = justify
Colors = 
 id:time value:rgb(0.7,0.7,1) #
 id:period value:rgb(1,0.7,0.5) #
 id:age value:rgb(0.95,0.85,0.5) #
 id:era value:rgb(1,0.85,0.5) #
 id:eon value:rgb(1,0.85,0.7) #
 id:filler value:gray(0.8) # background bar
 id:black value:black
Period = from:1200 till:3300
TimeAxis = orientation:vertical
ScaleMajor = unit:year increment:100 start:1200
ScaleMinor = unit:year increment:50 start:1200
PlotData =
 align:center textcolor:black fontsize:8 mark:(line,black) width:20 shift:(25,-5)
 bar:Phase color:era
 from: 3300 till: 3000 text:EBA I
 from: 3000 till: 2700 text:EBA II
 from: 2700 till: 2200 text:EBA III
 from: 2200 till: 2100 text:EBA IV
 from: 2100 till: 2000 text:MBA I
 from: 2000 till: 1750 text:MBA II A
 from: 1750 till: 1650 text:MBA II B
 from: 1650 till: 1550 text:MBA II C
 from: 1550 till: 1400 text:LBA I
 from: 1400 till: 1300 text:LBA II A
 from: 1300 till: 1200 text:LBA II B
 bar:Period color:age
 from: 3300 till: 2100 text:Early Bronze Age (EBA)
 from: 2100 till: 1550 text:Middle Bronze Age (MBA)
 from: 2100 till: 1550 shift:(25,-20) text:(Intermediate Bronze Age)
 from: 1550 till: 1200 text:Late Bronze Age (LBA)
 bar:Age color:period
 from: 3300 till: 1200 shift:(-25,0) text:Bronze Age

====Mesopotamia====

In Mesopotamia, the Mesopotamia Bronze Age began about 2900 BC and ended with the Kassite period. The usual tripartite division into an Early, Middle and Late Bronze Age is not used. Instead, a division primarily based on art-historical and historical characteristics is more common. The cities of the Ancient Near East housed several tens of thousands of people. Ur in the Middle Bronze Age and Babylon in the Late Bronze Age similarly had large populations.

The earliest mention of Babylonia appears on a tablet from the reign of Sargon of Akkad in the 23rd century BC. The Amorite dynasty established the city-state of Babylon in the 19th century BC. Over 100 years later, it briefly took over the other city-states and formed the first Babylonian empire during what is also called the Old Babylonian Period. Babylonia adopted the written Semitic Akkadian language for official use. By that time, the Sumerian language was no longer spoken, but was still in religious use. The Akkadian and Sumerian traditions played a major role in later Babylonian culture, and the region, even under outside rule, remained an important cultural center throughout the Bronze and Early Iron Age.

====Persian Plateau====

 Persian Bronze Age 
 Image:Elam cool.jpg|Late 3rd Millennium BC silver cup from Marvdasht, Fars, with linear-Elamite inscription. 

Elam was an ancient civilization located to the east of Mesopotamia. In the Old Elamite period (Middle Bronze Age), Elam consisted of kingdoms on the Iranian plateau, centered in Anshan, and from the mid-2nd millennium BC, it was centered in Susa in the Khuzestan lowlands. Its culture played a crucial role in the Gutian Empire and especially during the Achaemenid dynasty that succeeded it.

The Oxus civilization Dalton, O. M., Franks, A. W., & Read, C. H. (1905). The treasure of the Oxus: With other objects from ancient Persia and India. London: British Museum. was a Bronze Age Central Asian culture dated to ca. 23001700 BC and centered on the upper Amu Darya (Oxus). In the Early Bronze Age the culture of the Kopet Dag oases and Altyn-Depe developed a proto-urban society. This corresponds to level IV at Namazga-Depe. Altyn-Depe was a major centre even then. Pottery was wheel-turned. Grapes were grown. The height of this urban development was reached in the Middle Bronze Age c. 2300 BC, corresponding to level V at Namazga-Depe. V.M. Masson, The Bronze Age in Khorasan and Transoxiana, chapter 10 in A.H. Dani and Vadim Mikhalovich Masson (eds.), History of civilizations of Central Asia, volume 1: The dawn of civilization: earliest times to 700 BC This Bronze Age culture is called the BactriaMargiana Archaeological Complex (BMAC).

The Kulli culture, Possehl, G. L. (1986). Kulli: An exploration of ancient civilization in Asia. Durham, N.C: Carolina Academic Press Piggott, S. (1961). Prehistoric India to 1000 B.C. Baltimore: Penguin Book. similar to those of the Indus Valley Civilization, was located in southern Balochistan (Gedrosia) ca. 25002000 BC. Agriculture was the economical base of this people. At several places dams were found, providing evidence for a highly developed water management system.

Konar Sandal is associated with the hypothesized "Jiroft culture", a 3rd millennium BC culture postulated on the basis of a collection of artifacts confiscated in 2001.

====Anatolia====

The Hittite Empire was established in Hattusa in northern Anatolia from the 18th century BC. In the 14th century BC, the Hittite Kingdom was at its height, encompassing central Anatolia, southwestern Syria as far as Ugarit, and upper Mesopotamia. After 1180 BC, amid general turmoil in the Levant associated with the sudden arrival of the Sea Peoples, the kingdom disintegrated into several independent "Neo-Hittite" city-states, some of which survived until as late as the 8th century BC.

Arzawa in Western Anatolia during the second half of the second millennium BC likely extended along southern Anatolia in a belt that reaches from near the Turkish Lakes Region to the Aegean coast. Arzawa was the western neighborsometimes a rival and sometimes a vassalof the Middle and New Hittite Kingdoms.

The Assuwa league was a confederation of states in western Anatolia that was defeated by the Hittites under an earlier Tudhaliya I, around 1400 BC. Arzawa has been associated with the much more obscure Assuwa generally located to its north. It probably bordered it, and may even be an alternative term for it (at least during some periods).

====Levant====

 Mediterranean Bronze Age 
 File:TimnaChalcolithicMine.JPG|Chalcolithic copper mine in Timna Valley, Negev Desert, Israel. 

Ebla was at its height from ca. 1850 to 1600 BC. The first known ruler of Ebla in this period was Megum, an Ensi (governor) for Ur III during the reign of Amar-Sin of Ur. Ibbit-Lim was the first attested king. Ebla is mentioned in texts from Alalakh from ca. 1750 BC. The city was destroyed again in the turbulent period of 16501600 BC, by a Hittite king (Mursili I or Hattusili I). This is attested to only by the fragmentary Hurro-Hittite Song of Release.

Amorite kingdoms, ca. 20001600 BC, arose in Mari, Yamkhad, Qatna, Assyria, under Shamshi-Adad I Isin, Larsa, and also Babylon. This era ended in northern Mesopotamia with the expulsion of the Amorite dominated Babylonians from Assyria by King Adasi c. 1720 BC, and in the south with the Hittite sack of Babylon (c. 1595 BC), which brought new ethnic groupsparticularly Kassitesto the forefront in southern Mesopotamia. From the 15th century BC onward, the term Amurru is usually applied to the region extending north of Canaan as far as Kadesh on the Orontes.

The Mitanni was a loosely organized state in northern Syria and south-east Anatolia from ca. 1500 BC1300 BC. Founded by an Indo-Aryan ruling class that governed a predominately Hurrian population, Mitanni came to be a regional power after the Hittite destruction of Kassite Babylon created a power vacuum in Mesopotamia. At its beginning, Mitanni's major rival was Egypt under the Thutmosids. However, with the ascent of the Hittite empire, Mitanni and Egypt made an alliance to protect their mutual interests from the threat of Hittite domination. At the height of its power, during the 14th century BC, it had outposts centered around its capital, Washukanni, which archaeologists have located on the headwaters of the Khabur River. Eventually, Mitanni succumbed to Hittite, and later Assyrian attacks, and was reduced to a province of the Middle Assyrian Empire.

The earliest known Ugarit contact with Egypt (and the first exact dating of Ugaritic civilization) comes from a carnelian bead identified with the Middle Kingdom pharaoh Senusret I, 1971 BC1926 BC. A stela and a statuette from the Egyptian pharaohs Senusret III and Amenemhet III have also been found. However, it is unclear at what time these monuments got to Ugarit. Amarna letters from Ugarit ca. 1350 BC records one letter each from Ammittamru I, Niqmaddu II, and his queen. From the 16th to the 13th century BC Ugarit remained in constant touch with Egypt and Cyprus (named Alashiya).

The Aramaeans are a Northwest Semitic semi-nomadic and pastoralist people who originated in what is now modern Syria (Biblical Aram) during the Late Bronze Age and the Iron Age. Large groups migrated to Mesopotamia, where they intermingled with the native Akkadian (Assyrian and Babylonian) population. The Aramaeans never had a unified empire; they were divided into independent kingdoms all across the Near East. After the Bronze Age collapse, their political influence was confined to a number of Syro-Hittite states, which were entirely absorbed into the Neo-Assyrian Empire by the 8th century BC.

====Ancient Egypt====

=====Early Bronze dynasties=====
In Ancient Egypt, the Bronze Age begins in the Protodynastic period, c. 3150 BC. The archaic early Bronze Age of Egypt, known as the Early Dynastic Period of Egypt, Karin Sowada and Peter Grave. Egypt in the Eastern Mediterranean during the Old Kingdom. Lukas de Blois and R. J. van der Spek. An Introduction to the Ancient World. Page 14. immediately follows the unification of Lower and Upper Egypt, c. 3100 BC. It is generally taken to include the First and Second Dynasties, lasting from the Protodynastic Period of Egypt until about 2686 BC, or the beginning of the Old Kingdom. With the First Dynasty, the capital moved from Abydos to Memphis with a unified Egypt ruled by an Egyptian god-king. Abydos remained the major holy land in the south. The hallmarks of ancient Egyptian civilization, such as art, architecture and many aspects of religion, took shape during the Early Dynastic period. Memphis in the Early Bronze Age was the largest city of the time.
The Old Kingdom of the regional Bronze Age is the name given to the period in the 3rd millennium BC when Egypt attained its first continuous peak of civilization in complexity and achievement  the first of three "Kingdom" periods, which mark the high points of civilization in the lower Nile Valley (the others being Middle Kingdom and the New Kingdom).

The First Intermediate Period of Egypt, Hansen, M. H. (2000). A comparative study of thirty city-state cultures: An investigation conducted by the Copenhagen Polis Centre. Copenhagen: Det Kongelike Danske Videnskabernes Selskab. Page 68. often described as a "dark period" in ancient Egyptian history, spanned about 100 years after the end of the Old Kingdom from about 2181 to 2055 BC. Very little monumental evidence survives from this period, especially from the early part of it. The First Intermediate Period was a dynamic time when rule of Egypt was roughly divided between two competing power bases: Heracleopolis in Lower Egypt and Thebes in Upper Egypt. These two kingdoms would eventually come into conflict, with the Theban kings conquering the north, resulting in reunification of Egypt under a single ruler during the second part of the 11th Dynasty.

=====Middle Bronze dynasties=====
The Middle Kingdom of Egypt lasted from 2055 to 1650 BC. During this period, the Osiris funerary cult rose to dominate Egyptian popular religion. The period comprises two phases: the 11th Dynasty, which ruled from Thebes and the 12th Othmar Keel and Christoph Uehlinger. Gods, goddesses, and images of God in ancient Israel, 1998. Page 17 (cf. "The first phase (Middle Bronze Age IIA) runs roughly parallel to the Egyptian Twelfth Dynasty") and 13th Dynasties centered around el-Lisht. The unified kingdom was previously considered to comprise the 11th and 12th Dynasties, but historians now at least partially consider the 13th Dynasty to belong to the Middle Kingdom.

During the Second Intermediate Period, Bruce G. Trigger. Ancient Egypt: a social history. 1983. Page 137. (cf. ... "for the Middle Kingdom and Second Intermediate Period it is the Middle Bronze Age".) Ancient Egypt fell into disarray for a second time, between the end of the Middle Kingdom and the start of the New Kingdom. It is best known for the Hyksos, whose reign comprised the 15th and 16th dynasties. The Hyksos first appeared in Egypt during the 11th Dynasty, began their climb to power in the 13th Dynasty, and emerged from the Second Intermediate Period in control of Avaris and the Delta. By the 15th Dynasty, they ruled lower Egypt, and they were expelled at the end of the 17th Dynasty.

=====Late Bronze dynasties=====
The New Kingdom of Egypt, also referred to as the Egyptian Empire, lasted from the 16th to the 11th century BC. The New Kingdom followed the Second Intermediate Period and was succeeded by the Third Intermediate Period. It was Egypt's most prosperous time and marked the peak of Egypt's power. The later New Kingdom, i.e. the 19th and 20th Dynasties (12921069 BC), is also known as the Ramesside period, after the eleven pharaohs that took the name of Ramesses.

===Central Asia===

====Seima-Turbino Phenomenon====

The Altai Mountains in what is now southern Russia and central Mongolia have been identified as the point of origin of a cultural enigma termed the Seima-Turbino Phenomenon. 

 It is conjectured that changes in climate in this region around 2000 BC and the ensuing ecological, economic and political changes triggered a rapid and massive migration westward into northeast Europe, eastward into China and southward into Vietnam and Thailand across a frontier of some 4,000 miles. This migration took place in just five to six generations and led to peoples from Finland in the west to Thailand in the east employing the same metal working technology and, in some areas, horse breeding and riding. It is further conjectured that the same migrations spread the Uralic group of languages across Europe and Asia: some 39 languages of this group are still extant, including Hungarian, Finnish, Estonian and Lappish. 
However, recent genetic testings of sites in south Siberia and Kazakhstan (Andronovo horizon) would rather support a spreading of the bronze technology via Indo-European migrations eastwards, as this technology was well known for quite a while in western regions. C. Lalueza-Fox et al. 2004. Unravelling migrations in the steppe: mitochondrial DNA sequences from ancient central Asians C. Keyser et al. 2009. Ancient DNA provides new insights into the history of south Siberian Kurgan people. Human Genetics. 

===East Asia===

====East Asia timeline====
:Dates are approximate, consult particular article for details

ImageSize = width:800 height:60
PlotArea = width:720 height:35 left:65 bottom:20
AlignBars = justify

Colors = 
 id:time value:rgb(0.7,0.7,1) #
 id:age value:rgb(0.95,0.85,0.5) #
 id:era value:rgb(1,0.85,0.5) #
 id:filler value:gray(0.8) # background bar
 id:black value:black

Period = from:-3300 till:-300
TimeAxis = orientation:horizontal
ScaleMajor = unit:year increment:500 start:-3300
ScaleMinor = unit:year increment:100 start:-3300

PlotData =
 align:center textcolor:black fontsize:8 mark:(line,black) width:15 shift:(0,-5)

 bar:China color:age
 from: -3000 till: -700 shift:(0,5) text:Bronze Age China
 from: -3000 till: -2700 text:Majiayao
 from: -3000 till: -2000 text:Longshan
 from: -2000 till: -1550 text:Erlitou
 bar:China color:era
 from: -1550 till: -1046 text:Shang
 from: -1046 till: -700 text:Zhu
 bar:Korea color:era
 from: -800 till: -300 text:Gojoseon

====China====

 Chinese Bronze Age 
 File:Gefuding Gui.jpg|A Shang Dynasty two-handled bronze gefuding gui (16001046 BC). File:Pu with openwork interlaced dragons design.jpg|Spring and Autumn Period pu bronze vessel with interlaced dragon design (722481 BC) 

Historians disagree about the dates of a "Bronze Age" in China. The difficulty lies in the term "Bronze Age", as it has been applied to signify a period in history when bronze tools replaced stone tools, and, later, were themselves replaced by iron ones. The medium of the new "Age" made that of the old obsolete. In China, however, any attempt to establish a definite set of dates for a Bronze Age is complicated by two factors:
# arrival of iron smelting technology, and
# persistence of bronze objects.
The earliest bronze artifacts have been found in the Majiayao culture site (between 3100 and 2700 BC), and from then on, the society gradually grew into the Bronze Age.

Bronze metallurgy in China originated in what is referred to as the Erlitou () period, which some historians argue places it within the range of dates controlled by the Shang dynasty. Chang, K. C.: "Studies of Shang Archaeology", pp. 67, 1. Yale University Press, 1982. Others believe the Erlitou sites belong to the preceding Xia () dynasty. Chang, K. C.: "Studies of Shang Archaeology", p. 1. Yale University Press, 1982. The U.S. National Gallery of Art defines the Chinese Bronze Age as the "period between about 2000 BC and 771 BC," a period that begins with Erlitou culture and ends abruptly with the disintegration of Western Zhou rule. Though this provides a concise frame of reference, it overlooks the continued importance of bronze in Chinese metallurgy and culture. Since this is significantly later than the discovery of bronze in Mesopotamia, bronze technology could have been imported rather than discovered independently in China. While there may be reason to believe that bronzework developed inside China separately from outside influence, Li-Liu; The Chinese Neolithic, Cambridge University Press, 2005 Shang and Zhou Dynasties: The Bronze Age of China Heilbrunn Timeline Retrieved May 13, 2010 the discovery of European mummies in Xinjiang suggests a possible route of transmission from the West. 

The Shang Dynasty Also known as the Yin Dynasty. Thorp, R. L. (2005). China in the early bronze age: Shang civilization. Philadelphia: Univ. of Pennsylvania Press. of the Yellow River Valley rose to power after the Xia Dynasty. While some direct information about the Shang Dynasty comes from Shang-era inscriptions on bronze artifacts, most comes from oracle bonesturtle shells, cattle scapulae, or other bones, which bear glyphs that form the first significant corpus of recorded Chinese characters.

Iron is found from the Zhou Dynasty, but its use is minimal. Chinese literature dating to the 6th century BC attests a knowledge of iron smelting, yet bronze continues to occupy the seat of significance in the archaeological and historical record for some time after this. Barnard, N.: "Bronze Casting and Bronze Alloys in Ancient China", p. 14. The Australian National University and Monumenta Serica, 1961. Historian W. C. White argues that iron did not supplant bronze "at any period before the end of the Zhou dynasty (256 BC)" and that bronze vessels make up the majority of metal vessels all the way through the Later Han period, or to 221 BC. White, W. C.: "Bronze Culture of Ancient China", p. 208. University of Toronto Press, 1956. 
is unclear what White referred to: The former Han dynasty was 206-25BCE, the later Han dynasty ended 220CE. On iron, readers may prefer to refer to this newer book: Wagner, Donald B. Iron and Steel in Ancient China. Leiden, Netherlands; New York: E.J. Brill, 1993.

The Chinese bronze artifacts generally are either utilitarian, like spear points or adze heads, or "ritual bronzes", which are more elaborate versions in precious materials of everyday vessels, as well as tools and weapons. Examples are the numerous large sacrificial tripods known as dings in Chinese; there are many other distinct shapes. Surviving identified Chinese ritual bronzes tend to be highly decorated, often with the taotie motif, which involves highly stylized animal face(s). These appear in three main motif types: those of demons, of symbolic animals, and of abstract symbols. Erdberg, E.: "Ancient Chinese Bronzes", p. 20. Siebenbad-Verlag, 1993. Many large bronzes also bear cast inscriptions that are the great bulk of the surviving body of early Chinese writing and have helped historians and archaeologists piece together the history of China, especially during the Zhou Dynasty (1046-256 BC).

The bronzes of the Western Zhou Dynasty document large portions of history not found in the extant texts that were often composed by persons of varying rank and possibly even social class. Further, the medium of cast bronze lends the record they preserve a permanence not enjoyed by manuscripts. Shaughnessy, E. L.: "Sources of Western Zhou History", pp. xvxvi. University of California Press, 1982. These inscriptions can commonly be subdivided into four parts: a reference to the date and place, the naming of the event commemorated, the list of gifts given to the artisan in exchange for the bronze, and a dedication. Shaughnessy, E. L. "Sources of Western Zhou History", pp. 7683. University of California Press, 1982. The relative points of reference these vessels provide have enabled historians to place most of the vessels within a certain time frame of the Western Zhou period, allowing them to trace the evolution of the vessels and the events they record. Shaughnessy, E. L. "Sources of Western Zhou History", p. 107 

====Korea====

The beginning of the Bronze Age on the peninsula is around 900 BC - 800 BC. Carter J. Eckert, el., "Korea, Old and New: History", 1990, pp. 9 Although the Korean Bronze Age culture derives from the Liaoning and Manchuria, it exhibits unique typology and styles, especially in ritual objects. [http://daegu.museum.go.kr/museum/english/body_02/body02_1_03.htm ] 

The Mumun pottery period is named after the Korean name for undecorated or plain cooking and storage vessels that form a large part of the pottery assemblage over the entire length of the period, but especially 850-550 BC. The Mumun period is known for the origins of intensive agriculture and complex societies in both the Korean Peninsula and the Japanese Archipelago.

The Middle Mumun pottery period culture of the southern Korean Peninsula gradually adopted bronze production (c. 700600? BC) after a period when Liaoning-style bronze daggers and other bronze artifacts were exchanged as far as the interior part of the Southern Peninsula (c. 900700 BC). The bronze daggers lent prestige and authority to the personages who wielded and were buried with them in high-status megalithic burials at south-coastal centres such as the Igeum-dong site. Bronze was an important element in ceremonies and as for mortuary offerings until 100.

===South Asia===

==== South Asia timeline ====
:Dates are approximate, consult particular article for details

ImageSize = width:800 height:50
PlotArea = width:720 height:25 left:65 bottom:20
AlignBars = justify

Colors = 
 id:age value:rgb(0.95,0.85,0.5) #
 id:filler value:gray(0.8) # background bar
 id:black value:black

Period = from:-3300 till:-300
TimeAxis = orientation:horizontal
ScaleMajor = unit:year increment:500 start:-3300
ScaleMinor = unit:year increment:100 start:-3300

PlotData =
 align:center textcolor:black fontsize:8 mark:(line,black) width:15 shift:(0,-5)

 bar:India color:age
 from: -3300 till: -1550 shift:(0,7) text:Bronze Age India
 from: -3000 till: -2700 text:Early Indus
 from: -2700 till: -1900 text:Mature Harappan
 from: -1900 till: -1550 text:Late Harappa

====Indus Valley====

The Bronze Age on the Indian subcontinent began around 3300 BC with the beginning of the Indus Valley civilization. Inhabitants of the Indus Valley, the Harappans, developed new techniques in metallurgy and produced copper, bronze, lead and tin. The Indian Bronze Age was followed by the Iron Age Vedic Period. The Harappan culture, which dates from 1700 BC to 1300 BC, overlapped the transition from the Bronze Age to the Iron Age; thus it is difficult to date this transition accurately.

===Southeast Asia===
Dating back to the Neolithic Age, the first bronze drums, called the Dong Son drums, have been uncovered in and around the Red River Delta regions of Vietnam and Southern China. These relate to the prehistoric Dong Son Culture of Vietnam. In Ban Chiang, Thailand, (Southeast Asia) bronze artifacts have been discovered dating to 2100 BC. However,according to the radiocarbon dating on the human and pig bones in Ban Chiang,some scholars propose that the initial Bronze Age in Ban Chiang was in late 2nd millennium. Higham, C., Higham, T., Ciarla, R., Douka, K., Kijngam, A., & Rispoli, F. (2011). The Origins of the Bronze Age of Southeast Asia. Journal of world prehistory, 24(4), 227-274. In Nyaunggan, Burma, bronze tools have been excavated along with ceramics and stone artifacts. Dating is still currently broad (3500500 BC). Ban Non Wat, excavated by Charles Higham, was a rich site with over 640 graves excavated that gleaned many complex bronze items that may have had social value connected to them. Higham, C. F. W. (2011). The Bronze Age of Southeast Asia: New insight on social change from Ban Non Wat. Cambridge Archaeological Journal, 21(3), 365-389. 

Ban Chiang, however, is the most thoroughly documented site while having the clearest evidence of metallurgy when it comes to Southeast Asia. With a rough date range of late third millennium BC to the first millennium AD, this site alone has various artifacts such as burial pottery (dating from 2100 BC - 1700 BC), fragments of Bronze, copper-base bangles, and much more. What's interesting about this site, however, isn't just the old age of the artifacts but the fact that this technology suggested on-site casting from the very beginning. The on-site casting supports the theory that Bronze was first introduced in Southeast Asia as fully developed which therefore shows that Bronze was actually innovated from a different country. Some scholars believe that the copper-based metallurgy was disseminated from northwest and central China via south and southwest areas such as Guangdong province and Yunnan province and finally into southeast Asia around 1,000 BC. Higham, C., Higham, T., Ciarla, R., Douka, K., Kijngam, A., & Rispoli, F. (2011). The Origins of the Bronze Age of Southeast Asia. Journal of world prehistory, 24(4), 227-274. 

Archaeological research in Northern Vietnam indicates an increase in rates of infectious disease following the advent of metallurgy; skeletal fragments in sites dating to the early and mid-Bronze age evidence a greater proportion of lesions than in sites of earlier periods. There are a few possible implications of this. One is the increase contact with bacterial and/or fungal pathogens due to increase population density and land clearing/ cultivation. The other one is decreased levels of immunocompetence in the Metal age due to changes in diet caused by agriculture. The last is that there may have been an emergence of infectious disease in the Da But period that evolved into a more virulent form in the metal period. Archaeology also suggests that Bronze Age metallurgy may not have been as significant a catalyst in social stratification and warfare in Southeast Asia as in other regions, social distribution shifting away from chiefdom-states to a heterarchical network. Data analyses of sites such as Ban Lum Khao, Ban Na Di, Non Nok Tha, Khok Phanom Di, and Nong Nor have consistently led researchers to conclude that there was no forentrenched hierarchy. OReilly, D.J.W. 2003. Further evidence of heterarchy in Bronze Age Thailand. Current Anthropology 44:300-306. 

===Europe===

====European timeline====
A few examples of named Bronze Age cultures in Europe in roughly relative order.

: Dates are approximate, consult particular article for details

ImageSize = width:800 height:105
PlotArea = width:720 height:75 left:65 bottom:20
AlignBars = justify
Colors = 
 id:time value:rgb(0.7,0.7,1) #
 id:period value:rgb(1,0.7,0.5) #
 id:age value:rgb(0.95,0.85,0.5) #
 id:era value:rgb(1,0.85,0.5) #
 id:eon value:rgb(1,0.85,0.7) #
 id:filler value:gray(0.8) # background bar
 id:black value:black

Period = from:-3300 till:-300
TimeAxis = orientation:horizontal
ScaleMajor = unit:year increment:500 start:-3300
ScaleMinor = unit:year increment:100 start:-3300

PlotData =
 align:center textcolor:black fontsize:8 mark:(line,black) width:15 shift:(0,-5)

 bar:Europe color:era
 from: -3200 till: -600 shift:(0,7) text:Bronze Age Europe
 from: -3200 till: -2850 text:Aegean Bronze
 from: -2850 till: -2500 text:Corded Ware
 from: -2500 till: -2150 text:Beaker
 from: -2150 till: -1600 text:Unetice
 from: -1600 till: -1250 text:Tumulus
 from: -1250 till: -750 text:Urnfield
 from: -1250 till: -600 shift:(40,0) text:Lusatian
 bar:Britain color:era
 from: -2700 till: -700 shift:(0,7) text:Bronze Age Britain
 from: -2700 till: -2500 text:Mount Pleasant
 from: -2500 till: -1900 text:Beaker
 from: -1900 till: -1500 text:Bedd Branwen
 from: -1500 till: -1300 text:Acton Park
 from: -1300 till: -1200 shift:(0,5)text:Knighton Heath
 from: -1200 till: -850 text:Urnfield
 from: -850 till: -700 text:Ewart Park
 bar:Scand. color:era
 from: -1700 till: -500 shift:(0,7) text:Nordic Bronze Age
 from: -1700 till: -1500 text:Phase I
 from: -1500 till: -1300 text:Phase II
 from: -1300 till: -1100 text:Phase III
 from: -1100 till: -900 text:Phase IV
 from: -900 till: -700 text:Phase V
 from: -700 till: -500 text:Phase VI

: The chosen cultures overlapped in time and the indicated periods do not fully correspond to their estimated extents.

====Aegean====

 Aegean Bronze Age 
 File:Copper Ingot Crete.jpg|Bronze Age copper ingot found in Crete 

The Aegean Bronze Age began around 3200 BC, when civilizations first established a far-ranging trade network. This network imported tin and charcoal to Cyprus, where copper was mined and alloyed with the tin to produce bronze. Bronze objects were then exported far and wide, and supported the trade. Isotopic analysis of tin in some Mediterranean bronze artifacts points to the fact that they may have originated from Great Britain. Carl Waldman, Catherine Mason. Encyclopedia of European peoples: Volume 1. 2006. Page 524. 

Knowledge of navigation was well developed at this time, and reached a peak of skill not exceeded (except perhaps by Polynesian sailors) until 1730 when the invention of the chronometer enabled the precise determination of longitude.

The Minoan civilization based in Knossos appears to have coordinated and defended its Bronze Age trade. Illyrians are also believed to have roots in the early Bronze Age. Ancient empires valued luxury goods in contrast to staple foods, leading to famine. Lancaster, H. O. (1990). Expectations of life: A study in the demography, statistics, and history of world mortality. New York: Springer-Verlag. Page 228. 

=====Aegean Collapse=====

Bronze Age collapse theories have described aspects of the end of the Age in this region. At the end of the Bronze Age in the Aegean region, the Mycenaean administration of the regional trade empire followed the decline of Minoan primacy. Drews, R. (1993). The end of the Bronze Age: Changes in warfare and the catastrophe ca. 1200 B.C. Princeton, N.J: Princeton University Pres Several Minoan client states lost much of their population to famine and/or pestilence. This would indicate that the trade network may have failed, preventing the trade that would previously have relieved such famines and prevented illness caused by malnutrition. It is also known that in this era the breadbasket of the Minoan empire, the area north of the Black Sea, also suddenly lost much of its population, and thus probably some cultivation.

The Aegean Collapse has been attributed to the exhaustion of the Cyprus forests causing the end of the bronze trade. Cities on the Sea., Swiny, S., Hohlfelder, R. L., & Swiny, H. W. (1998). Res maritimae: Cyprus and the eastern Mediterranean from prehistory to late antiquity : proceedings of the Second International Symposium "Cities on the Sea", Nicosia, Cyprus, October 1822, 1994. Atlanta, Ga: Scholars Press. Creevey, B. (1994). The forest resources of Bronze Age Cyprus A. Bernard Knapp, Steve O. Held and Sturt W. Manning. The prehistory of Cyprus: Problems and prospects. These forests are known to have existed into later times, and experiments have shown that charcoal production on the scale necessary for the bronze production of the late Bronze Age would have exhausted them in less than fifty years.

Aegean Collapse has also been attributed to the fact that as iron tools became more common, the main justification for the tin trade ended, and that trade network ceased to function as it did formerly. Lockard, Craig A. (2009). Societies, Networks, and Transitions: To 600. Wadsworth Pub Co. Page 96. The colonies of the Minoan empire then suffered drought, famine, war, or some combination of those three, and had no access to the distant resources of an empire by which they could easily recover.

The Thera eruption occurred around the Aegean Collapse, 110 km north of Crete. Speculation include a tsunami from Thera (more commonly known today as Santorini) destroyed Cretan cities. A tsunami may have destroyed the Cretan navy in its home harbour, which then lost crucial naval battles; so that in the LMIB/LMII event (c. 1450 BC) the cities of Crete burned and the Mycenaean civilization took over Knossos. If the eruption occurred in the late 17th century BC (as most chronologists now think) then its immediate effects belong to the Middle to Late Bronze Age transition, and not to the end of the Late Bronze Age; but it could have triggered the instability that led to the collapse first of Knossos and then of Bronze Age society overall. One such theory looks to the role of Cretan expertise in administering the empire, post-Thera. If this expertise was concentrated in Crete, then the Mycenaeans may have made political and commercial mistakes in administering the Cretan empire.

Archaeological findings, including some on the island of Thera, suggest that the centre of Minoan Civilization at the time of the eruption was actually on Thera rather than on Crete . According to this theory, the catastrophic loss of the political, administrative and economic centre by the eruption as well as the damage wrought by the tsunami to the coastal towns and villages of Crete precipitated the decline of the Minoans. A weakened political entity with a reduced economic and military capability and fabled riches would have then been more vulnerable to human predators. Indeed, the Santorini Eruption is usually dated to c. 1630 BC, while the Mycenaean Greeks first enter the historical record a few decades later, c. 1600 BC. Thus, the later Mycenaean assaults on Crete (c.1450 BC) and Troy (c.1250 BC) are revealed as mere continuations of the steady encroachments of the Greeks upon the weakened Minoan world.

====Central Europe====

 Central European Bronze Age 
 File:Prehistoric Times of Bohemia, Moravia and Slovakia - NM Prague 18.JPG|Jeniovice cup File:Bronze cuirass 2900g Grenoble end of 7th early 6th century BCE.jpg|Grenoble cuirass File:2007 07260179.JPG|Mycenaean sword found in Romania File:Bronze age weapons Romania.jpg|Bronze Age weaponry and ornaments 

In Central Europe, the early Bronze Age Unetice culture (18001600 BC) includes numerous smaller groups like the Straubing, Adlerberg and Hatvan cultures. Some very rich burials, such as the one located at Leubingen with grave gifts crafted from gold, point to an increase of social stratification already present in the Unetice culture. All in all, cemeteries of this period are rare and of small size. The Unetice culture is followed by the middle Bronze Age (16001200 BC) Tumulus culture, which is characterised by inhumation burials in tumuli (barrows). In the eastern Hungarian Krs tributaries, the early Bronze Age first saw the introduction of the Mako culture, followed by the Otomani and Gyulavarsand cultures.

The late Bronze Age Urnfield culture, (1300700 BC) is characterized by cremation burials. It includes the Lusatian culture in eastern Germany and Poland (1300500 BC) that continues into the Iron Age. The Central European Bronze Age is followed by the Iron Age Hallstatt culture (700450 BC).

Important sites include:
* Biskupin (Poland)
* Nebra (Germany)
* Vrble (Slovakia)
* Zug-Sumpf, Zug, Switzerland

The Bronze Age in Central Europe has been described in the chronological schema of German prehistorian Paul Reinecke. He described Bronze A1 (Bz A1) period (23002000 BC : triangular daggers, flat axes, stone wrist-guards, flint arrowheads) and Bronze A2 (Bz A2) period (19501700 BC : daggers with metal hilt, flanged axes, halberds, pins with perforated spherical heads, solid bracelets) and phases Hallstatt A and B (Ha A and B).

====South Europe====
The Apennine culture (also called Italian Bronze Age) is a technology complex of central and southern Italy spanning the Chalcolithic and Bronze Age proper. The Camuni were an ancient people of uncertain origin (according to Pliny the Elder, they were Euganei; according to Strabo, they were Rhaetians) who lived in Val Camonica - in what is now northern Lombardy - during the Iron Age, although human groups of hunters, shepherds and farmers are known to have lived in the area since the Neolithic.

Located in Sardinia and Corsica, the Nuragic civilization lasted from the early Bronze Age (18th century BC) to the 2nd century AD, when the islands were already Romanized. They take their name from the characteristic nuragic towers, which evolved from the pre-existing megalithic culture, which built dolmens and menhirs. The nuraghe towers are unanimously considered the best preserved and largest megalithic remains in Europe. Their effective use is still debated: some scholars considered them as monumental tombs, others as Houses of the Giants, other as fortresses, ovens for metal fusion, prisons or, finally, temples for a solar cult.

The Terramare was an early Indo-European civilization in the area of what is now Pianura Padana (northern Italy) before the arrival of the Celts, and in other parts of Europe. They lived in square villages of wooden stilt houses. These villages were built on land, but generally near a stream, with roads that crossed each other at right angles. The whole complex denoted the nature of a fortified settlement. Terramare were widespread in the Pianura Padana (specially along the Panaro river, between Modena and Bologna) and in the rest of Europe. The civilization developed in the Middle and Late Bronze Age, between the 17th and the 13th centuries BC.

The Castellieri culture developed in Istria during the Middle Bronze Age. It lasted for more than a millennium, from the 15th century BC until the Roman conquest in the 3rd century BC. It takes its name from the fortified boroughs (Castellieri, Friulian cjastelir) that characterized the culture.

The Canegrate culture developed from the mid-Bronze Age (13th century BC) till the Iron Age in the Pianura Padana, in what are now western Lombardy, eastern Piedmont and Ticino. It takes its name from the township of Canegrate where, in the 20th century, some fifty tombs with ceramics and metal objects were found. The Canegrate culture migrated from the northwest part of the Alps and descended to Pianura Padana from the Swiss Alps passes and the Ticino.

The Golasecca culture developed starting from the late Bronze Age in the Po plain. It takes its name from Golasecca, a locality next to the Ticino where, in the early 19th century, abbot Giovanni Battista Giani excavated its first findings (some fifty tombs with ceramics and metal objects). Remains of the Golasecca culture span an area of c. 20,000 square kilometers south to the Alps, between the Po, Sesia and Serio rivers, dating from the 9th to the 4th century BC.

====West Europe====

=====Atlantic Bronze Age=====

 Atlantic Bronze Age 
 File:Sword bronze age (2nd version).jpg|Ceremonial giant dirk (15001300 BC). File:Casco Leiro.jpg|Golden helmet (Leiro, Galicia) 

The Atlantic Bronze Age is a cultural complex of the period of approximately 1300700 BC that includes different cultures in Portugal, Andalusia, Galicia and the British Isles. It is marked by economic and cultural exchange. Commercial contacts extend to Denmark and the Mediterranean. The Atlantic Bronze Age was defined by a number of distinct regional centres of metal production, unified by a regular maritime exchange of some of their products.

=====Great Britain=====

In Great Britain, the Bronze Age is considered to have been the period from around 2100 to 750 BC. Migration brought new people to the islands from the continent. Recent tooth enamel isotope research on bodies found in early Bronze Age graves around Stonehenge indicate that at least some of the migrants came from the area of modern Switzerland. The Beaker culture displayed different behaviours from the earlier Neolithic people, and cultural change was significant. Integration is thought to have been peaceful, as many of the early henge sites were seemingly adopted by the newcomers. The rich Wessex culture developed in southern Britain at this time. Additionally, the climate was deteriorating; where once the weather was warm and dry it became much wetter as the Bronze Age continued, forcing the population away from easily defended sites in the hills and into the fertile valleys. Large livestock farms developed in the lowlands and appear to have contributed to economic growth and inspired increasing forest clearances. The Deverel-Rimbury culture began to emerge in the second half of the Middle Bronze Age (c. 14001100 BC) to exploit these conditions. Devon and Cornwall were major sources of tin for much of western Europe and copper was extracted from sites such as the Great Orme mine in northern Wales. Social groups appear to have been tribal but with growing complexity and hierarchies becoming apparent.

Burial of dead (which, until this period, had usually been communal) became more individual. For example, whereas in the Neolithic a large chambered cairn or long barrow housed the dead, Early Bronze Age people buried their dead in individual barrows (also commonly known and marked on modern British Ordnance Survey maps as tumuli), or sometimes in cists covered with cairns.

The greatest quantities of bronze objects in England were discovered in East Cambridgeshire, where the most important finds were recovered in Isleham (more than 6500 pieces). Hall and Coles, p. 8188. 
Alloying of copper with zinc or tin to make brass or bronze was practised soon after the discovery of copper itself. One copper mine at Great Orme in North Wales, extended to a depth of 70 meters. At Alderley Edge in Cheshire, carbon dates have established mining at around 2280 to 1890 BC (at 95% probability). The earliest identified metalworking site (Sigwells, Somerset) is much later, dated by Globular Urn style pottery to approximately the 12th century BC. The identifiable sherds from over 500 mould fragments included a perfect fit of the hilt of a sword in the Wilburton style held in Somerset County Museum. 

=====Ireland=====

The Bronze Age in Ireland commenced around 2000 BC, when copper was alloyed with tin and used to manufacture Ballybeg type flat axes and associated metalwork. The preceding period is known as the Copper Age and is characterised by the production of flat axes, daggers, halberds and awls in copper. The period is divided into three phases: Early Bronze Age (20001500 BC), Middle Bronze Age (15001200 BC), and Late Bronze Age (1200  c. 500 BC). Ireland is also known for a relatively large number of Early Bronze Age burials.

One of the characteristic types of artifact of the Early Bronze Age in Ireland is the flat axe. There are five main types of flat axes: Lough Ravel (c. 2200 BC), Ballybeg (c. 2000 BC), Killaha (c. 2000 BC), Ballyvalley (c. 20001600 BC), Derryniggin (c. 1600 BC), and a number of metal ingots in the shape of axes. Waddell; Eogan. 

====North Europe====

 Bronze artifacts 
 File:Assorted bronze castings.JPG|Assorted Celtic bronze castings dating from the Bronze Age. 

The Bronze Age in Northern Europe spans the entire 2nd millennium BC (Unetice culture, Urnfield culture, Tumulus culture, Terramare culture, Lusatian culture) lasting until ca. 600 BC. The Northern Bronze Age was both a period and a Bronze Age culture in Scandinavian pre-history, c. 1700-500 BC, with sites that reached as far east as Estonia. Succeeding the Late Neolithic culture, its ethnic and linguistic affinities are unknown in the absence of written sources. It is followed by the Pre-Roman Iron Age.

Even though Northern European Bronze Age cultures were relatively late, and came in existence via trade, sites present rich and well-preserved objects made of wool, wood and imported Central European bronze and gold. Many rock carvings depict ships, and the large stone burial monuments known as stone ships suggest that shipping played an important role. Thousands of rock carvings depict ships, most probably representing sewn plank built canoes for warfare, fishing and trade. These may have a history as far back as the neolithic period and continue into the Pre-Roman Iron Age, as shown by the Hjortspring boat. There are many mounds and rock carving sites from the period. Numerous artifacts of bronze and gold are found. No written language existed in the Nordic countries during the Bronze Age. The rock carvings have been dated through comparison with depicted artifacts.

====Caucasus====
Arsenical bronze artifacts of the Maykop culture in the North Caucasus have been dated around the 4th millennium BC. Philip L. Kohl. The making of bronze age Eurasia. Page 58. This innovation resulted in the circulation of arsenical bronze technology over southern and eastern Europe. Gimbutas, "The Beginning of the Bronze Age in Europe and the Inclo- Europeans 35002500 BC," Journal of Indo-European Studies 1 (1973): 177. 

====Pontic-Caspian steppe====
The Yamna culture is a late copper age/early Bronze Age culture of the Southern Bug/Dniester/Ural region (the Pontic steppe), dating to the 36th23rd centuries BC. The name also appears in English as Pit Grave Culture or Ochre Grave Culture. The Catacomb culture, ca. 28002200 BC, refers to an early Bronze Age culture occupying essentially what is present-day Ukraine. It's seemed more of as an areal term to cover several smaller related archaeological cultures. The Srubna culture was a Late Bronze Age (18th-12th centuries BC) culture. It is a successor to the Yamna culture, the Pit Grave culture and the Poltavka culture.

===Americas===

The Moche civilization of South America independently discovered and developed bronze smelting. El bronce y el horizonte medio Bronze technology was developed further by the Incas and used widely both for utilitarian objects and sculpture. Later appearance of limited bronze smelting in West Mexico (see Metallurgy in pre-Columbian Mesoamerica) suggests either contact of that region with Andean cultures or separate discovery of the technology.

==Outside the Bronze Age==

===Japan===

The Jmon period lasted until 300 BCE and, towards the end of the period, the Japanese archipelago experienced the introduction of bronze and iron simultaneously. Bronze and iron smelting techniques spread to the Japanese archipelago through immigration and trade from the Korean peninsula and the Chinese mainland. Iron was mainly used for agricultural and other tools, whereas ritual and ceremonial artifacts were mainly made of bronze. Formerly, scholarly theories suggested that a bronze and iron using Yamato people gradually spread across the Japanese archipelago, conquering and assimilating the Jmon people and their descendants, as well as pushing them east and north. Current archaeology suggests a more complex picture of the "Jmon-Yayoi transition," including as regards ethnic categories; see the article on Yayoi people.

===Africa===

Although North Africa was influenced to a certain extent by European Bronze Age cultures (for example, traces of the Bell beaker tradition are found in Morocco), it has long been believed that Africa did not have its own metallurgy traditions until the Phoenician colonization (ca. 1100 BC) of North Africa, and that it remained attached to the Neolithic way of life. The civilization of Ancient Egypt, whose influence did not extensively cover Africa outside of the Nile's reach, was believed to be the sole exception to this rule as regards the whole range of ancient cultures of Africa. Recently, however, some discoveries have been made that appear to contradict these views.

In the Termit region of eastern Niger, its ancient inhabitants are now thought to have become the first iron smelting people in West Africa and among the first in the world at around 1500 BC. Iron and copper working then continued to spread southward to Nigeria, and then moved elsewhere in the continent, reaching South Africa around AD 200. The widespread use of iron revolutionized the Bantu-speaking farming communities who adopted it, driving out and absorbing the rock tool using hunter-gatherer societies they encountered as they expanded to farm wider areas of savannah. The technologically superior Bantu-speakers spread across southern Africa and became wealthy and powerful, producing iron for tools and weapons in large, industrial quantities.

==See also==
* Middle Bronze Age migrations (Ancient Near East)
* Namazga V and Altyndepe
* Oxhide ingot
* Synoptic table of the principal old world prehistoric cultures
* Tin sources and trade in ancient times

===Seafaring===
* Dover bronze age boatthe earliest known seagoing plank-built vessel
* Ferriby Boats
* Langdon Bay hoardsee also Dover Museum

==Notes==

==References==
* Figueiredo, Elin (2010) "Smelting and Recycling Evidences from the Late Bronze Age habitat site of Baioes," Journal of Archaeological Science, Volume 37, Issue 7, p. 16231634
* Eogan, George (1983) The hoards of the Irish later Bronze Age, Dublin : University College, 331p., ISBN 0-901120-77-4
* Hall, David and Coles, John (1994) Fenland survey : an essay in landscape and persistence, Archaeological report 1, London : English Heritage, 170 p., ISBN 1-85074-477-7
* Pernicka, E., Eibner, C., ztunah, ., Wagener, G.A. (2003) "Early Bronze Age Metallurgy in the Northeast Aegean", In: Wagner, G.A., Pernicka, E. and Uerpmann, H-P. (eds), Troia and the Troad : scientific approaches, Natural science in archaeology, Berlin; London : Springer, ISBN 3-540-43711-8, p. 143172
* Waddell, John (1998) The prehistoric archaeology of Ireland, Galway University Press, 433 p., ISBN 1-901421-10-4
* Siklosy et al. (2009): Bronze Age volcanic event recorded in stalagmites by combined isotope and trace element studies. Rapid Communications in Mass Spectrometry, 23/6, 801-808. 
* Roberts, B.W., Thornton, C.P. and Pigott, V.C. 2009. Development of Metallurgy in Eurasia. Antiquity 83, 112-122.

==Further reading==
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
*Higham, C. F. W. (2011). The Bronze Age of Southeast Asia: New insight on social change from Ban Non Wat. Cambridge Archaeological Journal, 21(3), 365-389.

==External links==

* Web index Bronze Age in Europe
* Ancient tin: old question and a new answer
* Bronze Age Experimental Archeology and Museum Reproductions
* Umha Aois - Reconstructed Bronze Age metal casting
* Umha Aois - ancient bronze casting videoclip
* Reconstructing the Danish Trundholm Sun Chariot
* Ancient bronze idol 13 Cent B.C.: Northern Russia 
* Hypothetical reconstruction of a Lusatian culture settlement, raised using only bronze age tools - Wola Radziszowska (near Cracow) - Poland
* Aegean and Balkan Prehistory articles, site-reports and bibliography database concerning the Aegean, Balkans and Western Anatolia
* Downloadable article: "Evidence that a West-East admixed population lived in the Tarim Basin as early as the early Bronze Age" Li et al. BMC Biology 2010, 8:15.

===Seafaring===
* Divers unearth Bronze Age hoard off the coast of Devon
* Moor Sands finds, including a remarkably well preserved and complete sword that has parallels with material from the Seine basin of northern France

 


[[BBC News (TV channel)]]

BBC News (also referred to as the BBC News Channel) is the BBC's 24-hour rolling news television network in the United Kingdom. The channel launched as BBC News 24 on 9 November 1997 at 17:30 as part of the BBC's foray into digital domestic television channels, becoming the first competitor to Sky News, which had been running since 1989. About BBC News 24 TV Home Since then, with several relaunches, an increase in funding and resources from the BBC and improvements in digital television technology, the channel has been able to diversify content, with two-minute looped bulletins available to view via BBC Red Button, BBC News Online and the BBC's mobile website, alongside individual weather and sport bulletins.

On 22 February 2006, the channel was named News Channel of the Year at the Royal Television Society Television Journalism Awards for the first time in its history. BBC winners at TV journalism awards Dave West; Digital Spy, 23 February 2006 The judges remarked that this was the year that the channel had "really come into its own." News 24 wins news channel of the year Newswatch  BBC News Online, 23 February 2006 

In May 2007, the channel became available for UK viewers to view through the BBC News website through a live stream. In April 2008, the channel was renamed "BBC News" as part of a 550,000 rebranding of the BBC's news output, complete with a new studio and presentation. Its sister service, BBC World was also renamed as "BBC World News" while the national news bulletins became BBC News at One, BBC News at Six and BBC News at Ten. Across the day the channel averages about twice the audience of Sky News.

As a major part of the BBC News department, the channel is based at and broadcast from Broadcasting House in Central London. The channel was named RTS News Channel of the Year in 2006 and again in 2009.

== History ==

BBC News 24 was originally available only to analogue cable television subscribers. To this day, it and BBC Parliament remain the only BBC "digital" channels which are made available to analogue cable subscribers. This coverage was improved in 1998 with the advent of digital television in the United Kingdom allowing satellite and digital terrestrial television viewers to also view the service. Initially it was difficult to obtain a digital satellite or terrestrial receiver without a subscription to Sky or ONdigital respectively, but now the channel forms an important part of the Freeview and Freesat channel packages.

The BBC had run the international news channel BBC World for two and a half years prior to the launch of BBC News 24 on 9 November 1997. Sky News had had a free hand with domestic news for over eight years (since 5 February 1989) and being owned by News Corporation their papers were used to criticise the BBC for extending its news output. The Sky News Blog-A New Angle In The News? Tips 'N' Tutorials 

Sky News objected to the breaking of its monopoly, complaining about the costs associated with running a channel that only a minority could view from the licence fee. Sky News claimed that a number of British cable operators had been incentivised to carry News 24 (which, as a licence-fee funded channel was made available to such operators for free) in preference to the commercial Sky News. However, in September 1999 the European Commission ruled against a complaint made by Sky News that the publicly funded channel was unfair and illegal under EU law. The Commission ruled that the licence fee should be considered state aid but that such aid was justified due to the public service remit of the BBC and that it did not exceed actual costs. BBC News 24 (State aid) Reckon Regulation & Competition Economics LLP 

The channel's journalistic output has been overseen by Controller of the channel, Kevin Bakhurst, since 16 December 2005. This was a return to having a dedicated Controller for the channel in the same way as the rest of the BBC's domestic television channels. At launch, Tim Orchard was Controller of News 24 from 1997 until 2000. Editorial decisions were then overseen by Rachel Atwell in her capacity as Deputy Head of television news. Her deputy Mark Popescu became responsible for editorial content in 2004, a role he continued in until the appointment of Bakhurst as Controller in 2005. BBC to revamp TV news operation  BBC News Online, 8 November 2005 

A further announcement by Head of television news Peter Horrocks came at the same time as Bakhurst's appointment in which he outlined his plan to provide more funding and resources for the channel and shift the corporation's emphasis regarding news away from the traditional BBC One bulletins and across to the rolling news channel. The introduction of simulcasts of the main bulletins on the channel was to allow the news bulletins to pool resources rather than work against each other at key times in the face of competition particularly from Sky News. BBC announces changes to Television News TV Newsroom, 8 November 2005 

The BBC Governors' annual report for 2005/2006 reported that average audience figures for fifteen minute periods had reached 8.6% in multichannel homes, up from 7.8% in 2004/2005. BBC Governor's Annual Report 2005/2006 Page 47 The 2004 report claimed that the channel outperformed Sky News in both weekly and monthly reach in multichannel homes for the January 2004 period, and for the first time in two years moved ahead of Sky News in being perceived as the channel best for news. BBC News 24 edging ahead of Sky News Neil Wilkes; Digital Spy, 19 August 2004 

=== 2008 rebranding ===
On 21 April 2008, BBC News 24 was renamed BBC News on the channel itself  but is referred to as the BBC News Channel on other BBC services. BBC News 24 to be renamed Times Online This is part of the creative futures plan, launched in 2006, to bring all BBC News output under the single brand name. Creative Futures Plan The Guardian 

The BBC News Channel moved from the Studio N8 set, which became home to BBC World News, to what was the home of the national news in Studio N6, allowing the Channel to share its set with the BBC News at One and the BBC News at Ten  with other bulletins moving to Studio TC7. 2008 Changes 

=== Move to Broadcasting House ===
The channel relocated, along with the remaining BBC News services at Television Centre, to the newly refurbished Broadcasting House on 18 March 2013 at 13:00 GMT, after completion of the new television news studios. The move also introduced refreshed on-screen graphics for the channel and new presentation, including new full HD studios and a live newsroom backdrop, which has been added as a feature of the opening titles to each hour. 

==BBC News HD==
BBC News HD logo.

On 16 July 2013, the BBC announced that a high-definition (HD) simulcast of BBC News would be launched by early 2014. The channel broadcasts on the BBC's new HD multiplex on Freeview. HD output from BBC News has been simulcast on BBC One HD and BBC Two HD since the move to Broadcasting House in March 2013. The channel launched on 10 December 2013 (at an early date), though will roll-out nationwide up to June 2014 (as will BBC Four HD and CBeebies HD). 

== Programming ==

=== News ===

BBC News at Broadcasting House in March 2013.
Each hour consists of headlines on each quarter-hour, extended at the top of the hour to form the main part of the daily schedule though these are interspaced with other programmes, generally at weekends. This will be often be displaced by rolling news coverage including reports and live interviews. Weather summaries are provided every half-hour by forecasters from the BBC Weather centre and the sports news from the BBC Sport centre at MediaCityUK.

==== Breaking news ====
The BBC maintains guidelines for procedures to be taken for breaking news. With domestic news, the correspondent first records a "generic minute" summary (for use by all stations and channels) and then priority is to report on BBC Radio 5 Live, then on the BBC News channel and any other programmes that are on air. For foreign news, first a "generic minute" is recorded, then reports are to World Service radio, then the reporter talks to any other programmes that are on air.

A key claim made by Lord Lambert in his report had been that the channel was slower to react to breaking news compared with its main rival Sky News. Getting creative breakthrough...-About BBC News TV Home To counteract this, a new feature introduced with the 2003 relaunch was a 'breaking news sting': a globe shown briefly onscreen to direct a viewer's attention to the breaking news.

The graphics relaunch in January 2007 has since seen the globe sting replaced by a red strapline to highlight the breaking story immediately.

To complement this, a permanent live news ticker had earlier been introduced in 2006: this had only previously been in use sporadically. News statements are shown as continuously scrolling upper-case text located at the bottom of the screen; some past ambiguities noted have included spelling the plural of MPs as "MPS", together with other occasional spelling and grammatical errors. The design of this ticker was slightly altered with the 2007 graphics redesign and from June turned red to indicate breaking news, as Newswatch reported viewers' confusion.

==== Overnight and special simulcasts ====
The BBC began simulcasting the channel overnight on terrestrial channel BBC One with the launch of the channel, ending the tradition of a closedown but at the same time effectively making the service available to many more viewers. In the early 2000s, BBC Two also started simulcasting the channel, although the weekend morning show Weekend 24 had been simulcast on the channel in the early days. During major breaking news events, the BBC News Channel has been broadcast on BBC One; examples of special broadcasts include the 11 September 2001 attacks, 7 July 2005 London bombings, the capture of Saddam Hussein, and the death of Osama bin Laden. News 24 claims July victory Neil Wilkes; Digital Spy, 1 August 2005 News 24 top for rolling news TV Newsroom, 21 August 2005 Coverage of major events has also been simulcast on BBC World News. Currently, overnight viewers receive 25-minute editions of BBC News every hour, and on weekdays 01:0001:30 receive Newsday, live from Singapore and from London 01:30-02:00 ABC World News with Diane Saywer 02:0005:30 (00:0006:00 on weekends) receive BBC World News.

==== Simulcast BBC One programmes ====
Since the launch of Breakfast in 2000, the programme has been simulcast on both BBC One and BBC News, replacing the individual breakfast news programmes that had been run by both channels (even though the programme is now presented in MediaCityUK). Since May 2006, the simulcast begins with the programme at 06:00 until 08:30 when programming on BBC News begins. Breakfast on BBC One then generally continues until 09:15.

The BBC News at Ten began simulcasting on the channel on 30 January 2006 as part of the Ten O'Clock Newshour, followed by extended sport and business news updates. The bulletin was joined in being simulcast on 10 April 2006 when the BBC News at One (with British Sign Language in-vision signing) and BBC News at Six bulletins were added to the schedule following a similar format to the News at Ten in terms of content on the channel once each simulcast ends.

During the Summer, the hour long programme News 24 Sunday was broadcast both on BBC One and the BBC News Channel at 09:00, to replace The Andrew Marr Show, which is off air. It was presented by a news presenter, and came from the main News channel studio. The programme was made up mostly of interviews focusing on current affairs, and included a full paper review, a weather summary, and a news update at 09:00, 09:30 and 10:00. Sunday Morning Live and alternate programming now fill this slot.

From 2013 a new hour long news program was created at 11am on BBC Two called Eleven O'Clock Newshour which is made up of half an hour of BBC News and half BBC World News.

==== Exclusive programmes ====
Part of the previous BBC News set
Other programming produced solely by the BBC News channel includes the BBC News at Five with Huw Edwards or Gavin Elser (including The Film Review with Mark Kermode at 17:45 on Fridays, Sportsday (at 18:45, except on Fridays and Saturdays when it is from 18:30, plus 22:45 and 23:45 every weekday), Daily BBC News at Nine which runs for 60 Minutes on Weekdays and 30 Minutes at weekends/bank holidays with Martine Croxall or Clive Myrie and Newswatch (Friday 20:45, Saturday 07:45). The Papers is a daily review of the next day's papers shown at 22:30 and 23:30 plus Saturday and Sunday mornings at 09:45.

Programmes including Click, Dateline London, HARDtalk, Our World, Reporters, The Travel Show, Talking Business with Linda Yeuh and Your Money appear regularly in the weekend schedules. Many of these programmes also appear throughout the week on BBC News's international channel BBC World News.

Previous BBC News programming includes Head 2 Head, Your News, E24, The Record Europe, STORYFix and News 24 Tonight a regular weekday evening programme providing a round up of the day's news which ran from 2005 to 2008.

==== BBC World News shared programming ====
Between 01:00 and 06:00 GMT (from 00:00 on weekends) the channel simulcasts with its sister channel, BBC World News, for the first 25 minutes of each hour with world news shown all through the simulcasts. This can also happen during big news events and the News Channel presenter will join the BBC World News presenter in Studio C as it used by both channels. Example are Glasgow Helicopter Crash, Election of pope Francis and Boston Marathon Bombings.

On 1 October 2007, BBC World News started broadcasting BBC World News America and World News Today at 00:00 and 03:00 GMT respectively. World News Today was simulcast on the BBC News channel at 03:00 GMT. BBC World News America used to be aired as a reduced length, tape-delayed version at 00:30 GMT. ABC World News with Diane Saywer also shown at 01:30 every Tuesday-Friday.

From 13 June 2011, the weeknight editions of BBC News at 01:00, 02:00, 03:00 and 04:00 were replaced with Newsday. The programme acts as a morning news bulletin for the Asia-Pacific region and is broadcast as a double-headed news bulletin with Rico Hizon in Singapore and Babita Sharma in London. Asia Business Report and Sport Today are aired at the back of the first three hours of Newsday. But Newsday changed to 23:00-02:00 On BBC News a year later meaning. Mike Embley presents Tuesday-Friday BBC World News 23:00-02:00 with Kasia Madera on Saturdays and Adnan Nawaz 00:00-06:00 Sunday, 02:00-05:00 Friday/Monday . the slot's focus is placed on audiences watching on PBS in the U.S.
BBC World News and World Business Report air at 05:00 on both channels and in lieu of commercials seen on the international broadcasts, the presenters give a brief update on UK news for domestic audiences.

=== Sport coverage ===
A sports bulletin from the BBC Sport Centre with Olly Foster in March 2012
Sports headlines are usually provided at 15 minutes past the hour with a full bulletin after the bottom-of-the-hour headlines. There are also two extended sports bulletins per day, entitled Sportsday broadcast at 13:30, 18:30, 22:45 and 23:45 (weekdays only). Each bulletin is read by a single sports presenter, with the exception of Saturday Sportsday, which is double headed. From 5 March 2012 Sports Bulletins come from the BBC Sport Centre in MediaCityUK in Salford Quays.

Bulletins during BBC Breakfast are presented by Sally Nugent or Mike Bushell, with the latter also appearing on other sports bulletins on the channel. As of March 2012 the main sports presenters on the channel are Olly Foster, Katie Gornall, Katherine Downes, Damian Johnson, Andrew Lindsay and Jenny Culshaw.

Until March 2012 bulletins came from the News Channel studio at 45 minutes past the hour. Presenters for bulletins on the channel have included: Reshmin Choudhury, Amanda Davies, Sean Fletcher, Olly Foster, Matt Gooderick, Lizzie Greenwood-Hughes, Amelia Harris, Celina Hinchcliffe, Rachael Hodges, Damian Johnson, Adnan Nawaz, George Riley and Olympic gold medallist turned journalist Matthew Pinsent.

===Business===
Before BBC News moved to Broadcasting House, an hourly business update was included during the weekday schedule from the BBC Business Unit. There were two shifts, from 08:3014:00 and 14:0023:00, presented by Penny Haslam, Maryam Moshiri, Ben Thompson, Adam Parsons, Susannah Streeter, Joe Lynam, Sara Coburn or Sally Eden. News Channel updates were usually broadcast at 40 minutes past the hour from 08:40 until 22:40. The 21:40 round-up was often earlier and the final bulletin is an extended round-up of the day's business news. Until May 2009, the business updates on the BBC News Channel were broadcast from one of the London Stock Exchange's studios in central London. From then until March 2013 the bulletins were provided from the channel's studio at BBC Television Centre. The business updates were axed in March 2013 as part of the BBC's Delivering Quality First plan. But after complaints returned in November 2013. Stock market updates now only appear during the headlines at 45 minutes past the hour. Currently, if a main business story breaks the duty presenter is Ben Thompson with Juliette Foster, Adam Parsons, Alice Baxter and Sally Bundock offer relief. from March 2014 hourly updates will be between 08:30-18:00. Declan Curry presents Your Money a weekly round-up on a Saturday morning.

Rico Hizon or Sharanjit Leyl regularly present the main business stories during the early hours of the morning from Singapore during the BBC's Asia Business Report, which is simulcast from BBC World News. Alice Baxter and Sally Bundock present World Business Report.

== News presenters ==

Since January 2014, the main regular presenters on the channel have been Simon McCoy, Sophie Long, Ben Brown, Joanna Gosling, Matthew Amroliwala, Jane Hill, Huw Edwards, Annita McVeigh, Julian Worricker, Gavin Esler, Emily Maitlis and Clive Myrie. Main BBC News Channel Presenters The Main regular weekend presenters include Maxine Mawhinney, Nicholas Owen, Chris Eakin and Martine Croxall, with Fiona Armstrong, Chris Rogers, Adam Parsons, Carole Walker, Mishal Husain and Gavin Grey being relief presenters.

Rico Hizon and Sharanjit Leyl (reporting from Singapore), Babita Sharma and Kasia Madera are the main overnight presenters on the channel, appearing on Newsday and generic BBC News bulletins. These programmes are simulcast with BBC World News and either BBC One or BBC Two. Daniela Ritorto, Adnan Nawaz and Mike Embley regularly presents between 02:00-05:00 weekdays and weekends. Munchetty present the BBC World News 05:00-hour on weekdays, which is also broadcast on the News Channel and BBC One. Komla Dumor suddenly died on 18 January 2014 of a heart attack. Martine Dennis left the BBC, to join Al Jazeera English in March, 2014

The simulcasting of the main national news bulletins has led to the presenters of those bulletins appearing on the channel and offer relief on the news channel including Huw Edwards, Fiona Bruce, George Alagiah, Sophie Raworth, Kate Silverton and Mishal Husain. The main Breakfast presenters have also appeared on the channel since it was first launched as a simulcast programme in 2000, with the current presenters being Bill Turnbull, Louise Minchin and Charlie Stayt and, Naga Munchetty.

Zeinab Badawi presents the BBC World News programme Reporters on the channel, while Gavin Esler presents Dateline London. Stephen Sackur appears on Hardtalk, which is aired weeknights and at weekends, while Zeinab Badawi, Carrie Gracie and Sarah Montague provide cover for him. Spencer Kelly presents the technology news programme Click. Today host Evan Davis presents The Bottom Line, and Victoria Derbyshire appears on Victoria Derbyshire Interviews. Dominic Byrne presents Newsbeat's Oddbox. Lee McKenzie presents Inside F1 on Grand Prix weekend's. Linda Yueh presents Talking Business. Ade Adepitan, Rajan Datar, Christa Larwood, Henry Golding and Carmen Robert present The Travel Show

During a major news event one or more of the main news presenters may be sent to present live for the channel from the scene of the story, where they will conduct interviews with the people involved, question correspondents, introduce related reports and also give general information on the story, much as a reporter sent to cover a story would. The presenters often have expertise in the story they are sent to cover, for example channel presenters and former reporters Ben Brown and Clive Myrie were dispatched to Cairo and Tripoli during the Middle East uprisings.

== Presentation ==

=== Graphics ===

The channel was criticised at launch for its style of presentation, with accusations of it being less authoritative than the BBC One news bulletins, with presenters appearing on-screen without jackets. Jenny Abramsky had originally planned to have a television version of the informal news radio channel BBC Radio 5 Live, or a TV version of Radio 4 News FM both of which she had run. The bright design of the set was also blamed for this  one insider reportedly described it as a "car crash in a shower"  and was subject to the network relaunch on 25 October 1999. The channel swapped studios with sister channel BBC World, moving to studio N8 within the newsroom, where it remained until 2008. New music and title sequences accompanied this set change, following the look of newly relaunched BBC One bulletins.

Graphics and titles were developed by the Lambie-Nairn design agency and were gradually rolled out across the whole of BBC News, including a similar design for regional news starting with Newsroom South East and the three 'BBC Nations'  Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland. The similarity of main BBC News output was intended to increase the credibility of the channel as well as aiding cross-channel promotion. About BBC News TV Home 

A graphics relaunch in January 2007 saw the channel updated, with redesigned headline straplines, a redesigned 'digital on-screen graphic' and repositioned clock. The clock was originally placed to the left hand side of the channel name though following complaints that this could only be viewed in widescreen, it was moved to the right in February 2007. Bulletins on BBC World News and BBC One also introduced similar graphics and title sequences on the same day.

In 2008, the graphics were again relaunched, using the style introduced in 2007 and a new colour scheme.

=== The Lambert Report ===
The Lambert Report into the channel's performance in 2002 called upon News 24 to develop a better brand of its own, to allow viewers to differentiate between itself and similar channels such as Sky News. As a direct result of this, a brand new style across all presentation for the channel launched on 8 December 2003 at 09:00. Philip Hayton and Anna Jones were the first two presenters on the set, the relaunch of which had been put back a week due to previous power disruptions at Television Centre where the channel was based. The new designs also featured a dynamic set of titles for the channel; the globe would begin spinning from where the main story was taking place, while the headline scrolled around in a ribbon; this was occasionally replaced by the BBC News logo. The titles concluded with a red globe surrounded by a red stylised clamshell and BBC News ribbons forming above the BBC News logo.

Bulletins on BBC One moved into a new set in January 2003 although retained the previous ivory Lambie-Nairn titles until February 2004. News 24 updated the title colours slightly to match those of BBC One bulletins in time for the 50th anniversary of BBC television news on 5 July 2004. BBC News 24 200308 TV & Radio Bits 

=== Countdown sequence ===
The countdown since 2005 has shown the elements of journalism and production involved in bringing news stories to air (2013 version shown).

An important part of the channel's presentation since launch has been the top of the hour countdown sequence, since there is no presentation system with continuity announcers so the countdown provides a link to the beginning of the next hour. A similar musical device is used on BBC Radio 5 Live, and mirrors the pips on BBC Radio 4.

Previous styles have included a series of fictional flags set to music between 1997 and 1999 before the major relaunch, incorporating the new contemporary music composed by David Lowe, and graphics developed by Lambie-Nairn. Various images, originally ivory numbers fully animated against a deep red background, were designed to fit the pace of the channel, and the music soon gained notoriety, and was often satirised and parodied in popular culture, perhaps most famously by comic Bill Bailey who likened the theme music to an "apocalyptic rave". Images of life around the UK were added in replacement later with the same music, together with footage of the newsroom and exterior of Television Centre. The 2003 relaunch saw a small change to this style with less of a metropolitan feel to the footage.

A new sequence was introduced on 28 March 2005, designed and created by Red Bee Media and directed by Mark Chaudoir. The full version ran for 60 seconds, though only around 30 seconds were usually shown on air. The music was revised completely but the biggest change came in the footage used  reflecting the methods and nature of newsgathering, while a strong emphasis was placed on the BBC logo itself. Satellite dishes are shown transmitting and receiving red "data streams". In production of the countdown sequence, Clive Norman filmed images around the United Kingdom, Richard Jopson in the United States, while BBC News cameramen filmed images from Iraq, Beijing (Great Wall of China), Bund of Shanghai, Africa, as well as areas affected by the 2004 Asian Tsunami and others.

The sequence has since seen several remixes to the music and a change in visuals to focus more on the well-known journalists, with less footage of camera crews and production teams. Changes have also seen the channel logo included during the sequences and at the end, as well as the fonts used for the time. The conclusion of the countdown was altered in 2008 to feature the new presentation style, rather than a data stream moving in towards the camera.

To coincide with the move of BBC News to Broadcasting House, on 18 March 2013 the countdown was updated again along with several other presentation elements. Three of the most striking features of the new countdown include music performed by the BBC Concert Orchestra, a redesign of the "data streams" and the ending of the sequence no longer fading to the BBC News globe and logo, but instead stopping with a time-lapse shot outside the corporation's headquarters. The countdown was also extended back to 90 seconds, of which approximately 86 were seen before the first hour from Broadcasting House.

A full three-minute version of the countdown music was made available on BBC News Online and David Lowe's own website after a remix on 16 May 2006. News 24 'releases' countdown music  BBC News Online, 18 May 2006 

An international version of the countdown was launched on BBC World News on 5 September 2005 featuring more international content and similar music. Various changes have been made to the music and visuals since then, with presentation following the style of BBC News. The visuals in the sequence were updated on 10 May 2010. In June 2011, further imagery was added relating to recent events, including the conflict in Libya and views of outside 10 Downing Street. In January 2013, as part of the relocation of BBC News to Broadcasting House in Central London, BBC World News received a new countdown in the same style as the BBC News Channel's updated countdown, with some minor differences.

== See also ==

* ITV News Channel
* ABC News 24

== References ==

== External links ==
* 
** via BBC News Online (available to UK viewers only - TV Licence required)
** via BBC iPlayer (available to UK viewers only - TV Licence required)



[[Bill Oddie]]

William Edgar "Bill" Oddie OBE (born 7 July 1941, Rochdale, Lancashire, England Bill Oddie - Rochdale Town Talk ) is an English author, actor, comedian, artist, naturalist and musician, who became famous as one of The Goodies.

A birdwatcher since his childhood in Quinton, Birmingham, Oddie has now established a reputation as an ornithologist, conservationist and television presenter on wildlife issues. Some of his books are illustrated with his own paintings and drawings. BBC - Bill Oddie OBE - Comedian and Naturalist 

Oddie's wildlife programmes for the BBC include: Springwatch/Autumnwatch, How to Watch Wildlife, Wild In Your Garden, Birding with Bill Oddie, Britain Goes Wild with Bill Oddie and Bill Oddie Goes Wild.

==Career==

===Comedy===
After attending Lapal Primary School, Halesowen Grammar School (now The Earls High School, Halesowen) then King Edward's School, Birmingham, where he captained the school's rugby union team. Oddie went on to study English Literature at Pembroke College at the University of Cambridge, where he appeared in several Cambridge University Footlights Club productions.

One of these, a revue called A Clump of Plinths, was so successful at the Edinburgh Festival Fringe that it was renamed Cambridge Circus and transferred to the West End in London, then New Zealand and Broadway in September 1964. Meanwhile, still at Cambridge, Oddie wrote scripts for TV's That Was The Week That Was. 
 

His first television appearance was in Bernard Braden's On The Braden Beat in 1964. Subsequently, he was a key member of the performers in the BBC radio series I'm Sorry, I'll Read That Again (ISIRTA; 1965), where many of his musical compositions were featured. Some were released on the album Distinctly Oddie (Polydor, 1967). He was possibly one of the first performers to parody a rock song, arranging the traditional Yorkshire folk song "On Ilkla Moor Baht'at" in the style of Joe Cocker's hit rendition of the Beatles' "With a Little Help from My Friends" (released on John Peel's Dandelion Records in 1970 and featured in Peel's special box of most-treasured singles), and singing "Andy Pandy" in the style of a brassy soul number such as Wilson Pickett or Geno Washington might perform. In many shows he would do short impressions of Hughie Green.

In one song on I'm Sorry, I'll Read That Again, Oddie performed "What a Wonderful World" with a voice fully reminiscent of Louis Armstrong. During the course of the song, the rest of the cast attributed the gravelly quality of his voice to a sore throat. In the background, during the rest of the song, it is possible to hear the cast dispense cough medicine, then call for a doctor, the arrival of the doctor and his decision that Oddie should go into hospital, the trip to hospital in an ambulance, and the operation extracting his tonsils. After this, the sound of his voice changed to a sound closer to that of Harry Secombe. He thanked the cast for curing him. On television Oddie was co-writer and performer in the comedy series Twice a Fortnight with Graeme Garden, Terry Jones, Michael Palin and Jonathan Lynn. Later, he was co-writer and performer in the comedy series Broaden Your Mind with Tim Brooke-Taylor and Graeme Garden, for which Oddie became a cast member for the second series.

Oddie, Brooke-Taylor and Garden then co-wrote and appeared in their television comedy series The Goodies. The Goodies also released records, including "Father Christmas Do Not Touch Me"/"The In-Betweenies", "Funky Gibbon", and "Black Pudding Bertha", which were hit singles in 197475. They reformed, briefly, in 2005, for a successful 13-date tour of Australia.

Oddie, Brooke-Taylor and Garden voiced characters on the 1983 animated children's programme Bananaman. "Bananaman"  80s Cartoons "Bananaman  International Hero "Bananaman"  Classic Nick Online 

In the Amnesty International show A Poke in the Eye (With a Sharp Stick), Oddie, Brooke-Taylor and Garden sang their hit song "Funky Gibbon". They also appeared on Top of the Pops with the song. Together with Garden (who is a qualified doctor), Oddie co-wrote many episodes of the television comedy series Doctor in the House, including most of the first season and all of the second season. He has occasionally appeared on the BBC Radio 4 panel game I'm Sorry I Haven't a Clue, on which Garden and Brooke-Taylor are regular panellists. In 1982 Garden and Oddie wrote, but did not perform in, a 6-part science fiction sitcom called Astronauts for Central and ITV. The show was set in an international space station in the near future. 

===Natural history===

Oddie's first published work was an article about the birdlife of Birmingham's Bartley Reservoir in the West Midland Bird Club's 1962 Annual Report (he is first credited in the 1956 report, in which reports of his bird observations are tagged with his initials "WEO" ). He has since written a number of books about birds and birdwatching, as well as articles for many specialist publications including British Birds, Birdwatching Magazine and Birdwatch.

He discussed bird song recordings with Derek Jones in an August 1973 BBC Radio 4 programme called Sounds Natural. Radio Times entry for 

In the autumn of 1976 Oddie was involved in the successful identification of Britain's first ever record of Pallas's Reed Bunting on Fair Isle, Shetland. 

One of Oddie's first forays in the world of television natural history was as a guest on Animal Magic in December 1977. Radio Times entry for Another early natural history radio appearance was in October, as the guest on Radio 4's Through My Window, discussing the birds of Hampstead Heath. Radio Times entry for 

In 30 July 1985, he was the subject of a 50-minute Nature Watch Special: Bill Oddie - Bird Watcher, in which he was interviewed by Julian Pettifer at places where he had spent time birding, including Bartley Reservoir, the Christopher Cadbury Wetland Reserve at Upton Warren, RSPB Titchwell Marsh and Blakeney Point. 

Oddie has since hosted a number of successful nature programmes for the BBC, many produced by Stephen Moss, including: 

*The Great Bird Race (1983; Channel 4)
*The Great Kenyan Bird Safari (BBC)
*Favourite Walks: "A Bird Walk" (1985; BBC; filmed on Fair Isle)
*Worldwise: "The Bird Business" (1985; Channel 4)
*Oddie in Paradise (1985; BBC)
*Wild Weekends (TV AM)
*Flight to Eilat (Channel 4)
*Bird in the Nest (two series, 1994 and 1995)
*Birding with Bill Oddie (three series, 1997, 1998 and 2000)
*Bill Oddie Goes Wild (three series, 2001, 2002 and 2003)
*Wild In Your Garden (2003)
*Britain Goes Wild (2004)

*Bill Oddie In Tiger Country (2004)
*Bill Oddie's How to Watch Wildlife (two series, 2005 and 2006; also on DVD)
*Seven Natural Wonders (London edition) (2005)
*The Truth About Killer Dinosaurs (2005; also on DVD)
*Springwatch (20052008)
*Autumnwatch (20062008)
*Bill Oddie Back in the USA (2007)
*Bill Oddie's Top Ten Birds (2007; BBC Four)
*100 Years of Wildlife (2007)
*Bill Oddie's Wild Side (2008)
*Bill Oddie's Top 10 (2008)

On its first evening of broadcast in 2004, Britain Goes Wild set a record for its timeslot of 8 pm on BBC Two of 3.4 million viewers, one million more than the Channel 4 programme showing at that time. Britain Goes Wild, renamed Springwatch the following year, became a wildlife broadcasting phenomenon, attracting up to 5 million viewers. 

He became president of the West Midland Bird Club in 1999, having been Vice-President since 1991, and is a former member of the council of the RSPB. Oddie is also a vice-president of the League Against Cruel Sports and a vice-president of the British Trust for Conservation Volunteers. BTCV - Who we are He practised as a bird ringer, but allowed his licence to lapse. 

In 2003 Oddie set up a half-marathon to raise money for various wildlife charities in his birth-town of Rochdale. Celebrities who have participated in the event include Ray Mears, Catherine Jenkins and Hugh Fearnley-Whittingstall.

In 2011, Oddie featured as an investigator in Snares Uncovered: killers in the countryside. The film carried out an expose of snaring in Scotland and was commissioned by animal protection charity OneKind. During the investigation, Oddie discovered over 70 snare traps and several stink pits.

===Music===
Oddie wrote original music at Cambridge University for the Footlights and later wrote comic songs for I'm Sorry, I'll Read That Again. He also wrote a number of comic songs for The Goodies, most of them performed by Oddie.

In the 1960s and early 1970s, Oddie released a number of singles and at least one album. One of the former, issued in 1970 on John Peel's Dandelion Records label (Catalogue No: 4786), was On Ilkla Moor Baht 'at, performed in the style of Joe Cocker's With a Little Help from my Friends. The B-side, Harry Krishna, featured the Hare Krishna chant, substituting the names of contemporary famous people called Harry, including Harry Secombe, Harry Worth, Harry Lauder, and Harry Corbett, as well as puns such as "Harry along now", "Harrystotle " and ending with "Harry-ly really must go now". Both tracks appear on the compilation CD Life Too, Has Surface Noise: The Complete Dandelion Records Singles Collection 19691972 (2007).

He played the drums and saxophone and appeared as Cousin Kevin in a production of The Who's rock opera Tommy at the Rainbow Theatre, Finsbury Park, London on 9 December 1972. He has also contributed vocals to a Rick Wakeman album, Criminal Record.

Oddie took part in the English National Opera production of the Gilbert and Sullivan comic opera The Mikado, in which he appeared in the role of the "Lord High Executioner", taking over the role from Eric Idle. During the early 1990s, Oddie was a DJ for London-based jazz radio station 102.2 Jazz FM, but was dismissed after criticising the management on air after they told him he was playing too much jazz on his show.

In 2007 Oddie appeared on the BBC series Play It Again. In the episode he attempts to realise his dream of becoming a rock guitarist. Initially teacher Bridget Mermikides tries to teach him using traditional methods but he rebels: instead he turns to old friends Albert Lee, Dave Davies (of The Kinks) and Mark Knopfler for advice and strikes out on his own. He succeeds in the target of playing lead guitar for his daughter Rosie's band at her 21st birthday party, and even manages to impress his erstwhile teacher.

In November 2010, he agreed, along with fellow members of The Goodies, to re-release their 1970s hit The Funky Gibbon to raise funds for the International Primate Protection League's Save the Gibbon appeal.

===Other television and audio appearances===
Oddie appeared as the hapless window cleaner in the Eric Sykes' comedy story The Plank in 1967. He also presented the live children's Saturday morning entertainment show Saturday Banana (ITV/Southern Television) during the late 1970s. In the late 1980s he was a presenter of the BBC TV show Fax (a show about 'facts').

In 1981 he appeared as a Telethon celebrity in New Zealand, hosted by TV1. 

In the 1990s he became better known as a presenter of birdwatching, and later wildlife-related, programmes such as Springwatch. Although he remains almost unknown to US audiences, in 1992 he was a guest star in the US comedy television series Married... with Children for a 3-part episode set in England. "Married...With Children."  BBC Guide to Comedy (Retrieved on: 30 July 2007) 

In 1997-98 he appeared on the Channel 4 archaeological programme Time Team, as the team excavated a Roman villa site in Turkdean, Gloucestershire.

He was the compre of a daytime BBC gameshow, History Hunt (in 2003); and has appeared in the Doctor Who audio drama Doctor Who and the Pirates. In 2004, he appeared in the BBC show Who Do You Think You Are?, in which he looked into his ancestry  he was visibly moved by its revelations. In 2005, he took part in Rolf on Art  the big event at Trafalgar Square and in September that year was also a celebrity guest along with Lynda Bellingham on the ITV1 programme Who Wants to be a Millionaire.

In 2006 Oddie appeared in the BBC show Never Mind The Buzzcocks, "Jupitus comments on Oddie's appearance on 'Never Mind The Buzzcocks'" and also appeared on the topical quiz show 8 out of 10 Cats. Bill also is the voice behind many B&Q adverts throughout 2006/2007. On 25 May 2007, Oddie made a cameo appearance on Ronni Ancona's new comedy sketch show, Ronni Ancona & Co.

He hosted the genealogy-based series My Famous Family, broadcast on UKTV History in 2007. In 2008, Oddie was a guest on Jamie Oliver's television special Jamie's Fowl Dinners, talking about free-range chickens. He also recorded a voice for Lionhead Studios' Fable II.

He also appeared on Would I Lie To You? in 2011 where he revealed that he was saved from drowning by Freddy from popular children's series Rainbow while on holiday in the Seychelles.

===2013 Australian tour===
Oddie undertook an Australian tour during June 2013, in all of the mainland capital cities  Brisbane, Sydney, Melbourne, Adelaide and Perth  in a series of one-off shows, "An Oldie but a Goodie". A video message from Tim Brooke-Taylor and Graeme Garden was shown during the performances. An Oldie but a Goodie Oddie made personal appearances on both The Project and Adam Hills Tonight TV shows during the tour.

==Personal life==

===Family===
Oddie's mother was diagnosed with schizophrenia. The One Show, 13 February 2012 

Oddie is married to Laura Beaumont Camden marriage register 1983 JulSep vol.14 p1900 (Beaumont-Gilles), Camden birth register 1985 November vol. 14 p1828 with whom he has worked on a variety of projects for children, including film scripts, drama and comedy series, puppet shows and books. They have a daughter, Rosie, (mentions Rosie's birth "the night before Halloween") and live in Hampstead, London. Rosie Oddie is a musician, also using the name Rosie Bones. 

Oddie also has two daughters from his first marriage (1967 to Jean Hart): Hampstead marriage register 1967 Oct-Dec vol. 5b p1372 Bonnie, and the actress Kate Hardie, plus three grandchildren, Lyle, Ella and Gracie.

===Depression===
Oddie has had depression for most of his life, being diagnosed with clinical depression in 2001. On 11 March 2009 it was reported that he had been admitted to Capio Nightingale psychiatric hospital in Marylebone, to deal with his depression. His agent David Foster said: "Bill gets these bouts every two or three years where he gets down for about two weeks and recovers. He sometimes goes into hospital or takes a break or has a change of scenery to recharge his batteries." In January 2010 Oddie spoke to the media, revealing that he had in fact had two separate stays in different hospitals, only being discharged "in time for Christmas". He said that he was dealing with depression and bipolar disorder, describing the period as "probably the worst 12 months of my life". Oddie stated that he was planning to meet with BBC executives to discuss his return to television work. 

His illness meant that he did not appear in the 2009 and 2010 series of Springwatch, although he made a guest appearance in the penultimate episode of the latter. Oddie subsequently claimed he was sacked from Springwatch and that this had caused the depressive illness. 

==Honours==
In 2001, Oddie became the third person to decline to appear on This Is Your Life. He changed his mind a few hours later and agreed to appear on the show. On 16 October 2003, Oddie was made an OBE for his service to Wildlife Conservation in a ceremony at Buckingham Palace. He played down the event, choosing to wear a camouflage shirt and crumpled jacket to receive his medal. In June 2004, Oddie and Johnny Morris were jointly profiled in the first of a three part BBC Two series, The Way We Went Wild, about television wildlife presenters. In May 2005, he received the British Naturalists' Association's Peter Scott Memorial Award, from BNA president David Bellamy, "in recognition of his great contribution to our understanding of natural history and conservation." He is a recipient of the RSPB Medal. 

On 30 June 2009, he was proposed for inclusion in the Birmingham Walk of Stars, with the public invited to vote. 

==Bibliography==
(incomplete list)
*Bill Oddie's Introduction to Birdwatching (Subbuteo Books, 2002)
*Bill Oddie's Colouring Guide to Birds (Piccolo, 1991)
*Bill Oddie's Little Black Bird Book
*Bill Oddie's Little Black Bird Book (paperback with additional material)
*Bill Oddie's Gone Birding
*The Big Bird Race (with David Tomlinson; Collins, 1983)
*Follow That Bird!
*Gripping Yarns
*Bird in the Nest
*Bill Oddie's How to Watch Wildlife
*One Flew into the Cuckoos Egg (Autobiography)
Bill Oddie also co-wrote the Springwatch & Autumnwatch book with Kate Humble and Simon King.

Co-written with the other members of The Goodies:
*The Goodies File
*The Goodies Book of Criminal Records
*The Goodies Disaster Movie

Co-written with Laura Beaumont:
*The Toilet Book (or 11 & 1/2 minutes a day and how not to waste them) (Methuen, 1984, ISBN 978-0-413-56910-3)

===Contributions===
*Confessions of a Scilly Birdman, David Hunt; Croom Helm, 1985. ISBN 0-7099-3724-5 (foreword and postscript)
*Bird in the Yorkshire Museum, Michael Denton; North Yorkshire County Council, 1995. ISBN 0-905807-10-3 (foreword)
*Bird Brain of Britain, Charles Gallimore & Tim Appleton; Christopher Helm, 2004. ISBN 0-7136-7036-3 (foreword)
*Blokes and Birds, Stephen Moss; New Holland Publishers. ISBN 1-84330-484-8 (foreword)
*The New Birds of the West Midlands, Graham and Janet Harrison (West Midland Bird Club, 2005) ISBN 0-9507881-2-0 (foreword )

== Discography ==

===Albums===

 Year Title Label Cat No. 
 1967 Distinctly Oddie Polydor 582 007 
 

===Singles===

 Year A-side B-side Label Cat. No. 
 1964 Nothing Better To Do Traffic Island Parlophone R 5153 
 1965 The Knitting Song Ain't Got Rhythm R 5346 
 1966 I Can't Get Through Because She Is My Love R 5433 
 1969 Jimmy Young Irish Get Out Decca F 12903 
 1970 On Ilkla Moor Baht'at Harry Krishna Dandelion Epic 4786 S EPC 3793 
 

==In popular culture==
In the fictional world of comedy character Alan Partridge, Oddie is an unseen presence in Alan's life.

He has also been referenced, often humorously, by the hosts of Top Gear. Jeremy Clarkson even used a mask with Bill Oddie's face to escape speed cameras while racing the Nissan GT-R against the Bullet train in Japan in the 4th episode of Top Gear's 11th series. James May also raced in Finland against a Bill Oddie lookalike, who won the race.

==References==

*
*

==External links==
*
*
*
*
*Bill Oddie's family history at the BBC website for the programme Who Do You Think You Are?
*Bill Oddie Goes Wild  on BBC's Science and Nature website
*In-depth interview, The Telegraph, 28 April 2005
*Gigrin Farm chapter from Gripping Yarns
*Oddie on UKTV



[[Broadway (Manhattan)]]

Broadway is a road in the U.S. state of New York. Perhaps best known for the portion that runs through the borough of Manhattan in New York City, it actually runs 13 mi through Manhattan and 2 mi through the Bronx, exiting north from the city to run an additional 18 mi through the municipalities of Yonkers, Hastings-On-Hudson, Dobbs Ferry, Irvington, Tarrytown and terminating north of Sleepy Hollow in Westchester County. There are four other streets named "Broadway" in New York City's remaining three boroughs: one each in Brooklyn (with its own article) and Staten Island, and two in Queens (one running from Astoria to Elmhurst, and the other in Hamilton Beach). Each borough therefore has a street named "Broadway". 

It is the oldest northsouth main thoroughfare in New York City, dating to the first New Amsterdam settlement. The name Broadway is the English literal translation of the Dutch name, Breede weg. Broadway is known worldwide as the heart of the American theatre industry. 

== History ==
Broadway in 1860
In 1885 the Broadway commercial district was overrun with telephone, telegraph, and electrical lines. This view was north from Cortlandt and Maiden Lane.

Broadway was originally the Wickquasgeck Trail, carved into the brush of Manhattan by its Native American inhabitants. This trail originally snaked through swamps and rocks along the length of Manhattan Island.

Upon the arrival of the Dutch, the trail soon became the main road through the island from Nieuw Amsterdam at the southern tip. The Dutch explorer and entrepreneur David de Vries gives the first mention of it in his journal for the year 1642 ("the Wickquasgeck Road over which the Indians passed daily"). The Dutch named the road "Heerestraat". Although current street signs are simply labeled as "Broadway", in a 1776 map of New York City, Broadway is explicitly labeled "Broadway Street". See the map inset. "Manhattans Sandy Evacuation Zones Match Up With the Islands Original Coastline" gizmodo.com In the mid-eighteenth century, part of Broadway in what is now lower Manhattan was known as Great George Street. 

In the 18th century, Broadway ended at the town commons north of Wall Street, where traffic continued up the East Side of the island via Eastern Post Road and the West Side via Bloomingdale Road. The western Bloomingdale Road would be widened and paved during the 19th century, and called "Western Boulevard" Traffic regulations for the Western Boulevard General Ordinances of the City of New York or "The Boulevard" north of the Grand Circle, now called Columbus Circle. On February 14, 1899, the name "Broadway" was extended to the entire Broadway/Bloomingdale/Boulevard road. February 14th in NYC History: 1899, referred to as "the 'Western' Boulevard"; called "the 'Grand' Boulevard" in The New York Times, February 1869, quoted in Michael V. Susi, The Upper West Side "Introduction", 2009:7. 

== Road ==

Broadway runs the length of Manhattan Island, roughly parallel to the Hudson River, from Bowling Green at the south to Inwood at the northern tip of the island. South of Columbus Circle, it is a one-way southbound street. Since 2009, vehicular traffic has been banned at Times Square between 47th and 42nd Streets, and at Herald Square between 35th and 33rd Streets as part of a pilot program; the right-of-way is intact and reserved for cyclists and pedestrians. From the northern shore of Manhattan, Broadway crosses Spuyten Duyvil Creek via the Broadway Bridge and continues through Marble Hill (a discontinuous portion of the borough of Manhattan) and the Bronx into Westchester County. U.S. 9 continues to be known as Broadway through its junction with NY 117.

Plan of 1868 for an "arcade railway"
A view of Broadway in 1909

Because Broadway preceded the grid that the Commissioners' Plan of 1811 imposed on the island, Broadway crosses midtown Manhattan diagonally, intersecting with both the east-west streets and north-south avenues. Broadway's intersections with avenues, marked by "squares" (some merely triangular slivers of open space), have induced some interesting architecture, such as the Flatiron Building.

The section of lower Broadway from its origin at Bowling Green to City Hall Park is the historical location for the city's ticker-tape parades, and is sometimes called the "Canyon of Heroes" during such events. West of Broadway as far as Canal Street was the city's fashionable residential area until circa 1825; landfill has more than tripled the area, and the Hudson shore now lies far to the west, beyond TriBeCa and Battery Park City.

Broadway marks the boundary between Greenwich Village to the west and the East Village to the east, passing Astor Place. It is a short walk from there to New York University near Washington Square Park, which is at the foot of Fifth Avenue. A bend in front of Grace Church allegedly avoids an earlier tavern; from 10th Street it begins its long diagonal course across Manhattan, headed almost due north.

At Union Square, Broadway crosses 14th Street, merges with 4th Avenue, and continues its diagonal uptown course from the Square's northwest corner. Union Square is the only location wherein the physical section of Broadway is discontinuous in Manhattan (other portions of Broadway in Manhattan are pedestrians-only plazas).

At Madison Square, location of the Flatiron Building, Broadway crosses Fifth Avenue at 23rd Street.

At Greeley Square (West 33rd Street), Broadway crosses Sixth Avenue aka the Avenue of the Americas.

Macy's Herald Square department store is located on the northwest corner of Broadway and West 34th St. and southwest corner of Broadway and West 35th Street; it is one of the largest department stores in the world.

One famous stretch near Times Square, where Broadway crosses Seventh Avenue in midtown Manhattan, is the home of many Broadway theatres, housing an ever-changing array of commercial, large-scale plays, particularly musicals. This area of Manhattan is often called the Theater District or the Great White Way, a nickname originating in the headline "Found on the Great White Way" in the February 3, 1902 edition of the New York Evening Telegram. The journalistic nickname was inspired by the millions of lights on theater marquees and billboard advertisements that illuminate the area.

After becoming the city's de facto Red Light District in the 1960s and 1970s (as can be seen in the films Taxi Driver and Midnight Cowboy), since the late 1980s Times Square has emerged as a family tourist center, in effect being Disneyfied following the company's purchase and renovation of the New Amsterdam Theatre on 42nd Street in 1993. Until June 2007, The New York Times, from which the Square gets its name, was published at offices at 239 West 43rd Street; the paper stopped printing papers there on June 15, 2007. 

At the southwest corner of Central Park, Broadway crosses Eighth Avenue (called Central Park West north of 59th Street) at West 59th Street; on the site of the former New York Coliseum convention center is the new shopping center at the foot of the Time Warner Center, headquarters of Time Warner.

From Columbus Circle northward, Broadway becomes a wide boulevard to 169th Street; it retains landscaped center islands that separate northbound from southbound traffic. The medians are a vestige of the central mall of "The Boulevard" that had become the spine of the Upper West Side, and many of these contain public seating.

Broadway intersects with Columbus Avenue (known as Ninth Avenue south of West 59th Street) at West 65th and 66th Streets where the Juilliard School and Lincoln Center, both well-known performing arts landmarks, as well as the Manhattan New York Temple of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints are located.

A view up Broadway from Bowling Green, with the Chrysler Building visible in the background
X-shaped intersection of Broadway (from lower right to upper left) and Amsterdam Avenue (lower left to upper right), looking north from Sherman Square to West 72nd Street and the thick treetops of Verdi Square

From West 70th to West 73rd Streets, Broadway intersects with Amsterdam Avenue (known as 10th Avenue south of West 59th Street). The wide intersection of the two thoroughfares has historically been the site of numerous traffic accidents and pedestrian casualties, partly due to the long crosswalks. Two small triangular plots of land were created at points where Broadway slices through Amsterdam Avenue. One is a tiny fenced-in patch of shrubbery and plants at West 70th Street called Sherman Square (although it and the surrounding intersection have also been known collectively as Sherman Square), and the other triangle is a lush tree-filled garden bordering Amsterdam Avenue from just above West 72nd Street to West 73rd Street. Called Verdi Square for its monument to Italian composer Giuseppe Verdi, which was erected in 1909, this triangular sliver of public space was designated a Scenic Landmark by the Landmarks Preservation Commission in 1974. In the 1960s and 1970s, the area surrounding both Verdi Square and Sherman Square was known by local drug users and dealers as "Needle Park," and was featured prominently in the gritty 1971 dramatic film The Panic in Needle Park, directed by Jerry Schatzberg and starring Al Pacino in his second onscreen role.

The original brick and stone shelter leading to the entrance of the 72nd Street subway station (IRT Broadway  Seventh Avenue Line), one of the first 28 subway stations in Manhattan, remains located on one of the wide islands in the center of Broadway, on the south side of West 72nd Street. For many years, all traffic on Broadway flowed on either side of this median and its subway entrance, and its uptown lanes went past it along the western edge of triangular Verdi Square. In 2001 and 2002, renovation of the historic 72nd St. station and the addition of a second subway control house and passenger shelter on an adjacent center median just north of 72nd Street, across from the original building, resulted in the creation of a public plaza with stone pavers and extensive seating, connecting the newer building with Verdi Square, and making it necessary to divert northbound traffic to Amsterdam Avenue for one block. While Broadway's southbound lanes at this intersection were unaffected by the new construction, its northbound lanes are no longer contiguous at this intersection. Drivers can either continue along Amsterdam Avenue to head uptown or turn left on West 73rd Street to resume traveling on Broadway.

Several notable apartment buildings are in close proximity to this intersection, including The Ansonia, its ornate architecture dominating the cityscape here. After the Ansonia first opened as a hotel, live seals were kept in indoor fountains inside its lobby. Later, it was home to the infamous Plato's Retreat nightclub. Immediately north of Verdi Square is the formidable Apple Bank for Savings building, formerly the Central Savings Bank, which was built in 1926 and designed to resemble the Federal Reserve Bank of New York. Broadway is also home to the Beacon Theater at West 74th Street, designated a national landmark in 1979 and still in operation as a concert venue after its establishment in 1929 as a vaudeville and music hall, and "sister" venue to Radio City Music Hall. 

At its intersection with West 78th Street, Broadway shifts direction and continues directly uptown and aligned approximately with the Commissioners' grid. Past the bend are the historic Apthorp apartment building, built in 1908, and the First Baptist Church in the City of New York, incorporated in New York in 1762, its current building on Broadway erected in 1891. The road heads north and passes historically important apartment houses such as the Belnord, the Astor Court Building, and the Art Nouveau Cornwall. Horsley, Carter B. "The Cornwall" City Review p. 351 

At Broadway and 95th Street, one finds Symphony Space, established in 1978 as home to avant-garde and classical music and dance performances in the former Symphony Theatre, which was originally built in 1918 as a premier "music and motion-picture house." At 99th Street, Broadway passes between the controversial skyscrapers of the Ariel East and West.

At 107th Street, Broadway intersects with West End Avenue (called 11th Avenue south of West 59th Street) to form Straus Park with its Titanic Memorial by Augustus Lukeman.

Further north, Broadway follows the old Bloomingdale Road as the main spine of the Upper West Side, passing the campus of Columbia University at 116th Street in Morningside Heights, in part on the tract that housed the Bloomingdale (Lunatic) Asylum from 1808 until it moved to Westchester County in 1894. Still in Morningside Heights, Broadway passes the handsome, park-like campus of Barnard College. Next, the beautiful Gothic quadrangle of Union Theological Seminary and the brick buildings of the Jewish Theological Seminary of America with their beautifully landscaped interior courtyards face one another across Broadway. On the next block is the Manhattan School of Music.

Broadway then runs past the proposed uptown campus of Columbia University, and the main campus of CUNYCity College; the beautiful Gothic buildings of the original City College campus are out of sight, a block to the east. Also to the east are the handsome brownstones of Hamilton Heights. Hamilton Place is a surviving section of Bloomingdale Road, and originally the address of Alexander Hamilton's house The Grange, now moved. Simmons, Eleanor Booth Where Cobwebs Thrive on Manhattan Isle New York Tribune; November 6, 1921 

Broadway at Dyckman Street in Inwood

Broadway achieves a verdant, park-like effect, particularly in the spring, when it runs between the uptown Trinity Church Cemetery and the former Trinity Chapel, now the Church of the Intercession near 155th Street. The springtime plantings in the median, maintained by Trinity Church, are spectacular.

NewYork-Presbyterian Hospital lies on Broadway near 166th, 167th, and 168th Streets in Washington Heights. The intersection with Saint Nicholas Avenue at 167th Street forms Mitchell Square Park. At 178th Street, US 9 becomes concurrent with Broadway.

Broadway crosses the Harlem River on the Broadway Bridge to Marble Hill and then enters the Bronx, where it is the eastern border of Riverdale and the western border of Van Cortlandt Park. At 253rd Street, NY 9A joins with U.S. 9 and Broadway. (NY 9A splits off Broadway at Ashburton Avenue in Yonkers.) After leaving New York City, it is the main northsouth street of western Yonkers through Sleepy Hollow (known as either North or South Broadway in most sections), before becoming Albany Post Road (and Highland Avenue) at the northern border of Sleepy Hollow, New York.

== Transportation ==
From south to north, Broadway at one point or another runs over or under the New York City Subway's Lexington Avenue, Broadway, Broadway  Seventh Avenue, Eighth Avenue trunk lines (the IND Sixth Avenue Line is the only north-south trunk line in Manhattan that does not run along Broadway).

* The IRT Lexington Avenue Line runs under Broadway from Bowling Green to Fulton Street ().
* The BMT Broadway Line runs under it from City Hall to Times Square  42nd Street ().
* The IRT Broadway  Seventh Avenue Line runs under and over Broadway from Times Square to 168th Street (), and again from 218th Street to its terminal in the Bronx at Van Cortlandt Park  242nd Street ().
* The northern portion of the IND Eighth Avenue Line runs under Broadway from Dyckman Street to Inwood  207th Street (). 

Broadway under the IRT Broadway  Seventh Avenue Line's elevated structure

Early street railways on Broadway included the Broadway and Seventh Avenue Railroad's Broadway and University Place Line (1864?) between Union Square (14th Street) and Times Square (42nd Street), the Ninth Avenue Railroad's Ninth and Amsterdam Avenues Line (1884) between 65th Street and 71st Street, the Forty-second Street, Manhattanville and St. Nicholas Avenue Railway's Broadway Branch Line (1885?) between Times Square and 125th Street, and the Kingsbridge Railway's Kingsbridge Line north of 169th Street. The Broadway Surface Railroad's Broadway Line, a cable car line, opened on lower Broadway (below Times Square) in 1893, and soon became the core of the Metropolitan Street Railway, with two cable branches: the Broadway and Lexington Avenue Line and Broadway and Columbus Avenue Line.

These streetcar lines were replaced with bus routes in the 1930s and 1940s. Before Broadway became one-way, the main bus routes along it were the New York City Omnibus Company's (NYCO) 6 (Broadway below Times Square), 7 (Broadway and Columbus Avenue), and 11 (Ninth and Amsterdam Avenues), and the Surface Transportation Corporation's M100 (Kingsbridge) and M104 (Broadway Branch). Additionally, the Fifth Avenue Coach Company's (FACCo) 4 and 5 used Broadway from 135th Street north to Washington Heights, and their 5 and 6 used Broadway between 57th Street and 72nd Street. With the implementation of one-way traffic, the northbound 6 and 7 were moved to Sixth Avenue.

, Broadway is now served by the M4 (ex-FACCo 4), M5 (ex-FACCo 5), M7 (ex-NYCO 7), M100, and M104. Other routes that use part of Broadway include the M10, M20, M60 Select Bus Service, Bx7, Bx9, and Bx20. 

Bee-Line buses also serves Broadway within Riverdale, the Bronx and Westchester County. Routes 1, 2, 3, 4, 6, 13 and several others run on a portion of Broadway.

==Canyon of Heroes==

Canyon of Heroes during a ticker-tape parade for the Apollo 11 astronauts on August 13, 1969

Canyon of Heroes is occasionally used to refer to the section of lower Broadway in the Financial District that is the location of the city's ticker-tape parades.

The traditional route of the parade is northward from Bowling Green to City Hall Park. Most of the route is lined with tall office buildings along both sides, affording a view of the parade for thousands of office workers who create the snowstorm-like jettison of shredded paper products that characterize the parade.

While typical sports championship parades have been showered with some 50 tons of confetti and shredded paper, the V-J Day parade on August 14 and 15, 1945  marking the end of World War II  was covered with 5,438 tons of paper, based on estimates provided by the New York City Department of Sanitation. 

More than 200 black granite strips embedded in the sidewalks along the Canyon of Heroes list honorees of past ticker-tape parades. 

The most recent parade up the Canyon of Heroes was on February 7, 2012 for the New York Giants in honor of their Super Bowl XLVI championship.

== Great White Way ==

"The Great White Way" is a nickname for a section of Broadway in the Midtown section of the New York City borough of Manhattan, specifically the portion that encompasses the Broadway Theater District, between 42nd and 53rd Streets, and encompassing Times Square.

In 1880, a stretch of Broadway between Union Square and Madison Square was illuminated by Brush arc lamps, making it among the first electrically lighted streets in the United States. Burrows & Wallace, p. 1063 By the 1890s, the portion from 23rd Street to 34th Street was so brightly illuminated by electrical advertising signs, that people began calling it "The Great White Way." Burrows & Wallace, p. 1066 When the theater district moved uptown, the name was transferred to the Times Square area.

The phrase Great White Way has been attributed to Shep Friedman, columnist for the New York Morning Telegraph in 1901, who lifted the term from the title of a book about the Arctic by Albert Paine. Bloom, Ken. Broadway: its history, people, and places : an encyclopedia, p.499 (2003) (ISBN 978-0415937047) The headline "Found on the Great White Way" appeared in the February 3, 1902, edition of the New York Evening Telegram. 

A portrait of Broadway in the early part of the 20th century and "The Great White Way" late at night appeared in "Artist In Manhattan"(1940) Jerome Myers, Artist in Manhattan, New York: American Artists Group, Inc. 1940. written by the artist-historian Jerome Myers:

::Early morn on Broadway, the same light that tips the mountain tops of the Colorado canyons gradually discloses the quiet anatomy, the bare skeletons of the huge iron signs that trellis the sky, now denuded of the attractions of the volcanic night. Almost lifeless, the tired entertainers of the night clubs and their friends straggle to their rooms, taximen compare notes and earnings, the vast street scene has had its curtain call, the play is over.

::Dear old Broadway, for many years have I dwelt on your borders. I have known the quiet note of your dawn. Even earlier I would take my coffee at Martin's, at 54th Streetnow, alas, vanishedwhere I would see creatures of the night life before they disappeared with the dawn.

::One night a celebrated female impersonator came to the restaurant in all his regalia, directly from a club across the street. Several taximen began to poke fun at him. Unable any longer to bear their taunts, he got up and knocked all the taximen out cold. Then he went back to the club, only to lament under his bitter tears, "See how they've ruined my dress!"

::Gone are the old-time Broadway oyster bars and chop houses that were the survivors of a tradition of their sporting patrons, the bon vivants of Manhattan. Gone are the days when the Hoffman House flourished on Madison Square, with its famous nudes by Bouguereau; when barrooms were palaces, on nearly every corner throughout the city; when Steve Brodie, jumping from Brooklyn Bridge, splashed the entire country with publicity; when Bowery concert halls dispensed schooners of beer for a nickel, with a stage show thrown in; when Theis's Music Hall still resounded on 14th Street with its great mechanical organ, the wonder of its day, a place of beauty, with fine paintings and free company and the frankest of female life. Across the street was Tammany Hall, and next to it Tony Pastor's, where stars of the stage were born. Tony himself, in dress clothes and top hat, sang his ballads, a gallant trouper introducing Lillian Russell and others to fame through his audience.

== Modern traffic flow ==
Broadway was once a two-way street for its entire length. The present status, in which it runs one-way southbound south of Columbus Circle (59th Street), came about in several stages. On June 6, 1954, Seventh Avenue became southbound and Eighth Avenue became northbound south of Broadway. None of Broadway became one-way, but the increased southbound traffic between Columbus Circle (Eighth Avenue) and Times Square (Seventh Avenue) caused the city to re-stripe that section of Broadway for four southbound and two northbound lanes. Broadway became one-way from Columbus Circle south to Herald Square (34th Street) on March 10, 1957, in conjunction with Sixth Avenue becoming one-way from Herald Square north to 59th Street and Seventh Avenue becoming one-way from 59th Street south to Times Square (where it crosses Broadway). On June 3, 1962, Broadway became one-way south of Canal Street, with Trinity Place and Church Street carrying northbound traffic. Another change was made on November 10, 1963, when Broadway became one-way southbound from Herald Square to Madison Square (23rd Street) and Union Square (14th Street) to Canal Street, and two routes  Sixth Avenue south of Herald Square and Centre Street, Lafayette Street, and Fourth Avenue south of Union Square  became one-way northbound. Finally, at the same time as Madison Avenue became one-way northbound and Fifth Avenue became one-way southbound, Broadway was made one-way southbound between Madison Square (where Fifth Avenue crosses) and Union Square on January 14, 1966, completing its conversion south of Columbus Circle. 

In August 2008, two traffic lanes from 42nd to 35th Streets were taken out of service and converted to public plazas. Additionally, bike lanes were added on Broadway from 42nd Street down to Union Square. Broadway Boulevard I 

Since May 2009, the portions of Broadway through Duffy Square, Times Square, and Herald Square have been closed entirely to automobile traffic, except for cross traffic on the Streets and Avenues, as part of a traffic and pedestrianization experiment, with the pavement reserved exclusively for walkers, cyclists, and those lounging in temporary seating placed by the city. The city decided that the experiment was successful and decided to make the change permanent in February 2010. Though the anticipated benefits to traffic flow were not as large as hoped, pedestrian injuries dropped dramatically and foot traffic increased in the designated areas; the project was popular with both residents and businesses. The current portions converted into pedestrian plazas are between West 47th Street and West 42nd Street within Times and Duffy Squares, and between West 35th Street and West 33rd Street in the Herald Square area. Additionally, portions of Broadway in the Madison Square and Union Square have been dramatically narrowed, allowing ample pedestrian plazas to exist along the side of the road.

In May 2013, the NYCDOT decided to redesign Broadway between 35th and 42nd Streets for the second time in five years, owing to poor connections between pedestrian plazas and decreased vehicular traffic. With the new redesign, the bike lane is now on the right side of the street; it was formerly on the left side adjacent to the pedestrian plazas, causing conflicts between pedestrian and bicycle traffic. Broadway Boulevard II 

== Buildings ==
One Broadway

Broadway is lined with many famous and otherwise noted and historic buildings, such as:
* 2 Broadway
* 280 Broadway (also known as the Marble Palace, the A.T. Stewart Company Store or The Sun Building)
* Alexander Hamilton US Custom House (at the southern foot of Broadway, facing Bowling Green Fence and Park)
* American Surety Building (100 Broadway)
* Bowling Green Fence and Park (at the southern foot of Broadway, between 25 and 26 Broadway)
* Bowling Green Building, later the White Star Line Building (11 Broadway)
* Corbin Building (196 Broadway)
* Cunard Building (25 Broadway)
* Equitable Building (120 Broadway)
* Grand Central Hotel (673 Broadway)
* The Morgan Stanley Building (1585 Broadway)
* Paramount Building (1501 Broadway)
* Standard Oil Company Building (26 Broadway, on the east side of Broadway, facing the Cunard building)
* Trinity Church (79 Broadway)
* United States Lines-Panama Pacific Line Building (1 Broadway)
* Winter Garden Theatre (1634 Broadway)
* Woolworth Building (233 Broadway)

Historic buildings on Broadway that are now demolished include:

* Appleton Building
* Alexander Macomb House
* Barnum's American Museum
* Equitable Life Building
* Mechanics' Hall
* Singer Building (Liberty Street and Broadway)

==See also==

* Broadway theatre
* Broadway, Brooklyn
* Broadway, Queens

* East Broadway, Manhattan
* West Broadway, Manhattan

==References==
Notes

Bibliography
*

==External links==

* Great White Way Historical citations from word researcher Barry Popik.
* New York Songlines: Broadway; a virtual walking tour of the street.
* Green Light for Midtown New York City Department of Transportation pilot program for Broadway traffic
* Walking the length of Broadway

*



[[Bilinear transform]]

The bilinear transform (also known as Tustin's method) is used in digital signal processing and discrete-time control theory to transform continuous-time system representations to discrete-time and vice versa. 

The bilinear transform is a special case of a conformal mapping (namely, the Mbius transformation), often used to convert a transfer function of a linear, time-invariant (LTI) filter in the continuous-time domain (often called an analog filter) to a transfer function of a linear, shift-invariant filter in the discrete-time domain (often called a digital filter although there are analog filters constructed with switched capacitors that are discrete-time filters). It maps positions on the axis, , in the s-plane to the unit circle, , in the z-plane. Other bilinear transforms can be used to warp the frequency response of any discrete-time linear system (for example to approximate the non-linear frequency resolution of the human auditory system) and are implementable in the discrete domain by replacing a system's unit delays with first order all-pass filters.

The transform preserves stability and maps every point of the frequency response of the continuous-time filter, to a corresponding point in the frequency response of the discrete-time filter, although to a somewhat different frequency, as shown in the Frequency warping section below. This means that for every feature that one sees in the frequency response of the analog filter, there is a corresponding feature, with identical gain and phase shift, in the frequency response of the digital filter but, perhaps, at a somewhat different frequency. This is barely noticeable at low frequencies but is quite evident at frequencies close to the Nyquist frequency.

== Discrete-time approximation ==
The bilinear transform is a first-order approximation of the natural logarithm function that is an exact mapping of the z-plane to the s-plane. When the Laplace transform is performed on a discrete-time signal (with each element of the discrete-time sequence attached to a correspondingly delayed unit impulse), the result is precisely the Z transform of the discrete-time sequence with the substitution of 

:

where is the numerical integration step size of the trapezoidal rule used in the bilinear transform derivation. The above bilinear approximation can be solved for or a similar approximation for can be performed.

The inverse of this mapping (and its first-order bilinear approximation) is

:

The bilinear transform essentially uses this first order approximation and substitutes into the continuous-time transfer function, 

:

That is

:

== Stability and minimum-phase property preserved ==
A continuous-time causal filter is stable if the poles of its transfer function fall in the left half of the complex s-plane. A discrete-time causal filter is stable if the poles of its transfer function fall inside the unit circle in the complex z-plane. The bilinear transform maps the left half of the complex s-plane to the interior of the unit circle in the z-plane. Thus filters designed in the continuous-time domain that are stable are converted to filters in the discrete-time domain that preserve that stability.

Likewise, a continuous-time filter is minimum-phase if the zeros of its transfer function fall in the left half of the complex s-plane. A discrete-time filter is minimum-phase if the zeros of its transfer function fall inside the unit circle in the complex z-plane. Then the same mapping property assures that continuous-time filters that are minimum-phase are converted to discrete-time filters that preserve that property of being minimum-phase.

== Example ==
As an example take a simple low-pass RC filter. This continuous-time filter has a transfer function

:

If we wish to implement this filter as a digital filter, we can apply the bilinear transform by substituting for the formula above; after some reworking, we get the following filter representation:

:

 
 
 
 

The coefficients of the denominator are the 'feed-backward' coefficients and the coefficients of the numerator are the 'feed-forward' coefficients used to implement a real-time digital filter.

== General second-order bi-quad transformation ==
It is possible to relate the coefficients of a continuous-time, analog filter with those of a similar discrete-time digital filter created through the bilinear transform process. Transforming a general, second-order continuous-time filter with the given transfer function
:
using the bilinear transform, the required substitution
:
results in a discrete-time digital filter with coefficients expressed in terms of the coefficients of the original continuous time filter:
:

== Frequency warping ==
To determine the frequency response of a continuous-time filter, the transfer function is evaluated at which is on the axis. Likewise, to determine the frequency response of a discrete-time filter, the transfer function is evaluated at which is on the unit circle, . When the actual frequency of is input to the discrete-time filter designed by use of the bilinear transform, it is desired to know at what frequency, , for the continuous-time filter that this is mapped to.

:

:

 
 
 
 
 
 

This shows that every point on the unit circle in the discrete-time filter z-plane, is mapped to a point on the axis on the continuous-time filter s-plane, . That is, the discrete-time to continuous-time frequency mapping of the bilinear transform is

:

and the inverse mapping is

:

The discrete-time filter behaves at frequency the same way that the continuous-time filter behaves at frequency . Specifically, the gain and phase shift that the discrete-time filter has at frequency is the same gain and phase shift that the continuous-time filter has at frequency . This means that every feature, every "bump" that is visible in the frequency response of the continuous-time filter is also visible in the discrete-time filter, but at a different frequency. For low frequencies (that is, when or ), .

One can see that the entire continuous frequency range

: 

is mapped onto the fundamental frequency interval

: 

The continuous-time filter frequency corresponds to the discrete-time filter frequency and the continuous-time filter frequency correspond to the discrete-time filter frequency 

One can also see that there is a nonlinear relationship between and This effect of the bilinear transform is called frequency warping. The continuous-time filter can be designed to compensate for this frequency warping by setting for every frequency specification that the designer has control over (such as corner frequency or center frequency). This is called pre-warping the filter design.

When designing a digital filter as an approximation of a continuous time filter, the frequency response (both amplitude and phase) of the digital filter can be made to match the frequency response of the continuous filter at frequency if the following transform is substituted into the continuous filter transfer function. Astrom, Karl J. Computer Controlled Systems, Theory and Design Second Edition. ISBN 0131686003. Prentice-Hall, 1990, pp 212 This is a modified version of Tustin's transform shown above. However, note that this transform becomes the above transform as . That is to say, the above transform causes the digital filter response to match the analog filter response at DC.

:

The main advantage of the warping phenomenon is the absence of aliasing distortion of the frequency response characteristic, such as observed with Impulse invariance. It is necessary, however, to compensate for the frequency warping by pre-warping the given frequency specifications of the continuous-time system. These pre-warped specifications may then be used in the bilinear transform to obtain the desired discrete-time system.

==See also==

* Impulse invariance
* Matched Z-transform method

==References==



[[Brian Boitano]]

Brian Anthony Boitano (born October 22, 1963) is an American figure skater from Sunnyvale, California. He is the 1988 Olympic champion, the 1986 and 1988 World Champion, and the 19851988 U.S. National Champion. He turned professional following the 1988 season. He returned to competition in 1993 and competed at the 1994 Winter Olympics, where he placed sixth.

==Early life==
Brian Boitano was born in Mountain View, California, and as an adult has lived in San Francisco. Boitano is a graduate of Marian A. Peterson High School in Sunnyvale, California. Who's Who in Santa Clara Unified?, accessed September 6, 2006. 

==Figure skating career==

===Early career===
Brian Boitano first made his mark on the international scene when he won the bronze medal at the 1978 World Junior Figure Skating Championships, beating future rival Brian Orser for that medal. 

In 1982 Boitano became the first American to land a triple axel. In 1987 he introduced his signature jump, the 'Tano triple lutz' in which the skater raises his left arm above his head. He attempted a quadruple jump throughout the 198687 season and at the 1988 World Figure Skating Championships, but did not cleanly land the jump; he double-footed the landing on two occasions.

Boitano was known primarily as a jumper early in his career and he, along with several other skaters, helped push the technical envelope of men's skating. It was not until his failure to defend his World title in 1987 that he focused specifically on improving his artistry.

Boitano placed second at the 1984 United States Figure Skating Championships, earning himself a trip to the 1984 Winter Olympics. He placed 5th at the Olympics, setting the stage for his success over the next four years.

===World Champion===
Following the 1984 Olympics, several skaters emerged as likely medal hopes following the retirement of Scott Hamilton.

Boitano won the 1985 United States Figure Skating Championships, the first of his four titles. At the first World Championships of the post-Hamilton era in 1985, Alexander Fadeev won, with Brian Orser finishing 2nd and Boitano 3rd. He had injured tendons in his right ankle a few weeks before the 1986 U.S. Championships but went on to win his second national title. At the 1986 World Championships, Boitano took the title, while Fadeev had a disastrous free skate despite having been in an excellent position to win; Orser finished 2nd once again.

During the 198687 season, Boitano had introduced two new elements to his programs: the 'Tano triple lutz and a quadruple toe loop, although he never succeeded in landing a clean quadruple jump in competition. The 1987 World Championships were held in Cincinnati, giving defending World champion Boitano a home-field advantage. The outcome of the event would set the tone for the 1988 Olympics. At Worlds, Boitano fell on his quadruple toe loop attempt and placed second.

After losing the world title to Orser at home, Boitano and his coach Linda Leaver decided that some changes needed to be made if Boitano was to become the Olympic champion. Boitano had always been good at the technical requirements ("The first mark"), but he was weak on the artistic ("the second mark"). He was a self-described "jumping robot." In order to help his growth as an artist, he hired choreographer Sandra Bezic to choreograph his programs for the 19871988 Olympic season. 

Bezic choreographed two programs that featured clean lines and accentuated the skating abilities of the 5' 11" Boitano. The short program was based on Giacomo Meyerbeer's ballet Les Patineurs in which Boitano plays a cocky young man showing off his tricks, using movements dating back to the 19th century. In one famous moment, Boitano wipes ice shavings, also called snow, off his skate blade and tosses it over his shoulder after landing a triple axel combination. The free skating program was based on the film score, Napoleon, detailing various phases of a soldier's life. 

Boitano debuted his new programs at 1987 Skate Canada, held in the Saddledome in Calgary, Alberta, Canada, the same venue in which he would compete against Brian Orser for the Olympic title three months later. Boitano's new programs were received with standing ovations by the audience. Although Orser won the competition, Boitano skated clean, landing seven triple jumps, including a footwork section into a jump. Boitano, Leaver, and Bezic were so confident about the strength of Boitano's new programs that they omitted the quadruple toe loop, which if landed, could have put him a shoulder above Orser in technical merit.

The short program at the 1988 United States Figure Skating Championships proved to be a highlight. Boitano received marks of 6.0 from eight of the nine judges for presentation, the second mark. His free skate was flawed. Due to delays, he did not skate until after midnight. Still, Boitano won the competition, and went into the Olympics as the national champion (U.S.), as did Orser (Canadian).

===1988 Olympics: Battle of the Brians===

Going into the Olympics, Boitano and Brian Orser each had won a World title and each had excellent, balanced repertoire, with Boitano being known as the slightly better technician and Orser as the better artist. Adding to the rivalry, Boitano and Orser were both performing military-themed programs. Boitano's was to the music of Napoleon.

The Battle of the Brians at the 1988 Winter Olympics was the highlight of Boitano's amateur career. Boitano and Orser were effectively tied going into the free skating portion of the event and whoever won that portion would win the event. Alexander Fadeev had won the compulsory figures section of the competition with Boitano second and Orser third. In the short program, Orser placed first and Boitano second. The free skating was, at the time, worth 50% of the score, and so Boitano's lead would not be enough to hold him in first place if he lost the free skate.

Boitano skated a clean, technically excellent long program, with eight triple jumps, two Axels, and a triple-triple combination. Orser made one small mistake on a jump and omitted his planned second triple axel. Boitano won the Battle in a 54 split. Boitano won the gold medal, wearing skates with American flag appliqus that are now part of the collections of the National Museum of American History at the Smithsonian Institution.

Following the Olympics, both Orser and Boitano went to the World Championships, which Boitano won. Boitano turned professional soon after.

===Professional career and return to amateur standing===
Following the Olympics, Boitano went on to dominate competitions in the professional ranks, winning 10 straight professional competitions, including 5 consecutive World Professional Championship titles and 4 consecutive wins at the Challenge of Champions. Boitano also appeared in Carmen on Ice, for which he won an Emmy. However, Boitano wanted to return to amateur competition and make another run at the Olympics.

Boitano's lobby proved successful and in June 1993, the International Skating Union (ISU) introduced a clause, commonly known as the "Boitano rule," which allowed professionals to reinstate as "amateur" or "eligible" skaters. This had been the result of Boitano's active involvement during the early 1990s, which saw professionals being allowed in the Olympic Games in the sports of tennis and basketball. Boitano reinstated as an amateur to compete in the 1994 Winter Olympics in Lillehammer, Norway.

Boitano competed at the 1994 United States Figure Skating Championships, led after the short program, but lost to Scott Davis in the long program in a 63 split decision. Boitano was named to the Olympic team. Going into the Olympics as a medal favorite in a strong field, Boitano missed his triple axel combination during the short program for the first time in his career. This mistake proved extremely costly, and knocked Boitano out of medal contention. He skated a good long program and finished 6th. 

Boitano returned to the professional ranks afterwards. He was inducted into the World Figure Skating Hall of Fame and the United States Figure Skating Hall of Fame in 1996.

==Personal life==
In December 2013, Boitano was named to the United States delegation to the 2014 Winter Olympics in Sochi, Russia. In conjunction with that appointment, Boitano publicly came out as gay. Brian Boitano announces he's gay before trip to Sochi, by Christine Brennan, at USA Today; published December 19, 2013; retrieved December 20, 2013 The Sochi games and Russia have been the targets of criticism and LGBT activism because of a Russian anti-gay "propaganda" law passed in June 2013. In January 2014, he told Associated Press that he did not want to come out until the delegation announcement. 

==Celebrity and popular culture career==

===What Would Brian Boitano Do?===

A caricature of Boitano as a superhero appears as a semi-recurring character in the cartoon series South Park. The movie (1999), features a musical number titled "What Would Brian Boitano Do?". Boitano also appears in a 1995 Christmas cartoon that was a prototype of South Park, entitled The Spirit of Christmas, in which the boys are more excited to meet him than either Jesus Christ or Santa Claus. The name of the song is a parody of the popular slogan What Would Jesus Do?.

===Food Network show===
On August 23, 2009, Food Network debuted a new series entitled What Would Brian Boitano Make?, which borrows both its name and opening musical theme from the song. The show features Boitano preparing meals for his friends. The series was picked up for a ten-episode second season. 

===Other television and film appearances===
* Boitano starred, along with Katarina Witt and archrival Brian Orser, in the 1990 German dance film Carmen on Ice; Boitano played Don Jose. All three won an Emmy Award for "Outstanding performance in classical music/dance programming".
* He was featured in the Super Bowl XXVI halftime show "Winter Magic" along with Gloria Estefan and Dorothy Hamill. Super Bowl XXVI (1992) (TV) 
* Boitano had a cameo in the 2007 film Blades of Glory as a world skating federation judge.
* He and fellow figure skater Michelle Kwan had a cameo as themselves in the 2005 Disney film, Ice Princess, appearing as commentators during the Sectionals competition.
* He appeared on Giada at Home for one episode.
* He appeared on Fox Business Network's Stossel, episode "Spontaneous Order" (2/10/11).
* He appeared in an episode of Check, Please! Bay Area, a restaurant review program which airs on KQED-TV in San Francisco. Check Please! Bay Area, Season 8, Episode 4 
He hosted a series on HGTV, called "The Brian Boitano Project", which premiered January 16, 2014, in which he purchased a near derelict ancestral home in Northern Italy, home to many Boitanos. During the series he gives the home in Favale di Malvaro a sympathetic restoration/renovation and shops flea markets with two nieces to find decor and furnishings. Local artisans, carpenters, masons and painters create a gem where he can live part-time and host Boitanos from afar. The Brian Boitano Project 

==Programs==

 Season Short program Free skating Exhibition 
 19931994 Carousel Waltz Appalachian Spring/Lincoln Portrait by Aaron Copland Elegy For Harp And StringsLee Holdridge 
 19871988 Les Patineurs (Meyerbeer) Silent movie Napoleon (Carmine Coppola / Francis Ford Coppola) Adventures of Don Juan from the Errol Flynn movie Parlami d'amore Mariu (Italian love song) 

==Results==

 International 
 Event 197778 197879 197980 198081 198182 198283 198384 198485 198586 198687 198788 199394 
 Olympics 5th 1st 6th 
 Worlds 7th 6th 3rd 1st 2nd 1st 
 Skate America 3rd 1st 2nd 1st 2nd 
 Skate Canada 1st 2nd 
 NHK Trophy 3rd 1st 
 Nebelhorn 3rd 
 St. Gervais 3rd 
 International: Junior 
 Junior Worlds 3rd 
 National 
 U.S. Champ. 4th 2nd 2nd 1st 1st 1st 1st 2nd 

==Further reading==
* 
* 
*Beisteiner, Johanna: Art music in figure skating, synchronized swimming and rhythmic gymnastics / Kunstmusik in Eiskunstlauf, Synchronschwimmen und rhythmischer Gymnastik. PhD thesis by Johanna Beisteiner, Vienna 2005, (German). The PhD thesis contains an extensive description and analysis of Carmen on Ice (Chapter II/2, pages 105162). Article about the PhD thesis of Johanna Beisteiner in the catalogue of the Austrian Library Network. 2005. (German and English)

===Bibliography===
*
*

==References==

==External links==
*Brian Boitano's Gold-Medal Skates at the National Museum of American History



[[Political scandals in the United Kingdom]]

Political scandals in the United Kingdom are commonly referred to by the press and commentators as "'sleaze".

==Sleaze==
A number of political scandals in the 1980s and 1990s created the impression of what was described in the British press as "sleaze": a perception that the then Conservative government was associated with political corruption and hypocrisy. This was revived in the late 1990s due to accounts of so-called "sleaze" by the Labour government.

==List of scandals==

===1890s===
*Liberator Building Society scandal, in which the Liberal Party MP Jabez Balfour was exposed as running several vast fraudulent companies to conceal colossal financial losses. Balfour fled to Argentina, but was eventually arrested and imprisoned.

===1910s===
* Marconi scandal of insider trading by Liberal Party Ministers including:
** Rufus Isaacs, 1st Marquess of Reading, the Attorney General
** The Master of Elibank, Lord Murray, the Treasurer of the Liberal Party,
** David Lloyd George, 1st Earl Lloyd-George of Dwyfor, the Chancellor of the Exchequer
**Herbert Samuel, 1st Viscount Samuel, Postmaster General; was falsely implicated. (1912)

*Shell Crisis of 1915, which led to the fall of Herbert Henry Asquith's Liberal Party government during World War I.

===1920s===
*Lloyd George and the honours scandal. Honours sold for large campaign contributions (1922)
* Zinoviev Letter (1924)
* Winston Churchill secretly accepted 5,000the equivalent of perhaps millions in today's moneyfrom Burmah Oil (now known as BP) to lobby the British government to allow them to monopolise Persian oil resources. (1923) 

===1930s===
* Jimmy Thomas budget leak (1936) 

===1940s===
* Hugh Dalton budget leak (1947)
* John Belcher corruptly influenced - led to Lynskey Tribunal

===1950s===
* Crichel Down and the resignation of Thomas Dugdale (1954)
* Suez Crisis (1956)

===1960s===
* Soviet agent John Vassall working for Minister Tam Galbraith (1962)
* Profumo Affair (1963): Secretary of State for War John Profumo had an affair with prostitute Christine Keeler (to whom he had been introduced by pimp and drug-dealer Stephen Ward) who was having an affair with a Soviet spy at the same time. 

===1970s===
* Corrupt architect John Poulson and links to Conservative Home Secretary Reginald Maudling, Labour council leader T. Dan Smith and others (1972-4): Maudling resigned, Smith sentenced to imprisonment.
* Earl Jellicoe and Lord Lambton sex scandal (1973): Conservatives, junior defence minister Lambton is arrested for using prostitutes and Cabinet minister Jellicoe also confesses.
* Labour MP John Stonehouse's faked suicide (1974)
* Harold Wilson's Prime Minister's Resignation Honours (known satirically as the "Lavender List") gives honours to a number of wealthy businessmen whose principles were considered antipathetic to those held by the Labour party (May 1976)
* Peter Jay's appointment as British Ambassador to the U.S. by his father in law, the then Labour Prime Minister James Callaghan. At the time Jay was a journalist with little diplomatic experience.(1976)
*"Rinkagate": Liberal Party leader Jeremy Thorpe was arrested and tried for allegedly paying a hitman to murder his homosexual lover, model Norman Scott, while walking his dog on Exmoor; the hitman only shot the dog, Rinka. Thorpe was forced to resign due to his clandestine gay affairs, but was acquitted of conspiracy to murder.

===1980s===
* Joseph Kagan, Baron Kagan, earlier ennobled by the Labour Prime Minister Harold Wilson's notorious Lavender List (1976), was convicted of fraud (1980)
* Cecil Parkinson affair with secretary Sara Keays resulting in their child, Flora Keays (1983)
* Al Yamamah contract alleged to have been obtained by bribery (1985)
* Westland affair (1986): The Defence Secretary, Michael Heseltine resigned from his Cabinet job in a disagreement with Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher over the Westland affair. Mr Heseltine walked out of a meeting at Number 10 concerning his views on the future of the Westland helicopter company were being ignored at the time. 
* Jeffrey Archer and the prostitute allegations (1986), and his subsequent conviction for perjury (2001)
* Edwina Currie resigns as a junior Health minister for incorrectly claiming that millions of British eggs were infected with salmonella, stating that "most of egg production" was infected (1988)
* "Homes for votes" gerrymandering scandal (19871989)
* BSE (1989)

===1990s===
* Nicholas Ridley compares the EU to the Third Reich in an interview in The Spectator magazine (1990)
* Arms-to-Iraq and the closely connected Iraqi Supergun affair (1990)
* David Mellor resignation after press disclosure of his affair with Antonia de Sancha and gratis holiday from a daughter of a PLO official (1992)
* Squidgygate, the covert leaking of a bugged phone call between the Princess of Wales and James Hewitt, although the phrase originally referred to the exposure of the Princess's extramarital affair (1992)
* Michael Mates gift of watch to Asil Nadir (1993)
* Monklandsgate dominated the Monklands East by-election. It mainly consisted of allegations of sectarian spending discrepancies between Protestant Airdrie and Catholic Coatbridge, fuelled by the fact that all 17 of the ruling Labour group were Roman Catholics. (1994)
* Back to Basics, a government policy slogan portrayed by opponents and the press as a morality campaign to compare it with a contemporaneous succession of sex scandals in John Major's government which led to the resignation of Tim Yeo and the Earl of Caithness, among others (1994)
* Cash-for-questions affair involving Neil Hamilton, Tim Smith and Mohamed Al-Fayed (1994)
* Jonathan Aitken and the hotel bill allegations, and subsequent conviction for perjury after his failed libel action against The Guardian, resulting in Aitken being only the third person to have to resign from the Privy Council in the 20th century. (1995)
* Bernie Ecclestone was involved in a political scandal when it transpired he had given the Labour Party a million pound donation - which raised eyebrows when the incoming Labour government changed its policy to allow Formula One to continue being sponsored by tobacco manufacturers. The Labour Party returned the donation when the scandal came to light. (1997)
* Double resignation rocks government. Peter Mandelson, Trade and Industry Secretary, resigns after failing to disclose 373,000 loan from Paymaster General Geoffrey Robinson. (1998)
* Ron Davies resigns from the cabinet after being robbed by a man he met at Clapham Common and then lying about it (1998)
* Jerry Hayes was "outed" as a homosexual by the News of the World. http://www.petertatchell.net/outing/outing%20too%20far.htm with the headline "TORY MP 2-TIMED WIFE WITH UNDER-AGE GAY LOVER". Hayes had met Young Conservative Paul Stone at the 1991 Conservative conference and that same evening, "committed a lewd act which was in breach of the law at the time". Stone had been 18 at the time, whilst the legal age for homosexual sex in 1991 was 21. He had previously supported Section 28 and other anti-gay legislation. (1997)

===2000s===
* Officegate (2001). Henry McLeish, Labour First Minister of Scotland, failed to refund the House of Commons for income he had received from the sub-let of his constituency office in Glenrothes while still a Westminster MP.
* Keith Vaz, Peter Mandelson and the Hinduja brothers. Mandelson forced to resign again due to misleading statements. (2001)
* Jo Moore, within an hour of the September 11 attacks, Moore sent an email to the press office of her department suggesting: It's now a very good day to get out anything we want to bury. Councillors' expenses? Although prior to the catastrophic collapse of the towers, the phrase "a good day to bury bad news" (not actually used by Moore) has since been used to refer to other instances of attempting to hide one item of news behind a more publicised issue.
* In 2002, Edwina Currie revealed that she had had an affair, beginning in 1984, with John Major before he became Prime Minister of the United Kingdom. This was criticised more harshly than may otherwise have been the case as Major had frequently pushed his Back To Basics agenda (see above), which was taken by the media as a form of moral absolutism.
* The Burrell affair - allegations about the behavior of the British Royal Family and their servants with possible constitutional implications. (2002)
* Ron Davies stands down from Welsh assembly following accusations of illicit gay sex. Mr Davies had claimed he had been badger-watching in the area. (2003) 
* The apparent suicide of Dr. David Kelly and the Hutton Inquiry. On 17 July 2003, Kelly, an employee of the Ministry of Defence, apparently committed suicide after being misquoted by BBC journalist Andrew Gilligan as saying that Tony Blair's Labour government had knowingly "sexed up" the "September Dossier", a report into Iraq and weapons of mass destruction. The government was cleared of wrongdoing, while the BBC was strongly criticised by the subsequent inquiry, leading to the resignation of the BBC's chairman and director-general.
*In April 2004, Beverly Hughes was forced to resign as minister for Immigration, Citizenship and Counter Terrorism when it was shown that she had been informed of procedural improprieties concerning the granting of visas to certain categories of workers from Eastern Europe. She had earlier told the House of Commons that if she had been aware of such facts she would have done something about it. 
*In 2005, David McLetchie, leader of the Scottish Conservative and Unionist Party is forced to resign after claiming the highest taxi expenses of any MSP. These included personal journeys, journeys related solely with his second job as a solicitor, and Conservative Party business, for example travel to Conservative conferences. Conservative backbench MSP Brian Monteith has the whip withdrawn for briefing against his leader to the Scotland on Sunday newspaper.
*Liberal Democrats Home Affairs spokesman Mark Oaten resigns after it is revealed by the News of the World that he paid rentboys to perform sexual activities on him. 
*Tessa Jowell financial allegations (2006). Tessa Jowell, Labour cabinet minister, embroiled in a scandal about a property remortgage allegedly arranged to enable her husband to realise 350,000 from an off-shore hedge fund, money he allegedly received as a gift following testimony he had provided for Silvio Berlusconi in the 1990s. Popularised by the press as "Jowellgate". 
*In March 2006 it emerged that the Labour party had borrowed millions of pounds in 2005 to help fund their general election campaign. While not illegal, on 15 March the Treasurer of the party, Jack Dromey stated publicly that he had neither knowledge of or involvement in these loans and had only become aware when he read about it in the newspapers. A story was running at the time that Dr Chai Patel and others had been recommended for Life peerages after lending the Labour party money. He called on the Electoral Commission to investigate the issue of political parties taking out loans from non-commercial sources. "Labour loans to be investigated", BBC, 15 March 2006 See Cash for Peerages.
:Cash for Honours (2006). Following revelations about Dr Chai Patel and others who were recommended for peerages after lending the Labour party money, the Treasurer of the party, Jack Dromey said he had not been involved and did not know the party had secretly borrowed millions of pounds in 2005. He called on the Electoral Commission to investigate the issue of political parties taking out loans from non-commercial sources.
*In November 2007, it emerged that more than 400,000 had been accepted by the Labour Party from one person through a series of third parties, causing the Electoral Commission to seek an explanation. http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/uk_politics/7111838.stm "Concern over secret Labour donor"], BBC, 25 November 2007 Peter Watt resigned as the General Secretary of the party the day after the story broke and was quoted as saying that he knew about the arrangement but had not appreciated that he had failed to comply with the reporting requirements. http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/uk_politics/7113255.stm "Labour boss quits over donations", BBC, 26 November 2007 
*On 24 January 2008, Peter Hain resigned his two cabinet posts (Secretary of State for Work and Pensions and Secretary of State for Wales) after the Electoral Commission referred donations to his Deputy Leadership campaign to the police. http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/uk_politics/7206812.stm "Hain quits jobs 'to clear name' ", BBC, 24 January 2007 
*Derek Conway (2008). Conservative Party MP found to have reclaimed salaries he had paid to his two sons who had in fact not carried out the work to the extent claimed. Ordered to repay 16,918, suspended from the House of Commons for 10 days and removed from the party whip. 
*Cash for Influence (2009). Details of covertly recorded discussions with 4 Labour Party peers which their ability to influence legislation and the consultancy fees that they charge (including retainer payments of up to 120,000) were published by The Sunday Times.
*United Kingdom parliamentary expenses scandal (2009), following the disclosure of widespread actual and alleged misuse of the permitted allowances and expenses claimed by Members of Parliament and attempts by MPs and peers to exempt themselves from Freedom of Information legislation.

===2010s===

* The Iris Robinson scandal in which First Minister of Northern Ireland Peter Robinson stepped aside for six weeks in January 2010 following revelations of his wifes involvement in an extramarital affair, her attempted suicide and allegations that he had failed to properly declare details of loans she had procured for her lover to develop a business venture.
* The 2010 Cash for Influence Scandal, in which undercover reporters for the Dispatches television series posed as political lobbyists offering to pay Members of Parliament to influence policy.
* On 29 May 2010 Chief Secretary to the Treasury David Laws resigned from the Cabinet and was referred to the Parliamentary Commissioner for Standards after the Daily Telegraph newspaper published details of Laws claiming around 40,000 in expenses on a second home owned by a secret partner between 2004 and 2009 whilst House of Commons rules have prevented MPs from claiming second home expenses on properties owned by a partner since 2006. By resigning Laws became the shortest serving Minister in modern British political history with less than 18 days service as a Cabinet Minister.
* On 14 October 2011 Secretary of State for Defence Liam Fox resigned from the Cabinet after he "mistakenly allowed the distinction between personal interest and government activities to become blurred" over his friendship with Adam Werrity.
* Conservative Party 'Cash for Access' scandal, March 2012.
* In April 2012 Conservative Party MP and culture secretary Jeremy Hunt came under pressure to resign as a result of his closeness to Rupert Murdoch's media empire and alleged corruption in dealing with Murdoch's bid for News Corporation's takeover of BSkyB.
* In October 2012 Andrew Mitchell resigned from his post as Chief Whip following allegations made about his conduct during an altercation with police at Downing Street on 19 September, the incident becoming known as "plebgate". "Andrew Mitchell row  timeline", The Guardian, 19 December 2012. Retrieved 6 April 2014 
* The 2013 Labour Party Falkirk candidate selection, which began following the announcement that the incumbent MP Eric Joyce was to step down at the 2015 General Election, erupted into a scandal after allegations were made on the significant infiltration of the selection process by the trade union Unite, currently the Labour Party's largest financial backer. 
* In April 2014 Maria Miller, the Culture Secretary, resigned following pressure relating to the results of an investigation into her past expenses claims. "Maria Miller row: Cameron faces questions, Labour says", BBC News, 5 April 2014. Retrieved 6 April 2014. 

==See also==
* List of British political defections

==Sources==

 
United Kingdom


[[Bombardier Inc.]]

Bombardier Inc. () is a Canadian multinational aerospace and transportation company, founded by Joseph-Armand Bombardier as L'Auto-Neige Bombardier Limite (loosely translated to 'Bombardier Snow Car Limited') on January 29, 1942, at Valcourt in the Eastern Townships, Quebec. Starting as a maker of snow machines or snowmobiles, over the years it has been a large manufacturer of regional aircraft, business jets, mass transportation equipment, recreational equipment and a provider of financial services. Bombardier is a Fortune Global 500 conglomerate company. Fortune Global 500  Bombardier Inc. Company Snapshot 2007 Its headquarters are in Montreal, Quebec, Canada. "Aerospace Directory." Bombardier Inc. Retrieved: December 4, 2010. Bombardier Inc. Corporate Headquarters are at 800 Ren-Lvesque Boulevard West, Montral, Qubec, Canada H3B 1Y8. "Address."Bombardier Inc. Retrieved: December 4, 2010. 

==History==
Art drawing of early Bombardier Snowmobile
Joseph-Armand Bombardier was a mechanic who dreamed of building a vehicle that could "float on snow". In 1937 he designed and produced his first snowmobile in his small repair shop in Valcourt, Quebec. 

Bombardier's technological breakthrough in the design of bush vehicles came in the mid-1930s when he developed a drive system that revolutionized travel in snow and swampy conditions. In 1937 Bombardier sold 12 snowmobiles, named the B7 and, in 1945, created l'Auto-Neige Bombardier Limite company.

The first snowmobiles were large, multipassenger vehicles designed to help people get around during the long winter months. Snowmobiles were used in rural Quebec to take children to school, carry freight, deliver mail, and as ambulances. His invention filled a very particular need in the region and soon business was booming. In 1941 Armand opened a new factory in Valcourt. Then a major setback hit the growing business: the Second World War was well underway and the Canadian government issued wartime rationing regulations. Bombardier customers had to prove that snowmobiles were essential to their livelihood in order to buy one. To keep his business going, Armand shifted his focus and developed vehicles for the military. After the war, Bombardier experienced another setback in his snowmobile business. In 1948, the Quebec government passed a law requiring all highways and local roads to be cleared of snow; the Bombardier company's sales fell by nearly half in one year. Armand Bombardier therefore decided to diversify his business, first by producing tracked snowplows sized specifically for use on municipal sidewalks (replacing horse-drawn vehicles), then by making all-terrain vehicles for the mining, oil, and forestry industries.

Of note, the machines had removable front skis that could be replaced with front wheels for use on paved or hard surfaces, thus providing greater utility to his large snowmobiles. Production of these machines evolved over time. During 1951, the wooden bodies were replaced with sheet steel and these vehicles were powered by Chrysler flathead six-cylinder engines and 3-speed manual transmissions. In the 1960s, V-8 engines began to appear and during the 1969/1970 production years, the standard round "porthole"-style windows were replaced with larger rectangular windows which allowed more interior light and made them feel less claustrophobic. Following these changes came the switchover to more reliable Chrysler Industrial 318 engines with the automatic Loadflite transmissions. Production of these machines continued into the mid-1970s.

Bombardier wanted to develop a fast, lightweight snowmobile that could carry one or two people. In the early 1950s, Armand set aside his dream to focus on developing his company's other tracked vehicles, but by the end of the decade, smaller, more efficient engines had been developed and were starting to come onto the market. Bombardier resumed his efforts to build a "miniature" snowmobile. He worked alongside his eldest son Germain, who shared his father's mechanical talents. Armand and Germain developed several prototypes of the lightweight snowmobile and finally, the first Bombardier snowmobile went on sale in 1959.Bombardier BR100+ Groomer, mid engine, hard cab model

The Ski-Doo snowmobile was originally called the "Ski-Dog" because Bombardier meant it to be a practical vehicle to replace the dogsled for hunters and trappers. By an accident, a painter misinterpreted the name and painted "Ski-Doo" on the first prototype. The public soon discovered that speedy vehicles that could zoom over snow were a lot of fun. Suddenly a new winter sport was born, centred in Quebec. In the first year, Bombardier sold 225 Ski-Doos; four years later, 8,210 were sold. But Armand was reluctant to focus too much on the Ski-Doo and move resources away from his all-terrain vehicles. He vividly remembered his earlier business setbacks that forced him to diversify. Armand slowed down promotion of the Ski-Doo line to prevent it from dominating the other company products, while still allowing him to dominate the snowmobile industry. The snowmobiles produced were of exceptional quality and performance, earning a better reputation than the rival Polaris and Arctic Cat brand of motosleds. In 1975 Bombardier completed the purchase of the Moto-Ski company.

On February 18, 1964, J. Armand Bombardier died of cancer at age 56. He left behind a thriving business, but also one that had been focused on one person. Armand dominated his company, overseeing all areas of operation. He controlled the small research department, making all the drawings himself. By the time of his death sales of the company had reached C$20 million, which is the equivalent of C$160 million in 2004 dollars. The younger generation took over, led by Armand's sons and sons-in-law. The young team reorganized and decentralized the company, adopting modern business tactics. The company adopted the latest technological innovationthe computerto handle inventory, accounts, and billing. Distribution networks were improved and increased, and an incentive program was developed for sales staff.

In 1967 L'Auto-Neige Bombardier Limite was renamed Bombardier Limited and on January 23, 1969, the company went public, listing on the Montreal and Toronto stock exchanges.

===Aerospace===
A Bombardier Canadair Regional Jet in Delta livery

BD-700 landing at Montreal International Airport
Bombardier CSeries CS100 Flight Test Vehicle (FTV1) at Mirabel
In 1986, "Restoration Primer  Sec. 3.1 Canadair." Project North Star. Retrieved: January 4, 2013. Bombardier acquired Canadair after the Canadian government-owned aircraft manufacturing company recorded the largest corporate loss in Canadian history. Shortly thereafter, de Havilland Canada, Short Brothers and Learjet operations were absorbed by the aerospace arm, which now accounts for over half of company revenue. Bombardier's most popular aircraft currently include its Dash 8, CRJ100/200/440, and CRJ700/900/1000 lines of regional airliners. Bombardier also manufactures the CL-415 amphibious water-bomber, the Global Express and the Challenger business jet. Learjet continues to operate as a subsidiary of Bombardier, manufacturing jets under the Learjet marque.. The slogan was changed in 2012 from "We Move People" to "Evolution of Mobility."

===Railway technology===

IORE locomotive
In 1970 Bombardier acquired the Austrian company Lohner-Rotax, a manufacturer of snowmobile engines and tramways, and became involved with rail business.

This section started to gain importance in the mid-1990s in the renaissance of tramways or "light-rail transit." Bombardier acquired the assets and designs of Budd Company, Pullman Company, and American Locomotive Company/Montreal Locomotive Works, the latter of which continued in the locomotive business until 1985. In the Canadian market, they also acquired Hawker Siddeley Canadas Thunder Bay facilities and UTDC (formerly of Kingston), and in Mexico the company acquired Concarril.

In 2001 Bombardier acquired Adtranz (DaimlerChrysler Rail Systems), a manufacturer of trains which were widely used throughout Germany and Great Britain. Bombardier was one of the companies that took over British Rail's Research and Development facilities after privatisation (the remainder largely being absorbed into AEA Technology and Alstom).

With the acquisition of Adtranz from DaimlerChrysler, Bombardier Transportation emerged as one of the largest manufacturers of railway rolling stock in the world.

===Financial services===
Bombardier Capital (BC) was the Bombardier division in charge of financial services. "Bombardier Capital Drives ERP Efficiency." Information Builders.com. Retrieved: February 22, 2009. From 1973, when it was based in Colchester, Vermont, "Jacksonville's Bombardier Capital cuts hundreds of jobs." Florida Times-Union, September 27, 2001. Retrieved: February 22, 2009. it offered financial services such as lending, leasing, and asset-management throughout the Americas. In 2001, BC restricted its loan activity to existing customers. The company, which began transitioning some services to Jacksonville, Florida in 1997, ceased taking on new consumer loans in 2001, focusing instead on loans to retailers and gradually downsizing. Bennett, Jane. "Bombardier reduces space." Jacksonville Business Journal, October 4, 2002. Retrieved: February 22, 2009. In November 2004, Bombardier's credit evaluation was downgraded by Moody's from "moderate credit risk" (Baa3) to "questionable credit quality" (Ba2), a below investment grade rating which impacted Bombardier Capital, although the company's transportation division was unaffected. Jelter, Jim. "Moody's downgrades Bombardier." Wall Street Journal, November 11, 2004. Retrieved: February 22, 2009. In 2005, Bombardier sold the Inventory Finance Division of BC to GE Commercial Finance. "GE Capital Solutions Signs Exclusive Agreement with BRP." Fox Business, May 28, 2008. 

==Divestitures==

===Military===

Bombardier used to be a major Canadian defence contractor. With the latest restructuring, the company sold off nearly all of its military-related work in Canada. Military Aviation Services was sold to SPAR Aerospace and land-based defence products made by Urban Transportation Development Corporation ceased operations as Bombardier moved away from non-aviation defence products.

===Recreational products===
Old Bombardier sprocket wheel logo

On 27 August 2003, Bombardier, Inc. announced the sale of its BRP (Recreational Products) unit to a group of investors: Bain Capital (50%), Bombardier Family (35%) and Caisse de dpt et placement du Qubec (15%) for $875 million. "Bombardier Recreational Products News." rbbi.com. Retrieved: January 4, 2013. 
As part of the deal, BRP retained rights to the sprocket logo, which it subsequently modified. Its snowcats and snowmobiles dated back to the origins of the company; current brands are Ski-Doo and Lynx. Bombardier Recreational Products has also become well known for its Sea-Doo personal watercraft division which also features jet-powered sport boats. Bombardier also makes all terrain vehicles (ATVs). In 2006, the Bombardier ATV was rebranded as Can-Am. Can-Am was the name of the line of dirt bikes it produced in the 1980s which used high-tech engines featuring Rotax Automatic Variable Exhaust (RAVE) valving to create peak power at a wider range of RPMs. The bikes were shelved but technology tweaks re-emerged in the company's Ski-Doo snowmobiles (beginning with the 1989 model year Ski-Doo Mach 1). Many of today's snowmobiles produced by the company feature proprietary engineering by BRP's Rotax brand engine production plant located in Austria. BRP's Can-Am product is among the high tech recreational vehicles which include the Can-Am Spyder, a three-wheel roadster with a rear-drive wheel and featuring a vehicle stability system (VSS), anti-lock braking system (ABS) and other safety and electronic vehicle control enhancements as certified by the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration (NHTSA).

===Public transport bus===

In the late 1970s in Ireland, Cras Iompair ireann (now Dublin Bus) commissioned a range of single and double decker buses to be designed and produced. The prototypes were devised in Germany and production was carried out in Shannon, Co. Clare, Ireland. A total of 51 express coaches (KE type) and 366 double deck buses (KD) were assembled at this facility between 1980 and 1983. They remained in service until 1997 and 2000 respectively. Some surviving examples are now exhibits at the National Transport Museum of Ireland in Howth, Co. Dublin. Conway, Shane. "The Bombardier buses and coaches of CIE." The Classic Irish Buses website, August 15, 2010. Retrieved: August 17, 2010. 

== Bombardier Museum ==
1951 Bombardier B12 Snow Bus Snowmobile
The Bombardier Museum is a large modern museum in Valcourt, Quebec dedicated to the life of Joseph-Armand Bombardier, the snowmobile, and the industry he helped create. Opened in 1971, with substantial renovations in 1990, the museum is professionally curated and features a wide array of Ski-Doos, other industrial designs, and a selection of related books, booklets and other items of interest to enthusiasts.

Also of note at the museum is the original garage "factory" that was the genesis of the Bombardier organization. The garage was carefully removed from its original location in Valcourt and moved to its present site at the museum, which is located blocks away from the present-day Bombardier Recreational Products factory.

== See also ==

* Antarctic snow cruiser
* Volkswagen Iltis
* Moto-Ski
* Snowcat
* Snow coach
* Snow grooming
* Snowmobiles

== References ==

== Bibliography ==

* Descarries, Eric. "Autoneiges Bombardier: Des patenteux perptuent la tradition." La Presse, 13 March 2006.
* Hadekel, Peter. Silent Partners: Taxpayers and the Bankrolling of Bombardier. Toronto: Key Porter Books Limited, 2004. ISBN 1-55263-626-7.
* MacDonald, Larry.The Bombardier Story: Planes, Trains and Snowmobiles. Toronto: J. Wiley & Sons, 2001. ISBN 0-470-83196-0.

==External links==

*
*Bombardier Museum, Official J. Armand Bombardier Museum Website
*Northern Tracks, Bombardier Collector's Website
*Vintage Snowmobiles, Moto-Ski Snowmobile History
*CBC Digital Archives  Bombardier: The Snowmobile Legacy*Yahoo!  Bombardier Inc. Company Profile
*V/LineCars.com VLocity 160 Page- Comprehensive information on Bombardier's VLocity 160 type diesel multiple unit train made for V/Line, the passenger rail service operator in the state of Victoria, Australia.

 

Bombardier


[[Break key]]

Break/Pause key on PC keyboard
The Break key is a key on a computer keyboard. The Break key originated with 19th century telegraph practice. While the Break key might no longer have a well-defined purpose, it can be used by software to switch between multiple login sessions, to terminate a program, or to interrupt a modem connection. 

Because the break key will send a software Interrupt halting the flow of code, the Break key is also called the Pause key. It can be used to pause some games, such as Deus Ex and in the Call Of Duty series. 

==History==
A standard telegraph circuit connects all the keys, sounders and batteries in a single series loop so the sounders actuate only when both keys are down (closed or "marking", after the ink marks made on paper tape by early printing telegraphs). The receiving operator thus has to hold his key down or close a built-in shorting switch to let the other operator send. The receiving operator could interrupt the sending operator by opening his key, breaking the circuit and forcing it into a "spacing" condition. Both sounders stop responding to the sender's keying, alerting the sender. (A physical break in the telegraph line would have the same effect.)

===Teleprinter===
The teleprinter operated in a very similar fashion except that the sending station kept the loop closed (logic 1 or "marking") even during short pauses between characters. Holding down a special "break" key opened the loop, forcing it into a continuous logic 0 or "spacing" condition. When this occurred, the teleprinter mechanisms continually actuated without printing anything as the all-0's character is the non-printing NUL in both Baudot and ASCII. The resulting noise got the sending operator's attention.

This practice carried over to teleprinter use on time-sharing computers. A continuous spacing (logical 0) condition violates the rule that every valid character has to end with one or more logic 1 (marking) "stop" bits. The computer (specifically the UART) recognized this as a special "break" condition and generated an interrupt that typically stopped a running program or forced the operating system to prompt for a login. Although asynchronous serial telegraphy is now rare, the key once used with terminal emulators can still be used by software for similar purposes.

==Sinclair==
On the Sinclair ZX80 and ZX81 computers, the Break is accessed by pressing Space. On the Sinclair ZX Spectrum it is accessed by . The Spectrum+ and later computers have a dedicated key. It does not trigger an interrupt but will halt any running BASIC program, or terminate the loading or saving of data to cassette tape. An interrupted BASIC program can usually be resumed with the CONTINUE command. The Sinclair QL computer, without a key, maps the function to .

==BBC Micro==
On a BBC Micro computer, the key generates an interrupt which would normally cause a warm restart of the computer. A cold restart is triggered by typing . If a DFS ROM is installed, will cause the computer to search for and load a file called !boot on the floppy disk in drive 0. The latter two behaviours were inherited by the successor to Acorn MOS, RISC OS.

==Modern keyboards==
On many modern PCs, Pause interrupts screen output by BIOS until another key is pressed. This is effective during boot in text mode and in a DOS box in Windows safe mode with 50 lines. On early keyboards without a key (before the introduction of 101/102-key keyboards) the Pause function was assigned to , and the Break function to ; these key-combinations still work with most programs, even on modern PCs with modern keyboards. Pressing the dedicated key on 101/102-key keyboards sends the same scancodes as pressing , then , then releasing them in the reverse order would do; additionally, an E1hex prefix is sent which enables 101/102-key aware software to discern the two situations, while older software usually just ignores the prefix. The key is different from all other keys in that it sends no scancodes at all on release; therefore it is not possible for any software to determine whether this key is being held down. 

On modern keyboards, the key is usually labeled Pause with Break below, sometimes separated by a line, or Pause on the top of the keycap and Break on the front. In most Windows environments, the key combination brings up the system properties. Compact and notebook keyboards often have the key mapped to a function command: for example or or (on certain Lenovo laptops). http://forum.thinkpads.com/viewtopic.php?f=60&t=98708 

Apple Keyboards do not have the Pause or Break key. Computer Hope, Pause key http://www.computerhope.com/jargon/p/pausekey.htm 

== Usage for breaking the program's execution ==
While both and combination are commonly implemented as a way of breaking the execution of a console application, they are also used for similar effect in integrated development environments. Although these two are often considered interchangeable, compilers and execution environments usually assign different signals to these. http://www.gnu.org/software/emacs/windows/ntemacs/discuss/subproc-ctrl-c Additionally, in some kernels (e.g. miscellaneous DOS variants) is detected only at the time OS tries reading from a keyboard buffer and only if it's the only key sequence in the buffer, while is often translated instantly (e.g. by INT 1Bh under DOS). Because of this, is usually a more effective choice under these operating systems; sensitivity for these two combinations can be enhanced by the [[BREAK (CONFIG.SYS directive)|BREAK]]=ON CONFIG.SYS statement.

== References ==

== See also ==

*SysRq
*Scroll lock
*Num lock



[[Bogie]]

US-style railroad truck with journal bearings in journal boxes.
Bettendorf-style freight car truck displayed at the Illinois Railway Museum. This one uses journal bearings in journal boxes

A bogie ( ) or truck is a wheeled wagon or trolley. In mechanics terms, a bogie is a chassis or framework carrying wheels, attached to a vehicle, thus serving as a modular subassembly of wheels and axles. Bogies take various forms in various modes of transport. A bogie may remain normally attached (as on a railway carriage/car or locomotive, or on a semi-trailer) or be quickly detachable (as the dolly in a road train); it may contain a suspension within it (as most rail and trucking bogies do), or be solid and in turn be suspended (as most bogies of tracked vehicles are); it may be mounted on a swivel, as on a railway carriage/car or locomotive, or additionally jointed and sprung (as in the landing gear of an airliner).

== Railway ==
Archbar type truck with journal bearings as used on some steam locomotive tenders. A version of the archbar truck was at one time also used on US freight cars
Bogie of an SBB Eurocity passenger car, as seen from underneath

A bogie in the UK, or a railroad truck, wheel truck, or simply truck in North America, is a structure underneath a train to which axles (and, hence, wheels) are attached through bearings. In Indian English, bogie may also refer to an entire railway carriage. http://www.oxfordadvancedlearnersdictionary.com/dictionary/bogie 

The first British railway to build coaches with bogies, instead of rigidly mounted axles, was the Midland Railway in 1874. 

Bogies serve a number of purposes: 

* Support of the rail vehicle body.
* Stability on both straight and curved track.
* Ensuring ride comfort by absorbing vibration and minimizing the impact of centrifugal forces when the train runs on curves at high speed.
* Minimizing generation of track irregularities and rail abrasion

Usually, two bogies are fitted to each carriage, wagon or locomotive, one at each end. An alternate configuration often is used in articulated vehicles, which places the bogies (often jacobs bogies) under the connection between the carriages or wagons.

Most bogies have two axles, as this is the simplest design, but some cars designed for extremely heavy loads have been built with up to five axles per bogie. Heavy-duty cars may have more than two bogies using span bolsters to equalize the load and connect the bogies to the cars.

Usually, the train floor is at a level above the bogies, but the floor of the car may be lower between bogies, such as for a double decker train to increase interior space while staying within height restrictions, or in easy-access, stepless-entry, low-floor trains.

Key components of a bogie include: 
* The bogie frame: This can be of inside frame type where the main frame and bearings are between the wheels, or (more commonly) of outside frame type where the main frame and bearings are outside the wheels.
* Suspension to absorb shocks between the bogie frame and the rail vehicle body: Common types are coil springs, or rubber airbags.
* At least one wheelset, composed of an axle with a bearings and wheel at each end
* Axle box suspensions absorb shocks between the axle bearings and the bogie frame. The axle box suspension usually consists of a spring between the bogie frame and axle bearings to permit up-and-down movement, and sliders to prevent lateral movement. A more modern design uses solid rubber springs.
* Brake equipment: Two main types are used: brake shoes that are pressed against the tread of the wheel, and disc brakes and pads.
* In powered vehicles, some form of transmission, usually electrically powered traction motors or a hydraulically powered torque converter

The connections of the bogie with the rail vehicle allow a certain degree of rotational movement around a vertical axis pivot (bolster), with side bearers preventing excessive movement. More modern, bolsterless bogie designs omit these features, instead taking advantage of the sideways movement of the suspension to permit rotational movement. 

=== Examples ===

==== BR1 bogie ====

The British Railways Mark 1 coach brought into production in 1950 used the BR1 bogie, which was rated to run at 90 mph. The wheels were cast as a one-piece item in a pair with their axle. The simple design involved the bogie resting on four leaf springs (one spring per wheel), which in turn were connected to the axles. The leaf springs were designed to absorb any movement or resonance and to have a damping effect to benefit ride quality.

Each spring was connected to the outermost edge of the axle by a roller bearing contained in oil-filled axle box. The oil had to be topped up at regular maintenance times to avoid the bearing running hot and seizing.

There was also a heavy-duty version designated BR2.

==== Commonwealth bogie ====
Commonwealth bogie as used on BR Mark 1 and CIE Park Royals

The Commonwealth bogie, manufactured by the English Steel Corporation under licence from the Commonwealth Rail Company in America. Fitted with SKF or Timken bearings, it was introduced in the late 1950s for all BR Mark 1 vehicles. It was a heavy, cast-steel design weighing about 6.5 LT, with sealed roller bearings on the axle ends, avoiding the need to maintain axle box oil levels.

The leaf springs were replaced by coil springs (one per wheel) running vertically rather than horizontally. The advanced design gave a better ride quality than the BR1, being rated for 100 mph.

The side frame of the bogie was usually of bar construction, with simple horn guides attached, allowing the axle boxes vertical movements between them. The axle boxes had a cast-steel equaliser beam or bar resting on them. The bar had two steel coil springs placed on it and the bogie frame rested on the springs. The effect was to allow the bar to act as a compensating lever between the two axles and to use both springs to soften shocks from either axle. The bogie had a conventional bolster suspension with swing links carrying a spring plank.

==== B4 bogie ====
B4 bogie as used on BR Mark 2 and Irish Cravens

The B4 bogie was introduced in 1963. It was a fabricated steel design versus cast iron and was lighter than the Commonwealth, weighing in at 5 LT. It also had a speed rating of 100 mph.

Axle/spring connection was again with fitted roller bearings. However, now two coil springs rather than one were fitted per wheel. Unofficial West Somerset Railway website - Bogies 

Only a very small number of Mark 1 stock was fitted with the B4 bogie from new, it being used on the Mark 1 only to replace worn BR1 bogies. The British Rail Mark 2 coach, however, carried the B4 bogies from new. A heavier-duty version, the B5, was standard on Southern Region Mk1-based EMUs from the 1960s onwards. Some Mark 1 catering cars had mixed bogiesa B5 under the kitchen end, and a B4 under the seating end. Some of the B4-fitted Mark 2s, as well as many B4-fitted Mark 1 BGs were allowed to run at 110 mph with extra maintenance, particularly of the wheel profile, and more frequent exams.

==== BT10 Bogie ====
BT10 high-speed bogie as used on MK3

The BT10 bogie was introduced on the British Rail Mark 3 coach in the 1970s. Each wheel is separately connected to the bogie by a swing-arm axle.

There is dual suspension:
*primary suspension via a coil spring and damper mounted on each axle
*secondary suspension via two air springs mounted on the pivot plank, this is connected to the bogie by pendulum links. A constant coach height is maintained by air valves. Roger Barnett - British Rails InterCity 125 and 225 

==== Locomotives ====
;Diesel and electric

Most diesel locomotives and electric locomotives are carried on bogies (trucks - US). Trucks used in the USA include AAR type A switcher truck, Blomberg B, HT-C truck and Flexicoil. http://www.hosam.com/emd/emd6a.html 

;Steam
On a steam locomotive, the leading wheels and trailing wheels may be mounted on bogies. Articulated locomotives (e.g. the Fairlie) have power bogies similar to those on diesel and electric locomotives.

=== Tramway ===

==== Modern ====
Side view of a SEPTA K-Car bogie

Tram bogies are much simpler in design because of their axle load, and the tighter curves found on tramways mean tram bogies almost never have more than two axles. Furthermore, some tramways have steeper gradients and vertical, as well as horizontal, curves, which means tram bogies often need to pivot on the horizontal axis, as well.

Some articulated trams have bogies located under articulations, a setup referred to as a Jacobs bogie. Often, low-floor trams are fitted with nonpivoting bogies and many tramway enthusiasts see this as a retrograde step, as it leads to more wear of both track and wheels and also significantly reduces the speed at which a tram can round a curve. The only 100% low-floor tram with pivoting bogies - koda ForCity - uses the Jacobs bogie.

==== Historic ====
In the past, many different types of bogie (truck) have been used under tramcars, e.g. "Brill", "Peckham" and "maximum traction". A maximum traction truck has one driving axle with large wheels and one nondriving axle with smaller wheels. The bogie pivot is located off-centre, so more than half the weight rests on the driving axle.

=== Hybrid systems ===
Mockup of the pneumatic bogie system of a MP 89 carriage used on the Meteor metro, showing the two special wheelsets

The retractable stadium roof on Toronto's Roger's Centre used modified off-the-shelf train bogies on a circular rail. The system was chosen for its proven reliability. 

Rubber-tyred metro trains use a specialised version of railway bogies. Special flanged steel wheels are behind the rubber-tired running wheels, with additional horizontal guide wheels in front of and behind the running wheels, as well. The unusually large flanges on the steel wheels guide the bogie through standard railroad switches, and in addition keep the train from derailing in case the tires deflate.

=== Variable gauge axles ===

To overcome breaks of gauge some bogies are being fitted with variable gauge axles (VGA) so that they can operate on two different gauges. These include the SUW 2000 system from ZNTK Pozna.

===Cleminson system===
The Cleminson system is not a true bogie, but serves a similar purpose. It was based on a patent of 1883 by James Cleminson, http://www.icevirtuallibrary.com/docserver/fulltext/imotp.1897.19461.pdf?expires=1315520526&id=id&accname=guest&checksum=AD521ED02561C3CF38D1772ECF1ACA2B and was once popular on narrow-gauge rolling stock, e.g. on the Isle of Man and Manx Northern Railways. The vehicle would have three axles and the outer two could pivot to adapt to curvature of the track. The pivoting was controlled by levers attached to the third (centre) axle, which could slide sideways. http://www.festipedia.org.uk/wiki/Cleminson_Flexible_Six-Wheeled_Waggon 

== Tracked vehicles ==

Some tanks and other tracked vehicles have bogies as external suspension components (see armoured fighting vehicle suspension). This type of bogie usually has two or more road wheels and some type of sprung suspension to smooth the ride across rough terrain. Bogie suspensions keep much of their components on the outside of the vehicle, saving internal space. Although vulnerable to antitank fire, they can often be repaired or replaced in the field.

==Articulated lorries (tractor-trailers)==
In trucking, a bogie is the subassembly of axles and wheels that supports a semi-trailer, whether permanently attached to the frame (as on a single trailer) or making up the dolly that can be hitched and unhitched as needed when hitching up a second or third semi-trailer (as when pulling doubles or triples).

== Gallery ==

== Manufacturers ==
*Siemens http://www.mobility.siemens.com/mobility/global/en/urban-mobility/rail-solutions/components-and-systems/Pages/components-and-systems.aspx#Bogies%20%E2%80%93%20a%20full%20range%20for%20high-quality%20passenger%20transport (link including 70 pages very detailed technical catalog)
* Bombardier http://www.bombardier.com/en/transportation/products-services/bogies 
* Alstom http://www.alstom.com/transport/news-and-events/events/archives/reveal-AGV/technologies 
* Vickers Ruwolt http://www.sffej.net/vickers/railway.html 

== See also ==

* Articulated bogie
* Bissel bogie
* Blomberg B
* Dolly
* Flange
* Glsdorf axle
* Jacobs bogie
* Krauss-Helmholtz bogie
* Luttermller axle
* Mason Bogie
* Pony truck
* Radial steering truck
* Rocker-bogie
* Schwartzkopff-Eckhardt II bogie
* Syntegra
* Trailing wheel
* Wheel arrangement
* Wheelbase
* Wheel gauge
* Wheelset (rail transport)

== References ==

===Notes===

===Further reading===
* 

== External links ==

* TRUCK (bogie) with tyres
* Arbel Faufet Rail Bogies
* Track modelling



[[British Steel]]

British Steel PLC was a major British steel producer. It originated as a nationalised industry, the British Steel Corporation (BSC), formed in 1967. This was converted to a public limited company, British Steel PLC, and privatised in 1988. It was once a constituent of the FTSE 100 Index. The company merged with Koninklijke Hoogovens to form Corus Group in 1999.

== History ==
Blair (1997) explores the history of the British Steel since the Second World War to evaluate the impact of government intervention in a market economy. Entrepreneurship was lacking in the 1940s; the government could not persuade the industry to upgrade its plants. For generations the industry had followed a patchwork growth pattern that proved inefficient in the face of world competition. The Labour Party came to power in 1945 committed to socialism. In 1946 it put the first steel development plan into practice with the aim of increasing capacity. It passed the "Iron and Steel Act of 1949," which meant nationalisation of the industry as the government bought out the shareholders. American Marshall Plan aid in 194850 reinforced modernisation efforts and provided funding for them. However, the reforms were dismantled by the Conservative governments in the 1950s. In 1967, under a Labour government again, the industry was again nationalised. But by then twenty years of political manipulation had left companies such as British Steel with serious problems: a complacency with existing equipment, plants operating under capacity (low efficiency), poor quality assets, outdated technology, government price controls, higher coal and oil costs, lack of funds for capital improvement, and increasing world market competition. By the 1970s the Labour government had its main goal to keep employment high in the declining industry. Since British Steel was a main employer in depressed regions, it had to keep many mills and facilities operating at a loss. In the 1980s, Conservative Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher re-privatised BSC as British Steel. Under private control the company has dramatically cut its work force and undergone a radical reorganisation and massive capital investment to again become competitive in the world marketplace. Alasdair M. Blair, "The British iron and steel industry since 1945," Journal of European Economic History (1997) 26#3 pp 571-81 

=== Nationalisation ===
BSC was formed from the assets of former private companies which had been nationalised, largely under the Labour government of Harold Wilson, on 28 July 1967. Wilson's was the second attempt at nationalisation, Clement Attlee's Iron and Steel Corporation of Great Britain having been largely privatised by the Conservative governments of the 1950s. Only one steel company, Richard Thomas and Baldwins, remained in public ownership throughout.

BSC was established under the Iron and Steel Act 1967, which vested in the Corporation the shares of the 14 major UK-based steel companies then in operation, being:
*Colvilles Ltd;
*Consett Iron Company Ltd;
*Dorman Long & Company Ltd;
*English Steel Corporation Ltd;
*GKN Steel Company Ltd;
*John Summers & Sons Ltd;
*The Lancashire Steel Corporation Ltd;
*The Park Gate Iron and Steel Company Ltd;
*Richard Thomas and Baldwins Ltd;
*Round Oak Steel Works Ltd;
*South Durham Steel & Iron Company Ltd;
*The Steel Company of Wales Ltd;
*Stewarts & Lloyds, Ltd; and
*The United Steel Companies Ltd.

At the time of its formation BSC comprised around 90 percent of the UK's steelmaking capacity, had around 268,500 employees and around 200 wholly or partly owned subsidiaries based in the United Kingdom, Australia, New Zealand, Canada, Africa, South Asia, and South America. UK Steel:Key dates 

Dorman Long, South Durham and Stewarts and Lloyds had merged as British Steel and Tube Ltd before vesting took place. BSC later arranged an exchange deal with Guest, Keen and Nettlefolds Ltd (GKN), the parent company of GKN Steel, under which BSC acquired Dowlais Ironworks at Merthyr Tydfil and GKN took over BSC's Brymbo Steelworks near Wrexham.

=== Restructuring ===
According to Blair (1997) British Steel faced serious problems at the time of its formation, including obsolescent plants; plants operating under capacity and thus at low efficiency; outdated technology; price controls that reduced marketing flexibility; soaring coal and oil costs; lack of capital investment funds; and increasing competition on the world market. By the 1970s the government adopted a policy of keeping employment artificially high in the declining industry. This especially impacted BSC since it was a major employer in a number of depressed regions. Alasdair M. Blair, "The British iron and steel industry since 1945," Journal of European Economic History Winter 1997, Vol. 26 Issue 3, pp 571-81 

One of the arguments aired in favour of nationalisation was that it would enable steel production to be rationalised. This involved concentrating investment on major integrated plants, placed near the coast for ease of access by sea, and closing older, smaller plants, especially those that had been located inland for proximity to coal supplies.

From the mid-1970s the (now loss-making) British Steel pursued a strategy of concentrating steelmaking in five areas: South Wales, South Yorkshire, Scunthorpe, Teesside and Scotland. This policy continued following the Conservative victory in the 1979 general election. Other traditional steelmaking areas faced cutbacks. Under the Labour government of James Callaghan, a review by Lord Beswick had led to the reprieve of the so-called 'Beswick plants', for social reasons, but subsequent governments were obliged under EU rules to withdraw subsidies. Major changes resulted across Europe including, in the UK:

* At Consett the closure of the British Steel works in 1980 marked the end of steel production in the Derwent Valley and the decline of the area.

* At Corby, the closure of the former Stewarts & Lloyds site in the early 1980s saw the loss of 11,000 jobs, leading to an initial unemployment rate of over 30%. Select Committee on Transport, Local Government and the Regions, HMSO 

* In Wales, works at East Moors (Cardiff), Ebbw Vale and Shotton were closed.

* In Scotland, Western Europe's largest hot strip steel mill Ravenscraig steelworks, near Motherwell, North Lanarkshire, was closed by British Steel in 1992, leading to huge unemployment in the area. It also led to the closure of several local support and satellite businesses, such as the nearby British Steel Clydesdale Works in Mossend, Clyde Alloy in Netherton and equipment maker Anderson Strathclyde. Demolition of the site's landmark blue gasometer in 1996, and the subsequent cleanup operation, has created the largest brownfield site in Europe. This huge area between Motherwell and Wishaw is in line to be transformed into the new town of Ravenscraig, a project partly funded by Corus.

=== Privatisation ===
British Steel was privatised in 1988 by the Conservative government of Margaret Thatcher. It merged with the Dutch steel producer Koninklijke Hoogovens to form Corus Group on 6 October 1999. British Steel merges with Dutch rival BBC, 7 June 1999 Corus itself was taken over in March 2007 by the Indian steel operator Tata Steel. 

== Chairmen ==
*Lord Melchett (19671973)
*Monty Finniston (19731976)
*Charles Villiers (19761980)
*Ian MacGregor (19801983)
*Robert Haslam (19831986)
*Robert Scholey (19861992)

Ian MacGregor later became famous for his role as Chairman of the National Coal Board during the UK miners' strike (19841985). During the strike the "Battle of Orgreave" took place at British Steel's coking plant.

== Sponsorships ==
In 1971, British Steel sponsored Sir Chay Blyth in his record-making non-stop circumnavigation against the winds and currents, known as 'The Impossible Voyage'. In 1992 they sponsored the British Steel Challenge, the first of a series of 'wrong way' races for amateur crews.

British Steel had agreed a sponsorship deal with Middlesbrough Football Club during the 199495 season, with a view to British Steel sponsored Middlesbrough shirts making their appearance the following season. But the sponsorship deal was terminated before it commenced after it was revealed that British steel only made up a tiny fraction of steel used in construction of the stadium  the bulk of the steel had been imported from Germany.

== See also ==
* British Iron and Steel Research Association

== References ==

== Further reading ==
*Blair, Alasdair M. "The British iron and steel industry since 1945," Journal of European Economic History (Winter 1997), Vol. 26 Issue 3, pp 57181
* , on nationalization 194550, pp 183235
*Dudley, G. F., and J. J. Richardson, eds. Politics and Steel in Britain, 19671988: The Life and Times of the British Steel Corporation (1990)
*Rhodes, Martin; Wright, Vincent. "The European Steel Unions and the Steel Crisis, 197484: A Study in the Demise of Traditional Unionism," British Journal of Political Science, April 1988, Vol. 18 Issue 2, pp 171195 in JSTOR
*Scheuerman, William. The Steel Crisis: The Economics and Politics of a Declining Industry (1986)

== External links ==
*British Steel Corporation, 1988 Competition Commission report
*British Steel plc and C Walker & Sons (Holdings) Ltd, 1990 Competition Commission report
*
*Catalogue of the BSC archives, held at the Modern Records Centre, University of Warwick
*Catalogue of the BSC Department of Operational Research archives, held at the Modern Records Centre, University of Warwick



[[BT Group]]

BT Group plc, trading as BT, is a British multinational telecommunications services company with head offices in London, England, United Kingdom. It has operations in around 170 countries. Through its BT Global Services division it is a supplier of telecoms services to corporate and government customers worldwide. Its BT Retail division is a supplier of telephony, broadband and subscription television services in GB, with circa 18 million customers. 

BT's origins date back to the founding of the Electric Telegraph Company in 1846 which developed a nationwide communications network. In 1912, the General Post Office, a government department, became the monopoly telecoms supplier in GB. The Post Office Act of 1969 led to the GPO becoming a public corporation. British Telecom was formed in 1980, and became independent of the Post Office in 1981. British Telecom was privatised in 1984, with some 50 per cent of its shares sold to investors. The Government sold its remaining stake in further share sales in 1991 and 1993.

BT has a primary listing on the London Stock Exchange and is a constituent of the FTSE 100 Index.

==History==
BT's origins date back to the establishment of the first telecommunications companies in Britain. Among them was the first commercial telegraph service, the Electric Telegraph Company, established in 1846. As these companies amalgamated and were taken over or collapsed, the remaining companies were transferred to state control under the Post Office in 1912. These companies were merged and rebranded as British Telecom. 

===1878 to 1969===
The BT Tower, originally the Post Office Tower, constructed between 1961 and 1964
In January 1878 Alexander Graham Bell demonstrated his recently developed telephone to Queen Victoria at Osborne House on the Isle of Wight. A few days later the first telephone in Britain was installed, under licence from the General Post Office, by engineers from David Moseley and Sons, to connect the Dantzic Street premises of Manchester hardware merchant, Mr. John Hudson, with his other premises in nearby Shudehill. As the number of installed telephones across the country grew it became sensible to consider constructing telephone exchanges to allow all the telephones in each city to be connected together. The first exchange was opened in London in August 1879, closely followed by the Lancashire Telephonic Exchange in Manchester. From 1878, the telephone service in Britain was provided by private sector companies such as the National Telephone Company, and later by the General Post Office. In 1896, the National Telephone Company was taken over by the General Post Office. In 1912 it became the primary supplier of telecommunications services, after the Post Office took over the private sector telephone service in GB, except for a few local authority services. Those services all folded within a few years, the sole exception being Kingston upon Hull, where the telephone department became present day KCOM Group. Telegraph and Telephone services became the exclusive responsibility of the Post Office Engineering department.

===Public corporation===
Converting the Post Office into a nationalised industry, as opposed to a governmental department, was first discussed in 1932 by Lord Wolmer. In 1932 the Bridgeman Committee produced a report that was rejected. Bridgeman Committee In 1961, more proposals were ignored. The Post Office remained a department of central government, with the Postmaster General sitting in Cabinet as a Secretary of State. 

In March 1965, Tony Benn, the acting Postmaster General, wrote to Harold Wilson, the Prime Minister, proposing that studies be undertaken aimed at converting the Post Office into a nationalised industry. A committee was set up to look into the advantages and disadvantages of the proposal, and its findings were found to be favourable enough for the Government to re-establish a Steering Group on the Organisation of the Post Office. After some initial deliberations that the business should be divided into five divisions; Post, Telecommunications, Savings, Giro and National Data Processing Services, it was decided that there should be two: Post and Telecommunications. These events finally resulted in the introduction of the Post Office Act, 1969. 

On 1 October 1969, under the Post Office Act of 1969, the Post Office ceased to be a government department and it became established as a public corporation. The Act gave the Post Office the exclusive privilege of operating telecommunications systems with listed powers to authorise others to run such systems. Effectively, the General Post Office retained its telecommunications monopoly. 

=== 1969 to 1982 ===
In 1977, the Carter Committee Report recommended a further division of the two main services and for their relocation under two individual corporations. The findings contained in the report led to the renaming of Post Office Telecommunications as British Telecom in 1980, although it remained part of the Post Office. 

The British Telecommunications Act 1981 transferred the responsibility for telecommunications services from the Post Office, creating two separate corporations, Post Office Ltd. and British Telecom. At this time the first steps were taken to introduce competition into British telecommunications industry. In particular, the Act empowered the Secretary of State for Trade and Industry, as well as British Telecom, to license other operators to run public telecommunications systems. Additionally, a framework was established which enabled the Secretary of State to set standards with the British Standards Institution (BSI) for apparatus supplied to the public by third parties, and had the effect of requiring British Telecom to connect approved apparatus to its systems. The Secretary of State made use of these new powers and began the process of opening up the apparatus supply market, where a phased programme of liberalisation was started in 1981. In 1982, a licence was granted to Cable & Wireless to run a public telecommunications network through its subsidiary, Mercury Communications Ltd. History of Mercury Communications fundinguniverse.com 

===1982 to 1991===
On 19 July 1982, the Government formally announced its intention to privatise British Telecom with the sale of up to 51% of the company's shares to private investors. This intention was confirmed by the passing of the Telecommunications Act 1984, which received Royal Assent on April 12 that year. The transfer to British Telecommunications plc of the business of British Telecom, the statutory corporation, took place on 6 August 1984 and, on 20 November 1984, more than 50 per cent of British Telecom shares were sold to the public. At the time, this was the largest share issue in the world. Tory conference bombed Express and Star. Retrieved 24 March 2012 

The new legislation was intended to enable British Telecom to become more responsive to competition in GB and to expand its operations globally. Commercial freedom granted to British Telecom allowed it to enter into new joint ventures and, if it so decided, to engage in the manufacture of its own apparatus. The company's transfer into the private sector continued in December 1991 when the Government sold around half its remaining holding of 47.6% of shares, reducing its stake to 21.8%. Substantially all the government's remaining shares were sold in a third flotation in July 1993, raising 5 billion for the Treasury and introducing 750,000 new shareholders to the company. Privatisation shares  how have they fared? The Telegraph, 18 November 2011 

The 1984 Act also abolished British Telecoms exclusive privilege of running telecommunications systems and established a framework to safeguard the workings of competition. This meant that British Telecom finally lost its monopoly in running telecommunications systems, which it had technically retained under the 1981 Act despite the Secretary of State's licensing powers. It now required a licence in the same way as any other telecommunications operator. The principal licence granted to British Telecom laid down strict and extensive conditions affecting the range of its activities, including those of manufacture and supply of apparatus. 

The BT Centre, completed in 1985.
The next major development for British Telecom, and a move towards a more open market in telecommunications, occurred in 1991. On 5 March, the Government's White Paper, "Competition and Choice: Telecommunications Policy" for the 1990s, was issued. In effect, it ended the duopoly which had been shared by British Telecom and Mercury Communications in the UK since November 1983 and the buildup to privatisation. The new policy enabled customers to acquire telecommunications services from competing providers using a variety of technologies. Independent "retail" companies were permitted to bulk-buy telecommunications capacity and sell it in packages to business and domestic users. The White Paper was endorsed by British Telecom, the new policy enabling the company to compete freely and more effectively by offering flexible pricing packages to meet the needs of different types of customer. Competition and choice in telecommunications: The Duopoly review consultative document 

===1991 to 2001===
On 2 April 1991, the company started using a new trading name, BT, and branding. 

In December 2000, following modifications to BTs licence in April 2000, BT offered local loop unbundling (LLU) to other telecommunications operators, enabling them to use BTs copper local loops (the connection between the customers premises and the exchange) to connect directly with their customers. Local loop unbundling 

====Concert====

In June 1994, BT and MCI Communication Corporation, the second largest carrier of long distance telecommunications services in the United States, launched Concert Communications Services, a $1 billion joint venture company. This alliance gave BT and MCI a global network for providing end-to-end connectivity for advanced business services. Concert was the first company to provide a single-source broad portfolio of global communications services for multinational customers. On 3 November 1996, BT and MCI announced they had entered into a merger agreement to create a global telecommunications company called Concert plc, to be incorporated in GB, with headquarters in both London and Washington, D.C. As part of the alliance BT acquired a 20% holding in MCI. Nevertheless, following U.S. carrier WorldCom's rival bid for MCI on 1 October 1997, BT ultimately decided in November, to sell its stake in MCI to WorldCom for $7 billion. The deal with WorldCom resulted in a profit of more than $2 billion on BT's original investment in MCI, with an additional $465 million severance fee for the break-up of the proposed merger. 

====Cellnet/O2====

In 1985, Cellnet was launched as a subsidiary of Telecom Securicor Cellular Radio Limited, a 60:40 venture between British Telecommunications and Securicor respectively. Securicor originally invested 4 million in Cellnet in 1983. In 1999, BT purchased Securicor's shares in Cellnet for 3.15 billion. The company was later rebranded as BT Cellnet, and it became a part of BT Wireless, a group of subsidiary companies owned by BT. 

In October 2001, at a general meeting held in Birmingham, 4.297 billion British Telecommunications shares voted in favour of the demerger, and 0.67 million voted against. In , BT Cellnet demerged from BT and was relaunched on as O2. Then in March 2005, the company underwent a corporate reorganisation that saw mmO2 plc being de-listed from the London Stock Exchange and acquired (via a share swap) by a new company, O2 plc, which was listed on the London Stock Exchange in its place and then ultimately acquired by Telefnica in 2007. Telefnica says it has no plans for a UK float of O2 

===2001 to 2006===
BT offices in Madrid, Spain
Following the dot com crash, the group undertook a board restructuring and asset sale to address its large debts. In May 2001, BT announced a three-for-ten rights issue to raise 5.9 billionstill GB's largest ever rights issueand the sale of Yell Group, the international directories and associated e-commerce business, for 2.14 billion. Both activities were completed in June 2001. The group also sold its property portfolio to Telereal, a property company. In April 2003, BT unveiled its current corporate identity and brand values. Reflecting the aspirations of a technologically innovative future, the connected world is designed to embody BTs five corporate values: trustworthy, helpful, inspiring, straightforward, heart. The Communications Act, 2003, which came into force on 25 July 2003, introduced a new industry regulator, the Office of Communications (Ofcom), to replace the Office of Telecommunications (Oftel). It also introduced a new regulatory framework. The licensing regime was replaced by a general authorisation for companies to provide telecommunications services subject to general conditions of entitlement and, in some instances, specific conditions. Under a specific condition BT retained its universal service obligation (USO) for GB, excluding the Hull area. The USO included connecting consumers to the fixed telephone network, schemes for consumers with special social needs, and the provision of call box services. 

In the summer of 2004, BT launched Consult 21, an industry consultation for BTs 21st century network (21CN) programme. 21CN is a next-generation network transformation, that, at one time, was due for completion by the end of 2010. Using internet protocol technology, 21CN will replace the existing networks and communications from any device such as mobile phone, PC, PDA, or home phone, to any other device. ITU: BT launches consulting business 

In 2004, BT was awarded the contract to deliver and manage N3, a secure and fast broadband network for the NHS National Programme for IT (NPfIT) program, on behalf of the English National Health Service (NHS). 

In 2005 BT made a number of important acquisitions. In February 2005, BT acquired Infonet (now re-branded BT Infonet), a large telecoms company based in El Segundo, California, giving BT access to new geographies. It also acquired the second largest telecoms operator in the Italian business market, Albacom. Then in April 2005, it bought Radianz from Reuters (now rebranded as BT Radianz), which expanded BT's coverage and provided BT with more buying power in certain countries. 

====Openreach====

An Openreach van.
Following the Telecommunications Strategic Review (TSR), in September 2005 BT signed legally binding Undertakings with Ofcom to help create a new regulatory framework for BT and GB telecoms industry generally. Openreach provides provision and repair in the "last mile" of copper wire and is formed from 25,000 engineers previously employed by BT's Retail and Wholesale divisions. It is designed to ensure that other communications providers (CPs) have exactly the same operational conditions as parts of the BT group. It opened for business on 11 January 2006 and reports directly into the BT chief executive. BT's Openreach could have to list separately 

===2006 to present===
In August 2006 BT acquired online electrical retailer Dabs.com for 30.6 million. The BT Home Hub manufactured by Inventel was also launched in June 2006. 
In October 2006 BT confirmed that it would be investing 75% of its total capital spending, put at 10 billion over five years, in its new Internet Protocol (IP) based 21st century network (21CN). Annual savings of 1 billion per annum were expected when the transition to the new network was to have been completed in 2010, with over 50% of its customers to have been transferred by 2008. (For actual progress see BT 21CN). That month the first customers on to 21CN was successfully tested at Adastral Park in Suffolk. 

In January 2007, BT acquired Sheffield-based ISP, PlusNet plc, adding an additional 200,000 customers. BT stated that PlusNet will continue to operate separately out of its Sheffield head-office. On 1 February 2007, BT announced agreed terms to acquire International Network Services Inc. (INS), an international provider of IT consultancy and software. This increases BT presence in North America enhancing BT's consulting capabilities. 

On 20 February 2007, Sir Michael Rake, then chairman of accountancy firm KPMG International, succeeded Sir Christopher Bland, who stepped down in September of that year. On 20 April 2007, BT acquired Comsat International which provides network services to the South American corporate market. On 1 October 2007, BT purchased Chesterfield based Lynx Technology which has been around since 1973. 

BT acquired Wire One Communications in June 2008 and folded the company into BT Conferencing, its existing conferencing unit, as a new video business unit BT buys Wire One 
In July 2008, BT acquired the online business directory firm Ufindus for 20 million in order to expand its position in the local information market in GB. On 28 July 2008, BT acquired Ribbit, of Mountain View, California, "Silicon Valley's First Phone Company". Ribbit provides Adobe Flash/Flex APIs, allowing web developers to incorporate telephony features into their software as a service (SaaS) applications. 

On 1 April 2009, BT Engage IT was created from the merger of two previous BT acquisitions, Lynx Technology and Basilica. Apart from the name change not much else changed in operations for another 12 months. Exclusive: Lynx and Basilica in BT rebrand On 14 May 2009, BT said it was cutting up to 15,000 jobs in the coming year after it announced its results for the year to 31 March 2009. BT to shed a further 15,000 job losses BBC News, 14 May 2009 Then in July 2009 BT offered workers a long holiday for an up front sum of 25% of their annual wage or a one-off payment of 1000 if they agree to go part-time. 

On 1 August 2013, BT launched its first television channels, BT Sport, to compete with rival broadcaster Sky Sports. Plans for the channels' launch came about when it was announced in June 2012 that BT had been awarded a package of broadcast rights for the Premier League from the 201314 to 201516 season, broadcasting 38 matches from each season. In February 2013, BT acquired ESPN Inc.'s UK and Ireland TV channels, continuing its expansion into sports broadcasting. ESPN America and ESPN Classic were both closed, while ESPN continued to be operated by BT. On 9 November BT announced it had acquired exclusive rights to the Champions League and Europa League for 897m, from the 2015 season, with some free games remaining including both finals. BBC Sport - Champions League: BT Sport wins 897m football rights deal. Bbc.co.uk (2013-11-09). Retrieved on 2013-12-09. 

==Operations==
The Adastral Park campus at Martlesham Heath in Suffolk, the principal site of BT Research.

British Telecommunications plc (BT) is a wholly owned subsidiary of BT Group plc and encompasses virtually all businesses and assets of the BT Group. BT Group plc is listed on stock exchanges in London and New York.

BT runs the telephone exchanges, trunk network and local loop connections for the vast majority of British fixed-line telephones. Currently BT is responsible for approximately 28 million telephone lines in GB. Apart from Kingston Communications, which serves Kingston upon Hull, BT is the only UK telecoms operator to have a Universal Service Obligation, (USO) which means it must provide a fixed telephone line to any address in the UK. It is also obliged to provide public call boxes.

BT's businesses are operated under special government regulation by the British telecoms regulator Ofcom (formerly Oftel). BT has been found to have Significant Market Power in some markets following Market Reviews by Ofcom. In these markets, BT is required to comply with additional obligations such as meeting reasonable requests to supply services and not to discriminate.

As well as continuing to provide service in those traditional areas in which BT has an obligation to provide services or is closely regulated, BT has expanded into more profitable products and services where there is less regulation. These are principally, broadband internet service and bespoke solutions in telecommunications and information technology.

===Divisions===
BT Group is organised into the following divisions: 

*Customer facing:
**BT Global Services  provides IT and telecoms services to multinationals (formerly BT Ignite and BT Syntegra)
**BT Retail  provides retail telecoms services to businesses and consumers
**BT Wholesale  operates BT's networks
**Openreach  fenced-off wholesale division, responsible for the "last mile" of BT's access network in GB and tasked with ensuring that rival operators have equality of access to BT's local network

*Internal service unit:
**BT Technology, Service & Operations  responsible for the innovation, design, test, build and running of BTs global networks and systems. 

=== Headquarters ===

BT Group's world headquarters and registered office is the BT Centre, a 10-storey office building at 81 Newgate Street in the City of London, opposite St. Paul's tube station.

==Corporate affairs==

===Financial performance===
BT's financial results have been as follows: 

 Year ending Turnover (m) Profit/(loss) before tax (m) Net profit/(loss) (m) Basic eps (p) 
 31 March 2013 18,017 2,501 2,091 26.7 
 31 March 2012 19,307 2,421 2,003 23.7 
 31 March 2011 20,076 1,717 1,504 19.4 
 31 March 2010 20,911 1,007 1,029 13.3 
 31 March 2009 21,390 (134) (81) 3.2 
 31 March 2008 20,704 1,976 1,738 21.5 
 31 March 2007 20,223 2,484 2,852 34.4 
 31 March 2006 19,514 2,633 1,644 19.5 
 31 March 2005 18,429 2,693 1,539 18.1 
 31 March 2004 18,519 1,945 1,414 16.4 
 31 March 2003 18,727 3,157 2,702 31.4 
 31 March 2002 18,447 1,461 1,008 12.1 
 31 March 2001 17,141 (1,031) (1,875) (25.8) 
 31 March 2000 18,715 2,942 2,055 31.7 
 31 March 1999 16,953 4,295 2,983 46.3 
 31 March 1998 15,640 3,214 1,702 26.6 
 31 March 1997 14,935 3,203 2,077 32.8 
 31 March 1996 14,446 3,019 1,986 31.6 
 31 March 1995 13,893 2,662 1,731 27.8 
 31 March 1994 13,675 2,756 1,767 28.5 
 31 March 1993 13,242 1,972 1,220 19.8 
 31 March 1992 13,337 3,073 2,044 33.2 

===Pension fund===
BT has the largest defined benefit pension plan of any UK public company. The trustees valued the scheme at 36.7 billion at the end of 2010; BT Pension scheme Report and Accounts An actuarial valuation valued the deficit of the scheme at 9.043 billion as of 31 December 2008. 
However following a change in the regulations governing inflation index linking, the deficit was estimated at 5.2 billion in November 2010. 
BT and the Trustee have agreed a 17-year recovery plan with the first three years payments amounting to 525mm. As of 2013 average annual payments have been estimated at 533M. The next triennial valuation is scheduled for 2014.

BTs pension obligation is derived from two pension plans: BTPS, the companys defined-benefit pension scheme which was closed in 2001, and the BT Retirement Saving Scheme (BTRSS), which was set up to replace the BTPS and is a defined-contribution retirement plan.

== Logo ==
The current BT corporate logo, "Connected World", was adopted in 2003. The globe device part of the logo was originally designed by the Wolff Olins brand consultancy for BT's Concert joint venture with AT&T, and was subsequently used by BT's internet division, Openworld, prior to being adopted by the company as a whole. 

Image:British Telecom 1981.svg|19801991 British Telecom "T" symbol logo.
Image:BT old logo.svg|19912003 BT "piper" logo.
Image:BT logo.svg|2003present BT "Connected World" logo.

== Environmental record ==
In 2004 the BT Group signed the world's largest renewable energy deal with npower and British Gas, and now all of their exchanges, satellite networks and offices are powered by renewable energy. BT is a member of the Corporate Leaders Group on Climate Change. They signed a letter urging the government to do more to tackle this problem. Janet Blake, head of global corporate social responsibility at BT, says that she would like to see incentives that find ways of rewarding those companies that focus on climate change by making investments in green business models. Interview: CSR delivers 2.2bn for BT  30 October 2006  IT Week 

BT has made it clear that it has an ambitious plan to reduce carbon dioxide emissions. Its strategy includes steps to reduce the company's carbon footprint as well as those of customers, suppliers and employees. BT has actually pledged to achieve an 80% reduction by the year 2016, which will require further efficiency improvements. 

==Controversies==

=== World Wide Web hyperlink patent ===
In 2001, BT discovered it owned a patent () which it believed gave it patent rights on the use of hyperlink technology on the World Wide Web. The corresponding UK patent had already expired, but the U.S. patent was valid until 2006. On 11 February 2002, BT began a court case relating to its claims in a U.S. federal court against the Internet service provider Prodigy Communications Corporation. In the case British Telecommunications Plc. v. Prodigy, the United States District Court for the Southern District of New York ruled on 22 August 2002 that the BT patent was not applicable to web technology and granted Prodigy's request for summary judgment of non-infringement. 

===Behavioural targeting===

In early 2008 it was announced that BT had entered into a contract (along with Virgin Media and TalkTalk) with the spyware company Phorm (responsible under their 121Media guise for the Apropos rootkit) F-Secure Spyware Information Pages: Apropos to intercept and analyse their users' click-stream data and sell the anonymised aggregate information as part of Phorm's OIX advertising service. The practice, known as "behavioural targeting" and condemned by critics as "data pimping", came under intense fire from various internet communities and other interested-parties who believe that the interception of data without the consent of users and web site owners is illegal under UK law (RIPA). At a more fundamental level, many have argued that the ISPs and Phorm have no right to sell a commodity (a user's data, and the copyright content of web sites) to which they have no claim of ownership. In response to questions about Phorm and the interception of data by the Webwise system Sir Tim Berners-Lee, credited as the creator of the World Wide Web protocol, indicated his disapproval of the concept and is quoted as saying of his data and web history:

===Alleged complicity with drone strikes in Yemen and Somalia===
In September 2012, BT entered into a $23 million deal with the US military to provide a key communications cable connecting RAF Croughton, a US military base on UK soil, with Camp Lemonnier, a large US base in Djibouti. Camp Lemonnier is used as a base for American drone attacks in Yemen and Somalia, and has been described by The Economist as the most important base for drone operations outside the war zone of Afghanistan. 

Human rights groups including Reprieve and Amnesty International have criticised the use of armed drones outside declared war zones. Evidence produced by The Bureau of Investigative Journalism and Stanford University's International Human Rights & Conflict Resolution Clinic suggest that drone strikes have caused substantial civilian casualties, and may be illegal under international law. 

In 2013, BT was the subject of a complaint to the Department of Business, Innovation and Skills under the OECD Guidelines for Multinational Enterprises, following their refusal to explain whether or not their infrastructure was used to facilitate drone strikes. The subsequent refusal of this complaint was appealed in May 2014, on the basis that the UK National Contact Points decision did not follow the OECD Guidelines. The issue of bias was also raised, due to the appointment of Lord Ian Livingston as government minister for the department which processed the complaint: Livingston had occupied a senior position at BT when the cable between RAF Croughton and Camp Lemonnier was originally built. 

== See also ==
* SHERIFF

==References==

==Further reading==
*Baldwin, F.G.C. The History of the Telephone in the United Kingdom (1925)
*Foreman-Peck, J. "The development and diffusion of telephone technology in Britain, 19001940," Transactions of the Newcomen Society, (1991-92). 63, pp165180.
*Foreman-Peck, J., & Millward, R. Public and private ownership of British industry 18201990 (1994). 
*Hazlewood, A. "The origins of the state telephone service in Britain" Oxford Economic Papers (1953). 5:1325. in JSTOR
* Holcombe, A. N. "The Telephone in Great Britain," Quarterly Journal of Economics (1906) 21#1 pp. 96-135 in JSTOR
* Johannessen, Neil. Ring up Britain: the Early Years of the Telephone in the United Kingdom (British Telecommunications plc, London, 1991) 
* Johnston, S. F. "The telephone in Scotland." in: K. Veitch, ed., Transport and Communications. Publications of the European Ethnological Research Centre; Scottish life and society: a compendium of Scottish ethnology (2009): pp. 716-727 online 
*Magill, Frank N. Great Events from History II: Business and Commerce Series, volume 1:1897-1923 (1994) pp 218-23; historiography
* Meyer, Hugo Richard. Public Ownership and the Telephone in Great Britain: Restriction of the Industry by the State and the Municipalities (1907). online
* Pitt, D.C. The telecommunications function in the British Post Office. A case study of bureaucratic adaption (Westmead: Saxon House, 1980). 
* Robertson, John Henry. The story of the telephone: A history of the telecommunications industry of Britain (1947)
* Tucker, D. G. "The Early Development of the British Underground Trunk Telephone Network," Transactions of the Newcomen Society (1978) 49: 57-74.
* Wetton, Jenny. "The Early History of Telephony in Manchester, 18771898," Transactions of the Newcomen Society (2007) 77#2 pp 245260.

==External links==

* BT Group
* 

 



[[Balmoral Castle]]

Balmoral Castle is a large estate house in Royal Deeside, Aberdeenshire, Scotland. It is located near the village of Crathie, 6.2 mi west of Ballater and 6.8 mi east of Braemar. 

Balmoral has been one of the residences of the British Royal Family since 1852, when it was purchased by Prince Albert, consort to Queen Victoria. The castle and estate remain the private property of the royal family, and are not the property of The Crown.

Soon after the estate was purchased the existing house was found to be too small and the current Balmoral Castle was commissioned. The architect was William Smith of Aberdeen, although his designs were amended by Prince Albert. The castle is an example of Scots Baronial architecture, and is classified by Historic Scotland as a category A listed building. The new castle was completed in 1856 and the old castle demolished shortly thereafter.

The Balmoral Estate has been added to by successive members of the Royal Family, and now covers an area of about 49000 acre. It is a working estate, including grouse moors, forestry, and farmland, as well as managed herds of deer, Highland cattle, and ponies. 

==History==
King Robert II of Scotland (13161390) had a hunting lodge in the area. A house at Balmoral was built by Sir William Drummond in 1390. The estate is recorded in 1451 as "Bouchmorale", and was later tenanted by Alexander Gordon, second son of the 1st Earl of Huntly. A tower house was built on the estate by the Gordons. In 1662 the estate passed to Charles Farquharson of Inverey, brother of John Farquharson, the "Black Colonel". The Farquharsons were Jacobite sympathisers, and James Farquharson of Balmoral was involved in both the 1715 and 1745 rebellions, and was wounded at the Battle of Falkirk in 1746. His estates were forfeit, and passed to the Farquharsons of Auchendryne. In 1798, James Duff, 2nd Earl Fife, acquired Balmoral, and leased the castle. Sir Robert Gordon, a younger son of the 3rd Earl of Aberdeen, acquired the lease in 1830 and made major alterations to the castle, with baronial-style extensions designed by John Smith of Aberdeen. 

===Royal acquisition===

Balmoral Castle. A principal keep similar to Craigievar Castle's is the middle of the castle, while a large turreted country house is attached
Balmoral Castle, painted by Queen Victoria in 1854 during its construction

Queen Victoria and Prince Albert first visited Scotland in 1842, five years after her accession and two years after their marriage. They stayed at Edinburgh, and at Taymouth Castle in Perthshire, the home of the Marquess of Breadalbane. They returned in 1844 to stay at Blair Castle, and in 1847 when they rented Ardverikie by Loch Laggan. Millar, pp.23,31 The latter trip was extremely rainy, which led Sir James Clark, the Queen's physician, to recommend Deeside for its more healthy climate. Millar, p.39 

Sir Robert Gordon died in 1847, and the lease on Balmoral reverted to Lord Aberdeen. In February 1848 it was decided that Prince Albert would acquire the remaining part of the lease on Balmoral, together with its furniture and staff, and the couple arrived for their first visit on 8 September 1848. Millar, pp.4041 Victoria found the house "small but pretty", Millar, p.41 and recorded in her diary that: "All seemed to breathe freedom and peace, and to make one forget the world and its sad turmoils". 

The house was quickly found to be too small, and John and William Smith were commissioned in 1848 to design new offices, cottages and other ancillary buildings. Improvements to the woodlands, gardens and estate buildings were also being made, assisted by the landscape gardener James Beattie and the painter James Giles. After seeing a corrugated iron cottage at the Great Exhibition of 1851, Prince Albert ordered a pre-fabricated iron building for Balmoral from E. T. Bellhouse & Co., to serve as a temporary ballroom and dining room. It was in use by 1 October 1851, and served as a ballroom until completion of the new ballroom in 1856. Millar, p.59 Major additions to the old house were considered in 1849, Millar, p.55 but by then negotiations were under way to purchase the estate from the trustees of the deceased Earl Fife. The sale was completed in November 1851, the price being 32,000, and Prince Albert formally took possession the following autumn. Millar, p.56 The neighbouring estate of Birkhall was bought at the same time, and the lease on Abergeldie secured.

===Construction of the new house===
The programme of improvement culminated during early 1852 with the decision to commission a new, larger house, from William Smith. The son of John Smith, designer of the earlier castle, William Smith was City Architect of Aberdeen from 1852. On learning of the commission, William Burn sought an interview with the Prince, apparently to complain that Smith had plagiarised his work in the past. However, Burn was unsuccessful in depriving Smith of the appointment. William Smith's designs were amended by Prince Albert, who took a close interest in details such as turrets and windows. Millar, p.57 Construction began during summer 1853, on a site some 100 yd north-west of the original building, which was considered to have a better outlook. Millar, pp.5657 Queen Victoria laid the foundation stone on 28 September 1853, during the annual autumn visit. Millar, p.58 By the autumn of 1855, the royal apartments were ready, though the tower was still under construction and the servants had to be lodged in the old house. The new house was completed in 1856, and the old castle was subsequently demolished. 

Balmoral Castle is built from granite quarried at Invergelder on the estate, and comprises two main blocks, each arranged around a courtyard. The south-western block contains the main rooms, while the north-eastern contains the service wings. At the south-east is an 80 ft tall clock tower topped with turrets, one of which has a balustrade similar to a feature at Castle Fraser. The architecture of the new house is considered to be somewhat dated for its time, being similar in style to the demolished castle of the 1830s, in contrast to the richer forms of Scots Baronial being developed by William Burn and others during the 1850s. As an exercise in Scots Baronial, it is sometimes described as being too ordered, pedantic, and even Germanic, as a result of Prince Albert's influence on the design. However, the purchase of a Scottish estate by Victoria and Albert, and their adoption of Scottish architectural style, was very influential for the ongoing revival of Highland culture. The royals decorated Balmoral with tartans and attended highland games at Braemar; Queen Victoria expressed an affinity for Scotland, even professing herself to be a Jacobite. Added to the work of Sir Walter Scott, this was a major factor in promoting the adoption of Highland culture by Lowland Scots. Historian Michael Lynch comments that "the Scottishness of Balmoral helped to give the monarchy a truly British dimension for the first time". 

===Victoria and Albert at Balmoral===
Balmoral, c.18901900
Even before the completion of the new house, the pattern of the royal couple's life in the Highlands was soon established. Albert spent many days shooting deer and game, while Victoria took long walks of up to four hours daily. In 1849 the diarist Charles Greville described their life at Balmoral as like that of gentry rather than royalty. Millar, p.44 Victoria began a policy of commissioning artists to record Balmoral, its surroundings and its staff. Over the years, numerous painters were employed at Balmoral, including Edwin and Charles Landseer, Carl Haag, William Wyld, William Henry Fisk, and many others. Millar, passim The couple took great interest in their staff, and set up a lending library. During the 1850s, new plantations were established around the house, and exotic conifers were planted in the grounds. Prince Albert had an active role in these improvements, overseeing the design of parterres, the diversion the main road north of the river via a new bridge, and plans for farm buildings. These included a model dairy which he developed during 1861, the year of his death. It was completed by Victoria, who subsequently built several monuments to her husband on the estate. These included an obelisk, and a large statue of Albert by William Theed, inaugurated in 1867. Millar, p.102 

After Albert's death, Victoria spent increasing periods at Balmoral, staying up to four months a year during early summer and autumn. Few further changes were made to the grounds, with the exception of the monuments and cottages built during the remainder of the 19th century. It was during this period that Victoria began to depend on her servant John Brown, a local ghillie from Crathie who became one of her closest companions during her long mourning. Balmoral Castle was the birthplace of Victoria Eugenie of Spain, a granddaughter of Queen Victoria.

In September 1896, Victoria welcomed Emperor Nicholas II of Russia and Empress Alexandra to Balmoral. Four years later Victoria made her last visit, three months before her death on 22 January 1901.

===After Victoria===
Edward VII relaxing at Balmoral Castle, photographed by his wife, Alexandra
After Victoria's death, the royal family continued to use Balmoral during annual autumn visits. George V had substantial improvements done during the 1910s and 1920s, including formal gardens to the south of the castle. Since the 1950s, Prince Philip has also added herbaceous borders and a water garden. During the 1980s new staff buildings were built close to the castle. 

==Ownership==
Balmoral is a private property and, unlike the monarch's official residences, is not the property of the Crown. It was originally purchased by Prince Albert, rather than the Queen, meaning that no revenues from the estate go to Parliament or to the public purse as would be the case, in accord with the 1760 Civil List Act, for property owned outright by the monarch. Ownership of Balmoral, along with Sandringham House in Norfolk, was inherited by Edward VIII on his accession in 1936. However, when he abdicated later the same year, he retained ownership. A financial settlement was devised, under which Balmoral and Sandringham were purchased by Edward's brother and successor to the Crown, George VI. Presently the estate is not owned outright by the monarch but rather by Trustees under Deeds of Nomination and Appointment. 

==The estate==
North-west corner of Balmoral Castle

Balmoral Estate is within the Cairngorms National Park, and is partly within the Deeside and Lochnagar National Scenic Area. The 49000 acre estate contains a wide variety of landscapes, from the Dee Valley to open mountains. There are seven Munros (hills in Scotland over 3000 ft) in the estate, the highest being Lochnagar at 3789 ft. The mountain was the setting for a children's story, The Old Man of Lochnagar, told originally by Prince Charles to his younger brothers, Andrew and Edward, and published in 1980 with royalties accruing to The Prince's Trust. 

The areas of Lochnagar and Ballochbuie were designated in 1998 by the Secretary of State for Scotland as Special Protection Areas (SPA) under the European Union (EU) Birds Directive. Ballochbuie is also protected as a Special Area of Conservation by the EU Habitats Directive, as "one of the largest remaining continuous areas of native Caledonian Forest". In addition, there are four Sites of Special Scientific Interest on the estate. 

In 1931, the castle gardens were first opened to the public, and are now open daily between April and the end of July, after which the Queen arrives for her annual stay. The ballroom is the only room in the castle which can be viewed by the public. 

The Royal Family employs about 50 full-time and 50100 part-time staff to maintain the working estate. A malt whisky distillery located on the Balmoral Estate produces the Royal Lochnagar Single Malt whisky.

Other properties on the estate include Birkhall, formerly home to Queen Elizabeth, The Queen Mother, and used now by Prince Charles and the Duchess of Cornwall for their summer holidays. Craigowan Lodge is used regularly by the Queen's friends and family, and has also been used by the Queen while Balmoral Castle is being prepared. Six smaller properties on the estate are let as holiday cottages. 

===Craigowan Lodge===

Craigowan Lodge is a seven-bedroom stone house about a mile from the main castle in Balmoral. 

It is more rustic than the castle, and was often the home of Charles and Diana when they visited. Now it is usually a home for very important guests.

In the obituary of Michael Andreevich Romanoff, the highest-ranking member of the Russian imperial family at the time of his death in 2008, it was noted that his family spent most of World War II at Craigowan Lodge. 

The Lodge has been in the news periodically since 2005, because the Queen often spends the first few days of her summer holiday in the lodge. Each weekend in the summer the castle is a lucrative source of income from visiting tourists, and the Queen sometimes arrives at Balmoral before the tourist visiting season is over. 

==In popular culture==
The Queen was in residence at Balmoral at the time of the death of Diana, Princess of Wales in 1997. Her private discussions with Prime Minister Tony Blair were dramatised in Stephen Frears' film The Queen (2006). The 1997 film Mrs. Brown was also based on events at Balmoral, although in both films substitute locations were used: Blairquhan Castle in The Queen; and Duns Castle in Mrs Brown. 

==Banknotes==
Since 1987 an illustration of the castle has featured on the reverse side of 100 notes issued by the Royal Bank of Scotland. 

==See also==
*Crathie Kirk
*Castles in Scotland

==References==

===Bibliography===
* 

==External links==

*Balmoral Castle - Official site
*Royal Deeside - Official site
*Tom Weir visits Balmoral - video from ScotlandonTV



[[Breton language]]

Breton Laurie Bauer, 2007, The Linguistics Students Handbook, Edinburgh () is a Celtic language spoken in Brittany (; ), France. Breton is a Brittonic language brought from Great Britain to Armorica by migrating Britons during the Early Middle Ages; it is thus an Insular Celtic language and not closely related to the Gaulish language. Breton is most closely related to Cornish, as both are Southwestern Brittonic languages. Welsh and the extinct Cumbric are the more distantly-related Brittonic languages.

The other regional language of Brittany, Gallo, is a langue d'ol (a Romance language, thus ultimately descended from Latin, unlike the similarly-named ancient Celtic language Gaulish, also known as Gallic) and consequently very close to French, although not mutually intelligible.

Having declined from more than one million speakers around 1950 to about 200,000 (out of which only 35,000 use it on a daily basis http://www.ofis-bzh.org/fr/langue_bretonne/chiffres_cles/index.php ) in the first decade of the 21st century, of whom 61% are more than 60 years old, Breton is classified as "severely endangered" by the UNESCO Atlas of the World's Languages in Danger. However, the number of children attending bilingual classes has risen 33% between 2006 and 2012 to 14,709. Donnes cls sur breton, Ofis ar Brezhoneg 

==History and status==
The Brittonic community around the 6th century. The sea was a communication medium rather than a barrier
Celtic nations, with Brittany coloured in black at the bottom

Breton is spoken in Lower Brittany, roughly to the west of a line linking Plouha (west of Saint Brieuc) and La Roche-Bernard (east of Vannes). It comes from a Brittonic language community (see image) that once extended from Great Britain to Armorica (present-day Brittany) and which had even established a toehold in Galicia (in present-day Spain). Old Breton is attested from the 9th century. It was the language of the upper classes until the 12th century, after which it became the language of commoners in West Brittany (Breizh Izel: "Lower Brittany"). The nobility, followed by the bourgeoisie, adopted French. The written language of the Duchy of Brittany was Latin, switching to French in the 15th century. There exists a limited tradition of Breton literature. Some Old Breton vocabulary remains in the present day as philosophical and scientific terms in Modern Breton.

The French monarchy was not concerned with the minority languages of France spoken by the lower classes, and required the use of French for government business as part of its policy of national unity. During the French Revolution, the government introduced policies favouring French over the regional languages, which it pejoratively referred to as patois. The revolutionaries assumed that reactionary and monarchist forces preferred regional languages to try to keep the peasant masses under-informed. In 1794, Bertrand Barre submitted his "report on the patois" to the Committee of Public Safety in which he said that "federalism and superstition speak Breton". 

Since the 19th century, under the Third, Fourth and Fifth Republics, the government has attempted to stamp out minority languages in state schools, including Breton, in an effort to build a national culture. Teachers humiliated students for using their regional languages, and such practices prevailed until the late 1960s. ICBL information about Breton at breizh.net 

In the early 21st century, due to the political centralization of France, the influence of the media, and the increasing mobility of people, only about 200,000 people can speak Breton. This has dramatically declined from more than a million in 1950. The majority of today's speakers are more than 60 years old, and Breton is now classified as an endangered language. 

At the beginning of the 20th century, half of the population of Lower Brittany knew only Breton; the other half were bilingual. By 1950, there were only 100,000 monolingual Bretons, and a rapid decline has occurred, with likely no monolingual speakers left today. A statistical survey in 1997 found around 300,000 speakers in Breizh izel, of whom about 190,000 were aged 60 or over. Few 15- to 19-year-olds spoke Breton. Fach Broudic, Qui parle breton aujourd'hui? Qui le parlera demain? Brest: Brud Nevez, 1999 

==Revival efforts==
In 1925, Professor Roparz Hemon founded the Breton-language review Gwalarn. During its 19-year run, Gwalarn tried to raise the language to the level of a great international language. Its publication encouraged the creation of original literature in all genres, and proposed Breton translations of internationally-recognized foreign works. In 1946, Al Liamm replaced Gwalarn. Other Breton-language periodicals have been published, which established a fairly large body of literature for a minority language.

In 1977, Diwan schools were founded to teach Breton by immersion. They taught a few thousand young people from elementary school to high school. See the education section for more information.

The Asterix comic series has been translated into Breton. According to the comic, the Gaulish village where Asterix lives is in the Armorica peninsula, which is now Brittany. Some other popular comics have also been translated into Breton, including The Adventures of Tintin, Spirou, Titeuf, Hgar the Horrible, Peanuts and Yakari.

Some original media is created in Breton. Radio Kerne, broadcasting from Finistre, has exclusively Breton programming. Some movies (Lancelot du Lac, Shakespeare in Love, Marion du Faouet, Sezneg) and TV series (Columbo, Perry Mason) have also been translated and broadcast in Breton. Poets, linguists, and writers who have written in Breton, including Yann-Ber Kalloc'h, Roparz Hemon, Anjela Duval, Pr-Jakez Helias and Youenn Gwernig, are now known internationally.

Today, Breton is the only living Celtic language that is not recognized by the national government as an official or regional language. The French State refuses to change the second article of the Constitution (added in 1994), which establishes that "the language of the Republic is French". Although Breton was long the Celtic language with the highest number of speakers, it is now endangered. 

The first Breton dictionary, the Catholicon, was also the first French dictionary. Edited by Jehan Lagadec in 1464, it was a trilingual work containing Breton, French and Latin. Today bilingual dictionaries have been published for Breton and such languages as English, Dutch, German, Spanish and Welsh. A new generation is determined to gain international recognition for Breton. The monolingual dictionary, Geriadur Brezhoneg an Here (1995), defines Breton words in Breton. The first edition contained about 10,000 words, and the second edition of 2001 contains 20,000 words.

In the early 21st century, the Ofis ar Brezhoneg ("Office of the Breton language") began a campaign to encourage daily use of Breton in the region by both businesses and local communes. Efforts include installing bilingual signs and posters for regional events.

==Geographic distribution and dialects==
Regional statistics of Breton speakers, in 2004.
Dialects of Breton
Breton is spoken mainly in Western Brittany, but also in a more dispersed way in Eastern Brittany (where Gallo is spoken alongside Breton and French), and in areas around the world that have Breton immigrants.

The four traditional dialects of Breton correspond to medieval bishoprics rather than to linguistic divisions. They are leoneg (lonard, of the county of Lon), tregerieg (trgorrois, of Trgor), kerneveg (cornouaillais, of Cornouaille), and gwenedeg (vannetais, of Vannes). Gurandais was spoken up to the beginning of the 20th century in the region of Gurande and Batz-sur-Mer. There are no clear boundaries between the dialects because they form a dialect continuum, varying only slightly from one village to the next. Compared to the other dialects, Gwenedeg is somewhat more distinct.

==Official status==

Ofis Publik ar Brezhoneg, the Breton language agency, was set up in 1999 by the Brittany region to promote and develop the use of Breton

===Nation===
As noted, only French is an official language of France. Supporters of Breton and other minority languages continue to argue for their recognition, teaching in public schools and place in public life. 

====Constitution====
In July 2008, the legislature amended the French Constitution, adding article 75-1: les langues rgionales appartiennent au patrimoine de la France (the regional languages belong to the heritage of France). This acknowledged the significance of the languages. The government has not provided official recognition, rights or funds to support use of these languages.

Bilingual sign in Vannes (Gwened)

===Region===
Regional and departmental authorities use Breton to a very limited extent, for example in signage. Some bilingual signage has also been installed, such as street name signs in Breton towns. One station of the Rennes metro system has signs in both French and Breton.

Under French law (the Toubon Law), it is illegal for commercial signage to be in Breton alone. Signs must be bilingual or else in French. Since commercial signage usually has limited physical space, most businesses have signs only in French.

Ofis Publik ar Brezhoneg, the Breton language agency, was set up in 1999 by the Brittany region to promote and develop the daily use of Breton. It created the Ya d'ar brezhoneg campaign, to encourage enterprises, organisations and communes to promote the use of Breton, for example by installing bilingual signage or translating their websites into Breton.

==Education==
Sign in French and Breton in Rennes, outside a school with bilingual classes

In the late 20th century, the French government considered incorporating the independent Breton-language immersion schools (called Diwan) into the state education system. This action was blocked by the French Constitutional Council based on the 1994 amendment to the Constitution that establishes French as the language of the Republic. Therefore, no other language may be used as a language of instruction in state schools. The Toubon Law implemented the amendment, asserting that French is the language of public education.

The Diwan schools were founded in Brittany in 1977 to teach Breton by immersion. They taught a few thousand young people from elementary school to high school. They have gained fame owing to their high level of results in school exams. Diwan FAQ, #6. Breton-language schools do not receive funding from the national government, though the Brittany Region may fund them.

Another teaching method is a bilingual approach by Div Yezh ("Two Languages") in the State schools, created in 1979. Dihun ("Awakening") was created in 1990 for bilingual education in the Catholic schools.

===Statistics===
In 2012, 14,709 Donnes cls sur breton, Ofis ar Brezhoneg. pupils (about 1.63% of all pupils in Brittany) attended Diwan, Div Yezh and Dihun schools. Their number has increased yearly. Jean-Yves Le Drian, the president of the Regional Council, had a goal of 20,000 students by 2010, but is encouraged by their progress. Interview with Jean-Yves Le Drian, the president of the Region Council. 

In 2007, some 4,500 to 5,000 adults followed a Breton-language course (such as evening course, correspondence, or other.) The family transmission of Breton in 1999 is estimated to be 3%. 

Growth of the percentage of pupils in bilingual education.

 Year Number Percentage of all pupils in Brittany 
 2005 10,397 1.24% 
 2006 11,092 1.30% 
 2007 11,732 1.38% 
 2008 12,333  1.4% 
 2009 13,077 1.45% 
 2010 13,493 1.48% 
 2011 14,174 1.55% 
 2012 14,709 1.63% 
 2013 15,338 1.70% 

Percentage of pupils in bilingual education per department.

 Department Primary education (2008) Ofis ar Brezhoneg: Enseignement bilingue 2009 (anne scolaire 2008-2009) 
 Finistre 4.71% 
 Morbihan 4.3% 
 Ctes-d'Armor 2.86% 
 Ille-et-Vilaine 0.71% 
 Loire-Atlantique 0.29% 

===Municipalities===

The ten communes with the highest percentage of pupils in bilingual primary education, listed with their total population.

 Commune Percentage (2008) Population (2007) Populations lgales 2007 
 Saint-Rivoal (Finistre) 100% 177 
 Plounvez-Modec (Ctes-d'Armor) 61.07% 1 461 
 Bulat-Pestivien (Ctes-d'Armor) 46% 493 
 Commana (Finistre) 45.1% 1 061 
 Cavan (Ctes-d'Armor) 38.43% 1 425 
 Gugon (Morbihan) 35.21% 2 432 
 Rostrenen (Ctes-d'Armor) 34.5% 3 655 
 Lannilis (Finistre) 33.17% 5 121 
 Pabu (Ctes-d'Armor) 32.46% 2 923 
 Melrand (Morbihan) 31.4% 1 558 

The ten communes of historic Brittany These figures include some cities in the department of Loire-Atlantique, which today is technically included in Pays de la Loire. See for example Brittany (administrative region). with the highest total population, listed with their percentages of pupils in bilingual primary education.

 Commune Percentage (2008) Population (2007) 
 Nantes (Loire-Atlantique) 1.4% 290 943 
 Rennes (Ille-et-Vilaine) 2.87% 213 096 
 Brest (Finistre) 1.94% 146 519 
 Saint-Nazaire (Loire-Atlantique) 0.41% 71 046 
 Quimper (Finistre) 3.17% 67 255 
 Lorient (Morbihan) 2.71% 59 805 
 Vannes (Morbihan) 7.71% 55 383 
 Saint-Malo (Ille-et-Vilaine) 0.55% 50 206 
 Saint-Brieuc (Ctes-d'Armor) 3.98% 48 178 
 Saint-Herblain (Loire-Atlantique) ? 44 364 

===Other forms of education===
In addition to bilingual education (including Breton-medium education), the region has introduced Breton language in the primary education, primarily in the department of Finistre. These "initiation" sessions are generally 1 to 3 hours per week, and consist of songs and games.

Schools in secondary education (collges and lyces) offer some courses of Breton (given as either foreign language or option, instead of e.g. German or Spanish). In 2010, nearly 5,000 students in Brittany were reported to be taking this option. L'option de breton 

==Phonology==

===Vowels===
Vowels in Breton may be short or long (see Vowel length). All unstressed vowels are short; stressed vowels can be short or long (vowel lengths are not noted in usual orthographies as they are implicit in the phonology of particular dialects, and not all dialects pronounce stressed vowels as long).

All vowels can also be nasalized, which is noted by appending an 'n' letter after the base vowel, or by adding a combining tilde above the vowel, or more commonly by non-ambiguously appending an '' letter after the base vowel (this depends on the orthographic variant).

 Front Back 
 unrounded rounded unrounded rounded 
 Close i u ou 
 Close-mid e eu o 
 Open-mid e eu o 
 Open a a 

Diphthongs are .

===Consonants===

 Bilabial Labio-dental Alveolar Post-alveolar Palatal Velar Uvular Glottal 
 plain lab. plain lab. 
 Nasal stop m n gn 
 Plosive voiced b d g gw, gou 
 voiceless p t k kw 
 Fricative voiced v z, zh j 
 voiceless f s ch ch h, zh 
 Trill r 
 Approximant lateral l lh 
 central y u w 

==Grammar==

===Verbal aspect===
As in English, and the other Celtic languages a variety of verbal constructions are available to express grammatical aspect, for example showing a distinction between progressive and habitual actions:

 Breton English Irish Welsh Cornish 
 Me zo o komz gant ma amezeg \"I am talking with my neighbour\" \"Tim ag labhairt le mo chomharsana\" \"Dw i'n siarad  fy nghymydog\" \"Yth esov ow kewsel orth ow hentrevek\" 
 Me a gomz gant ma amezeg mintin \"I talk with my neighbour morning\" \"Labhram le mo chomharsana maidin\" \"Siaradaf  fy nghymydog bore\" \"My a gows orth ow hentrevek myttin\" 

==="Conjugated" prepositions===
As in other modern Celtic languages, Breton pronouns are fused into preceding prepositions to produce a sort of "conjugated" preposition. Below are some examples in Breton, Cornish, Welsh, and Irish.

 Breton Cornish Welsh Irish Scottish Gaelic Manx English 
 ul levr zo ganina book is with-me yma lyver genev mae llyfr gennyf t leabhar agam tha leabhar agam ta lioar aym I have a book 
 un died zo ganita drink is with-you yma diwes genes mae diod gennyt t deoch agat tha deoch agad ta jough ayd you have a drink 
 un urzhiataer zo gantaa computer is with-him yma jynn-amontya ganso mae cyfrifiadur ganddo t romhaire aige tha coimpiutair aige ta co-earrooder echey he has a computer 
 ur bugel zo gantia child is with-her yma flogh gensi mae plentyn ganddi t leanbh aici tha leanabh aice ta lhiannoo eck she has a child 
 ur c'harr zo ganimp (or ganeomp)a car is with-us yma karr genen mae car gennym t gluaisten/carr againn tha cr againn ta gleashtan/carr ain we have a car 
 un ti zo ganeoc'ha house is with-you yma chi genowgh mae t gennych t teach agaibh tha taigh agaibh ta thie eu you have a house 
 arc'hant zo ganto (or gante)money is with-them yma mona gansa mae arian ganddynt t airgead acu tha airgead aca ta argid oc they have money 

Note that in the examples above the Goidelic languages (Irish, Scottish Gaelic and Manx) use the preposition meaning "at" to show possession while the Brittonic languages use "with". The Goidelic languages, however, do use the preposition "with" to express "belong to" (Irish "is liom an leabhar", Scottish "is leam an leabhar", Manx "she lhiam yn lioar" The book belongs to me).

Note also that the above examples of Welsh are the formal written language. The order and preposition may differ slightly in colloquial Welsh (Formal "mae car gennym", North Wales "mae gynnon ni gar", South Wales "mae car gyda ni"). 

===Initial consonant mutations===

Breton has four initial consonant mutations: though modern Breton lost the nasal mutation of Welsh, it also has a 'hard' mutation, in which voiced stops become voiceless, and a 'mixed' mutation, which is a mixture of hard and soft mutations.

 Initial consonant mutations in Breton 
 Unmutated consonant Mutations Unmutated consonant Mutations 
 Hard Mixed Soft Aspirant Hard Mixed Soft Aspirant 
 m v v 
 b p v v d t t z 
 p b f t d z 
 g k ch ch gw kw w w 
 k g ch 

==Vocabulary==

;Some words that passed into French and in English
The English words dolmen and menhir have been borrowed from French, which supposedly took them from Breton. However, this is uncertain: for instance, menhir is peulvan or maen hir ("long stone"), maen sav ("straight stone") (two words: noun + adjective) in Breton. Dolmen is a misconstructed word (it should be taol-vaen). Some studies state that these words were borrowed from Cornish. Maen hir can be directly translated from Welsh as "long stone" (which is exactly what a menhir or maen hir is).

To jabber in a foreign language: French baragouiner from bara 'bread' and gwin 'wine'.

Sea gull (big one): French goland from gwelan same root as gull (Welsh gwylan).

==Orthography==
The first Breton texts, contained in the Leyde manuscript, were written at the end of the 8th century: fifty years prior to the Strasbourg Oaths, considered to be the earliest example of French. After centuries of orthography calqued on the French model, in the 1830s Jean-Franois Le Gonidec created a modern phonetic system for the language.

During the early years of the 20th century, a group of writers known as Emglev ar Skrivanerien elaborated and reformed Le Gonidec's system. They made it more suitable as a super-dialectal representation of the dialects of Cornouaille, Leon and Trgor (known as from Kernev, Leon and Treger in Breton). This KLT orthography was established in 1911. At the same time writers of the more divergent Vannetais dialect developed a phonetic system also based on that of Le Gonidec.

Following proposals made during the 1920s, the KLT and Vannetais orthographies were merged in 1941 to create an orthographic system to represent all four dialects. This ("wholly unified") orthography was significant for the inclusion of the zh digraph, which represents a in Vannetais and corresponds to a in the KLT dialects.

In 1955 Franois Falc'hun and the group Emgleo Breiz proposed a new orthography. It was designed to use a set of graphemes closer to the conventions of French. This Orthographie Universitaire ("University Orthography", known in Breton as Skolveurieg) was given official recognition by the French authorities as the "official orthography of Breton in French education." It was opposed in the region and today is used only by the magazine Brud Nevez and the publishing house Emglo Breiz.

Between 1971 and 1974, a new standard orthography was devised  the etrerannyezhel or interdialectale. This system is based on the derivation of the words.

Today the majority of writers continue to use the Peurunvan orthography, and it is the version taught in most Breton-language schools.

===Alphabet===
Breton is written in the Latin script. Peurunvan, the most commonly used orthography, consists of the following letters:

: a, b, ch, c'h, d, e, f, g, h, i, j, k, l, m, n, o, p, r, s, t, u, v, w, y, z

The circumflex, grave accent, trema and tilde appear on some letters. These diacritics are used in the following way:

: , , , , , , , 

See for an introduction to the Breton alphabet and pronunciation.

===Differences between Skolveurieg and Peurunvan===
Both orthographies use the above alphabet, although  is used only in Skolveurieg.

Differences between the two systems are particularly noticeable in word endings. In Peurunvan, final obstruents, which are devoiced in absolute final position and voiced in sandhi before voiced sounds, are represented by a grapheme that indicates a voiceless sound. In OU they are written as voiced but represented as voiceless before suffixes: braz (big), brasoc'h (bigger).

In addition, Peurunvan maintains the KLT convention, which distinguishes noun/adjective pairs by nouns written with a final voiced consonant and adjectives with a voiceless one. No distinction is made in pronunciation, e.g. brezhoneg Breton language vs. brezhonek Breton (adj).

Some examples of words in the different orthographies:

 Etrerannyezhel (1975) Peurunvan (1941) Skolveurieg (1956) 
 glaw glav glao 
 piw piv piou 
 levr levr leor 
 ewid evit evid 
 gant gant gand 
 anezhi anezhi anezi 
 ouzhpenn ouzhpenn ouspenn 
 brawa brava brava 
 pelec'h pelec'h peleh 

===Pronunciation of the Breton alphabet===

 Letter Pronunciation (IPA) 
 A a a,  
  1 
 ae TGw, Kae/aj, La 
 ao T, KLGwao/aw 
 aou /w 
 B b b, p3 
 Ch ch , 4 
 Ch ch h2, KTx, L/20, Gwh, KLTGwx3 
 chw LTxw, Kxw/f, Gwhw (Gwh)6 
 D d d, t3 
 E e , , e, e5, Gw23 
  18 
 ei i/j 
 eeu e/ew 
 eo KLTe, Gwe 
 eu , , , 5 
 e y, e(v)y 
 eue e/e 
 F f f, v4 
 f v/ 
 G g , k3 (Gw, c)6 7 
 gn 8 
 gw w28 (Gw)6 
 H h h9 
 I i i, i, j10 
 ilh (i)11 
 J j , 3 
 K k k (Gwc)6 7 
 L l l24, 12 
 M m m 
 N n n24, 13 
  (not pronounced, causes nasalization of a preceding vowel) 
 v v (with a nasalization of a preceding vowel) 
 O o , , o, o5 25 
 oa KLTa/wa, /w, Gw/w, e/we, La, oa 
 a oa19 
 oe ()/w() 
 ou u, u, w (Gw)6 14 
 o Lu, To, Gw, Gwow, Gwaw, Gwa, Gw15 
 o oy, oy 
 P p p 
 R r //r//22 24, /r//12 
 S s s, z 
 sh KLTs, Gwh 
 sk sk (Gwsc/c)6 
 st KLTst, Gwt 
 T t t 
 U u y, y, 29 
 ui i, i 
 ur, un, ul Lr/n/l, T/n/l, K/n/l, Gwy/yn/yl29 
 V v v16 
 vh f 
 W w w6 26 
 Y y j 
 Z z z17 27, h21 
 zh KLTz17 27, Gwh17 

Notes:
:1 Vocative particle:  Vreizh O Brittany!
:2 Word-initially.
:3 Word-finally.
:4 Non written lenition of ch, ch, f, s and spirantization of p > f .
:5 Unstressed vowels e, eu, o are pronounced ,  in Leoneg but , o in the other dialects. The pronunciation ,  appears mainly in front of clusters lch, rch (less often also before ch), before semivowels w, before other clusters beginning with r, l and before rr. Stressed long e, eu, o are realized as , o.
:6 In Gwenedeg velars or labialized velars are palatalized when followed by e and i: k, g, kw/kou, chw/chou, gw/gou, w/ou, sk to , c, h, , , sc/c. Instead of  also  may appear.
:7 In Gwenedeg word-final g and k is palatalized to after preceding i.
:8 But before a vowel other than i the digraph ni is written instead of gn, e.g. blenia to drive, radical blegn, 1PS preterite blegnis, 3PS preterite blenias.
:9 But mute in words such as ha(g), he(ch), ho(ch), holl, hon/hor/hol. Silent in Gwenedeg and Leoneg.
:10 I is realized as when it precedes or follows a vowel (or when between vowels), but in words such as lien, liorzh, rakdiazeza the letter i is pronounced as (in orthography  may be used:len, lorzh, rakdazeza).
:11 Group ilh is pronounced when it follows an vowel, following a consonant the group is pronounced . But before a vowel other than i li is written instead of ilh, e.g. heulia to follow, radical heuilh, 1PS preterite heulhis, 3PS preterite heulias. In some regions instead of may appear pronunciation .
:12 Word-finally following a cluster of unvoiced consonants.
:13 In front of k, g.
:14 The digraph ou is realized same as the letter w when preceded or followed by a vowel (or when between vowels), but in words such as Doue, douar, gouarn the digraph ou is pronounced .
:15 The digraph o marks plural ending. Its pronunciation varies throughout Brittany: o, , ow, aw, a,  rating geographically from Northwest Leon to Southeast Gwened.
:16 The letter v is usually pronounced , but word-finally (except word-final v) is prinunced usually as or in KLT, as in Gwenedeg and as in Golo. The pronunciation is retained word-finally in verbs. In words bliv, Gwiskriv, gwiv, liv, piv, riv are v is pronounced in KLT, in Gwenedeg and in Golo. Word-finally following r, l, n, z it is pronounced .
:17 But mute in words such as gouez, bloaz, goaz, ruzia, kleiz, rakdazeza, beza, Roazhon, dezha, kouezha, z, az, ez, daz, gwirionez, enep(g)wirionez, moneiz, falsvoneiz, karantez, kengarantez, nevez, nevezchanet, nadozio, abardaez, ruzia, gwez, bemdez, kriz, bleiz, morvleiz, dezha/dezhi . Z is generally mute in Kerneweg, Tregerieg and Gwenedeg, but in Leoneg z(h) is always pronounced.
:18 Used to distinguish words str river, hr heir, kr town (written also kaer) from ster sense, her bold, ker dear.
:19 Used to distinguish trad circuit/tour from troad foot.
:20 In northern dialects (mainly in Leoneg), there is a tendency to voice ch between vowels. Pronunciation appears also in forms of lenition of g, ch and mixed mutation of g.
:21 Spirantization of t > z .
:22 Pronunciation of r varies in Brittany, nowadays uvular (or ) is a standard; in Leoneg r is pronounced , in Tregerieg or .
:23 In Gwenedeg unstressed e often .
:24 Lenited varieties of r, l, n may appear word-initially in case of soft mutation.
:25 In Leoneg in front of a nasal.
:26 In Leoneg w in front of e, i .
:27 In Leoneg z(h) in front of i .
:28 In Leoneg gwr .
:28 Forms of the indefinite article.
:29 Before a vowel.

==Examples==

===Lord's Prayer===

:Hon Tad,
:c'hwi hag a zo en Nev,
:ra vo santelaet hoc'h ano.
:Ra zeuio ho Rouantelezh.
:Ra vo graet ho youl war an douar evel en nev.
:Roit dimp hizio bara hor bevas.
:Distaolit dimp hon dleo
:evel m' hor bo ivez distaolet d' hon dleourion.
:Ha n' hon lezit ket da vont gant an temptadur,
:met hon dieubit eus an Droug.

===Words and phrases in Breton===

Bilingual signage in Quimper/Kemper. Note the use of the word ti in the Breton for police station and tourist office, plus da bep lec'h for all directions.

Visitors to Brittany may encounter words and phrases (especially on signs and posters) such as the following:

 Breton English 
 deuet mat welcome 
 deuet mat oc'h you're welcome 
 Breizh Brittany 
 brezhoneg Breton (language) 
 ti, \"ty\" house 
 ti-kr town hall 
 kreiz-kr town centre 
 da bep lec'h all directions 
 skol school 
 skol-veur university 
 bagad pipe band (nearly) 
 fest-noz lit. \"night fte\", a fest deiz or \"day fte\" also exists 
 kenavo goodbye 
 krampouezh pancakes (a pancake = ur grampouezhenn) 
 sistr cider 
 chouchenn Breton mead 
 yec'hed mat Cheers! 
 war vor atav always at sea 
 kouign amann rich butter and sugar cake 

==See also==

* Armoricani
* Gaelic revival Irish language revival
* Julian Maunoir, 17th century Breton language orthographer
* List of Celtic-language media

==References==

==External links==

* Ofis Publik ar Brezhoneg official website.
* , the public Breton TV channel.
* : an essay about the situation of the Breton language.
* 
* : news in Breton.
* : Brittany information, articles about Breton.
* .
* .

===Dictionaries===
* English online dictionary and grammar for Breton
* A multilingual dictionary containing many Breton words alongside those of other languages

===Learning===
* Breton site including online lessons
* Breton site with learners' forum and lessons (mostly in French with some English)
* Jouitteau, M. Grammaire du breton, (extensive Breton grammar in French, with glossed examples and typological comparisons), IKER, CNRS, .

 



[[Broch]]

Dun Carloway broch, Lewis, Scotland
A broch is an Iron Age drystone hollow-walled structure of a type found only in Scotland. Brochs include some of the most sophisticated examples of drystone architecture ever created, and belong to the classification "complex Atlantic Roundhouse" devised by Scottish archaeologists in the 1980s. Their origin is a matter of some controversy. The theory that they were defensive military structures (an Iron Age equivalent to the castles and tower houses of medieval Scotland) is not accepted by many modern archaeologists (see the 'general references' below), while the alternative notion that they were farmhouses is dismissed by some others. Although most stand alone in the landscape, some examples exist of brochs surrounded by clusters of smaller dwellings.

==Origin and definition==
The word broch is derived from Lowland Scots 'brough', meaning (among other things) fort. In the mid-19th century Scottish antiquaries called brochs 'burgs', after Old Norse borg, with the same meaning. Place names in Scandinavian Scotland such as Burgawater and Burgan show that Old Norse borg is the older word used for these structures in the north. Brochs are often referred to as 'duns' in the west. Antiquaries began to use the spelling 'broch' in the 1870s.

A precise definition for the word has proved elusive. Brochs are the most spectacular of a complex class of roundhouse buildings found throughout Atlantic Scotland. The Shetland Amenity Trust lists about 120 sites in Shetland as candidate brochs, while the Royal Commission on the Ancient and Historical Monuments of Scotland (RCAHMS) identifies a total of 571 candidate broch sites throughout the country. Researcher Euan MacKie has proposed a much smaller total for Scotland of 104. Armit (2003) p. 16. 

Broch of Mousa
The origin of brochs is a subject of continuing research. Sixty years ago most archaeologists believed that brochs, usually regarded as the 'castles' of Iron Age chieftains, were built by immigrants who had been pushed northward after being displaced first by the intrusions of Belgic tribes into what is now southeast England at the end of the second century BC and later by the Roman invasion of southern Britain beginning in AD 43. Yet there is now little doubt that the hollow-walled broch tower was purely an invention from what is now Scotland; even the kinds of pottery found inside them that most resembled south British styles were local hybrid forms. The first of the modern review articles on the subject (MacKie 1965) MacKie, E. W. (1965) 'The origin and development of the broch and wheelhouse building cultures of the Scottish Iron Age'. Proceedings of the Prehistoric Society 31, pages 93-146. did not, as is commonly believed, propose that brochs were built by immigrants, but rather that a hybrid culture formed from the blending of a small number of immigrants with the native population of the Hebrides produced them in the first century BC, basing them on earlier, simpler, promontory forts. This view contrasted, for example, with that of Sir Lindsay Scott, who argued, Scott, Sir Lindsay (1947), The problem of the brochs, Proceedings of the Prehistoric Society 13, pages 1-36. following Childe (1935), Childe, V. G. (1935) The Prehistory of Scotland. London. for a wholesale migration into Atlantic Scotland of people from southwest England.

MacKie's theory has fallen from favour too, mainly because starting in the 1970s there was a general move in archaeology away from 'diffusionist' explanations towards those pointing to exclusively indigenous development. Meanwhile, the increasing number  albeit still pitifully few  of radiocarbon dates for the primary use of brochs (as opposed to their later, secondary use) still suggests that most of the towers were built in the 1st centuries BC and AD. Parker Pearson, M. & Sharples, N. et al. (1999) Between land and sea: excavations at Dun Vulan, South Uist. Sheffield. A few may be earlier, notably the one proposed for Old Scatness Broch in Shetland, where a sheep bone dating to 390200 BC has been reported. Dockrill, S. J., Outram, Z. and Batt, C. M. (2006) Time and place: a new chronology for the origin of the broch based on the scientific dating programme at the Old Scatness Broch, Shetland, PSAS, v. 136, p. 89-110, ISSN 0081-1564 The other broch claimed to be substantially older than the 1st century BC is Crosskirk in Caithness, but a recent review of the evidence suggests that it cannot plausibly be assigned a date earlier than the 1st centuries BC/AD MacKie, E. W. (2007) The Roundhouses, Brochs and Wheelhouses of Atlantic Scotland c. 700 BC - AD 500: architecture and material culture. Part 2 The Mainland and the Western Islands. British Archaeological Reports British Series. Oxford. For the C14 dates for the Shetland sites see Shetland Amenity Trust Retrieved 14 August 2007. 

==Distribution==
Global overview of the distribution of brochs.
The distribution of brochs is centred on northern Scotland. Caithness, Sutherland and the Northern Isles have the densest concentrations, but there are also a great many examples in the west of Scotland and the Hebrides.

Although mainly concentrated in the northern Highlands and the Islands, a few examples occur in the Borders (for example Edin's Hall Broch and Bow Castle Broch), on the west coast of Dumfries and Galloway and near Stirling. In a c.1560 sketch there appears to be a broch by the river next to Annan Castle in Dumfries and Galloway. http://archive.org/stream/seventhreportwit00scotuoft#page/n39/mode/1up This small group of southern brochs has never been satisfactorily explained.

==Purposes==
The remains of Kilphedir broch, Sutherland, are surrounded by massive earthworks. The original interpretation of brochs, favoured by nineteenth century antiquarians, was that they were defensive structures, places of refuge for the community and their livestock. They were sometimes regarded as the work of Danes or Picts.

From the 1930s to the 1960s, archaeologists like V. Gordon Childe and later John Hamilton Hamilton, J.R.C. (1968) Excavations at Clickhimin, Shetland. Edinburgh. regarded them as castles where local landowners held sway over a subject population.

The castle theory fell from favour among Scottish archaeologists in the 1980s, due to a lack of supporting archaeological evidence. These archaeologists suggested that defensibility was never a major concern in the siting of a broch, and argued that they may have been the "stately homes" of their time, objects of prestige and very visible demonstrations of superiority for important families (Armit 2003). Once again, however, there is a lack of archaeological proof for this reconstruction, and the sheer number of brochs, sometimes in places with a lack of good land, makes it problematic.

Brochs' close groupings and profusion in many areas may indeed suggest that they had a primarily defensive or even offensive function. Some of them were sited beside precipitous cliffs and were protected by large ramparts, artificial or natural: a good example is at Burland near Gulberwick in Shetland, on a clifftop and cut off from the mainland by huge ditches. Often they are at key strategic points. In Shetland they sometimes cluster on each side of narrow stretches of water: the broch of Mousa, for instance, is directly opposite another at Burraland in Sandwick. In Orkney there are more than a dozen on the facing shores of Eynhallow Sound, and many at the exits and entrances of the great harbour of Scapa Flow. In Sutherland quite a few are placed along the sides and at the mouths of deep valleys. Writing in 1956 John Stewart suggested that brochs were forts put up by a military society to scan and protect the countryside and seas. Stewart, J. (1956) An Outline of Shetland Archaeology, Lerwick : Shetland Times Ltd. 

Finally, some archaeologists consider broch sites individually, doubting that there ever was a single common purpose for which every broch was constructed. There are differences between the various areas in which brochs are found, with regard to position, dimensions and likely status. For example, the broch 'villages' which occur at a few places in Orkney have no parallel in the Western Isles.

==Structures==
Brochs vary from 5 to 15 metres (1650 ft) in internal diameter, with 3 metre (10 ft) thick walls. On average, the walls only survive to a few metres. There are five extant examples of towers with significantly higher walls: Dun Carloway on Lewis, Dun Telve and Dun Troddan in Glenelg, Mousa in Shetland and Dun Dornaigil in Sutherland, all of whose walls exceed 6.5 m (21 ft) in height. Armit (2003) p. 55. Mousa's walls are the best preserved and are still 13 m tall; it is not clear how many brochs originally stood this high. A frequent characteristic is that the walls are galleried: with an open space between, the outer and inner wall skins are separate but tied together with linking stone slabs; these linking slabs may in some cases have served as steps to higher floors. It is normal for there to be a cell breaking off from the passage beside the door; this is known as the guard cell. It has been found in some Shetland brochs that guard cells in entrance passageways are close to large door-check stones. Though there was much argument in the past, it is now generally accepted that brochs were roofed, probably with a conical timber framed roof covered with a locally sourced thatch. The evidence for this assertion is still fairly scanty, though excavations at Dun Bharabhat, Lewis, have supported it. The main difficulty with this interpretation continues to be the potential source of structural timber, though bog and driftwood may have been plentiful sources.

The remains of Feranch broch, Sutherland
On the islands of Orkney and Shetland there are very few cells at ground floor. Most brochs have scarcements (ledges) which would have allowed the construction of a very sturdy wooden first floor (first spotted by the antiquary George Low in Shetland in 1774), and excavations at Loch na Berie on the Isle of Lewis show signs of a further, second floor (e.g. stairs on the first floor, which head upwards). Some brochs such as Dun Dornaigil and Culswick in Shetland have unusual triangular lintels above the entrance door. "Dun Dornaigil" The Megalithic Portal. Retrieved 11 May 2008. "Culswick" RockStanza. Retrieved 11 May 2008. 

As in the case of Old Scatness in Shetland (near Jarlshof and Burroughston on Shapinsay, brochs were sometimes located close to arable land and a source of water (some have wells or natural springs rising within their central space). Hogan, C. Michael (7 October 2007) Burroughston Broch The Megalithic Portal. Retrieved 11 May 2008. Sometimes, on the other hand, they were sited in wilderness areas (e.g. Levenwick and Culswick in Shetland, Castle Cole in Sutherland). Brochs are often built beside the sea (Carn Liath, Sutherland); sometimes they are on islands in lochs (e.g. Clickimin in Shetland).

About 20 Orcadian broch sites include small settlements of stone buildings surrounding the main tower. Examples include Howe, near Stromness, Gurness Broch in the north west of Mainland, Orkney, Midhowe on Rousay and Lingro near Kirkwall (destroyed in the 1980s). There are "broch village" sites in Caithness, but elsewhere they are unknown. Armit (2003) p. 95-106. 

Most brochs are unexcavated. Armit (2003) p. 51 notes that of 140 Atlantic roundhouses in the Outer Hebrides only 14 have been "at least partially excavated". Many of those that have been properly examined show that they continued in use for many centuries, although the interiors were often modified and changed, and they underwent many phases of habitation and abandonment. The end of the broch period par excellence seems to have come around AD 200-300.
Dun Telve broch, Glenelg

==Heritage status==
Crucible of Iron Age Shetland|Mousa, Old Scatness and Jarlshof: The Crucible of Iron Age Shetland] is a combination of three broch sites in Shetland that are on the United Kingdom "Tentative List" of possible nominations for the UNESCO World Heritage Programme list of sites of outstanding cultural or natural importance to the common heritage of humankind. This list, published in July 2010, includes sites that may be nominated for inscription over the next 510 years. 

==See also==
* Nuraghe
* Oldest buildings in Scotland
* Talaiot
* Irish round tower
* Fortified tower

==References and footnotes==

;General references
* Armit, I. (1991) The Atlantic Scottish Iron Age: five levels of chronology, Proc. Soc. Antiq. Scot. v. 121, p. 181-214, ISSN 0081-1564
* Armit, I. (1996) The Archaeology of Skye and the Western Isles, Edinburgh University Press, ISBN 0-7486-0640-8
* Armit, I. (2003) Towers in the North: The Brochs of Scotland, Stroud : Tempus, ISBN 0-7524-1932-3
* Ballin Smith, B. and Banks, I. (eds) (2002) In the Shadow of the Brochs, the Iron Age in Scotland, Stroud : Tempus, ISBN 0-7524-2517-X
* Fojut, N. (1982) Towards a Geography of Shetland Brochs, Glasgow Archaeological Journal, v. 9, p. 38-59, ISSN 0305-8980
* Harding, D.W. (2000) The Hebridean Iron Age: Twenty Years Research, University of Edinburgh Department of Archaeology, Occasional Paper No. 20, ISSN: 0144-3313
* Harding, D.W. (2004) The Iron Age in Northern Britain, London : Routledge, ISBN 0-415-30150-5
* Hingley, R (1992) Society in Scotland from 700 BC to 200 AD, Proc. Soc. Antiq. Scot. v. 122, p. 7-53, ISSN 0081-1564.
;Specific references and notes
 

==Further reading==
*Armit, Ian (2002), Towers in the North: The Brochs of Scotland. The History Press. ISBN 0752419323
* MacKie, E W 1992 The Iron Age semibrochs of Atlantic Scotland: a case study in the problems of deductive reasoning. Archaeol Journ 149 (1991), 149-81.
* MacKie, E W 1995a Gurness and Midhowe brochs in Orkney: some problems of misinterpretation. Archaeol Journ 151 (1994), 98-157.
* MacKie, E W 1995b The early Celts in Scotland. Miranda Green (ed) The Celtic World. Routledge, London: 654-70.
* MacKie, E W 1997 Dun Mor Vaul re-visited, J.N.G. Ritchie (ed) The Archaeology of Argyll. Edinburgh: 141-80.
* MacKie, E W 1998 Continuity over three thousand years of northern prehistory: the tel at Howe, Orkney. Antiq Journ 78, 1-42.
* MacKie, E W 2000 The Scottish Atlantic Iron Age: indigenous and isolated or part of a wider European world? 99-116 in Jon C Henderson (ed) The Prehistory and Early History of Atlantic Europe. BAR International Series 861: Oxford.
* MacKie, E W 2002a Excavations at Dun Ardtreck, Skye, in 1964 and 1965. Proc Soc Antiq Scot 131 (2000), 301-411.
* MacKie, E W 2002b The Roundhouses, Brochs and Wheelhouses of Atlantic Scotland c. 700 BC - AD 500: architecture and material culture. Part 1 The Orkney and Shetland Isles. British Archaeological Reports British Series 342. Oxford.
* MacKie, E. W. 2005 119. Scottish brochs at the start of the new millennium, 11-31 in Turner, Val E, Nicholson, Rebecca A, Dockrill, S J & Bond, Julie M (eds.) Tall stories? Two millennia of brochs. Lerwick.
*Ritchie, J N G (1998), Brochs of Scotland. Shire Publications. ISBN 0747803897
* Hunter, Mollie, The Stronghold, an historical novel about the building of the first broch.

==External links==

* "Towers of stonethe brochs of Scotland", from The Scotsman, 27 February 2006.
* Pretanic World - Chart of Neolithic, Bronze Age and Celtic Stone Structures
* Glenelg Brochs
* Shetlopedia: Brochs of Shetland

 



[[Billy Crystal]]

William Edward "Billy" Crystal On page 17 of his book 700 Sundays, Crystal displays his birth announcement, which gives his first two names as "William Edward", not "William Jacob" (born March 14, 1948) Note: Some sources have given 1947, as per FIlmReference.com, below is an American actor, voice artist, writer, film producer, director, comedian, singer and television host. He gained prominence in the 1970s for playing Jodie Dallas on the ABC sitcom Soap and became a Hollywood film star during the late 1980s and 1990s, appearing in the critical and box office successes When Harry Met Sally... (1989), City Slickers (1991), and Analyze This (1999) and providing the voice of Mike in the Monsters, Inc. franchise. He has hosted the Academy Awards nine times, beginning in 1990 and most recently in 2012.

==Early life==
Crystal was born at Doctors Hospital on the Upper East Side of Manhattan, and initially raised in The Bronx. As a toddler, he moved with his family to 549 East Park Avenue in Long Beach, New York, on Long Island. He and his older brothers Joel and Richard, nicknamed Rip, were the sons of Helen (ne Gabler), a housewife, and Jack Crystal, who owned and operated the Commodore Music Store, founded by Helen's father, Julius Gabler. Jack Crystal was also a jazz promoter, a producer and executive for an affiliated jazz record label, Commodore Records, founded by Helen's brother, musician and songwriter Milt Gabler. Crystal is Jewish and was raised by a Jewish family (they immigrated from Austria and Russia). http://womansday.ninemsn.com/entertainment/tvfilmsbooks/8638833/billy-is-crystal-clear The three young brothers would entertain by reprising comedy routines from the likes of Bob Newhart, Rich Little and Sid Caesar records their father would bring. Jazz artists such as Arvell Shaw, Pee Wee Russell, Eddie Condon, and Billie Holiday were often guests in the home. With the decline of Dixieland jazz circa 1963, Crystal's father lost his business, and died later that year at the age of 54 after suffering a heart attack while bowling. His mother, Helen Crystal, died in 2001. 

After graduation from Long Beach High School in 1965, Crystal attended Marshall University in Huntington, West Virginia on a baseball scholarship, having learned the game from his father, who pitched for St. John's University. Crystal never played a game at Marshall because the program was suspended during his first year. He did not return to Marshall as a sophomore, staying back in New York with his future wife. He instead attended Nassau Community College and later New York University, where he graduated in 1970 with a BFA from its Tisch School of the Arts, His instructors there included Martin Scorsese, with Oliver Stone and Christopher Guest among his classmates. Crystal, in 

==Career==
===Television===
Crystal returned to New York City and performed regularly at The Improv and Catch a Rising Star. In 1976, Crystal appeared on an episode of All in the Family. He was on the dais for The Dean Martin Celebrity Roast of Muhammad Ali on February 19, 1976, where he did impressions of both Ali and sportscaster Howard Cosell. He was scheduled to appear on the first episode of NBC Saturday Night (later renamed Saturday Night Live) (October 11, 1975), but his sketch was cut. He did perform on episode 17 of that first season, doing a monologue of an old jazz man capped by the line "Can you dig it? I knew that you could." Host Ron Nessen introduced him as "Bill Crystal." Crystal was a guest on the first and the last episode of "The Tonight Show with Jay Leno" which concluded February 6, 2014 after 22 seasons on the air. Crystal also made game show appearances such as The Hollywood Squares, All Star Secrets and The $20,000 Pyramid. He holds the record for getting his contestant partner to the top of the pyramid in winner's circle in the fastest time, 26 seconds.

===Saturday Night Live===
*Al Minkman, a maker of quality novelty tricks and toys
*Fernando, host of Fernando's Hideaway, a celebrity interview show; based on actor Fernando Lamas
*Buddy Young, Jr. (an insult comic who appears on Weekend Update)
*Lew Goldman
*Ricky, a bowler
*Tony Minetti, a butcher
*Willie, a man who, along with his friend, Frankie (played by Christopher Guest), discuss their masochistic tendencies

====Impersonations====

*Fernando Lamas
*Howard Cosell
*Jerry Mathers as the Beaver
*Muhammad Ali
*John F. Kennedy
*Joe Franklin

*Herv Villechaize
*Joe Garagiola
*Adam Ant
*Prince
*Sammy Davis, Jr.
*Phil Rizzuto

Billy Crystal (seated at left of table) as Jodie Dallas in a 1977 promotional photo of the premiere for the TV sitcom Soap.
Crystal's earliest prominent role was as Jodie Dallas on Soap, one of the first unambiguously homosexual characters in the cast of an American television series. He continued in the role during the series' entire 19771981 run.

In 1982, Billy Crystal hosted his own variety show, The Billy Crystal Comedy Hour on NBC. When Crystal arrived to shoot the fifth episode, he learned it had been canceled after only the first two aired. After hosting Saturday Night Live twice on March 17, 1984 and the show's ninth season finale on May 5, he joined the regular cast for the 1984-85 season. His most famous recurring sketch was his parody of Fernando Lamas, a smarmy talk-show host whose catchphrase, "You look... mahvelous!," became a media sensation. Crystal subsequently released an album of his stand-up material titled Mahvelous! in 1985, as well as the single "You Look Marvelous", which peaked at No. 58 on the Billboard Hot 100 in the US, and No. 17 in Canada. Also in the 1980s, Crystal starred in an episode of Shelley Duvall's Faerie Tale Theatre as the smartest of the three little pigs.

In 1996, Crystal was the guest star of the third episode of Muppets Tonight.

Billy Crystal hosted three Grammy Awards Telecasts: the 29th Grammys; the 30th Grammys; and the 31st Grammys.

===Acting in film and hosting the Oscars===
Crystal's first film role was in Joan Rivers's 1978 film Rabbit Test. 

Crystal appeared briefly in the Rob Reiner "rockumentary" This Is Spinal Tap (1984) as Morty The Mime, a waiter dressed as a mime at one of Spinal Tap's parties. He shared the scene with a then-unknown, non-speaking Dana Carvey, stating famously that "Mime is money." He later starred in the action comedy Running Scared (1986) and was directed by Reiner again in The Princess Bride (1987), in a comedic supporting role as "Miracle Max." Reiner got Crystal to accept the part by saying, "How would you like to play Mel Brooks?" Reiner also allowed Crystal to ad-lib, and his parting shot, "Hev fun stawming de kessel!" (i.e., "Have fun storming the castle!"), is a frequently-quoted line.

Reiner directed Crystal for a third time in the romantic comedy When Harry Met Sally... (1989), in which Crystal starred alongside Meg Ryan and for which he was nominated for a Golden Globe. The film has since become an iconic classic for the genre and is Crystal's most celebrated film. Crystal then starred in the award-winning buddy comedy City Slickers (1991), which proved very successful both commercially and critically and for which Crystal was nominated for his second Golden Globe. The film was followed by a sequel, which was less successful. In 1992, he played the narrator in Doctor Seuss Video Classics: Horton Hatches the Egg.

Following the significant success of these films, Crystal wrote, directed, and starred in Mr. Saturday Night (1992) and Forget Paris (1995). In the former, Crystal played a serious role in aging makeup, as an egotistical comedian who reflects back on his career, although the character was from his SNL days. Though some of his subsequent films were not as well received as his earlier hits, Crystal had another success alongside Robert De Niro in Harold Ramis' mobster comedy Analyze This (1999). More recent performances include roles in America's Sweethearts (2001), the sequel Analyze That (2002), and Parental Guidance (2012).

He directed the made-for-television movie 61* (2001) based on Roger Maris's and Mickey Mantle's race to break Babe Ruth's single-season home run record in 1961. This earned Crystal an Emmy nomination for Outstanding Directing for a Miniseries, Movie or a Special.

Crystal was originally asked to provide the voice of Buzz Lightyear in Toy Story (1995) but turned it down, a decision he later regretted due to the popularity of the series. Crystal later went on to provide the voice of Mike Wazowski in the blockbuster Pixar film Monsters, Inc. (2001), and reprised his role in the prequel, Monsters University, which was released in June 2013. Crystal also provided the voice of Calcifer in the English version of Hayao Miyazaki's Howl's Moving Castle (2004).

Crystal hosted the Academy Awards broadcast in 19901993, 1997, 1998, 2000, 2004 and 2012. His hosting was critically praised, resulting in two Emmy wins for hosting and writing the 63rd Academy Awards and an Emmy win for writing the 64th Academy Awards. He returned as M.C. for the 2012 Oscar ceremony, after Eddie Murphy backed out of hosting. His nine times as the M.C. is second only to Bob Hope's 18 in most ceremonies hosted. At the 83rd Academy Awards ceremony in 2011, he appeared as a presenter for a digitally inserted Bob Hope and before doing so was given a standing ovation. Film critic Roger Ebert said when Crystal came onstage about two hours into the show, he got the first laughs of the broadcast. Crystal's hosting gigs have regularly included an introductory video segment in which he comedically inserts himself into scenes of that year's films in addition to a song following his opening monologue.

===Broadway===
Crystal won the 2005 Tony Award for Best Special Theatrical Event for 700 Sundays, a two-act, one-man play, which he conceived and wrote about his parents and his childhood growing up on Long Island. He toured the U.S. with the show in 2006 and Australia in 2007.

Following the initial success of the play, Crystal wrote the book 700 Sundays for Warner Books, which was published on October 31, 2005. In conjunction with the book and the play that also paid tribute to his uncle, Milt Gabler, Crystal produced two CD compilations: Billy Crystal Presents: The Milt Gabler Story, which featured his uncle's most influential recordings from Billie Holiday's "Strange Fruit" to "Rock Around the Clock" by Bill Haley & His Comets; and Billy Remembers Billie featuring Crystal's favorite Holiday recordings.

In the fall of 2013, he brought the show back to Broadway for a two-month run at the Imperial Theatre. HBO will film the January 34, 2014 performances, airing it as a special beginning April 19, 2014. 

==Philanthropy==

In 1986, Crystal started hosting Comic Relief on HBO with Robin Williams and Whoopi Goldberg. Founded by Bob Zmuda, Comic Relief raises money for homeless people in the United States.

On September 6, 2005, on The Tonight Show with Jay Leno, Crystal and Jay Leno were the first celebrities to sign a Harley-Davidson motorcycle to be auctioned off for Gulf Coast relief. 

Crystal has participated in the Simon Wiesenthal Center Museum of Tolerance in Los Angeles. Portraying himself in a video, Crystal introduces museum guests to the genealogy wing of the museum.

==Baseball==
On March 12, 2008, Crystal signed a minor league contract, for a single day, to play with the New York Yankees, and was invited to the team's major league spring training. He wore uniform number 60, in honor of his upcoming 60th birthday. On March 13, in a spring training game against the Pittsburgh Pirates, Crystal led off as the designated hitter. He managed to make contact, fouling a fastball up the first base line, but was eventually struck out by Pirates pitcher Paul Maholm on six pitches and was later replaced in the batting order by Johnny Damon. He was released on March 14, his 60th birthday. 

Crystal's boyhood idol was Yankee Hall of Fame legend Mickey Mantle who had signed a program for him when Crystal attended a game where Mantle had hit a home run. Years later on The Dinah Shore Show, in one of his first television appearances, Crystal met Mantle in person and had Mantle re-sign the same program. Crystal would be good friends with Mickey Mantle until Mantle's death in 1995. He and Bob Costas together wrote the eulogy Costas read at Mantle's funeral, and George Steinbrenner then invited Crystal to emcee the unveiling of Mantle's monument at Yankee Stadium. In his 2013 memoir Still Foolin' 'Em, Crystal writes that after the ceremony, near the Yankee clubhouse, he was punched in the stomach by Joe DiMaggio, who was angry at Crystal for not having introduced him to the crowd as the "Greatest living player."

Crystal also was well known for his impressions of Yankee Hall of Famer turned broadcaster Phil Rizzuto. Rizzuto, known for his quirks calling games, did not travel to Anaheim, California in 1996 to call the game for WPIX. Instead, Crystal joined the broadcasters in the booth and pretended to be Rizzuto for a few minutes during the August 31 game.

Although a lifelong Yankee fan, he is a part-owner of the Arizona Diamondbacks, even earning a World Series ring in 2001 when the Diamondbacks beat his beloved Yankees. 

In the movie City Slickers, Crystal wears a New York Mets baseball cap. In the 1986 film Running Scared, Crystal's character is an avid Chicago Cubs fan, wearing a Cubs' jersey in several scenes. In the 2012 film Parental Guidance, Crystal's character is the announcer for the Fresno Grizzlies, a Minor League Baseball team, and aspires to announce for their Major League affiliate, the San Francisco Giants.

==Personal life==
Billy Crystal and his wife Janice (ne: Goldfinger) married in June 1970, Crystal, Still Foolin' 'em, p. 43 have two daughters, actress Jennifer and producer Lindsay, and are grandparents. 
They reside in Pacific Palisades, California. He is a fan of the Los Angeles Clippers and the New York Yankees.

==Filmography==

==Bibliography==
* 
* 
* 
* C
* http://stillfoolinem.com 

==Awards and nominations==

 Year Award Nominated work Result 
 1984 CableACE Award for Writing a Comedy or Music Program Billy Crystal: A Comic's Line 
 1985 Primetime Emmy Award for Individual Performance in a Variety or Music Program Saturday Night Live 
 1986 Grammy Award for Best Comedy Album You Look Marvelous 
 1987 CableACE Award for Comedy Special Billy Crystal: Don't Get Me Started - The Billy Crystal Special 
 1987 CableACE Award for Directing a Comedy Special Billy Crystal: Don't Get Me Started - The Billy Crystal Special 
 1987 CableACE Award for Writing a Comedy Special Billy Crystal: Don't Get Me Started - The Billy Crystal Special 
 1987 CableACE Award for Performance in a Comedy Special Billy Crystal: Don't Get Me Started - The Billy Crystal Special 
 1987 Primetime Emmy Award for Individual Performance in a Variety or Music Program 29th Annual Grammy Awards 
 1988 American Comedy Award for Funniest Supporting Male Performer - Motion Picture or TV The Princess Bride 
 1988 CableACE Award for Directing a Comedy Special Billy Crystal: Don't Get Me Started - The Lost Minutes 
 1988 CableACE Award for Writing a Comedy Special Billy Crystal: Don't Get Me Started - The Lost Minutes 
 1988 CableACE Award for Performance in a Comedy Special Billy Crystal: Don't Get Me Started - The Lost Minutes 
 1988 Primetime Emmy Award for Individual Performance in a Variety or Music Program An All-Star Toast to the Improv 
 1988 Primetime Emmy Award for Individual Performance in a Variety or Music Program 30th Annual Grammy Awards 
 1989 CableACE Award for Actor in a Comedy Series An All-Star Toast to the Improv 
 1989 Golden Apple Award for Male Star of the Year 
 1989 Primetime Emmy Award for Individual Performance in a Variety or Music Program 31st Annual Grammy Awards 
 1990 Golden Globe Award for Best Actor  Motion Picture Musical or Comedy When Harry Met Sally... 
 1990 American Comedy Award for Funniest Actor in a Motion Picture (Leading Role) When Harry Met Sally... 
 1990 American Comedy Award for Funniest Male Performer in a TV Special (Leading or Supporting) Network, Cable or Syndication Midnight Train to Moscow 
 1990 TCA Award for Outstanding Achievement in Movies, Miniseries and Specials 
 1990 Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Variety, Music, or Comedy Special Midnight Train to Moscow 
 1990 Primetime Emmy Award for Individual Performance in a Variety or Music Program Midnight Train to Moscow 
 1990 Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Writing in a Variety or Music Program Midnight Train to Moscow 
 1991 Hollywood Walk of Fame 
 1991 TCA Award for Outstanding Achievement in Movies, Miniseries and Specials 
 1991 Primetime Emmy Award for Individual Performance in a Variety or Music Program 63rd Academy Awards 
 1991 Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Writing in a Variety or Music Program 63rd Academy Awards 
 1991 Norma Zarky Humanitarian award 
 1991 Comedy Star of the Decade 
 1992 Golden Globe Award for Best Actor  Motion Picture Musical or Comedy City Slickers 
 1992 American Comedy Award for Funniest Actor in a Motion Picture (Leading Role) City Slickers 
 1992 American Comedy Award for Funniest Male Performer in a TV Special (Leading or Supporting) Network, Cable or Syndication 63rd Academy Awards 
 1992 MTV Movie Award for Best Comedic Performance City Slickers 
 1992 TCA Award for Outstanding Achievement in Movies, Miniseries and Specials 64th Academy Awards 
 1992 Primetime Emmy Award for Individual Performance in a Variety or Music Program 64th Academy Awards 
 1992 Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Writing in a Variety or Music Program 64th Academy Awards 
 1993 Golden Globe Award for Best Actor  Motion Picture Musical or Comedy Mr. Saturday Night 
 1993 Creative Achievement Award 
 1993 American Comedy Award for Funniest Male Performer in a TV Special (Leading or Supporting) Network, Cable or Syndication 64th Academy Awards 
 1993 CableACE Award for Comedy Series Sessions 
 1993 CableACE Award for Entertainment Host Comic Relief V 
 1993 Primetime Emmy Award for Individual Performance in a Variety or Music Program 65th Academy Awards 
 1994 American Comedy Award for Funniest Male Performer in a TV Special (Leading or Supporting) Network, Cable or Syndication 65th Academy Awards 
 1995 Golden Raspberry Award for Worst Remake or Sequel 
 1995 CableACE Award for Entertainment Host Comic Relief VI 
 1996 Primetime Emmy Award for Individual Performance in a Variety or Music Program Comic Relief VII 
 1997 Primetime Emmy Award for Individual Performance in a Variety or Music Program 69th Academy Awards 
 1998 Primetime Emmy Award for Individual Performance in a Variety or Music Program 70th Academy Awards 
 1999 American Comedy Award for Funniest Male Performer in a TV Special (Leading or Supporting) Network, Cable or Syndication 70th Academy Awards 
 2000 American Comedy Award for Funniest Male Performer in a TV Special (Leading or Supporting) Network, Cable or Syndication Saturday Night Live 25th Anniversary Special 
 2000 Blockbuster Entertainment Award for Favorite Comedy Team (with Robert De Niro) Analyze This 
 2000 Primetime Emmy Award for Individual Performance in a Variety or Music Program 72nd Academy Awards 
 2000 Hasty Pudding Man of the Year 
 2001 American Comedy Award for Funniest Male Performer in a TV Special (Leading or Supporting) Network, Cable or Syndication 72nd Academy Awards 
 2001 AFI Star Award 
 2001 Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Television Movie 61* 
 2001 Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Directing for a Miniseries, Movie or a Dramatic Special 61* 
 2002 Directors Guild of America Award for Outstanding Directing  Television Film 61* 
 2002 Kids' Choice Awards for Favorite Voice From an Animated Movie Monsters, Inc. 
 2002 World Soundtrack Award for Best Original Song Written Directly for a Film Monsters, Inc. for \"If I Didn't Have You\" 
 2004 Primetime Emmy Award for Individual Performance in a Variety or Music Program 76th Academy Awards 
 2005 GLAAD Excellence in Media Award 
 2005 Drama Desk Award for Outstanding Solo Performance 700 Sundays 
 2005 Tony Award for Best Special Theatrical Event 700 Sundays 
 2007 Mark Twain Prize for American Humor 
 2012 Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Special Class Program 84th Academy Awards 
 2012 Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Writing for a Variety Series 84th Academy Awards 
 2013 Disney Legends 
 2014 Grammy Award for Best Spoken Word Album Still Foolin' Em 
 2014 Annie Award for Voice Acting in a Feature Production Monsters University 
 2014 Kids' Choice Awards for Favorite Voice from an Animated Movie Monsters University 

==References==

==External links==
*
*Billy Crystal appears on Michael Eisner's talkshow on CNBC



[[Black hole]]

Simulated view of a black hole (center) in front of the Large Magellanic Cloud. Note the gravitational lensing effect, which produces two enlarged but highly distorted views of the Cloud. Across the top, the Milky Way disk appears distorted into an arc.

A black hole is defined as a region of spacetime from which gravity prevents anything, including light, from escaping. The theory of general relativity predicts that a sufficiently compact mass will deform spacetime to form a black hole. Around a black hole, there is a mathematically defined surface called an event horizon that marks the point of no return. The hole is called "black" because it absorbs all the light that hits the horizon, reflecting nothing, just like a perfect black body in thermodynamics. Quantum field theory in curved spacetime predicts that event horizons emit radiation like a black body with a finite temperature. This temperature is inversely proportional to the mass of the black hole, making it difficult to observe this radiation for black holes of stellar mass or greater.

Objects whose gravity fields are too strong for light to escape were first considered in the 18th century by John Michell and Pierre-Simon Laplace. The first modern solution of general relativity that would characterize a black hole was found by Karl Schwarzschild in 1916, although its interpretation as a region of space from which nothing can escape was first published by David Finkelstein in 1958. Long considered a mathematical curiosity, it was during the 1960s that theoretical work showed black holes were a generic prediction of general relativity. The discovery of neutron stars sparked interest in gravitationally collapsed compact objects as a possible astrophysical reality.

Black holes of stellar mass are expected to form when very massive stars collapse at the end of their life cycle. After a black hole has formed it can continue to grow by absorbing mass from its surroundings. By absorbing other stars and merging with other black holes, supermassive black holes of millions of solar masses may form. There is general consensus that supermassive black holes exist in the centers of most galaxies.

Despite its invisible interior, the presence of a black hole can be inferred through its interaction with other matter and with electromagnetic radiation such as light. Matter falling onto a black hole can form an accretion disk heated by friction, forming some of the brightest objects in the universe. If there are other stars orbiting a black hole, their orbit can be used to determine its mass and location. Such observations can be used to exclude possible alternatives (such as neutron stars). In this way, astronomers have identified numerous stellar black hole candidates in binary systems, and established that the core of the Milky Way contains a supermassive black hole of about 4.3 million solar masses.

==History==
larger animation)]]
The idea of a body so massive that even light could not escape was first put forward by John Michell in a letter written to Henry Cavendish in 1783 of the Royal Society:

 In 1796, mathematician Pierre-Simon Laplace promoted the same idea in the first and second editions of his book Exposition du systme du Monde (it was removed from later editions). 
 Such "dark stars" were largely ignored in the nineteenth century, since it was not understood how a massless wave such as light could be influenced by gravity. 

===General relativity===
In 1915, Albert Einstein developed his theory of general relativity, having earlier shown that gravity does influence light's motion. Only a few months later, Karl Schwarzschild found a solution to the Einstein field equations, which describes the gravitational field of a point mass and a spherical mass. 
 and A few months after Schwarzschild, Johannes Droste, a student of Hendrik Lorentz, independently gave the same solution for the point mass and wrote more extensively about its properties. This solution had a peculiar behaviour at what is now called the Schwarzschild radius, where it became singular, meaning that some of the terms in the Einstein equations became infinite. The nature of this surface was not quite understood at the time. In 1924, Arthur Eddington showed that the singularity disappeared after a change of coordinates (see EddingtonFinkelstein coordinates), although it took until 1933 for Georges Lematre to realize that this meant the singularity at the Schwarzschild radius was an unphysical coordinate singularity. 

In 1931, Subrahmanyan Chandrasekhar calculated, using special relativity, that a non-rotating body of electron-degenerate matter above a certain limiting mass (now called the Chandrasekhar limit at 1.4 solar masses) has no stable solutions. His arguments were opposed by many of his contemporaries like Eddington and Lev Landau, who argued that some yet unknown mechanism would stop the collapse. 
 They were partly correct: a white dwarf slightly more massive than the Chandrasekhar limit will collapse into a neutron star, 
 which is itself stable because of the Pauli exclusion principle. But in 1939, Robert Oppenheimer and others predicted that neutron stars above approximately three solar masses (the TolmanOppenheimerVolkoff limit) would collapse into black holes for the reasons presented by Chandrasekhar, and concluded that no law of physics was likely to intervene and stop at least some stars from collapsing to black holes. 
 

Oppenheimer and his co-authors interpreted the singularity at the boundary of the Schwarzschild radius as indicating that this was the boundary of a bubble in which time stopped. This is a valid point of view for external observers, but not for infalling observers. Because of this property, the collapsed stars were called "frozen stars", 
 because an outside observer would see the surface of the star frozen in time at the instant where its collapse takes it inside the Schwarzschild radius.

===Golden age===

In 1958, David Finkelstein identified the Schwarzschild surface as an event horizon, "a perfect unidirectional membrane: causal influences can cross it in only one direction". 
 This did not strictly contradict Oppenheimer's results, but extended them to include the point of view of infalling observers. Finkelstein's solution extended the Schwarzschild solution for the future of observers falling into a black hole. A complete extension had already been found by Martin Kruskal, who was urged to publish it. 
 

These results came at the beginning of the golden age of general relativity, which was marked by general relativity and black holes becoming mainstream subjects of research. This process was helped by the discovery of pulsars in 1967, 
 
 which, by 1969, were shown to be rapidly rotating neutron stars. 
 Until that time, neutron stars, like black holes, were regarded as just theoretical curiosities; but the discovery of pulsars showed their physical relevance and spurred a further interest in all types of compact objects that might be formed by gravitational collapse.

In this period more general black hole solutions were found. In 1963, Roy Kerr found the exact solution for a rotating black hole. Two years later, Ezra Newman found the axisymmetric solution for a black hole that is both rotating and electrically charged. 
 Through the work of Werner Israel, 
 Brandon Carter, 
 
 and David Robinson 
 the no-hair theorem emerged, stating that a stationary black hole solution is completely described by the three parameters of the KerrNewman metric; mass, angular momentum, and electric charge. 

At first, it was suspected that the strange features of the black hole solutions were pathological artifacts from the symmetry conditions imposed, and that the singularities would not appear in generic situations. This view was held in particular by Vladimir Belinsky, Isaak Khalatnikov, and Evgeny Lifshitz, who tried to prove that no singularities appear in generic solutions. However, in the late 1960s Roger Penrose 
 and Stephen Hawking used global techniques to prove that singularities appear generically. 
 

Work by James Bardeen, Jacob Bekenstein, Carter, and Hawking in the early 1970s led to the formulation of black hole thermodynamics. 
 These laws describe the behaviour of a black hole in close analogy to the laws of thermodynamics by relating mass to energy, area to entropy, and surface gravity to temperature. The analogy was completed when Hawking, in 1974, showed that quantum field theory predicts that black holes should radiate like a black body with a temperature proportional to the surface gravity of the black hole. 

The first use of the term "black hole" in print was by journalist Ann Ewing in her article "'Black Holes' in Space", 
dated 18 January 1964, which was a report on a meeting of the American Association for the Advancement of Science. 
 John Wheeler used term "black hole" a lecture in 1967, leading some to credit him with coining the phrase. After Wheeler's use of the term, it was quickly adopted in general use.

==Properties and structure==
The no-hair theorem states that, once it achieves a stable condition after formation, a black hole has only three independent physical properties: mass, charge, and angular momentum. Any two black holes that share the same values for these properties, or parameters, are indistinguishable according to classical (i.e. non-quantum) mechanics.

These properties are special because they are visible from outside a black hole. For example, a charged black hole repels other like charges just like any other charged object. Similarly, the total mass inside a sphere containing a black hole can be found by using the gravitational analog of Gauss's law, the ADM mass, far away from the black hole. Likewise, the angular momentum can be measured from far away using frame dragging by the gravitomagnetic field.

When an object falls into a black hole, any information about the shape of the object or distribution of charge on it is evenly distributed along the horizon of the black hole, and is lost to outside observers. The behavior of the horizon in this situation is a dissipative system that is closely analogous to that of a conductive stretchy membrane with friction and electrical resistancethe membrane paradigm. This is different from other field theories like electromagnetism, which do not have any friction or resistivity at the microscopic level, because they are time-reversible. Because a black hole eventually achieves a stable state with only three parameters, there is no way to avoid losing information about the initial conditions: the gravitational and electric fields of a black hole give very little information about what went in. The information that is lost includes every quantity that cannot be measured far away from the black hole horizon, including approximately conserved quantum numbers such as the total baryon number and lepton number. This behavior is so puzzling that it has been called the black hole information loss paradox. 

===Physical properties===
The simplest static black holes have mass but neither electric charge nor angular momentum. These black holes are often referred to as Schwarzschild black holes after Karl Schwarzschild who discovered this solution in 1916. According to Birkhoff's theorem, it is the only vacuum solution that is spherically symmetric. This means that there is no observable difference between the gravitational field of such a black hole and that of any other spherical object of the same mass. The popular notion of a black hole "sucking in everything" in its surroundings is therefore only correct near a black hole's horizon; far away, the external gravitational field is identical to that of any other body of the same mass. 

Solutions describing more general black holes also exist. Charged black holes are described by the ReissnerNordstrm metric, while the Kerr metric describes a rotating black hole. The most general stationary black hole solution known is the KerrNewman metric, which describes a black hole with both charge and angular momentum. 

While the mass of a black hole can take any positive value, the charge and angular momentum are constrained by the mass. In Planck units, the total electric charge Q and the total angular momentum J are expected to satisfy
:
for a black hole of mass M. Black holes saturating this inequality are called extremal. Solutions of Einstein's equations that violate this inequality exist, but they do not possess an event horizon. These solutions have so-called naked singularities that can be observed from the outside, and hence are deemed unphysical. The cosmic censorship hypothesis rules out the formation of such singularities, when they are created through the gravitational collapse of realistic matter. This is supported by numerical simulations. 

Due to the relatively large strength of the electromagnetic force, black holes forming from the collapse of stars are expected to retain the nearly neutral charge of the star. Rotation, however, is expected to be a common feature of compact objects. The black-hole candidate binary X-ray source GRS 1915+105 appears to have an angular momentum near the maximum allowed value.

 Black hole classifications 
 Class Mass Size 
 Supermassive black hole ~1051010 MSun ~0.001400 AU 
 Intermediate-mass black hole ~103 MSun ~103 km  REarth 
 Stellar black hole ~10 MSun ~30 km 
 Micro black hole up to ~MMoon up to ~0.1 mm 

Black holes are commonly classified according to their mass, independent of angular momentum J or electric charge Q. The size of a black hole, as determined by the radius of the event horizon, or Schwarzschild radius, is roughly proportional to the mass M through
:
where rsh is the Schwarzschild radius and MSun is the mass of the Sun. This relation is exact only for black holes with zero charge and angular momentum; for more general black holes it can differ up to a factor of 2.

===Event horizon===

 Far away from the black hole, a particle can move in any direction, as illustrated by the set of arrows. It is only restricted by the speed of light. 
 Closer to the black hole, spacetime starts to deform. There are more paths going towards the black hole than paths moving away. 
 Inside of the event horizon, all paths bring the particle closer to the center of the black hole. It is no longer possible for the particle to escape. 

The defining feature of a black hole is the appearance of an event horizona boundary in spacetime through which matter and light can only pass inward towards the mass of the black hole. Nothing, not even light, can escape from inside the event horizon. The event horizon is referred to as such because if an event occurs within the boundary, information from that event cannot reach an outside observer, making it impossible to determine if such an event occurred. 

As predicted by general relativity, the presence of a mass deforms spacetime in such a way that the paths taken by particles bend towards the mass. At the event horizon of a black hole, this deformation becomes so strong that there are no paths that lead away from the black hole.

To a distant observer, clocks near a black hole appear to tick more slowly than those further away from the black hole. Due to this effect, known as gravitational time dilation, an object falling into a black hole appears to slow down as it approaches the event horizon, taking an infinite time to reach it. At the same time, all processes on this object slow down, for a fixed outside observer, causing emitted light to appear redder and dimmer, an effect known as gravitational redshift. Eventually, at a point just before it reaches the event horizon, the falling object becomes so dim that it can no longer be seen.

On the other hand, an indestructible observer falling into a black hole does not notice any of these effects as he crosses the event horizon. According to his own clock, which appears to him to tick normally, he crosses the event horizon after a finite time without noting any singular behaviour. In particular, he is unable to determine exactly when he crosses it, as it is impossible to determine the location of the event horizon from local observations. 

The shape of the event horizon of a black hole is always approximately spherical. For non-rotating (static) black holes the geometry is precisely spherical, while for rotating black holes the sphere is somewhat oblate.

===Singularity===

At the center of a black hole as described by general relativity lies a gravitational singularity, a region where the spacetime curvature becomes infinite. For a non-rotating black hole, this region takes the shape of a single point and for a rotating black hole, it is smeared out to form a ring singularity lying in the plane of rotation. In both cases, the singular region has zero volume. It can also be shown that the singular region contains all the mass of the black hole solution. The singular region can thus be thought of as having infinite density.

Observers falling into a Schwarzschild black hole (i.e., non-rotating and not charged) cannot avoid being carried into the singularity, once they cross the event horizon. They can prolong the experience by accelerating away to slow their descent, but only up to a point; after attaining a certain ideal velocity, it is best to free fall the rest of the way. When they reach the singularity, they are crushed to infinite density and their mass is added to the total of the black hole. Before that happens, they will have been torn apart by the growing tidal forces in a process sometimes referred to as spaghettification or the "noodle effect". 

In the case of a charged (ReissnerNordstrm) or rotating (Kerr) black hole, it is possible to avoid the singularity. Extending these solutions as far as possible reveals the hypothetical possibility of exiting the black hole into a different spacetime with the black hole acting as a wormhole. The possibility of traveling to another universe is however only theoretical, since any perturbation will destroy this possibility. It also appears to be possible to follow closed timelike curves (going back to one's own past) around the Kerr singularity, which lead to problems with causality like the grandfather paradox. It is expected that none of these peculiar effects would survive in a proper quantum treatment of rotating and charged black holes. 

The appearance of singularities in general relativity is commonly perceived as signaling the breakdown of the theory. This breakdown, however, is expected; it occurs in a situation where quantum effects should describe these actions, due to the extremely high density and therefore particle interactions. To date, it has not been possible to combine quantum and gravitational effects into a single theory, although there exist attempts to formulate such a theory of quantum gravity. It is generally expected that such a theory will not feature any singularities. 

===Photon sphere===

The photon sphere is a spherical boundary of zero thickness such that photons moving along tangents to the sphere will be trapped in a circular orbit. For non-rotating black holes, the photon sphere has a radius 1.5 times the Schwarzschild radius. The orbits are dynamically unstable, hence any small perturbation (such as a particle of infalling matter) will grow over time, either setting it on an outward trajectory escaping the black hole or on an inward spiral eventually crossing the event horizon. 

While light can still escape from inside the photon sphere, any light that crosses the photon sphere on an inbound trajectory will be captured by the black hole. Hence any light reaching an outside observer from inside the photon sphere must have been emitted by objects inside the photon sphere but still outside of the event horizon. 

Other compact objects, such as neutron stars, can also have photon spheres. This follows from the fact that the gravitational field of an object does not depend on its actual size, hence any object that is smaller than 1.5 times the Schwarzschild radius corresponding to its mass will indeed have a photon sphere.

===Ergosphere===

The ergosphere is an oblate spheroid region outside of the event horizon, where objects cannot remain stationary.
Rotating black holes are surrounded by a region of spacetime in which it is impossible to stand still, called the ergosphere. This is the result of a process known as frame-dragging; general relativity predicts that any rotating mass will tend to slightly "drag" along the spacetime immediately surrounding it. Any object near the rotating mass will tend to start moving in the direction of rotation. For a rotating black hole, this effect becomes so strong near the event horizon that an object would have to move faster than the speed of light in the opposite direction to just stand still. 

The ergosphere of a black hole is bounded by the (outer) event horizon on the inside and an oblate spheroid, which coincides with the event horizon at the poles and is noticeably wider around the equator. The outer boundary is sometimes called the ergosurface.

Objects and radiation can escape normally from the ergosphere. Through the Penrose process, objects can emerge from the ergosphere with more energy than they entered. This energy is taken from the rotational energy of the black hole causing it to slow down. 

==Formation and evolution==
Considering the exotic nature of black holes, it may be natural to question if such bizarre objects could exist in nature or to suggest that they are merely pathological solutions to Einstein's equations. Einstein himself wrongly thought that black holes would not form, because he held that the angular momentum of collapsing particles would stabilize their motion at some radius. This led the general relativity community to dismiss all results to the contrary for many years. However, a minority of relativists continued to contend that black holes were physical objects, and by the end of the 1960s, they had persuaded the majority of researchers in the field that there is no obstacle to forming an event horizon.

Once an event horizon forms, Penrose proved that a singularity will form somewhere inside it. Shortly afterwards, Hawking showed that many cosmological solutions describing the Big Bang have singularities without scalar fields or other exotic matter (see PenroseHawking singularity theorems). The Kerr solution, the no-hair theorem and the laws of black hole thermodynamics showed that the physical properties of black holes were simple and comprehensible, making them respectable subjects for research. The primary formation process for black holes is expected to be the gravitational collapse of heavy objects such as stars, but there are also more exotic processes that can lead to the production of black holes.

===Gravitational collapse===

Gravitational collapse occurs when an object's internal pressure is insufficient to resist the object's own gravity. For stars this usually occurs either because a star has too little "fuel" left to maintain its temperature through stellar nucleosynthesis, or because a star that would have been stable receives extra matter in a way that does not raise its core temperature. In either case the star's temperature is no longer high enough to prevent it from collapsing under its own weight. 
The collapse may be stopped by the degeneracy pressure of the star's constituents, condensing the matter in an exotic denser state. The result is one of the various types of compact star. The type of compact star formed depends on the mass of the remnantthe matter left over after the outer layers have been blown away, such from a supernova explosion or by pulsations leading to a planetary nebula. Note that this mass can be substantially less than the original starremnants exceeding 5 solar masses are produced by stars that were over 20 solar masses before the collapse. 

If the mass of the remnant exceeds about 34 solar masses (the TolmanOppenheimerVolkoff limit )either because the original star was very heavy or because the remnant collected additional mass through accretion of mattereven the degeneracy pressure of neutrons is insufficient to stop the collapse. No known mechanism (except possibly quark degeneracy pressure, see quark star) is powerful enough to stop the implosion and the object will inevitably collapse to form a black hole. 

The gravitational collapse of heavy stars is assumed to be responsible for the formation of stellar mass black holes. Star formation in the early universe may have resulted in very massive stars, which upon their collapse would have produced black holes of up to 103 solar masses. These black holes could be the seeds of the supermassive black holes found in the centers of most galaxies. 

While most of the energy released during gravitational collapse is emitted very quickly, an outside observer does not actually see the end of this process. Even though the collapse takes a finite amount of time from the reference frame of infalling matter, a distant observer sees the infalling material slow and halt just above the event horizon, due to gravitational time dilation. Light from the collapsing material takes longer and longer to reach the observer, with the light emitted just before the event horizon forms delayed an infinite amount of time. Thus the external observer never sees the formation of the event horizon; instead, the collapsing material seems to become dimmer and increasingly red-shifted, eventually fading away. 

====Primordial black holes in the Big Bang====
Gravitational collapse requires great density. In the current epoch of the universe these high densities are only found in stars, but in the early universe shortly after the big bang densities were much greater, possibly allowing for the creation of black holes. The high density alone is not enough to allow the formation of black holes since a uniform mass distribution will not allow the mass to bunch up. In order for primordial black holes to form in such a dense medium, there must be initial density perturbations that can then grow under their own gravity. Different models for the early universe vary widely in their predictions of the size of these perturbations. Various models predict the creation of black holes, ranging from a Planck mass to hundreds of thousands of solar masses. Primordial black holes could thus account for the creation of any type of black hole.

===High-energy collisions===
A simulated event in the CMS detector, a collision in which a micro black hole may be created.
Gravitational collapse is not the only process that could create black holes. In principle, black holes could be formed in high-energy collisions that achieve sufficient density. As of 2002, no such events have been detected, either directly or indirectly as a deficiency of the mass balance in particle accelerator experiments. This suggests that there must be a lower limit for the mass of black holes. Theoretically, this boundary is expected to lie around the Planck mass (mP =   ), where quantum effects are expected to invalidate the predictions of general relativity. This would put the creation of black holes firmly out of reach of any high-energy process occurring on or near the Earth. However, certain developments in quantum gravity suggest that the Planck mass could be much lower: some braneworld scenarios for example put the boundary as low as . This would make it conceivable for micro black holes to be created in the high-energy collisions occurring when cosmic rays hit the Earth's atmosphere, or possibly in the new Large Hadron Collider at CERN. Yet these theories are very speculative, and the creation of black holes in these processes is deemed unlikely by many specialists. Even if micro black holes should be formed in these collisions, it is expected that they would evaporate in about 1025 seconds, posing no threat to the Earth. 

===Growth===
Once a black hole has formed, it can continue to grow by absorbing additional matter. Any black hole will continually absorb gas and interstellar dust from its direct surroundings and omnipresent cosmic background radiation. This is the primary process through which supermassive black holes seem to have grown. A similar process has been suggested for the formation of intermediate-mass black holes in globular clusters. 

Another possibility is for a black hole to merge with other objects such as stars or even other black holes. Although not necessary for growth, this is thought to have been important, especially for the early development of supermassive black holes, which could have formed from the coagulation of many smaller objects. The process has also been proposed as the origin of some intermediate-mass black holes. 

===Evaporation===

In 1974, Hawking showed that black holes are not entirely black but emit small amounts of thermal radiation; an effect that has become known as Hawking radiation. By applying quantum field theory to a static black hole background, he determined that a black hole should emit particles in a perfect black body spectrum. Since Hawking's publication, many others have verified the result through various approaches. If Hawking's theory of black hole radiation is correct, then black holes are expected to shrink and evaporate over time because they lose mass by the emission of photons and other particles. The temperature of this thermal spectrum (Hawking temperature) is proportional to the surface gravity of the black hole, which, for a Schwarzschild black hole, is inversely proportional to the mass. Hence, large black holes emit less radiation than small black holes. 

A stellar black hole of one solar mass has a Hawking temperature of about 100 nanokelvins. This is far less than the 2.7 K temperature of the cosmic microwave background radiation. Stellar-mass or larger black holes receive more mass from the cosmic microwave background than they emit through Hawking radiation and thus will grow instead of shrink. To have a Hawking temperature larger than 2.7 K (and be able to evaporate), a black hole needs to have less mass than the Moon. Such a black hole would have a diameter of less than a tenth of a millimeter. 

If a black hole is very small the radiation effects are expected to become very strong. Even a black hole that is heavy compared to a human would evaporate in an instant. A black hole the weight of a car would have a diameter of about 1024 m and take a nanosecond to evaporate, during which time it would briefly have a luminosity more than 200 times that of the Sun. Lower-mass black holes are expected to evaporate even faster; for example, a black hole of mass 1 TeV/c2 would take less than 1088 seconds to evaporate completely. For such a small black hole, quantum gravitation effects are expected to play an important role and could evenalthough current developments in quantum gravity do not indicate so hypothetically make such a small black hole stable. 
 

==Observational evidence==
Images of gas cloud being ripped apart by the black hole at the centre of the Milky Way. 

By their very nature, black holes do not directly emit any signals other than the hypothetical Hawking radiation; since the Hawking radiation for an astrophysical black hole is predicted to be very weak, this makes it impossible to directly detect astrophysical black holes from the Earth. A possible exception to the Hawking radiation being weak is the last stage of the evaporation of light (primordial) black holes; searches for such flashes in the past have proven unsuccessful and provide stringent limits on the possibility of existence of light primordial black holes. NASA's Fermi Gamma-ray Space Telescope launched in 2008 will continue the search for these flashes. 

Astrophysicists searching for black holes thus have to rely on indirect observations. A black hole's existence can sometimes be inferred by observing its gravitational interactions with its surroundings. A project run by MIT's Haystack Observatory is attempting to observe the event horizon of a black hole directly. Initial results are encouraging. 

===Accretion of matter===

A computer simulation of a star being consumed by a black hole. The blue dot indicates the location of the black hole.

Due to conservation of angular momentum, gas falling into the gravitational well created by a massive object will typically form a disc-like structure around the object. Friction within the disc causes angular momentum to be transported outward, allowing matter to fall further inward, releasing potential energy and increasing the temperature of the gas. section 4.1.5. In the case of compact objects such as white dwarfs, neutron stars, and black holes, the gas in the inner regions becomes so hot that it will emit vast amounts of radiation (mainly X-rays), which may be detected by telescopes. This process of accretion is one of the most efficient energy-producing processes known; up to 40% of the rest mass of the accreted material can be emitted in radiation. (In nuclear fusion only about 0.7% of the rest mass will be emitted as energy.) In many cases, accretion discs are accompanied by relativistic jets emitted along the poles, which carry away much of the energy. The mechanism for the creation of these jets is currently not well understood.

As such many of the universe's more energetic phenomena have been attributed to the accretion of matter on black holes. In particular, active galactic nuclei and quasars are believed to be the accretion discs of supermassive black holes. Similarly, X-ray binaries are generally accepted to be binary star systems in which one of the two stars is a compact object accreting matter from its companion. It has also been suggested that some ultraluminous X-ray sources may be the accretion disks of intermediate-mass black holes. 

===X-ray binaries===

X-ray binaries are binary star systems that are luminous in the X-ray part of the spectrum. These X-ray emissions are generally thought to be caused by one of the component stars being a compact object accreting matter from the other (regular) star. The presence of an ordinary star in such a system provides a unique opportunity for studying the central object and determining if it might be a black hole.

If such a system emits signals that can be directly traced back to the compact object, it cannot be a black hole. The absence of such a signal does, however, not exclude the possibility that the compact object is a neutron star. By studying the companion star it is often possible to obtain the orbital parameters of the system and obtain an estimate for the mass of the compact object. If this is much larger than the TolmanOppenheimerVolkoff limit (that is, the maximum mass a neutron star can have before collapsing) then the object cannot be a neutron star and is generally expected to be a black hole. 

This animation compares the X-ray 'heartbeats' of GRS 1915 and IGR J17091, two black holes that ingest gas from companion stars.
The first strong candidate for a black hole, Cygnus X-1, was discovered in this way by Charles Thomas Bolton, Louise Webster and Paul Murdin in 1972. Some doubt, however, remained due to the uncertainties resultant from the companion star being much heavier than the candidate black hole. Currently, better candidates for black holes are found in a class of X-ray binaries called soft X-ray transients. In this class of system the companion star is relatively low mass allowing for more accurate estimates in the black hole mass. Moreover, these systems are only active in X-ray for several months once every 1050 years. During the period of low X-ray emission (called quiescence), the accretion disc is extremely faint allowing for detailed observation of the companion star during this period. One of the best such candidates is V404 Cyg.

====Quiescence and advection-dominated accretion flow====
The faintness of the accretion disc during quiescence is suspected to be caused by the flow entering a mode called an advection-dominated accretion flow (ADAF). In this mode, almost all the energy generated by friction in the disc is swept along with the flow instead of radiated away. If this model is correct, then it forms strong qualitative evidence for the presence of an event horizon. Because, if the object at the center of the disc had a solid surface, it would emit large amounts of radiation as the highly energetic gas hits the surface, an effect that is observed for neutron stars in a similar state. 

====Quasi-periodic oscillations====

The X-ray emission from accretion disks sometimes flickers at certain frequencies. These signals are called quasi-periodic oscillations and are thought to be caused by material moving along the inner edge of the accretion disk (the innermost stable circular orbit). As such their frequency is linked to the mass of the compact object. They can thus be used as an alternative way to determine the mass of potential black holes. 

===Galactic nuclei===

Astronomers use the term "active galaxy" to describe galaxies with unusual characteristics, such as unusual spectral line emission and very strong radio emission. Theoretical and observational studies have shown that the activity in these active galactic nuclei (AGN) may be explained by the presence of supermassive black holes. The models of these AGN consist of a central black hole that may be millions or billions of times more massive than the Sun; a disk of gas and dust called an accretion disk; and two jets that are perpendicular to the accretion disk. 

Although supermassive black holes are expected to be found in most AGN, only some galaxies' nuclei have been more carefully studied in attempts to both identify and measure the actual masses of the central supermassive black hole candidates. Some of the most notable galaxies with supermassive black hole candidates include the Andromeda Galaxy, M32, M87, NGC 3115, NGC 3377, NGC 4258, NGC 4889, NGC 1277, OJ 287, APM 08279+5255 and the Sombrero Galaxy. 

It is now widely accepted that the center of nearly every galaxy, not just active ones, contains a supermassive black hole. The close observational correlation between the mass of this hole and the velocity dispersion of the host galaxy's bulge, known as the M-sigma relation, strongly suggests a connection between the formation of the black hole and the galaxy itself. 

Simulation of gas cloud after close approach to the black hole at the centre of the Milky Way. 

Currently, the best evidence for a supermassive black hole comes from studying the proper motion of stars near the center of our own Milky Way. Since 1995 astronomers have tracked the motion of 90 stars in a region called Sagittarius A*. By fitting their motion to Keplerian orbits they were able to infer in 1998 that 2.6 million solar masses must be contained in a volume with a radius of 0.02 lightyears. Since then one of the starscalled S2has completed a full orbit. From the orbital data they were able to place better constraints on the mass and size of the object causing the orbital motion of stars in the Sagittarius A* region, finding that there is a spherical mass of 4.3 million solar masses contained within a radius of less than 0.002 lightyears. While this is more than 3000 times the Schwarzschild radius corresponding to that mass, it is at least consistent with the central object being a supermassive black hole, and no "realistic cluster stars is physically tenable". 

===Effects of strong gravity===
Another way that the black hole nature of an object may be tested in the future is through observation of effects caused by strong gravity in their vicinity. One such effect is gravitational lensing: The deformation of spacetime around a massive object causes light rays to be deflected much like light passing through an optic lens. Observations have been made of weak gravitational lensing, in which light rays are deflected by only a few arcseconds. However, it has never been directly observed for a black hole. One possibility for observing gravitational lensing by a black hole would be to observe stars in orbit around the black hole. There are several candidates for such an observation in orbit around Sagittarius A*. 

Another option would be the direct observation of gravitational waves produced by an object falling into a black hole, for example a compact object falling into a supermassive black hole through an extreme mass ratio inspiral. Matching the observed waveform to the predictions of general relativity would allow precision measurements of the mass and angular momentum of the central object, while at the same time testing general relativity. These types of events are a primary target for the proposed Laser Interferometer Space Antenna.

===Alternatives===
The evidence for stellar black holes strongly relies on the existence of an upper limit for the mass of a neutron star. The size of this limit heavily depends on the assumptions made about the properties of dense matter. New exotic phases of matter could push up this bound. A phase of free quarks at high density might allow the existence of dense quark stars, and some supersymmetric models predict the existence of Q stars. Some extensions of the standard model posit the existence of preons as fundamental building blocks of quarks and leptons, which could hypothetically form preon stars. These hypothetical models could potentially explain a number of observations of stellar black hole candidates. However, it can be shown from general arguments in general relativity that any such object will have a maximum mass. 

Since the average density of a black hole inside its Schwarzschild radius is inversely proportional to the square of its mass, supermassive black holes are much less dense than stellar black holes (the average density of a 108 solar mass black hole is comparable to that of water). Consequently, the physics of matter forming a supermassive black hole is much better understood and the possible alternative explanations for supermassive black hole observations are much more mundane. For example, a supermassive black hole could be modelled by a large cluster of very dark objects. However, such alternatives are typically not stable enough to explain the supermassive black hole candidates. 

The evidence for stellar and supermassive black holes implies that in order for black holes not to form, general relativity must fail as a theory of gravity, perhaps due to the onset of quantum mechanical corrections. A much anticipated feature of a theory of quantum gravity is that it will not feature singularities or event horizons (and thus no black holes). In 2002, http://forum.wolframscience.com/archive/topic/1688-1.html much attention has been drawn by the fuzzball model in string theory. Based on calculations in specific situations in string theory, the proposal suggests that generically the individual states of a black hole solution do not have an event horizon or singularity, but that for a classical/semi-classical observer the statistical average of such states does appear just like an ordinary black hole in general relativity. 

==Open questions==

===Entropy and thermodynamics===

The formula for the BekensteinHawking entropy (S) of a black hole, which depends on the area of the black hole (A). The constants are the speed of light (c), the Boltzmann constant (k), Newton's constant (G), and the reduced Planck constant ().
In 1971, Hawking showed under general conditions In particular, he assumed that all matter satisfies the weak energy condition. that the total area of the event horizons of any collection of classical black holes can never decrease, even if they collide and merge. This result, now known as the second law of black hole mechanics, is remarkably similar to the second law of thermodynamics, which states that the total entropy of a system can never decrease. As with classical objects at absolute zero temperature, it was assumed that black holes had zero entropy. If this were the case, the second law of thermodynamics would be violated by entropy-laden matter entering a black hole, resulting in a decrease of the total entropy of the universe. Therefore, Bekenstein proposed that a black hole should have an entropy, and that it should be proportional to its horizon area. 

The link with the laws of thermodynamics was further strengthened by Hawking's discovery that quantum field theory predicts that a black hole radiates blackbody radiation at a constant temperature. This seemingly causes a violation of the second law of black hole mechanics, since the radiation will carry away energy from the black hole causing it to shrink. The radiation, however also carries away entropy, and it can be proven under general assumptions that the sum of the entropy of the matter surrounding a black hole and one quarter of the area of the horizon as measured in Planck units is in fact always increasing. This allows the formulation of the first law of black hole mechanics as an analogue of the first law of thermodynamics, with the mass acting as energy, the surface gravity as temperature and the area as entropy. 

One puzzling feature is that the entropy of a black hole scales with its area rather than with its volume, since entropy is normally an extensive quantity that scales linearly with the volume of the system. This odd property led Gerard 't Hooft and Leonard Susskind to propose the holographic principle, which suggests that anything that happens in a volume of spacetime can be described by data on the boundary of that volume. 

Although general relativity can be used to perform a semi-classical calculation of black hole entropy, this situation is theoretically unsatisfying. In statistical mechanics, entropy is understood as counting the number of microscopic configurations of a system that have the same macroscopic qualities (such as mass, charge, pressure, etc.). Without a satisfactory theory of quantum gravity, one cannot perform such a computation for black holes. Some progress has been made in various approaches to quantum gravity. In 1995, Andrew Strominger and Cumrun Vafa showed that counting the microstates of a specific supersymmetric black hole in string theory reproduced the BekensteinHawking entropy. Since then, similar results have been reported for different black holes both in string theory and in other approaches to quantum gravity like loop quantum gravity. 

===Information loss paradox===

Because a black hole has only a few internal parameters, most of the information about the matter that went into forming the black hole is lost. Regardless of the type of matter which goes into a black hole, it appears that only information concerning the total mass, charge, and angular momentum are conserved. As long as black holes were thought to persist forever this information loss is not that problematic, as the information can be thought of as existing inside the black hole, inaccessible from the outside. However, black holes slowly evaporate by emitting Hawking radiation. This radiation does not appear to carry any additional information about the matter that formed the black hole, meaning that this information appears to be gone forever. 

The question whether information is truly lost in black holes (the black hole information paradox) has divided the theoretical physics community (see ThorneHawkingPreskill bet). In quantum mechanics, loss of information corresponds to the violation of vital property called unitarity, which has to do with the conservation of probability. It has been argued that loss of unitarity would also imply violation of conservation of energy. Over recent years evidence has been building that indeed information and unitarity are preserved in a full quantum gravitational treatment of the problem. 

==See also==

* Black brane
* Black hole complementarity
* Black hole starship
* Black holes in fiction
* Black string
* BTZ black hole
* Dumb hole
* General relativity
* Kugelblitz (astrophysics)
* List of black holes
* Susskind-Hawking battle
* Timeline of black hole physics
* White hole
* Wormhole

==Notes==
 

==References==

==Further reading==
;Popular reading
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 

;University textbooks and monographs
* , the lecture notes on which the book was based are available for free from Sean Carroll's website.
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 

;Review papers
* 
* Lecture notes from 2005 SLAC Summer Institute.

==External links==

* 
* Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy: "Singularities and Black Holes" by Erik Curiel and Peter Bokulich.
* "Black hole" on Scholarpedia.
* Black Holes: Gravity's Relentless PullInteractive multimedia Web site about the physics and astronomy of black holes from the Space Telescope Science Institute
* Frequently Asked Questions (FAQs) on Black Holes
* "Schwarzschild Geometry"
* Advanced Mathematics of Black Hole Evaporation
* Hubble site
;Videos
* 16-year long study tracks stars orbiting Milky Way black hole
* Movie of Black Hole Candidate from Max Planck Institute

 



[[Beta decay]]

 decay in an atomic nucleus (the accompanying antineutrino is omitted). The inset shows beta decay of a free neutron. In both processes, the intermediate emission of a virtual boson (which then decays to electron and antineutrino) is not shown.
 
In nuclear physics, beta decay ( decay) is a type of radioactive decay in which a beta particle (an electron or a positron) is emitted from an atomic nucleus. Beta decay is a process which allows the atom to obtain the optimal ratio of protons and neutrons. 
 

Beta decay is mediated by the weak force. There are two types: beta minus and beta plus. In the case of beta decay that produces an electron emission, it is referred to as beta minus (), while in the case of a positron emission as beta plus (+).

An example of  decay is shown when carbon-14 decays into nitrogen-14:

:  + + 

Notice how, in electron emission, an electron antineutrino is also emitted. In this form of decay, the original element has decayed into a new element with an unchanged mass number but an atomic number that has increased by one.

An example of positron (+ decay) is shown with magnesium-23 decaying into sodium-23:

:  + + 

In contrast to electron emission, positron emission is accompanied by the emission of an electron neutrino. Similar to electron emission, positron decay results in nuclear transmutation, changing an atom of a chemical element into an atom of an element with an unchanged mass number. However, in positron decay, the resulting element has an atomic number that has decreased by one.

Emitted beta particles have a continuous kinetic energy spectrum, ranging from 0 to the maximal available energy (value (nuclear science)|]), which depends on the parent and daughter nuclear states that participate in the decay. The continuous energy spectra of beta particle occurs because is shared between the beta particle and a neutrino. A typical is around 1 MeV, but it can range from a few keV to a few tens of MeV. Since the rest mass energy of the electron is 511 keV, the most energetic beta particles are ultrarelativistic, with speeds very close to the speed of light.

Sometimes electron capture decay is included as a type of beta decay (and is referred to as "inverse beta decay"), because the basic process, mediated by the weak force is the same. However, no beta particle is emitted, but only an electron neutrino. Instead of beta-plus emission, an inner atomic electron is captured by a proton in the nucleus. An example of electron capture involves krypton-81 becoming bromine-81 and producing an electron neutrino:

: +  + 

This type of decay is therefore analogous to positron emission (and also happens, as an alternative decay route, in all positron-emitters). However, the route of electron capture is the only type of decay that is allowed in proton-rich nuclides that do not have sufficient energy to emit a positron (and neutrino). These may still reach a lower energy state, by the equivalent process of electron capture and neutrino emission.

==  decay ==
The Feynman diagram for decay of a neutron into a proton, electron, and electron antineutrino via an intermediate boson.
In decay, the weak interaction converts an atomic nucleus into a nucleus with one higher atomic number while emitting an electron () and an electron antineutrino ():

:  + + 
where and are the mass number and atomic number of the decaying nucleus.

Another example is when the free neutron () decays by decay into a proton ():
:  + + .

At the fundamental level (as depicted in the Feynman diagram on the right), this is caused by the conversion of the negatively charged ( e) down quark to the positively charged (+ e) up quark by emission of a boson; the boson subsequently decays into an electron and an electron antineutrino:
:  + + .

 decay generally occurs in neutron-rich nuclei.

== + decay ==

Energy spectrum of beta particle in beta decay 
In decay, or "positron emission", the weak interaction converts a nucleus into its next-lower neighbor on the periodic table while emitting a positron () and an electron neutrino ():

:  + + 

 decay cannot occur in an isolated proton because it requires energy due to the mass of the neutron being greater than the mass of the proton. decay can only happen inside nuclei when the daughter nucleus has a greater binding energy (and therefore a lower total energy) than the mother nucleus. The difference between these energies goes into the reaction of converting a proton into a neutron, a positron and a neutrino and into the kinetic energy of these particles. In an opposite process to negative beta decay, the weak interaction converts a proton into a neutron by converting an up quark into a down quark by having it emit a or absorb a .

== Electron capture (K-capture) ==

In all cases where decay of a nucleus is allowed energetically, the electron capture process is also allowed, in which the same nucleus captures an atomic electron with the emission of a neutrino:

: +  + 

The emitted neutrino is mono-energetic. In proton-rich nuclei where the energy difference between initial and final states is less than 2mec2, decay is not energetically possible, and electron capture is the sole decay mode.

This decay is also called K-capture because the innermost electron of an atom belongs to the K-shell of the electronic configuration of the atom, and this has the highest probability to interact with the nucleus.

There is an analogous process possible in theory in antimatter: antiproton-rich antimatter radioisotopes might decay via an analogous process of positron capture, but in practice no such complex antimatter nuclides have either been discovered or artificially constructed.

== Nuclear transmutation ==
right
If the proton and neutron are part of an atomic nucleus, these decay processes transmute one chemical element into another. For example:

:

  + + (beta minus decay) 
  + + (beta plus decay) 
 +  + (electron capture) 

Beta decay does not change the number of nucleons in the nucleus but changes only its charge . Thus the set of all nuclides with the same can be introduced; these isobaric nuclides may turn into each other via beta decay. Among them, several nuclides (at least one for any given mass number ) are beta stable, because they present local minima of the mass excess: if such a nucleus has (A, Z) numbers, the neighbour nuclei (A, Z1) and (A, Z+1) have higher mass excess and can beta decay into (A, Z), but not vice versa. For all odd mass numbers the global minimum is also the unique local minimum. For even , there are up to three different beta-stable isobars experimentally known; for example, , , and are all beta-stable, though the first one can undergo a very rare double beta decay (see below). There are about 355 known beta-decay stable nuclides total.

Usually unstable nuclides are clearly either "neutron rich" or "proton rich", with the former undergoing beta decay and the latter undergoing electron capture (or more rarely, due to the higher energy requirements, positron decay). However, in a few cases of odd-proton, odd-neutron radionuclides, it may be energetically favorable for the radionuclide to decay to an even-proton, even-neutron isobar either by undergoing beta-positive or beta-negative decay. An often-cited example is , which decays by positron emission 61% of the time to , and 39% of the time by (negative) beta decay to .

A beta-stable nucleus may undergo other kinds of radioactive decay (alpha decay, for example). In nature, most isotopes are beta stable, but a few exceptions exist with half-lives so long that they have not had enough time to decay since the moment of their nucleosynthesis. One example is the odd-proton odd-neutron nuclide , which undergoes all three types of beta decay (, and electron capture) with a half-life of .

== Double beta decay ==

Some nuclei can undergo double beta decay ( decay) where the charge of the nucleus changes by two units. Double beta decay is difficult to study in most practically interesting cases, because both  decay and  decay are possible, with probability favoring  decay; the rarer  decay process is masked by these events. Thus,  decay is usually studied only for beta stable nuclei. Like single beta decay, double beta decay does not change ; thus, at least one of the nuclides with some given has to be stable with regard to both single and double beta decay.

==Bound-state  decay==
For fully ionized atoms (bare nuclei), it is possible for electrons to be emitted from the nucleus into low-lying atomic bound states (orbitals). This can not occur for neutral atoms whose low-lying bound states are already filled.

The phenomenon was first observed for 163Dy66+ in 1992 by Jung et al. of the Darmstadt Heavy-Ion Research group. Although neutral 163Dy is a stable isotope, the fully ionized 163Dy66+ undergoes  decay into the K and L shells with a half-life of 47 days. 
 

Another possibility is that a fully ionized atom undergoes greatly accelerated  decay, as observed for 187Re by Bosch et al., also at Darmstadt. Neutral 187Re does undergo  decay with a half-life of 42  109 years, but for fully ionized 187Re75+ this is shortened by a factor of 109 to only 32.9 years. 
 For comparison the variation of decay rates of other nuclear processes due to chemical environment is less than 1%.

==Forbidden transitions==
Beta decays can be classified according to the -value of the emitted radiation. When L > 0, the decay is referred to as "forbidden". Nuclear selection rules require high L-values to be accompanied by changes in nuclear spin () and parity (). The selection rules for the th forbidden transitions are:

:

where 1= = 1 or 1 corresponds to no parity change or parity change, respectively. The special case of a 0+  0+ transition (which in gamma decay is absolutely forbidden) is referred to as "superallowed" for beta decay, and proceeds very quickly by this decay route. The following table lists the  and  values for the first few values of :

 Forbiddenness   
 Superallowed 0+  0+ no 
 Allowed 0, 1 no 
 First forbidden 0, 1, 2 yes 
 Second forbidden 1, 2, 3 no 
 Third forbidden 2, 3, 4 yes 

==Beta emission spectrum==

Beta decay can be considered as a perturbation as described in quantum mechanics, and thus Fermi's Golden Rule can be applied. This leads to an expression for the kinetic energy spectrum N(T) of emitted betas as follows: 
 

:

where is the kinetic energy, is a shape function that depends on the forbiddenness of the decay (it is constant for allowed decays), F(Z, T) is the Fermi Function (see below) with Z the charge of the final-state nucleus, 1=E = T + mc2 is the total energy, 1=p = is the momentum, and is the Q value of the decay. The kinetic energy of the emitted neutrino is given approximately by minus the kinetic energy of the beta.

===Fermi function===

The Fermi function that appears in the beta spectrum formula accounts for the Coulomb attraction / repulsion between the emitted beta and the final state nucleus. Approximating the associated wavefunctions to be spherically symmetric, the Fermi function can be analytically calculated to be: 
 

:

where 1=S = ( is the fine-structure constant), 1=  =  ZE/pc (+ for electrons,  for positrons), 1= = r'N/ ( is the radius of the final state nucleus), and  is the Gamma function.

For non-relativistic betas (Q  mec2), this expression can be approximated by: 
 

:

Other approximations can be found in the literature. 
 
 

===Kurie plot=== 

A Kurie plot (also known as a FermiKurie plot) is a graph used in studying beta decay developed by Franz N. D. Kurie, in which the square root of the number of beta particles whose momenta (or energy) lie within a certain narrow range, divided by the Fermi function, is plotted against beta-particle energy. It is a straight line for allowed transitions and some forbidden transitions, in accord with the Fermi beta-decay theory. The energy-axis (x-axis) intercept of a Kurie plot corresponds to the maximum energy imparted to the electron/positron (the decay's -value).

==History==

===Discovery and characterization of  decay===
Radioactivity was discovered in 1896 by Henri Becquerel in uranium, and subsequently observed by Marie and Pierre Curie in thorium and in the new elements polonium and radium.
In 1899 Ernest Rutherford separated radioactive emissions into two types: alpha and beta (now beta minus), based on penetration of objects and ability to cause ionization. Alpha rays could be stopped by thin sheets of paper or aluminium, whereas beta rays could penetrate several millimetres of aluminium. (In 1900 Paul Villard identified a still more penetrating type of radiation, which Rutherford identified as a fundamentally new type in 1903, and termed gamma rays).

In 1900 Becquerel measured the mass-to-charge ratio (m/e) for beta particles by the method of J.J. Thomson used to study cathode rays and identify the electron. He found that m/e for a beta particle is the same as for Thomsons electron, and therefore suggested that the beta particle is in fact an electron.

In 1901 Rutherford and Frederick Soddy showed that alpha and beta radioactivity involves the transmutation of atoms into atoms of other chemical elements. In 1913, after the products of more radioactive decays were known, Soddy and Kazimierz Fajans independently proposed their radioactive displacement law, which states that beta (i.e. ) emission from one element produces another element one place to the right in the periodic table, while alpha emission produces an element two places to the left.

===Neutrinos in beta decay===

Historically, the study of beta decay provided the first physical evidence of the neutrino. In 1911 Lise Meitner and Otto Hahn performed an experiment that showed that the energies of electrons emitted by beta decay had a continuous rather than discrete spectrum. This was in apparent contradiction to the law of conservation of energy, as it appeared that energy was lost in the beta decay process. A second problem was that the spin of the nitrogen-14 atom was 1, in contradiction to the Rutherford prediction of .

In 19201927, Charles Drummond Ellis (along with James Chadwick and colleagues) established clearly that the beta decay spectrum is really continuous, ending all controversies. It also had an effective upper bound in energy, which was a severe blow to Bohr's suggestion that conservation of energy might be true only in a statistical sense, and might be violated in any given decay. Now the problem of how to account for the variability of energy in known beta decay products, as well as for conservation of momentum and angular momentum in the process, became acute.

In a famous letter written in 1930 Wolfgang Pauli suggested that in addition to electrons and protons atoms also contained an extremely light neutral particle which he called the neutron. He suggested that this "neutron" was also emitted during beta decay (thus accounting for the known missing energy, momentum, and angular momentum) and had simply not yet been observed. In 1931 Enrico Fermi renamed Pauli's "neutron" to neutrino, and in 1934 Fermi published a very successful model of beta decay in which neutrinos were produced. The neutrino interaction with matter was so weak that detecting it proved a severe experimental challenge, and was not accomplished until 1956. However, the properties of neutrinos were (with a few minor modifications) as predicted by Pauli and Fermi.

===Discovery of other types of beta decay===
In 1934 Frdric and Irne Joliot-Curie bombarded aluminium with alpha particles to effect the nuclear reaction +  + , and observed that the product isotope emits a positron identical to those found in cosmic rays by Carl David Anderson in 1932. This was the first example of decay (positron emission), which they termed artificial radioactivity since is a short-lived nuclide which does not exist in nature.

The theory of electron capture was first discussed by Gian-Carlo Wick in a 1934 paper, and then developed by Hideki Yukawa and others. K-electron capture was first observed in 1937 by Luis Alvarez, in the nuclide 48V. 
 
 
 Alvarez went on to study electron capture in 67Ga and other nuclides. 
 
 

==See also==

*Double beta decay
*Electron capture
*Neutrino
*Alpha decay
*Betavoltaics
*Particle radiation
*Radionuclide
*Tritium illumination, a form of fluorescent lighting powered by beta decay
*Pandemonium effect
*Total absorption spectroscopy

==References==

* 
* 
*

== External links ==
* The Live Chart of Nuclides - IAEA with filter on decay type
* Definition of Beta Disintegration (Decay) at Science Dictionary



[[Blitzkrieg]]

The classic characteristic of what is commonly known as "blitzkrieg" is a highly mobile form of infantry and armor working in combined arms teams. (German armed forces, June 1943)

Blitzkrieg (German, "lightning war") is an anglicised term describing a method of warfare whereby an attacking force spearheaded by a dense concentration of armoured and motorized or mechanized infantry formations, and heavily backed up by close air support, forces a breakthrough into the enemy's line of defense through a series of short, fast, powerful attacks; and once in the enemy's territory, proceeds to dislocate them using speed and surprise, and then encircle them. Clark, Lloyd, Kursk: The Greatest Battle: Eastern Front 1943, 2012, p. 22 Through the employment of combined arms in maneuver warfare, the blitzkrieg attempts to unbalance the enemy by making it difficult for them to respond effectively to the continuously changing front, and defeat them through a decisive Vernichtungsschlacht (battle of annihilation). 

During the interwar period, aircraft and tank technologies matured and were combined with systematic application of the traditional German tactics of deep penetration and bypassing of enemy strong points to encircle and destroy enemy force in a Kesselschlacht (cauldron battle). When Germany invaded Poland in 1939, Western journalists adopted the term blitzkrieg to describe this form of armoured warfare. However, the term had already made an appearance as early as 1935, in a German military periodical Deutsche Wehr (German Defense), in connection to quick or lightning warfare. Blitzkrieg operations were very effective during the campaigns of 19391941, and by 1940 the term had gained extensive use in Western media and journalism. The blitzkrieg operations capitalized on surprise penetrations (e.g., the penetration of the Ardennes forest region), general enemy unpreparedness, and an inability to react swiftly enough to the attacker's offensive operations. During the Battle of France, the French, who made attempts to re-form defensive lines along rivers, were constantly frustrated when German forces arrived there first and pressed on. Shirer, William, The Collapse of the Third Republic: An Inquiry into the Fall of France in 1940, Ch.2931, "The Fall of France I, II, (and) III" for a (partially eye-witnessed) account of the strategic and tactical success in the Battle of France 

Many modern historians have come to the conclusion that blitzkrieg itself was never an official doctrine or concept of the Wehrmacht, and that it is a myth that it was officially adopted. Some senior officers of the Wehrmacht, including Kurt Student, Franz Halder and Johann Adolf von Kielmansegg, disputed the idea that the blitzkrieg was an organized military concept of the Wehrmacht, and instead asserted that what many regarded as the blitzkrieg was nothing more than "ad hoc solutions that simply popped out of the prevailing situation" (Johann Adolf von Kielmansegg) and ideas that "naturally emerged from the existing circumstances" (Kurt Student) as a response to operational challenges. German historian Frieser summarized the blitzkrieg as simply the result of German commanders blending the latest technology in the most beneficial way with the traditional military principles and " the right units in the right place at the right time" on the operational level of warfare, and that it was in no way a brand-new military doctrine or concept. As such, many modern historians now understand the blitzkrieg as the outcome of the rejuvenation of the traditional German military principles, methods and doctrines of the 19th century with the latest weapon systems of the interwar period. 

However, many modern historians continue to use the term casually to describe the style of maneuver warfare practised by the Axis powers (particularly Germany) of this period, even though it was never a formal doctrine. This is justifiable, since in the context of Guderian's ideas of highly mobile formations in combined arms, the term blitzkrieg is extensively a synonym for maneuver warfare on the operational level. 

==Definition==

===Common interpretation===
Ju 87 Bs over Poland, September/October 1939
The classic interpretation of blitzkrieg is that of German tactical and operational methodology in the first half of the Second World War that was often hailed as a new method of warfare. The word, meaning "lightning war", in its strategic means is associated with a series of quick and decisive short battles to deliver a knockout blow to an enemy state before it could fully mobilize. The tactical meaning of blitzkrieg involves a coordinated military effort by tanks, mobilized infantry, artillery and aircraft, to create an overwhelming local superiority in combat power, to overwhelm an enemy and break through its lines. Blitzkrieg as used by Germany had considerable psychological, or as some writers call, "terror" elements, such as the 'Jericho Trompete', a noise-making siren on the Junkers Ju 87 dive-bomber to affect the morale of enemy forces. The devices were largely removed when the enemy became used to the noise after the Battle of France in 1940, and instead bombs sometimes had whistles attached. Griehl 2001, pp. 31, 6465. It is also common for historians and writers to include psychological tactics behind the line using Fifth columnists to spread rumours and lies among the civilian population in the theatre of operation. 

===Origin of the term===
The origins of the term blitzkrieg are obscure. It was never used in the title of a military doctrine or handbook of the German army or air force. 
It seems rarely to have been used in the German military press before 1939. Recent research conducted at the German military historical institute at Freiburg has found only two military articles from the 1930s in which it is employed. Neither article advocates any radically new military doctrine or approach to war. Both use the term simply to mean a swift strategic knockout. The first, published in 1935, deals primarily with food (and to a lesser extent with raw material) supplies in wartime. The term blitzkrieg is here employed with reference to Germany's efforts to win a quick victory in the First World War and is not associated with the use of armoured or mechanised forces or with airpower. The argument is that Germany must develop self-sufficiency in food supplies because it might again prove impossible to deal a swift knockout to her enemies and a protracted total war might prove unavoidable. The second article, published in 1938, states that launching a swift strategic knockout has great attractions for Germany but appears to accept that such a knockout will be very difficult to achieve by land attack under modern conditions (especially in view of the existence of systems of fortification like the Maginot Line) unless an exceptionally high degree of surprise is achieved. The author vaguely suggests that a massive strategic air attack might hold out better prospects, but that topic is not explored in any detail. 

Another relatively early use of the term in a German-language work was in a book by Fritz Sternberg, a Jewish Marxist political economist who was a refugee from the Third Reich. Entitled Die Deutsche Kriegsstrke (German War Strength), it was published in Paris in 1939. It had been preceded by an English-language edition of 1938 called Germany and a Lightning War. The German edition uses the term blitzkrieg. The book's argument is that Germany is not prepared economically for a long war but might win a lightning war. It does not treat in any detail operational and tactical matters, and does not suggest that the German armed forces have evolved a radically new operational method. It offers scant clues as to how German lightning victories might be won. 

Hitler, in a speech in November 1941, said "I have never used the word Blitzkrieg, because it is a very silly word", Domains, Max, Hitler. Reden und Proklmationen 1932-1945. Kommentiert von einem deutschen Zeitgenossen, 2 vols, Wiesbaden, 1973, Vol. 2, p.1776. and it seems even at the beginning of 1942 he dismissed it as 'Italian phraseology' Adolf Hitler, Monologe im Fuhrerhauptquartier 1941-1944. Die Aufzeichnungen Heinrich Heims, ed. Werner Jochmann, Hamburg, 1980, p.173 (3/4 January 1942). 

==Roots of German military methods==
During the First World War, on the Western front, the two sides had been locked in a trench war, where kill zones by overlapping fire of machine guns and barbed wire prevented either side from breaking through. The British introduced the tank as invulnerable to machine gun fire, and able to cross trenches and breach barbed wire, to lead men across the battlefield. The British had been able to penetrate German lines this way, but not enough tanks were made before the war ended. The Germans had therefore first-hand experience of the potential of tanks to change the battlefield. Where the allied armies were slow to deploy and study the tank in the inter-war years, the German army was very eager to study and master this new technology.

===Development of German tactical methods===
German operational theories began to evolve immediately after Germany's defeat in the First World War. The Treaty of Versailles limited any German Army to a maximum of 100,000 men, making impossible the deployment of massed troops which had characterized German strategy before the War. Although the German General Staff was also abolished by the treaty, it nevertheless continued to exist as the Truppenamt or "Troop Office", supposedly only an administrative body. Committees of veteran staff officers were formed within the Truppenamt to evaluate 57 issues of the war. Their reports led to doctrinal and training publications, which became the standard procedures by the time of the Second World War. The Reichswehr was influenced by its analysis of pre-war German military thought, in particular the infiltration tactics which at the end of the war had seen some breakthroughs in the Western Front's trench war, and the maneuver warfare which dominated the Eastern Front.

===Return to Prussian and 19th century methodology===
German military history had previously been influenced by Carl von Clausewitz, Alfred von Schlieffen and von Moltke the Elder, who were proponents of maneuver, mass, and envelopment. During and after the First World War, these concepts were further developed by generals, such as Oskar von Hutier and the Reichswehr. Following the First World War, these concepts were modified by the Reichswehr. The German army Chief of Staff, Hans von Seeckt, moved doctrine away from what he argued was an excessive focus on encirclement towards one based on speed. 

Under his command, a modern update of the doctrinal system called Bewegungskrieg ("maneuver warfare") and its associated leadership system called Auftragstaktik ("mission tactics"; i.e., units are assigned missions; local commanders decide how to achieve those missions) was developed, which was a critical advantage and a major reason for the success of blitzkrieg. This concept was abandoned in January 1942. The OKW believed it too risky to allow German Corps and Army Groups to be operated and commanded independently by one field commander.

The German leadership had also been criticized for failing to understand the technical advances of the First World War, having given tank production the lowest priority and having conducted no studies of the machine gun prior to that war. In response, German officers attended technical schools during this period of rebuilding after the war. The infiltration tactics developed by the German Army during the First World War became the basis for later tactics. German infantry had advanced in small, decentralized groups which bypassed resistance in favour of advancing at weak points and attacking rear-area communications. This was aided by coordinated artillery and air bombardments, and followed by larger infantry forces with heavy guns, which destroyed centers of resistance. These concepts formed the basis of the Wehrmacht's tactics during the Second World War.

On the Eastern Front of World War I, where combat did not bog down into trench warfare, German and Russian armies fought a war of maneuver over thousands of miles, giving the German leadership unique experience which the trench-bound Western Allies did not have. Studies of operations in the East led to the conclusion that small and coordinated forces possessed more combat worth than large, uncoordinated forces.

==Differing views==
During this period, all the war's major combatants developed mechanised force theories. However, the official doctrines of the Western Allies differed substantially from those of the Reichswehr. British, French, and American doctrines broadly favoured a more deliberate set-piece battle, using mechanised forces to maintain the impetus and momentum of an offensive. There was less emphasis on combined arms, deep penetration or concentration. In short, their philosophy was not too different from that which they had at the end of World War I. Although early Reichswehr periodicals contained many translated works from Allied sources, they were rarely adopted. Technical advances in foreign countries were, however, observed and used in part by the Weapons Office of the Reichswehr. Foreign doctrines are widely considered to have had little serious influence. Argued by Corum, Edwards, and House. This is not to include theories which were not adopted as actual doctrine, on which there are varied views. 

===Britain===
British armoured car and motorcycle at the Battle of Megiddo (1918), allowing for rapid mobile warfare.
The British Army's lessons were mainly drawn from the successful infantry and artillery offensives on the Western Front in late 1918. To obtain the best cooperation between all arms, emphasis was placed on detailed planning, and rigid control and adherence to orders. French (2000), pp.18-20 Although mechanisation of the Army was considered as a means of avoiding the heavy casualties and indecisive nature of the offensives during the earlier years of the war, no strategic doctrine was evolved to match technical developments. French (2000), pp.22-24 

However, the Sinai and Palestine Campaign had witnessed operations that involved some aspects of what would later be known as blitzkrieg. Key elements in the "blitzkrieg warfare" at the decisive Battle of Megiddo included concentration, surprise and speed; success depending on attacking only in favourable terrain, where the terrain favoured the movement of large formations around the battlefield, and tactical improvements in the British artillery and infantry attack. Woodward 2006 p. 191 General Edmund Allenby used infantry, to successfully attack the strong Ottoman front line, under cover of an artillery barrage. Wavell 1968 p. 206 This creeping barrage lifted and moved forward at a rate of between 50 yards (46 m), 75 yards (69 m) and 100 yards (91 m) per minute, while 4.5-inch howitzers fired on points beyond the barrage augmented by the guns of two destroyers firing from the Mediterranean Sea. Through constant pressure by both infantry and cavalry, two Ottoman armies in the Judean Hills, were kept off-balance and virtually encircled during the Battles of Sharon and Nablus which have become known as the Battle of Megiddo. Hill 1978 pp. 1712 

These methods induced "strategic paralysis" among the defending Ottoman troops and led to their rapid and complete collapse. In an advance of 65 miles (105 km), captures were "estimated at at least prisoners and 260 guns." Allenby 22 September 1918 in Hughes 2004 pp. 1813 Theorist Basil Liddell Hart considered that the most important aspect of the operation was the degree to which the Ottoman commanders were first denied intelligence on the British preparations for the attack through British air superiority, and then crippled by air attacks on their headquarters and telephone exchanges, paralysing their attempts to react to the rapidly deteriorating situation. 

===France===
French doctrine in the mid-war years was defense-oriented. Colonel Charles de Gaulle was a known advocate of concentration of armor and airplanes. His opinions were expressed in his book, Vers l'Arme de Mtier (Towards the Professional Army). Like von Seeckt, he concluded that France could no longer maintain the huge armies of conscripts and reservists with which World War I had been fought, and sought to use tanks, mechanised forces and aircraft to allow a smaller number of highly trained soldiers to have greater impact in battle. His views little endeared him to the French high command, but are claimed by some to have influenced Heinz Guderian. 

===Soviet Union/Russia===
In 1916, General Alexei Brusilov had used infiltration tactics and surprise during the Brusilov Offensive. Later, Marshal Mikhail Tukhachevsky, one of the most prominent officers of the Red Army of the Soviet Union during the inter-war years, developed the concept of deep operations from his experiences of the Polish-Soviet War. These concepts would guide Red Army doctrine throughout World War II. Realising the limitations of infantry and cavalry, Tukhachevsky was an advocate of mechanised formations, and the large-scale industrialization required. However, Robert Watt states that blitzkrieg holds little in common with Soviet deep battle. Watt 2008, pp. 677678. H P Willmott has noted that deep battle contains two critical differences  it advocated the idea of total war, not limited operations and it also rejected the idea of the decisive battle in favour of several large scale and simultaneous offensives. 

The Reichswehr and the Red Army collaborated in war games and tests in Kazan and Lipetsk beginning in 1926. Set within the Soviet Union, these two centers were used to field test aircraft and armoured vehicles up to the battalion level, as well as housing aerial and armoured warfare schools through which officers were rotated. This was done in the Soviet Union, in secret, to evade the Treaty of Versailles's occupational agent, the Inter-Allied Commission. 

===Germany===
After becoming head of government in 1933, Adolf Hitler ignored the Versailles Treaty provisions. A command for armoured forces was created within the German Wehrmacht; the Panzerwaffe, as it came to be known later. The Luftwaffe, the German air force, was established, and development begun on ground-attack aircraft and doctrines. Hitler was a strong supporter of this new strategy. He read Guderian's book Achtung - Panzer! and upon observing armoured field exercises at Kummersdorf he remarked "That is what I wantand that is what I will have." Guderian, Heinz; Panzer Leader, p.46. 

===Guderian's armoured concept===
Heinz Guderian
Heinz Guderian was probably the first to fully develop and advocate the principles associated with blitzkrieg. He summarized combined-arms tactics as the way to get the mobile and motorized armoured divisions to work together and support each other in order to achieve decisive success. In his book, Panzer Leader, he wrote:

Guderian believed that developments in technology were required to support the theory; especially equipping armoured divisionstanks foremost, with wireless communications. Guderian insisted in 1933 to the high command that every tank in the German armoured force must be equipped with radio. Guderian, Heinz; Panzer Leader, p.20 At the start of the war, only the German army was thus prepared with all tanks "radio equipped". This proved critical in early tank battles where German tank commanders exploited the organizational advantage over the Allies that radio communication gave them. Later all allied armies would copy this innovation.

===Spanish Civil War===
German volunteers first used armour in live field conditions during the Spanish Civil War of 1936. Armour commitment consisted of Panzer Battalion 88, a force built around three companies of Panzer I tanks that functioned as a training cadre for Nationalists. The Luftwaffe deployed squadrons of fighters, dive bombers, and transport aircraft as the Condor Legion. Guderian said that the tank deployment was "on too small a scale to allow accurate assessments to be made." The true test of his "armoured idea" would have to wait for the Second World War. However, the Luftwaffe also provided volunteers to Spain to test both tactics and aircraft in combat, including the first combat use of the Stuka.

During the war, the Condor Legion undertook the bombing of Guernica which had a tremendous psychological effect on the populations of Europe. The results were exaggerated, and the Western Allies concluded that the "city-busting" techniques were now a part of the German way in war. The targets of the German aircraft were actually the rail lines and bridges. But lacking the ability to hit them with accuracy (only three or four Ju 87s saw action in Spain), a method of carpet bombing was chosen resulting in heavy civilian casualties. 

==Methods of operations==

===Schwerpunkt===
The Germans referred to a Schwerpunkt (focal point) and to a Schwerpunktprinzip (concentration principle) in the planning of operations. They viewed the Schwerpunkt as a center of gravity or point of maximum effort, where a decisive action could be achieved. Ground, mechanised and tactical air forces were concentrated at this point of maximum effort whenever possible. By local success at the Schwerpunkt, a small force achieved a breakthrough and gained advantages by fighting in the enemy's rear. Guderian summarized this doctrine as "Klotzen, nicht kleckern!" (approx. "Get in there and do it! Don't mess about!"). Alexander, Bevin, How Great Generals Win, 2002 (reprint edition), p. 227 

To achieve a breakthrough, armoured forces would attack the enemy's defensive line directly, supported by motorized infantry, artillery fire and aerial bombardment, in order to create a breach in the enemy's line. Through this breach, the tanks and motorised units could break through without the traditional encumbrance of the slow logistics of infantry on foot. In the opening phase of an operation, air forces sought to gain superiority over enemy air-forces by attacking aircraft on the ground, bombing their airfields, and seeking to destroy them in the air. The principle of Schwerpunkt enabled the attacker to win numerical superiority at the point of the main effort, which in turn gave the attacker tactical and operational superiority even though the attacker may be numerically and strategically inferior along the front overall. 

One of the earliest examples of these principles applied in a Schwerpunkt type attack formation is identified in the American Civil War; arranged and executed in 1863 at the Battle of Chickamauga by Lieutenant General James Longstreet. While there is no apparent direct link between Longstreet's innovation and German thinkers such as Hutier or Guderian, whereby Longstreet was a direct influence upon them decades in the future, Longstreet's troop arrangements have close similarity to the later German versions utilized by tank units at the tactical level. At Chickamauga, Longstreet demonstrated an improvement upon the more commonly used tactics of this war and many previous European wars, such as the en-echelon attacks by divisions of only one or two brigades in depth. At Chickamauga, he lined up eight brigades in a five echelons on a very narrow front (as opposed to a wide formation). This attack formation is similar to the German Schwerpunkt in that it gave the attacking Confederates massive numerical superiority at the point of penetration Focal Point of the Union line. The front of Longstreet's Schwerpunkt was a narrow 150-200 yards wide, and also similar to what developed in 1918; then called "infiltration tactics" and further improved upon in the Second World War. Knudsen, Harold M. General James Longstreet the Confederacy's Most Modern General, 2nd edition Girard, Illinois: USA Publishing. 2011. Pages 56-61. 

In forming his version of a Schwerpunkt, Longstreet harnessed the advantage of force ratios by focusing on a narrow front with a long column. Most modern planning doctrine requires a ratio advantage of 3:1 to reasonably expect to achieve success in rupturing a defensive line; Longstreet planned a 4:1 ratio (assuming the division of Union MG Wood's division would likely be deployed with two brigades up and one or two back, thus a depth of two brigades at the point of attack). However, MG Wood was ordered to move to support the other Union wing, and so when Longstreet's Schwerpunkt attacked, only one brigade of Wood's Division was still in the way. The result was at the point of break through the force ratio was 8:1 and the Confederates poured through into the open areas behind the Union line, in effect collapsing the entire Union right wing. A post war explanation found in a letter by General Longstreet provides insights on his idea behind the column. Longstreet stating: "With a column of say four or five brigades, if the first and second are broken or dispersed by the assault, the third, in turn finding itself in full strength and force, and near enough the enemies line to break them. The force is strong enough in itself to give confidence as long as it is in order." Hence the use of massive force ratio advantage at a narrow point with successive echelons in line rather than side by side was the change employed by Longstreet at Chickamauga that has similarity to later German method and principle of Schwerpunkt. The formation was intended not to become decisively engaged with enemy units at the breakthrough point, but to move past them and into open areas behind the Union line for faster movement. It was intended to execute the expedient of momentum, as a follow-on capability, to reach distant objectives of an operational nature. Ibid. 

Longstreet conducts movements of the divisions of the left wing of the Confederate Army the morning of September the 20th, 1863. After closing vacant space between the wings, the second division in those up front (Johnson) assumes the point of the Schwerpunkt and five brigades of the ad hoc division under MG Hood fall in behind Johnson to make up the Schwerpunkt.

Following the breakthrough of the Union line and collapse of the Union wing opposite Longstreet's wing, Longstreet continued to drive this Schwerpunkt in a direction toward a gap in Missionary Ridge called McFarland Gap, in an apparent effort to seize the gap and deny its use for escape by Union units. Demonstrating a level of operational thinking in selecting a target in the rear area of the Union Army with further pursuit that would effect both Union wings. He was stopped by reinforced Union troops forming on high ground, which held until nightfall.

===Pursuit===
Having achieved a breakthrough of the enemy's line, units comprising the schwerpunkt were not supposed to become decisively engaged with enemy frontline units to the right and left of the breakthrough area. Units pouring through the hole were tasked to drive upon set objectives in the rear areas of the enemy front line. In World War II, German Panzer forces, for example, utilized motorized mobility, attempted to paralyze the enemy's ability to react. Moving faster than enemy forces, mobile forces exploited weaknesses and acted before opposing forces could formulate a response.
Central to this is the decision cycle. Every decision made by German or opposing forces required time to gather information, make a decision, disseminate orders to subordinates, and then implement this decision through action. Through superior mobility and faster decision-making cycles, mobile forces could take action on a situation sooner than the forces opposing them.
Directive control was a fast and flexible method of command. Rather than receiving an explicit order, a commander would be told of his superior's intent and the role which his unit was to fill in this concept. The exact method of execution was then a matter for the low-level commander to determine as best fit the situation. Staff burden was reduced at the top and spread among commands more knowledgeable about their own situation. In addition, the encouragement of initiative at all levels aided implementation. As a result, significant decisions could be effected quickly and either verbally or with written orders a few pages long. 

===Destruction of pockets of resistance===
An operation's final phase, was the destruction of the pockets which were enveloped by the initial stages of an operation. The Kesselschlacht, ("cauldron battle"), was a concentric attack on encircled forces earlier bypassed by the Schwerpunkt attack(s). It was here that most losses were inflicted upon the enemy, primarily through the capture of prisoners and weapons. During Barbarossa, massive encirclements netted nearly 3,500,000 Soviet prisoners along with masses of equipment. 

===Use of Air Power===
The "Stuka" dive-bomber was used extensively in Blitzkrieg operations
In this regard, close air support was provided in the form of the dive bomber and medium bomber. They would support the focal point of attack from the air. German successes are closely related to the extent to which the German Luftwaffe was able to control the air war in early campaigns in Europe and the Soviet Union. However, the Luftwaffe was a broadly based force with no constricting central doctrine, other than its resources should be used generally to support national strategy. It was flexible and it was able to carry out both operational-tactical, and strategic bombing effectively. Flexibility was the Luftwaffe's strength in 19391941. Paradoxically, from that period onward it became its weakness. While Allied Air Forces were tied to the support of the Army, the Luftwaffe deployed its resources in a more general, operational way. It switched from air superiority missions, to medium-range interdiction, to strategic strikes, to close support duties depending on the need of the ground forces. In fact, far from it being a dedicated panzer spearhead arm, less than 15 percent of the Luftwaffe was designed for close support of the army in 1939. Buckley 1998, pp. 126127. 

==Limitations and countermeasures==

===Environment===
The concepts associated with the term blitzkrieg  deep penetrations by armour, large encirclements, and combined arms attacks  were largely dependent upon terrain and weather conditions. Where the ability for rapid movement across "tank country" was not possible, armoured penetrations were often avoided or resulted in failure. Terrain would ideally be flat, firm, unobstructed by natural barriers or fortifications, and interspersed with roads and railways. If it was instead hilly, wooded, marshy, or urban, armour would be vulnerable to infantry in close-quarters combat and unable to break out at full speed. Additionally, units could be halted by mud (thawing along the Eastern Front regularly slowed both sides) or extreme snow. Armour, motorised and aerial support was also naturally dependent on weather.
It should however be noted that the disadvantages of such terrain could be nullified if surprise was achieved over the enemy by an attack through such terrain. During the Battle of France, the German blitzkrieg-style attack on France went through the Ardennes. There is little doubt that the hilly, heavily wooded Ardennes could have been relatively easily defended by the Allies, even against the bulk of the German armoured units. However, precisely because the French thought the Ardennes unsuitable for massive troop movement, particularly for tanks, they were left with only light defences which were quickly overrun by the Wehrmacht. The Germans quickly advanced through the forest, knocking down the trees the French thought would impede this tactic. 

===Air superiority===
The Hawker Typhoon, especially when armed with eight RP-3 rockets, posed a serious threat to German armour and motor vehicles during the Battle of Normandy in 1944.
Allied air superiority became a significant hindrance to German operations during the later years of the war. Early German successes were conducted when Allied aircraft could not make a significant impact on the battlefield or its air space. In addition, the Germans enjoyed air parity or superiority which allowed the unencumbered movement of ground forces, close air support and aerial reconnaissance. By 1944, however, the Western Allies' fighter-bomber aircraft were so effective that German vehicle crews experienced great difficulty moving en masse during daylight. Quote: "Many examples of the experiences and losses suffered by German formations moving up to the front are well known. Panzer Lehr, for instance, on 7 June alone lost 84 half-tracks, prime movers and self propelled guns, 40 fuel bowsers, 90 soft-skinned vehicles and five tanks as it made its way from LeMans to Caen." Indeed, the final German offensive operation in the west, Operation Wacht am Rhein, was planned to take place during poor weather to minimize interference by Allied aircraft. Under these conditions it was difficult for German commanders to employ the "armoured idea" to its envisioned potential, if at all. 

===Counter-tactics===
Blitzkrieg is vulnerable to an enemy that is robust enough to weather the shock of the attack and that does not panic at the idea of enemy formations in its rear area. This is especially true if the attacking formation lacks the reserve to keep funneling forces into the spearhead, or lacks the mobility to provide infantry, artillery and supplies into the attack. If the defender can hold the shoulders of the breach they will have the opportunity to counterattack into the flank of the attacker, potentially cutting off the van as happened to Kampfgruppe Peiper in the Ardennes.

During the Battle of France in 1940, De Gaulle's 4th Armoured Division and elements of the British Expeditionary Force's 1st Army Tank Brigade both made probing attacks on the German flank, actually pushing into the rear of the advancing armoured columns at times. This may have been a reason for Hitler to call a halt to the German advance. Those attacks combined with Maxime Weygand's Hedgehog tactic would become the major basis for responding to blitzkrieg attacks in the future: deployment in depth, permitting enemy or "shoulders" of a penetration was essential to channeling the enemy attack, and artillery, properly employed at the shoulders, could take a heavy toll of attackers. While Allied forces in 1940 lacked the experience to successfully develop these strategies, resulting in France's capitulation with heavy losses, they characterized later Allied operations. For example, at the Battle of Kursk the Red Army employed a combination of defense in great depth, extensive minefields, and tenacious defense of breakthrough shoulders. In this way they depleted German combat power even as German forces advanced. The reverse can be seen in the Russian summer offensive of 1944. German attempts to weather the storm and fight out of encirclements failed due to the Russians' ability to continue to feed armoured units into the attack, maintaining the mobility and strength of the offensive, arriving in force deep in the rear areas faster than the Germans could regroup and resulting in the devastating destruction of Army Group Center.

In August 1944 at Mortain, stout defense and counterattacks against the German flanks by American and Canadian forces closed the Falaise pocket. In the Ardennes, determined defenders in a combination of hedgehog defense at Bastogne, St Vith and other locations, and a counterattack by Patton's 3rd U.S. Army were employed.

===Logistics===
Although effective in quick campaigns against Poland and France, mobile operations could not be sustained by Germany in later years. Strategies based on maneuver have the inherent danger of the attacking force overextending its supply lines, and can be defeated by a determined foe who is willing and able to sacrifice territory for time in which to regroup and rearm, as the Soviets did on the Eastern Front (as opposed to, for example, the Dutch who had no territory to sacrifice). Tank and vehicle production was a constant problem for Germany; indeed, late in the war many panzer "divisions" had no more than a few dozen tanks. Richard Simpkin, Race to the Swift: Thoughts on Twenty-First Century Warfare, (London: Brassey's, 2000), p.34 As the end of the war approached, Germany also experienced critical shortages in fuel and ammunition stocks as a result of Anglo-American strategic bombing and blockade. Although production of Luftwaffe fighter aircraft continued, they would be unable to fly for lack of fuel. What fuel there was went to panzer divisions, and even then they were not able to operate normally. Of those Tiger tanks lost against the United States Army, nearly half of them were abandoned for lack of fuel. 

==Operations==

===Poland, 1939===
In Poland, fast moving armies encircled Polish forces (blue circles), but the blitzkrieg idea never really took hold  artillery and infantry forces acted in time-honoured fashion to crush these pockets.

Despite the term blitzkrieg being coined by journalists during the Invasion of Poland of 1939, historians Mathew Cooper and J. P Harris generally hold that German operations during it were more consistent with more traditional methods. The Wehrmacht's strategy was more in line with Vernichtungsgedanken, or a focus on envelopment to create pockets in broad-front annihilation. Panzer forces were dispersed among the three German concentrations without strong emphasis on independent use, being used to create or destroy close pockets of Polish forces and seize operational-depth terrain in support of the largely un-motorized infantry which followed.

While early German tanks, Stuka dive-bombers and concentrated forces were used in the Polish campaign, the majority of the battle was conventional infantry and artillery based warfare and most Luftwaffe action was independent of the ground campaign. Matthew Cooper wrote that

John Ellis explained that "...there is considerable justice in Matthew Cooper's assertion that the panzer divisions were not given the kind of strategic mission that was to characterize authentic armoured blitzkrieg, and were almost always closely subordinated to the various mass infantry armies." Ellis, John. Brute Force (Viking Penguin, 1990) 

Steven Zaloga states: "Whilst Western accounts of the September campaign have stressed the shock value of the panzers and Stuka attacks, they have tended to underestimate the punishing effect of German artillery on Polish units. Mobile and available in significant quantity, artillery shattered as many units as any other branch of the Wehrmacht." Zaloga, Steven and Majej. The Polish Campaign 1939 (Hippocrene Books, 1985) 

===Western Europe, 1940===
German advances during the Battle of Belgium

The German invasion of France, with subsidiary attacks on Belgium and the Netherlands, consisted of two phases, Operation Yellow (Fall Gelb) and Operation Red (Fall Rot). Yellow opened with a feint conducted against the Netherlands and Belgium by two armoured corps and paratroopers. The Germans had massed the bulk of their armoured force in Panzer Group von Kleist, which attacked through the comparatively unguarded sector of the Ardennes and achieved a breakthrough at the Battle of Sedan with air support. 

The group raced to the coast of the English Channel at Abbeville, thus isolating the British Expeditionary Force, Belgian Army, and some divisions of the French Army in northern France. The armoured and motorized units under Guderian and Rommel initially advanced far beyond the following divisions, and indeed far in excess of that with which German high command was initially comfortable. When the German motorized forces were met with a counterattack at Arras, British tanks with heavy armour (Matilda I & IIs) created a brief panic in the German High Command. The armoured and motorized forces were halted, by Hitler, outside the port city of Dunkirk, which was being used to evacuate the Allied forces. Hermann Gring had promised the Luftwaffe would complete the destruction of the encircled armies, but aerial operations did not prevent the evacuation of the majority of Allied troops (which the British named Operation Dynamo); some French and British were saved. 

Overall, Yellow succeeded beyond what most people had expected, despite the fact that the Allies had 4,000 armoured vehicles and the Germans 2,200, and the Allied tanks were often superior in armour and caliber of cannon. Guderian, Heinz; Panzer Leader, p.94 The French and the British used tanks in their pre-blitzkrieg 'traditional' role of assisting infantry and dispersed across the whole army so there was not concentration of tanks, while the blitzkrieg method of concentrating tanks, even less in number and less capable in ability, led to victorious success.

German advances during the Battle of France

This left the French armies much reduced in strength (although not demoralized), and without much of their own armour and heavy equipment. Operation Red then began with a triple-pronged panzer attack. The XV Panzer Corps attacked towards Brest, XIV Panzer Corps attacked east of Paris, towards Lyon, and Guderian's XIX Panzer Corps completed the encirclement of the Maginot Line. The defending forces were hard pressed to organize any sort of counter-attack. The French forces were continually ordered to form new lines along rivers, often arriving to find the German forces had already passed them. When Colonel de Gaulle did organize a counter-attack with superior French tanks, he did not have the air support to gain the upper hand and had to retreat.

Ultimately, the French army and nation collapsed after barely two months of mobile operations, in contrast to the four years of trench warfare of the First World War. The French president of the Ministerial Council, Reynaud, attributed the collapse in a speech on 21 May 1940:

The truth is that our classic conception of the conduct of war has come up against a new conception. At the basis of this...there is not only the massive use of heavy armoured divisions or cooperation between them and airplanes, but the creation of disorder in the enemy's rear by means of parachute raids.

In fact, the German army had not used paratroop attacks in France. The one major paratrooper attack was used earlier in the Netherlands to capture a bridge and a number of small-scale glider-landings were conducted in Belgium to capture terrain dominating bottle-necks on planned routes of advance prior to the arrival of the main ground forces (the most renowned being the landing on the Belgian border-fort of Eben-Emael). The real cause for the fall of France was the blitzkrieg method of warfare.

===Soviet Union: the Eastern Front: 194144===
After 194142, armoured formations were increasingly used as a mobile reserve against Allied breakthroughs. The black arrows depict armoured counter-attacks.
Use of armoured forces was crucial for both sides on the Eastern Front. Operation Barbarossa, the German invasion of the Soviet Union in 1941, involved a number of breakthroughs and encirclements by motorized forces. Its stated goal was "to destroy the Russian forces deployed in the West and to prevent their escape into the wide-open spaces of Russia." Alan Clark, Barbarossa: The Russian-German Conflict, 194145, New York: Quill, 1965, p.78 A key factor was the surprise attack which included the near annihilation of the total Soviet airforce by simultaneous attacks on airfields. On the ground, four giant panzer armies encircled surprised and disorganized Soviet forces, followed by marching infantry which completed the encirclement and defeated the trapped forces. The first year of the Eastern Front offensive can generally be considered to have had the last successful major mobile operation for the German army.

After Germany's failure to destroy the Soviets before the winter of 1941, the strategic failure above the German tactical superiority became apparent. Although the German invasion successfully conquered large areas of Soviet territory, the overall strategic effects were more limited. The Red Army was able to shrug off enormous losses and regroup with new formations far to the rear of the main battle line, and eventually defeat the German forces for the first time in the Battle of Moscow. 

In the summer of 1942, when Germany launched another offensive in the southern USSR against Stalingrad and the Caucasus, the Soviets again lost tremendous amounts of territory, only to counter-attack once more during winter. German gains were ultimately limited by Hitler diverting forces from the attack on Stalingrad itself and seeking to pursue a drive to the Caucasus oilfields simultaneously as opposed to subsequently as the original plan had envisaged. Even so, the Wehrmacht was becoming overstretched. By winning operationally, strategically it could not keep up the momentum as the durability of the Soviet Union's manpower resources, industrial base and aid from the West began to take effect. 

In the summer of 1943 the Wehrmacht launched another combined forces offensive operation  Zitadelle (Citadel)  against the Soviet salient at Kursk. Soviet defensive tactics were by now hugely improved, particularly in terms of artillery and effective use of air support. Eventually, the Battle of Kursk marked the Soviet switch to offense and 
the revival of deep operations. According to military historain David Glantz, for the first time the blitzkrieg was defeated in summer and the opposing forces were able to mount their own successful counteroperation. During the preparation for the Battle of Kursk, the Soviet command had been apprised of German intentions through Ultra intercepts, and this time they trusted the information they were being given was valid, and not an elaborate British deception. At Kursk the Soviets were able to develop a very deep defensive front. In addition, Soviet defensive tactics, their use of artillery and their use of close air support were much improved. As the strength of the German forces began to wane, the battle was marked by the Soviet switch over to offense and their use of the revived doctrine of deep operations. Of course, the Kursk operation did not comprise a true "blitzkrieg" operation, although it was intended to be, as there was no element of surprise, no breakthrough to outflank or strike at rear areas, and no psychological pressure being exerted upon the minds of the Soviet command.

By the summer of 1944 the reversal of fortune was complete and Operation Bagration saw Soviet forces inflict crushing defeats on Germany through the aggressive use of armour, infantry and air power in combined strategic assault, known as deep operations.

===Western Front, 194445===
As the war progressed, Allied armies began using combined arms formations and deep penetration strategies that Germany had used in the opening years of the war. Many Allied operations in the Western Desert and on the Eastern Front relied on massive concentrations of firepower to establish breakthroughs by fast-moving armoured units. These artillery-based tactics were also decisive in Western Front operations after Operation Overlord and both the British Commonwealth and American armies developed flexible and powerful systems for using artillery support. What the Soviets lacked in flexibility, they made up for in number of multiple rocket launchers, cannon and mortar tubes. The Germans never achieved the kind of fire concentrations their enemies were capable of by 1944. 

After the Allied landings at Normandy, Germany made attempts to overwhelm the landing force with armoured attacks, but these failed for lack of co-ordination and through Allied air superiority. The most notable attempt to use deep penetration operations in Normandy was at Mortain, which exacerbated the German position in the already-forming Falaise Pocket and assisted in the ultimate destruction of German forces in Normandy. The Mortain counter-attack was effectively destroyed by U.S. 12th Army Group with little effect on its own offensive operations. 

Germany's last offensive on its Western front, Operation Wacht am Rhein, was an offensive launched towards the vital port of Antwerp in December 1944. Launched in poor weather against a thinly held Allied sector, it achieved surprise and initial success as Allied air power was stymied by cloud cover. However, stubborn pockets of defence in key locations throughout the Ardennes, the lack of serviceable roads, and poor German logistics planning caused delays. Allied forces deployed to the flanks of the German penetration, and as soon as the skies cleared, Allied aircraft were again able to attack motorized columns. The stubborn defense by US units and German weakness led to a defeat for the Germans.

==Controversy==
The origins of blitzkrieg are in some doubt: if it existed, who contributed to it, whether it was part of German war strategy in 1933  1939.

There has been a great deal of debate about whether blitzkrieg existed as a coherent military strategy. Many historians now hold the position that blitzkrieg was not a military theory, and the campaigns conducted by the German military in 1939 to circa, 1942 (with the exception of Operation Barbarossa) were improvised invasions put together and modified at the last moment and therefore was not a proper military strategy.
In the past blitzkrieg has also been hailed as a Revolution in Military Affairs (RMA). In recent years a large number of writers and historians have come to the conclusion it was not a new form of warfare invented by the German military, but an old method of pursuing decisive battles using new technology. 

===Strategic intent===
There is disagreement on whether Germany had designed its war plans around blitzkrieg. The popular view can be summarized in an essay published in 1965, the then Captain Robert O'Neill, Professor of the History of War at the Oxford University. Writing on Doctrine and Training in the German Army 19191939, O'Neill stated:

What makes this story worth telling is the development of one idea: the blitzkrieg. The German Army had a greater grasp of the effects of technology on the battlefield, and went on to develop a new form of warfare by which its rivals when it came to the test were hopelessly outclassed.

Some historians were prepared to go even further, claiming that blitzkrieg was not merely an operational doctrine of the German armed forces but a strategic concept on which the leadership of the Third Reich based its strategic and economic planning.
Those who made the Third Reich's military plans and organized its war economy appear rarely, if ever, to have employed the term blitzkrieg in official documents. The idea that the German army operated on a "blitzkrieg doctrine" was vigorously attacked in the late 1970s by Matthew Cooper. The concept of a blitzkrieg Luftwaffe was challenged by Richard Overy in the late 1970s and by Williamson Murray in the mid-1980s. The thesis that the Third Reich went to war on the basis of "blitzkrieg economics" was criticized by Richard Overy in the 1980s and Historian George Raudzens highlighted the many, somewhat conflicting, senses in which historians have used the word. Though the notion of a German blitzkrieg concept or doctrine survive in popular consciousness and popular literature, and many professional historians also still support the thesis. 

Frieser, in agreement with Overy, Cooper and others that reject the existence of a blitzkrieg doctrine, argues that after the failure of the Schlieffen Plan in 1914, the German Army came to the conclusion decisive battles could not be executed on a strategic level. This meant the idea of one early large scale offensive could not bring about a knockout blow. Frieser argues that the OKW had intended to avoid the decisive battle concepts of its predecessors and planned for a long all out war of attrition. It was only after the hastily improvised plan for the invasion of Western Europe in 1940 and its successful conclusion, which led the German General Staff to believe that decisive battles were not obsolete. It was only after the Battle of France German thinking reverted to the possibility of a blitzkrieg method for the Balkan Campaign and Operation Barbarossa. 

===Doctrine===
The position of some academic literature regards the notion that the Third Reich developed a blitzkrieg strategy to achieve its total aims as a myth, and therefore such notion has been widely disputed.

Historians Shimon Naveh and Richard Overy reject the idea that blitzkrieg was a military doctrine. Naveh states, "The striking feature of the blitzkrieg concept is the complete absence of a coherent theory which should have served as the general cognitive basis for the actual conduct of operations". Naveh described it as an "ad hoc solution" to operational dangers, thrown together at the last moment. 

Richard Overy also rejected the idea that Hitler and the Nazi regime ever intended a blitzkrieg war. The suggestion that the German state intentionally streamlined its economy to carry out its grand strategy in a series of short campaigns in the near future was false. In fact Hitler intended to start an unlimited war, at a much later date than 1939. But the Third Reich's foreign policy had forced the Nazi state into war before it had fully prepared. Hitler's, and the Wehrmacht's planning attitudes during the 1930s do not reflect a blitzkrieg method, but the exact opposite. 

Historian J. P Harris has pointed out that the Germans never used the word blitzkrieg. It was never used in any German military field manual, either in the Army or the Air Force. It first appeared in September 1939, by a Times newspaper reporter. Harris also rejects that German military thinking developed any kind of blitzkrieg mentality. 

In his book the Blitzkrieg Legend, German historian Karl-Heinz Frieser also shares Adam Tooze' (in his work Wages of Destruction|The Wages of Destruction: The Making and Breaking of the Nazi Economy]), Overy's and Naveh's concerns over the myth of the blitzkrieg-economy and strategy. Moreover Frieser states that surviving German economists and members of the German General Staff have denied Germany went to war based on a blitzkrieg strategy.

===Economy===
The German armament industry did not fully mobilize until 1944, and this has led to some historians in the 1960s, particularly Alan Milward, to develop a theory of blitzkrieg economics. Milward argued the German Reich could not fight a long war, so it deliberately refrained from arming in depth, to arming in breadth, to enable it to win a series of quick victories. Milward alleged an economy positioned between a full war economy and a peacetime economy. The purpose of the blitzkrieg economy was to allow the German people to enjoy high living standards in the event of hostilities, and avoiding economic hardships suffered during the First World War. 

Overy states that blitzkrieg as a "coherent military and economic concept has proven a difficult strategy to defend in light of the evidence". Milward's theory was completely contrary to Hitler's and German planners' intentions. It was their fear of the spectre of 1914 that emerged victorious in the conflict of goals between armament in breadth for a short war and armament in depth for a feared long war. The Germans were aware of the error of the First World War, and rejected the concept of orientating its economy geared to fighting only a short war. Hitler proclaimed to rely on surprise alone was "criminal", and that "we have to prepare for a long war along with surprise attack". 

During the winter of 193940, Hitler decreased the size of the fighting manpower in order to return as many skilled workers to the factories as was possible. It was realised that the war would be decided in the factories, not a quick-decision "Panzer operation". 

Throughout the 1930s, Hitler had ordered rearmament programs that cannot be considered limited. In November 1937 Hitler had indicated that most of the armament projects would be completed by 194345. The rearmament of the Kriegsmarine was to have been completed in 1949, the Luftwaffe rearmament program was to have been completed in 1942 with a force capable of carrying out strategic bombing using heavy bombers. The construction and training of motorised forces and a full mobilisation of the rail networks would not begin until 1943 and 1944 respectively. 
Hitler needed to avoid war until these projects were complete. Hitler's misjudgements in 1939 forced him into war before he was able to complete rearmament. 

After the war, Albert Speer pointed out that the German economy achieved greater armaments output, not because of diversions of capacity from civilian to military industry, but through streamlining of the economy. Richard Overy pointed out some 23 percent of German output was military by 1939. Between 1937 and 1939 70 percent of investment capital went into rubber, synthetic fuel development, aircraft and shipbuilding industries. Hermann Gring had consistently stated the task of the Four Year Plan was to rearm Germany for total war. Adolf Hitler's correspondence with his economists also reveals that his intent was to wage war in 19431945 when the resources of central Europe had been absorbed into the Third Reich. 

Living standards were not high in the late 1930s. Consumption of consumer goods had fallen from 71 percent in 1928 to 59 percent in 1938. The demands of the war economy reduced the amount of spending in non-military sectors to satisfy the demand for the armed forces. On 9 September the Head of the Reich Defence Council, Goring called for complete "employment" of living and fighting power of the national economy for the duration of the war. Overy presents this as evidence that a "blitzkrieg economy" did not exist. 

Adam Tooze supports Overy. Tooze explains that the German economy was planning for a long war. The expenditure for this war was extensive and put the economy under severe strain. The German leadership were concerned less with how to balance the civilian economy and the needs of civilian consumption, but rather to figure out how to best prepare the economy for total war. Once war had begun, Hitler urged his economic experts to abandon caution and expend all available resources on the war effort. The expansion plans only gradually gained momentum in 1941. Tooze maintained the huge armament plans in the pre-war period did not indicate any clear-sighted blitzkrieg economy or strategy. 

===Heer===
There is the argument that the Heer (the German army) itself was not ready for blitzkrieg at the start of the war. The blitzkrieg method called for a young, highly skilled mechanised army. In 193940, 45 percent of the army was 40 years old, and 50 percent of all the soldiers had just a few weeks' training. The German Army, contrary to what the blitzkrieg legend suggests, was not fully motorised. The German Army could muster only 120,000 vehicles compared to the 300,000 of the French Army. The British also had an "enviable" contingent of motorised forces. Thus, "the image of the German 'Blitzkrieg' army is a figment of propaganda imagination". During the First World War the German army used horses for logistics, 1.4 million of them, in the Second World War it used 2.7 million horses. Moreover just 10 percent of the Army was motorised in 1940. 

Half of the German divisions available in 1940 were combat ready, but often being more poorly equipped than the British and French Armies, as well as the German Army of 1914. 
In the spring, 1940, the German army was semi-modern. A small number of the best equipped and "elite divisions were offset by many second and third rate divisions". Apart from the few motorised and Panzer Divisions, ninety percent of the German Army was not a blitzkrieg army. Frieser 2005, p. 33. 

It has been argued by John Mosier that, while the French soldiers in 1940 were better trained than German soldiers, as were the Americans later, and the German army was the least mechanised of the major armies, its leadership cadres were both larger and superior and their high standards of leadership were the primary reason for the successes of the German army in World War II as it had been in World War I. 

===Luftwaffe doctrine===
James Corum states a prevalent myth about the Luftwaffe and its blitzkrieg operations is that it had a doctrine of terror bombing, in which civilians were deliberately targeted in order to break the will or aid the collapse of an enemy. After the bombing of Guernica in 1937 and of Rotterdam in 1940, it was commonly assumed that terror bombing was a part of Luftwaffe doctrine. During the interwar period the Luftwaffe leadership rejected the concept of terror bombing, and confined the air arm's use to battlefield support of interdiction operations. 

Corum continues: General Walther Wever compiled a doctrine known as The Conduct of the Aerial War. This document, which the Luftwaffe adopted, rejected Giulio Douhet's theory of terror bombing. Terror bombing was deemed to be "counter-productive", increasing rather than destroying the enemy's will to resist. Such bombing campaigns were regarded as diversion from the Luftwaffe's main operations; destruction of the enemy armed forces. The bombings of Guernica, Rotterdam and Warsaw were tactical missions in support of military operations and were not intended as strategic terror attacks. 

J.P. Harris states that most Luftwaffe leaders from Goering through the general staff believed as did their counterparts in Britain and the United States that strategic bombing was the chief mission of the air force and that given such a role, the Luftwaffe would win the next war and that:

The Luftwaffe did end up with an air force consisting mainly of relatively short-range aircraft, but this does not prove that the German air force was solely interested in tactical bombing. It happened because the German aircraft industry lacked the experience to build a long-range bomber fleet quickly, and because Hitler was insistent on the very rapid creation of a numerically large force. It is also significant that Germany's position in the centre of Europe to a large extent obviated the need to make a clear distinction between bombers suitable only for tactical and those necessary for strategic purposes in the early stages of a likely future war. 

===J.F.C. Fuller and B. H. Liddell Hart===
British theorists J.F.C. Fuller and Captain B. H. Liddell Hart have often been associated with the development of blitzkrieg, though this is a matter of controversy. In recent years historians have uncovered that Liddell Hart distorted and falsified facts to make it appear as if his ideas were adopted. After the war Liddell Hart imposed his own perceptions, after the event, claiming that the mobile tank warfare practiced by the Wehrmacht was a result of his influence. Blitzkrieg itself is not an official doctrine and historians in recent times have come to the conclusion it did not exist as such:
It was the opposite of a doctrine. Blitzkrieg consisted of an avalanche of actions that were sorted out less by design and more by success. In hindsightand with some help from Liddell Hartthis torrent of action was squeezed into something it never was: an operational design. 

By "manipulation and contrivance, Liddell Hart distorted the actual circumstances of the blitzkrieg formation and he obscured its origins. Through his indoctrinated idealization of an ostentatious concept he reinforced the myth of blitzkrieg". By imposing, retrospectively, his own perceptions of mobile warfare upon the shallow concept of blitzkrieg, he "created a theoretical imbroglio that has taken 40 years to unravel." The early 1950s literature transformed blitzkrieg into a historical military doctrine, which carried the signature of Liddell Hart and Heinz Guderian. The main evidence of Liddell Hart's deceit and "tendentious" report of history can be found in his letters to the German Generals Erich von Manstein and Heinz Guderian, as well as relatives and associates of Erwin Rommel. Liddell Hart, in letters to Guderian, "imposed his own fabricated version of blitzkrieg on the latter and compelled him to proclaim it as original formula". Danchev 1998, p. 239 Historian Kenneth Macksey found Liddell Hart's original letters to Guderian, in the General's papers, requesting that Guderian give him credit for "impressing him" with his ideas of armoured warfare. When Liddell Hart was questioned about this in 1968, and the discrepancy between the English and German editions of Guderian's memoirs, "he gave a conveniently unhelpful though strictly truthful reply. ('There is nothing about the matter in my file of correspondence with Guderian himself except...that I thanked him...for what he said in that additional paragraph'.)". Danchev 1998, pp. 235239. 

During World War I, Fuller had been a staff officer attached to the newly developed tank force. He later developed plans for massive, independent tank operations, which he claimed was subsequently studied by the German military. It is variously argued that Fuller's wartime plans and post-war writings were an inspiration, or that his readership was low and German experiences during the war received more attention. The Germans' view of themselves as the losers of the war may be linked to the senior and experienced officers' undertaking a thorough review, studying, and rewriting of all their Army doctrine and training manuals. The UK's response was much weaker. 

Both Fuller and Liddell Hart were "outsiders": Liddell Hart was unable to serve as an active soldier because of ill-health, and Fuller's abrasive personality resulted in his premature retirement in 1933. Their views therefore had limited impact within the British Army's official hierarchy. The British War Office did permit the formation of an Experimental Mechanized Force on 1 May 1927, composed of tanks, lorried infantry, self-propelled artillery and motorized engineers, but financial constraints prevented the experiment from being extended.

===Innovation===
It has been argued that blitzkrieg was not new. The Germans did not invent something called blitzkrieg in the 1920s and 1930s. Rather the German concept of wars of movement and concentrated force were seen in wars of Prussia and the German wars of unification. The first European general to introduce rapid movement, concentrated power and integrated military effort was Swedish King Gustavus Adolphus during the Thirty Years' War. The appearance of the aircraft and tank in the First World War, often hailed as a revolution in military affairs (RMA), offered the German military a chance to get back to the traditional war of movement as practiced by Moltke the Elder. 
The so-called "blitzkrieg campaigns" of 1939  circa 1942, were well within that operational context. 

At the outbreak of war, the German army had no radically new theory of war named Blitzkrieg or otherwise. The operational thinking of the German army had not changed significantly since the First World War or since the late 19th century. J. P. Harris and Robert M. Citino point out that the Germans had always had a marked preference for short, decisive campaigns  but were unable to achieve short-order victories in First World War conditions. The transformation from the stalemate of the First World War into tremendous initial operational and strategic success in the Second, was partly the employment of a relatively small number of mechanised divisions, most importantly the Panzer divisions, and the support of an exceptionally powerful air force. 

===Guderian===
Heinz Guderian is popularly alleged to be one of the founders of the military method of warfare that was eventually branded blitzkrieg. Some have recently expressed doubt to how much of the theory was his. Following Germany's military reforms of the 1920s, Heinz Guderian emerged as a strong proponent of mechanised forces. Within the Inspectorate of Transport Troops, Guderian and colleagues performed theoretical and field exercise work. Guderian claimed there was opposition from many officers who gave primacy to the infantry or simply doubted the usefulness of the tank. Among them, Guderian claimed, was Chief of the General Staff Ludwig Beck (193538), who he alleged was skeptical that armored forces could be decisive. This claim has been disputed by later historians. For example, James Corum stated:
Guderian expressed a hearty contempt for General Ludwig Beck, chief of the General Staff from 1935 to 1938, whom he characterized as hostile to ideas of modern mechanised warfare: quoting Guderian "He was a paralyzing element wherever he appeared....ignificantly of his way of thought was his much-boosted method of fighting which he called delaying defense". This is a crude caricature of a highly competent general who authored Army Regulation 300 (Troop Leadership) in 1933, the primary tactical manual of the German Army in World War II, and under whose direction the first three panzer divisions were created in 1935, the largest such force in the world of the time. 

Another misconception, enhanced by Guderian's own account, that he was the sole creator of German tactical and operational methodology is also misleading. Between 1922 and 1928 Guderian wrote very few articles of barely more than a page or two concerning military movement. Guderian's Achtung Panzer! (1937) relied heavily on other theorists such as Ludwig Ritter von Eimannsberger, whose major book, The Tank War (Der Kampfwagenkrieg) (1934) gained a wide audience in the German Army. Another theorist, Ernst Volckheim, was also used by Guderian, and wrote a huge amount on tank and combined arms tactics, and is not acknowledged by Guderian. 

Guderian's leadership was supported, fostered and institutionalized by his supporters in the Reichswehr General Staff system, which worked the Army to greater and greater levels of capability through massive and systematic Movement Warfare war games in the 1930s.

Guderian argued that the tank was the decisive weapon of war. "If the tanks succeed, then victory follows", he wrote. In an article addressed to critics of tank warfare, he wrote "until our critics can produce some new and better method of making a successful land attack other than self-massacre, we shall continue to maintain our beliefs that tanksproperly employed, needless to sayare today the best means available for land attack." Addressing the faster rate at which defenders could reinforce an area than attackers could penetrate it during the First World War, Guderian wrote that "since reserve forces will now be motorized, the building up of new defensive fronts is easier than it used to be; the chances of an offensive based on the timetable of artillery and infantry co-operation are, as a result, even slighter today than they were in the last war." He continued, "We believe that by attacking with tanks we can achieve a higher rate of movement than has been hitherto obtainable, andwhat is perhaps even more importantthat we can keep moving once a breakthrough has been made." Guderian's remarks are from an unnamed article published in the National Union of German Officers, 15 October 1937 as quoted in Panzer Leader, pp.3946. Italics removedthe quoted sections are all italics in the original. Guderian additionally required that tactical radios be widely used to facilitate co-ordination and command by having one installed in all tanks.

==See also==
* AirLand Battle, blitzkrieg-like doctrine of US Army in 1980s
* Armored warfare
* Maneuver warfare
* Rush (computer and video games), an RTS strategy influenced by the blitzkrieg method
* Shock and Awe, the 21st century US military doctrine.
* Vernichtungsgedanken, or "annihilation concept".
* Mission-type tactics
* Deep Battle, Soviet Red Army Military Doctrine from the 1930s often confused with blitzkrieg.
* Battleplan (documentary TV series)
* Vernichtungsschlacht

==References==

===Footnotes===

==Bibliography==

* Citino, Robert Michael. (2005) The German Way of War: From the Thirty Years' War to the Third Reich. Lawrence: University of Kansas Press. ISBN 978-0-7006-1624-4
* Cooper, Matthew. (1997) The German Army, 19331945 : Its Political and Military Failure. Lantham: Scarborough House. ISBN 0-8128-8519-8.
*
*
* Alex Danchev, Alchemist of War: The Life of Basil Liddell Hart. Nicolson, London. 1998. ISBN 0-7538-0873-0
*
*
*
* 
*
* 
* Frieser, Karl-Heinz. (1995) Blitzkrieg-Legende : Der Westfeldzug 1940, Operationen des Zweiten Weltkrieges. Mnchen: R. Oldenbourg. ISBN 3-486-56124-3.
*
*
*
*
* Griehl, Manfred. Junker Ju 87 Stuka. London/Stuttgart: Airlife Publishing/Motorbuch, 2001. ISBN 1-84037-198-6.
* Guderian, Heinz Achtung-Panzer London, Wellington House, 1937. (Reissue edition, 1999).
* Guderian, Heinz Panzer Leader New York Da Capo Press, 1952. (Reissue edition, 2001). ISBN 0-306-80689-4.
*
* Hill, A. J. (1978) Chauvel of the Light Horse A Biography of General Sir Harry Chauvel, GCMG, KCB. Melbourne: Melbourne University Press. OCLC 5003626.
* Hughes, Matthew (edited and selected) (2004) Allenby in Palestine The Middle East Correspondence of Field Marshal Viscount Allenby June 1917October 1919 Publications of the Army Records Society Vol. 22. Stroud, Gloucestershire, Phoenix Mill, Thrupp, Sutton Publishing Ltd for Army Records Society. IBSN 9780750938419.
*
*
*
*
* Mosier, John. (2003)The Blitzkrieg Myth, Harper Collins Publishers Inc.. ISBN 0-06-000976-4
*
*
* Paret, John. Makers of Modern Strategy: From Machiavelli to the Nuclear Age. Oxford University Press. 1986. ISBN 0-19-820097-8
* Shirer, William. (1969) The Collapse of the Third Republic: An Inquiry into the Collapse of France in 1940. New York: Simon & Schuster. ISBN 978-0-671-20337-5
*
*
*
*
*
* 

==External links==
* 
* House, Jonathan M. (1985) Toward Combined Arms Warfare: A Survey of 20th-Century Tactics, Doctrine, and Organization. Fort Leavenworth/Washington: U.S. Army Command and General Staff College.
* Sinesi, Michael Patrick (2001) Modern Bewegungskrieg: German Battle Doctrine, 19201940. Thesis submitted to The Faculty of Columbian School of Arts and Sciences of The George Washington University in partial satisfaction of the requirements for the degree of Master of Arts; directed by Andrew Zimmerman, Assistant Professor of History. (Microsoft Word document).

 



[[The Beano]]

The Beano is a long running British children's comic, published by D. C. Thomson & Co.

The comic first appeared on 30 July 1938, http://www.lollipopanimation.com/php/The_Beano_art.php and was published weekly. During World War II, The Beano and The Dandy were published on alternating weeks because of paper and ink rationing. D. C. Thomson's other publications also suffered, with the Oor Wullie and The Broons annuals falling victim to paper and ink shortages. Paper and ink supplies were fully restored shortly after the end of hostilities and weekly publication of The Beano and The Dandy resumed in 1949. In September 2009, The Beanos 3,500th issue was published. http://forbiddenplanet.co.uk/blog/wp-content/uploads/2009/09/beano3500.jpg The Beano is currently edited by Michael Stirling. Each issue is published on a Wednesday, with the issue date being that of the following Saturday.

Its iconic characters, such as Dennis the Menace, Minnie the Minx, The Bash Street Kids, The Numskulls, Roger the Dodger, Billy Whizz and Ball Boy, have become known to generations of British children. Earlier generations will remember other notable characters who have been phased out, such as Ivy the Terrible, Calamity James, The Three Bears and Pansy Potter. Some old characters, like Biffo the Bear, Lord Snooty, Baby Face Finlayson and Little Plum, have more recently made a return as "funsize" quarter-page strips.

The style of Beano humour has shifted noticeably over the years, though the longstanding tradition of anarchic humour has remained. For decades strips have appeared to glorify immoral behaviour, e.g. bullying (Dennis the Menace), dishonesty (Roger the Dodger) and even robbery (Baby Face Finlayson and The Three Bears). Although the readers' sympathies are assumed to be with the miscreants, the latter are very often shown punished for their actions. Recent years have seen a rise in humour involving gross bodily functions, especially flatulence (which would have been taboo in children's comics prior to the 1990s), while depictions of corporal punishment have declined. For example the literal slipper (Dennis the Menace's father's instrument of chastisement) has become the name of the local chief of police (Sergeant Slipper).

The comics were also distributed in some of Britain's colonies or former colonies. As they were sent by sea mail, they would go on sale some weeks after the date shown on the cover.

==History==
===Founding, expansion===
In 1921, D. C. Thomson had first entered the field of boys' story papers with Adventure. The success of this paper led to five further publications, The Rover and The Wizard in 1922, The Vanguard in 1924, The Skipper in 1930 and The Hotspur in 1933. Although The Vanguard folded in 1926, the others were a great triumph and became known as "The Big Five"; they ended Amalgamated Press's near-monopoly of the British comic industry. Joseph McAleer, Popular Reading and Publishing in Britain 19141950, Oxford: Clarendon, 1992, ISBN 0-19-820329-2, pp. 167-68. 

Another success was the Fun Section of D. C. Thomson's Scottish weekly newspaper The Sunday Post, which included the two strips Oor Wullie and The Broons by lead artist Dudley Watkins, as well as other funnies and various puzzles and adventure stories. This gave R. D. Low, the head of children's publications at D. C. Thomson at the time, the idea to create another Big Five, this time of comics intended for both boys and girls and consisting mainly of 'funnies' and more lighthearted adventure and text stories. Ian Brown, The Edinburgh History of Scottish Literature volume 3: Modern transformations: New Identities (from 1918), Edinburgh University Press, 2007, ISBN 978-0-7486-2482-9, p. 205. 

The first of these publications, The Dandy, commenced in 1937 and was followed by The Beano on 26 July 1938. A third paper, The Magic Comic, aimed at a slightly younger audience, followed in July 1939, but ceased publication in early 1941, due to paper rationing. Wartime shortages also prevented the New Big Five project from being completed.

The Beano comic takes its name from the English word beano which can be loosely interpreted as a good time. For further discussion of the origin of this word, see The Meaning Of Beano 

The first edition of The Beano was dated 30 July 1938, Issue dates of British comics. Retrieved 30 March 2007 and the 3000th issue was published in January 2000. Mark Oliver, "Dennis the Menace", The Guardian, Wednesday 14 March 2001. Retrieved 30 March 2007. There are only 12 known copies of the first issue in existence, and only 5 known copies of the second issue (not including facsimiles). The first issue's cover could be found on the back of issue 2000.

A copy of this first issue sold for 12,100 on 16 March 2004, which was at the time thought to be the highest price ever paid for a British comic at an auction. 12,000 Record Beano. Retrieved 30 March 2007 The current highest price is 20,350, "Dandy comic sold for record price". Retrieved 5 October 2010 which was paid for the first issue of The Dandy on 7 September 2004. The Beano is now the longest-running weekly comic, since The Dandy became a fortnightly comic in 2007.

===Merchandising===
Beano stamp issued by Royal Mail
The now defunct Beanoland at Chessington World of Adventures in the UK.
The Beano is so popular that it had its own section of the Chessington World of Adventures theme park, "Beanoland". This opened in 2000 and survived for a decade before sponsorship was eventually lost. Most of the major Beanoland attractions remain in operation today but have been rethemed as "Wild Asia".

On 19 March 2012 The Royal Mail launched a special stamp collection to celebrate Britain's rich comic book history. The collection featured The Beano, The Dandy, Eagle, The Topper, Roy of the Rovers, Bunty, Buster, Valiant, Twinkle and 2000 AD.

===Editors===
The original editor was George Moonie, 19381959, followed by Harold Cramond, 1959-84. Euan Kerr was editor from 1984 until he handed over to Alan Digby in early 2006. Alan had been Beano Chief Sub Editor when Euan first became editor, and later edited The Beezer. Euan has returned to edit BeanoMAX as of issue 2 (see below). Following the retirement of Euan Kerr, Alan Digby took over as Editor-in-Chief of both titles. Digby retired in 2011, leaving Michael Stirling as the new editor. Currently the latest editor of The Beano is Craig Graham who joined The Beano once The Dandy announced its closure. Upon his arrival as editor he has made many changes to The Beano and has already revamped The Beano twice despite only becoming editor in August 2012.

===Revamps===
The Beanos first major revamp was in the 50th birthday issue of 1988, when the page number was increased, the comic had a wider paper style, and more colour was used throughout. Another occurred in issue 2674, dated 16 October 1993, when the whole comic was now printed in full colour, along with some new strips such as The Numskulls, which had been moved from The Beezer.

No major revamps happened from then until 1998, when Dennis' baby sister Bea was born. The logo was rounded and embossed (but later flattened in February 1999), and there were 8 extra pages. Computers were starting to be used for articles and speech bubbles, rather than the usual hand drawn ones.

Since April 2007, The Beano has had five revamps to help it keep up to date. The first occurred on 7 April 2007. The logo was raised using a heavy black drop shadow, and the body of the lettering and its yellow trim were separated by a subtle 3D groove effect. The website address was looped inside the "O". This logo had been used in the Beano Club for one issue in 2006. Two new comic strips were introduced, these being The Riot Squad and Fred's Bed, reprints from Hoot and The Beezer and Topper respectively. There was a record number of uncredited reprints, with the likes of Ivy the Terrible, Calamity James, Les Pretend also being reprinted. In certain areas of the UK, such as Lancashire, the price was increased to 99p, while elsewhere it remained as 85p.

The second happened on 27 October 2007. The logo was still grooved, but was now back to the rounded style which it had from 1999 to 2006. It was quite similar to the original rounded logo from 1998, which was flattened the following year.
The number of reprint pages was cut from 4 to 2, but more started to appear after about a month. Two new strips were also added, Johnny Bean from Happy Bunny Green and London B412. The price increased to 99p across the whole UK.

The third was the least major revamp. The background was changed from one colour behind the logo and another behind the Dennis strip to one single colour or a pattern, such as red and black stripes. New fonts were being used on the front cover, and the "Pocket money price" logo had been changed to a large "WOW! 99p" which was usually placed in the top corners. No new strips were added this time, but the amount of reprints went up to 5, sometimes lowering back to 4 per week, and an extra Dennis strip was added on the inside back two pages.

The fourth revamp, which happened with the issue dated 18 October 2008 had been the most major revamp to date. There was a return of Billy the Cat inside, as well as a new Super School strip by Lew Stringer. The price rose to 1.25 per issue. Different characters appear on the 'O' each week in a cleaner tidier embossed logo. New headline fonts were introduced (CCZoinks), the balloon font was also changed to Cloudsplitter by Blambot. But the main change was the paper style, which had finally changed from newsprint to a glossy paper, much in the style of the inside pages of the then companion papers Dandy Xtreme and BeanoMAX. The only difference between these paper styles is the front cover, which was thicker on the Dandy Xtreme and BeanoMAX, but the same as the pages throughout in the weekly Beano.

As of late 2010, The Beano is printed by BGP and the comic is now in an A4 format. A mild revision of style accompanies this with balloon font changed to CCTimeSaleLower, an upper and lower case font and a much larger Beano logo on the cover. The font CCZoinks appears to have less prominence with CreativeBlockBold taking centre stage. The Beano Club was closed down in 2010 and its pages changed to Beano VIP with more online presence. The paper is still glossy, but the paper stock gives it a matte feel. At the start of 2011, the Beano VIP pages were dropped from the comic, but the online features remain.

In the issue dated 12 October 2011, there was another revamp. The comic was expanded to 36 pages, and the paper stock was made smoother. The Number 13 and The Germs strips returned as reprints. A reader's page was also reintroduced, this time titled the Menace Gallery. After two appearances, this was renamed "The Treehouse".

In the issue dated 28 January 2012, The Beano's cover changed. The logo was now more like the 1972-1998 version, but with the "The" inside the B, like it was mainly since then. The special "O"s that had appeared sometimes in the last year were also kept. The first panel of the Dennis & Gnasher strip also appeared on the cover, like from 1972-2008, but the "This Week In Beanotown" feature still appeared across the bottom.

In late 2012, Craig Graham took over as Beano editor and revamped the comic entirely to be similar to the 2010-12 Dandy. As a result, two mini-strip pages titled 'Funsize Funnies' were introduced and featured Simply Smiffy, Rasher, Little Plum, Les Pretend, Pup Parade, Baby Face Finlayson as well as two new strips Gnash Gnews and Winston and also introduced artists such as Wilbur Dawbarn (who took over Billy Whizz from Nick Brennan), Lew Stringer (not seen in The Beano since Super School), Alexander Matthews, Paul Palmer and Nigel Auchterlounie. Auchterlounie soon took over writing Dennis the Menace and Gnasher also which had returned to its pre-2009 style with new characters from the 2009 TV series. In January 2013, Biffo the Bear, Pansy Potter, Lord Snooty and Gnipper were added to the Funsize Funnies introducing Graham Howie to The Beano and being the return of Wayne Thompson. Later that year, two new comic strips were added called Big Time Charlie and Tricky Dicky (relaunch of the classic Topper star) and Stunt Gran, BamBeanos, BSK CCTV joined the Funsize Funnies replacing Gnash Gnews, Pup Parade and Pansy Potter. Puzzle pages frequently appeared in the comic now, similar to the 2010-12 Dandy with Jamie Smart and Lew Stringer originally drawing the puzzles and later on other artists such as Steve Beckett and Barrie Appleby.

===Gnashional Menace Day and the 70th birthday===
As a celebration, in partnership with the CLIC Sargent charity, 2 August 2008 was Gnashional Menace Day, where children were sponsored to behave like Dennis. The anniversary was also celebrated with a 40-page issue (instead of 32 pages; the 60th birthday issue also had extra pages, 48 instead of 24) guest edited by Wallace and Gromit creator Nick Park, Gromit creator revels in having a bash at the Beano, The Guardian, 21 July 2008 price 1.50 (not 99p) and an issue of Classics from the Comics devoted to the Beano. There is also a special 64-page book available, The Beano Special Collectors Edition: 70 Years of Fun, giving a brief history of the comic. In the Beano's home city of Dundee, a special exhibition was held at the University of Dundee featuring original artwork and other memorabilia loaned from D.C. Thomson - it ran until 20 September 2008. happy Birthday Beano!, the University of Dundee Museum Collections In London the Cartoon Museum showed the exhibition Beano and Dandy Birthday Bash! from 30 July to 2 November 2008, featuring original artwork from all eight decades of both 'The Beano' and 'The Dandy', including work by Dudley D. Watkins, David Law, Leo Baxendale and Ken Reid as well as David Sutherland and many contemporary artists. There were events for children throughout August. Cartoon Museum 
There was also a special coffee table book called , published by Waverly Books.

===75th Anniversary, changes===
In the 75th Anniversary Special, The Beano had yet another revamp introducing celebrities as regular characters in a similar fashion to that of the 2010-11 Dandy. As a result, all of the Funsize Funnies as well as the two new recently added comic strips Tricky Dicky and Big Time Charlie plus the reprinted Calamity James were all dropped. Bananaman came out of Geering reprints after being in them for over a year with Wayne Thompson reprising the role of artist after drawing him previously in The Dandy from 2010-12. Roger the Dodger was taken over by Jamie Smart and Ball Boy was taken over by Alexander Matthews and completely relaunched. Nigel Auchterlounie also took over as scriptwriter of The Bash Street Kids and Bananaman, as well as now both writing and drawing The Numskulls which itself had had a huge relaunch with one-off celebrities replacing the role of Edd starting with Ant and Dec. 12-year-old artist Zoom Rockman also joined The Beano in this issue drawing Skanky Pigeon which would appear monthly. In the issue after the 75th Anniversary Special, fourteen new comic strips joined The Beano with twelve of these becoming the new Funsize Funnies stories, all of which are parodies of either a celebrity or TV show: High School Moozical, Neigh-Bours, Celebrity Believe It or Not, I Pity the School, Murs Attacks, Ashley's Banjo, Coronation Bleat, Jose's Back, Simon's Bowel, Guess Who?, Watch-Hog and Danny Diddly O'Donoghue as well as two new one-page stories to replace Tricky Dicky and Big Time Charlie: El Poco Loco and Teenage Mutant Ninja Turkeys. Stu Munro also took over as both puzzle page artist (as he did in The Dandy) and The Dandy's Madvertisements were brought back with Stu Munro once again drawing them. Since the 75th Anniversary Special revamp, The Beano has now gained Andy Fanton, Stephen Waller, Dean Rankine, Garry Davies and Rick Eades all from The Dandy and the only original Beano artists that remain in the comic are David Sutherland, Laura Howell and Nigel Parkinson since Barrie Appleby, Barry Glennard, Hunt Emerson and Dave Eastbury all appear to have gone.

The Beano now operates more like The Dandy used to in its 2010-12 era. Stories now appear in short series as opposed to the previous lengthy series with comic strips replacing others constantly.

==Strips==

A number of strips in the comic have run for a very long time. The top five longest running Beano comic strips are, in descending order, Dennis the Menace, Minnie the Minx, Bash Street Kids, Roger the Dodger, and then the last holder of the title before Dennis, Lord Snooty.
Dennis the Menace's famous red and black jersey had formed the colours of a few of the Beano characters' clothes (Minnie the Minx has the same, although the placement of the stripes is a bit different; Ball Boy's was a vertical red and black; Roger the Dodger has a chessboard design top, and Danny (from the Bash Street Kids) has a similar cap), but they have changed for Minnie and Ball Boy (Minnie at one point had a red and yellow top and Ball Boy's strip is now black and blue).

There are frequent fictional crossovers between Beano characters, with most of the characters living in the fictional Beanotown. Many of the comic strips in The Dandy are drawn by the same artists, and crossovers between the two comics also occur occasionally. Quite often, one comic will make a tongue-in-cheek jibe at the other (e.g., a character meeting an elderly lady, and stating that she's "older than the jokes in The Dandy"). In the strips, it is expressed that the two towns are rivals with each other and before The Dandy did a drastic format change they had an embassy in Beanotown which many of the town's citizens attempted to overrun, but failed (the embassy had no existence in The Beano). This rivalry inspired the spin-off computer game Beanotown Racing, in which various characters from both comics could be raced around points in Beanotown, including the Embassy. The game was given a large amount of advance publicity in the comics, with story lines often revolving how the characters each acquired his/her vehicle.

Occasionally there are longer than usual strips for example a strip of sixteen pages rather than the usual two pages. These longer strips include The Bash Street Kids Adventures written and drawn by Kev F Sutherland which since 2004 have featured parodies of famous comic strip images, including Amazing Fantasy's first Spider-Man cover, Action Comics' first Superman cover, and most recently the cover of X Men #100.

===Reader Polls===

During the 1980s, The Beano ran a 'Readers' Request' feature where readers could request for a particular comic strip to feature in the Beano. This led to the return of dropped characters, including Little Plum, Baby Face Finlayson and The McTickles, but also led to the introduction of new strips such as Little Monkey.

Reader polls started to appear in the 1990s, allowing the readers to rate the strips in the comic. These polls have been quite influential, as they indicate which strips the readers like best, and strips that have performed poorly in these polls were usually dropped.

On a number of occasions the Beano has allowed its readers to vote for which new strips they want to appear in the comic. This usually consists of three new comic strips being run for a number of weeks and the readers can vote on which strips they prefer and the one that receives the most votes stays in the Beano. Readers have been able to cast their votes via telephone, or more recently via the Beano website.

The first such vote occurred in 1995 with Vic Volcano emerging as the winner. In the 1997 competition, two new strips were added permanently, with Tim Traveller winning and Crazy for Daisy the runner-up. By the early 2000s, these competitions were named Comic Idol (in reference to Pop Idol). In the 2004 competition, the margin between winner Joe Jitsu and runner-up Colin the Vet was 1%, so both strips were added to the comic.

The most recent incarnation in 2010 featured three new strips, Meebo and Zuky, Home Invasion, and Uh oh Si Co!. Meebo and Zuky won, with Home Invasion finishing as runner-up, though only Meebo and Zuky were added to the comic. In 2011 the Dandy did a similar competition where readers voted for their favourite out of four strips, entitled Strictly Come Laughing (a reference to Strictly Come Dancing).

==Spin-off comics==

===Comic libraries===

Since 1982 the comic, along with The Dandy, has also run "Comic Library" titles. Released monthly, these titles are a feature length (usually about 64-page) adventure, featuring a character from the comic itself. They are available in A5 size only. In 1998, these were replaced by the Fun Size Beano. Fun Size Comics were discontinued in late 2010.

===Beano specials===
The comic also ran A4-sized Beano Specials in 1987 with full coloured pages, which later were replaced by Beano Superstars which ran for 121 issues from 1992-2002. These were similar to the Comic Library series. Some of the last issues were printed versions of episodes from the 1996-1998 Dennis and Gnasher animated TV series.
A Beano Poster Comic series was also printed in the early 1990s.

The Beano Specials returned in 2003, and were now published seasonally. The issues were numbered, and the first one was a Dennis and Friends special, the last a Christmas reprint special. These were replaced by BeanoMAX in early 2007.

===BeanoMAX===

On 15 February 2007, the first issue of a monthly comic entitled BeanoMAX was published. The sister comic features many of the same characters, however the stories in BeanoMAX are written in a longer format meant for 1013-year olds. The first issue was a Comic Relief special featuring assorted celebrity guests.

===Plug===

Plug was a comic based on the eponymous character from The Bash Street Kids that began with issue dated 24 September 1977, and is notable for being the first comic to make use of rotogravure printing. The magazine similar in style to I.P.C's Krazy which had started the previous year. It contained uncharacteristically outlandish material for D C. Thomson, as well as later including celebrity appearances in the comic.

The comic revealed Plug's full name to be Percival Proudfoot Plugsley and also gave him a pet monkey by the name of Chumkee. Plug's strip was mostly drawn by Vic Neill but other artists, including Dave Gudgeon drew some later strips. Other strips included Antchester United, Violent Elizabeth, Eebagoom, Hugh's Zoo and D'ye Ken John Squeal and his Hopeless Hounds.

The venture was unsuccessful, in part because the comic cost 9p, with the Beano at the time only costing 4p and most of its rivals priced similarly. It merged with The Beezer on 24 February 1979.

===Dennis and Gnasher===
The brand new Dennis and Gnasher was launched separately from The Beano in September 2009.

Dennis and Gnasher got their own TV series on CBBC from 7 September 2009 to accompany the comic's new look. This was their second, having also had one in 1996, which ran for two series on CBBC, The Children's Channel, and Fox Kids.

Dennis and Gnasher were presenting their own radio show on Fun Kids from 5 September 2009.

==See also==

* The Beano Summer Special
* The Beano Annual
* List of magazines published in Scotland
* British comics
*List of Beano comic strips
*List of Beano comic strips by annual

==References==

*
*
*

* 

* 
* "75 years of The Beano: A timeline." http://chrishallamworldview.wordpress.com/2013/07/03/75-years-of-the-beano-a-timeline-1938-2013/ July 2013

==External links==
* Official Beano site



[[Bee]]

Bees are flying insects closely related to wasps and ants, and are known for their role in pollination and for producing honey and beeswax. Bees are a monophyletic lineage within the superfamily Apoidea, presently considered as a clade Anthophila. There are nearly 20,000 known species of bees in seven to nine recognized families, though many are undescribed and the actual number is probably higher. They are found on every continent except Antarctica, in every habitat on the planet that contains insect-pollinated flowering plants.

Bees are adapted for feeding on nectar and pollen, the former primarily as an energy source and the latter primarily for protein and other nutrients. Most pollen is used as food for larvae.

Bees have a long proboscis (a complex "tongue") that enables them to obtain the nectar from flowers. They have antennae almost universally made up of 13 segments in males and 12 in females, as is typical for the superfamily. Bees all have two pairs of wings, the hind pair being the smaller of the two; in a very few species, one sex or caste has relatively short wings that make flight difficult or impossible, but none are wingless.

Tiny bee stingless bee species exist whose workers are less than 2 mm long. The largest bee in the world is Megachile pluto, a leafcutter bee whose females can attain a length of 39 mm (1.5"). Members of the family Halictidae, or sweat bees, are the most common type of bee in the Northern Hemisphere, though they are small and often mistaken for wasps or flies.

The best-known bee species is the European honey bee, which, as its name suggests, produces honey, as do a few other types of bee. Human management of this species is known as beekeeping or apiculture.

Bees are the favorite meal of Merops apiaster, the bee-eater bird. Other common predators are kingbirds, mockingbirds, beewolves, and dragonflies.

== Evolution ==
The ancestors of bees were wasps in the family Crabronidae, and therefore predators of other insects. The switch from insect prey to pollen may have resulted from the consumption of prey insects which were flower visitors and were partially covered with pollen when they were fed to the wasp larvae. This same evolutionary scenario has also occurred within the vespoid wasps, where the group known as "pollen wasps" also evolved from predatory ancestors. Up until recently, the oldest non-compression bee fossil had been Cretotrigona prisca in New Jersey amber and of Cretaceous age, a meliponine. A recently reported bee fossil, of the genus Melittosphex, is considered "an extinct lineage of pollen-collecting Apoidea sister to the modern bees", and dates from the early Cretaceous (~100 mya). Derived features of its morphology ("apomorphies") place it clearly within the bees, but it retains two unmodified ancestral traits ("plesiomorphies") of the legs (two mid-tibial spurs, and a slender hind basitarsus), indicative of its transitional status.

The earliest animal-pollinated flowers were pollinated by insects such as beetles, so the syndrome of insect pollination was well established before bees first appeared. The novelty is that bees are specialized as pollination agents, with behavioral and physical modifications that specifically enhance pollination, and are generally more efficient at the task than any other pollinating insect such as beetles, flies, butterflies and pollen wasps. The appearance of such floral specialists is believed to have driven the adaptive radiation of the angiosperms, and, in turn, the bees themselves.

Among living bee groups, the "short-tongued" bee family Colletidae has traditionally been considered the most "primitive", and sister taxon to the remainder of the bees. In the 21st century, however, some researchers have claimed that the Dasypodaidae is the basal group, the short, wasp-like mouthparts of colletids being the result of convergent evolution, rather than indicative of a plesiomorphic condition. This subject is still under debate, and the phylogenetic relationships among bee families are poorly understood.

== Eusocial and semisocial bees ==
A honey bee swarm
Honey bees defend against wasp attacks
Bees may be solitary or may live in various types of communities. The most advanced of these are eusocial colonies found among the honey bees, bumblebees, and stingless bees. Sociality, of several different types, is believed to have evolved separately many times within the bees.

In some species, groups of cohabiting females may be sisters, and if there is a division of labor within the group, then they are considered semisocial.

If, in addition to a division of labor, the group consists of a mother and her daughters, then the group is called eusocial. The mother is considered the queen and the daughters are workers. These castes may be purely behavioral alternatives, in which case the system is considered "primitively eusocial" (similar to many paper wasps), and if the castes are morphologically discrete, then the system is "highly eusocial".

There are many more species of primitively eusocial bees than highly eusocial bees, but they have rarely been studied. The biology of most such species is almost completely unknown. The vast majority are in the family Halictidae, or "sweat bees". Colonies are typically small, with a dozen or fewer workers, on average. The only physical difference between queens and workers is average size, if they differ at all. Most species have a single season colony cycle, even in the tropics, and only mated females (future queens, or "gynes") hibernate (called diapause). A few species have long active seasons and attain colony sizes in the hundreds. The orchid bees include a number of primitively eusocial species with similar biology. Certain species of allodapine bees (relatives of carpenter bees) also have primitively eusocial colonies, with unusual levels of interaction between the adult bees and the developing brood. This is "progressive provisioning"; a larva's food is supplied gradually as it develops. This system is also seen in honey bees and some bumblebees.

Highly eusocial bees live in colonies. Each colony has a single queen, many workers and, at certain stages in the colony cycle, drones. When humans provide the nest, it is called a hive. Honey bee hives can contain up to 40,000 bees at their annual peak, which occurs in the spring, but usually have fewer.

=== Bumblebees ===

Bumblebees (Bombus terrestris, Bombus pratorum, et al.) are eusocial in a manner quite similar to the eusocial Vespidae such as hornets. The queen initiates a nest on her own (unlike queens of honey bees and stingless bees which start nests via swarms in the company of a large worker force). Bumblebee colonies typically have from 50 to 200 bees at peak population, which occurs in mid to late summer. Nest architecture is simple, limited by the size of the nest cavity (pre-existing), and colonies are rarely perennial. Bumblebee queens sometimes seek winter safety in honey bee hives, where they are sometimes found dead in the spring by beekeepers, presumably stung to death by the honey bees. It is unknown whether any survive winter in such an environment.

Bumblebees are one of the more important wild pollinators, but have declined significantly in recent decades. In the UK, two species have become nationally extinct during the last 75 years while others have been placed on the UK Biodiversity Action Plan as priority species in recognition of the need for conservation action. In 2006 a new charity, the Bumblebee Conservation Trust, was established to coordinate efforts to conserve remaining populations through conservation and education. In 2011, the International Union for the Conservation of Nature set up the Bumblebee Specialist Group to review the threat status of all bumblebee species world-wide using the IUCN Red List criteria. 

=== Stingless bees ===

Stingless bees are very diverse in behavior, but all are highly eusocial. They practise mass provisioning, complex nest architecture, and perennial colonies.

=== Honey bees ===
An African bee Apis mellifera suspecies scutellata, extracts nectar from a flower as pollen grains stick to its body in Tanzania

The true honey bees (genus Apis) have arguably the most complex social behavior among the bees, is the best known bee species, and one of the best known of all insects. There are 29 subspecies of Apis mellifera, native to Europe, the Middle East, and Africa.

==== Africanized honey bee ====

Africanized bees, also called killer bees, are a hybrid strain of Apis mellifera derived from experiments by Warwick Estevam Kerr to cross European and African honey bee subspecies. Several queen bees escaped from his laboratory in South America and have spread throughout the Americas. Africanized honey bees are more defensive than European honey bees.

== Solitary and communal bees ==
Most other bees, including familiar species of bee such as the Eastern carpenter bee (Xylocopa virginica), alfalfa leafcutter bee (Megachile rotundata), orchard mason bee (Osmia lignaria) and the hornfaced bee (Osmia cornifrons) are solitary in the sense that every female is fertile, and typically inhabits a nest she constructs herself. There are no worker bees for these species. Solitary bees typically produce neither honey nor beeswax. They are immune from acarine and Varroa mites, but have their own unique parasites, pests and diseases (see also diseases of the honey bee).

Solitary bees are important pollinators, and pollen is gathered for provisioning the nest with food for their brood. Often it is mixed with nectar to form a paste-like consistency. Some solitary bees have very advanced types of pollen-carrying structures on their bodies. A very few species of solitary bees are being increasingly cultured for commercial pollination. Most of these species belong to a distinct set of genera, namely: carpenter bees, sweat bees, mason bees, polyester bees, squash bees, dwarf carpenter bees, leafcutter bees, alkali bees, digger bees. 

A solitary bee, Anthidium florentinum (family Megachilidae), visiting Lantana

Solitary bees are often oligoleges, in that they only gather pollen from one or a few species/genera of plants (unlike honey bees and bumblebees which are generalists). No known bees are nectar specialists; many oligolectic bees will visit multiple plants for nectar, but there are no bees which visit only one plant for nectar while also gathering pollen from many different sources. Specialist pollinators also include bee species which gather floral oils instead of pollen, and male orchid bees, which gather aromatic compounds from orchids (one of the only cases where male bees are effective pollinators). In a very few cases only one species of bee can effectively pollinate a plant species, and some plants are endangered at least in part because their pollinator is dying off. There is, however, a pronounced tendency for oligolectic bees to be associated with common, widespread plants which are visited by multiple pollinators (e.g., there are some 40 oligoleges associated with creosote bush in the US desert southwest, and a similar pattern is seen in sunflowers, asters, mesquite, etc.)

Solitary bees create nests in hollow reeds or twigs, holes in wood, or, most commonly, in tunnels in the ground. The female typically creates a compartment (a "cell") with an egg and some provisions for the resulting larva, then seals it off. A nest may consist of numerous cells. When the nest is in wood, usually the last (those closer to the entrance) contain eggs that will become males. The adult does not provide care for the brood once the egg is laid, and usually dies after making one or more nests. The males typically emerge first and are ready for mating when the females emerge. Providing nest boxes for solitary bees is increasingly popular among gardeners. Solitary bees are either stingless or very unlikely to sting (only in self-defense, if ever).

While solitary females each make individual nests, some species are gregarious, preferring to make nests near others of the same species, giving the appearance to the casual observer that they are social. Large groups of solitary bee nests are called aggregations, to distinguish them from colonies.

In some species, multiple females share a common nest, but each makes and provisions her own cells independently. This type of group is called "communal" and is not uncommon. The primary advantage appears to be that a nest entrance is easier to defend from predators and parasites when there are multiple females using that same entrance on a regular basis.

== Cleptoparasitic bees ==
Bombus vestalis, a cuckoo bee parasite of the bumblebee Bombus terrestris

Cleptoparasitic bees, commonly called "cuckoo bees" because their behavior is similar to cuckoo birds, occur in several bee families, though the name is technically best applied to the apid subfamily Nomadinae. Females of these bees lack pollen collecting structures (the scopa) and do not construct their own nests. They typically enter the nests of pollen collecting species, and lay their eggs in cells provisioned by the host bee. When the cuckoo bee larva hatches it consumes the host larva's pollen ball, and if the female cleptoparasite has not already done so, kills and eats the host larva. In a few cases where the hosts are social species, the cleptoparasite remains in the host nest and lays many eggs, sometimes even killing the host queen and replacing her.

Many cleptoparasitic bees are closely related to, and resemble, their hosts in looks and size, (i.e., the Bombus subgenus Psithyrus, which are parasitic bumblebees that infiltrate nests of species in other subgenera of Bombus). This common pattern gave rise to the ecological principle known as "Emery's Rule". Others parasitize bees in different families, like Townsendiella, a nomadine apid, one species of which is a cleptoparasite of the dasypodaid genus Hesperapis, while the other species in the same genus attack halictid bees.

== Nocturnal bees ==
Four bee families (Andrenidae, Colletidae, Halictidae, and Apidae) contain some species that are crepuscular (these may be either the vespertine or matinal type). These bees have greatly enlarged ocelli, which are extremely sensitive to light and dark, though incapable of forming images. Many are pollinators of flowers that themselves are crepuscular, such as evening primroses, and some live in desert habitats where daytime temperatures are extremely high.

== Flight ==
Bee in mid air flight carrying pollen in pollen basket

In M. Magnan 1934 French book Le vol des insectes, he wrote that he and a M. Saint-Lague had applied the equations of air resistance to bumblebees and found that their flight could not be explained by fixed-wing calculations, but that "One shouldn't be surprised that the results of the calculations don't square with reality". Ingram, Jay (2001) The Barmaid's Brain, Aurum Press, pp. 9192, ISBN 0716741202. This has led to a common misconception that bees "violate aerodynamic theory", but in fact it merely confirms that bees do not engage in fixed-wing flight, and that their flight is explained by other mechanics, such as those used by helicopters. 

In 1996 Charlie Ellington at Cambridge University showed that vortices created by many insects wings and non-linear effects were a vital source of lift; Secrets of bee flight revealed, Phillips, Helen. 28 November 2005. Retrieved 28 December 2007. vortices and non-linear phenomena are notoriously difficult areas of hydrodynamics, which has made for slow progress in theoretical understanding of insect flight.

In 2005, Michael Dickinson and his Caltech colleagues studied honey bee flight with the assistance of high-speed cinematography A video from newscientist.com. and a giant robotic mock-up of a bee wing. Deciphering the Mystery of Bee Flight Caltech Media Relations. 29 November 2005. Retrieved 2007, 47. Their analysis revealed that sufficient lift was generated by "the unconventional combination of short, choppy wing strokes, a rapid rotation of the wing as it flops over and reverses direction, and a very fast wing-beat frequency". Wing-beat frequency normally increases as size decreases, but as the bee's wing beat covers such a small arc, it flaps approximately 230 times per second, faster than a fruitfly (200 times per second) which is 80 times smaller. 

== Pollination ==

Squash bees are important pollinators of the plant genus Cucurbita and closely related plants, such as cucumbers
Bees play an important role in pollinating flowering plants, and are the major type of pollinator in ecosystems that contain flowering plants. Bees either focus on gathering nectar or on gathering pollen depending on demand, especially in social species. Bees gathering nectar may accomplish pollination, but bees that are deliberately gathering pollen are more efficient pollinators. It is estimated that one third of the human food supply depends on insect pollination, most of which is accomplished by bees, especially the domesticated European honey bee. Contract pollination has overtaken the role of honey production for beekeepers in many countries. Monoculture and the massive decline of many bee species (both wild and domesticated) have increasingly caused honey bee keepers to become migratory so that bees can be concentrated in seasonally varying high-demand areas of pollination.

Most bees are fuzzy and carry an electrostatic charge, which aids in the adherence of pollen. Female bees periodically stop foraging and groom themselves to pack the pollen into the scopa, which is on the legs in most bees, and on the ventral abdomen on others, and modified into specialized pollen baskets on the legs of honey bees and their relatives. Many bees are opportunistic foragers, and will gather pollen from a variety of plants, while others are oligolectic, gathering pollen from only one or a few types of plant. A small number of plants produce nutritious floral oils rather than pollen, which are gathered and used by oligolectic bees. One small subgroup of stingless bees, called "vulture bees," is specialized to feed on carrion, and these are the only bees that do not use plant products as food. Pollen and nectar are usually combined to form a "provision mass", which is often soupy, but can be firm. It is formed into various shapes (typically spheroid), and stored in a small chamber (a "cell"), with the egg deposited on the mass. The cell is typically sealed after the egg is laid, and the adult and larva never interact directly (a system called "mass provisioning").
Honey Bees immersed in Cactus flower pollen

In New Zealand scientists discovered that three genera of native bees have evolved to open flower buds of the native mistletoe Peraxilla tetrapetala. The buds cannot open themselves but are visited by birds such as the tui and bellbird which twist the top of the ripe bud. That action releases a mechanism which causes the petals to suddenly spring open, giving access to the nectar and pollen. However, when observing the native bees in the Canterbury province in the South Island, the scientists were astonished to see the bees biting the top off the buds, then pushing with their legs, occasionally popping open the buds to allow the bees to harvest the nectar and pollen, and therefore aid in the pollination of the mistletoe which is in decline in New Zealand. Nowhere else in the world have bees demonstrated ability to open explosive bird-adapted flowers. 

Visiting flowers can be a dangerous occupation. Many assassin bugs and crab spiders hide in flowers to capture unwary bees. Other bees are lost to birds in flight. Insecticides used on blooming plants kill many bees, both by direct poisoning and by contamination of their food supply. A honey bee queen may lay 2000 eggs per day during spring buildup, but she also must lay 1000 to 1500 eggs per day during the foraging season, mostly to replace daily casualties, most of which are workers dying of old age. Among solitary and primitively social bees, however, lifetime reproduction is among the lowest of all insects, as it is common for females of such species to produce fewer than 25 offspring.

The population value of bees depends partly on the individual efficiency of the bees, but also on the population itself. Thus while bumblebees have been found to be about ten times more efficient pollinators on cucurbits, the total efficiency of a colony of honey bees is much greater due to greater numbers. Likewise during early spring orchard blossoms, bumblebee populations are limited to only a few queens, and thus are not significant pollinators of early fruit.

== Bees and humans ==
Bee larvae as food in Java
Former coat of arms of Abella de la Conca, Lleida, Spain
Bees figure prominently in mythology and folklore and have been used by political theorists as a model for human society. Journalist Bee Wilson states that the image of a community of honey bees "occurs from ancient to modern times, in Aristotle and Plato; in Virgil and Seneca; in Erasmus and Shakespeare; Tolstoy, as well as by social theorists Bernard Mandeville and Karl Marx." They are found in heraldry where they can signify industriousness as in the Manchester bee in the crest of Manchester City Council.

In English folklore, bees would be told of important events in the household, in a custom known as "Telling the bees". 

Despite the honey bee's painful sting and the stereotype of insects as pests, bees are generally held in high regard. This is most likely due to their usefulness as pollinators and as producers of honey, their social nature, and their reputation for diligence. Bees are one of the few insects frequently used in advertisements in a positive manner, typically for products containing honey (such as Honey Nut Cheerios).

In ancient Egypt, the bee was seen to symbolize the lands of Lower Egypt, with the Pharaoh being referred to as "He of Sedge and Bee" (the sedge representing Upper Egypt).

In North America, yellowjackets and hornets, especially when encountered as flying pests, are often misidentified as bees, despite numerous differences between them.

Although a bee sting can be deadly to those with allergies, virtually all bee species are non-aggressive if undisturbed and many cannot sting at all. Humans are often a greater danger to bees, as bees can be affected or even harmed by encounters with toxic chemicals in the environment (see also bees and toxic chemicals).

In Indonesia bee larvae are eaten as a companion to rice, after being mixed with shredded coconut "meat", wrapped in banana leaves, and steamed.

=== Pollinator decline ===
Morphology of a female honey bee

From 1972 to 2006, there was a dramatic reduction in the number of feral honey bees in the US, which are now almost absent. At the same time there was a significant though somewhat gradual decline in the number of colonies maintained by beekeepers. This decline includes the cumulative losses from all factors, such as urbanization, systematic pesticide use, tracheal and Varroa mites, and commercial beekeepers' retiring and going out of business. However, in late 2006 and early 2007 the rate of attrition reached new proportions, and the term colony collapse disorder was coined to describe the sudden disappearances. After several years of research and concern, a team of scientists headed by Jerry Bromenshenk published a paper in October 2010 saying that a new DNA-based virus, invertebrate iridescent virus or IIV6, and the fungus Nosema ceranae were found in every killed colony the group studied. In their study they found that neither agent alone seemed deadly, but a combination of the virus and Nosema ceraneae was always 100% fatal. Bromenshenk said it is not yet clear whether one condition weakens the bees enough to be finished off by the second, or whether they somehow compound the others destructive power. "They're co-factors, thats all we can say at the moment. Theyre both present in all these collapsed colonies." Johnson, Kirk (6 October 2010) Scientists and Soldiers Solve a Bee Mystery. New York Times. Investigations into the phenomenon had occurred amidst great concern over the nature and extent of the losses. "Honey bees in US facing extinction", Telegraph, 14 March 2007. In 2009 some reports from the US suggested that 1/3 of the honey bee colonies did not survive the winter, Benjamin, Alison (2 May 2010) Fears for crops as shock figures from America show scale of bee catastrophe. The Observer. though normal winter losses are known to be around 25%. At the end of May 2012, the Swiss government reported that about half of the bee population had not survived the winter. The main cause of the decline was thought to be the parasite varroa. 

Apart from colony collapse disorder, many of the losses outside the US have also been attributed to other causes. Pesticides used to treat seeds, such as Clothianidin, Imidacloprid and Thiamethoxam, have been considered prime suspects. Gesundheitlicher und wirtschaftlicher Verbraucherschutz. German Consumer Protection Agency Bulletin, 9 June 2008. EFSA report of 16 january 2013 Other species of bees such as mason bees are increasingly cultured and used to meet the agricultural pollination need. Orchard Mason Bees. gardening.wsu.edu. 

Native pollinators include bumblebees and solitary bees, which often survive in refuges in wild areas away from agricultural spraying, but may still be poisoned in massive spray programs for mosquitoes, gypsy moths, or other insect pests. Although pesticide use remains a concern, the major problem for wild pollinator populations is the loss of the flower-rich habitat on which they depend for food. Throughout the northern hemisphere, the last 70 or so years have seen an intensification of agricultural systems, which has decreased the abundance and diversity of wild flowers. Morelle, Rebecca (28 May 2012) 'Extinct' short-haired bumblebee returns to UK BBC News, Science and the Environment, Accessed 28 May 2012 

Legislation such as the UK's Bees Act 1980 is designed to stop the decline of bees. In April 2013 the European Union announced plans to restrict the use of certain pesticides to stop bee populations from declining further. 

In 2014 the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change report warned that bees and other pollinators faced increased risk of extinction because of global warming. This was due to their natural habitats moving and the alteration in the seasonal behaviour of species. Gosden Emily (29 March 2014) Bees and the crops they pollinate are at risk from climate change, IPCC report to warn The Daily Telegraph, Retrieved 30 March 2014 Climate change was causing the natural foraging areas for bees to change location but the bees were not always be able to move to these new areas. Bees were also emerging at different times in the year due to global warming when flowering plants were not available.

== See also ==
* Apiology
* Bee and wasp stings
* Honey bee life cycle
* International Union for the Study of Social Insects
* Insect_hotel#Solitary_bees_and_wasps
* Pesticide toxicity to bees
* Schmidt Sting Pain Index
* Starr sting pain scale
* Proboscis extension reflex

=== Regional lists ===
*List of bees of Great Britain

== References ==

== Further reading ==
*O'Toole, Christopher, and Raw, Anthony. (1991). Bees of the World. New York: Facts on File.
*Michener, Charles D. (2007). The Bees of the World, second edition. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins.

== External links ==

* All Living Things Images, identification guides, and maps of bees
* Bee Genera of the World
* Solitary Bees & Things Solitary Bees in British gardens
* Scientists identify the oldest known bee, a 100 million-year-old specimen preserved in amber
* North American species of bees at Bugguide
* Native Bees of North America

 



[[Basque people]]

The Basque (; ; ) are an indigenous ethnic group Totoricagena, G. Identity, Culture, and Politics in the Basque Diaspora (2003) p.59 University of Nevada Press who primarily inhabit an area traditionally known as the Basque Country (), a region that is located around the western end of the Pyrenees on the coast of the Bay of Biscay and straddles parts of north-central Spain and south-western France.

The Basque are known as:
*Euskaldunak in Basque (this ethnonym means "the speakers of the Basque language"; to refer to all the inhabitants of the Basque Country, the name euskal herritarrak is preferred)
*Vasco in Spanish
*Basque in French and English.
*Basco in Gascon and Portuguese.

==Etymology of the word Basque==
The English word Basque comes from the French Basque (pronounced ), which is derived from Gascon Basco (pronounced ), cognate with Spanish Vasco (pronounced ). These, in turn, come from Latin Vasco (pronounced ), plural Vascones (see History section below). The Latin labial-velar approximant /w/ generally evolved into the bilabials /b/ and // in Gascon and Spanish, probably under the influence of Basque and Aquitanian, a language related to old Basque and spoken in Gascony in Antiquity (similarly the Latin /w/ evolved into /v/ in French, Italian and other languages).

Barscunes coin, Roman period
Several coins from the 1st and 2nd centuries BC found in the Basque Country bear the inscription barscunes. The place where they were minted is not certain but is thought to be somewhere near Pamplona in the heartland of the area that historians believe was inhabited by the Vascones. Some scholars have suggested a Celtic etymology based on bhar-s-, meaning "summit", "point" or "leaves", according to which barscunes may have meant "the mountain people", "the tall ones" or "the proud ones", while others have posited a relationship to a proto-Indo-European root *bar- meaning "border", "frontier", "march". 

In Basque, the people call themselves the euskaldunak, singular euskaldun, formed from euskal- (i.e. "Basque (language)") and -dun (i.e. "one who has"); euskaldun literally means a Basque speaker. Not all Basques are Basque-speakers. Therefore the neologism euskotar, plural euskotarrak, was coined in the 19th century to mean a culturally Basque person, whether Basque-speaking or not. These Basque words are all derived from euskara, the Basque name for the Basque language.

Alfonso Irigoyen claimed that the word euskara comes from an ancient Basque verb enautsi "to say" (cf. modern Basque esan) and the suffix -(k)ara ("way (of doing something)"). Thus euskara would literally mean "way of saying", "way of speaking". One item of evidence in favour of this hypothesis is found in the Spanish book Compendio Historial, written in 1571 by the Basque writer Esteban de Garibay. He records the name of the Basque language as enusquera. It may, however, be a writing mistake.

In the 19th century, the Basque nationalist activist Sabino Arana posited an original root euzko which, he thought, came from eguzkiko ("of the sun," related to the assumption of an original solar religion). On the basis of this putative root, Arana proposed the name Euzkadi for an independent Basque nation, composed of seven Basque historical territories. Arana's neologism Euzkadi (in the regularized spelling Euskadi) is still widely used in both Basque and Spanish, since it is now the official name of the Autonomous Community of the Basque Country.

It has also been suggested that the root of eusk- may be linked to the Aquitanian tribe of the Ausci.

==History==

Basque women in Bayonne
Since the Basque language is unrelated to Indo-European, it has long been thought to represent the people or culture that occupied Europe before the spread of Indo-European languages there. A comprehensive analysis of Basque genetic patterns has shown that Basque genetic uniqueness predates the arrival of agriculture in the Iberian Peninsula, about 7,000 years ago. 

It is thought that Basques are a remnant of the early inhabitants of Western Europe, specifically those of the Franco-Cantabrian region. Basque tribes were already mentioned in Roman times by Strabo and Pliny, including the Vascones, the Aquitani, and others. There is enough evidence to support the hypothesis that at that time and later they spoke old varieties of the Basque language (see: Aquitanian language).

In the Early Middle Ages (up to the 9th or 10th century) the territory between the Ebro and Garonne rivers was known as Vasconia, a vaguely defined cultural area and political entity struggling to fend off pressure from the Iberian Visigothic kingdom and Muslim rule to the south, as well as the Franks advancing from the north. A Basque presence is also mentioned on the southern banks of the Loire river (7th to 8th centuries). By the turn of the millennium, following the Muslim invasions and Frankish expansion under Charlemagne, the territory of Vasconia (to become Gascony) fragmented into different feudal regions. For example, the viscountcies of Soule and Labourd formed out of former tribal systems and minor realms (County of Vasconia), while south of the Pyrenees the Kingdom of Castile, Kingdom of Pamplona and the Pyrenean counties of Aragon, Sobrarbe, Ribagorza (later merged into the Kingdom of Aragon), and Pallars arose as the main regional powers containing Basque populations in the 9th century.

The Kingdom of Pamplona (a central Basque realm), later known as Navarre, underwent a process of feudalization and was subjected to the influence of its much larger Aragonese, Castilian and French neighbours. In the 11th and the 12th centuries, Castile deprived Navarre of its coastline by annexing key western territories, leaving it landlocked. Basque territory was ravaged by the War of the Bands, bitter partisan wars between local ruling families. Weakened by the Navarrese civil war, the bulk of the realm eventually fell before the onslaught of the Castilian army, the result of a series of wars between 1512 to 1524. However, the Navarrese territory north of the Pyrenees remained beyond the reach of an increasingly powerful Spain. It was formally incorporated into France in 1620.

Nevertheless the Basques enjoyed a great deal of self-government until the French Revolution, that affected their Northern communities, and the civil wars named Carlist Wars, occurred in the Southern territories when they supported heir apparent Carlos and his descendantsto the cry of "God, Fatherland, King". In both North and South regions the Basques were defeated and their Charters abolished.

Since then, despite the current limited self-governing status of the Basque Autonomous Community and Navarre as settled by the Spanish Constitution, a significant part of Basque society is still attempting higher degrees of self-empowerment (see Basque nationalism), sometimes by acts of violence.

==Geography==

===Political and administrative divisions===
Mountains of the Basque Country
Leitza, in Navarre, Basque Country
The Basque region is divided into at least three administrative units, namely the Basque Autonomous Community and Navarre in Spain, and the arrondissement of Bayonne and the cantons of Maulon-Licharre and Tardets-Sorholus in the dpartement of Pyrnes Atlantiques, France.

The autonomous community (a concept established in the Spanish Constitution of 1978) known as Euskal Autonomia Erkidegoa or EAE in Basque and as Comunidad Autnoma Vasca or CAV in Spanish (in English: Basque Autonomous Community or BAC), is made up of the three Spanish provinces of lava, Biscay and Gipuzkoa. The corresponding Basque names of these territories are Araba, Bizkaia and Gipuzkoa, and their Spanish names are lava, Vizcaya and Guipzcoa.

The BAC only includes three of the seven provinces of the currently called historical territories. It is sometimes referred to simply as "the Basque Country" (or Euskadi) by writers and public agencies only considering those three western provinces, but also on occasions merely as a convenient abbreviation when this does not lead to confusion in the context. Others reject this usage as inaccurate and are careful to specify the BAC (or an equivalent expression such as "the three provinces", up to 1978 referred to as "Provincias Vascongadas" in Spanish) when referring to this entity or region. Likewise, terms such as "the Basque Government" for "the government of the BAC" are commonly though not universally employed. In particular in common usage the French term Pays Basque ("Basque Country"), in the absence of further qualification, refers either to the whole Basque Country ("Euskal Herria" in Basque), or not infrequently to the northern (or "French") Basque Country specifically.

Under Spain's present constitution, Navarre (Nafarroa in present-day Basque, Navarra historically in Spanish) constitutes a separate entity, called in present-day Basque Nafarroako Foru Erkidegoa, in Spanish Comunidad Foral de Navarra (the autonomous community of Navarre). The government of this autonomous community is the Government of Navarre. Note that in historical contexts Navarre may refer to a wider area, and that the present-day northern Basque province of Lower Navarre may also be referred to as (part of) Nafarroa, while the term "High Navarre" (Nafarroa Garaia in Basque, Alta Navarra in Spanish) is also encountered as a way of referring to the territory of the present-day autonomous community.

There are three other historic provinces parts of the Basque Country: Labourd, Lower Navarre and Soule (Lapurdi, Nafarroa Beherea and Zuberoa in Basque; Labourd, Basse-Navarre and Soule in French), devoid of official status within France's present-day political and administrative territorial organization, and only minor political support to the Basque nationalists. A large number of regional and local nationalist and non-nationalist representatives has waged a campaign for years advocating for the creation of a separate Basque dpartement, while these demands have gone unheard by the French administration.

===Population, main cities and languages===
Olentzero in Gipuzkoa, Basque Country
There are 2,123,000 people living in the Basque Autonomous Community (279,000 in Alava, 1,160,000 in Biscay and 684,000 in Gipuzkoa). The most important cities in this region, which serve as the provinces' administrative centers, are Bilbao (in Biscay), San Sebastin (in Gipuzkoa) and Vitoria-Gasteiz (in lava). The official languages are Basque and Spanish. Knowledge of Spanish is compulsory according to the Spanish Constitution (article no. 3), and knowledge and usage of Basque is a right according to the Statute of Autonomy (article no. 6), so only knowledge of Spanish is virtually universal. Knowledge of Basque, after declining for many years during Franco's dictatorship owing to official persecution, is again on the rise due to favourable official language policies and popular support. Currently about 33 percent of the BAC's population speaks Basque.

Navarre has a population of 601,000; its administrative capital and main city, also regarded by many nationalist Basques as the Basques' historical capital, is Pamplona (Iruea in modern Basque). Although Spanish and Basque are official languages in this autonomous community, Basque language rights are only recognised by current legislation and language policy in the province's northern region, where most Basque-speaking Navarrese are concentrated.

Approximately a quarter of a million people live in the French Basque Country. Nowadays Basque-speakers refer to this region as "Iparralde" ( Basque for North), and therefore to the Spanish provinces as "Hegoalde" (South). Much of this population lives in or near the Bayonne-Anglet-Biarritz (BAB) urban belt on the coast (in Basque these are Baiona, Angelu and Miarritze). The Basque language, which was traditionally spoken by most of the region's population outside the BAB urban zone, is today losing ground to French at a fast rate. Associated with the northern Basque Country's lack of self-government within the French state is the absence of official status for the Basque language throughout this region.

== Basque diaspora==

Basque festival in Buenos Aires, Argentina

Large numbers of Basque have left the Basque Country for other parts of the world in different historical periods, often for economic or political reasons. Historically the Basque were often employed in sheepherding and ranching, maritime fisheries and merchants around the world. Millions of Basque descendants (see Basque American and Basque Canadian) live in North America (the United States and Mexico; Canada, mainly in the provinces of New Brunswick and Quebec), Latin America (in all 23 countries), South Africa, and Australia.

Miguel de Unamuno said: "There are at least two things that clearly can be attributed to Basques: the Society of Jesus and the Republic of Chile. "La Compaa de Jess y la Repblica de Chile son las dos grandes hazaas del pueblo vascongado, sola decir don Miguel de Unamuno". Miguel de Unamuno used to say "The Company of Jesus and the Republic of Chile are the two great achievements of the Basque people." Filosofia.org Chilean historian Luis Thayer Ojeda estimated that 45 per cent of immigrants to Chile in the 17th and 18th century were Basque. William A. Douglass, Jon Bilbao (2005). Amerikanuak: Basques in the New World, University of Nevada Press. p.81. ISBN 0-87417-625-5 Over 2.5 million Basque descendants live in Chile; the Basque have been a major influence in the country's cultural and economic development.

A large wave of Basques emigrated to Latin America. Substantial numbers also settled elsewhere in North (the U.S.). In addition to Chile in Latin America, they settled in Argentina, Paraguay, Colombia, Cuba, Nicaragua, Panama, Uruguay and Venezuela. Basque place names are to be found, such as New Biscay, now Durango (Mexico), Biscayne Bay, Jalapa (Guatemala), Aguerreberry or Aguereberry Point in the United States, and the Nuevo Santander region of Mexico. Nueva Vizcaya was the first province in the north of the Viceroyalty of New Spain (Mexico) to be explored and settled by the Spanish. It consisted mostly of the area which is today the states of Chihuahua and Durango.

In Mexico most Basques are concentrated in the cities of Monterrey, Saltillo, Reynosa, Camargo, and the states of Jalisco, Durango, Nuevo Len, Tamaulipas, and Coahuila. The Basques were important in the mining industry; many were ranchers and vaqueros (cowboys), and the rest opened small shops in major cities such as Mexico City, Guadalajara and Puebla. In Guatemala, most Basques have been concentrated in Jalapa for six generations now, while some have migrated to Guatemala City.
Basque festival in Winnemucca, Nevada

The largest of several important Basque communities in the United States is in the area around Boise, Idaho, home to the Basque Museum and Cultural Center, host to an annual Basque festival, as well as a festival for the Basque diaspora every five years. Reno, Nevada, where the Center for Basque Studies and the Basque Studies Library are located at the University of Nevada, is another significant nucleus of Basque population. Elko, Nevada sponsors an annual Basque festival that celebrates the dance, cuisine and cultures of the Basque peoples of Spanish, French and Mexican nationalities who have arrived in Nevada since the late 19th century.

Texas has a large percentage of Hispanics descended from Basques who participated in the conquest of New Spain. Many of the original Tejanos had Basque blood, including those who fought in the Alamo alongside many of the other Texans. Along the Mexican/Texan border, many Basque surnames can be found. The largest concentration of Basque who settled on Mexico's NorthEastern "frontera", which include the states of Chihuahua, Durango, Coahuila, Nuevo Len, and Tamaulipas, also settled along Texas' Rio Grande River from South Texas to West Texas. Many of the historic hidalgo, or noble families from this area, had gained their titles and land grants from Spain and Mexico; they still value their land. Some of North America's largest ranches, which were founded under these colonial land grants, can be found in this region.

California has a major concentration of Basques, most notably in the San Joaquin Valley between Stockton, Fresno and Bakersfield. The city of Bakersfield has a large Basque community and the city boasts several Basque restaurants, including Noriega's which won the 2011 James Beard Foundation America's Classic Award. There is a history of Basque culture in Chino, California. In Chino, two annual Basque festivals celebrate the dance, cuisine, and culture of the peoples. The surrounding area of San Bernardino County has many Basque descendants as residents. They are mostly descendants of settlers from Spain and Mexico. These Basque in California are grouped in the group known as Californios.

Basques of European Spanish-French and Latin American nationalities also settled throughout the western U.S. in states like Louisiana, New Mexico, Arizona, Utah, Colorado, Wyoming, Montana, Oregon, and Washington state.

Many Basques and people of Basque ancestry live outside their homeland in Spain, France and other European countries.

In Spain, nearly 4.4 million persons have a Basque surname. But of these only 19% reside in the Basque Country and the rest, more than 3.5 million Spanish with Basque surname, reside outside. 

Classification of population according to cultural identity: Do you consider yourself Basque? 1 - Yes2 - Yes, in some ways 3 - No4 - Don't know / Don't answer

==Culture==

===Language===

The identifying language of the Basques is called Basque or Euskara, spoken today by 25%-30% of the region's population. An idea of the central place of the cultural terms in Basque nationalist politicians is given by the fact that, in Basque, Basques identify themselves by the term euskaldun and their country as Euskal Herria, literally "Basque speaker" and "Country of the Basque Language" respectively. The language has been made a political issue by official Spanish and French policies restricting its use either historically or currently; however, this has not stopped the teaching, speaking, writing, and cultivating of this increasingly vibrant minority language. This sense of Basque identity tied to the local language does not exist in isolation. It is juxtaposed with an equally strong sense of national identity tied with the use of the Spanish and French languages among other Basques. As with many European states, a regional identity, be it linguistically derived or otherwise, is not mutually exclusive with the broader national one. For example, Basque rugby union player for France, Imanol Harinordoquy, has said about his national identity:I am French and Basque. There is no conflict, I am proud of both. . . . I have friends who are involved in the political side of things but that is not for me. My only interest is the culture, the Euskera language, the people, our history and ways. 

As a result of state language promotion, school policies, the effects of mass media and migration, today virtually all Basques (except for some children below school age) speak the official language of their state (Spanish or French). There are extremely few Basque monoglots: essentially all Basque speakers are bilingual on both sides of the border. Spanish or French is typically the first language of citizens from other regions (who often feel no need to learn Basque), maintains the dominance of the state tongues of both France and Spain. Recent Basque Government policies aim to change this pattern, as they are viewed as potential threats against mainstream usage of the minority tongue. X. Aierdi Urraza, Routes to linguistic and cultural integration for immigrants in the Basque Autonomous Community 

The Basque language is thought to be a genetic language isolate. Thus Basque contrasts with other European languages, almost all of which belong to the broad Indo-European language family. Another peculiarity of Basque is that it has been spoken continuously in situ, in and around its present territorial location, for longer than other modern European languages, which have all been introduced in historical or prehistorical times through population migrations or other processes of cultural transmission. TRASK, Robert Lawrence: History of Basque. New York/London: Routledge, 1996. ISBN 0-415-13116-2 

However, popular stereotypes characterizing Basque as "the oldest language in Europe" and "unique among the world's languages" may be misunderstood and lead to erroneous assumptions. J.C. Moreno Cabrera, Misconceptions about Basque Over the centuries, Basque has remained in continuous contact with neighboring western European languages with which it has come to share numerous lexical properties and typological features; it is therefore misleading to exaggerate the "outlandish" character of Basque. Basque is also a modern language, and is established as a written and printed one used in present-day forms of publication and communication, as well as a language spoken and used in a very wide range of social and cultural contexts, styles, and registers.

===Land and inheritance===
The Aranguren baserri in Orozko, converted from a fortified tower.
Basques have a close attachment to their home (etxe(a) 'house, home'), especially when this consists of the traditional self-sufficient, family-run farm or baserri(a). Home in this context is synonymous with family roots. Some Basque surnames were adapted from old baserri or habitation names. They typically related to a geographical orientation or other locally meaningful identifying features. Such surnames provide event those Basque whose families may have left the land generations ago with an important link to their rural family origins: Bengoetxea "the house of further down", Goikoetxea "the house above", Landaburu "top of the field", Errekondo "next to the stream", Elizalde "by the church", Mendizabal "wide hill", Usetxe "house of birds" Ibarretxe "house in the valley", Etxeberria "the new house", and so on. MITXELENA, Koldo, Apellidos vascos (fifth edition), San Sebastin: Txertoa, 1997. 

A widespread belief that Basque society was originally matriarchal is at odds with the current, clearly patrilineal kinship system and inheritance structures. Some scholars and commentators have attempted to reconcile these points by assuming that patrilineal kinship represents an innovation. In any case, the social position of women in both traditional and modern Basque society is somewhat better than in neighbouring cultures, and women have a substantial influence in decisions about the domestic economy. In the past, some women participated in collective magical ceremonies. They were key participants in a rich folklore, today largely forgotten.

In contrast to surrounding regions, ancient Basque inheritance patterns, recognised in the fueros, favour survival of the unity of inherited land holdings. In a kind of primogeniture, these usually are inherited by a single male heir, and usually the oldest son. As in England, other siblings had to make their livings by other means. Before the advent of industrialisation, this system resulted in the emigration of many rural Basques to Spain, France or the Americas. Harsh by modern standards, this custom resulted in a great many enterprising figures of Basque origin who went into the world to earn their way, from Spanish conquistadors such as Lope de Aguirre and Francisco Vsquez de Coronado, to explorers, missionaries and saints of the Catholic Church, such as Francis Xavier.

===Cuisine===

Basque cuisine is at the heart of Basque culture, influenced by the neighboring communities and the excellent produce from the sea and the land. A 20th-century feature of Basque culture is the phenomenon of gastronomical societies (called txoko in Basque), food clubs where men gather to cook and enjoy their own food. Until recently, women were allowed entry only one day in the year. Cider houses (Sagardotegiak) are popular restaurants in Gipuzkoa open for a few months while the cider is in season.

===Cultural production===
Artzaiak eta inudeak festival, Donostia, Basque Country.
At the end of the 20th century, despite ETA violence (ended in 2010) and the crisis of heavy industries, the Basque economic condition recovered remarkably. They emerged from the Franco regime with a revitalized language and culture. The Basque language expanded geographically led by large increases in the major urban centers of Pamplona, Bilbao, and Bayonne, where only a few decades ago the Basque language had all but disappeared. Nowadays, the number of Basque speakers is maintaining its level or increasing slightly.

===Music===

Basque dance

===Religion===
Traditionally Basques have been mostly Roman Catholics. In the 19th century and well into the 20th, Basques as a group remained notably devout and churchgoing. In recent years church attendance has fallen off, as in most of Western Europe. The region has been a source of missionaries like Francis Xavier and Michel Garicots. Ignatius Loyola, founder of the Society of Jesus, was a Basque. California Franciscan Fermn Lasun was born in Vitoria. Lasun was the successor to Franciscan Padre Junpero Serra and founded 9 of the 21 extant California Missions along the coast.

A sprout of Protestantism in the continental Basque Country produced the first translation of the new Testament into Basque by Joanes Leizarraga. After Henry III of Navarre converted to Catholicism to become king of France, Protestantism almost disappeared.

Bayonne held a Jewish community composed mainly of Sephardi Jews fleeing from the Spanish and Portuguese Inquisitions. There were also important Jewish and Muslim communities in Navarre before the Castilian invasion of 1512-21.

Nowadays, according to one single opinion poll, only slightly more than 50% of Basques profess some kind of belief in God, while the rest are either agnostic or atheist. The number of religious skeptics increases noticeably for the younger generations, while the older ones are more religious. 

====Pre-Christian religion and mythology====
Anboto mountain is one of sites where Mari was believed to dwell

Christianisation of the Basque Country has been the topic of some discussion. There are broadly speaking two views. According to one, Christianity arrived in the Basque Country during the 4th and 5th centuries but according to the other, it did not take place until the 12th and 13th centuries. The main issue lies in the different interpretations of what is considered Christianisation. Early traces of Christianity can be found in the major urban areas from the 4th century onwards, a bishopric from 589 in Pamplona and three hermit cave concentrations (two in lava, one in Navarre) were in use from the 6th century onwards. In this sense, Christianity arrived "early".

Pre-Christian belief seems to have focused on a goddess called Mari. A number of place-names contain her name and would suggest these places were related to worship of her such as Anbotoko Mari who appears to have been related to the weather. According to one tradition, she traveled every seven years between a cave on Mount Anboto and one on another mountain (the stories vary); the weather would be wet when she was in Anboto, dry when she was in Aloa, or Supelegor, or Gorbea. One of her names, Mari Urraca possibly ties her to an historical Navarrese princess of the 11th and 12th century, with other legends giving her a brother or cousin who was a Roman Catholic priest. So far the discussions about whether the name Mari is original and just happened to coincide closely with the Christian name Mara or if Mari is an early Basque attempt to give a Christian veneer to pagan worship have remained speculative.

Mari's consort is Sugaar. This chthonic couple seem to bear the superior ethical power and also the power of creation and destruction. It's said that when they gathered in the high caves of the sacred peaks, they engendered the storms. These meetings typically happened on Friday nights, the day of historical akelarre or coven. Mari was said to reside in Mount Anboto; periodically she crossed the skies as a bright light to reach her other home at mount Txindoki.

Legends also speak of many and abundant genies, like jentilak (equivalent to giants), lamiak (equivalent to nymphs), mairuak (builders of the cromlechs or stone circles, literally Moors), iratxoak (imps), sorginak (witches, priestess of Mari), and so on. Basajaun is a Basque version of the Woodwose. There is a trickster named San Martin Txiki ("St Martin the Lesser").

It has been shown that some of these stories have entered Basque culture in recent centuries or as part of Roman superstition. It is unclear whether neolithic stone structures called dolmens have a religious significance or were built to house animals or resting shepherds. Some of the dolmens and cromlechs are burial sites serving as well as border markers.
Ioaldunak dancers of Navarre.
The jentilak ('Giants'), on the other hand, are a legendary people which explains the disappearance of a people of Stone Age culture that used to live in the high lands and with no knowledge of the iron. Many legends about them tell that they were bigger and taller, with a great force, but were displaced by the ferrons, or workers of ironworks foundries, until their total fade-out. They were pagans, but one of them, Olentzero, accepted Christianity and became a sort of Basque Santa Claus. They gave name to several toponyms, as Jentilbaratza.

===Society===
Historically, Basque society can be described as being somewhat at odds with Roman and later Western European societal norms.

Strabo's account of the north of Spain in his Geographica makes a mention of "a sort of woman-rulenot at all a mark of civilization" (Hadington 1992), a first mention of thefor the periodunusual position of women. "Women could inherit and control property as well as officiate in churches. Combined with the issue of lingering pagan beliefs, this enraged the leaders of the Spanish Inquisition, perhaps leading to one of the largest witch hunts in the Basque town of Logroo in 1610". Hadingham 1992. Note that Logroo is not a Basque town, but it was the see of the diocesis covering Zugarramurdi in 1610. The Spanish Inquisition rarely acted against witches, devoting most of its attention to Judaizers, Moriscos and Protestants. 

This preference for female dominance existed well into the 20th century:
...matrilineal inheritance laws, and agricultural work performed by women continued in Basque country until the early twentieth century. For more than a century, scholars have widely discussed the high status of Basque women in law codes, as well as their positions as judges, inheritors, and arbitrators through ante-Roman, medieval, and modern times. The system of laws governing succession in the French Basque region reflected total equality between the sexes. Up until the eve of the French Revolution, the Basque woman was truly the mistress of the house', hereditary guardian, and head of the lineage. Gimbutas, M. The Living Goddesses University of California Press: 2001 

Although the kingdom of Navarre did adopt feudalism, most Basques also possessed unusual social institutions different from those of the rest of feudal Europe. Some aspects of this include the elizate tradition where local house-owners met in front of the church to elect a representative to send to the juntas and Juntas Generales (such as the Juntas Generales de Vizcaya or Guipzcoa) which administered much larger areas. Another example was the fact that in the medieval period most land was owned by the farmers, not the Church or a king. Collins, R. The Basques Blackwell: 1986 

==Sports in the Basque Country==

===Pelota===

The great family of ball games has its unique offspring among Basque ball games, known generically as pilota (Spanish: pelota). Some variants have been exported to the United States and Macau under the name of Jai Alai.

===Rural sports===
Trainerilla in the Bilbao estuary.
Barrenatzaileak in Barakaldo.

There are several sports derived by Basques from everyday chores. Heavy workers were challenged and bets placed upon them. Examples are:
*estropadak rowing regattas: from fishermen activities.
*sokatira: tug-of-war.
*harri jasoketa: stone-lifting, from quarry works.
*aizkolaritza and trontzalaritza: wood-chopping and log sawing.
*sega jokoa: cutting grass with a scythe.
*Giza-abere probak: stone block pulling, from construction works:
**idi probak with teams of oxen.
**asto probak with donkeys.
**zaldi probak with horses.
**gizon probak with human teams.
*txinga eramatea: carrying of weights, one in each hand, representing milk canisters.
*aharai topaketa: ram fights.
*harri zulaketa competitions: drilling stone blocks with a metal bar, only in the former mining areas of West Biscay.
*Basque sheepdog trials competitions.

===Bull runs and bullock games===
The encierro (bull run) in Pamplona's fiestas Sanfermines started as a transport of bulls to the ring. These encierros, as well as other bull and bullock related activities are not exclusive to Pamplona but are traditional in many towns and villages of the Basque country.

===Football===

The largest symbol of Basque identity in football is Athletic Bilbao. While there are other clubs within the Spanish Basque country, such as Real Sociedad, Bilbao's cantera policy has meant the club refuses to sign any non-Basque players. CA Osasuna, from the neighbouring autonomous community of Navarre, is the only club in La Liga that has a Basque name (osasuna means "health").

===Rugby union===
Rugby union is a popular sport among French Basques, with major clubs Biarritz Olympique and Aviron Bayonnais traditional powerhouses in the premier division of French Rugby (the Top 14). Biarritz regularly play Heineken Cup matches, especially knockout matches, at Estadio Anoeta in San Sebastian. Games between the Basque clubs and Catalan club USA Perpignan are always hard fought.

===Professional cycling===
Cycling is popular and the Euskaltel-Euskadi professional cycling team participates in the UCI World Tour division. Known for their orange tops and hill-climbing ability, their fans are famous for lining the most famous Pyrenean climbs in the Tour de France, in support of their compatriots.

Each April the week-long Tour of the Basque Country showcases the beautiful rolling Basque countryside.

==Politics==

While there is no independent Basque state, Spain's autonomous community of the Basque Country, made up of the provinces of lava (Araba), Vizcaya (Bizkaia) and Guipzcoa (Gipuzkoa), is primarily a historical consequence and an answer to the wide autonomy claim of the residents.

Navarre has a separate statute of autonomy, also based on the historical medieval charters. Until recently, Basque only survived in the Northern part of Navarre in the areas designated as Basque speaking or mixed in Navarrese law. Questions of political, linguistic and cultural allegiance and identity are highly complex in Navarre. Politically some Basque nationalists would like to integrate with the Autonomous Basque Community.

The Northern Basque Country today does not exist as a formal political entity and is officially simply part of the French department of Pyrnes Atlantiques, centered in Barn. In recent years the number of mayors of the region supporting the creation of a separate Basque department has grown to 63,87%. So far, their attempts have been unsuccessful.

==Political conflicts==

===Language===

Both Spanish and French governments have, at times, tried to suppress Basque linguistic and cultural identity. The French Republics, the epitome of the nation-state, have a long history of attempting the complete cultural absorption of cultural minority groups. Spain has, at most points in its history, granted some degree of linguistic, cultural, and even political autonomy to its Basques, but under the regime of Francisco Franco, the Spanish government reversed the advances of Basque nationalism, as it had fought in the opposite side of the Spanish Civil War: cultural activity in Basque was limited to folkloric issues and the Roman Catholic Church.

Today, the Southern Basque Country within Spain enjoys an extensive cultural and political autonomy. The majority of schools under the jurisdiction of the Basque education system use Basque as the primary medium of teaching. However, the situation is more delicate in the Northern Basque Country within France, where Basque is not officially recognized, and where lack of autonomy and monolingual public schooling in French exert great pressure on the Basque language.

In Navarre, Basque has been declared an endangered language, since the anti-Basque and reactionary government of Unin del Pueblo Navarro opposes the symbols of Basqueness, Resolution of the General Assembly of the European Bureau for Lesser Used Languages, 13 September 2003 (Helsinki), on the situation of the Basque language in the Autonomous Community of Navarre. Reported in MERCATOR Butlleti 55: "Speakers of a regional or minority language should have the right to use their language in private and public life. Contrary to these principles, local authorities from Irua/Pamplona (capital city of the Autonomous Community of Navarre in Spain) have been implementing a series of reforms to the Autonomous Community legislation limiting the use of the Basque language. Basque is the only endangered language in the Autonomous Community of Navarre..." highlighting a Spanish identity for Navarre.

Basque is also spoken by immigrants in the major cities of Spain and France, in Australia, in many parts of Latin America, and in the United States, especially in Nevada, Idaho, and California. TRASK, Robert Lawrence (1997), The history of Basque, Routledge, p. 1. 

===Political status and violence===
A republican mural in Belfast showing solidarity with the Basque nationalism.

Since its articulation by Sabino Arana in the late 19th century, the more radical currents of Basque nationalism have demanded the right of self-determination and even independence. Mughal, Muhammad Aurang Zeb. 2012. Spain. Steven L. Denver (ed.), "Native Peoples of the World: An Encyclopedia of Groups, Cultures, and Contemporary Issues", Vol. 3. Armonk, NY: M .E. Sharpe, pp. 674-675. Within the Basque country, this element of Basque politics is often in balance with the conception of the Basque Country as just another part of the Spanish state, a view more commonly espoused on the right of the political spectrum. In contrast, the desire for greater autonomy and/or independence is particularly common among leftist Basque nationalists. The right of self-determination was asserted by the Basque Parliament in 2002 and 2006. 
Since self-determination is not recognized in the Spanish Constitution of 1978, a wide majority of Basques abstained (55%) and some even voted against it (23.5%) in the referendum of December 6 of that year. However, it was approved by clear majority at the Spanish level (87%). The derived autonomous regimes for the (Western) Basque Country was approved in a later referendum but the autonomy of Navarre (amejoramiento del fuero: "improvement of the charter") was never subject to a referendum but only approved by the Navarrese Cortes (parliament).

====Political violence====

==Classification==
As with their language, the Basques are clearly a distinct cultural group in their region. They notably regard themselves as culturally and especially linguistically distinct from their surrounding neighbours. Some Basques, especially in Spain, are strongly nationalist, identifying far more firmly as Basques than as citizens of any existing state. Others are not, feeling as much Basque as Spanish. Euskobarmetro series, Evolucin de la identidad nacional subjetiva de los vascos, 1981-2006. "As Basque as Spanish" shows 33% of the citizens of the Basque Autonomous Community in late 2006. Many Basques regard designation as a "cultural minority" as incomplete, favouring instead the definition as a nation.

In modern times, as a European people living in a highly industrialized area, cultural differences from the rest of Europe are inevitably blurred, although a conscious cultural identity as a people or nation remains very strong, as does an identification with their homeland, even among many Basques who have emigrated to other parts of Spain or France, or to other parts of the world.

The strongest distinction between the Basques and their traditional neighbours is linguistic. Surrounded by Romance-language speakers, the Basques traditionally spoke (and many still speak) a language that was not only non-Romance but non-Indo-European. The prevailing belief amongst Basques, and forming part of their national identity, is that their language has continuity with the people who were in this region since not only pre-Roman and pre-Celtic times, but since the Stone Age.

==Genetics==
Even before the development of modern genetics based on DNA sequencing, Basques were already noted for distinctive genetic patterns, such as possessing the highest global apportion of the Rh- blood type (35% phenotypically, 60% genetically). Additionally, the Basque population has virtually no B blood type, nor the related AB type.

Although they are genetically distinctive in some ways, the Basques are still very typically West European in terms of their Y-DNA and mtDNA sequences, and in terms of some other genetic loci. These same sequences are widespread throughout the western half of Europe, especially along the western fringe of the continent. 

Specifically, studies of the Y-chromosome found that on their direct male lineages modern Basques have a common ancestry with other Western Europeans, namely the marked predominance of Haplogroup R1b. 

The distinctiveness already noted by studies of 'classical markers', the subsequent discovery of frequency maxima of R1b in Basque populations, and the apparently "pre-Indo-European" nature of the Basque language resulted in a popular and long-held view that Basques are "living fossils" of the earliest modern humans who colonized Europe. Specifically, Y haplogroup R1b was deemed to be a Palaeolithic marker, highest in Basques, from when western Europe was repopulated after the Last Glacial Maximum, maybe 25,000 years ago. 

As such, Basque populations were used as proxy representatives for the "Palaeolithic component" in admixture studies that tried to quantify the extent of Neolithic diffusions. Such studies concluded that the main components in the European genomes appear to derive from ancestors whose features were similar to those of modern Basques and people of the Near East (or Western Asia), with average values greater than 35% for both these parental populations, regardless of whether molecular information is taken into account or not. The smallest degree of both Basque and Near Eastern admixture is found in Finland, whereas the highest values are, respectively, 70% "Basque" in Spain and roughly 60% "Near Eastern" in the Balkans. from: 

But, this theory encountered inconsistencies even prior to most recent chronological re-evaluations. That R1b should be a Palaeolithic marker was an ad hoc assumption suggested by Semino et al. (2000) and propagated by subsequent scholars without further analysis. Higher resolution STR analysis of R1b lineages from other western European populations (e.g. Italy or Britain) show that their populations appear to derive from the Basque ones.

The majority of recent studies now propose that R1b spread through Europe from southwest Asia in the Neolithic period or later, between 4,000 to 8,000 years ago. B. Arredi, E.S. Poloni and C. Tyler-Smith, The Peopling of Europe, in M. Crawford (ed.) Anthropological Genetics: Theory, Methods and Applications (Cambridge University Press 2007) 

According to Myres and others (2010): "The coalescent estimate for the Y-STR network tree of 245 M269*+L23(xM412) chromosomes is 10 2701680 years Before Present (BP)", which would coincide with the Neolithic Expansion from Anatolia. Another study by Cruciani and others (2010) has confirmed that there is a clear dichotomy between the Western-Eastern branches of R1b1b2. According to Cruciani and others. (2010):

Only Morelli et al. have recently attempted to defend an older, Palaeolithic chronology for R1b1b2(R-M269): 

Autosomal genetic studies, on the one hand, confirm that Basques have a very close relationship with other Europeans, especially with the rest of Spaniards, who have a common genetic identity of over 70% with Basques. A high-density SNP genotyping study done in May 2010 has shown homogeneity of Spanish and French Basques, and confirmed their genomic distinctiveness from other European populations. 

Finally, several ancient DNA samples have been recovered and amplified from Palaeolithic sites in the Basque region. The collection of mtDNA haplogroups sampled there differed significantly compared to their modern frequencies. The authors concluded that there is "discontinuity" between ancient and modern Basques. 

Thus, while Basques (like all Europeans) harbour some very archaic lineages (such as mtDNA Hg U8a), they are not of "undiluted Palaeolithic ancestry", nor are they ancestral to large parts of western Europe. Rather, their genetic distinctiveness is a result of centuries of low population size, genetic drift and endogamy. 

In 1920, H. G. Wells referred to the Mediterranean race as the Iberian race. He regarded it as a fourth subrace of the Caucasian race, along with the Aryan, Semitic, and Hamitic subraces. He stated that the main ethnic group that most purely represented the racial stock of the Iberian race was the Basques, and that the Basques were the descendants of the Cro-Magnons. Wells, H. G. The Outline of History New York: 1920, Doubleday & Co., Volume I, Chapter XI "The Races of Mankind," Pages 131-144 See Pages 98, 137, and 139 In 1994, in his book The History and Geography of Human Genes, population geneticist L. Luca Cavalli-Sforza stated that "there is support from many sides" for the hypothesis that the Basques are the descendants of the original Cro-Magnons. ^ Cavalli-Sforza, L. Luca; Menozzi, Paolo; and Piazza Alberto. The History and Geography of Human Genes Princeton, New Jersey: Princeton University Press, 1994, p. 280 

==Notable Basques==

Among the most notable Basque people are Juan Sebastin Elcano (led the first successful expedition to circumnavigate the globe after Ferdinand Magellan died mid-journey); Sancho III of Navarre; and Ignatius of Loyola and Francis Xavier, founders of the Society of Jesus. Don Diego de Gardoqui Arriquibar (1735-1798) was Spain's first Ambassador to the United States.

==See also==

payaso Porrotx (de Pirritx eta Porrotx) en la celebracion del Aberri Eguna de los partidos independentistas vascos en 2009.jpg|thumb|]
*Aberri Eguna
*Celtiberians
*Basque code talkers
*Duchy of Vasconia
*French people
*Genetic history of Europe
*Jai Alai
*Late Basquisation
*Ml Espine
*Nationalisms and regionalisms of Spain
*Red Bay, Newfoundland and Labrador
*Spanish people

==References==

==Readings==
* The Basques, the Catalans and Spain, Daniele Conversi, 2000, ISBN 1-85065-268-6.
* The Basque History of the World, Mark Kurlansky, 1999, ISBN 0-8027-1349-1.
* The Oldest Europeans, J.F. del Giorgio, A.J.Place, 2006, ISBN 980-6898-00-1.
* Ethnologue report for France for population statistics in France.
* Euskal Herria en la Prehistoria, Xabier Pealver Iribarren, 1996, ISBN 84-89077-58-4.
* Gimbutas, Marija, The Living Goddesses (Berkeley: University of California Press, 2001).
*
*

==External links==

*Basque Autonomous Government
*8 Probintziak. Non profit association working with the basques in the world

People
 



[[Blot]]

Blot may refer to:
*Blot (biology), method of transferring proteins, DNA, RNA or a protein onto a carrier.
*In Germanic paganism and Germanic neopaganism, a blt is a sacrifice to the gods or other beings
**Blot (album), an album by Einherjer, referring to the Germanic practice
*The Blot, a 1921 silent film
*Another name of a trick-taking card game Belot
*Blot (Transformers), a character from the Transformers franchise
*Phantom Blot, a character made by the Walt Disney Company
*Ink blots, as used in the Rorschach test



[[Bookkeeping]]

Bookkeeping, in business, is the recording of financial transactions, and is part of the process of accounting. Transactions include purchases, sales, receipts and payments by an individual or organization. The accountant creates reports from the recorded financial transactions recorded by the bookkeeper and files forms with government agencies. There are some common methods of bookkeeping such as the single-entry bookkeeping system and the double-entry bookkeeping system. But while these systems may be seen as "real" bookkeeping, any process that involves the recording of financial transactions is a bookkeeping process.

Bookkeeping is usually performed by a bookkeeper. A bookkeeper (or book-keeper), also known as an accounting clerk or accounting technician, is a person who records the day-to-day financial transactions of an organization. A bookkeeper is usually responsible for writing the "daybooks". The daybooks consist of purchases, sales, receipts, and payments. The bookkeeper is responsible for ensuring all transactions are recorded in the correct day book, suppliers ledger, customer ledger and general ledger.

The bookkeeper brings the books to the trial balance stage. An accountant may prepare the income statement and balance sheet using the trial balance and ledgers prepared by the bookkeeper.

== Process ==
The bookkeeping process primarily records the financial effects of transactions only. The variation between manual and any electronic accounting system stems from the latency between the recording of the financial transaction and its posting in the relevant account. This delay, although absent in electronic accounting systems due to instantaneous posting into relevant accounts, is a basic characteristic of manual systems, thus giving rise to primary books of accounts such as Cash Book, Bank Book, Purchase Book, and Sales Book for manually recording the immediate effect of the financial transaction.

In the normal course of business, a document is produced each time a transaction occurs. Sales and purchases usually have invoices or receipts. Deposit slips are produced when lodgements (deposits) are made to a bank account. Cheques are written to pay money out of the account. Bookkeeping involves, first of all, recording the details of all of these source documents into multi-column journals (also known as a books of first entry or daybooks). For example, all credit sales are recorded in the sales journal, all cash payments are recorded in the cash payments journal. Each column in a journal normally corresponds to an account. In the single entry system, each transaction is recorded only once. Most individuals who balance their cheque-book each month are using such a system, and most personal finance software follows this approach.

After a certain period, typically a month, the columns in each journal are each totaled to give a summary for the period. Using the rules of double entry, these journal summaries are then transferred to their respective accounts in the ledger, or book of accounts. For example the entries in the Sales Journal are taken and a debit entry is made in each customer's account (showing that the customer now owes us money) and a credit entry might be made in the account for "Sale of class 2 widgets" (showing that this activity has generated revenue for us). This process of transferring summaries or individual transactions to the ledger is called posting. Once the posting process is complete, accounts kept using the "T" format undergo balancing, which is simply a process to arrive at the balance of the account.

As a partial check that the posting process was done correctly, a working document called an unadjusted trial balance is created. In its simplest form, this is a three column list. The first column contains the names of those accounts in the ledger which have a non-zero balance. If an account has a debit balance, the balance amount is copied into column two (the debit column). If an account has a credit balance, the amount is copied into column three (the credit column). The debit column is then totalled and then the credit column is totalled. The two totals must agree  this agreement is not by chance  because under the double-entry rules, whenever there is a posting, the debits of the posting equal the credits of the posting. If the two totals do not agree, an error has been made either in the journals or during the posting process. The error must be located and rectified and the totals of debit column and credit column recalculated to check for agreement before any further processing can take place.

Once the accounts balance, the accountant makes a number of adjustments and changes the balance amounts of some of the accounts. These adjustments must still obey the double-entry rule. For example, the "inventory" account asset account might be changed to bring them into line with the actual numbers counted during a stock take. At the same time, the expense account associated with usage of inventory is adjusted by an equal and opposite amount. Other adjustments such as posting depreciation and prepayments are also done at this time. This results in a listing called the adjusted trial balance. It is the accounts in this list and their corresponding debit or credit balances that are used to prepare the financial statements.

Finally financial statements are drawn from the trial balance, which may include:
* the income statement, also known as the statement of financial results, profit and loss account, or P&L
* the balance sheet, also known as the statement of financial position
* the cash flow statement
* the statement of retained earnings, also known as the statement of total recognised gains and losses or statement of changes in equity

== Entry systems ==
Two common bookkeeping systems used by businesses and other organizations are the single-entry bookkeeping system and the double-entry bookkeeping system. Single-entry bookkeeping uses only income and expense accounts, recorded primarily in a revenue and expense journal. Single-entry bookkeeping is adequate for many small businesses. Double-entry bookkeeping requires posting (recording) each transaction twice, using debits and credits.

===Single-entry system===
The primary bookkeeping record in single-entry bookkeeping is the cash book, which is similar to a checking (cheque) account register but allocates the income and expenses to various income and expense accounts. Separate account records are maintained for petty cash, accounts payable and receivable, and other relevant transactions such as inventory and travel expenses. These days, single entry bookkeeping can be done with DIY bookkeeping software to speed up manual calculations.

===Double-entry system===

A double-entry bookkeeping system is a set of rules for recording financial information in a financial accounting system in which every transaction or event changes at least two different nominal ledger accounts.

==Daybooks==
A daybook is a descriptive and chronological (diary-like) record of day-to-day financial transactions also called a book of original entry. The daybook's details must be entered formally into journals to enable posting to ledgers. Daybooks include:

*Sales daybook, for recording all the sales invoices.
*Sales credits daybook, for recording all the sales credit notes.
*Purchases daybook, for recording all the purchase invoices.
*Purchases credits daybook, for recording all the purchase credit notes.
*Cash daybook, usually known as the cash book, for recording all money received as well as money paid out. It may be split into two daybooks: receipts daybook for money received in, and payments daybook for money paid out.
*General Journal daybook, for recording journals.

==Petty cash book==
A petty cash book is a record of small value purchases before they are later transferred to the ledger and final accounts, it is maintained by a petty or junior cashier. This type of cash book usually uses the imprest system: a certain amount of money is provided to the petty cashier by the senior cashier. This money is to cater for minor expenditures (hospitality, minor stationery, casual postage and so on) and is reimbursed periodically on satisfactory explanation of how it was spent.

==Journals==
Journals are recorded in the general journal daybook. A journal is a formal and chronological record of financial transactions before their values are accounted for in the general ledger as debits and credits. A company can maintain one journal for all transactions, or keep several journals based on similar activity (i.e. sales, cash receipts, revenue, etc.) making transactions easier to summarize and reference later. For every debit journal entry recorded there must be an equivalent credit journal entry to maintain a balanced accounting equation. 

==Ledgers==
A ledger is a record of accounts. These accounts are recorded separately showing their beginning/ending balance. A journal lists financial transactions in chronological order without showing their balance but showing how much is going to be charged in each account. A ledger takes each financial transaction from the journal and records it into the corresponding account for every transaction listed. The ledger also sums up the total of every account which is transferred into the balance sheet and income statement. There are 3 different kinds of ledgers that deal with book-keeping. Ledgers include:
*Sales ledger, which deals mostly with the accounts receivable account. This ledger consists of the financial transactions made by customers to the business.
*Purchase ledger is a ledger that goes hand and hand with the Accounts Payable account. This is the purchasing transaction a company does.
*General ledger representing the original 5 main accounts: assets, liabilities, equity, income, and expenses

==Abbreviations used in bookkeeping==
* A/C  Account
* Acc  Account
* A/R  Accounts receivable
* A/P  Accounts payable
* B/S  Balance sheet
* c/d  Carried down
* b/d  Brought down
* c/f  Carried forward
* b/f  Brought forward
* Dr  Debit
* Cr  Credit
* G/L  General ledger; (or N/L  nominal ledger)
* P&L  Profit and loss; (or I/S  income statement)
* P/R - Payroll
* PP&E  Property, plant and equipment
* TB  Trial Balance
* GST  Goods and services tax
* VAT  Value added tax
* CST  Central sale tax
* TDS  Tax deducted at source
* AMT  Alternate minimum tax
* EBITDA  Earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation and amortisation
* EBDTA  Earnings before depreciation, taxes and amortisation
* EBT  Earnings before tax
* EAT  Earnings after tax
* PAT  Profit after tax
* PBT  Profit before tax
* Depr  Depreciation
* Dep  Depreciation
* CPO  Cash paid out
*

==Chart of accounts==
A chart of accounts is a list of the accounts codes that can be identified with numeric, alphabetical, or alphanumeric codes allowing the account to be located in the general ledger. The equity section of the chart of accounts is based on the fact that the legal structure of the entity is of a particular legal type. Possibilities include sole trader, partnership, trust and company. Marsden,Stephen (2008). Australian Master Bookkeepers Guide. Sydney: CCH ISBN = 978-1-921593-57-4 

==Computerized bookkeeping==
Computerized bookkeeping removes many of the paper "books" that are used to record the financial transactions of an entity. Instead, relational databases take their place, but still typically enforce the double entry bookkeeping system and methodology.

==See also==
* Accountancy

==Notes and references==



[[Bzier curve]]

Cubic Bzier curve
A Bzier curve is a parametric curve frequently used in computer graphics and related fields. Generalizations of Bzier curves to higher dimensions are called Bzier surfaces, of which the Bzier triangle is a special case.

In vector graphics, Bzier curves are used to model smooth curves that can be scaled indefinitely. "Paths", as they are commonly referred to in image manipulation programs, Image manipulation programs such as Inkscape, Adobe Photoshop, and GIMP. are combinations of linked Bzier curves. Paths are not bound by the limits of rasterized images and are intuitive to modify. Bzier curves are also used in animation as a tool to control motion. In animation applications such as Adobe Flash, Adobe After Effects, Microsoft Expression Blend, Blender, Autodesk Maya and Autodesk 3ds max. 

Bzier curves are also used in the time domain, particularly in animation and interface design, e.g., a Bzier curve can be used to specify the velocity over time of an object such as an icon moving from A to B, rather than simply moving at a fixed number of pixels per step. When animators or interface designers talk about the "physics" or "feel" of an operation, they may be referring to the particular Bzier curve used to control the velocity over time of the move in question.

The mathematical basis for Bzier curves  the Bernstein polynomial  has been known since 1912, but its applicability to graphics was understood half a century later.
Bzier curves were widely publicized in 1962 by the French engineer Pierre Bzier, who used them to design automobile bodies at Renault. The study of these curves was however first developed in 1959 by mathematician Paul de Casteljau using de Casteljau's algorithm, a numerically stable method to evaluate Bzier curves, at Citron, another French automaker.

==Applications==

===Computer graphics===
Bzier path in Adobe Illustrator
Bzier curves are widely used in computer graphics to model smooth curves. As the curve is completely contained in the convex hull of its control points, the points can be graphically displayed and used to manipulate the curve intuitively. Affine transformations such as translation and rotation can be applied on the curve by applying the respective transform on the control points of the curve.

Quadratic and cubic Bzier curves are most common. Higher degree curves are more computationally expensive to evaluate. When more complex shapes are needed, low order Bzier curves are patched together, producing a Bzier spline. A Bzier spline is commonly referred to as a "path" in vector graphics standards (like SVG) and vector graphics programs (like Adobe Illustrator, CorelDraw and Inkscape). To guarantee smoothness, the control point at which two curves meet must be on the line between the two control points on either side.

The simplest method for scan converting (rasterizing) a Bzier curve is to evaluate it at many closely spaced points and scan convert the approximating sequence of line segments. However, this does not guarantee that the rasterized output looks sufficiently smooth, because the points may be spaced too far apart. Conversely it may generate too many points in areas where the curve is close to linear. A common adaptive method is recursive subdivision, in which a curve's control points are checked to see if the curve approximates a line segment to within a small tolerance. If not, the curve is subdivided parametrically into two segments, 0  t  0.5 and 0.5  t  1, and the same procedure is applied recursively to each half. There are also forward differencing methods, but great care must be taken to analyse error propagation.
Analytical methods where a spline is intersected with each scan line involve finding roots of cubic polynomials (for cubic splines) and dealing with multiple roots, so they are not often used in practice.

===Animation===
In animation applications, such as Adobe Flash and Synfig, Bzier curves are used to outline, for example, movement. Users outline the wanted path in Bzier curves, and the application creates the needed frames for the object to move along the path.
For 3D animation Bzier curves are often used to define 3D paths as well as 2D curves for keyframe interpolation.

===Fonts===
TrueType fonts use Bzier splines composed of quadratic Bzier curves. Modern imaging systems like PostScript, Asymptote, Metafont, and SVG use Bzier splines composed of cubic Bzier curves for drawing curved shapes. OpenType fonts can use either kind, depending on the flavor of the font.

The internal rendering of all Bzier curves in font or vector graphics renderers will split them recursively up to the point where the curve is flat enough to be drawn as a series of linear or circular segments. The exact splitting algorithm is implementation dependent, only the flatness criteria must be respected to reach the necessary precision and to avoid non-monotonic local changes of curvature. The "smooth curve" feature of charts in Microsoft Excel also uses this algorithm. http://www.xlrotor.com/resources/files.shtml 

Because arcs of circles and ellipses cannot be exactly represented by Bzier curves, they are first approximated by Bzier curves, which are in turn approximated by arcs of circles. This is inefficient as there exists also approximations of all Bzier curves using arcs of circles or ellipses, which can be rendered incrementally with arbitrary precision. Another approach, used by modern hardware graphics adapters with accelerated geometry, can convert exactly all Bzier and conic curves (or surfaces) into NURBS, that can be rendered incrementally without first splitting the curve recursively to reach the necessary flatness condition. This approach also allows preserving the curve definition under all linear or perspective 2D and 3D transforms and projections.

Font engines, like FreeType, draw the font's curves (and lines) on a pixellated surface, in a process called Font rasterization. FreeType Glyph Conventions, David Turner + Freetype Development Team, Freetype.org, retr May 2011 

==Examination of cases==
A Bzier curve is defined by a set of control points P0 through Pn, where n is called its order (n = 1 for linear, 2 for quadratic, etc.). The first and last control points are always the end points of the curve; however, the intermediate control points (if any) generally do not lie on the curve.

===Linear Bzier curves===
Given points P0 and P1, a linear Bzier curve is simply a straight line between those two points. The curve is given by

:
and is equivalent to linear interpolation.

===Quadratic Bzier curves===
A quadratic Bzier curve is the path traced by the function B(t), given points P0, P1, and P2,

: ,

which can be interpreted as the linear interpolant of corresponding points on the linear Bzier curves from P0 to P1 and from P1 to P2 respectively. Rearranging the preceding equation yields:

: 

The derivative of the Bzier curve with respect to t is

: 

from which it can be concluded that the tangents to the curve at P0 and P2 intersect at P1. As t increases from 0 to 1, the curve departs from P0 in the direction of P1, then bends to arrive at P2 from the direction of P1.

The second derivative of the Bzier curve with respect to t is

: 

A quadratic Bzier curve is also a parabolic segment. As a parabola is a conic section, some sources refer to quadratic Bziers as "conic arcs". 

===Cubic Bzier curves===
Four points P0, P1, P2 and P3 in the plane or in higher-dimensional space define a cubic Bzier curve.
The curve starts at P0 going toward P1 and arrives at P3 coming from the direction of P2. Usually, it will not pass through P1 or P2; these points are only there to provide directional information. The distance between P0 and P1 determines "how long" the curve moves into direction P2 before turning towards P3.

Writing BPi,Pj,Pk(t) for the quadratic Bzier curve defined by points Pi, Pj, and Pk, the cubic Bzier curve can be defined as a linear combination of two quadratic Bzier curves:

:

The explicit form of the curve is:

:

For some choices of P1 and P2 the curve may intersect itself, or contain a cusp.

Any series of any 4 distinct points can be converted to a cubic Bzier curve that goes through all 4 points in order.
Given the starting and ending point of some cubic Bzier curve, and the points along the curve corresponding to t = 1/3 and t = 2/3, the control points for the original Bzier curve can be recovered. 
John Burkardt.
"Forcing Bezier Interpolation (from web.archive.org 2013-12-25)".
 

The derivative of the cubic Bzier curve with respect to t is
: 

The second derivative of the Bzier curve with respect to t is
: 

==Generalization==
Bzier curves can be defined for any degree n.

===Recursive definition===
A recursive definition for the Bzier curve of degree n expresses it as a point-to-point linear combination (linear interpolation) of a pair of corresponding points in two Bzier curves of degree n &minus; 1.

Let denote the Bzier curve determined by any selection of points P0, P1, ..., Pn. Then to start,

:

:

This recursion is elucidated in the animations below.

===Explicit definition===
The formula can be expressed explicitly as follows:

:

where are the binomial coefficients.

For example, for n = 5:

:

===Terminology===
Some terminology is associated with these parametric curves. We have

:

where the polynomials

:

are known as Bernstein basis polynomials of degree n.

Note that t0 = 1, (1  t)0 = 1, and that the binomial coefficient, , also expressed as or is:

:

The points Pi are called control points for the Bzier curve. The polygon formed by connecting the Bzier points with lines, starting with P0 and finishing with Pn, is called the Bzier polygon (or control polygon). The convex hull of the Bzier polygon contains the Bzier curve.

===Properties===
* The curve begins at P0 and ends at Pn; this is the so-called endpoint interpolation property.
* The curve is a straight line if and only if all the control points are collinear.
* The start (end) of the curve is tangent to the first (last) section of the Bzier polygon.
* A curve can be split at any point into two subcurves, or into arbitrarily many subcurves, each of which is also a Bzier curve.
* Some curves that seem simple, such as the circle, cannot be described exactly by a Bzier or piecewise Bzier curve; though a four-piece cubic Bzier curve can approximate a circle (see Bzier spline), with a maximum radial error of less than one part in a thousand, when each inner control point (or offline point) is the distance horizontally or vertically from an outer control point on a unit circle. More generally, an n-piece cubic Bzier curve can approximate a circle, when each inner control point is the distance from an outer control point on a unit circle, where t is 360/n degrees, and n > 2.
* The curve at a fixed offset from a given Bzier curve, often called an offset curve (lying "parallel" to the original curve, like the offset between rails in a railroad track), cannot be exactly formed by a Bzier curve (except in some trivial cases). However, there are heuristic methods that usually give an adequate approximation for practical purposes. (For example: )
* Every quadratic Bzier curve is also a cubic Bzier curve, and more generally, every degree n Bzier curve is also a degree m curve for any m > n. In detail, a degree n curve with control points P0, , Pn is equivalent (including the parametrization) to the degree n + 1 curve with control points P'0, , Pn + 1, where .
* Bzier curves follow the Variation diminishing property.

===Derivative===

The generalised derivative for a curve of order n is

:

==Constructing Bzier curves==

===Linear curves===

 Animation of a linear Bzier curve, t in 
 Animation of a linear Bzier curve, t in 

The t in the function for a linear Bzier curve can be thought of as describing how far B(t) is from P0 to P1. For example when t=0.25, B(t) is one quarter of the way from point P0 to P1. As t varies from 0 to 1, B(t) describes a straight line from P0 to P1.

===Quadratic curves===
For quadratic Bzier curves one can construct intermediate points Q0 and Q1 such that as t varies from 0 to 1:
* Point Q0 varies from P0 to P1 and describes a linear Bzier curve.
* Point Q1 varies from P1 to P2 and describes a linear Bzier curve.
* Point B(t) varies from Q0 to Q1 and describes a quadratic Bzier curve.

 Construction of a quadratic Bzier curve Animation of a quadratic Bzier curve, t in 
 Construction of a quadratic Bzier curve Animation of a quadratic Bzier curve, p in 

===Higher-order curves===
For higher-order curves one needs correspondingly more intermediate points. For cubic curves one can construct intermediate points Q0, Q1, and Q2 that describe linear Bzier curves, and points R0 & R1 that describe quadratic Bzier curves:

 Construction of a cubic Bzier curve Animation of a cubic Bzier curve, t in 
 Construction of a cubic Bzier curve Animation of a cubic Bzier curve, t in 

For fourth-order curves one can construct intermediate points Q0, Q1, Q2 & Q3 that describe linear Bzier curves, points R0, R1 & R2 that describe quadratic Bzier curves, and points S0 & S1 that describe cubic Bzier curves:

 Construction of a quartic Bzier curve Animation of a quartic Bzier curve, t in 
 Construction of a quartic Bzier curve Animation of a quartic Bzier curve, t in 

For fifth-order curves, one can construct similar intermediate points.

 Animation of the construction of a fifth-order Bzier curve 
 Animation of a fifth order Bzier curve, t in 

These representations rest on the process used in De Casteljau's algorithm to calculate Bzier curves. 

==Degree elevation==
A Bzier curve of degree n can be converted into a Bzier curve of degree n + 1 with the same shape. This is useful if software supports Bzier curves only of specific degree. For example, you can draw a quadratic Bzier curve with Cairo, which supports only cubic Bzier curves.

To do degree elevation, we use the equality . Each component is multiplied by (1 &minus; t) or t, thus increasing a degree by one. Here is the example of increasing degree from 2 to 3.

: 

For arbitrary n we use equalities

:

introducing arbitrary and .

Therefore new control points are 

: 

===Repeated Degree Elevation===
The concept of Degree Elevation can be repeated on a control polygon R to get a sequence of control polygons R,R1,R2, and so on. After r degree elevations, the polygon Rr has the vertices P0,r,P1,r,P2,r,...,Pn+r,r given by 

:

It can also be shown that for the underlying Bzier curve B,

:

==Polynomial form==
Sometimes it is desirable to express the Bzier curve as a polynomial instead of a sum of less straightforward Bernstein polynomials. Application of the binomial theorem to the definition of the curve followed by some rearrangement will yield:

:

where

:

This could be practical if can be computed prior to many evaluations of ; however one should use caution as high order curves may lack numeric stability (de Casteljau's algorithm should be used if this occurs). Note that the empty product is 1.

==Rational Bzier curves==
Sections of conic sections represented exactly by rational Bzier curves
The rational Bzier curve adds adjustable weights to provide closer approximations to arbitrary shapes. The numerator is a weighted Bernstein-form Bzier curve and the denominator is a weighted sum of Bernstein polynomials. Rational Bzier curves can, among other uses, be used to represent segments of conic sections exactly. 

Given n + 1 control points Pi, the rational Bzier curve can be described by:
:
or simply
:

==See also==
Quadratic Bziers in string art: The end points (&bull;) and control point (&times;) define the quadratic Bzier curve (&#8943;).
* Bzier surface
* Hermite curve
* NURBS
* String art  Bzier curves are also formed by many common forms of string art, where strings are looped across a frame of nails.
* Variation diminishing property of Bzier curves

==Notes==

==References==
 
* Rida T. Farouki, The Bernstein polynomial basis: A centennial retrospective, Computer Aided Geometric Design, Volume 29, Issue 6, August 2012, Pages 379419, 
* Paul Bourke: Bzier Surfaces (in 3D), http://local.wasp.uwa.edu.au/~pbourke/geometry/bezier/index.html
* Donald Knuth: Metafont: the Program, Addison-Wesley 1986, pp. 123131. Excellent discussion of implementation details; available for free as part of the TeX distribution.
* Dr Thomas Sederberg, BYU Bzier curves, http://www.tsplines.com/resources/class_notes/Bezier_curves.pdf
* J.D. Foley et al.: Graphics: Principles and Practice#Second Edition in C|Computer Graphics: Principles and Practice in C] (2nd ed., Addison Wesley, 1992)
* Rajiv Chandel: "Implementing Bezier Curves in games"

==External links==
* From Bzier to Bernstein Feature Column from American Mathematical Society
* 
* A Primer on Bzier Curves &mdash; A detailed explanation of implementing Bzier curves and associated graphics algorithms, with interactive graphics.
* 



[[Banach algebra]]

In mathematics, especially functional analysis, a Banach algebra, named after Stefan Banach, is an associative algebra A over the real or complex numbers that at the same time is also a Banach space, i.e. normed and complete. The algebra multiplication and the Banach space norm are required to be related by the following inequality:
:
(i.e., the norm of the product is less than or equal to the product of the norms). This ensures that the multiplication operation is continuous. This property is found in the real and complex numbers; for instance, |-65|  |-6||5|.

If in the above we relax Banach space to normed space the analogous structure is called a normed algebra.

A Banach algebra is called "unital" if it has an identity element for the multiplication whose norm is 1, and "commutative" if its multiplication is commutative.
Any Banach algebra (whether it has an identity element or not) can be embedded isometrically into a unital Banach algebra so as to form a closed ideal of . Often one assumes a priori that the algebra under consideration is unital: for one can develop much of the theory by considering and then applying the outcome in the original algebra. However, this is not the case all the time. For example, one cannot define all the trigonometric functions in a Banach algebra without identity.

The theory of real Banach algebras can be very different from the theory of complex Banach algebras. For example, the spectrum of an element of a nontrivial complex Banach algebra can never be empty, whereas in a real Banach algebra it could be empty for some elements.

Banach algebras can also be defined over fields of p-adic numbers. This is part of p-adic analysis.

== Examples ==
The prototypical example of a Banach algebra is , the space of (complex-valued) continuous functions on a locally compact (Hausdorff) space that vanish at infinity. is unital if and only if X is compact. The complex conjugation being an involution, is in fact a C*-algebra. More generally, every C*-algebra is a Banach algebra.

* The set of real (or complex) numbers is a Banach algebra with norm given by the absolute value.
* The set of all real or complex n-by-n matrices becomes a unital Banach algebra if we equip it with a sub-multiplicative matrix norm.
* Take the Banach space Rn (or Cn) with norm ||x|| = max |x'i| and define multiplication componentwise: (x1,...,x'n)(y1,...,y'n) = (x1y1,...,x'n'y'n).
* The quaternions form a 4-dimensional real Banach algebra, with the norm being given by the absolute value of quaternions.
* The algebra of all bounded real- or complex-valued functions defined on some set (with pointwise multiplication and the supremum norm) is a unital Banach algebra.
* The algebra of all bounded continuous real- or complex-valued functions on some locally compact space (again with pointwise operations and supremum norm) is a Banach algebra.
* The algebra of all continuous linear operators on a Banach space E (with functional composition as multiplication and the operator norm as norm) is a unital Banach algebra. The set of all compact operators on E is a closed ideal in this algebra.
* If G is a locally compact Hausdorff topological group and  its Haar measure, then the Banach space L1(G) of all -integrable functions on G becomes a Banach algebra under the convolution xy(g) =  x(h) y(h1g) d(h) for x, y in L1(G).
* Uniform algebra: A Banach algebra that is a subalgebra of C(X) with the supremum norm and that contains the constants and separates the points of X (which must be a compact Hausdorff space).
* Natural Banach function algebra: A uniform algebra whose all characters are evaluations at points of X.
* C*-algebra: A Banach algebra that is a closed *-subalgebra of the algebra of bounded operators on some Hilbert space.
* Measure algebra: A Banach algebra consisting of all Radon measures on some locally compact group, where the product of two measures is given by convolution.

== Properties ==
Several elementary functions which are defined via power series may be defined in any unital Banach algebra; examples include the exponential function and the trigonometric functions, and more generally any entire function. (In particular, the exponential map can be used to define abstract index groups.) The formula for the geometric series remains valid in general unital Banach algebras. The binomial theorem also holds for two commuting elements of a Banach algebra.

The set of invertible elements in any unital Banach algebra is an open set, and the inversion operation on this set is continuous, (and hence homeomorphism) so that it forms a topological group under multiplication.

If a Banach algebra has unit 1, then 1 cannot be a commutator; i.e., &thinsp; for any x, y  A.

The various algebras of functions given in the examples above have very different properties from standard examples of algebras such as the reals. For example:

* Every real Banach algebra which is a division algebra is isomorphic to the reals, the complexes, or the quaternions. Hence, the only complex Banach algebra which is a division algebra is the complexes. (This is known as the Gelfand-Mazur theorem.)

* Every unital real Banach algebra with no zero divisors, and in which every principal ideal is closed, is isomorphic to the reals, the complexes, or the quaternions.

* Every commutative real unital Noetherian Banach algebra with no zero divisors is isomorphic to the real or complex numbers.

* Every commutative real unital Noetherian Banach algebra (possibly having zero divisors) is finite-dimensional.

* Permanently singular elements in Banach algebras are topological divisors of zero, i.e., considering extensions B of Banach algebras A some elements that are singular in the given algebra A have a multiplicative inverse element in a Banach algebra extension B. Topological divisors of zero in A are permanently singular in all Banach extension B of A.

== Spectral theory ==

Unital Banach algebras over the complex field provide a general setting to develop spectral theory. The spectrum of an element x  A, denoted by , consists of all those complex scalars  such that x &minus; 1 is not invertible in A. The spectrum of any element x is a closed subset of the closed disc in C with radius ||x|| and center 0, and thus is compact. Moreover, the spectrum of an element x is non-empty and satisfies the spectral radius formula:

:

Given x &isin; A, the holomorphic functional calculus allows to define (x)  A for any function  holomorphic in a neighborhood of Furthermore, the spectral mapping theorem holds:

: Takesaki, Theory of Operator Algebras I. Proposition 2.8. 

When the Banach algebra A is the algebra L(X) of bounded linear operators on a complex Banach space X&thinsp; (e.g., the algebra of square matrices), the notion of the spectrum in A coincides with the usual one in the operator theory. For  &isin; C(X) (with a compact Hausdorff space X), one sees that:

:

The norm of a normal element x of a C*-algebra coincides with its spectral radius. This generalizes an analogous fact for normal operators.

Let A&thinsp; be a complex unital Banach algebra in which every non-zero element x is invertible (a division algebra). For every a &isin; A, there is  &isin; C such that
a &minus; 1 is not invertible (because the spectrum of a is not empty) hence a = 1 : this algebra A is naturally isomorphic to C (the complex case of the Gelfand-Mazur theorem).

== Ideals and characters ==
Let A&thinsp; be a unital commutative Banach algebra over C. Since A is then a commutative ring with unit, every non-invertible element of A belongs to some maximal ideal of A. Since a maximal ideal in A is closed, is a Banach algebra that is a field, and it follows from the Gelfand-Mazur theorem that there is a bijection between the set of all maximal ideals of A and the set (A) of all nonzero homomorphisms from A&thinsp; to C. The set (A) is called the "structure space" or "character space" of A, and its members "characters."

A character  is a linear functional on A which is at the same time multiplicative, (ab) = (a) (b), and satisfies (1) = 1. Every character is automatically continuous from A&thinsp; to C, since the kernel of a character is a maximal ideal, which is closed. Moreover, the norm (i.e., operator norm) of a character is one. Equipped with the topology of pointwise convergence on A (i.e., the topology induced by the weak-* topology of A), the character space, (A), is a Hausdorff compact space.

For any x  A,

:

where is the Gelfand representation of x defined as follows: is the continuous function from (A) to C given by &thinsp; The spectrum of in the formula above, is the spectrum as element of the algebra C((A)) of complex continuous functions on the compact space (A). Explicitly, 

:.

As an algebra, a unital commutative Banach algebra is semisimple (i.e., its Jacobson radical is zero) if and only if its Gelfand representation has trivial kernel. An important example of such an algebra is a commutative C*-algebra. In fact, when A is a commutative unital C*-algebra, the Gelfand representation is then an isometric *-isomorphism between A and C((A)) . Proof: Since every element of a commutative C*-algebra is normal, the Gelfand representation is isometric; in particular, it is injective and its image is closed. But the image of the Gelfand representation is dense by the Stone-Weierstrass theorem. 

== See also ==
* Operator algebras
* Shilov boundary
* Automatic continuity
* Kaplansky's conjecture
* Approximate identity

==Notes==

==References==
* 
* 
* 
* 

 



[[B*-algebra]]

#redirectC*-algebra

[[Boris Pasternak]]

Boris Leonidovich Pasternak (; 30 May 1960) was a Russian poet, novelist, and literary translator. In his native Russia, Pasternak's anthology My Sister, Life, is one of the most influential collections ever published in the Russian language. Furthermore, Pasternak's translations of stage plays by Johann Wolfgang von Goethe, Friedrich Schiller, Pedro Caldern de la Barca, and William Shakespeare remain very popular with Russian audiences.

Outside Russia, Pasternak is best known as the author of Doctor Zhivago, a novel which takes place between the Russian Revolution of 1905 and the Second World War. Due to its independent minded stance on the socialist state, Doctor Zhivago was refused publication in the USSR. At the instigation of Giangiacomo Feltrinelli, Doctor Zhivago was smuggled to Milan and published in 1957. Pasternak was awarded the Nobel Prize for Literature the following year, an event which both humiliated and enraged the Communist Party of the Soviet Union.

==Early life==
Boris (left) with his brother; painting by their father, Leonid Pasternak.

Pasternak was born in Moscow on 10 February, (Gregorian), 1890 (Julian 29 January) into a wealthy assimilated Russian Jewish family. His father was the Post-Impressionist painter, Leonid Pasternak, professor at the Moscow School of Painting, Sculpture, and Architecture. His mother was Rosa Kaufman, a concert pianist and the daughter of Odessa industrialist Isadore Kaufman.

In a 1959 letter to Jacqueline de Proyart, Pasternak recalled,
I was baptized as a child by my nanny, but because of the restrictions imposed on Jews, particularly in the case of a family which was exempt from them and enjoyed a certain reputation in view of my father's standing as an artist, there was something a little complicated about this, and it was always felt to be half-secret and intimate, a source of rare and exceptional inspiration rather than being calmly taken for granted. I believe that this is at the root of my distinctiveness. Most intensely of all my mind was occupied by Christianity in the years 1910-12, when the main foundations of this distinctiveness -- my way of seeing things, the world, life -- were taking shape... Ivinskaya (1978), p 137. 

Shortly after his birth, Pasternak's parents had joined the Tolstoyan Movement. Novelist Leo Tolstoy was a close family friend, as Pasternak recalled, "my father illustrated his books, went to see him, revered him, and ...the whole house was imbued with his spirit." Pasternak (1959) p 25 

In a 1956 essay, Pasternak recalled his father's feverish work creating illustrations for Tolstoy's novel Resurrection. The novel was then serialized in the journal Niva by the publisher Fyodor Marx, based in St Petersburg. The sketches were drawn from observations in such places as courtrooms, prisons and on trains, in a spirit of realism. To ensure that the sketches met the journal deadline, train conductors were enlisted to personally collect the illustrations. Pasternak wrote,
My childish imagination was struck by the sight of a train conductor in his formal railway uniform, standing waiting at the door of the kitchen as if he were standing on a railway platform at the door of a compartment that was just about to leave the station. Joiner's glue was boiling on the stove. The illustrations were hurriedly wiped dry, fixed, glued on pieces of cardboard, rolled up, tied up. The parcels, once ready, were sealed with sealing wax and handed to the conductor. Pasternak (1959) pp 2728. 

According to Max Hayward, "In November 1910, when Tolstoy fled from his home and died in the stationmaster's house at Astapovo, Leonid Pasternak was informed by telegram and he went there immediately, taking his son Boris with him, and made a drawing of Tolstoy on his deathbed." Ivinskaya (1978), p xvi. 

Regular visitors to the Pasternak's home also included Sergei Rachmaninoff, Alexander Scriabin, Lev Shestov, Rainer Maria Rilke. Pasternak aspired first to be a musician. Pasternak (1967) Inspired by Scriabin, Pasternak briefly was a student at the Moscow Conservatory. In 1910 he abruptly left for the German University of Marburg, where he studied under Neo-Kantian philosophers Hermann Cohen and Nicolai Hartmann.

==Career==

===Early career===
The University of Marburg, where Pasternak studied Philosophy 1912.
Boris Pasternak in 1910. A painting by Leonid Pasternak
Pasternak fell in love with Ida Wissotzkaya, a girl from a notable Moscow family of tea merchants whose company, Wissotzky Tea was the largest tea company in the world. Pasternak had tutored her at the final class of high school. He helped her prepare for finals. They met in Marburg during the summer of 1912 when Boris's father, Leonid Pasternak, painted her. He told of his love and rejection in the poem "Marburg" (1917)., Ivinskaya (1978) p 395. as she turned him down.

Although Professor Cohen encouraged him to remain in Germany and to pursue a Philosophy doctorate, Pasternak decided against it. Ultimately, he returned to Moscow upon the outbreak of World War I. His first poetry anthology was published later that year. In the aftermath, Pasternak proposed marriage to Ida. However, the Wissotzky family was disturbed by Pasternak's poor prospects and persuaded Ida to refuse him.

Another failed love affair in 1917 inspired the poems in his collection My Sister, Life. His early verse cleverly dissimulates his preoccupation with Immanuel Kant's philosophy. Its fabric includes striking alliterations, wild rhythmic combinations, day-to-day vocabulary, and hidden allusions to his favourite poets such as Rilke, Lermontov, Pushkin and German language Romantic poets.

During World War I, Pasternak taught and worked at a chemical factory in Vsevolodovo-Vilve near Perm, which undoubtedly provided him with material for Dr. Zhivago many years later.

Unlike the rest of his family and many of his closest friends, Pasternak chose not to leave Russia after the October Revolution of 1917. According to Max Hayward, 
"Pasternak remained in Moscow throughout the Civil War (19181920), making no attempt to escape abroad or to the White-occupied south, as a number of other Russian writers did at the time. No doubt, like Yuri Zhivago, he was momentarily impressed by the "splendid surgery" of the Bolshevik seizure of power in October 1917, but  again to judge by the evidence of the novel, and despite a personal admiration for Vladimir Lenin, whom he saw at the 9th Congress of Soviets in 1921  he soon began to harbor profound doubts about the claims and credentials of the regime, not to mention its style of rule. The terrible shortages of food and fuel, and the depredations of the Red Terror, made life very precarious in those years, particularly for the "bourgeois" intelligentsia. In a letter written to Pasternak from abroad in the twenties, Marina Tsvetayeva reminded him of how she had run into him in the street in 1919 as he was on the way to sell some valuable books from his library in order to buy bread. He continued to write original work and to translate, but after about the middle of 1918 it became almost impossible to publish. The only way to make one's work known was to declaim it in the several "literary" cafes which then sprang up, or  anticipating samizdat  to circulate it in manuscript. It was in this way that My Sister, Life first became available to a wider audience." Ivinskaya (1978) p xxiii. 

Pasternak (second from left) with friends including Lilya Brik, Eisenstein (third from left) and Mayakovsky (centre).
When it finally was published in 1921, Pasternak's My Sister, Life revolutionised Russian poetry. It made Pasternak the model for younger poets, and decisively changed the poetry of Osip Mandelshtam, Marina Tsvetayeva and others.

Following My Sister, Life, Pasternak produced some hermetic pieces of uneven quality, including his masterpiece, the lyric cycle Rupture (1921). Both Pro-Soviet writers and their White emigre equivalents applauded Pasternak's poetry as pure, unbridled inspiration. In the late 1920s, he also participated in the much celebrated tripartite correspondence with Rilke and Tsvetayeva. 

As the 1920s wore on, however, Pasternak increasingly felt that his colourful style was at odds with an increasingly less educated readership. He attempted to make his poetry more comprehensible by reworking his earlier pieces and starting two lengthy poems on the Russian Revolution of 1905. He also turned to prose and wrote several autobiographical stories, notably The Childhood of Luvers and Safe Conduct.

By 1927, Pasternak's close friends Vladimir Mayakovsky and Nikolai Aseyev were advocating the complete subordination of the Arts to the needs of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union. Boris Pasternak: Family Correspondence, 1921-1960, p 78. In a letter to his sister Josephine, Pasternak wrote of his intentions to, "break off relations," with both of them. Although he expressed that it would be deeply painful, Pasternak explained that it could not be prevented. He explained, 
They don't in any way measure up to their exalted calling. In fact, they've fallen short of it but -- difficult as it is for me to understand -- a modern sophist might say that these last years have actually demanded a reduction in conscience and feeling in the name of greater intelligibility. Yet now the very spirit of the times demands great, courageous purity. And these men are ruled by trivial routine. Subjectively, they're sincere and conscientious. But I find it increasingly difficult to take into account the personal aspect of their convictions. I'm not out on my own -- people treat me well. But all that only holds good up to a point. It seems to me that I've reached that point. Nicholas Pasternak Slater, Boris Pasternak: Family Correspondence 1921-1960, p 80. 

By 1932, Pasternak had strikingly reshaped his style to make it more understandable to the general public and printed the new collection of poems aptly titled The Second Birth. Although its Caucasian pieces were as brilliant as the earlier efforts, the book alienated the core of Pasternak's refined audience abroad, which was largely composed of anti-communist emigres. He simplified his style and language even further for his next book, Early Trains (1943).

===The Stalin Epigram===
After Joseph Stalin was acclaimed as leader of the CPSU in 1929, Pasternak became further disillusioned with the Party's tightening censorship of literature. Still unwilling to conform, Pasternak remained a close friend of Anna Akhmatova and Osip Mandelstam. Mandelstam recited his searing indictment of Stalin, the Stalin Epigram, to Pasternak soon after its composition in late April 1934. After listening, Pasternak told Mandelstam, "I didn't hear this, you didn't recite it to me, because, you know, very strange and terrible things are happening now: they've begun to pick people up. I'm afraid the walls have ears and perhaps even these benches on the boulevard here may be able to listen and tell tales. So let's make out that I heard nothing." Ivinskaya (1978) pp 61-63 

On the night of 14 May 1934, Mandelstam was arrested at his home based on a warrant signed by NKVD boss Genrikh Yagoda. Devastated, Pasternak went immediately to the offices of Izvestia and begged Nikolai Bukharin to intercede on Mandelstam's behalf.

According to Olga Ivinskaya, Pasternak was deeply upset by Mandelstam's arrest. He was concerned for his friend but he also worried that he might be blamed for betraying Mandelstam to the secret police. Ivinskaya writes that Pasternak "raced frantically all over town, telling everybody that he was not to blame and denying responsibility for Mandelstam's disappearance, which for some reason he thought might be laid at his door. 

Soon after his meeting with Bukharin, the telephone rang in Pasternak's Moscow apartment. A voice from The Kremlin said, "Comrade Stalin wishes to speak with you." According to Ivinskaya, Pasternak was struck dumb. "He was totally unprepared for such a conversation. But then he heard his voice, the voice of Stalin, coming over the line. The Leader addressed him in a rather bluff uncouth fashion, using the familiar thou form: 'Tell me, what are they saying in your literary circles about the arrest of Mandelstam?'" Flustered, Pasternak denied that there was any discussion or that there were any literary circles left in Soviet Russia. Stalin went on to ask him for his own opinion of Mandelstam. In an "eager fumbling manner" Pasternak explained that himself and Mandelstam each had a completely different philosophy about poetry. Ivinskaya writes that he "went on for quite a time in this vein. Stalin gave him no encouragement whatsoever, not interjecting, or uttering a sound of any kind. At last B L came to a halt. Stalin then said, in a mocking tone of voice: "I see, you just aren't able to stick up for a comrade," and put down the receiver. 

Years later, Pasternak recalled that he was horrified at how the conversation had ended. He repeatedly telephoned the Kremlin's number, begging to be reconnected to Stalin. Instead, Pasternak was told, "Comrade Stalin is busy." Pasternak became frantic, pacing around his apartment repeating over and over that he must write to Stalin to explain what he had meant and to also say that injustices were being committed in the name of the Leader. Pasternak later did write and send just such a letter. 

According to Ivinskaya,
If ever the conversation turned to Mandelstam, Leonidovich would always hark back to the same thing: that he was not to blame for his misfortunes, and that if he had not written to Bukharin and in general made a great fuss about his arrest, then perhaps Mandelstam would not even have had the respite, brief as it was, which was granted to him -- with the result that the Voronezh Notebooks might never have been written. It was clear, however, that Leonidovich himself felt he had not come as well as he should out of his unexpected conversation with the Leader. He had done something not quite right... Ivinskaya (1978), pp 156-157. 

===Great Purge===

According to Pasternak, during the 1937 show trial of General Iona Yakir and Marshal Mikhail Tukhachevsky, the Union of Soviet Writers requested all members to add their names to a statement supporting the death penalty for the defendants. They demanded Pasternak's signature as well, but he refused to give it. Vladimir Stavski, the chairman of the Union, was terrified that he himself would be punished for Pasternak's dissent. The leadership of the Union travelled to Peredelkino and severely threatened Pasternak, who refused to sign the statement and returned to his dacha. Upon hearing this, his pregnant second wife, Zinaida Pasternak threw herself on the floor, weeping and accusing her husband of risking the destruction of their family. Pasternak, however, still would not be moved and went to bed. Boris and Zinaida expected to be arrested that evening. They later learned that an NKVD agent was hiding in the bushes outside their window and wrote down every word they said to each other. Ivinskaya (1978) pp 132133 

Soon after, Pasternak appealed directly to Stalin. He wrote about his family's strong Tolstoyan convictions, which he still held dear. He declared that his own life was at the Leader's disposal. He said, however, that he could not stand as a self-appointed judge of life and death. Pasternak was certain that he would be instantly arrested, but he was not. Stalin is said to have crossed Pasternak's name off an execution list during the Great Purge. According to Pasternak himself, Stalin declared, "Do not touch this cloud dweller" (or, in another version than Ivinskaya's, "Leave that holy fool alone!") Ivinskaya (1978) p 133. 

Although Pasternak was never arrested by the Soviet secret police, his close friend Titsian Tabidze fell victim to the Great Purge. In an autobiographical essay published in the 1950s, Pasternak described the execution of Tabidze and the suicides of Marina Tsvetaeva and Paolo Iashvili as the greatest heartbreaks of his entire life.

According to Stalin's biographer, Simon Sebag Montefiore, Stalin was well aware that Mandelstam, Pasternak, and Bulgakov were geniuses, but ordered their writings suppressed. As Bulgakov and Pasternak never attacked him openly, they were never arrested. Simon Sebag Montefiore, Stalin: Court of the Red Tsar, p 98. According to Ivinskaya, however, "I believe that between Stalin and Pasternak there was an incredible, silent duel." Ivinskaya (1978), p 135. 

===World War II===
Pasternak was elated by the outbreak of war between Nazi Germany and the Soviet Union. When the Luftwaffe began bombing Moscow, Pasternak immediately began to serve as a fire warden on the roof of the writer's building on Lavrushinski Street. According to Olga Ivinskaya he repeatedly helped to dispose of German bombs which fell on it. Ivinskaya (1978) pp 7273. 

In 1943, Pasternak was finally granted permission to visit the soldiers at the front. He bore up well, considering the hardships of the journey (he had a weak leg from an old injury) and he wanted to go to the most dangerous places. He read his poetry and talked extensively with the active and injured troops. 

With the end of the war in 1945 there was a great expectation that the Soviet people would not only see the end of the devastation of Nazism, but also the end of Stalin's Purges. However, sealed trains began carrying large numbers of prisoners to the Soviet Gulags. Some were Nazi collaborators who had fought under General Andrey Vlasov, but most were ordinary Soviet officers and men. Pasternak watched as ex-POWs were directly transferred from Nazi to Soviet concentration camps. White emigres who had returned due to pledges of amnesty were also sent directly to the Gulag, as were Jews from the Anti-Fascist Committee and other organizations. Many thousands of innocent people were incarcerated in connection with the Leningrad Affair and the Doctor's Plot, while whole ethnic groups were deported to Siberia. Ivinskaya (1978) p 75. 

Pasternak later said, "If, in a bad dream, we had seen all the horrors in store for us after the war, we should not have been sorry to see Stalin fall, together with Hitler. Then, an end to the war in favour of our allies, civilized countries with democratic traditions, would have meant a hundred times less suffering for our people than that which Stalin again inflicted on it after his victory." Ivinskaya (1978) p 80. 

===Olga Ivinskaya===
Olga Ivinskaya (19121995)

In October 1946, the married Pasternak met Olga Ivinskaya, a single mother employed by Novy Mir. Deeply moved by her resemblance to his first love Ida Vysotskaya, Ivinskaya (1978) pp 12, 395, footnote 3. Pasternak gave Ivinskaya several volumes of his poetry and literary translations. Although Pasternak never left his wife, this initiated an extramarital relationship that would last for the remainder of Pasternak's life. Ivinskaya later recalled, "He phoned almost every day and, instinctively fearing to meet or talk with him, yet dying of happiness, I would stammer out that I was "busy today." But almost every afternoon, toward the end of working hours, he came in person to the office and often walked with me through the streets, boulevards, and squares all the way home to Potapov Street. 'Shall I make you a present of this square?' he would ask."

She gave him the phone number of her neighbour Olga Volkova who resided below. In the evenings, Pasternak would phone and Volkova would signal by banging on the water pipe which connected their apartments. Ivinskaya (1978) p 12. 

When they first met, Pasternak was translating the verse of the Hungarian national poet, Sndor Petfi. Pasternak gave his lover a book of Petfi with the inscription, "Petfi served as a code in May and June 1947, and my close translations of his lyrics are an expression, adapted to the requirements of the text, of my feelings and thoughts for you and about you. In memory of it all, B.P., 13 May 1948."

Pasternak later noted on a photograph of himself "Petfi is magnificent with his descriptive lyrics and picture of nature, but you are better still. I worked on him a good deal in 1947 and 1948, when I first came to know you. Thank you for your help. I was translating both of you." Ivinskaya (1978) p 27. Therefore, Ivinskaya would later describe the Petfi translations as, "a first declaration of love." Ivinskaya (1978), p 28. 

According to Ivinskaya, Zinaida Pasternak was infuriated by her husband's infidelity. Once, when his younger son Leonid fell seriously ill, Zinaida extracted a promise from her husband, as they stood by the boy's sickbed, that he would end his affair with Olga Ivinskaya. Pasternak asked Luisa Popova, a mutual friend, to tell Ivinskaya about his promise. Instead, Popova told him that he must do it himself. Soon after, Ivinskaya was lying ill in Luisa Popova's apartment, when suddenly Zinaida Pasternak arrived and confronted her.

Ivinskaya later recalled, 
But I became so ill through loss of blood that she and Luisa had to get me to the hospital, and I not longer remember exactly what passed between me and this heavily built, strong-minded woman, who kept repeating how she didn't give a damn for our love and that, although she no longer loved Leonidovich herself, she would not allow her family to be broken up. After my return from the hospital, Boris came to visit me, as though nothing had happened, and touchingly made his peace with my mother, telling her how much he loved me. By now she was pretty well used to these funny ways of his. Ivinskaya (1978), p 23. 

In 1948, Pasternak advised Ivinskaya to resign her job at Novy Mir, which was becoming extremely difficult due to their relationship. In the aftermath, Pasternak began to instruct her in translating poetry. In time, they began to refer to her apartment on Potapov Street as, "Our Shop."

On the evening of 6 October 1949, Ivinskaya was arrested at her apartment by the KGB. Ivinskaya relates in her memoirs that, when the agents burst into her apartment, she was at her typewriter working on translations of the Korean poet Won Tu-Son. Her apartment was ransacked and all items connected with Pasternak were piled up in her presence. Ivinskaya was then taken to the Lubyanka Prison, where she refused to say anything incriminating about Pasternak. At the time, she was pregnant with Pasternak's child and had a miscarriage early in her ten-year sentence in the GULAG.

Upon learning of his mistress' arrest, Pasternak telephoned Liuisa Popova and asked her to come at once to Gogol Boulevard. She found him sitting on a bench near the Palace of Soviets Metro Station. Weeping, Pasternak told her, "Everything is finished now. They've taken her away from me and I'll never see her again. It's like death, even worse." Ivinskaya (1978), p 86. 

According to Ivinskaya, "After this, in conversation with people he scarcely knew, he always referred to Stalin as a 'murderer.' Talking with people in the offices of literary periodicals, he often asked: 'When will there be an end to this freedom for lackeys who happily walk over corpses to further their own interests?' He spent a good deal of time with Akhmatova--who in those years was given a very wide berth by most of the people who knew her. He worked intensively on the second part of Doctor Zhivago." 

In a 1958 letter to a friend in West Germany, Pasternak wrote, "She was put in jail on my account, as the person considered by the secret police to be closest to me, and they hoped that by means of a gruelling interrogation and threats they could extract enough evidence from her to put me on trial. I owe my life, and the fact that they did not touch me in those years, to her heroism and endurance." Ivinskaya (1978) p 109. 

===Translating Goethe===
Pasternak's translation of the first part of Faust led him to be attacked in the August 1950 edition of Novy Mir. The critic accused Pasternak of distorting Goethe's "progressive" meanings to support "the reactionary theory of 'pure art'", as well as introducing aesthetic and individualist values. In a subsequent letter to the daughter of Marina Tsvetaeva, Pasternak explained that the attack was motivated by the fact that the supernatural elements of the play, which Novy Mir considered, "irrational," had been translated as Goethe had written them. Pasternak further declared that, despite the attacks on his translation, his contract for the second part had not been revoked. 

===Khrushchev thaw===
When Stalin died of a stroke on 5 March 1953, Olga Ivinskaya was still imprisoned in the Gulag, and Pasternak was in Moscow. Across the nation, there were waves of panic, confusion, and public displays of grief. Pasternak wrote, "Men who are not free... always idealize their bondage." Ivinskaya (1978) p 144. 

After her release, Pasternak's relationship with Ivinskaya picked up where it had left off. Soon after he confided in her, "For so long we were ruled over by a madman and a murderer, and now by a fool and a pig. The madman had his occasional flights of fancy, he had an intuitive feeling for certain things, despite his wild obscurantism. Now we are ruled over by mediocrities." Ivinskaya (1978) p 142. During this period, Pasternak delighted in reading a clandestine copy of George Orwell's Animal Farm in English. In conversation with Ivinskaya, Pasternak explained that the pig dictator Napoleon, in the novel, "vividly reminded " him of Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev. 

===Doctor Zhivago===
Cover to the First Edition of Doctor Zhivago, 1957.

Although it contains passages written in the 1910s and 1920s, Doctor Zhivago was not completed until 1956. Pasternak submitted the novel to " " (Novy Mir), which refused publication due to its rejection of socialist realism. "Doctor Zhivago": Letter to Boris Pasternak from the Editors of Novyi Mir. Daedalus, Vol. 89, No. 3, The Russian Intelligentsia (Summer, 1960), pp. 648668 The author, like his protagonist Yuri Zhivago, showed more concern for the welfare of individual characters than for the "progress" of society. Censors also regarded some passages as anti-Soviet, especially the novel's criticisms of Stalinism, Collectivisation, the Great Purge, and the Gulag.

According to Lazar Fleishman,
In March 1956, the Italian Communist Party dispatched a young journalist, Sergio d'Angelo, to work in the Soviet Union... His membership of the Communist Party and his job as a journalist allowed d'Angelo to plunge immediately into the cultural life of the Soviet capital . Besides his official appointment, he also had a private commission from a Milan publisher -- the communist Giangiacomo Feltrinelli -- to find new works of Soviet literature that would be of interest to the Western reader. Lazar Fleishman, Boris Pasternak: The Poet and His Politics, p 275. 

Upon learning of Doctor Zhivagos existence, d'Angelo travelled immediately to Peredelkino and offered to submit Pasternak's novel to Feltrinelli's company for publication. At first Pasternak was stunned. Then he brought the manuscript from his study and told d'Angelo with a laugh, "You are hereby invited to watch me face the firing squad." Fleishman, p 275. 

According to Lazar Fleishman, Pasternak was aware that he was taking a huge risk. No Soviet author had attempted to deal with Western publishers since the 1920s, when such behavior led the Soviet State to declare war on Boris Pilnyak and Evgeny Zamyatin. Pasternak, however, believed that Feltrinelli's Communist affiliation would not only guarantee publication, but might even force the Soviet State to publish the novel in Russia. Fleishman, pp 275-276. 

In a rare moment of agreement, both Olga Ivinskaya and Zinaida Pasternak were horrified by the submission of Doctor Zhivago to a Western publishing house. Pasternak, however, refused to change his mind and informed an emissary from Feltrinelli that he was prepared to undergo any sacrifice in order to see Doctor Zhivago published. Fleishman, p 276. 

In 1957, Feltrinelli announced that the novel would be published by his company. Despite repeated demands from visiting Soviet emissaries, Feltrinelli refused to cancel or delay publication. According to Ivinskaya, "He did not believe that we would ever publish the manuscript here and felt he had no right to withhold a masterpiece from the world -- this would be an even greater crime." Ivinskaya (1978), p 203. The Soviet government forced Pasternak to cable the publisher to withdraw the manuscript, but he sent separate, secret letters advising Feltrinelli to ignore the telegrams.

Helped considerably by the Soviet campaign against the novel, Doctor Zhivago became an instant sensation throughout the non-Communist world upon its release in November 1957. In the State of Israel, however, Pasternak's novel was sharply criticized for its assimilationist views towards the Jewish people. When informed of this, Pasternak responded, "No matter. I am above race..." Ivinskaya (1978), p 136. According to Lazar Fleishman, Pasternak had written the disputed passages prior to Israeli independence. At the time, Pasternak had also been regularly attending Russian Orthodox Divine Liturgy. Therefore, he believed that Soviet Jews converting to Christianity was preferable to assimilating into atheism and Stalinism. Fleishman, pp 264-266. 

The first English translation of Doctor Zhivago was hastily produced by Max Hayward and Manya Harari in order to coincide with overwhelming public demand. It was released in August 1958, and remained the only edition available for more than fifty years. Between 1958 and 1959, the English language edition spent 26 weeks at the top of The New York Times bestseller list.

Ivinskaya's daughter Irina circulated typed copies of the novel in Samizdat. Although no Soviet critics had read the banned novel, Doctor Zhivago was pilloried in the State-owned press. Similar attacks led to a humorous Russian saying, "I haven't read Pasternak, but I condemn him". Ivinskaya (1978), pp 268-271. 

During the aftermath of the Second World War, Pasternak had composed a series of poems on Gospel themes. According to Ivinskaya, Pasternak had regarded Stalin as a, "giant of the pre-Christian era." Therefore, Pasternak's Christian-themed poems were, "a form of protest." Ivinskaya (1978), p 134. 

On 9 September 1958, the Literary Gazette critic Viktor Pertsov retaliated by denouncing, "the decadent religious poetry of Pasternak, which reeks of mothballs from the Symbolist suitcase of 1908-10 manufacture." Ivinskaya (1978), p 231. Furthermore, the author received much hate mail from Communists both at home and abroad. According to Ivinskaya, Pasternak continued to receive such letters for the remainder of his life. Ivinskaya (1978), p 230. 

In a letter written to his sister Josephine, however, Pasternak recalled the words of his friend Ekaterina Krashennikova upon reading Doctor Zhivago. She had said, "Don't forget yourself to the point of believing that it was you who wrote this work. It was the Russian people and their sufferings who created it. Thank God for having expressed it through your pen." Boris Pasternak: Family Correspondence 1912-1960, p 403. 

===Nobel Prize===
Copy of the original Russian-language edition of Doctor Zhivago, covertly published by the CIA. The front cover and the binding identify the book in Russian; the back of the book states that it was printed in France.

According to Yevgeni Borisovich Pasternak, "Rumors that Pasternak was to receive the Nobel Prize started right after the end of World War II. According to the current Nobel Committee head Lars Gillensten, his nomination was discussed every year from 1946 to 1950, then again in 1957 (it was finally awarded in 1958). Pasternak guessed at this from the growing waves of criticism in USSR. Sometimes he had to justify his European fame: 'According to the Union of Soviet Writers, some literature circles of the West see unusual importance in my work, not matching its modesty and low productivity'" 

According to journalist Ivan Tolstoi, the British MI6 and the American CIA lent a hand to ensure that Doctor Zhivago was submitted to the Nobel Committee in the original Russian. According to Tolstoi, this was done so that Pasternak could win the Nobel prize and harm the international credibility of the Soviet Union. He repeats and elaborates upon Feltrinelli's claims that the CIA operatives had photographed a manuscript of the novel and secretly printed a small number of books in the Russian language. How the CIA won Zhivago a Nobel More recently, Anna Sergeyeva-Klyatis wrote that the first Russian edition of Doctor Zhivago, which was a pirated version with numerous typographical errors and omissions, was actually initiated by the Central Association of Postwar migres, in response to a growing demand among Russian migrs. 

Meanwhile, Pasternak wrote to Renate Schweitzer Ivinskaya (1978), p 220. and his sister, Lydia Pasternak Slater. Boris Pasternak: Family Correspondence 1921-1960, Hoover Press, 2010. p 402. In both letters, the author expressed hope that he would be passed over by the Nobel Committee in favour of Alberto Moravia. Pasternak wrote that he was wracked with torments and anxieties at the thought of placing his loved ones in danger.

On 23 October 1958, Boris Pasternak was announced as the winner of the Nobel Prize. The citation credited Pasternak's contribution to Russian lyric poetry and for his role in, "continuing the great Russian epic tradition." On 25 October, Pasternak sent a telegram to the Swedish Academy: "Infinitely grateful, touched, proud, surprised, overwhelmed." Ivinskaya (1978), p 221. That same day, the Literary Institute in Moscow demanded that all its students sign a petition denouncing Pasternak and his novel. They were further ordered to join a "spontaneous" demonstration demanding Pasternak's exile from the Soviet Union. Ivinskaya (1978), pp 223224. On 26 October, the Literary Gazette ran an article by David Zaslavski entitled, Reactionary Propaganda Uproar over a Literary Weed. Ivinskaya (1978), p 224. 

According to Solomon Volkov, The anti-Pasternak campaign was organized in the worst Stalin tradition: denunciations in Pravda and other newspapers; publications of angry letters from, "ordinary Soviet workers," who had not read the book; hastily convened meetings of Pasternak's friends and colleagues, at which fine poets like Vladimir Soloukin, Leonid Martynov, and Boris Slutsky were forced to censure an author they respected. Slutsky, who in his brutal prose-like poems had created an image for himself as a courageous soldier and truth-lover, was so tormented by his anti-Pasternak speech that he later went insane. On October 29, 1958, at the plenum of the Central Committee of the Young Communist League, dedicated to the Komsomol's fortieth anniversary, its head, Vladimir Semichastny, attacked Pasternak before an audience of 14,000 people, including Khrushchev and other Party leaders. Semishastny first called Pasternak, "a mangy sheep," who pleased the enemies of the Soviet Union with, "his slanderous so-called work." Then Semichastny (who became head of the KGB in 1961) added that, "this man went and spat in the face of the people." And he concluded with, "If you compare Pasternak to a pig, a pig would not do what he did," because a pig, "never shits where it eats." Khrushchev applauded demonstratively. News of that speech drove Pasternak to the brink of suicide. It has recently come to light that the real author of Semichastny's insults was Khrushchev, who had called the Komsomol leader the night before and dictated his lines about the mangy sheep and the pig, which Semichastny described as a, "typically Khrushchevian, deliberately crude, unceremoniously scolding." Solomon Volkov, The Magical Chorus: A History of Russian Culture from Tolstoy to Solzhenitsyn, Alfred A. Knopf, 2008. Pages 195-196. 

Furthermore, Pasternak was informed that, if he traveled to Stockholm to collect his Nobel Medal, he would be refused re-entry to the Soviet Union. As a result, Pasternak sent a second telegram to the Nobel Committee: "In view of the meaning given the award by the society in which I live, I must renounce this undeserved distinction which has been conferred on me. Please do not take my voluntary renunciation amiss." Ivinskaya (1978), p 232. The Swedish Academy announced: "This refusal, of course, in no way alters the validity of the award. There remains only for the Academy, however, to announce with regret that the presentation of the Prize cannot take place." 

(Via )
 

According to Yevgenii Pasternak, "I couldnt recognize my father when I saw him that evening. Pale, lifeless face, tired painful eyes, and only speaking about the same thing: 'Now it all doesnt matter, I declined the Prize.'" 

===Deportation plans===
Despite his decision to decline the award, the Soviet Union of Writers continued to demonise Pasternak in the State owned press. Furthermore, he was threatened at the very least with formal exile to the West. In response, Pasternak wrote directly to Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev, 
I am addressing you personally, the C.C. of the C.P.S.S., and the Soviet Government. From Comrade Semichastny's speech I learn that the government, 'would not put any obstacles in the way of my departure from the U.S.S.R.' For me this is impossible. I am tied to Russia by birth, by my life and work. I cannot conceive of my destiny separate from Russia, or outside it. Whatever my mistakes or failings, I could not imagine that I should find myself at the center of such a political campaign as has been worked up round my name in the West. Once I was aware of this, I informed the Swedish Academy of my voluntary renunciation of the Nobel Prize. Departure beyond the borders of my country would for me be tantamount to death and I therefore request you not to take this extreme measure with me. With my hand on my heart, I can say that I have done something for Soviet literature, and may still be of use to it. Ivinskaya (1978), pp 240-241. 

In The Oak and the Calf, Alexander Solzhenitsyn sharply criticized Pasternak, both for declining the Nobel Prize and for sending such a letter to Khrushchev. In her own memoirs, Olga Ivinskaya blames herself for pressuring her lover into making both decisions.

According to Yevgenii Pasternak, "She accused herself bitterly for persuading Pasternak to decline the Prize. After all that had happened, open shadowing, friends turning away, Pasternaks suicidal condition at the time, one can... understand her: the memory of Stalins camps was too fresh, she tried to protect him." 

On 31 October 1958, the Union of Soviet Writers held a trial behind closed doors. According to the meeting minutes, Pasternak was denounced as an internal White emigre and a Fascist fifth columnist. Afterwards, the attendees announced that Pasternak had been expelled from the Union. They further signed a petition to the Politburo, demanding that Pasternak be stripped of his Soviet citizenship and exiled to, "his Capitalist paradise." Ivinskaya (1978), pp 251-261. According to Yevgenii Pasternak, however, author Konstantin Paustovsky refused to attend the meeting. Yevgeny Yevtushenko did attend, but walked out in disgust. 

According to Yevgenii Pasternak, his father would have been exiled had it not been for Indian Prime Minister Jawaharlal Nehru, who telephoned Khrushchev and threatened to found a Committee for Pasternaks protection. 

It is possible that the 1958 Nobel Prize prevented Pasternak's imprisonment due to the Soviet State's fear of international protests. Yevgenii Pasternak believes, however, that the resulting persecution fatally weakened his father's health.

Meanwhile, Bill Mauldin produced a political cartoon which won the 1959 Pulitzer Prize for Editorial Cartooning. The cartoon depicts Pasternak and another GULAG inmate, splitting trees in the snow. The caption reads, "I won the Nobel Prize for literature. What was your crime?" Bill Mauldin Beyond Willie and Joe (Library of Congress) 

===Last years===
Boris Pasternak's dacha in Peredelkino, where he lived between 1936 and 1960.
Pasternak's post-Zhivago poetry probes the universal questions of love, immortality, and reconciliation with God. Hostage of Eternity: Boris Pasternak (Hoover Institution) Conference set on Doctor Zhivago writer (Stanford Report, 28 April 2004) Boris Pasternak wrote his last complete book, When the Weather Clears, in 1959.

According to Ivinskaya, Pasternak continued to stick to his daily writing schedule even during the controversy over Doctor Zhivago. He also continued translating the writings of Juliusz Sowacki and Pedro Caldern de la Barca. In his work on Calderon, Pasternak received the discrete support of Nikolai Mikhailovich Liubimov, a senior figure in the Party's literary apparatus. Ivinskaya describes Liubimov as, "a shrewd and enlightened person who understood very well that all the mudslinging and commotion over the novel would be forgotten, but that there would always be a Pasternak." Ivinskaya (1978), p 292. In a letter to his sisters in Oxford, England, Pasternak claimed to have finished translating one of Calderon's plays in less than a week. Ivinskaya (1978), p xxxix. 

During the summer of 1959, Pasternak began writing The Blind Beauty, a trilogy of stage plays set before and after Alexander II's abolition of serfdom in Russia. In an interview with Olga Carlisle from The Paris Review, Pasternak enthusiastically described the play's plot and characters. He informed Olga Carlisle that, at the end of The Blind Beauty, he wished to depict "the birth of an enlightened and affluent middle class, open to occidental influences, progressive, intelligent, artistic..." "The Paris Review" interviews Boris Pasternak. However, Pasternak fell ill with terminal lung cancer before he could complete the first play of the trilogy.

==Death==
Boris Pasternak's grave in Peredelkino in October 1983.

Boris Pasternak died of lung cancer in his dacha in Peredelkino on the evening of 30 May 1960. He first summoned his sons, and in their presence said, "Who will suffer most because of my death? Who will suffer most? Only Oliusha will, and I haven't had time to do anything for her. The worst thing is that she will suffer." Ivinskaya (1978), pp 323326 Pasternak's last words were, "I can't hear very well. And there's a mist in front of my eyes. But it will go away, won't it? Don't forget to open the window tomorrow." 

Shortly before his death, a priest of the Russian Orthodox Church had given Pasternak the last rites. Later, in the strictest secrecy, a Russian Orthodox funeral liturgy, or Panikhida, was offered in the family's dacha. Ivinskaya (1978), p 332. 

===Funeral demonstration===
Despite only a small notice appearing in the Literary Gazette, handwritten notices carrying the date and time of the funeral were posted throughout the Moscow subway system. As a result, thousands of admirers braved Militia and KGB surveillance to attend Pasternak's funeral in Peredelkino. Ivinskaya (1978), pp 326-327. 

Before Pasternak's civil funeral, Olga Ivinskaya had a conversation with Konstantin Paustovsky. According to Ivinskaya,
"He began to say what an authentic event the funeral was--an expression of what people really felt, and so characteristic of the Russia which stoned its prophets and did its poets to death as a matter of longstanding tradition. At such a moment, he continued indignantly, one was bound to recall the funeral of Pushkin and the Tsar's courtiers -- their miserable hypocrisy and false pride. 'Just think how rich they are, how many Pasternaks they have--as many as there were Pushkins in the Russia of Tsar Nicholas... Not much has changed. But what can one expect? They are afraid...'" Ivinskaya (1978), p 328. 

Then, in the presence of a large number of foreign journalists, the body of Pasternak was removed to the cemetery. According to Ivinskaya,
The graveside service now began. It was hard for me in my state to make out what was going on. Later, I was told that Paustovski had wanted to give the funeral address, but it was in fact Professor Asmus who spoke. Wearing a light colored suit and a bright tie, he was dressed more for some gala occasion than for a funeral. "A writer has died," he began, "who, together with Pushkin, Dostoevsky, and Tolstoy, forms part of the glory of Russian literature. Even if we cannot agree with him in everything; we all none the less owe him a debt of gratitude for setting an example of unswerving honesty, for his incorruptible conscience, and for his heroic view of his duty as a writer." Needless to say, he mentioned Leonidovich's, "mistakes and failings," but hastened to add that, "they do not, however, prevent us from recognizing the fact that he was a great poet." "He was a very modest man," Asmus said in conclusion, "and he did not like people to talk about him too much, so with this I shall bring my address to a close." Ivinskaya (1978), pp 330-331. 

To the horror of the assembled Party officials, however, someone with, "a young and deeply anguished voice," Ivinskaya (1978), p 331. began reciting Pasternak's banned poem Hamlet.

 : .    . :   , :    , :    . :     :   . :  , A O, :   . :     :    . :    , :     . :   , :   . : ,    . :  -   . :The murmurs ebb; onto the stage I enter. :I am trying, standing at the door, :To discover in the distant echoes :What the coming years may hold in store. :The nocturnal darkness with a thousand :Binoculars is focused onto me. :Take away this cup, O Abba, Father, :Everything is possible to Thee. :I am fond of this Thy stubborn project, :And to play my part I am content. :But another drama is in progress, :And, this once, O let me be exempt. :But the plan of action is determined, :And the end irrevocably sealed. :I am alone; all round me drowns in falsehood: :Life is not a walk across a field. Lydia Pasternak Slater, Pasternak: Fifty Poems, Barnes & Noble Books, 1963. p 57. 

According to Ivinskaya,
At this point, the persons stage-managing the proceedings decided the ceremony must be brought to an end as quickly as possible, and somebody began to carry the lid toward the coffin. For the last time, I bent down to kiss Boria on the forehead, now completely cold... But now something unusual began to happen in the cemetery. Someone was about to put the lid on the coffin, and another person in gray trousers... said in an agitated voice: "That's enough, we don't need any more speeches! Close the coffin!" But people would not be silenced so easily. Someone in a colored, open-necked shirt who looked like a worker started to speak: "Sleep peacefully, dear Boris Leonidovich! We do not know all your works, but we swear to you at this hour: the day will come when we shall know them all. We do not believe anything bad about your book. And what can we say about all you others, all you brother writers who have brought such disgrace upon yourselves that no words can describe it. Rest in peace, Boris Leonidovich!" The man in gray trousers seized hold of other people who tried to come forward and pushed them back into the crowd: "The meeting is over, there will be no more speeches!" A foreigner expressed his indigation in broken Russian: "You can only say the meeting is over when no more people wish to speak!" 

The final speaker at the graveside service said, 
God marks the path of the elect with thorns, and Pasternak was picked out and marked by God. He believed in eternity and he will belong to it... We excommunicated Tolstoy, we disowned Dostoevsky, and now we disown Pasternak. Everything that brings us glory we try to banish to the West... But we cannot allow this. We love Pasternak and we revere him as a poet... Glory to Pasternak! Ivinskaya (1978), pp 331332. 

As the spectators cheered, the bells of Peredelkino's Church of the Transfiguration began to toll. Written prayers for the dead were then placed upon Pasternak's forehead and the coffin was closed and buried. Pasternak's gravesite would go on to become a major shrine for members of the Soviet dissident movement. 

==Legacy==
USSR, 4 kopeck stamp, 1990
After Pasternak's death, Olga Ivinskaya was arrested for the second time, with her daughter, Irina Emelyanova. Both were accused of being Pasternak's link with Western publishers and of dealing in hard currency for Doctor Zhivago. All of Pasternak's letters to Ivinskaya, as well as many other manuscripts and documents, were seized by the KGB. The KGB quietly released them, Irina after one year, in 1962, and Olga in 1964. By this time, Ivinskaya had served four years of an eight-year sentence, in retaliation for her role in Doctor Zhivagos publication. In 1978, her memoirs were smuggled abroad and published in Paris. An English translation by Max Hayward was published the same year under the title A Captive of Time: My Years with Pasternak.

Ivinskaya was rehabilitated only in 1988. After the dissolution of the Soviet Union, Ivinskaya sued for the return of the letters and documents seized by the KGB in 1961. The Russian Supreme Court ultimately ruled against her, stating that, "there was no proof of ownership," and that the, "papers should remain in the state archive". Olga Ivinskaya died of cancer on 8 September 1995. A reporter on NTV compared her role to that of other famous muses for Russian poets: "As Pushkin would not be complete without Anna Kern, and Yesenin would be nothing without Isadora, so Pasternak would not be Pasternak without Olga Ivinskaya, who was his inspiration for Doctor Zhivago.". 

Meanwhile, Boris Pasternak continued to be pilloried by the Soviet State until Mikhail Gorbachev proclaimed Perestroika during the 1980s.

In 1988, after decades of circulating in Samizdat, Doctor Zhivago was serialized in the literary journal Novy Mir. Contents of Novy Mir magazines 

In December, 1989, Yevgenii Borisovich Pasternak was permitted to travel to Stockholm in order to collect his father's Nobel Medal. "Boris Pasternak: The Nobel Prize. Son's memoirs". (Pravda, 18 December 2003) At the ceremony, acclaimed cellist and Soviet dissident Mstislav Rostropovich performed a Bach serenade in honor of his deceased countryman.

A 2009 book by Ivan Tolstoi reasserts claims that British and American intelligence officers were involved in ensuring Pasternak's Nobel victory however another Russian researcher disagrees. When Yevgeny Borisovich Pasternak was questioned about this, he responded that his father was completely unaware of the actions of Western intelligence services. Yevgeny further declared that the Nobel Prize caused his father nothing but severe grief and harassment at the hands of the Soviet State. 

The Pasternak family papers are stored at the Hoover Institution Archives, Stanford University. They contain correspondence, drafts of Doctor Zhivago and other writings, photographs, and other material, of Boris Pasternak and other family members.

===Cultural influence===
A minor planet 3508 Pasternak, discovered by Soviet astronomer Lyudmila Georgievna Karachkina in 1980 is named after him. 

Russian-American singer and songwriter Regina Spektor recites a verse from "Black Spring", a 1912 poem by Pasternak in her song "Apres Moi" from her album Begin to Hope.

In October 2010, Random House released Richard Pevear and Larissa Volokhonsky's translation of Doctor Zhivago. 

===Adaptations===
The first screen adaptation of Doctor Zhivago, adapted by Robert Bolt and directed by David Lean, appeared in 1965. The film, which toured in the roadshow tradition, starred Omar Sharif, Geraldine Chaplin, and Julie Christie. Concentrating on the love triangle aspects of the novel, the film became a worldwide blockbuster, but was unavailable in Russia until Perestroika.

In 2002, the novel was adapted as a television miniseries. Directed by Giacomo Campiotti, the serial starred Hans Matheson, Alexandra Maria Lara, Keira Knightley, and Sam Neill.

The Russian TV version of 2006, directed by Alexander Proshkin and starring Oleg Menshikov as Zhivago, is considered more faithful to Pasternak's novel than David Lean's 1965 film.

==Work==

===Poetry===

====Thoughts on poetry====
According to Ivinskaya, In Pasternak the 'all-powerful god of detail' always, it seems, revolted against the idea of turning out verse for its own sake or to convey vague personal moods. If 'eternal' themes were to be dealt with yet again, then only by a poet in the true sense of the word -- otherwise he should not have the strength of character to touch them at all. Poetry so tightly packed (till it crunched like ice) or distilled into a solution where 'grains of true prose germinated,' a poetry in which realistic detail cast a genuine spell -- only such poetry was acceptable to Pasternak; but not poetry for which indulgence was required, or for which allowances had to be made -- that is, the kind of ephemeral poetry which is particularly common in an age of literary conformism. Leonidovich could weep over the 'purple-gray circle' which glowed above Blok's tormented muse and he never failed to be moved by the terseness of Pushkin's sprightly lines, but rhymed slogans about the production of tin cans in the so-called 'poetry' of Surkov and his like, as well as the outpourings about love in the work of those young poets who only echo each other and the classics -- all this left him cold at best and for the most part made him indignant." Ivinskaya (1978), p 145. 

For this reason, Pasternak regularly avoided literary cafes where young poets regularly invited them to read their verse. According to Ivinskaya, "It was this sort of thing that moved him to say: 'Who started the idea that I love poetry? I can't stand poetry.'" 

Also according to Ivinskaya, "'The way they could write!' he once exclaimed -- by 'they' he meant the Russian classics. And immediately afterward, reading or, rather, glancing through some verse in the Literary Gazette: 'Just look how tremendously well they've learned to rhyme! But there's actually nothing there -- it would be better to say it in a news bulletin. What has poetry got to do with this?' By 'they' in this case, he meant the poets writing today." Ivinskaya (1978), p 146. 

====Translation====
Reluctant to conform to Socialist Realism, Pasternak turned to translation in order to provide for his family. He soon produced acclaimed translations of Sandor Petfi, Johann Wolfgang von Goethe, Rainer Maria Rilke, Paul Verlaine, Taras Shevchenko, and Nikoloz Baratashvili. Osip Mandelstam, however, privately warned him, "Your collected works will consist of twelve volumes of translations, and only one of your own work." Ivinskaya (1978) pp 7879. 

In a 1942 letter, Pasternak declared, "I am completely opposed to contemporary ideas about translation. The work of Lozinski, Radlova, Marshak, and Chukovski is alien to me, and seems artificial, soulless, and lacking in depth. I share the nineteenth century view of translation as a literary exercise demanding insight of a higher kind than that provided by a merely philological approach." 

According to Ivinskaya, Pasternak believed in not being too literal in his translations, which he felt could confuse the meaning of the text. He instead advocated observing each poem from afar to plumb its true depths. Ivinskaya (1978) pp 2829. 

Pasternak's translations of William Shakespeare (Romeo and Juliet, Antony and Cleopatra, Othello, King Henry IV (Parts I and II), Hamlet, Macbeth, King Lear) Boris Pasternak, I Remember: Sketch for an Autobiography, Pantheon Books, 1959. p 127. remain deeply popular with Russian audiences because of their colloquial, modernised dialogues. Paternak's critics, however, accused him of "pasternakizing" Shakespeare. In a 1956 essay, Pasternak wrote, "Translating Shakespeare is a task which takes time and effort. Once it is undertaken, it is best to divide it into sections long enough for the work to not get stale and to complete one section each day. In thus daily progressing through the text, the translator finds himself reliving the circumstances of the author. Day by day, he reproduces his actions and he is drawn into some of his secrets, not in theory, but practically, by experience." Pasternak, (1959) p 142. 

According to Ivinskaya, Whenever Leonidovich was provided with literal versions of things which echoed his own thoughts or feelings, it made all the difference and he worked feverishly, turning them into masterpieces. I remember his translating Paul Verlaine in a burst of enthusiasm like this  Art potique (Verlaine) was after all an expression of his own beliefs about poetry. Ivinskaya (1978), p 34. 

While they were both collaborating on translating Rabindranath Tagore from Bengali into Russian, Pasternak advised Ivinskaya, "1) Bring out the theme of the poem, its subject matter, as clearly as possible; 2) tighten up the fluid, non-European form by rhyming internally, not at the end of the lines; 3) use loose, irregular meters, mostly ternary ones. You may allow yourself to use assonances." 

Later, while she was collaborating with him on a translation of Vtzslav Nezval, Pasternak told Ivinskaya, "Use the literal translation only for the meaning, but do not borrow words as they stand from it: they are absurd and not always comprehensible. Don't translate everything, only what you can manage, and by this means try to make the translation more precise than the original  an absolute necessity in the case of such a confused, slipshod piece of work." 

According to Olga Ivinskaya, however, translation was not a genuine vocation for Pasternak. She later recalled, One day someone brought him a copy of a British newspaper in which there was a double feature under the title, "Pasternak Keeps a Courageous Silence." It said that if Shakespeare had written in Russian he would have written in the same way he was translated by Pasternak... What a pity, the article continued, that Pasternak published nothing but translations, writing his own work for himself and a small circle of intimate friends. "What do they mean by saying that my silence is courageous?" Leonidovich commented sadly after reading all this. "I am silent because I am not printed." Ivinskaya (1978), p 35. 

===Music===
Boris Pasternak was also a composer, and had a promising musical career as a musician ahead of him, had he chosen to pursue it. He came from a musical family: his mother was a concert pianist and a student of Anton Rubinstein and Theodor Leschetizky, and Pasternak's early impressions were of hearing piano trios in the home. The family had a dacha  country house  close to one occupied by Alexander Scriabin; Sergei Rachmaninoff, Rainer Maria Rilke and Leo Tolstoy were all visitors to the family home. His father Leonid was a painter who produced one of the most important portraits of Scriabin, and Pasternak wrote many years later of witnessing with great excitement the creation of Scriabin's Symphony No. 3, "The Divine Poem", in 1903.

Pasternak began to compose at the age of 13. The high achievements of his mother discouraged him from becoming a pianist, but - inspired by Scriabin - he entered the Moscow Conservatory, but left abruptly in 1910 at the age of twenty, to study philosophy in Marburg University. Four years later he returned to Moscow, having finally decided on a career in literature, publishing his first book of poems, influenced by Alexander Blok and the Russian Futurists, the same year.

Pasternak's early compositions show the clear influence of Scriabin. His single-movement Piano Sonata of 1909 shows a more mature and individual voice. Nominally in B minor, it moves freely from key to key with frequent changes of key-signature and a chromatic dissonant style that defies easy analysis. Although composed during his time at the Conservatory, the Sonata was composed at Raiki, some 27 miles north-east of Moscow, where Leonid Pasternak had his painting studio and taught his students. (NB. This is not the site of the Pasternak family dacha, now open to the public, in the writers' colony at Peredelkino, which is about 16 miles south-west of the capital.)

==Selected books by Pasternak==

===Poetry collections===
*In The Interlude: Poems 19451960 (1962)
*My Sister, Life (1922)
*On Early Trains (1944)
*Over the Barriers (1916)
*Poems (1954)
*Selected Poems (1946)
*Themes and Variations (1917)
*Twin in the Clouds (1914)
*When the Weather Clears (1959)

===Books of prose===
*Childhood (1941)
*Collected Works (1945)
*Doctor Zhivago (1957)
*Essay in Autobiography (1956)
*Goethe's Faust (1952)
*Safe Conduct (1931)
*Second Birth (1932)
*Selected Writings (1949)

==See also==

*List of Jewish Nobel laureates

==References==

==Sources==
* Boris Pasternak, I Remember; Sketches for an Autobiography, Pantheon Books, 1959.
* Boris Pasternak. "Sister, My Life" Translated by C. Flayderman. Introduction by Robert Payne. Washington Square Press, 1967.
* Olga Ivinskaya, A Captive of Time; My Years with Pasternak, Doubleday, 1978. Translated by Max Hayward.

==External links==

* Read Pasternak's interview with The Paris Review Summer-Fall 1960 No. 24
* 1958 Nobel Prize in Literature
* Pasternak profile at Poets.org
* PBS biography of Pasternak
* Register of the Pasternak Family Papers at the Hoover Institution Archives
* profile and images at the Pasternak Trust
* pp. 36-39: Pasternak as a student at Marburg University, Germany



[[Binomial coefficient]]

The binomial coefficients can be arranged to form Pascal's triangle.

In mathematics, binomial coefficients are a family of positive integers that occur as coefficients in the binomial theorem. They are indexed by two nonnegative integers; the binomial coefficient indexed by n and k is usually written . It is the coefficient of the x k term in the polynomial expansion of the binomial power (1 + x) n. Under suitable circumstances the value of the coefficient is given by the expression . Arranging binomial coefficients into rows for successive values of n, and in which k ranges from 0 to n, gives a triangular array called Pascal's triangle.

This family of numbers also arises in many areas of mathematics other than algebra, notably in combinatorics. For any set containing n elements, the number of distinct k-element subsets of it that can be formed (the k-combinations of its elements) is given by the binomial coefficient . Therefore is often read as "n choose k". The properties of binomial coefficients have led to extending the meaning of the symbol beyond the basic case where n and k are nonnegative integers with k  n; such expressions are then still called binomial coefficients.

The notation was introduced by Andreas von Ettingshausen in 1826, although the numbers were already known centuries before that (see Pascal's triangle). The earliest known detailed discussion of binomial coefficients is in a tenth-century commentary, by Halayudha, on an ancient Sanskrit text, Pingala's Chandastra. In about 1150, the Indian mathematician Bhaskaracharya gave an exposition of binomial coefficients in his book Lilavati. Lilavati Section 6, Chapter 4 (see ). 

Alternative notations include C(n, k), n'C'k, n'C'k, C'k'n, C'n'k, C'n,k in all of which the C stands for combinations or choices.

== Definition and interpretations ==
For natural numbers (taken to include 0) n and k, the binomial coefficient can be defined as the coefficient of the monomial X'k in the expansion of (1 + X)n. The same coefficient also occurs (if k  n) in the binomial formula
:
(valid for any elements x,y of a commutative ring),
which explains the name "binomial coefficient".

Another occurrence of this number is in combinatorics, where it gives the number of ways, disregarding order, that k objects can be chosen from among n objects; more formally, the number of k-element subsets (or k-combinations) of an n-element set. This number can be seen as equal to the one of the first definition, independently of any of the formulas below to compute it: if in each of the n factors of the power (1 + X)n one temporarily labels the term X with an index i (running from 1 to n), then each subset of k indices gives after expansion a contribution X'k, and the coefficient of that monomial in the result will be the number of such subsets. This shows in particular that is a natural number for any natural numbers n and k. There are many other combinatorial interpretations of binomial coefficients (counting problems for which the answer is given by a binomial coefficient expression), for instance the number of words formed of n bits (digits 0 or 1) whose sum is k is given by , while the number of ways to write where every a'i is a nonnegative integer is given by . Most of these interpretations are easily seen to be equivalent to counting k-combinations.

== Computing the value of binomial coefficients ==
Several methods exist to compute the value of without actually expanding a binomial power or counting k-combinations.

=== Recursive formula ===
One method uses the recursive, purely additive, formula

:

with initial/boundary values

:

The formula follows from considering the set {1,2,3,,n} and counting separately (a) the k-element groupings that include a particular set element, say i, in every group (since i is already chosen to fill one spot in every group, we need only choose k  1 from the remaining n &minus; 1) and (b) all the k-groupings that dont include i; this enumerates all the possible k-combinations of n elements. It also follows from tracing the contributions to X'k in (1 + X)n1(1 + X). As there is zero X'n+1 or X&minus;1 in (1 + X)n, one might extend the definition beyond the above boundaries to include = 0 when either k > n or k < 0. This recursive formula then allows the construction of Pascal's triangle, surrounded by white spaces where the zeros, or the trivial coefficients, would be.

=== Multiplicative formula ===
A more efficient method to compute individual binomial coefficients is given by the formula

:

where the numerator of the first fraction is expressed as a falling factorial power.
This formula is easiest to understand for the combinatorial interpretation of binomial coefficients.
The numerator gives the number of ways to select a sequence of k distinct objects, retaining the order of selection, from a set of n objects. The denominator counts the number of distinct sequences that define the same k-combination when order is disregarded.

=== Factorial formula ===
Finally, though computationally unsuitable, there is the compact form, often used in proofs and derivations, which makes repeated use of the familiar factorial function:

:

where n! denotes the factorial of n. This formula follows from the multiplicative formula above by multiplying numerator and denominator by (n  k)!; as a consequence it involves many factors common to numerator and denominator. It is less practical for explicit computation unless common factors are first cancelled (in particular since factorial values grow very rapidly). The formula does exhibit a symmetry that is less evident from the multiplicative formula (though it is from the definitions)

which leads to a more efficient multiplicative computational routine. Using the falling factorial notation,

:

=== Generalization and connection to the binomial series ===
The multiplicative formula allows the definition of binomial coefficients to be extended See , which also defines for . Alternative generalizations, such as to two real or complex valued arguments using the Gamma function assign nonzero values to for , but this causes most binomial coefficient identities to fail, and thus is not widely used majority of definitions. One such choice of nonzero values leads to the aesthetically pleasing "Pascal windmill" in Hilton, Holton and Pedersen, Mathematical reflections: in a room with many mirrors, Springer, 1997, but causes even Pascal's identity to fail (at the origin). by replacing n by an arbitrary number  (negative, real, complex) or even an element of any commutative ring in which all positive integers are invertible:
:

With this definition one has a generalization of the binomial formula (with one of the variables set to 1), which justifies still calling the binomial coefficients:

This formula is valid for all complex numbers  and X with |X| &lt; 1. It can also be interpreted as an identity of formal power series in X, where it actually can serve as definition of arbitrary powers of series with constant coefficient equal to 1; the point is that with this definition all identities hold that one expects for exponentiation, notably

:

If  is a nonnegative integer n, then all terms with k &gt; n are zero, and the infinite series becomes a finite sum, thereby recovering the binomial formula. However for other values of , including negative integers and rational numbers, the series is really infinite.

== Pascal's triangle ==
1000th row of Pascal's triangle, arranged vertically, with grey-scale representations of decimal digits of the coefficients, right-aligned. The left boundary of the image corresponds roughly to the graph of the logarithm of the binomial coefficients, and illustrates that they form a log-concave sequence.

Pascal's rule is the important recurrence relation

which can be used to prove by mathematical induction that is a natural number for all n and k, (equivalent to the statement that k! divides the product of k consecutive integers), a fact that is not immediately obvious from formula (1).

Pascal's rule also gives rise to Pascal's triangle:
:

 0: 1 
 1: 1 1 
 2: 1 2 1 
 3: 1 3 3 1 
 4: 1 4 6 4 1 
 5: 1 5 10 10 5 1 
 6: 1 6 15 20 15 6 1 
 7: 1 7 21 35 35 21 7 1 
 8: 1 8 28 56 70 56 28 8 1 
 

Row number n contains the numbers for k = 0,,n. It is constructed by starting with ones at the outside and then always adding two adjacent numbers and writing the sum directly underneath. This method allows the quick calculation of binomial coefficients without the need for fractions or multiplications. For instance, by looking at row number 5 of the triangle, one can quickly read off that
:(x + y)5 = 1 x5 + 5 x4y + 10 x3y2 + 10 x2y3 + 5 x y4 + 1 y5.
The differences between elements on other diagonals are the elements in the previous diagonal, as a consequence of the recurrence relation () above.

== Combinatorics and statistics ==
Binomial coefficients are of importance in combinatorics, because they provide ready formulas for certain frequent counting problems:
* There are ways to choose k elements from a set of n elements. See Combination.
* There are ways to choose k elements from a set of n elements if repetitions are allowed. See Multiset.
* There are strings containing k ones and n zeros.
* There are strings consisting of k ones and n zeros such that no two ones are adjacent. 
* The Catalan numbers are 
* The binomial distribution in statistics is 
* The formula for a Bzier curve.

== Binomial coefficients as polynomials ==
For any nonnegative integer k, the expression can be simplified and defined as a polynomial divided by k!:

:

This presents a polynomial in t with rational coefficients.

As such, it can be evaluated at any real or complex number t to define binomial coefficients with such first arguments.
These "generalized binomial coefficients" appear in Newton's generalized binomial theorem.

For each k, the polynomial can be characterized as the unique degree k polynomial p(t) satisfying p(0) = p(1) = ... = p(k &minus; 1) = 0 and p(k) = 1.

Its coefficients are expressible in terms of Stirling numbers of the first kind:
:
The derivative of can be calculated by logarithmic differentiation:
:

=== Binomial coefficients as a basis for the space of polynomials ===
Over any field of characteristic 0 (that is, any field that contains the rational numbers), each polynomial p(t) of degree at most d is uniquely expressible as a linear combination of binomial coefficients. The coefficient a'k is the kth difference of the sequence p(0), p(1), , p(k).
Explicitly, This can be seen as a discrete analog of Taylor's theorem. It is closely related to Newton's polynomial. Alternating sums of this form may be expressed as the NrlundRice integral. 

=== Integer-valued polynomials ===

Each polynomial is integer-valued: it takes integer values at integer inputs.
(One way to prove this is by induction on k, using Pascal's identity.)
Therefore any integer linear combination of binomial coefficient polynomials is integer-valued too.
Conversely, () shows that any integer-valued polynomial is an integer linear combination of these binomial coefficient polynomials.
More generally, for any subring R of a characteristic 0 field K, a polynomial in K takes values in R at all integers if and only if it is an R-linear combination of binomial coefficient polynomials.

=== Example ===
The integer-valued polynomial 3t(3t + 1)/2 can be rewritten as
:

== Identities involving binomial coefficients ==
The factorial formula facilitates relating nearby binomial coefficients. For instance, if k is a positive integer and n is arbitrary, then

and, with a little more work,
:
Moreover, the following may be useful:
:
For constant n, we have the following recurrence:
:

=== Series involving binomial coefficients ===
The formula

is obtained from () using x = 1. This is equivalent to saying that the elements in one row of Pascal's triangle always add up to two raised to an integer power. A combinatorial interpretation of this fact involving double counting is given by counting subsets of size 0, size 1, size 2, and so on up to size n of a set S of n elements. Since we count the number of subsets of size i for 0  i  n, this sum must be equal to the number of subsets of S, which is known to be 2n. That is, Equation 5 is a statement that the power set for a finite set with n elements has size 2n.
More explicitly, consider a bit string with n digits. This bit string can be used to represent 2n numbers. Now consider all of the bit strings with no ones in them. There is just one, or rather n choose 0. Next consider the number of bit strings with just a single one in them. There are n, or rather n choose 1. Continuing this way we can see that the equation above holds.

The formulas

and

follow from () after differentiating with respect to x (twice in the latter) and then substituting x = 1.

The Chu-Vandermonde identity, which holds for any complex-values m and n and any non-negative integer k, is

and can be found by examination of the coefficient of in the expansion of (1 + x)m (1 + x)n  m = (1 + x)n using equation (). When m = 1, equation () reduces to equation ().

A similar looking formula, which applies for any integers j, k, and n satisfying 0  j  k  n, is

and can be found by examination of the coefficient of in the expansion of 
using 
When j = k, equation () gives
:

From expansion () using n = 2m, k = m, and (), one finds

Let F(n) denote the n-th Fibonacci number.
We obtain a formula about the diagonals of Pascal's triangle

This can be proved by induction using () or by Zeckendorf's representation (Just note that the lhs gives the number of subsets of {F(2),...,F(n)} without consecutive members, which also form all the numbers below F(n + 1)). A combinatorial proof is given below.

Also using () and induction, one can show that

Although there is no closed formula for

:

(unless one resorts to Hypergeometric functions), one can again use () and induction, to show that for k = 0, ..., n &minus; 1

as well as

in the trivial case where n = 0, where the result is 1 instead which is itself a special case of the result from the theory of finite differences that for any polynomial P(x) of degree less than n, 

Differentiating () k times and setting x = &minus;1 yields this for
,
when 0  k < n,
and the general case follows by taking linear combinations of these.

When P(x) is of degree less than or equal to n,

where is the coefficient of degree n in P(x).

More generally for (),

where m and d are complex numbers. This follows immediately applying () to the polynomial Q(x):=P(m + dx) instead of P(x), and observing that Q(x) has still degree less than or equal to n, and that its coefficient of degree n is dnan.

The infinite series

is convergent for k  2. This formula is used in the analysis of the German tank problem.
It is equivalent to the formula for the finite sum
:
which is proved for M>m by induction on M.

Using () one can derive

and

Series multisection gives the following identity for the sum of binomial coefficients taken with a step s and offset t as a closed-form sum of s terms:
: 

=== Identities with combinatorial proofs ===
Many identities involving binomial coefficients can be proved by combinatorial means. For example, the following identity for nonnegative integers (which reduces to () when q = 1):

:

can be given a double counting proof as follows. The left side counts the number of ways of selecting a subset of = {1, 2, , n} with at least q elements, and marking q elements among those selected. The right side counts the same parameter, because there are ways of choosing a set of q marks and they occur in all subsets that additionally contain some subset of the remaining elements, of which there are 

In the Pascal's rule
:
both sides count the number of k-element subsets of with the right hand side rst grouping them into those that contain element n and those that do not.

The identity () also has a combinatorial proof. The identity reads

:

Suppose you have empty squares arranged in a row and you want to mark (select) n of them. There are ways to do this. On the other hand, you may select your n squares by selecting k squares from among the first n and squares from the remaining n squares; any k from 0 to n will work. This gives
:
Now apply () to get the result.

The identity (),

:

has the following combinatorial proof. The number denotes the number of paths in a two-dimensional lattice from to using steps and . This is easy to see: there are steps in total and one may choose the steps. Now, replace each step by a step; note that there are exactly . Then one arrives at point using steps and . Doing this for all between and gives all paths from to using steps and . Clearly, there are exactly such paths.

==== Sum of coefficients row ====

The number of k-combinations for all k, , is the sum of the nth row (counting from 0) of the binomial coefficients. These combinations are enumerated by the 1 digits of the set of base 2 numbers counting from 0 to , where each digit position is an item from the set of n.

=== Dixon's identity ===
Dixon's identity is

:

or, more generally,

:

where a, b, and c are non-negative integers.

=== Continuous identities ===
Certain trigonometric integrals have values expressible in terms of
binomial coefficients:

For 

: 

: 

: 

These can be proved by using Euler's formula to convert trigonometric functions to complex exponentials, expanding using the binomial theorem, and integrating term by term.

== Generating functions ==

=== Ordinary generating functions ===
For a fixed n, the ordinary generating function of the sequence is:
: 

For a fixed k, the ordinary generating function of the sequence is:
: 

The bivariate generating function of the binomial coefficients is:
: 

Another bivariate generating function of the binomial coefficients, which is symmetric, is:
: 

=== Exponential generating function ===
The exponential bivariate generating function of the binomial coefficients is:
: 

== Divisibility properties ==

In 1852, Kummer proved that if m and n are nonnegative integers and p is a prime number, then the largest power of p dividing equals p'c, where c is the number of carries when m and n are added in base p.
Equivalently, the exponent of a prime p in 
equals the number of nonnegative integers j such that the fractional part of k/p'j is greater than the fractional part of n/p'j. It can be deduced from this that is divisible by n/gcd(n,k). In particular therefore it follows that p divides for all positive integers r and s such that s < p'r. However this is not true of higher powers of p: for example 9 does not divide .

A somewhat surprising result by David Singmaster (1974) is that any integer divides almost all binomial coefficients. More precisely, fix an integer d and let f(N) denote the number of binomial coefficients with n < N such that d divides . Then
:
Since the number of binomial coefficients with n < N is N(N + 1) / 2, this implies that the density of binomial coefficients divisible by d goes to 1.

Another fact:
An integer n  2 is prime if and only if
all the intermediate binomial coefficients
: 
are divisible by n.

Proof:
When p is prime, p divides
: for all 0 < k < p
because it is a natural number and the numerator has a prime factor p but the denominator does not have a prime factor p.

When n is composite, let p be the smallest prime factor of n and let k = n/p. Then 0 < p < n and
:
otherwise the numerator k(n &minus; 1)(n &minus; 2)&times;...&times;(n &minus; p + 1) has to be divisible by n = k&times;p, this can only be the case when (n &minus; 1)(n &minus; 2)&times;...&times;(n &minus; p + 1) is divisible by p. But n is divisible by p, so p does not divide n &minus; 1, n &minus; 2, ..., n &minus; p + 1 and because p is prime, we know that p does not divide (n &minus; 1)(n &minus; 2)&times;...&times;(n &minus; p + 1) and so the numerator cannot be divisible by n.

== Bounds and asymptotic formulas ==
The following bounds for hold:

: for 1  k  n.

Stirling's approximation yields the bounds:

: and, in general, for m  2 and n  1,

and the approximation

: as 

For both and much larger than 1, Stirling's approximation also yields the following asymptotic approximation:

:

Where is the binary entropy of .

When is large and is much smaller than , one can also write

:

and therefore

:

If more precision is desired, one can approximate with an integral, obtaining

:

For and , , and these approximations yield 12.312 and 12.133 respectively.

The infinite product formula (cf. Gamma function, alternative definition)
:
yields the asymptotic formulas
:
as .

This asymptotic behaviour is contained in the approximation
:
as well. (Here is the k-th harmonic number and is the EulerMascheroni constant.)

The sum of binomial coefficients can be bounded by a term exponential in and the binary entropy of the largest that occurs. More precisely, for and , it holds
:
where is the binary entropy of . see e.g. 

A simple and rough upper bound for the sum of binomial coefficients is given by the formula below (not difficult to prove)
:

==Generalizations==

===Generalization to multinomials===

Binomial coefficients can be generalized to multinomial coefficients defined to be the number:
:
where
:

While the binomial coefficients represent the coefficients of (x+y)n, the multinomial coefficients
represent the coefficients of the polynomial
:
The case r = 2 gives binomial coefficients:
:

The combinatorial interpretation of multinomial coefficients is distribution of n distinguishable elements over r (distinguishable) containers, each containing exactly ki elements, where i is the index of the container.

Multinomial coefficients have many properties similar to these of binomial coefficients, for example the recurrence relation:
:
and symmetry:
:
where is a permutation of (1,2,...,r).

=== Taylor series ===
Using Stirling numbers of the first kind the series expansion around any arbitrarily chosen point is
:

=== Binomial coefficient with n= ===
The definition of the binomial coefficients can be extended to the case where is real and is integer.

In particular, the following identity holds for any non-negative integer :
:

This shows up when expanding into a power series using the Newton binomial series :
:

=== Identity for the product of binomial coefficients ===
One can express the product of binomial coefficients as a linear combination of binomial coefficients:

:

where the connection coefficients are multinomial coefficients. In terms of labelled combinatorial objects, the connection coefficients represent the number of ways to assign m+n-k labels to a pair of labelled combinatorial objects&mdash;of weight m and n respectively&mdash;that have had their first k labels identified, or glued together to get a new labelled combinatorial object of weight m+n-k. (That is, to separate the labels into three portions to apply to the glued part, the unglued part of the first object, and the unglued part of the second object.) In this regard, binomial coefficients are to exponential generating series what falling factorials are to ordinary generating series.

=== Partial fraction decomposition ===
The partial fraction decomposition of the reciprocal is given by
: and 
