* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 

== See also ==

=== Related articles ===
* Centre de recherche et de restauration des muses de France
* List of museums in Paris
* Muse de la mode et du textile

=== External links===
* 
* Virtual reality gallery with fullscreen panoramas of the Louvre
* "A Closer Look" series  multimedia features focusing on masterpieces from the Louvre (Louvre official web site)
* Louvre's location

 



[[Love]]

Archetypal lovers Romeo and Juliet portrayed by Frank Dicksee
Love is a variety of different feelings, states, and attitudes that ranges from interpersonal affection ("I love my mother") to pleasure ("I loved that meal"). It can refer to an emotion of a strong attraction and personal attachment. Oxford Illustrated American Dictionary (1998) + Merriam-Webster Collegiate Dictionary (2000) It can also be a virtue representing human kindness, compassion, and affection"the unselfish loyal and benevolent concern for the good of another". Merriam Webster Dictionary It may also describe compassionate and affectionate actions towards other humans, one's self or animals. Fromm, Erich; The Art of Loving, Harper Perennial (1956), Original English Version, ISBN 978-0-06-095828-2 

Ancient Greeks identified four forms of love: kinship or familiarity (in Greek, storge), friendship (philia), sexual and/or romantic desire (eros), and self-emptying or divine love (agape). C.S. Lewis, The Four Loves, 1960. Modern authors have distinguished further varieties of romantic love. Stendhal, in his book On Love (Paris, 1822), distinguished carnal love, passionate love, a kind of uncommitted love that he called "taste-love", and love of vanity. Denis de Rougemont in his book Love in the Western World traced the story of passionate love (l'amour-passion) from its courtly to its romantic forms. Benjamin Pret, in the introduction to his Anthology of Sublime Love (Paris, 1956), further distinguished "sublime love", a state of realized idealisation perhaps equatable with the romantic form of passionate love. 
Non-Western traditions have also distinguished variants or symbioses of these states. (J. Mascar, translator) This diversity of uses and meanings combined with the complexity of the feelings involved makes love unusually difficult to consistently define, compared to other emotional states.

Love in its various forms acts as a major facilitator of interpersonal relationships and, owing to its central psychological importance, is one of the most common themes in the creative arts. 

Love may be understood as a function to keep human beings together against menaces and to facilitate the continuation of the species. Helen Fisher. Why we love: the nature and chemistry of romantic love. 2004. 

==Definitions==

The word "love" can have a variety of related but distinct meaning in different contexts. Many other languages use multiple words to express some of the different concepts that English relies mainly on "love" to encapsulate; one example is the plurality of Greek words for "love." Cultural differences in conceptualizing love thus doubly impede the establishment of a universal definition. 

Although the nature or essence of love is a subject of frequent debate, different aspects of the word can be clarified by determining what isn't love. Love as a general expression of positive sentiment (a stronger form of like) is commonly contrasted with hate (or neutral apathy); as a less sexual and more emotionally intimate form of romantic attachment, love is commonly contrasted with lust; and as an interpersonal relationship with romantic overtones, love is sometimes contrasted with friendship, although the word love is often applied to close friendships.

Fraternal love (Prehispanic sculpture from 250900 A.D., of Huastec origin). Museum of Anthropology in Xalapa, Veracruz, Mexico.

Abstractly discussed love usually refers to an experience one person feels for another. Love often involves caring for or identifying with a person or thing (cf. vulnerability and care theory of love), including oneself (cf. narcissism). In addition to cross-cultural differences in understanding love, ideas about love have also changed greatly over time. Some historians date modern conceptions of romantic love to courtly Europe during or after the Middle Ages, although the prior existence of romantic attachments is attested by ancient love poetry. 

The complex and abstract nature of love often reduces discourse of love to a thought-terminating clich. Several common proverbs regard love, from Virgil's "Love conquers all" to The Beatles' "All You Need Is Love". St. Thomas Aquinas, following Aristotle, defines love as "to will the good of another." Bertrand Russell describes love as a condition of "absolute value," as opposed to relative value. Philosopher Gottfried Leibniz said that love is "to be delighted by the happiness of another." Biologist Jeremy Griffith defines love as "unconditional selflessness". http://www.worldtransformation.com/what-is-love/ What is love?. In The Book of Real Answers to Everything! Griffith, J. 2011. ISBN 9781741290073. 

Love is sometimes referred to as an "international language" that overrides cultural and linguistic divisions.

==Impersonal love==
A person can be said to love an object, principle, or goal to which they are deeply committed and greatly value. For example, compassionate outreach and volunteer workers' "love" of their cause may sometimes be born not of interpersonal love but impersonal love, altruism, and strong spiritual or political convictions. Fromm, Erich; The Art of Loving, Harper Perennial (September 5, 2000), Original English Version, ISBN 978-0-06-095828-2 People can also "love" material objects, animals, or activities if they invest themselves in bonding or otherwise identifying with those things. If sexual passion is also involved, then this feeling is called paraphilia. 

==Interpersonal love==
Interpersonal love refers to love between human beings. It is a more potent sentiment than a simple liking for another. Unrequited love refers to those feelings of love that are not reciprocated. Interpersonal love is most closely associated with interpersonal relationships. Such love might exist between family members, friends, and couples. There are also a number of psychological disorders related to love, such as erotomania.
Pair of Lovers. 14801485
Throughout history, philosophy and religion have done the most speculation on the phenomenon of love. In the last century, the science of psychology has written a great deal on the subject. In recent years, the sciences of psychology, anthropology, neuroscience, and biology have added to the understanding of the nature and function of love.

===Biological basis===

Biological models of sex tend to view love as a mammalian drive, much like hunger or thirst. Helen Fisher, a leading expert in the topic of love, divides the experience of love into three partly overlapping stages: lust, attraction, and attachment. Lust is the feeling of sexual desire; romantic attraction determines what partners mates find attractive and pursue, conserving time and energy by choosing; and attachment involves sharing a home, parental duties, mutual defense, and in humans involves feelings of safety and security. 
http://homepage.mac.com/helenfisher/archives_of_sex_beh.pdf Dening the Brain Systems of Lust, Romantic Attraction,
and Attachment by Fisher et. al Three distinct neural circuitries, including neurotransmitters, and three behavioral patterns, are associated with these three romantic styles. 

Lust is the initial passionate sexual desire that promotes mating, and involves the increased release of chemicals such as testosterone and estrogen. These effects rarely last more than a few weeks or months. Attraction is the more individualized and romantic desire for a specific candidate for mating, which develops out of lust as commitment to an individual mate forms. Recent studies in neuroscience have indicated that as people fall in love, the brain consistently releases a certain set of chemicals, including the neurotransmitter hormones, dopamine, norepinephrine, and serotonin, the same compounds released by amphetamine, stimulating the brain's pleasure center and leading to side effects such as increased heart rate, loss of appetite and sleep, and an intense feeling of excitement. Research has indicated that this stage generally lasts from one and a half to three years. 

Since the lust and attraction stages are both considered temporary, a third stage is needed to account for long-term relationships. Attachment is the bonding that promotes relationships lasting for many years and even decades. Attachment is generally based on commitments such as marriage and children, or on mutual friendship based on things like shared interests. It has been linked to higher levels of the chemicals oxytocin and vasopressin to a greater degree than short-term relationships have. Enzo Emanuele and coworkers reported the protein molecule known as the nerve growth factor (NGF) has high levels when people first fall in love, but these return to previous levels after one year. 

===Psychological basis===

Psychology depicts love as a cognitive and social phenomenon. Psychologist Robert Sternberg formulated a triangular theory of love and argued that love has three different components: intimacy, commitment, and passion. Intimacy is a form in which two people share confidences and various details of their personal lives, and is usually shown in friendships and romantic love affairs. Commitment, on the other hand, is the expectation that the relationship is permanent. The last and most common form of love is sexual attraction and passion. Passionate love is shown in infatuation as well as romantic love. All forms of love are viewed as varying combinations of these three components. Non-love does not include any of these components. Liking only includes intimacy. Infatuated love only includes passion. Empty love only includes commitment. Romantic love includes both intimacy and passion. Companionate love includes intimacy and commitment. Fatuous love includes passion and commitment. Lastly, consummate love includes all three. Sternberg, R.J. (1986). "A triangular theory of love". Psychological Review 93 (2): 119135. doi:10.1037/0033-295X.93.2. American psychologist Zick Rubin sought to define love by psychometrics in the 1970s. His work states that three factors constitute love: attachment, caring, and intimacy. 
 
Grandmother and grandchild, Sri Lanka

Following developments in electrical theories such as Coulomb's law, which showed that positive and negative charges attract, analogs in human life were developed, such as "opposites attract." Over the last century, research on the nature of human mating has generally found this not to be true when it comes to character and personalitypeople tend to like people similar to themselves. However, in a few unusual and specific domains, such as immune systems, it seems that humans prefer others who are unlike themselves (e.g., with an orthogonal immune system), since this will lead to a baby that has the best of both worlds. In recent years, various human bonding theories have been developed, described in terms of attachments, ties, bonds, and affinities.
Some Western authorities disaggregate into two main components, the altruistic and the narcissistic. This view is represented in the works of Scott Peck, whose work in the field of applied psychology explored the definitions of love and evil. Peck maintains that love is a combination of the "concern for the spiritual growth of another," and simple narcissism. In combination, love is an activity, not simply a feeling.

Psychologist Erich Fromm maintained in his book The Art of Loving that love is not merely a feeling but is also actions, and that in fact, the "feeling" of love is superficial in comparison to one's commitment to love via a series of loving actions over time. In this sense, Fromm held that love is ultimately not a feeling at all, but rather is a commitment to, and adherence to, loving actions towards another, oneself, or many others, over a sustained duration. Fromm also described love as a conscious choice that in its early stages might originate as an involuntary feeling, but which then later no longer depends on those feelings, but rather depends only on conscious commitment. 

===Evolutionary basis===
Evolutionary psychology has attempted to provide various reasons for love as a survival tool. Humans are dependent on parental help for a large portion of their lifespans compared to other mammals. Love has therefore been seen as a mechanism to promote parental support of children for this extended time period. Another factor may be that sexually transmitted diseases can cause, among other effects, permanently reduced fertility, injury to the fetus, and increase complications during childbirth. This would favor monogamous relationships over polygamy. The Handbook of Evolutionary Psychology, edited by David M. Buss, John Wiley & Sons, Inc., 2005. Chapter 14, Commitment, Love, and Mate Retention by Lorne Campbell and Bruce J. Ellis. 

===Comparison of scientific models===
Biological models of love tend to see it as a mammalian drive, similar to hunger or thirst. Psychology sees love as more of a social and cultural phenomenon. Certainly love is influenced by hormones (such as oxytocin), neurotrophins (such as NGF), and pheromones, and how people think and behave in love is influenced by their conceptions of love. The conventional view in biology is that there are two major drives in love: sexual attraction and attachment. Attachment between adults is presumed to work on the same principles that lead an infant to become attached to its mother. The traditional psychological view sees love as being a combination of companionate love and passionate love. Passionate love is intense longing, and is often accompanied by physiological arousal (shortness of breath, rapid heart rate); companionate love is affection and a feeling of intimacy not accompanied by physiological arousal.

==Cultural views==

===Ancient Greek===
Greek distinguishes several different senses in which the word "love" is used. For example, Ancient Greek has the words philia, eros, agape, storge, and xenia. However, with Greek (as with many other languages), it has been historically difficult to separate the meanings of these words totally. At the same time, the Ancient Greek text of the Bible has examples of the verb agapo having the same meaning as phileo.

Agape ( agp) means love in modern-day Greek. The term s'agapo means I love you in Greek. The word agapo is the verb I love. It generally refers to a "pure," ideal type of love, rather than the physical attraction suggested by eros. However, there are some examples of agape used to mean the same as eros. It has also been translated as "love of the soul."

Eros ( rs) (from the Greek deity Eros) is passionate love, with sensual desire and longing. The Greek word erota means in love. Plato refined his own definition. Although eros is initially felt for a person, with contemplation it becomes an appreciation of the beauty within that person, or even becomes appreciation of beauty itself. Eros helps the soul recall knowledge of beauty and contributes to an understanding of spiritual truth. Lovers and philosophers are all inspired to seek truth by eros. Some translations list it as "love of the body."

Philia ( phila), a dispassionate virtuous love, was a concept addressed and developed by Aristotle. It includes loyalty to friends, family, and community, and requires virtue, equality, and familiarity. Philia is motivated by practical reasons; one or both of the parties benefit from the relationship. It can also mean "love of the mind."

Storge ( storg) is natural affection, like that felt by parents for offspring.

Xenia ( xena), hospitality, was an extremely important practice in Ancient Greece. It was an almost ritualized friendship formed between a host and his guest, who could previously have been strangers. The host fed and provided quarters for the guest, who was expected to repay only with gratitude. The importance of this can be seen throughout Greek mythologyin particular, Homer's Iliad and Odyssey.

===Ancient Roman (Latin)===
The Latin language has several different verbs corresponding to the English word "love." am is the basic verb meaning I love, with the infinitive amare (to love) as it still is in Italian today. The Romans used it both in an affectionate sense as well as in a romantic or sexual sense. From this verb come amansa lover, amator, "professional lover," often with the accessory notion of lecheryand amica, "girlfriend" in the English sense, often being applied euphemistically to a prostitute. The corresponding noun is amor (the significance of this term for the Romans is well illustrated in the fact, that the name of the City, Romein Latin: Romacan be viewed as an anagram for amor, which was used as the secret name of the City in wide circles in ancient times), Thomas Kves-Zulauf, Reden und Schweigen, Munich, 1972. which is also used in the plural form to indicate love affairs or sexual adventures. This same root also produces amicus"friend"and amicitia, "friendship" (often based to mutual advantage, and corresponding sometimes more closely to "indebtedness" or "influence"). Cicero wrote a treatise called On Friendship (de Amicitia), which discusses the notion at some length. Ovid wrote a guide to dating called Ars Amatoria (The Art of Love), which addresses, in depth, everything from extramarital affairs to overprotective parents.

Latin sometimes uses amre where English would simply say to like. This notion, however, is much more generally expressed in Latin by placere or delectre, which are used more colloquially, the latter used frequently in the love poetry of Catullus. Diligere often has the notion "to be affectionate for," "to esteem," and rarely if ever is used for romantic love. This word would be appropriate to describe the friendship of two men. The corresponding noun diligentia, however, has the meaning of "diligence" or "carefulness," and has little semantic overlap with the verb. Observare is a synonym for diligere; despite the cognate with English, this verb and its corresponding noun, observantia, often denote "esteem" or "affection." Caritas is used in Latin translations of the Christian Bible to mean "charitable love"; this meaning, however, is not found in Classical pagan Roman literature. As it arises from a conflation with a Greek word, there is no corresponding verb.

===Chinese and other Sinic cultures===
"Ai," the traditional Chinese character for love () consists of a heart (, middle) inside of "accept," "feel," or "perceive," () which shows a graceful emotion. It can also be interpreted as a hand offering one's heart to another hand.

Two philosophical underpinnings of love exist in the Chinese tradition, one from Confucianism which emphasized actions and duty while the other came from Mohism which championed a universal love. A core concept to Confucianism is Ren ("benevolent love", ), which focuses on duty, action and attitude in a relationship rather than love itself. In Confucianism, one displays benevolent love by performing actions such as filial piety from children, kindness from parent, loyalty to the king and so forth.

The concept of Ai () was developed by the Chinese philosopher Mozi in the 4th century BC in reaction to Confucianism's benevolent love. Mozi tried to replace what he considered to be the long-entrenched Chinese over-attachment to family and clan structures with the concept of "universal love" (jin'i, ). In this, he argued directly against Confucians who believed that it was natural and correct for people to care about different people in different degrees. Mozi, by contrast, believed people in principle should care for all people equally. Mohism stressed that rather than adopting different attitudes towards different people, love should be unconditional and offered to everyone without regard to reciprocation, not just to friends, family and other Confucian relations. Later in Chinese Buddhism, the term Ai () was adopted to refer to a passionate caring love and was considered a fundamental desire. In Buddhism, Ai was seen as capable of being either selfish or selfless, the latter being a key element towards enlightenment.

In contemporary Chinese, Ai () is often used as the equivalent of the Western concept of love. Ai is used as both a verb (e.g. wo ai ni , or "I love you") and a noun (such as aiqing , or "romantic love"). However, due to the influence of Confucian Ren, the phrase Wo ai ni (I love you) carries with it a very specific sense of responsibility, commitment and loyalty. Instead of frequently saying "I love you" as in some Western societies, the Chinese are more likely to express feelings of affection in a more casual way. Consequently, "I like you" (Wo xihuan ni, ) is a more common way of expressing affection in Chinese; it is more playful and less serious. JFK Miller, "Why the Chinese Don't Say I Love You" This is also true in Japanese (suki da, ). The Chinese are also more likely to say "I love you" in English or other foreign languages than they would in their mother tongue.

===Persian===
Rumi, Hafiz and Sa'di are icons of the passion and love that the Persian culture and language present. The Persian word for love is eshgh, derived from the Arabic ishq, however is considered by most to be too stalwart a term for interpersonal love and is more commonly substituted for 'doost dashtan' ('liking'). In the Persian culture, everything is encompassed by love and all is for love, starting from loving friends and family, husbands and wives, and eventually reaching the divine love that is the ultimate goal in life . Over seven centuries ago, Sa'di wrote:

===Japanese===
Ohatsu and Tokubei, characters of Sonezaki Shinj
In Japanese Buddhism, ai () is passionate caring love, and a fundamental desire. It can develop towards either selfishness or selflessness and enlightenment. Amae (), a Japanese word meaning "indulgent dependence," is part of the child-rearing culture of Japan. Japanese mothers are expected to hug and indulge their children, and children are expected to reward their mothers by clinging and serving. Some sociologists have suggested that Japanese social interactions in later life are modeled on the mother-child amae.

===Turkish (Shaman and Islamic)===
In Turkish, the word "love" comes up with several meanings. A person can love a god, a person, parents, or family. But that person can "love" just one special person, which they call the word "ak." Ak is a feeling for to love, or being "in love" (Ak), as it still is in Turkish today. The Turks used this word just for their loves in a romantic or sexual sense. If a Turk says that he is in love (Ak) with somebody, it is not a love that a person can feel for his or her parents; it is just for one person, and it indicates a huge infatuation. The word is also common for Turkic languages, such as Azerbaijani (eq) and Kazakh ().

==Religious views==

===Abrahamic religions===
Robert Indiana's 1977 Love sculpture spelling ahava.

====Christianity====
The Christian understanding is that love comes from God. The love of man and womaneros in Greekand the unselfish love of others (agape), are often contrasted as "ascending" and "descending" love, respectively, but are ultimately the same thing. 

There are several Greek words for "love" that are regularly referred to in Christian circles.
* Agape: In the New Testament, agap is charitable, selfless, altruistic, and unconditional. It is parental love, seen as creating goodness in the world; it is the way God is seen to love humanity, and it is seen as the kind of love that Christians aspire to have for one another.
* Phileo: Also used in the New Testament, phileo is a human response to something that is found to be delightful. Also known as "brotherly love."
* Two other words for love in the Greek language, eros (sexual love) and storge (child-to-parent love), were never used in the New Testament.

Christians believe that to Love God with all your heart, mind, and strength and Love your neighbor as yourself are the two most important things in life (the greatest commandment of the Jewish Torah, according to Jesus; cf. Gospel of Mark chapter 12, verses 2834). Saint Augustine summarized this when he wrote "Love God, and do as thou wilt."

Sacred Love Versus Profane Love (160203) by Giovanni Baglione. Intended as an attack on his hated enemy the artist Caravaggio, it shows a boy (hinting at Caravaggio's homosexuality) on one side, a devil with Caravaggio's face on the other, and between an angel representing pure, meaning non-erotic, love.

The Apostle Paul glorified love as the most important virtue of all. Describing love in the famous poem in 1 Corinthians, he wrote, "Love is patient, love is kind. It does not envy, it does not boast, it is not proud. It is not rude, it is not self-seeking, it is not easily angered, it keeps no record of wrongs. Love does not delight in evil but rejoices with the truth. It always protects, always trusts, always hopes, and always perseveres." (1 Cor. 13:47, NIV)

The Apostle John wrote, "For God so loved the world that he gave his one and only Son, that whoever believes in him shall not perish but have eternal life. For God did not send his Son into the world to condemn the world, but to save the world through him." (John 3:1617, NIV) John also wrote, "Dear friends, let us love one another for love comes from God. Everyone who loves has been born of God and knows God. Whoever does not love does not know God, because God is love." (1 John 4:78, NIV)

Saint Augustine says that one must be able to decipher the difference between love and lust. Lust, according to Saint Augustine, is an overindulgence, but to love and be loved is what he has sought for his entire life. He even says, I was in love with love. Finally, he does fall in love and is loved back, by God. Saint Augustine says the only one who can love you truly and fully is God, because love with a human only allows for flaws such as jealousy, suspicion, fear, anger, and contention. According to Saint Augustine, to love God is to attain the peace which is yours. (Saint Augustine's Confessions)

Augustine regards the duplex commandment of love in Matthew 22 as the heart of Christian faith and the interpretation of the Bible. After the review of Christian doctrine, Augustine treats the problem of love in terms of use and enjoyment until the end of Book I of De Doctrina Christiana (1.22.21-1.40.44;). 

Christian theologians see God as the source of love, which is mirrored in humans and their own loving relationships. Influential Christian theologian C.S. Lewis wrote a book called The Four Loves. Benedict XVI wrote his first encyclical on "God is love". He said that a human being, created in the image of God, who is love, is able to practice love; to give himself to God and others (agape) and by receiving and experiencing God's love in contemplation (eros). This life of love, according to him, is the life of the saints such as Teresa of Calcutta and the Blessed Virgin Mary and is the direction Christians take when they believe that God loves them. 

In Christianity the practical definition of love is best summarised by St. Thomas Aquinas, who defined love as "to will the good of another," or to desire for another to succeed. This is the explanation of the Christian need to love others, including their enemies. As Thomas Aquinas explains, Christian love is motivated by the need to see others succeed in life, to be good people.

====Judaism====
In Hebrew, Ahava is the most commonly used term for both interpersonal love and love between God and God's creations. Chesed, often translated as loving-kindness, is used to describe many forms of love between human beings.

The commandment to love other people is given in the Torah, which states, "Love your neighbor like yourself" (Leviticus 19:18). The Torah's commandment to love God "with all your heart, with all your soul and with all your might" (Deuteronomy 6:5) is taken by the Mishnah (a central text of the Jewish oral law) to refer to good deeds, willingness to sacrifice one's life rather than commit certain serious transgressions, willingness to sacrifice all of one's possessions, and being grateful to the Lord despite adversity (tractate Berachoth 9:5). Rabbinic literature differs as to how this love can be developed, e.g., by contemplating divine deeds or witnessing the marvels of nature. As for love between marital partners, this is deemed an essential ingredient to life: "See life with the wife you love" (Ecclesiastes 9:9). The biblical book Song of Solomon is considered a romantically phrased metaphor of love between God and his people, but in its plain reading, reads like a love song. The 20th-century Rabbi Eliyahu Eliezer Dessler is frequently quoted as defining love from the Jewish point of view as "giving without expecting to take" (from his Michtav me-Eliyahu, Vol. 1).

====Islam====
Love encompasses the Islamic view of life as universal brotherhood that applies to all who hold faith. Amongst the 99 names of God (Allah), there is the name Al-Wadud, or "the Loving One," which is found in Surah as well as Surah . God is also referenced at the beginning of every chapter in the Qur'an as Ar-Rahman and Ar-Rahim, or the "Most Compassionate" and the "Most Merciful", indicating that nobody is more loving, compassionate and benevolent than God. The Qur'an refers to God as being "full of loving kindness."

The Qur'an exhorts Muslim believers to treat all people, those who have not persecuted them, with birr or "deep kindness" as stated in Surah . Birr is also used by the Qur'an in describing the love and kindness that children must show to their parents.

Ishq, or divine love, is the emphasis of Sufism in the Islamic tradition. Practitioners of Sufism believe that love is a projection of the essence of God to the universe. God desires to recognize beauty, and as if one looks at a mirror to see oneself, God "looks" at himself within the dynamics of nature. Since everything is a reflection of God, the school of Sufism practices to see the beauty inside the apparently ugly. Sufism is often referred to as the religion of love. God in Sufism is referred to in three main terms, which are the Lover, Loved, and Beloved, with the last of these terms being often seen in Sufi poetry. A common viewpoint of Sufism is that through love, humankind can get back to its inherent purity and grace. The saints of Sufism are infamous for being "drunk" due to their love of God; hence, the constant reference to wine in Sufi poetry and music. 

===Eastern religions===

====Buddhism====
In Buddhism, Kma is sensuous, sexual love. It is an obstacle on the path to enlightenment, since it is selfish. Karu is compassion and mercy, which reduces the suffering of others. It is complementary to wisdom and is necessary for enlightenment. Advea and mett are benevolent love. This love is unconditional and requires considerable self-acceptance. This is quite different from ordinary love, which is usually about attachment and sex and which rarely occurs without self-interest. Instead, in Buddhism it refers to detachment and unselfish interest in others' welfare.

The Bodhisattva ideal in Mahayana Buddhism involves the complete renunciation of oneself in order to take on the burden of a suffering world. The strongest motivation one has in order to take the path of the Bodhisattva is the idea of salvation within unselfish, altruistic love for all sentient beings.

====Hinduism====

Kama (left) with Rati on a temple wall of Chennakesava Temple, Belur
In Hinduism, kma is pleasurable, sexual love, personified by the god Kamadeva. For many Hindu schools, it is the third end (Kama) in life. Kamadeva is often pictured holding a bow of sugar cane and an arrow of flowers; he may ride upon a great parrot. He is usually accompanied by his consort Rati and his companion Vasanta, lord of the spring season. Stone images of Kamadeva and Rati can be seen on the door of the Chennakeshava temple at Belur, in Karnataka, India. Maara is another name for kma.

In contrast to kma, premaor premrefers to elevated love. Karuna is compassion and mercy, which impels one to help reduce the suffering of others. Bhakti is a Sanskrit term, meaning "loving devotion to the supreme God." A person who practices bhakti is called a bhakta. Hindu writers, theologians, and philosophers have distinguished nine forms of bhakti, which can be found in the Bhagavata Purana and works by Tulsidas. The philosophical work Narada Bhakti Sutras, written by an unknown author (presumed to be Narada), distinguishes eleven forms of love.

In certain Vaishnava sects within Hinduism, attaining unaldulterated, unconditional and incessant love for Godhead is considered the foremost goal of life. Gaudiya Vaishnavas who worship Krishna as the Supreme Personality of Godhead and the cause of all causes consider Love for Godhead (Prema) to act in two ways: sambhoga and vipralambha (union and separation)two opposites . 

In the condition of separation, there is an acute yearning for being with the beloved and in the condition of union there is supreme happiness and nectarean. Gaudiya Vaishnavas consider that Krishna-prema (Love for Godhead) is not fire but that it still burns away one's material desires. They consider that Ka-prema is not a weapon, but it still pierces the heart. It is not water, but it washes away everythingone's pride, religious rules, and one's shyness. Krishna-prema is considered to make one drown in the ocean of transcendental ecstasy and pleasure. The love of Radha, a cowherd girl, for Krishna is often cited as the supreme example of love for Godhead by Gaudiya Vaishnavas. Radha is considered to be the internal potency of Krishna, and is the supreme lover of Godhead. Her example of love is considered to be beyond the understanding of material realm as it surpasses any form of selfish love or lust that is visible in the material world. The reciprocal love between Radha (the supreme lover) and Krishna (God as the Supremely Loved) is the subject of many poetic compositions in India such as the Gita Govinda and Hari Bhakti Shuddhodhaya.

In the Bhakti tradition within Hinduism, it is believed that execution of devotional service to God leads to the development of Love for God (taiche bhakti-phale krsne prema upajaya), and as love for God increases in the heart, the more one becomes free from material contamination (krishna-prema asvada haile, bhava nasa paya). Being perfectly in love with God or Krishna makes one perfectly free from material contamination. and this is the ultimate way of salvation or liberation. In this tradition, salvation or liberation is considered inferior to love, and just an incidental by-product. Being absorbed in Love for God is considered to be the perfection of life. 

==Political views==

===Free love===

Lovers kissing on the street
The term free love has been used The Handbook of the Oneida Community claims to have coined the term around 1850, and laments that its use was appropriated by socialists to attack marriage, an institution that they felt protected women and children from abandonment to describe a social movement that rejects marriage, which is seen as a form of social bondage. The Free Love movements initial goal was to separate the state from sexual matters such as marriage, birth control, and adultery. It claimed that such issues were the concern of the people involved, and no one else. McElroy, Wendy. "The Free Love Movement and Radical Individualism." Libertarian Enterprise .19 (1996): 1. 

Many people in the early 19th century believed that marriage was an important aspect of life to "fulfill earthly human happiness." Middle-class Americans wanted the home to be a place of stability in an uncertain world. This mentality created a vision of strongly defined gender roles, which provoked the advancement of the free love movement as a contrast. Spurlock, John C. Free Love Marriage and Middle-Class Radicalism in America. New York, NY: New York UP, 1988. 

The term "sex radical" is also used interchangeably with the term "free lover", and was the preferred term by advocates because of the negative connotations of "free love". By whatever name, advocates had two strong beliefs: opposition to the idea of forceful sexual activity in a relationship and advocacy for a woman to use her body in any way that she pleases. Passet, Joanne E. Sex Radicals and the Quest for Women's Equality. Chicago,IL: U of Illinois P, 2003. These are also beliefs of Feminism.

==Philosophical views==

Graffito in East Timor

The philosophy of love is a field of social philosophy and ethics that attempts to explain the nature of love. The philosophical investigation of love includes the tasks of distinguishing between the various kinds of personal love, asking if and how love is or can be justified, asking what the value of love is, and what impact love has on the autonomy of both the lover and the beloved.

Many different theories attempt to explain the nature and function of love. Explaining love to a hypothetical person who had not himself or herself experienced love or being loved would be very difficult because to such a person love would appear to be quite strange if not outright irrational behavior. Among the prevailing types of theories that attempt to account for the existence of love are: psychological theories, the vast majority of which consider love to be very healthy behavior; evolutionary theories which hold that love is part of the process of natural selection; spiritual theories which may, for instance consider love to be a gift from a god; and theories that consider love to be an unexplainable mystery, very much like a mystical experience.

==References==

==Sources==

* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 

==External links==

* 
* 
* 
* 

 



[[Forever Changes]]

Forever Changes is the third album by the American rock band Love. It was released by Elektra Records in November 1967 and would be the final album by the original band, as subsequent albums featured leader Arthur Lee backed by a variety of new players.

Forever Changes failed to achieve commercial success when it was first released in 1967, but it has since become recognized as one of the finest albums to come out of the Summer of Love, ranking 40th on Rolling Stone magazine's 2003 list of The 500 Greatest Albums of All Time, being inducted into the Grammy Hall of Fame in 2008 as well as being added to the National Recording Registry in May 2012. 

==Recording==
After the previous album, Da Capo, keyboardist/drummer Alban "Snoopy" Pfisterer and flautist/saxophonist Tjay Cantrelli were dropped from the band, leaving Love a quintet. The remaining personnel performed on nine of the eleven tracks on Forever Changes. The album was the first to be produced by Arthur Lee, with assistance from Bruce Botnick. Originally, the album was to be produced by Botnick and Neil Young, but Young bowed out due to his commitments to Buffalo Springfield. According to the liner notes of the 1995 compilation Love Story, Young stuck with the album project long enough to arrange the track "The Daily Planet." Young, however, has denied such involvement. pp 160 footnote 

The title of the album came from a story that Lee had heard about a friend-of-a-friend who had broken up with his girlfriend. She exclaimed, "You said you would love me forever!," and he replied, "Well, forever changes." Lee also noted that since the name of the band was Love, the full title was actually Love Forever Changes. Einarson, John. Forever Changes: Arthur Lee and the Book of Love. A Genuine Jawbone Book. 2010. ISBN 978-1-906002-31-2 

The sessions began in June 1967, with the group (except for Lee and Maclean) replaced by well-known Los Angeles session musicians Billy Strange (guitar), Don Randi (piano), Hal Blaine (drums) and most likely Carol Kaye (bass, guitar). This line-up was put in place due to the regular line-up's alleged inability to function in the studio. The two tracks recorded during these sessions, "Andmoreagain" and "The Daily Planet," were later given sparing overdubs by the actual members of Love, who felt the tracks otherwise sufficed. Drummer Michael Stuart says that bassist Kaye actually played acoustic guitar on "The Daily Planet" but that Ken Forssi taught her the part.

Botnick recalls that the use of session musicians "sparked" the band, and they "realized they had blown it, got their act together and recorded the rest of the album." After much rehearsal, the group returned to the studio in August and continued through September, quickly laying down the remaining nine tracks, at a total estimated cost of $2,257.

Lee spent three weeks with David Angel, the arranger of the strings and horns, playing and singing the orchestral parts to him. Contrary to what has been reported in other places, Lee envisioned the horns and strings from the beginning, and they were not added as an afterthought. 

A September 18 recording session finished the album, adding the horns and strings, as well as some additional piano from Randi, who played all the keyboard parts on the album as the band now had no keyboard player.

==Reception==

Upon its release in late 1967, Forever Changes was largely unsuccessful commercially. It spent 10 weeks on the Billboard 200 album chart, according to Joel Whitburn's Top Pop Albums, peaking at #154 in 1968, by far the worst showing among Love's first three albums. (According to the same book, Love's next album, Four Sail, fared better on the Billboard 200, peaking at #102 in 1969.) Forever Changes had a much stronger showing in Great Britain, where it reached #24 on the UK album chart in 1968. It peaked at #63 when it re-entered the chart in 2001.

Initial critical reviews were positive. Pete Johnson of the Los Angeles Times wrote that the album "can survive endless listening with no diminishing either of power or of freshness", while noting "parts of the album are beautiful; others are disturbingly ugly, reflections of the pop movement towards realism." Gene Youngblood of LA Free Express also praised the album, calling it "melancholy iconoclasm and tasteful romanticism." 

The Bonzo Dog Band's contemporary track We Are Normal contains a section parodying The Red Telephone': "We are normal and we dig Bert Weedon" 
 http://www.iankitching.me.uk/music/bonzos/history.html#WeAreNormal 

The 1979 edition of The Rolling Stone Record Guide gave the album a rating of five stars (out of five). It also received five stars in the 1983 edition of the guide and in the fourth edition that was published in 2004.

In a special issue of Mojo magazine, Forever Changes was ranked the second greatest psychedelic album of all time. In the January 1996 issue, Mojo readers selected Forever Changes as #11 of the "100 Greatest Albums Ever Made." 

Forever Changes was praised by a group of Members of the British Parliament in 2002 as being one of the greatest albums of all time. 

Rolling Stone magazine ranked the album 40th in its list of the 500 greatest albums of all time in the December 11, 2003 issue.

In 2003, NME ranked the album #6 on their list of greatest albums of all time. In 1998, Q magazine readers voted Forever Changes the 82nd greatest album of all time.

In a 2005 survey held by British television's Channel 4, the album was ranked 83rd in the 100 greatest albums of all time. 

The album was included in the 2005 book 1001 Albums You Must Hear Before You Die. 

According to the New Musical Express, The Stone Roses' relationship with their future producer John Leckie was settled when they all agreed that Forever Changes was the "best record ever". 

==Reissues==
Forever Changes was included in its entirety on the 2-CD retrospective Love compilation Love Story 1966-1972, released by Rhino Records in 1995. The album was re-released in an expanded single-CD version by Rhino in 2001, featuring alternate mixes, outtakes and the group's 1968 single, "Your Mind and We Belong Together"/"Laughing Stock", the final tracks ever to feature the Forever Changes line-up of Arthur Lee, Johnny Echols, Ken Forssi, Michael Stuart and Bryan MacLean (Forssi and MacLean both died in 1998).

The Forever Changes Concert was released on DVD in 2003 to great critical acclaim and marked the first time many of the songs had been performed live. The set features the entire album recorded in its original running order during a tour of England by Lee in early 2003, in which he was backed by the band Baby Lemonade and string and horn ensembles. The DVD features the album concert, five bonus performances, documentary footage and an interview with Lee.

A double-CD "Collector's Edition" of the album was issued by Rhino Records on April 22, 2008. The first disc consists of a remastered version of the original 1967 album. The second disc contains a previously unissued alternate mix of the album.

A Super High Material CD (SHM-CD) version of Forever Changes was released in Japan in 2009.

A 24 Bit 192kHz High Resolution version of the album was released by HDTracks in 2014.

==Track listing==
All songs written by Arthur Lee, except where noted.

===Side one===
# "Alone Again Or" (Bryan MacLean)  3:16
# "A House Is Not a Motel"  3:31
# "Andmoreagain"  3:18 (Lee, MacLean)
# "The Daily Planet"  3:30
# "Old Man" (MacLean)  3:02
# "The Red Telephone"  4:46

===Side two===
# "Maybe the People Would Be the Times or Between Clark and Hilldale"  3:34
# "Live and Let Live"  5:26
# "The Good Humor Man He Sees Everything Like This"  3:08
# "Bummer in the Summer"  2:24
# "You Set the Scene"  6:56

==Personnel==

===Music===
According to the liner notes of the 2008 "Collector's Edition":
* Arthur Lee: lead vocals, guitar
* Johnny Echols: lead guitar
* Bryan MacLean: rhythm guitar, background vocals (lead vocals on "Old Man" and co-lead vocals on "Alone Again Or")
* Ken Forssi: bass guitar
* Michael Stuart: drums, percussion
;With
* David Angel: arranger, orchestrations
* Strings: Robert Barene, Arnold Belnick, James Getzoff, Marshall Sosson, Darrel Terwilliger (violins); Norman Botnick (viola); Jesse Ehrlich (cello); Chuck Berghofer (string bass)
* Horns: Bud Brisbois, Roy Caton, Ollie Mitchell (trumpets); Richard Leith (trombone)
;Additional personnel according to the liner notes of the 2001 release
* Carol Kaye: (possibly) bass guitar on "Andmoreagain" and "The Daily Planet"
* Don Randi: piano on "Andmoreagain" and "The Daily Planet"
* Billy Strange: guitar on "Andmoreagain" and "The Daily Planet"
* Hal Blaine: drums on "Andmoreagain" and "The Daily Planet"
;Additional personnel according to the book "Forever Changes - Arthur Lee and the Book of Love"
* Neil Young: arranger on "The Daily Planet"
;Production and design, credits from the original 1967 album
* Bruce Botnick and Arthur Lee: Producers
* Bruce Botnick: Engineer
* Jac Holzman: Production Supervisor
* Zal Schreiber: Mastering
* William S. Harvey: Cover Design
* Bob Pepper: Cover Art
* Ronnie Haran: Back Cover Photo
;Production and design, credits from the original 1967 album
* Andrew Sandoval: Project Producer
* Andrew Sandoval, Dan Hersch, Bill Inglot: Remastering, Disc 1
* Steve Hoffman: Remastering, Disc 2, tracks 1-11
* Dan Hersch and Andrew Sandoval: Remastering, Disc 2, tracks 12-21
* Michael Kachko: Product Manager
* Andrew Sandoval: Liner Notes
* Amanda Smith: Art Supervision
* Vanessa Atkins and Cory Frye: Editorial Supervision

==References==



[[Kepler's laws of planetary motion]]

:This article uses more modern mathematical notation and concepts than were available to Johannes Kepler. For a more historical approach, see in particular the article Astronomia nova.

In astronomy, Kepler's laws of planetary motion are three scientific laws describing the motion of planets around the Sun. Kepler's laws are now traditionally enumerated in this way:

Figure 1: Illustration of Kepler's three laws with two planetary orbits. (1) The orbits are ellipses, with focal points &fnof;1 and &fnof;2 for the first planet and &fnof;1 and &fnof;3 for the second planet. The Sun is placed in focal point &fnof;1. (2) The two shaded sectors A1 and A2 have the same surface area and the time for planet 1 to cover segment A1 is equal to the time to cover segment A2. (3) The total orbit times for planet 1 and planet 2 have a ratio a13/2 : a23/2.

#The orbit of a planet is an ellipse with the Sun at one of the two foci.
#A line segment joining a planet and the Sun sweeps out equal areas during equal intervals of time. Bryant, Jeff; Pavlyk, Oleksandr. "Kepler's Second Law", Wolfram Demonstrations Project. Retrieved December 27, 2009. 
#The square of the orbital period of a planet is proportional to the cube of the semi-major axis of its orbit.

Most planetary orbits are almost circles, so it is not apparent that they are actually ellipses. Calculations of the orbit of the planet Mars first indicated to Kepler its elliptical shape, and he inferred that other heavenly bodies, including those farther away from the Sun, have elliptical orbits also. Kepler's work broadly followed the heliocentric theory of Nicolaus Copernicus by asserting that the Earth orbited the Sun. It innovated in explaining how the planets' speeds varied, and using elliptical orbits rather than circular orbits with epicycles. 

Isaac Newton showed in 1687 that relationships like Kepler's would apply in the solar system to a good approximation, as consequences of his own laws of motion and law of universal gravitation. Together with Newton's theories, Kepler's laws became part of the foundation of modern astronomy and physics. See also G. E. Smith, "Newton's Philosophiae Naturalis Principia Mathematica", especially the section Historical context ... in The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Winter 2008 Edition), Edward N. Zalta (ed.). 

==Nomenclature==
It took nearly two centuries for the current formulation of Kepler's work to take on its settled form. Voltaire's Elments de la philosophie de Newton (Elements of Newton's Philosophy) of 1738 was the first publication to use the terminology of "laws". The Biographical Encyclopedia of Astronomers in its article on Kepler (p. 620) states that the terminology of scientific laws for these discoveries was current at least from the time of Joseph de Lalande. De la Lande, Astronomie, vol. 1 (Paris, France: Desaint & Saillant, 1764). See, for example:
* From page 390: "  mais suivant la fameuse loi de Kepler, qui sera explique dans le Livre suivant (892), le rapport des temps priodiques est toujours plus grand que celui des distances, une planete cinq fois plus loigne'e du soleil, emploie  faire sa rvolution douze fois plus de temps ou environ;  " (  but according to the famous law of Kepler, which will be explained in the following book chapter (paragraph 892), the ratio of the periods is always greater than that of the distances that, for example, a planet five times farther from the sun, requires about twelve times or so more time to make its revolution the sun;  )
* From page 429: "Les Quarrs des Temps priodiques sont comme les Cubes des Distances. 892. La plus fameuse loi du mouvement des planetes dcouverte par Kepler, est celle du repport qu'il y a entre les grandeurs de leurs orbites, & le temps qu'elles emploient  les parcourir;  " (The squares of the periods are as the cubes of the distances. 892. The most famous law of the movement of the planets discovered by Kepler is that of the relation that exists between the sizes of their orbits and the times that the require to traverse them;  )
* From page 430: "Les Aires sont proportionnelles au Temps. 895. Cette loi gnrale du mouvement des planetes devenue si importante dans l'Astronomie, savior, que les aires sont proportionnelles au temps, est encore une des dcouvertes de Kepler;  " (Areas are proportional to times. 895. This general law of the movement of the planets has become so important in astronomy to know, that areas are proportional to times, is one of Kepler's discoveries;  )
* From page 435: "On a appell cette loi des aires proportionnelles aux temps, Loi de Kepler, aussi bien que celle de l'article 892, du nome de ce clebre Inventeur;  " (One called this law of areas proportional to times (the law of Kepler) as well as that of paragraph 892, by the name of that celebrated inventor;  ) It was the exposition of Robert Small, in An account of the astronomical discoveries of Kepler (1804) that made up the set of three laws, by adding in the third. Robert Small, An account of the astronomical discoveries of Kepler (London, England: J Mawman, 1804), pp. 298-299. Small also claimed, against the history, that these were empirical laws, based on inductive reasoning. Robert Small, An account of the astronomical discoveries of Kepler (London, England: J. Mawman, 1804). 

Further, the current usage of "Kepler's Second Law" is something of a misnomer. Kepler had two versions of it, related in a qualitative sense, the "distance law" and the "area law". The "area law" is what became the Second Law in the set of three; but Kepler did himself not privilege it in that way. 

==History==
Johannes Kepler published his first two laws about planetary motion in 1609, having found them by analyzing the astronomical observations of Tycho Brahe. In his Astronomia nova, Kepler presented only a proof that Mars' orbit is elliptical. Evidence that the other known planets' orbits are elliptical was presented only in 1621.
See: Johannes Kepler, Astronomia nova  (1609), p. 285. After having rejected circular and oval orbits, Kepler concluded that Mars' orbit must be elliptical. From the top of page 285: "Ergo ellipsis est Planet iter;  " (Thus, an ellipse is the planet's Mars' path;  ) Later on the same page: "  ut sequenti capite patescet: ubi simul etiam demonstrabitur, nullam Planet relinqui figuram Orbit, prterquam perfecte ellipticam;  " (  as will be revealed in the next chapter: where it will also then be proved that any figure of the planet's orbit must be relinquished, except a perfect ellipse;  ) And then: "Caput LIX. Demonstratio, quod orbita Martis,  , fiat perfecta ellipsis:  " (Chapter 59. Proof that Mars' orbit,  , is a perfect ellipse:  ) The geometric proof that Mars' orbit is an ellipse appears as Protheorema XI on pages 289-290.
Kepler stated that all planets travel in elliptical orbits having the Sun at one focus in: Johannes Kepler, Epitome Astronomiae Copernicanae of Copernican Astronomy (Linz ("Lentiis ad Danubium"), (Austria): Johann Planck, 1622), book 5, part 1, III. De Figura Orbit (III. On the figure shape of orbits), pages 658-665. From p. 658: "Ellipsin fieri orbitam planet  " (Of an ellipse is made a planet's orbit  ). From p. 659: "  Sole (Foco altero huius ellipsis)  " (  the Sun (the other focus of this ellipse)  ). In his Astronomia nova  (1609), Kepler did not present his second law in its modern form. He did that only in his Epitome of 1621. Furthermore, in 1609, he presented his second law in two different forms, which scholars call the "distance law" and the "area law".
* His "distance law" is presented in: "Caput XXXII. Virtutem quam Planetam movet in circulum attenuari cum discessu a fonte." (Chapter 32. The force that moves a planet circularly weakens with distance from the source.) See: Johannes Kepler, Astronomia nova  (1609), pp. 165-167. On page 167, Kepler states: "  , quanto longior est  quam , tanto diutius moratur Planeta in certo aliquo arcui excentrici apud , quam in quali arcu excentrici apud ." (  , as  is longer than , so much longer will a planet remain on a certain arc of the eccentric near  than on an equal arc of the eccentric near .) That is, the farther a planet is from the Sun (at the point ), the slower it moves along its orbit, so a radius from the Sun to a planet passes through equal areas in equal times. However, as Kepler presented it, his argument is accurate only for circles, not ellipses.
* His "area law" is presented in: "Caput LIX. Demonstratio, quod orbita Martis,  , fiat perfecta ellipsis:  " (Chapter 59. Proof that Mars' orbit,  , is a perfect ellipse:  ), Protheorema XIV and XV, pp. 291-295. On the top p. 294, it reads: "Arcum ellipseos, cujus moras metitur area AKN, debere terminari in LK, ut sit AM." (The arc of the ellipse, of which the duration is delimited measured by the area AKM, should be terminated in LK, so that it the arc is AM.) In other words, the time that Mars requires to move along an arc AM of its elliptical orbit is measured by the area of the segment AMN of the ellipse (where N is the position of the Sun), which in turn is proportional to the section AKN of the circle that encircles the ellipse and that is tangent to it. Therefore, the area that is swept out by a radius from the Sun to Mars as Mars moves along an arc of its elliptical orbit is proportional to the time that Mars requires to move along that arc. Thus, a radius from the Sun to Mars sweeps out equal areas in equal times.
In 1621, Kepler restated his second law for any planet: Johannes Kepler, Epitome Astronomiae Copernicanae of Copernican Astronomy (Linz ("Lentiis ad Danubium"), (Austria): Johann Planck, 1622), book 5, page 668. From page 668: "Dictum quidem est in superioribus, divisa orbita in particulas minutissimas quales: accrescete iis moras planet per eas, in proportione intervallorum inter eas & Solem." (It has been said above that, if the orbit of the planet is divided into the smallest equal parts, the times of the planet in them increase in the ratio of the distances between them and the sun.) That is, a planet's speed along its orbit is inversely proportional to its distance from the Sun. (The remainder of the paragraph makes clear that Kepler was referring to what is now called angular velocity.) Kepler's third law was published in 1619. Johannes Kepler, Harmonices Mundi Harmony of the World (Linz, (Austria): Johann Planck, 1619), book 5, chapter 3, p. 189. From the bottom of p. 189: "Sed res est certissima exactissimaque quod proportio qua est inter binorum quorumcunque Planetarum tempora periodica, sit prcise sesquialtera proportionis mediarum distantiarum,  " (But it is absolutely certain and exact that the proportion between the periodic times of any two planets is precisely the sesquialternate proportion the ratio of 3:2 of their mean distances,  ")
An English translation of Kepler's Harmonices Mundi is available as: Johannes Kepler with E.J. Aiton, A.M. Duncan, and J.V. Field, trans., The Harmony of the World (Philadelphia, Pennsylvania: American Philosophical Society, 1997); see especially p. 411. 

Kepler in 1621 and Godefroy Wendelin in 1643 noted that Kepler's third law applies to the four brightest moons of Jupiter. Godefroy Wendelin wrote a letter to Giovanni Battista Riccioli about the relationship between the distances of the Jovian moons from Jupiter and the periods of their orbits, showing that the periods and distances conformed to Kepler's third law. See: Joanne Baptista Riccioli, Almagestum novum  (Bologna (Bononia), (Italy): Victor Benati, 1651), volume 1, page 492 Scholia III. In the margin beside the relevant paragraph is printed: Vendelini ingeniosa speculatio circa motus & intervalla satellitum Jovis. (The clever Wendelin's speculation about the movement and distances of Jupiter's satellites.)In 1621, Johannes Kepler had noted that Jupiter's moons obey (approximately) his third law in his Epitome Astronomiae Copernicanae of Copernican Astronomy (Linz (Lentiis ad Danubium), (Austria): Johann Planck, 1622), book 4, part 2, page 554. The second law ("area law" form) was contested by Nicolaus Mercator in a book from 1664; but by 1670 he was publishing in its favour in Philosophical Transactions, and as the century proceeded it became more widely accepted. The reception in Germany changed noticeably between 1688, the year in which Newton's Principia was published and was taken to be basically Copernican, and 1690, by which time work of Gottfried Leibniz on Kepler had been published. 

==First Law==

:"The orbit of every planet is an ellipse with the Sun at one of the two foci."

Figure 2: Kepler's first law placing the Sun at the focus of an elliptical orbit

Figure 4: Heliocentric coordinate system (r, ) for ellipse. Also shown are: semi-major axis a, semi-minor axis b and semi-latus rectum p; center of ellipse and its two foci marked by large dots. For  = 0, r = rmin and for  = 180, r = rmax.

Mathematically, an ellipse can be represented by the formula:
:
where (r, ) are polar coordinates, d is the focal parameter, and  is the eccentricity of the ellipse.

Note that 0 <  < 1 for an ellipse; in the limiting case  = 0, the orbit is a circle with the sun at the centre (see section Zero eccentricity below).

For a planet r is the distance from the Sun to the planet, and  is the angle to the planet's current position from its closest approach, as seen from the Sun.

At  = 0, perihelion, the distance is minimum 
:

At  = 90 and at  = 270, the distance is equal to the semi-latus rectum.

At  = 180, aphelion, the distance is maximum 
:
 
The semi-major axis a is the arithmetic mean between rmin and rmax:
:
 
:

The semi-minor axis b is the geometric mean between rmin and rmax:
:

:

The semi-latus rectum p is the harmonic mean between rmin and rmax:
:

:

The eccentricity &epsilon; is the coefficient of variation between rmin and rmax:
:

The area of the ellipse is
:
The special case of a circle is  = 0, resulting in r = p = rmin = rmax = a = b and A =  r2.

;Practical examples

 Semi-major axis Orbital eccentricity Interfocal distance Location of f2 
 Jupiter 7,783 mn km 0.048386 75 mn km Roughly half-way between Mercury's (58 mn km) and Venus's (108 mn km) orbital distances. 
 Saturn 14,267 mn km 0.053862 154 mn km Roughly at Earth orbit distance (150 mn km). 

==Second law==

:"A line joining a planet and the Sun sweeps out equal areas during equal intervals of time." 

The same blue area is swept out in a given time. The green arrow is velocity. The purple arrow directed towards the Sun is the acceleration. The other two purple arrows are acceleration components parallel and perpendicular to the velocity

This law relates radial distance and angular velocity in elliptical orbits. That is, in a perfectly circular orbit, the orbital radius of the satellite would be constant and therefore so would be its observed angular velocity. In elliptical orbits, the orbital radius of the satellite will vary and therefore so will its angular velocity. This is shown in the above animation where the satellite travels "faster" (greater angular velocity) when closer to the parent object, then "slower" (less angular velocity) at a more distant radius. The result is that the blue sectors are shorter but wider when close to the body, then longer but narrower at a greater distance. Kepler's 2nd law states that for a given elliptical orbit, any two sectors of equal time duration will have the same area. This implies that radial distance and angular velocity have an inversely proportional relationship in a given orbit; angular velocity is minimum at apoapsis and maximum at periapsis. The constant of proportionality is the rate at which area in the ellipse is covered.

===Mathematical derivation===
In a small time the planet sweeps out a small triangle (or, more precisely, a sector) having base line and height and area 
 and so the constant areal velocity is 

The planet moves faster when it is closer to the Sun.

The area enclosed by the elliptical orbit is

So the period

satisfies
:
and the mean motion of the planet around the Sun 

satisfies
:

;Practical examples

 Perihelion distance Perihelion speed Aphelion distance Aphelion speed Sector area sweptin one second 
 Mercury 46.0 mn km 59,000 m/s 69.8 mn km 38,900 m/s 1.35651015 m2for both perihelion and aphelion 
 Sedna 11,423 bn km 4,640 m/s ~ 140,000 bn km ~ 430 m/s 3.011016 m2 (based on perihelion measurements)2.651016 m2 (based on aphelion measurements) 

:Note: the point speeds are worked out based on v=GM(2/d1/a); the "area swept" figure is less accurate for Sedna due to the imprecise degree to which its orbital parameters are currently known.

==Third law==

The third law, published by Kepler in 1619, For a brief biography of Kepler and discussion of his third law, see: NASA: Stargaze captures the relationship between the distance of planets from the Sun, and their orbital periods.

Kepler enunciated this third law in a laborious attempt to determine what he viewed as the "music of the spheres" according to precise laws, and express it in terms of musical notation. Burtt, Edwin. The Metaphysical Foundations of Modern Physical Science. p. 52. 
So it used to be known as the harmonic law. 

Mathematically, the law says that the expression has the same value for all the planets in the solar system.

;Examples

 Period & Semi-major axis (in relation to Earth) Period 2 : Semi-major axis 3(in relation to Earth) Period & Semi-major axis (in real terms) Period 2 : Semi-major axis 3(in real terms) Ratio 
 Venus 0.615 yr, 0.723 AU 0.3785 : 0.3785 19.4 mn secs, 1.0821011 m 3.7691014 : 1.2671033 1 : 3.3621018 
 Neptune 164.8 yrs, 30.1 AU 27160 : 27280 5.2 bn secs, 4.4981012 m 2.7041019 : 9.1031037 1 : 3.3661018 

The modern formulation with the constant evaluated reads:
:
with
* T the orbital period of the orbiting body,
* M the mass of the star,
* G the universal gravitational constant and
* r the radius, the semi-major axis of the ellipse.

In the full formulation under Newton's laws of motion, should be replaced by , where is the mass of the orbiting body. Consequently, the proportionality constant is not truly the same for each planet. Nevertheless, for all planets in our solar system such that variations in the proportionality constant are negligible.

==Zero eccentricity==
Kepler's laws refine the model of Copernicus, which assumed circular orbits. If the eccentricity of a planetary orbit is zero, then Kepler's laws state:
#The planetary orbit is a circle with the Sun at the center
#The speed of the planet in the orbit is constant
#The square of the sidereal period is proportionate to the cube of the distance from the Sun.
Actually, the eccentricities of the orbits of the six planets known to Copernicus and Kepler are quite small, so the rules above give excellent approximations of planetary motion, but Kepler's laws fit observations even better.

Kepler's corrections to the Copernican model are not at all obvious:
#The planetary orbit is not a circle, but an ellipse
#The Sun is not at the center but at a focal point
#Neither the linear speed nor the angular speed of the planet in the orbit is constant, but the area speed is constant.
#The square of the sidereal period is proportionate to the cube of the mean between the maximum and minimum distances from the Sun.

The nonzero eccentricity of the orbit of the earth makes the time from the March equinox to the September equinox, around 186 days, unequal to the time from the September equinox to the March equinox, around 179 days. A diameter would cut the orbit into equal parts, but the plane through the sun parallel to the equator of the earth cuts the orbit into two parts with areas in a 186 to 179 ratio, so the eccentricity of the orbit of the Earth is approximately
:
which is close to the correct value (0.016710219). (See Earth's orbit).
The calculation is correct when the perihelion, the date that the Earth is closest to the Sun, is on a solstice. The current perihelion, near January 4, is fairly close to the solstice on December 21 or 22.

==Planetary acceleration==
A sudden sunward velocity change is applied to a planet. Then the areas of the triangles defined by the path of the planet for fixed time intervals will be equal. (Click on image for a detailed description.)
Isaac Newton computed in his Philosophi Naturalis Principia Mathematica the acceleration of a planet moving according to Kepler's first and second law.
#The direction of the acceleration is towards the Sun.
#The magnitude of the acceleration is in inverse proportion to the square of the distance from the Sun.

This suggests that the Sun may be the physical cause of the acceleration of planets.

Newton defined the force on a planet to be the product of its mass and the acceleration. (See Newton's laws of motion). So:
#Every planet is attracted towards the Sun.
#The force on a planet is in direct proportion to the mass of the planet and in inverse proportion to the square of the distance from the Sun.

Here the Sun plays an unsymmetrical part, which is unjustified. So he assumed Newton's law of universal gravitation:
#All bodies in the solar system attract one another.
#The force between two bodies is in direct proportion to the product of their masses and in inverse proportion to the square of the distance between them.

As the planets have small masses compared to that of the Sun, the orbits conform to Kepler's laws approximately. Newton's model improves upon Kepler's model and fits actual observations more accurately. (See two-body problem).

A deviation in the motion of a planet from Kepler's laws due to the gravity of other planets is called a perturbation.

Below comes the detailed calculation of the acceleration of a planet moving according to Kepler's first and second laws.

===Acceleration vector===

From the heliocentric point of view consider the vector to the planet where is the distance to the planet and the direction is a unit vector. When the planet moves the direction vector changes:
:
where is the unit vector orthogonal to and pointing in the direction of rotation, and is the polar angle, and where a dot on top of the variable signifies differentiation with respect to time.

So differentiating the position vector twice to obtain the velocity and the acceleration vectors:
:
:
So
:
where the radial acceleration is
:
and the transversal acceleration is
:

===The inverse square law===
Kepler's laws say that
: 
is constant.

The transversal acceleration is zero:
:
So the acceleration of a planet obeying Kepler's laws is directed towards the sun.

The radial acceleration is
:
Kepler's first law states that the orbit is described by the equation:
:
Differentiating with respect to time
:
or
:
Differentiating once more
:
The radial acceleration satisfies
:
Substituting the equation of the ellipse gives
:
The relation gives the simple final result
:
This means that the acceleration vector of any planet obeying Kepler's first and second law satisfies the inverse square law 
:
where 
:
is a constant, and is the unit vector pointing from the Sun towards the planet, and is the distance between the planet and the Sun.

According to Kepler's third law, has the same value for all the planets. So the inverse square law for planetary accelerations applies throughout the entire solar system.

The inverse square law is a differential equation. The solutions to this differential equation include the Keplerian motions, as shown, but they also include motions where the orbit is a hyperbola or parabola or a straight line. See Kepler orbit.

===Newton's law of gravitation===
By Newton's second law, the gravitational force that acts on the planet is:

:

where is the mass of the planet and has the same value for all planets in the solar system. According to Newton's third Law, the Sun is attracted to the planet by a force of the same magnitude. Since the force is proportional to the mass of the planet, under the symmetric consideration, it should also be proportional to the mass of the Sun, . So

:

where is the gravitational constant.

The acceleration of solar system body number i is, according to Newton's laws:
:
where is the mass of body j, is the distance between body i and body j, is the unit vector from body i towards body j, and the vector summation is over all bodies in the world, besides i itself.

In the special case where there are only two bodies in the world, Earth and Sun, the acceleration becomes
:
which is the acceleration of the Kepler motion. So this Earth moves around the Sun according to Kepler's laws.

If the two bodies in the world are Moon and Earth the acceleration of the Moon becomes
:
So in this approximation the Moon moves around the Earth according to Kepler's laws.

In the three-body case the accelerations are

:
:
:

These accelerations are not those of Kepler orbits, and the three-body problem is complicated. But Keplerian approximation is basis for perturbation calculations. See Lunar theory.

==Position as a function of time ==
Kepler used his two first laws to compute the position of a planet as a function of time. His method involves the solution of a transcendental equation called Kepler's equation.

The procedure for calculating the heliocentric polar coordinates (r,) of a planet as a function of the time t since perihelion, is the following four steps:

:1. Compute the mean anomaly where n is the mean motion. 
:: where P is the period.
:2. Compute the eccentric anomaly E by solving Kepler's equation:
::
:3. Compute the true anomaly &theta; by the equation:
::
:4. Compute the heliocentric distance r from the first law:
::

The important special case of circular orbit,  = 0, gives  = E = M. Because the uniform circular motion was considered to be normal, a deviation from this motion was considered an anomaly.

The proof of this procedure is shown below.

===Mean anomaly, M===
 FIgure 5: Geometric construction for Kepler's calculation of . The Sun (located at the focus) is labeled S and the planet P. The auxiliary circle is an aid to calculation. Line xd is perpendicular to the base and through the planet P. The shaded sectors are arranged to have equal areas by positioning of point y.
The Keplerian problem assumes an elliptical orbit and the four points:
:s the Sun (at one focus of ellipse);
:z the perihelion
:c the center of the ellipse
:p the planet
and 
: distance between center and perihelion, the semimajor axis,
: the eccentricity,
: the semiminor axis,
: the distance between Sun and planet.
: the direction to the planet as seen from the Sun, the true anomaly.

The problem is to compute the polar coordinates (r,) of the planet from the time since perihelion, t.

It is solved in steps. Kepler considered the circle with the major axis as a diameter, and 
: the projection of the planet to the auxiliary circle
: the point on the circle such that the sector areas |zcy| and |zsx| are equal,
: the mean anomaly.

The sector areas are related by 

The circular sector area 

The area swept since perihelion, 
:
is by Kepler's second law proportional to time since perihelion. So the mean anomaly, M, is proportional to time since perihelion, t.
:
where n is the mean motion.

===Eccentric anomaly, E===
When the mean anomaly M is computed, the goal is to compute the true anomaly . The function =f(M) is, however, not elementary. Kepler's solution is to use 
:, x as seen from the centre, the eccentric anomaly
as an intermediate variable, and first compute E as a function of M by solving Kepler's equation below, and then compute the true anomaly  from the eccentric anomaly E. Here are the details.
:

:
Division by a2/2 gives Kepler's equation
:

This equation gives M as a function of E. Determining E for a given M is the inverse problem. Iterative numerical algorithms are commonly used.

Having computed the eccentric anomaly E, the next step is to calculate the true anomaly .

===True anomaly, ===
Note from the figure that
:
so that
:
Dividing by and inserting from Kepler's first law
:
to get
:&ensp;&ensp;
The result is a usable relationship between the eccentric anomaly E and the true anomaly .

A computationally more convenient form follows by substituting into the trigonometric identity:
:
Get
:&ensp;&ensp;&ensp;
Multiplying by 1+ gives the result
:

This is the third step in the connection between time and position in the orbit.

=== Distance, r ===
The fourth step is to compute the heliocentric distance r from the true anomaly  by Kepler's first law:
:

==See also==
*Circular motion
*Free-fall time
*Gravity
*Kepler orbit
*Kepler problem
*Kepler's equation
*LaplaceRungeLenz vector

==Notes==
 

==References==

==Bibliography==
*Kepler's life is summarized on pages 523&ndash;627 and Book Five of his magnum opus, Harmonice Mundi (harmonies of the world), is reprinted on pages 635&ndash;732 of On the Shoulders of Giants: The Great Works of Physics and Astronomy (works by Copernicus, Kepler, Galileo, Newton, and Einstein). Stephen Hawking, ed. 2002 ISBN 0-7624-1348-4

*A derivation of Kepler's third law of planetary motion is a standard topic in engineering mechanics classes. See, for example, pages 161&ndash;164 of .

*Murray and Dermott, Solar System Dynamics, Cambridge University Press 1999, ISBN 0-521-57597-4
*V.I. Arnold, Mathematical Methods of Classical Mechanics, Chapter 2. Springer 1989, ISBN 0-387-96890-3

==External links==
* B.Surendranath Reddy; animation of Kepler's laws: applet
* Crowell, Benjamin, Conservation Laws, http://www.lightandmatter.com/area1book2.html, an online book that gives a proof of the first law without the use of calculus. (see section 5.2, p. 112)
* David McNamara and Gianfranco Vidali, Kepler's Second Law - Java Interactive Tutorial, http://www.phy.syr.edu/courses/java/mc_html/kepler.html, an interactive Java applet that aids in the understanding of Kepler's Second Law.
* Audio - Cain/Gay (2010) Astronomy Cast Johannes Kepler and His Laws of Planetary Motion
* University of Tennessee's Dept. Physics & Astronomy: Astronomy 161 page on Johannes Kepler: The Laws of Planetary Motion 
* Equant compared to Kepler: interactive model 
* Kepler's Third Law:interactive model 
* Solar System Simulator (Interactive Applet)
* Kepler and His Laws, educational web pages by David P. Stern



[[Laser]]

United States Air Force laser experiment
Green (532 nm), blue-violet (445 nm) and red (635 nm), lasers
A laser is a device that emits light through a process of optical amplification based on the stimulated emission of electromagnetic radiation. The term "laser" originated as an acronym for "light amplification by stimulated emission of radiation". A laser differs from other sources of light because it emits light coherently. Spatial coherence allows a laser to be focused to a tight spot, enabling applications like laser cutting and lithography. Spatial coherence also allows a laser beam to stay narrow over long distances (collimation), enabling applications such as laser pointers. Lasers can also have high temporal coherence which allows them to have a very narrow spectrum, i.e., they only emit a single color of light. Temporal coherence can be used to produce pulses of lightas short as a femtosecond.

Lasers have many important applications. They are used in common consumer devices such as Optical disk drives, laser printers, and barcode scanners. They are used in medicine for laser surgery and various skin treatments, and in industry for cutting and welding materials. They are used in military and law enforcement devices for marking targets and measuring range and speed. Laser lighting displays use laser light as an entertainment medium. Lasers also have many important applications in scientific research.

==Fundamentals==
Lasers are distinguished from other light sources by their coherence. Spatial coherence is typically expressed through the output being a narrow beam which is diffraction-limited, often a so-called "pencil beam." Laser beams can be focused to very tiny spots, achieving a very high irradiance, or they can be launched into beams of very low divergence in order to concentrate their power at a large distance.

Temporal (or longitudinal) coherence implies a polarized wave at a single frequency whose phase is correlated over a relatively large distance (the coherence length) along the beam. Conceptual physics, Paul Hewitt, 2002 A beam produced by a thermal or other incoherent light source has an instantaneous amplitude and phase which vary randomly with respect to time and position, and thus a very short coherence length.

Most so-called "single wavelength" lasers actually produce radiation in several modes having slightly different frequencies (wavelengths), often not in a single polarization. And although temporal coherence implies monochromaticity, there are even lasers that emit a broad spectrum of light, or emit different wavelengths of light simultaneously. There are some lasers which are not single spatial mode and consequently their light beams diverge more than required by the diffraction limit. However all such devices are classified as "lasers" based on their method of producing that light: stimulated emission. Lasers are employed in applications where light of the required spatial or temporal coherence could not be produced using simpler technologies.

===Terminology===
Laser beams in fog, reflected on a car windshield
The word laser started as an acronym for "light amplification by stimulated emission of radiation"; in modern usage "light" broadly denotes electromagnetic radiation of any frequency, not only visible light, hence infrared laser, ultraviolet laser, X-ray laser, and so on. Because the microwave predecessor of the laser, the maser, was developed first, devices of this sort operating at microwave and radio frequencies are referred to as "masers" rather than "microwave lasers" or "radio lasers". In the early technical literature, especially at Bell Telephone Laboratories, the laser was called an optical maser; this term is now obsolete. 

A laser which produces light by itself is technically an optical oscillator rather than an optical amplifier as suggested by the acronym. It has been humorously noted that the acronym LOSER, for "light oscillation by stimulated emission of radiation", would have been more correct. With the widespread use of the original acronym as a common noun, actual optical amplifiers have come to be referred to as "laser amplifiers", notwithstanding the apparent redundancy in that designation.

The back-formed verb to lase is frequently used in the field, meaning "to produce laser light," especially in reference to the gain medium of a laser; when a laser is operating it is said to be "lasing." Further use of the words laser and maser in an extended sense, not referring to laser technology or devices, can be seen in usages such as astrophysical maser and atom laser.

==Design==
Components of a typical laser:1. Gain medium2. Laser pumping energy3. High reflector4. Output coupler5. Laser beam

Animation explaining the stimulated emission and the Laser principle

A laser consists of a gain medium, a mechanism to supply energy to it, and something to provide optical feedback. The gain medium is a material with properties that allow it to amplify light by stimulated emission. Light of a specific wavelength that passes through the gain medium is amplified (increases in power).

For the gain medium to amplify light, it needs to be supplied with energy. This process is called pumping. The energy is typically supplied as an electrical current, or as light at a different wavelength. Pump light may be provided by a flash lamp or by another laser.

The most common type of laser uses feedback from an optical cavitya pair of mirrors on either end of the gain medium. Light bounces back and forth between the mirrors, passing through the gain medium and being amplified each time. Typically one of the two mirrors, the output coupler, is partially transparent. Some of the light escapes through this mirror. Depending on the design of the cavity (whether the mirrors are flat or curved), the light coming out of the laser may spread out or form a narrow beam. This type of device is sometimes called a laser oscillator in analogy to electronic oscillators, in which an electronic amplifier receives electrical feedback that causes it to produce a signal.

Most practical lasers contain additional elements that affect properties of the emitted light such as the polarization, the wavelength, and the shape of the beam.

==Laser physics==

Electrons and how they interact with electromagnetic fields are important in our understanding of chemistry and physics.

=== Stimulated emission ===

In the classical view, the energy of an electron orbiting an atomic nucleus is larger for orbits further from the nucleus of an atom. However, quantum mechanical effects force electrons to take on discrete positions in orbitals. Thus, electrons are found in specific energy levels of an atom, two of which are shown below:

550px

When an electron absorbs energy either from light (photons) or heat (phonons), it receives that incident quantum of energy. But transitions are only allowed in between discrete energy levels such as the two shown above.
This leads to emission lines and absorption lines.

When an electron is excited from a lower to a higher energy level, it will not stay that way forever.
An electron in an excited state may decay to a lower energy state which is not occupied, according to a particular time constant characterizing that transition. When such an electron decays without external influence, emitting a photon, that is called "spontaneous emission". The phase associated with the photon that is emitted is random. A material with many atoms in such an excited state may thus result in radiation which is very spectrally limited (centered around one wavelength of light), but the individual photons would have no common phase relationship and would emanate in random directions. This is the mechanism of fluorescence and thermal emission.

An external electromagnetic field at a frequency associated with a transition can affect the quantum mechanical state of the atom. As the electron in the atom makes a transition between two stationary states (neither of which shows a dipole field), it enters a transition state which does have a dipole field, and which acts like a small electric dipole, and this dipole oscillates at a characteristic frequency. In response to the external electric field at this frequency, the probability of the atom entering this transition state is greatly increased. Thus, the rate of transitions between two stationary states is enhanced beyond that due to spontaneous emission. Such a transition to the higher state is called absorption, and it destroys an incident photon (the photon's energy goes into powering the increased energy of the higher state). A transition from the higher to a lower energy state, however, produces an additional photon; this is the process of stimulated emission.

=== Gain medium and cavity ===
A heliumneon laser demonstration at the Kastler-Brossel Laboratory at Univ. Paris 6. The pink-orange glow running through the center of the tube is from the electric discharge which produces incoherent light, just as in a neon tube. This glowing plasma is excited and then acts as the gain medium through which the internal beam passes, as it is reflected between the two mirrors. Laser radiation output through the front mirror can be seen to produce a tiny (about 1mm in diameter) intense spot on the screen, to the right. Although it is a deep and pure red color, spots of laser light are so intense that cameras are typically overexposed and distort their color.
here for comparison), with the bandwidth of a single longitudinal mode being much narrower still.]]

The gain medium is excited by an external source of energy into an excited state. In most lasers this medium consists of population of atoms which have been excited into such a state by means of an outside light source, or an electrical field which supplies energy for atoms to absorb and be transformed into their excited states.

The gain medium of a laser is normally a material of controlled purity, size, concentration, and shape, which amplifies the beam by the process of stimulated emission described above. This material can be of any state: gas, liquid, solid, or plasma. The gain medium absorbs pump energy, which raises some electrons into higher-energy ("excited") quantum states. Particles can interact with light by either absorbing or emitting photons. Emission can be spontaneous or stimulated. In the latter case, the photon is emitted in the same direction as the light that is passing by. When the number of particles in one excited state exceeds the number of particles in some lower-energy state, population inversion is achieved and the amount of stimulated emission due to light that passes through is larger than the amount of absorption. Hence, the light is amplified. By itself, this makes an optical amplifier. When an optical amplifier is placed inside a resonant optical cavity, one obtains a laser oscillator. 

In a few situations it is possible to obtain lasing with only a single pass of EM radiation through the gain medium, and this produces a laser beam without any need for a resonant or reflective cavity (see for example nitrogen laser). Thus, reflection in a resonant cavity is usually required for a laser, but is not absolutely necessary.

The optical resonator is sometimes referred to as an "optical cavity", but this is a misnomer: lasers use open resonators as opposed to the literal cavity that would be employed at microwave frequencies in a maser.
The resonator typically consists of two mirrors between which a coherent beam of light travels in both directions, reflecting back on itself so that an average photon will pass through the gain medium repeatedly before it is emitted from the output aperture or lost to diffraction or absorption.
If the gain (amplification) in the medium is larger than the resonator losses, then the power of the recirculating light can rise exponentially. But each stimulated emission event returns an atom from its excited state to the ground state, reducing the gain of the medium. With increasing beam power the net gain (gain minus loss) reduces to unity and the gain medium is said to be saturated. In a continuous wave (CW) laser, the balance of pump power against gain saturation and cavity losses produces an equilibrium value of the laser power inside the cavity; this equilibrium determines the operating point of the laser. If the applied pump power is too small, the gain will never be sufficient to overcome the resonator losses, and laser light will not be produced. The minimum pump power needed to begin laser action is called the lasing threshold. The gain medium will amplify any photons passing through it, regardless of direction; but only the photons in a spatial mode supported by the resonator will pass more than once through the medium and receive substantial amplification.

=== The light emitted ===
The light generated by stimulated emission is very similar to the input signal in terms of wavelength, phase, and polarization. This gives laser light its characteristic coherence, and allows it to maintain the uniform polarization and often monochromaticity established by the optical cavity design.

The beam in the cavity and the output beam of the laser, when travelling in free space (or a homogeneous medium) rather than waveguides (as in an optical fiber laser), can be approximated as a Gaussian beam in most lasers; such beams exhibit the minimum divergence for a given diameter. However some high power lasers may be multimode, with the transverse modes often approximated using Hermite&ndash;Gaussian or Laguerre-Gaussian functions. It has been shown that unstable laser resonators (not used in most lasers) produce fractal shaped beams. G. P. Karman, G. S. McDonald, G. H. C. New, J. P. Woerdman, "Laser Optics: Fractal modes in unstable resonators", Nature, Vol. 402, 138, November 11, 1999. Near the beam "waist" (or focal region) it is highly collimated: the wavefronts are planar, normal to the direction of propagation, with no beam divergence at that point. However
due to diffraction, that can only remain true well within the Rayleigh range. The beam of a single transverse mode (gaussian beam) laser eventually diverges at an angle which varies inversely with the beam diameter, as required by diffraction theory. Thus, the "pencil beam" directly generated by a common heliumneon laser would spread out to a size of perhaps 500 kilometers when shone on the Moon (from the distance of the earth). On the other hand the light from a semiconductor laser typically exits the tiny crystal with a large divergence: up to 50. However even such a divergent beam can be transformed into a similarly collimated beam by means of a lens system, as is always included, for instance, in a laser pointer whose light originates from a laser diode. That is possible due to the light being of a single spatial mode. This unique property of laser light, spatial coherence, cannot be replicated using standard light sources (except by discarding most of the light) as can be appreciated by comparing the beam from a flashlight (torch) or spotlight to that of almost any laser.

=== Quantum vs. classical emission processes ===
The mechanism of producing radiation in a laser relies on stimulated emission, where energy is extracted from a transition in an atom or molecule. This is a quantum phenomenon discovered by Einstein who derived the relationship between the A coefficient describing spontaneous emission and the B coefficient which applies to absorption and stimulated emission. However in the case of the free electron laser, atomic energy levels are not involved; it appears that the operation of this rather exotic device can be explained without reference to quantum mechanics.

==Continuous and pulsed modes of operation==
Lidar measurements of lunar topography made by Clementine mission.
Laserlink.
Mercury Laser Altimeter (MLA) of the MESSENGER spacecraft.
A laser can be classified as operating in either continuous or pulsed mode, depending on whether the power output is essentially continuous over time or whether its output takes the form of pulses of light on one or another time scale. Of course even a laser whose output is normally continuous can be intentionally turned on and off at some rate in order to create pulses of light. When the modulation rate is on time scales much slower than the cavity lifetime and the time period over which energy can be stored in the lasing medium or pumping mechanism, then it is still classified as a "modulated" or "pulsed" continuous wave laser. Most laser diodes used in communication systems fall in that category.

===Continuous wave operation===
Some applications of lasers depend on a beam whose output power is constant over time. Such a laser is known as continuous wave (CW). Many types of lasers can be made to operate in continuous wave mode to satisfy such an application. Many of these lasers actually lase in several longitudinal modes at the same time, and beats between the slightly different optical frequencies of those oscillations will in fact produce amplitude variations on time scales shorter than the round-trip time (the reciprocal of the frequency spacing between modes), typically a few nanoseconds or less. In most cases these lasers are still termed "continuous wave" as their output power is steady when averaged over any longer time periods, with the very high frequency power variations having little or no impact in the intended application. (However the term is not applied to mode-locked lasers, where the intention is to create very short pulses at the rate of the round-trip time).

For continuous wave operation it is required for the population inversion of the gain medium to be continually replenished by a steady pump source. In some lasing media this is impossible. In some other lasers it would require pumping the laser at a very high continuous power level which would be impractical or destroy the laser by producing excessive heat. Such lasers cannot be run in CW mode.

===Pulsed operation===
Pulsed operation of lasers refers to any laser not classified as continuous wave, so that the optical power appears in pulses of some duration at some repetition rate. This encompasses a wide range of technologies addressing a number of different motivations. Some lasers are pulsed simply because they cannot be run in continuous mode.

In other cases the application requires the production of pulses having as large an energy as possible. Since the pulse energy is equal to the average power divided by the repetition rate, this goal can sometimes be satisfied by lowering the rate of pulses so that more energy can be built up in between pulses. In laser ablation for example, a small volume of material at the surface of a work piece can be evaporated if it is heated in a very short time, whereas supplying the energy gradually would allow for the heat to be absorbed into the bulk of the piece, never attaining a sufficiently high temperature at a particular point.

Other applications rely on the peak pulse power (rather than the energy in the pulse), especially in order to obtain nonlinear optical effects. For a given pulse energy, this requires creating pulses of the shortest possible duration utilizing techniques such as Q-switching.

The optical bandwidth of a pulse cannot be narrower than the reciprocal of the pulse width. In the case of extremely short pulses, that implies lasing over a considerable bandwidth, quite contrary to the very narrow bandwidths typical of CW lasers. The lasing medium in some dye lasers and vibronic solid-state lasers produces optical gain over a wide bandwidth, making a laser possible which can thus generate pulses of light as short as a few femtoseconds (1015 s).

====Q-switching====

In a Q-switched laser, the population inversion is allowed to build up by introducing loss inside the resonator which exceeds the gain of the medium; this can also be described as a reduction of the quality factor or 'Q' of the cavity. Then, after the pump energy stored in the laser medium has approached the maximum possible level, the introduced loss mechanism (often an electro- or acousto-optical element) is rapidly removed (or that occurs by itself in a passive device), allowing lasing to begin which rapidly obtains the stored energy in the gain medium. This results in a short pulse incorporating that energy, and thus a high peak power.

====Mode-locking====

A mode-locked laser is capable of emitting extremely short pulses on the order of tens of picoseconds down to less than 10 femtoseconds. These pulses will repeat at the round trip time, that is, the time that it takes light to complete one round trip between the mirrors comprising the resonator. Due to the Fourier limit (also known as energy-time uncertainty), a pulse of such short temporal length has a spectrum spread over a considerable bandwidth. Thus such a gain medium must have a gain bandwidth sufficiently broad to amplify those frequencies. An example of a suitable material is titanium-doped, artificially grown sapphire (laser|Ti:sapphire]) which has a very wide gain bandwidth and can thus produce pulses of only a few femtoseconds duration.

Such mode-locked lasers are a most versatile tool for researching processes occurring on extremely short time scales (known as femtosecond physics, femtosecond chemistry and ultrafast science), for maximizing the effect of nonlinearity in optical materials (e.g. in second-harmonic generation, parametric down-conversion, optical parametric oscillators and the like) due to the large peak power, and in ablation applications. Again, because of the extremely short pulse duration, such a laser will produce pulses which achieve an extremely high peak power.

====Pulsed pumping====
Another method of achieving pulsed laser operation is to pump the laser material with a source that is itself pulsed, either through electronic charging in the case of flash lamps, or another laser which is already pulsed. Pulsed pumping was historically used with dye lasers where the inverted population lifetime of a dye molecule was so short that a high energy, fast pump was needed. The way to overcome this problem was to charge up large capacitors which are then switched to discharge through flashlamps, producing an intense flash. Pulsed pumping is also required for three-level lasers in which the lower energy level rapidly becomes highly populated preventing further lasing until those atoms relax to the ground state. These lasers, such as the excimer laser and the copper vapor laser, can never be operated in CW mode.

==History==

===Foundations===
In 1917, Albert Einstein established the theoretical foundations for the laser and the maser in the paper Zur Quantentheorie der Strahlung (On the Quantum Theory of Radiation); via a re-derivation of Max Planck's law of radiation, conceptually based upon probability coefficients (Einstein coefficients) for the absorption, spontaneous emission, and stimulated emission of electromagnetic radiation; in 1928, Rudolf W. Ladenburg confirmed the existences of the phenomena of stimulated emission and negative absorption; Steen, W. M. "Laser Materials Processing", 2nd Ed. 1998. in 1939, Valentin A. Fabrikant predicted the use of stimulated emission to amplify "short" waves; in 1947, Willis E. Lamb and R. C. Retherford found apparent stimulated emission in hydrogen spectra and effected the first demonstration of stimulated emission; in 1950, Alfred Kastler (Nobel Prize for Physics 1966) proposed the method of optical pumping, experimentally confirmed, two years later, by Brossel, Kastler, and Winter. The Nobel Prize in Physics 1966 Presentation Speech by Professor Ivar Waller. Retrieved January 1, 2007. 

===Maser===

Aleksandr Prokhorov
In 1953, Charles Hard Townes and graduate students James P. Gordon and Herbert J. Zeiger produced the first microwave amplifier, a device operating on similar principles to the laser, but amplifying microwave radiation rather than infrared or visible radiation. Townes's maser was incapable of continuous output. Meanwhile, in the Soviet Union, Nikolay Basov and Aleksandr Prokhorov were independently working on the quantum oscillator and solved the problem of continuous-output systems by using more than two energy levels. These gain media could release stimulated emissions between an excited state and a lower excited state, not the ground state, facilitating the maintenance of a population inversion. In 1955, Prokhorov and Basov suggested optical pumping of a multi-level system as a method for obtaining the population inversion, later a main method of laser pumping.

Townes reports that several eminent physicists  among them Niels Bohr, John von Neumann, Isidor Rabi, Polykarp Kusch, and Llewellyn Thomas  argued the maser violated Heisenberg's uncertainty principle and hence could not work. Townes, Charles H. (1999). How the Laser Happened: Adventures of a Scientist. Oxford University Press. pp. 69-70. Archived at Google Books. In 1964 Charles H. Townes, Nikolay Basov, and Aleksandr Prokhorov shared the Nobel Prize in Physics, "for fundamental work in the field of quantum electronics, which has led to the construction of oscillators and amplifiers based on the maserlaser principle".

===Laser===
In 1957, Charles Hard Townes and Arthur Leonard Schawlow, then at Bell Labs, began a serious study of the infrared laser. As ideas developed, they abandoned infrared radiation to instead concentrate upon visible light. The concept originally was called an "optical maser". In 1958, Bell Labs filed a patent application for their proposed optical maser; and Schawlow and Townes submitted a manuscript of their theoretical calculations to the Physical Review, published that year in Volume 112, Issue No. 6.

LASER notebook: First page of the notebook wherein Gordon Gould coined the LASER acronym, and described the technologic elements for constructing the device.

Simultaneously, at Columbia University, graduate student Gordon Gould was working on a doctoral thesis about the energy levels of excited thallium. When Gould and Townes met, they spoke of radiation emission, as a general subject; afterwards, in November 1957, Gould noted his ideas for a "laser", including using an open resonator (later an essential laser-device component). Moreover, in 1958, Prokhorov independently proposed using an open resonator, the first published appearance (the USSR) of this idea. Elsewhere, in the U.S., Schawlow and Townes had agreed to an open-resonator laser design  apparently unaware of Prokhorov's publications and Gould's unpublished laser work.

At a conference in 1959, Gordon Gould published the term LASER in the paper The LASER, Light Amplification by Stimulated Emission of Radiation. Gould's linguistic intention was using the "-aser" word particle as a suffix  to accurately denote the spectrum of the light emitted by the LASER device; thus x-rays: xaser, ultraviolet: uvaser, et cetera; none established itself as a discrete term, although "raser" was briefly popular for denoting radio-frequency-emitting devices.

Gould's notes included possible applications for a laser, such as spectrometry, interferometry, radar, and nuclear fusion. He continued developing the idea, and filed a patent application in April 1959. The U.S. Patent Office denied his application, and awarded a patent to Bell Labs, in 1960. That provoked a twenty-eight-year lawsuit, featuring scientific prestige and money as the stakes. Gould won his first minor patent in 1977, yet it was not until 1987 that he won the first significant patent lawsuit victory, when a Federal judge ordered the U.S. Patent Office to issue patents to Gould for the optically pumped and the gas discharge laser devices. The question of just how to assign credit for inventing the laser remains unresolved by historians. Joan Lisa Bromberg, The Laser in America, 19501970 (1991), pp. 7477 online 

On May 16, 1960, Theodore H. Maiman operated the first functioning laser, at Hughes Research Laboratories, Malibu, California, ahead of several research teams, including those of Townes, at Columbia University, Arthur Schawlow, at Bell Labs, and Gould, at the TRG (Technical Research Group) company. Maiman's functional laser used a solid-state flashlamp-pumped synthetic ruby crystal to produce red laser light, at 694 nanometres wavelength; however, the device only was capable of pulsed operation, because of its three-level pumping design scheme. Later in 1960, the Iranian physicist Ali Javan, and William R. Bennett, and Donald Herriott, constructed the first gas laser, using helium and neon that was capable of continuous operation in the infrared (U.S. Patent 3,149,290); later, Javan received the Albert Einstein Award in 1993. Basov and Javan proposed the semiconductor laser diode concept. In 1962, Robert N. Hall demonstrated the first laser diode device, made of gallium arsenide and emitted at 850 nm the near-infrared band of the spectrum. Later, in 1962, Nick Holonyak, Jr. demonstrated the first semiconductor laser with a visible emission. This first semiconductor laser could only be used in pulsed-beam operation, and when cooled to liquid nitrogen temperatures (77 K). In 1970, Zhores Alferov, in the USSR, and Izuo Hayashi and Morton Panish of Bell Telephone Laboratories also independently developed room-temperature, continual-operation diode lasers, using the heterojunction structure.

=== Recent innovations ===

Graph showing the history of maximum laser pulse intensity throughout the past 40 years.

Since the early period of laser history, laser research has produced a variety of improved and specialized laser types, optimized for different performance goals, including:
* new wavelength bands
* maximum average output power
* maximum peak pulse energy
* maximum peak pulse power
* minimum output pulse duration
* maximum power efficiency
* minimum cost
and this research continues to this day.

Lasing without maintaining the medium excited into a population inversion was discovered in 1992 in sodium gas and again in 1995 in rubidium gas by various international teams. This was accomplished by using an external maser to induce "optical transparency" in the medium by introducing and destructively interfering the ground electron transitions between two paths, so that the likelihood for the ground electrons to absorb any energy has been cancelled.

==Types and operating principles==
:For a more complete list of laser types see this list of laser types.

Wavelengths of commercially available lasers. Laser types with distinct laser lines are shown above the wavelength bar, while below are shown lasers that can emit in a wavelength range. The color codifies the type of laser material (see the figure description for more details).

===Gas lasers===

Following the invention of the HeNe gas laser, many other gas discharges have been found to amplify light coherently.
Gas lasers using many different gases have been built and used for many purposes. The heliumneon laser (HeNe) is able to operate at a number of different wavelengths, however the vast majority are engineered to lase at 633 nm; these relatively low cost but highly coherent lasers are extremely common in optical research and educational laboratories. Commercial carbon dioxide (CO2) lasers can emit many hundreds of watts in a single spatial mode which can be concentrated into a tiny spot. This emission is in the thermal infrared at 10.6 m; such lasers are regularly used in industry for cutting and welding. The efficiency of a CO2 laser is unusually high: over 30%. Argon-ion lasers can operate at a number of lasing transitions between 351 and 528.7 nm. Depending on the optical design one or more of these transitions can be lasing simultaneously; the most commonly used lines are 458 nm, 488 nm and 514.5 nm. A nitrogen transverse electrical discharge in gas at atmospheric pressure (TEA) laser is an inexpensive gas laser, often home-built by hobbyists, which produces rather incoherent UV light at 337.1 nm. Metal ion lasers are gas lasers that generate deep ultraviolet wavelengths. Helium-silver (HeAg) 224 nm and neon-copper (NeCu) 248 nm are two examples. Like all low-pressure gas lasers, the gain media of these lasers have quite narrow oscillation linewidths, less than 3 GHz (0.5 picometers), making them candidates for use in fluorescence suppressed Raman spectroscopy.

====Chemical lasers====
Chemical lasers are powered by a chemical reaction permitting a large amount of energy to be released quickly. Such very high power lasers are especially of interest to the military, however continuous wave chemical lasers at very high power levels, fed by streams of gasses, have been developed and have some industrial applications. As examples, in the Hydrogen fluoride laser (27002900 nm) and the Deuterium fluoride laser (3800 nm) the reaction is the combination of hydrogen or deuterium gas with combustion products of ethylene in nitrogen trifluoride.

====Excimer lasers====
Excimer lasers are a special sort of gas laser powered by an electric discharge in which the lasing medium is an excimer, or more precisely an exciplex in existing designs. These are molecules which can only exist with one atom in an excited electronic state. Once the molecule transfers its excitation energy to a photon, therefore, its atoms are no longer bound to each other and the molecule disintegrates. This drastically reduces the population of the lower energy state thus greatly facilitating a population inversion. Excimers currently used are all noble gas compounds; noble gasses are chemically inert and can only form compounds while in an excited state. Excimer lasers typically operate at ultraviolet wavelengths with major applicatons including semiconductor photolithography and LASIK eye surgery. Commonly used excimer molecules include ArF (emission at 193 nm), KrCl (222 nm), KrF (248 nm), XeCl (308 nm), and XeF (351 nm). 
The molecular fluorine laser, emitting at 157 nm in the vacuum ultraviolet is sometimes referred to as an excimer laser, however this appears to be a misnomer inasmuch as F2 is a stable compound.

===Solid-state lasers===
A frequency-doubled green laser pointer, showing internal construction. Two AAA cells and electronics power the laser module (lower diagram) This contains a powerful 808 nm IR diode laser that optically pumps a Nd:YVO4 crystal inside a laser cavity. That laser produces 1064 nm (infrared) light which is mainly confined inside the resonator. Also inside the laser cavity, however, is a non-linear KTP crystal which causes frequency doubling, resulting in green light at 532 nm. The front mirror is transparent to this visible wavelength which is then expanded and collimated using two lenses (in this particular design).

Solid-state lasers use a crystalline or glass rod which is "doped" with ions that provide the required energy states. For example, the first working laser was a ruby laser, made from ruby (chromium-doped corundum). The population inversion is actually maintained in the "dopant", such as chromium or neodymium.
These materials are pumped optically using a shorter wavelength than the lasing wavelength, often from a flashtube or from another laser.

It should be noted that "solid-state" in this sense refers to a crystal or glass, but this usage is distinct from the designation of "solid-state electronics" in referring to semiconductors. Semiconductor lasers (laser diodes) are pumped electrically and are thus not referred to as solid-state lasers.
The class of solid-state lasers would, however, properly include fiber lasers in which dopants in the glass lase under optical pumping. But in practice these are simply referred to as "fiber lasers" with "solid-state" reserved for lasers using a solid rod of such a material.

Neodymium is a common "dopant" in various solid-state laser crystals, including yttrium orthovanadate (yttrium orthovanadate|Nd:YVO4]), yttrium lithium fluoride () and yttrium aluminium garnet (). All these lasers can produce high powers in the infrared spectrum at 1064 nm. They are used for cutting, welding and marking of metals and other materials, and also in spectroscopy and for pumping dye lasers.

These lasers are also commonly frequency doubled, tripled or quadrupled, in so-called "diode-pumped solid-state" (DPSS) lasers. Under second, third, or fourth harmonic generation these produce 532 nm (green, visible), 355 nm and 266 nm (UV) beams. This is the technology behind the bright laser pointers particularly at green (532 nm) and other short visible wavelengths.

Ytterbium, holmium, thulium, and erbium are other common "dopants" in solid-state lasers. Ytterbium is used in crystals such as Yb:YAG, Yb:KGW, Yb:KYW, Yb:SYS, Yb:BOYS, Yb:CaF2, typically operating around 10201050 nm. They are potentially very efficient and high powered due to a small quantum defect. Extremely high powers in ultrashort pulses can be achieved with Yb:YAG. Holmium-doped YAG crystals emit at 2097 nm and form an efficient laser operating at infrared wavelengths strongly absorbed by water-bearing tissues. The Ho-YAG is usually operated in a pulsed mode, and passed through optical fiber surgical devices to resurface joints, remove rot from teeth, vaporize cancers, and pulverize kidney and gall stones.

Titanium-doped sapphire (laser|Ti:sapphire]) produces a highly tunable infrared laser, commonly used for spectroscopy. It is also notable for use as a mode-locked laser producing ultrashort pulses of extremely high peak power.

Thermal limitations in solid-state lasers arise from unconverted pump power that manifests itself as heat. This heat, when coupled with a high thermo-optic coefficient (dn/dT) can give rise to thermal lensing as well as reduced quantum efficiency. These types of issues can be overcome by another novel diode-pumped solid-state laser, the diode-pumped thin disk laser. The thermal limitations in this laser type are mitigated by using a laser medium geometry in which the thickness is much smaller than the diameter of the pump beam. This allows for a more even thermal gradient in the material. Thin disk lasers have been shown to produce up to kilowatt levels of power. C. Stewen, M. Larionov, and A. Giesen, "Yb:YAG thin disk laser with 1 kW output power", in OSA Trends in Optics and Photonics, Advanced Solid-State Lasers, H. Injeyan, U. Keller, and C. Marshall, ed. (Optical Society of America, Washington, D.C.., 2000) pp. 3541. 

===Fiber lasers===

Solid-state lasers or laser amplifiers where the light is guided due to the total internal reflection in a single mode optical fiber are instead called fiber lasers. Guiding of light allows extremely long gain regions providing good cooling conditions; fibers have high surface area to volume ratio which allows efficient cooling. In addition, the fiber's waveguiding properties tend to reduce thermal distortion of the beam. Erbium and ytterbium ions are common active species in such lasers.

Quite often, the fiber laser is designed as a double-clad fiber. This type of fiber consists of a fiber core, an inner cladding and an outer cladding. The index of the three concentric layers is chosen so that the fiber core acts as a single-mode fiber for the laser emission while the outer cladding acts as a highly multimode core for the pump laser. This lets the pump propagate a large amount of power into and through the active inner core region, while still having a high numerical aperture (NA) to have easy launching conditions.

Pump light can be used more efficiently by creating a fiber disk laser, or a stack of such lasers.

Fiber lasers have a fundamental limit in that the intensity of the light in the fiber cannot be so high that optical nonlinearities induced by the local electric field strength can become dominant and prevent laser operation and/or lead to the material destruction of the fiber. This effect is called photodarkening. In bulk laser materials, the cooling is not so efficient, and it is difficult to separate the effects of photodarkening from the thermal effects, but the experiments in fibers show that the photodarkening can be attributed to the formation of long-living color centers.

===Photonic crystal lasers===
Photonic crystal lasers are lasers based on nano-structures that provide the mode confinement and the density of optical states (DOS) structure required for the feedback to take place. They are typical micrometre-sized and tunable on the bands of the photonic crystals. 

===Semiconductor lasers===
A 5.6 mm 'closed can' commercial laser diode, probably from a CD or DVD player
Semiconductor lasers are diodes which are electrically pumped. Recombination of electrons and holes created by the applied current introduces optical gain. Reflection from the ends of the crystal form an optical resonator, although the resonator can be external to the semiconductor in some designs.

Commercial laser diodes emit at wavelengths from 375 nm to 3500 nm. Low to medium power laser diodes are used in laser pointers, laser printers and CD/DVD players. Laser diodes are also frequently used to optically pump other lasers with high efficiency. The highest power industrial laser diodes, with power up to 10 kW (70dBm), are used in industry for cutting and welding. External-cavity semiconductor lasers have a semiconductor active medium in a larger cavity. These devices can generate high power outputs with good beam quality, wavelength-tunable narrow-linewidth radiation, or ultrashort laser pulses.

In 2012, Nichia and OSRAM developed and manufactured commercial high-power green laser diodes (515/520 nm), which compete with traditional diode-pumped solid-state lasers. LASER Diode-NICHIA CORPORATION Green Laser, Visible Laser - OSRAM Opto Semiconductors 

Vertical cavity surface-emitting lasers (VCSELs) are semiconductor lasers whose emission direction is perpendicular to the surface of the wafer. VCSEL devices typically have a more circular output beam than conventional laser diodes. As of 2005, only 850 nm VCSELs are widely available, with 1300 nm VCSELs beginning to be commercialized, "Picolight ships first 4-Gbit/s 1310-nm VCSEL transceivers", Laser Focus World, December 9, 2005. Retrieved May 27, 2006 and 1550 nm devices an area of research. VECSELs are external-cavity VCSELs. Quantum cascade lasers are semiconductor lasers that have an active transition between energy sub-bands of an electron in a structure containing several quantum wells.

The development of a silicon laser is important in the field of optical computing. Silicon is the material of choice for integrated circuits, and so electronic and silicon photonic components (such as optical interconnects) could be fabricated on the same chip. Unfortunately, silicon is a difficult lasing material to deal with, since it has certain properties which block lasing. However, recently teams have produced silicon lasers through methods such as fabricating the lasing material from silicon and other semiconductor materials, such as indium(III) phosphide or gallium(III) arsenide, materials which allow coherent light to be produced from silicon. These are called hybrid silicon laser. Another type is a Raman laser, which takes advantage of Raman scattering to produce a laser from materials such as silicon.

===Dye lasers===
Close-up of a table-top dye laser based on Rhodamine 6G.
Dye lasers use an organic dye as the gain medium. The wide gain spectrum of available dyes, or mixtures of dyes, allows these lasers to be highly tunable, or to produce very short-duration pulses (on the order of a few femtoseconds). Although these tunable lasers are mainly known in their liquid form, researchers have also demonstrated narrow-linewidth tunable emission in dispersive oscillator configurations incorporating solid-state dye gain media. F. J. Duarte, Tunable Laser Optics (Elsevier Academic, New York, 2003). In their most prevalent form these solid state dye lasers use dye-doped polymers as laser media.

===Free-electron lasers===
The free-electron laser FELIX at the FOM Institute for Plasma Physics Rijnhuizen, Nieuwegein
Free-electron lasers, or FELs, generate coherent, high power radiation, that is widely tunable, currently ranging in wavelength from microwaves, through terahertz radiation and infrared, to the visible spectrum, to soft X-rays. They have the widest frequency range of any laser type. While FEL beams share the same optical traits as other lasers, such as coherent radiation, FEL operation is quite different. Unlike gas, liquid, or solid-state lasers, which rely on bound atomic or molecular states, FELs use a relativistic electron beam as the lasing medium, hence the term free-electron.

===Exotic media===
In September 2007, the BBC News reported that there was speculation about the possibility of using positronium annihilation to drive a very powerful gamma ray laser. Dr. David Cassidy of the University of California, Riverside proposed that a single such laser could be used to ignite a nuclear fusion reaction, replacing the banks of hundreds of lasers currently employed in inertial confinement fusion experiments. 

Space-based X-ray lasers pumped by a nuclear explosion have also been proposed as antimissile weapons. Such devices would be one-shot weapons.

Living cells have been used to produce laser light. The cells were genetically engineered to produce green fluorescent protein (GFP). The GFP is used as the laser's "gain medium", where light amplification takes place. The cells were then placed between two tiny mirrors, just 20 millionths of a metre across, which acted as the "laser cavity" in which light could bounce many times through the cell. Upon bathing the cell with blue light, it could be seen to emit directed and intense green laser light.

==Uses==
Lasers range in size from microscopic diode lasers (top) with numerous applications, to football field sized neodymium glass lasers (bottom) used for inertial confinement fusion, nuclear weapons research and other high energy density physics experiments.

When lasers were invented in 1960, they were called "a solution looking for a problem". Since then, they have become ubiquitous, finding utility in thousands of highly varied applications in every section of modern society, including consumer electronics, information technology, science, medicine, industry, law enforcement, entertainment, and the military.

The first use of lasers in the daily lives of the general population was the supermarket barcode scanner, introduced in 1974. The laserdisc player, introduced in 1978, was the first successful consumer product to include a laser but the compact disc player was the first laser-equipped device to become common, beginning in 1982 followed shortly by laser printers.

Some other uses are:
* Medicine: Bloodless surgery, laser healing, surgical treatment, kidney stone treatment, eye treatment, dentistry
* Industry: Cutting, welding, material heat treatment, marking parts, non-contact measurement of parts
* Military: Marking targets, guiding munitions, missile defence, electro-optical countermeasures (EOCM), alternative to radar, blinding troops.
* Law enforcement: used for latent fingerprint detection in the forensic identification field Dalrymple B. E., Duff J. M., Menzel E. R. "Inherent fingerprint luminescence  detection by laser". Journal of Forensic Sciences, 22(1), 1977, 106115 Dalrymple B. E. "Visible and infrared luminescence in documents : excitation by laser". Journal of Forensic Sciences, 28(3), 1983, 692696 
* Research: Spectroscopy, laser ablation, laser annealing, laser scattering, laser interferometry, LIDAR, laser capture microdissection, fluorescence microscopy
* Product development/commercial: laser printers, optical discs (e.g. CDs and the like), barcode scanners, thermometers, laser pointers, holograms, bubblegrams.
* Laser lighting displays: Laser light shows
* Cosmetic skin treatments: acne treatment, cellulite and striae reduction, and hair removal.

In 2004, excluding diode lasers, approximately 131,000 lasers were sold with a value of US$2.19 billion. Kincade, Kathy and Stephen Anderson (2005) "Laser Marketplace 2005: Consumer applications boost laser sales 10%", Laser Focus World, vol. 41, no. 1. (online) In the same year, approximately 733 million diode lasers, valued at $3.20 billion, were sold. Steele, Robert V. (2005) "Diode-laser market grows at a slower rate", Laser Focus World, vol. 41, no. 2. (online) 

===Examples by power===
Laser application in astronomical adaptive optics imaging
Different applications need lasers with different output powers. Lasers that produce a continuous beam or a series of short pulses can be compared on the basis of their average power. Lasers that produce pulses can also be characterized based on the peak power of each pulse. The peak power of a pulsed laser is many orders of magnitude greater than its average power. The average output power is always less than the power consumed.

 The continuous or average power required for some uses: 
 Power Use 
 15 mW Laser pointers 
 5 mW CD-ROM drive 
 510 mW DVD player or DVD-ROM drive 
 100 mW High-speed CD-RW burner 
 250 mW Consumer 16 DVD-R burner 
 400 mW Burning through a jewel case including disc within 4 seconds 
 DVD 24 dual-layer recording. 
 1 W Green laser in current Holographic Versatile Disc prototype development 
 120 W Output of the majority of commercially available solid-state lasers used for micro machining 
 30100 W Typical sealed CO2 surgical lasers George M. Peavy, \"How to select a surgical veterinary laser\", veterinary-laser.com. URL accessed March 14, 2008. 
 1003000 W Typical sealed CO2 lasers used in industrial laser cutting 
 

Examples of pulsed systems with high peak power:
* 700 TW (7001012 W)  National Ignition Facility, a 192-beam, 1.8-megajoule laser system adjoining a 10-meter-diameter target chamber. Heller, Arnie, "Orchestrating the world's most powerful laser." Science and Technology Review. Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory, July/August 2005. URL accessed May 27, 2006. 
* 1.3 PW (1.31015 W)  world's most powerful laser as of 1998, located at the Lawrence Livermore Laboratory 

===Hobby uses===
In recent years, some hobbyists have taken interests in lasers. Lasers used by hobbyists are generally of class IIIa or IIIb (see Safety), although some have made their own class IV types. PowerLabs CO2 LASER! Sam Barros June 21, 2006. Retrieved January 1, 2007. However, compared to other hobbyists, laser hobbyists are far less common, due to the cost and potential dangers involved. Due to the cost of lasers, some hobbyists use inexpensive means to obtain lasers, such as salvaging laser diodes from broken DVD players (red), Blu-ray players (violet), or even higher power laser diodes from CD or DVD burners. 

Hobbyists also have been taking surplus pulsed lasers from retired military applications and modifying them for pulsed holography. Pulsed Ruby and pulsed YAG lasers have been used.

==Safety==
Warning symbol for lasers
Laser warning label

Even the first laser was recognized as being potentially dangerous. Theodore Maiman characterized the first laser as having a power of one "Gillette" as it could burn through one Gillette razor blade. Today, it is accepted that even low-power lasers with only a few milliwatts of output power can be hazardous to human eyesight when the beam hits the eye directly or after reflection from a shiny surface. At wavelengths which the cornea and the lens can focus well, the coherence and low divergence of laser light means that it can be focused by the eye into an extremely small spot on the retina, resulting in localized burning and permanent damage in seconds or even less time.

Lasers are usually labeled with a safety class number, which identifies how dangerous the laser is:
*Class 1 is inherently safe, usually because the light is contained in an enclosure, for example in CD players.
*Class 2 is safe during normal use; the blink reflex of the eye will prevent damage. Usually up to 1 mW power, for example laser pointers.
*Class 3R (formerly IIIa) lasers are usually up to 5 mW and involve a small risk of eye damage within the time of the blink reflex. Staring into such a beam for several seconds is likely to cause damage to a spot on the retina.
*Class 3B can cause immediate eye damage upon exposure.
*Class 4 lasers can burn skin, and in some cases, even scattered light can cause eye and/or skin damage. Many industrial and scientific lasers are in this class.
The indicated powers are for visible-light, continuous-wave lasers. For pulsed lasers and invisible wavelengths, other power limits apply. People working with class 3B and class 4 lasers can protect their eyes with safety goggles which are designed to absorb light of a particular wavelength.

Infrared lasers with wavelengths longer than about 1.4 micrometres are often referred to as "eye-safe", because the cornea strongly absorbs light at these wavelengths, protecting the retina from damage. The label "eye-safe" can be misleading, however, as it only applies to relatively low power continuous wave beams; a high power or Q-switched laser at these wavelengths can burn the cornea, causing severe eye damage, and even moderate power lasers can injure the eye.

==As weapons==
The US-Israeli Tactical High Energy weapon has been used to shoot down rockets and artillery shells.

Lasers of all but the lowest powers can potentially be used as incapacitating weapons, through their ability to produce temporary or permanent vision loss in varying degrees when aimed at the eyes. The degree, character, and duration of vision impairment caused by eye exposure to laser light varies with the power of the laser, the wavelength(s), the collimation of the beam, the exact orientation of the beam, and the duration of exposure. Lasers of even a fraction of a watt in power can produce immediate, permanent vision loss under certain conditions, making such lasers potential non-lethal but incapacitating weapons. The extreme handicap that laser-induced blindness represents makes the use of lasers even as non-lethal weapons morally controversial, and weapons designed to cause blindness have been banned by the Protocol on Blinding Laser Weapons. Incidents of pilots being exposed to lasers while flying have prompted aviation authorities to implement special procedures to deal with such hazards. 

Laser weapons capable of directly damaging or destroying a target in combat are still in the experimental stage. The general idea of laser-beam weaponry is to hit a target with a train of brief pulses of light. The rapid evaporation and expansion of the surface causes shockwaves that damage the target. The power needed to project a high-powered laser beam of this kind is beyond the limit of current mobile power technology, thus favoring chemically powered gas dynamic lasers. Example experimental systems include MIRACL and the Tactical High Energy Laser.

The U.S. Air Force was working on the Boeing YAL-1, an airborne laser mounted in a Boeing 747. It was intended to be used to shoot down incoming ballistic missiles over enemy territory. On March 18, 2009 Northrop Grumman claimed that its engineers in Redondo Beach had successfully built and tested an electrically powered solid state laser capable of producing a 100-kilowatt beam, powerful enough to destroy an airplane. According to Brian Strickland, manager for the United States Army's Joint High Power Solid State Laser program, an electrically powered laser is capable of being mounted in an aircraft, ship, or other vehicle because it requires much less space for its supporting equipment than a chemical laser. However the source of such a large electrical power in a mobile application remains unclear. The YAL-1 program was canceled due to infeasibility in December 2011.

The United States navy is developing a laser weapon referred to as the Laser Weapon System or LaWS. 

==Fictional predictions==

 A typical imaginary raygun
Several novelists described devices similar to lasers, prior to the discovery of stimulated emission:
*A very early example is the Heat-Ray featured in H. G. Wells' novel The War of the Worlds (1898). Van Riper, op.cit., p. 46. 
*A laser-like device was described in Alexey Tolstoy's science fiction novel The Hyperboloid of Engineer Garin in 1927.
*Mikhail Bulgakov exaggerated the biological effect (laser bio stimulation) of intense red light in his science fiction novel Fatal Eggs (1925), without any reasonable description of the source of this red light. (In that novel, the red light first appears occasionally from the illuminating system of an advanced microscope; then the protagonist Prof. Persikov arranges a special set-up for generation of the red light.)

==See also==

* Bessel beam
* Coherent perfect absorber
* Dazzler (weapon)
* Free-space optical communication
* Homogeneous broadening
* Induced gamma emission
* Injection seeder
* International Laser Display Association
* Laser accelerometer
* Lasers and aviation safety

* Laser beam profiler
* Laser bonding
* Laser converting
* Laser cooling
* Laser engraving
* Laser medicine
* Laser scalpel
* 3D scanner
* Laser turntable
* Laser beam welding
* List of laser articles
* List of light sources

* Maser
* Mercury laser
* Nanolaser
* Reference beam
* Rytov number
* Sound Amplification by Stimulated Emission of Radiation
* Selective laser sintering
* Spaser
* Speckle pattern
* Tophat beam

==References==

==Further reading==
:Books
*Bertolotti, Mario (1999, trans. 2004). The History of the Laser, Institute of Physics. ISBN 0-7503-0911-3
*Bromberg, Joan Lisa (1991). The Laser in America, 19501970, MIT Press. ISBN 978-0-262-02318-4
*Csele, Mark (2004). Fundamentals of Light Sources and Lasers, Wiley. ISBN 0-471-47660-9
*Koechner, Walter (1992). Solid-State Laser Engineering, 3rd ed., Springer-Verlag. ISBN 0-387-53756-2
*Siegman, Anthony E. (1986). Lasers, University Science Books. ISBN 0-935702-11-3
*Silfvast, William T. (1996). Laser Fundamentals, Cambridge University Press. ISBN 0-521-55617-1
*Svelto, Orazio (1998). Principles of Lasers, 4th ed. (trans. David Hanna), Springer. ISBN 0-306-45748-2
*
*Wilson, J. & Hawkes, J.F.B. (1987). Lasers: Principles and Applications, Prentice Hall International Series in Optoelectronics, Prentice Hall. ISBN 0-13-523697-5
*Yariv, Amnon (1989). Quantum Electronics, 3rd ed., Wiley. ISBN 0-471-60997-8

:Periodicals
* ()
*IEEE Journal of Lightwave Technology ()
*IEEE Journal of Quantum Electronics ()
*IEEE Journal of Selected Topics in Quantum Electronics ()
*IEEE Photonics Technology Letters ()
* ()
*Laser Focus World ()
*Optics Letters ()
*Photonics Spectra ()

==External links==

*Encyclopedia of laser physics and technology by Dr. Rdiger Paschotta
*A Practical Guide to Lasers for Experimenters and Hobbyists by Samuel M. Goldwasser
*Homebuilt Lasers Page by Professor Mark Csele
*Powerful laser is 'brightest light in the universe'  The world's most powerful laser as of 2008 might create supernova-like shock waves and possibly even antimatter (New Scientist, April 9, 2008)
*"Laser Fundamentals" an online course by Prof. F. Balembois and Dr. S. Forget. Instrumentation for Optics, 2008, (accessed January 17, 2014)
*Northrop Grumman's Press Release on the Firestrike 15kw tactical laser product.
*Website on Lasers 50th anniversary by APS, OSA, SPIE
*Advancing the Laser anniversary site by SPIE: Video interviews, open-access articles, posters, DVDs
*Bright Idea: The First Lasers
*Free software for Simulation of random laser dynamics
*Video Demonstrations in Lasers and Optics Produced by the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT). Real-time effects are demonstrated in a way that would be difficult to see in a classroom setting.
*Virtual Museum of Laser History, from the touring exhibit by SPIE
*website with animations, applications and research about laser and other quantum based phenomena Universite Paris Sud

 



[[Live action role-playing game]]

Players dressed in character for a LARP event
A live action role-playing game (LARP) is a form of role-playing game where the participants physically act out their characters' actions. The players pursue goals within a fictional setting represented by the real world while interacting with each other in character. The outcome of player actions may be mediated by game rules or determined by consensus among players. Event arrangers called gamemasters decide the setting and rules to be used and facilitate play.

The first LARPs were run in the late 1970s, inspired by tabletop role-playing games and genre fiction. The activity spread internationally during the 1980s and has diversified into a wide variety of styles. Play may be very game-like or may be more concerned with dramatic or artistic expression. Events can also be designed to achieve educational or political goals. The fictional genres used vary greatly, from realistic modern or historical settings to fantastic or futuristic eras. Production values are sometimes minimal, but can involve elaborate venues and costumes. LARPs range in size from small private events lasting a few hours to large public events with thousands of players lasting for days.

==Terminology==
LARP has also been referred to as live role-playing (LRP), interactive literature, and free form role-playing. Some of these terms are still in common use; however, LARP has become the most commonly accepted term. (Tychsen et al. 2006:255) "LARP ... is the commonly accepted term in the gaming community." It is sometimes written in lowercase, as larp. (Fatland 2005:1) "The non-Nordic reader should, however, keep in mind that there are some differences between the Nordic and Anglo-American uses of English when talking about larp. Most importantly, we treat 'larp' as a word in its own right, not an acronym (L.A.R.P.), and it is spelt lower-case." The live action in LARP is analogous to the term live action used in film and video to differentiate works with human actors from animation. Playing a LARP is often called larping, and one who does it is a larper.

==Play overview==
The participants in a LARP physically portray characters in a fictional setting, improvising their characters' speech and movements somewhat like actors in improvisational theatre. (Kilgallon et al. 2001:1) "A live action roleplaying game is a cross between a traditional 'tabletop' roleplaying game and improvisational theatre." This is distinct from tabletop role-playing games, where character actions are described verbally. (Tychsen et al. 2006:255) "LARPs can be viewed as forming a distinct category of RPG because of two unique features: (a) The players physically embody their characters, and (b) the game takes place in a physical frame. Embodiment means that the physical actions of the player are regarded as those of the character. Whereas in a RPG played by a group sitting around a table, players describe the actions of their characters (e.g., "I run to stand beside my friend"); in an equivalent situation in a LARP, a player would physically run to the appropriate point within the game space." LARPs may be played in a public or private area and may last for hours or days. There is usually no audience. (Falk & Davenport 2004:128) "...live role-playing games are devoid of the audience concept." Players may dress as their character and carry appropriate equipment, and the environment is sometimes decorated to resemble the setting. (Falk & Davenport 2004:131) "The LRP player, like a stage actor, is a person who under-goes a transformation into a character. The character's costume and accessories, or kit, aids this transformation ... Physical structures may be used as game locations, and sometimes even purposely constructed to enhance the game world ... Players frequently use physical artifacts as props and tools in their role-play, primarily to back up their character roles." LARPs can be one-off events or a series of events in the same setting, and events can vary in size from a handful of players to several thousand. (Tychsen et al. 2006:259) "Most LARPs are either scenarios (or single-shots) or campaigns (also known as chronicles)" (Tychsen et al. 2006:258) "Games range in size from a handful to more than 4,000 players" 

Events are put on for the benefit of the players, who take on roles called player characters (PCs) that the players may create themselves or be given by the gamemasters. Players sometimes play the same character repeatedly at separate events, progressively developing the character and its relations with other characters and the setting.

Arrangers called gamemasters (GMs) determine the rules and setting of a LARP, and may also influence an event and act as referees while it is taking place. (Tychsen et al. 2005:216) "In order to play, the players must have a fictional setting... In essence, the GM creates the magical circle around the game." (Montola, Stenros & Waern 2009) "Runtime game mastering is the process of influencing the flow of a game in real time." (Tychsen et al. 2005:218) "The GM may or may not be responsible for enforcing the rules between players... The GM can also be responsible of hunting down cheaters or other rule breakers." The GMs may also do the logistical work, or there may be other arrangers who handle details such as advertising the event, booking a venue, and financial management. Unlike the GM in a tabletop role-playing game, a LARP GM seldom has an overview of everything that is happening during play because numerous participants may be interacting at once. For this reason, a LARP GM's role is often less concerned with tightly maintaining a narrative or directly entertaining the players, and more with arranging the structure of the LARP before play begins and facilitating the players and crew to maintain the fictional environment during play. (Tychsen et al. 2005:218) "GM is forced to let go of the game and let it take on a life of its own outside his or her control. While based on similar principles, the requirements therefore very different in practice from GMs in PnP RPGs... The GM is generally, unless the LARP is small in terms of number of participants, not responsible for keeping the narrative flow. The GM can however oversee the progress of the game and help or influence where needed... Establishing a hierarchy of GMs and NPCs to monitor the game and ensure everyone is entertained and activated within the shared game space is a typical way of controlling large fantasy LARPS. This structure is usually established before the game commences." 

Participants sometimes known as the crew may help the GMs to set up and maintain the environment of the LARP during play by acting as stagehands or playing non-player characters (NPCs) who fill out the setting. (Bestul 2006:26) "Finally, a person may also participate as a type of stagehand. Though not all games will require them, it is occasionally necessary to have a support staff to help coordinate events and NPCs as a stage manager or running crew might." (Tychsen et al. 2005:216) "The environment needs to be filled out with non-player controlled characters (NPCs) Crew typically receive more information about the setting and more direction from the GMs than players do. In a tabletop role-playing game, a GM usually plays all the NPCs, whereas in a LARP, each NPC is typically played by a separate crew member. (Tresca 2010:188) "Where LARPs differ most from tabletop games is in the handling of non-player characters (NPCs). The physical performance necessary to pull off a performance in a LARP makes it impractical for a single person to handle many NPC roles. As a result, there is often a cast of characters who take on the roles of other NPCs. Unlike the players, the NPCs usually know the game's plot and have some idea of the narrative. NPCs, then, are a form of pseudo-player. They play the game, their characters have somewhat more limited goals, but they are ultimately constrained by the plot." Sometimes players are asked to play NPCs for periods of an event.

Much of play consists of interactions between characters. Some LARP scenarios primarily feature interaction between PCs. Other scenarios focus on interaction between PCs and aspects of the setting, including NPCs, that are under the direction of the GMs. (Young 2003:11) "The focus of interaction of larp... can be player to player or player to environment." (Tychsen et al. 2005:216) "LARP scenarios can likewise vary from detailed scripts of each participating character, to a loose association of GM-controlled NPCs in a fictional world setting." 

==History==

LARP does not have a single point of origin, but was invented independently by groups in North America, Europe, and Australia. (Tychsen et al. 2006:256) "LARPs ... appear to have developed based on inspiration from tabletop RPGs such as Dungeons & Dragons, more or less simultaneously in North America, Europe, and Australia in the early 80s. Players from all of these continents claim to have hosted the oldest LARP, however, it appears that LARPs developed independently and with marked cultural differences." These groups shared an experience with genre fiction or tabletop role-playing games, and a desire to physically experience such settings. In addition to tabletop role-playing, LARP is rooted in childhood games of make believe, play fighting, costume parties, roleplay simulations, Commedia dell'arte, improvisational theatre, psychodrama, military simulations, and historical reenactment groups such as the Society for Creative Anachronism. 

Two Dagorhir fighters use foam weapons to duel

The earliest recorded LARP group is Dagorhir, which was founded in 1977 in the USA and focuses on fantasy battles. Soon after the release of the movie Logan's Run in 1976, rudimentary live role-playing games based on the movie were run at US science fiction conventions. In 1981, the International Fantasy Gaming Society (IFGS) started, with rules influenced by Dungeons & Dragons. IFGS was named after a fictional group in the 1981 novel Dream Park, which described futuristic LARPs. In 1982, the Society for Interactive Literature, a predecessor of the Live Action Roleplayers Association (LARPA), formed as the first recorded theatre-style LARP group in the US. 

Treasure Trap, formed in 1982 at Peckforton Castle, was the first recorded LARP game in the UK and influenced the fantasy LARPs that followed there. The first recorded LARP in Australia was run in 1983, using the science fiction Traveller setting. In 1993, White Wolf Publishing released Mind's Eye Theatre, which is still played internationally and is probably the most commercially successful published LARP. The first German events were in about 1994 (other sources claim 1992 or 1991), with fantasy LARP in particular growing quickly there, so that since 2001, two major German events have been run annually that have between 3000 and 7000 players each and attract players from around Europe. 

Today, LARP is a widespread activity internationally. Games with thousands of participants are run by for-profit companies, and a small industry exists to sell costume, armour and foam weapons intended primarily for LARP. (Tychsen et al. 2006:258) "Today, LARPing is a widespread hobby, especially within the United States and Europe, and caters to at least 100,000 players worldwide ... Professional, full-time LARP sites also exist ... a small industry has grown-up supplying latex weapons, costumes, theater props, and special effects, and numerous special effects and make-up artists work in the LARP environment for training purposes." 

==Purpose==
Most LARPs are intended as games for entertainment. Enjoyable aspects can include the collaborative creation of a story, the attempt to overcome challenges in pursuit of a character's objectives, and a sense of immersion in a fictional setting. 
 LARPs may also include other game-like aspects such as intellectual puzzles, and sport-like aspects such as fighting with simulated weapons.

Some LARPs stress artistic considerations such as dramatic interaction or challenging subject matter. Avant-garde or arthaus events have especially experimental approaches and high culture aspirations and are occasionally held in fine-art contexts such as festivals or art museums. The themes of avant-garde events often include politics, culture, religion, sexuality and the human condition. Such LARPs are common in the Nordic countries but also present elsewhere. (Fatland 2005:5) 

In addition to entertainment and artistic merit, LARP events may be designed for educational or political purposes. For example, the Danish secondary school sterskov Efterskole uses LARP to teach most of its classes. Language classes can be taught by immersing students in a role-playing scenario in which they are forced to improvise speech or writing in the language they are learning. " Politically themed LARP events may attempt to awaken or shape political thinking within a culture. (Montola, Stenros & Waern 2009) "Some pervasive larps seek to engage in active dialogue with their social environment. The purpose of such dialogue can be politically or artistically motivated. These games have a message that is aimed either at the players, at bystanders, or society as a whole." 

Because LARP involves a controlled artificial environment within which people interact, it has sometimes been used as a research tool to test theories in social fields such as economics or law. For example, LARP has been used to study the application of game theory to the development of criminal law. 

==Fiction and reality==
A medieval LARP venue, the Duchy of Bicolline
During a LARP, player actions in the real world represent character actions in an imaginary setting. Game rules, physical symbols and theatrical improvisation are used to bridge differences between the real world and the setting. For example, a rope could signify an imaginary wall. Realistic-looking weapon props and risky physical activity are sometimes discouraged or forbidden for safety reasons. For example, the Mind's Eye Theatre system forbids realistic looking weapons and contact. From the "Basic Rules" section: "#1 - No Touching. This means none whatsoever, even with consent ... #2 - No weapons as props ... real weapons or anything that even looks like a real weapon ... are a definite no-no." (Dansky 1996:136). Similarly, the Rules to Live By system forbids certain sorts of physical action, and recommends against realistic-looking weapons: "A participant should never have to run, climb, or jump over anything... Participants should never, ever use real weapons, even as props. They should be extremely cautious about anything that looks like a real weapon - police get nervous." (Kilgallon et al. 2001:2) While the fictional timeline in a tabletop RPG often progresses in game-time, which may be much faster or slower than the time passing for players, LARPs are different in that they usually run in real-time, with game-time only being used in special circumstances. (Bestul 2006:28) "All of this, with the occasional exceptions, takes place in real-time, with the idea of game-time only invoked in certain situations (combat or emergencies, for example). " 

There is a distinction between when a player is in character, meaning they are actively representing their character, and when the player is out-of-character, meaning they are being themselves. Some LARPs encourage players to stay consistently in character except in emergencies, while others accept players being out-of-character at times. (Waern, Montola & Stenros 2009:1550) "Nordic 360 illusion larp the players stay in character continuously (unlike American larp as reported by Lancaster)" In a LARP, it is usually assumed that players are speaking and acting in character unless otherwise noted, which is the opposite of normal practice in tabletop role-playing games. (Tresca 2010:190) "Generally speaking, players in a larp are usually expected to be in character first and then signal their desire to speak or act out-of-character second, the reverse of a tabletop game." Character knowledge is usually considered to be separate from player knowledge, and acting upon information a character would not know may be viewed as cheating.

While most LARPs maintain a clear distinction between the real world and the fictional setting, pervasive LARPs mingle fiction with modern reality in a fashion similar to alternate reality games. Bystanders who are unaware that a game is taking place may be treated as part of the fictional setting, and in-character materials may be incorporated into the real world. 

==Rules==
Foam weapons are sometimes used for combat 
Many LARPs have game rules that determine how characters can affect each other and the setting. (Tychsen et al. 2005:216) "Rules in RPGs ... focus on 1) How the fictional world operates; 2) How the players interact with the fictional world and its inhabitants and; 3) How the players interact with each other and the GM." The rules may be defined in a publication or created by the gamemasters. (Tychsen et al. 2005:218) "In PnP RPGs and LARPs, the GMs can be responsible for creating the rules, if an existing RPG rules system is not used." These rules may define characters' capabilities, what can be done with various objects that exist in the setting, and what characters can do during the downtime between LARP events. Because referees are often not available to mediate all character actions, players are relied upon to be honest in their application of the rules.

Some LARP rules call for the use of simulated weapons such as foam weapons or airsoft guns to determine whether characters succeed in hitting one another in combat situations. In Russian LARP events, weapons made of hard plastic, metal or wood are used. The alternative to using simulated weapons is to pause role-play and determine the outcome of an action symbolically, for example by rolling dice, playing rock-paper-scissors or comparing character attributes. (Young 2003:7-8) "Live combat... requires the players' abilities to perform an action. You want to hit someone with a sword? You have to actually hit the player with a prop representing a sword, usually a padded weapon. ... Simulated combat is more abstract. It uses an external method that does not rely on player ability. For example, if you want to hit the other person with a sword, you may have to make a rock-paper-scissors challenge." 

There are also LARPs that do without rules, instead relying on players to use their common sense or feel for dramatic appropriateness to cooperatively decide what the outcome of their actions will be. (Tychsen et al. 2006:255) "...a LARP can be very similar to improvisational theater, with only a few guidelines for rules and a very low-powered GM." 

==Genres==
LARPs can have any genre, although many use themes and settings derived from genre fiction. (Falk & Davenport 2004:129) "All LRP games of our definition take place within an agreed upon theme or narrative setting that provides the context for players' actions and character roles. This theme can be pretty much anything you can imagine; the possibilities are inexhaustible. To give some obvious and common examples, it may be fantasy and involve magic, heroes, and fantastic creatures, much like the game world settings of the classic tabletop role-playing games. Or, it may be realistic, based on historic events or contemporary life. Or it can be futuristic post apocalyptic environments, involving mutants and cyborgian characters dwelling in deserted cities. Or, it can be any combination of these" Some LARPs borrow a setting from an established work in another medium (e.g., The Lord of the Rings or the World of Darkness), while others use settings based on the real world or designed specifically for the LARP. (Tychsen et al. 2006:261) "The world setting or framework for the fictional world in which the game takes place varies greatly in LARPs. Generally, these can be divided into either real-world settings or fictional settings." Proprietary campaign settings, together with rulesets, are often the principal creative asset of LARP groups and LARP publishers.

LARP with a Victorian setting

LARPs set in the modern day may explore everyday concerns, or special interests such as espionage or military activity. Such LARPs sometimes resemble an Alternate Reality Game, an Assassin game, or a military simulation using live combat with airsoft, laser tag, or paintball markers. LARPs can also be set in historical eras or have semi-historical settings with mythological or fantastical aspects incorporated.

Fantasy LARP
Fantasy is one of the most common LARP genres internationally and is the genre that the largest events use. (Tychsen et al. 2006:258) "Exclusively, the large LARPs with hundreds or more players are set in fantasy/medieval world settings, which is the historic genre for LARPs." Fantasy LARPs are set in pseudo-historical worlds inspired by fantasy literature and fantasy role-playing games such as Dungeons & Dragons. These settings typically have magic, fantasy races, and limited technology. Many fantasy LARPs focus on adventure or on competition between character factions. In contrast, science fiction LARPs take place in futuristic settings with high technology and sometimes with extraterrestrial life. This describes a broad array of LARPs, including politically themed LARPs depicting dystopian or utopian societies and settings inspired by cyberpunk, space opera and post-apocalyptic fiction. While many of these science fiction LARPs use rules created by the event arrangers, official LARP rules have been published for the popular space opera Star Wars, see (Russo & Heinig 1996) 

Horror LARPs are inspired by horror fiction. Popular sub-genres include zombie apocalypse and Cthulhu Mythos, sometimes using the published Cthulhu Live rules. The World of Darkness, published by White Wolf Publishing, is a widely used goth&ndash;punk horror setting in which players usually portray secretive supernatural creatures such as vampires and werewolves. This setting can be played using Mind's Eye Theatre, which is a set of LARP rules also published by White Wolf. World of Darkness LARPs are usually played in a chronicle, a series of short events held at regular intervals, and are also popular at conventions. An international chronicle is run by White Wolf's official fan club, the Camarilla.

==Styles==
A theatre-style LARP in a decorated room
A battle at a fest event
LARP events have a wide variety of styles that often overlap. Simple distinctions can be made regarding the genre used, the presence of simulated weapons or abstract rules, and whether players create their own characters or have them assigned by gamemasters. There is also a distinction between scenarios that are only run once and those that are designed to be repeatable. A number of other common classifications follow.

Theatre-style, or freeform, LARP is characterised by a focus on interaction between characters that are written by the gamemasters, not using simulated weapons for combat, and an eclectic approach to genre and setting. Events in this style typically only last a few hours and require relatively little preparation by players and are sometimes played at gaming conventions. Some murder mystery games where players are assigned characters and encouraged to roleplay freely also resemble theatre-style LARP.

Some very large events known as fests (short for festival) have hundreds or thousands of participants who are usually split into competing character factions camped separately around a large venue. There are relatively few fests in the world, all based in Europe and Canada; however, their size means that they have a significant influence on local LARP culture and design. At the other end of the size scale, some small events known as linear or line-course LARPs feature a small group of PCs facing a series of challenges from NPCs and are often more tightly planned and controlled by GMs than other styles of LARP. 

While some LARPs are open to participants of all ages, others have a minimum age requirement. There are also youth LARPs, specifically intended for children and young people. Some are run through institutions such as schools, churches, or the Scouts. Denmark has an especially high number of youth LARPs. "According to the survey, 8% of children had participated in role-playing events in nature during the last month" 

==Cultural significance==
Roleplaying may be seen as part of a movement in Western culture towards participatory arts, as opposed to traditional spectator arts. Participants in a LARP cast off the role of passive observer and take on new roles that are often outside of their daily life and contrary to their culture. The arrangers of a LARP and the other participants act as co-creators of the game. This collaborative process of creating shared fictional worlds may be associated with a broader burgeoning "geek" culture in developed societies that is in turn associated with prolonged education, high uptake of information technology and increased leisure time. In comparison to the mainstream video-game industry, which is highly commercialized and often marketed towards a male audience, LARP is less commoditized, and women actively contribute as authors and participants. 

LARP is not well known in most countries and is sometimes confused with other role-playing, reenactment, costuming, or dramatic activities. While fan and gamer culture in general has become increasingly mainstream in developed countries, LARP has often not achieved the same degree of cultural acceptability. This may be due to intolerance of the resemblance to childhood games of pretend, a perceived risk of over-identification with the characters, and the absence of mass marketing. In US films such as the 2006 documentary Darkon, the 2007 documentary Monster Camp, and the 2008 comedy Role Models, fantasy LARP is depicted as somewhat ridiculous and escapist, but also treated affectionately as a "constructive social outlet". In the Nordic countries, LARP has achieved a high level of public recognition and popularity. It is often shown in a positive light in mainstream media, with an emphasis on the dramatic and creative aspects. (Fatland 2005) "The popularity of larp the Nordic countries has recently made it a feature of 'common knowledge', so that a Swedish journalist may refer to something unrelated as 'larp-like', Finnish TV produces a teen soap opera about fantasy larpers, and a Norwegian professor of theatre history routinely ends his course by mentioning larp as the 'new theatre'." However, even in Norway, where LARP has greater recognition than in most other countries, it has still not achieved full recognition as a cultural activity by government bodies. 

Communities have formed around the creation, play and discussion of LARP. These communities have developed a subculture that crosses over with role-playing, fan, reenactment, and drama subcultures. Early LARP subculture focused on Tolkien-like fantasy, but it later broadened to include appreciation of other genres, especially the horror genre with the rapid uptake of the World of Darkness setting in the 1990s. Like many subcultures, LARP groups often have a common context of shared experience, language, humour, and clothing that can be regarded by some as a lifestyle. 

LARP has been a subject of academic research and theory. Much of this research originates from role-players, especially from the publications of the Nordic Knutepunkt role-playing conventions. (Waern, Montola & Stenros 2009:1550) "The community is well documented through annual self-reflective books published by the annual "Nodal Point" events where theorists and practitioners meet to discuss larp" The broader academic community has recently begun to study LARP as well, both to compare it to other media and other varieties of interactive gaming, and also to evaluate it in its own right. 
 
It has been speculated that LARP may one day evolve into a major industry in the form of location-based games using ubiquitous computing. 

== In media ==

; Documentary
* Darkon (2006)
* Monster Camp (2007)

; Fiction
* Dream Park (1981)
* Mazes and Monsters (1982)
* Days of Darkness (2007)
* Role Models (2008)
* Little Brother (2008)
* The Wild Hunt (2009)
* Supernatural (2009, 2013)
* "Lloyd the Conqueror" (2011)
* Knights of Badassdom (2014)

==See also==

*Cosplay

===Lists===
*List of live action role-playing groups

===LARP conventions===
*Intercon - several conventions regularly held on the East Coast of the United States
*Knutepunkt - convention regularly held in several Nordic countries
*Wyrd Con - convention held on the West Coast of the United States

==References==
Notes
 

Bibliography

* 
* 
* 
*
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 

 

[[Lithium]]

Lithium (from , "stone") is a chemical element with symbol Li and atomic number 3. It is a soft, silver-white metal belonging to the alkali metal group of chemical elements. Under standard conditions it is the lightest metal and the least dense solid element. Like all alkali metals, lithium is highly reactive and flammable. For this reason, it is typically stored in mineral oil. When cut open, lithium exhibits a metallic luster, but contact with moist air corrodes the surface quickly to a dull silvery gray, then black tarnish. Because of its high reactivity, lithium never occurs freely in nature, and instead, only appears in compounds, which are usually ionic. Lithium occurs in a number of pegmatitic minerals, but due to its solubility as an ion is present in ocean water and is commonly obtained from brines and clays. On a commercial scale, lithium is isolated electrolytically from a mixture of lithium chloride and potassium chloride.

The nuclei of lithium verge on instability, since the two stable lithium isotopes found in nature have among the lowest binding energies per nucleon of all stable nuclides. Because of its relative nuclear instability, lithium is less common in the solar system than 25 of the first 32 chemical elements even though the nuclei are very light in atomic weight. Numerical data from: Graphed at ] For related reasons, lithium has important links to nuclear physics. The transmutation of lithium atoms to helium in 1932 was the first fully man-made nuclear reaction, and lithium-6 deuteride serves as a fusion fuel in staged thermonuclear weapons. Nuclear Weapon Design. Federation of American Scientists (1998-10-21). fas.org 

Lithium and its compounds have several industrial applications, including heat-resistant glass and ceramics, high strength-to-weight alloys used in aircraft, lithium batteries and lithium-ion batteries. These uses consume more than half of lithium production.

Trace amounts of lithium are present in all organisms. The element serves no apparent vital biological function, since animals and plants survive in good health without it. Non-vital functions have not been ruled out. The lithium ion Li+ administered as any of several lithium salts has proved to be useful as a mood-stabilizing drug in the treatment of bipolar disorder, due to neurological effects of the ion in the human body.

==Properties==

===Atomic and physical===

Like the other alkali metals, lithium has a single valence electron that is easily given up to form a cation. Because of this, it is a good conductor of heat and electricity as well as a highly reactive element, though the least reactive of the alkali metals. Lithium's low reactivity compared to other alkali metals is due to the proximity of its valence electron to its nucleus (the remaining two electrons are in lithium's 1s orbital and are much lower in energy, and therefore they do not participate in chemical bonds). 

Lithium metal is soft enough to be cut with a knife. When cut, it possesses a silvery-white color that quickly changes to gray due to oxidation. While it has one of the lowest melting points among all metals (180 C), it has the highest melting and boiling points of the alkali metals. 

Lithium has a very low density of 0.534 g/cm3, comparable with that of pine wood. It is the least dense of all elements that are solids at room temperature, the next lightest solid element (potassium, at 0.862 g/cm3) being more than 60% denser. Furthermore, apart from helium and hydrogen, it is less dense than any liquid element, being only 2/3 as dense as liquid nitrogen (0.808 g/cm3). Densities for all the gaseous elements can be obtained at Airliquide.com Lithium can float on the lightest hydrocarbon oils and is one of only three metals that can float on water, the other two being sodium and potassium.
Lithium floating in oil
Lithium's coefficient of thermal expansion is twice that of aluminium and almost four times that of iron. It has the highest specific heat capacity of any solid element. Lithium is superconductive below 400 K at standard pressure and at higher temperatures (more than 9 K) at very high pressures (>20 GPa) At temperatures below 70 K, lithium, like sodium, undergoes diffusionless phase change transformations. At 4.2 K it has a rhombohedral crystal system (with a nine-layer repeat spacing); at higher temperatures it transforms to face-centered cubic and then body-centered cubic. At liquid-helium temperatures (4 K) the rhombohedral structure is the most prevalent. Multiple allotropic forms have been reported for lithium at high pressures. 

Lithium has a specific heat capacity of 3.58 kilojoules per kilogram-Kelvin, the highest of all solids. THERMO Because of this, lithium metal is often used in coolants for heat transfer applications. 

===Chemistry and compounds===
Lithium reacts with water easily, but with noticeably less energy than other alkali metals do. The reaction forms hydrogen gas and lithium hydroxide in aqueous solution. Because of its reactivity with water, lithium is usually stored under cover of a hydrocarbon, often petroleum jelly. Though the heavier alkali metals can be stored in more dense substances, such as mineral oil, lithium is not dense enough to be fully submerged in these liquids. In moist air, lithium rapidly tarnishes to form a black coating of lithium hydroxide (LiOH and LiOHH2O), lithium nitride (Li3N) and lithium carbonate (Li2CO3, the result of a secondary reaction between LiOH and CO2). 

Hexameric structure of the n-butyllithium fragment in a crystal
When placed over a flame, lithium compounds give off a striking crimson color, but when it burns strongly the flame becomes a brilliant silver. Lithium will ignite and burn in oxygen when exposed to water or water vapors. Lithium is flammable, and it is potentially explosive when exposed to air and especially to water, though less so than the other alkali metals. The lithium-water reaction at normal temperatures is brisk but nonviolent, as the hydrogen produced will not ignite on its own. As with all alkali metals, lithium fires are difficult to extinguish, requiring dry powder fire extinguishers, specifically the Class D type (see Types of extinguishing agents). Lithium is the only metal which reacts with nitrogen under normal conditions. 

Lithium has a diagonal relationship with magnesium, an element of similar atomic and ionic radius. Chemical resemblances between the two metals include the formation of a nitride by reaction with N2, the formation of an oxide () and peroxide () when burnt in O2, salts with similar solubilities, and thermal instability of the carbonates and nitrides. The metal reacts with hydrogen gas at high temperatures to produce lithium hydride (LiH). 

Other known binary compounds include the halides (LiF, LiCl, LiBr, LiI), and the sulfide (sulfide|]), the superoxide (superoxide|]), carbide (carbide|]). Many other inorganic compounds are known, where lithium combines with anions to form various salts: borates, amides, carbonate, nitrate, or borohydride (borohydride|]). Multiple organolithium reagents are known where there is a direct bond between carbon and lithium atoms effectively creating a carbanion. These are extremely powerful bases and nucleophiles. In many of these organolithium compounds, the lithium ions tend to aggregate into high-symmetry clusters by themselves, which is relatively common for alkali cations. LiHe, a very weakly interacting van der Waals compound, has been detected at very low temperatures. 

Lithium has also been found to exhibit ferromagnetism in its gaseous form, under certain conditions. http://web.mit.edu/newsoffice/2009/magnetic-gas-0918.html 

===Isotopes===

Naturally occurring lithium is composed of two stable isotopes, 6Li and 7Li, the latter being the more abundant (92.5% natural abundance). Both natural isotopes have anomalously low nuclear binding energy per nucleon compared to the next lighter and heavier elements, helium and beryllium, which means that alone among stable light elements, lithium can produce net energy through nuclear fission. The two lithium nuclei have lower binding energies per nucleon than any other stable nuclides other than deuterium and helium-3. energy curve - common isotopes.svg] shows binding energies of stable nuclides graphically; the source of the data-set is given in the figure background. As a result of this, though very light in atomic weight, lithium is less common in the Solar System than 25 of the first 32 chemical elements. 
Seven radioisotopes have been characterized, the most stable being 8Li with a half-life of 838 ms and 9Li with a half-life of 178 ms. All of the remaining radioactive isotopes have half-lives that are shorter than 8.6 ms. The shortest-lived isotope of lithium is 4Li, which decays through proton emission and has a half-life of 7.6  1023 s. 

7Li is one of the primordial elements (or, more properly, primordial nuclides) produced in Big Bang nucleosynthesis. A small amount of both 6Li and 7Li are produced in stars, but are thought to be burned as fast as produced. Additional small amounts of lithium of both 6Li and 7Li may be generated from solar wind, cosmic rays hitting heavier atoms, and from early solar system 7Be and 10Be radioactive decay. While lithium is created in stars during the Stellar nucleosynthesis, it is further burnt. 7Li can also be generated in carbon stars. 

Lithium isotopes fractionate substantially during a wide variety of natural processes, including mineral formation (chemical precipitation), metabolism, and ion exchange. Lithium ions substitute for magnesium and iron in octahedral sites in clay minerals, where 6Li is preferred to 7Li, resulting in enrichment of the light isotope in processes of hyperfiltration and rock alteration. The exotic 11Li is known to exhibit a nuclear halo. The process known as laser isotope separation can be used to separate lithium isotopes. 

Nuclear weapons manufacture and other nuclear physics uses are a major source of artificial lithium fractionation, with the light isotope 6Li being retained by industry and military stockpiles to such an extent as to slightly but measurably change the 6Li to 7Li ratios even in natural sources, such as rivers. This has led to unusual uncertainty in the standardized atomic weight of lithium, since this quantity depends on the natural abundance ratios of these naturally-occurring stable lithium isotopes, as they are available in commercial lithium mineral sources. 

==Occurrence==
Lithium is about as common as chlorine in the Earth's upper continental crust, on a per-atom basis.

===Astronomical===

According to modern cosmological theory, lithiumas both of its stable isotopes lithium-6 and lithium-7was among the 3 elements synthesized in the Big Bang. Though the amount of lithium generated in Big Bang nucleosynthesis is dependent upon the number of photons per baryon, for accepted values the lithium abundance can be calculated, and there is a "cosmological lithium discrepancy" in the Universe: older stars seem to have less lithium than they should, and some younger stars have far more. The lack of lithium in older stars is apparently caused by the "mixing" of lithium into the interior of stars, where it is destroyed. Furthermore, lithium is produced in younger stars. Though it transmutes into two atoms of helium due to collision with a proton at temperatures above 2.4 million degrees Celsius (most stars easily attain this temperature in their interiors), lithium is more abundant than predicted in later-generation stars, for causes not yet completely understood. 

Though it was one of the three first elements (together with helium and hydrogen) to be synthesized in the Big Bang, lithium, together with beryllium and boron are markedly less abundant than other nearby elements. This is a result of the low temperature necessary to destroy lithium, and a lack of common processes to produce it. 

Lithium is also found in brown dwarf substellar objects and certain anomalous orange stars. Because lithium is present in cooler, less-massive brown dwarfs, but is destroyed in hotter red dwarf stars, its presence in the stars' spectra can be used in the "lithium test" to differentiate the two, as both are smaller than the Sun. Certain orange stars can also contain a high concentration of lithium. Those orange stars found to have a higher than usual concentration of lithium (such as Centaurus X-4) orbit massive objectsneutron stars or black holeswhose gravity evidently pulls heavier lithium to the surface of a hydrogen-helium star, causing more lithium to be observed. 

===Terrestrial===

+Lithium mine production (2011) and reserves in tonnes U.S. Geological Survey, 2012, commodity summaries 2011: U.S. Geological Survey 
 Country Production Reserves 
 Argentina 3,200 850,000 
 Australia 9,260 970,000 
 Brazil 160 64,000 
 Canada (2010) 480 180,000 
 Chile 12,600 7,500,000 
 People's Republic of China 5,200 3,500,000 
 Portugal 820 10,000 
 Zimbabwe 470 23,000 
 World total 34,000 13,000,000 

Although lithium is widely distributed on Earth, it does not naturally occur in elemental form due to its high reactivity. The total lithium content of seawater is very large and is estimated as 230 billion tonnes, where the element exists at a relatively constant concentration of 0.14 to 0.25 parts per million (ppm), or 25 micromolar; 
higher concentrations approaching 7 ppm are found near hydrothermal vents. 

Estimates for the Earth's crustal content range from 20 to 70 ppm by weight. In keeping with its name, lithium forms a minor part of igneous rocks, with the largest concentrations in granites. Granitic pegmatites also provide the greatest abundance of lithium-containing minerals, with spodumene and petalite being the most commercially viable sources. Another significant mineral of lithium is lepidolite. A newer source for lithium is hectorite clay, the only active development of which is through the Western Lithium Corporation in the United States. At 20 mg lithium per kg of Earth's crust, Taylor, S. R.; McLennan, S. M.; The continental crust: Its composition and evolution, Blackwell Sci. Publ., Oxford, 330 pp. (1985). Cited in Abundances of the elements (data page) lithium is the 25th most abundant element.

According to the Handbook of Lithium and Natural Calcium, "Lithium is a comparatively rare element, although it is found in many rocks and some brines, but always in very low concentrations. There are a fairly large number of both lithium mineral and brine deposits but only comparatively few of them are of actual or potential commercial value. Many are very small, others are too low in grade." Garrett, Donald (2004) Handbook of Lithium and Natural Calcium, Academic Press, cited in The Trouble with Lithium 2, Meridian International Research (2008) 

One of the largest reserve base Apendixes. By USGS definitions, reserve base "may encompass those parts of the resources that have a reasonable potential for becoming economically available within planning horizons beyond those that assume proven technology and current economics. The reserve base includes those resources that are currently economic (reserves), marginally economic (marginal reserves), and some of those that are currently subeconomic (subeconomic resources)." of lithium is in the Salar de Uyuni area of Bolivia, which has 5.4 million tonnes. US Geological Survey, estimates that in 2010 Chile had the largest reserves by far (7.5 million tonnes) Clarke, G.M. and Harben, P.W., "Lithium Availability Wall Map". Published June 2009. Referenced at International Lithium Alliance and the highest annual production (8,800 tonnes). Other major suppliers include Australia, Argentina and China. 

In June 2010, the New York Times reported that American geologists were conducting ground surveys on dry salt lakes in western Afghanistan believing that large deposits of lithium are located there. "Pentagon officials said that their initial analysis at one location in Ghazni Province showed the potential for lithium deposits as large as those of Bolivia, which now has the world's largest known lithium reserves." These estimates are "based principally on old data, which was gathered mainly by the Soviets during their occupation of Afghanistan from 19791989" and "Stephen Peters, the head of the USGS's Afghanistan Minerals Project, said that he was unaware of USGS involvement in any new surveying for minerals in Afghanistan in the past two years. 'We are not aware of any discoveries of lithium,' he said." 

===Biological===
Lithium is found in trace amount in numerous plants, plankton, and invertebrates, at concentrations of 69 to 5,760 parts per billion (ppb). In vertebrates the concentration is slightly lower, and nearly all vertebrate tissue and body fluids have been found to contain lithium ranging from 21 to 763 ppb. Marine organisms tend to bioaccumulate lithium more than terrestrial ones. It is not known whether lithium has a physiological role in any of these organisms, but nutritional studies in mammals have indicated its importance to health, leading to a suggestion that it be classed as an essential trace element with an RDA of 1 mg/day. Observational studies in Japan, reported in 2011, suggested that naturally occurring lithium in drinking water may increase human lifespan. 

==History==
Johan August Arfwedson is credited with the discovery of lithium in 1817
Petalite (LiAlSi4O10) was discovered in 1800 by the Brazilian chemist and statesman Jos Bonifcio de Andrada e Silva in a mine on the island of Ut, Sweden. However, it was not until 1817 that Johan August Arfwedson, then working in the laboratory of the chemist Jns Jakob Berzelius, detected the presence of a new element while analyzing petalite ore. This element formed compounds similar to those of sodium and potassium, though its carbonate and hydroxide were less soluble in water and more alkaline. Berzelius gave the alkaline material the name "lithion/lithina", from the Greek word o (transliterated as lithos, meaning "stone"), to reflect its discovery in a solid mineral, as opposed to potassium, which had been discovered in plant ashes, and sodium which was known partly for its high abundance in animal blood. He named the metal inside the material "lithium". 

Arfwedson later showed that this same element was present in the minerals spodumene and lepidolite. In 1818, Christian Gmelin was the first to observe that lithium salts give a bright red color to flame. However, both Arfwedson and Gmelin tried and failed to isolate the pure element from its salts. It was not isolated until 1821, when William Thomas Brande obtained it by electrolysis of lithium oxide, a process that had previously been employed by the chemist Sir Humphry Davy to isolate the alkali metals potassium and sodium. Brande also described some pure salts of lithium, such as the chloride, and, estimating that lithia (lithium oxide) contained about 55% metal, estimated the atomic weight of lithium to be around 9.8 g/mol (modern value ~6.94 g/mol). In 1855, larger quantities of lithium were produced through the electrolysis of lithium chloride by Robert Bunsen and Augustus Matthiessen. The discovery of this procedure henceforth led to commercial production of lithium, beginning in 1923, by the German company Metallgesellschaft AG, which performed an electrolysis of a liquid mixture of lithium chloride and potassium chloride. 

The production and use of lithium underwent several drastic changes in history. The first major application of lithium was in high-temperature lithium greases for aircraft engines or similar applications in World War II and shortly after. This use was supported by the fact that lithium-based soaps have a higher melting point than other alkali soaps, and are less corrosive than calcium based soaps. The small market for lithium soaps and the lubricating greases based upon them was supported by several small mining operations mostly in the United States.

The demand for lithium increased dramatically during the Cold War with the production of nuclear fusion weapons. Both lithium-6 and lithium-7 produce tritium when irradiated by neutrons, and are thus useful for the production of tritium by itself, as well as a form of solid fusion fuel used inside hydrogen bombs in the form of lithium deuteride. The United States became the prime producer of lithium in the period between the late 1950s and the mid-1980s. At the end, the stockpile of lithium was roughly 42,000 tonnes of lithium hydroxide. The stockpiled lithium was depleted in lithium-6 by 75%, which was enough to affect the measured atomic weight of lithium in many standardized chemicals, and even the atomic weight of lithium in some "natural sources" of lithium ion which had been "contaminated" by lithium salts discharged from isotope separation facilities, which had found its way into ground water. 

Lithium was used to decrease the melting temperature of glass and to improve the melting behavior of aluminium oxide when using the Hall-Hroult process. These two uses dominated the market until the middle of the 1990s. After the end of the nuclear arms race the demand for lithium decreased and the sale of Department of Energy stockpiles on the open market further reduced prices. But in the mid-1990s, several companies started to extract lithium from brine which proved to be a less expensive method than underground or even open-pit mining. Most of the mines closed or shifted their focus to other materials as only the ore from zoned pegmatites could be mined for a competitive price. For example, the US mines near Kings Mountain, North Carolina closed before the turn of the 21st century.

The use in lithium ion batteries increased the demand for lithium and became the dominant use in 2007. With the surge of lithium demand in batteries in the 2000s, new companies have expanded brine extraction efforts to meet the rising demand. 

==Production==

World production trend of Lithium

Since the end of World War II lithium production has greatly increased. The metal is separated from other elements in igneous minerals such as those above. Lithium salts are extracted from the water of mineral springs, brine pools and brine deposits. The metal is produced electrolytically from a mixture of fused 55% lithium chloride and 45% potassium chloride at about 450o C. In 1998 it was about 95 US$ / kg (or 43 US$/pound). 

Worldwide identified reserves of lithium in 2008 were estimated by the US Geological Survey as 13 million tonnes. Deposits of lithium are found in South America throughout the Andes mountain chain. Chile is the leading lithium producer, followed by Argentina. Both countries recover the lithium from brine pools. In the United States lithium is recovered from brine pools in Nevada. However, half the world's known reserves are located in Bolivia, a nation sitting along the central eastern slope of the Andes.
In 2009 Bolivia was negotiating with Japanese, French, and Korean firms to begin extraction. According to the US Geological Survey, Bolivia's Uyuni Desert has 5.4 million tonnes of lithium. A newly discovered deposit in Wyoming's Rock Springs Uplift is estimated at 228,000 tons. Additional deposits in the same formation were extrapolated to be as much as 18 million tons. 

After an industry wide pricing reduction for lithium carbonate after the Great Financial Crisis, where major suppliers such as Sociedad Qumica y Minera (SQM) dropped pricing by 20% in light of incoming lithium resource developers and to further defend their market position, pricing in 2012 scaled up due to increased lithium demand. A 2012 Business Week article outlined the existing oligopoly in the lithium space, "SQM, controlled by billionaire Julio Ponce, is the second-largest, followed by Rockwood, which is backed by Henry Kraviss KKR & Co., and Philadelphia-based FMC." Global consumption may jump to 300,000 metric tons a year by 2020 from about 150,000 tons in 2012, as demand for lithium batteries has been growing at about 25 percent a year, outpacing the 4 percent to 5 percent overall gain in lithium 

A potential source is geothermal wells. Geothermal fluids carry leachates to the surface; Parker, Ann. Mining Geothermal Resources. Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory recovery of lithium has been demonstrated in the field. Patel, P. (2011-11-16) Startup to Capture Lithium from Geothermal Plants. technologyreview.com As the lithium is separated by simple filtration techniques, the process and environmental costs are primarily that of the already-operating geothermal well; relative environmental impacts may thus be positive. Wald, M. (2011-09-28) Start-Up in California Plans to Capture Lithium, and Market Share. The New York Times 

There are differing opinions about the potential growth of lithium production. A 2008 study concluded that "realistically achievable lithium carbonate production will be sufficient for only a small fraction of future PHEV and EV global market requirements", that "demand from the portable electronics sector will absorb much of the planned production increases in the next decade", and that "mass production of lithium carbonate is not environmentally sound, it will cause irreparable ecological damage to ecosystems that should be protected and that LiIon propulsion is incompatible with the notion of the 'Green Car'". 

However, according to a 2011 study conducted at Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory and the University of California Berkeley, the currently estimated reserve base of lithium should not be a limiting factor for large-scale battery production for electric vehicles, as the study estimated that on the order of 1 billion 40 kWh Li-based batteries could be built with current reserves. Another 2011 study by researchers from the University of Michigan and Ford Motor Company found that there are sufficient lithium resources to support global demand until 2100, including the lithium required for the potential widespread use of hybrid electric, plug-in hybrid electric and battery electric vehicles. The study estimated global lithium reserves at 39 million tons, and total demand for lithium during the 90-year period analyzed at 1220 million tons, depending on the scenarios regarding economic growth and recycling rates. 

==Uses==
Estimates of global lithium uses in 2011 

===Ceramics and glass===
Lithium oxide is a widely used flux for processing silica, reducing the melting point and viscosity of the material and leading to glazes of improved physical properties including low coefficients for thermal expansion. Worldwide demand by sector Lithium oxides are a component of ovenware. Worldwide, this is the single largest use for lithium compounds. Lithium carbonate (Li2CO3) is generally used in this application: upon heating it converts to the oxide. 

===Electrical and electronics===
In the later years of the 20th century, owing to its high electrode potential, lithium became an important component of the electrolyte and of one of the electrodes in batteries. Because of its low atomic mass, it has a high charge- and power-to-weight ratio. A typical lithium-ion battery can generate approximately 3 volts per cell, compared with 2.1 volts for lead-acid or 1.5 volts for zinc-carbon cells. Lithium-ion batteries, which are rechargeable and have a high energy density, should not be confused with lithium batteries, which are disposable (primary) batteries with lithium or its compounds as the anode. Other rechargeable batteries that use lithium include the lithium-ion polymer battery, lithium iron phosphate battery, and the nanowire battery.

===Lubricating greases===
The third most common use of lithium is in greases. Lithium hydroxide is a strong base and, when heated with a fat, produces a soap made of lithium stearate. Lithium soap has the ability to thicken oils, and it is used to manufacture all-purpose, high-temperature lubricating greases. 

===Metallurgy===
When used as a flux for welding or soldering, metallic lithium promotes the fusing of metals during the process and eliminates the forming of oxides by absorbing impurities. Its fusing quality is also important as a flux for producing ceramics, enamels and glass. Alloys of the metal with aluminium, cadmium, copper and manganese are used to make high-performance aircraft parts (see also Lithium-aluminium alloys). 

===Other chemical and industrial uses===
Lithium use in flares and pyrotechnics is due to its rose-red flame. 

====Pyrotechnics====
Lithium compounds are used as pyrotechnic colorants and oxidizers in red fireworks and flares. Wiberg, Egon; Wiberg, Nils and Holleman, Arnold Frederick Inorganic chemistry, Academic Press (2001) ISBN 0-12-352651-5, p. 1089 

====Air purification====
Lithium chloride and lithium bromide are hygroscopic and are used as desiccants for gas streams. Lithium hydroxide and lithium peroxide are the salts most used in confined areas, such as aboard spacecraft and submarines, for carbon dioxide removal and air purification. Lithium hydroxide absorbs carbon dioxide from the air by forming lithium carbonate, and is preferred over other alkaline hydroxides for its low weight.

Lithium peroxide (Li2O2) in presence of moisture not only reacts with carbon dioxide to form lithium carbonate, but also releases oxygen. The reaction is as follows:
:2 Li2O2 + 2 CO2  2 Li2CO3 + O2.
Some of the aforementioned compounds, as well as lithium perchlorate, are used in oxygen candles that supply submarines with oxygen. These can also include small amounts of boron, magnesium, aluminum, silicon, titanium, manganese, and iron. 

====Optics====
Lithium fluoride, artificially grown as crystal, is clear and transparent and often used in specialist optics for IR, UV and VUV (vacuum UV) applications. It has one of the lowest refractive indexes and the farthest transmission range in the deep UV of most common materials. Finely divided lithium fluoride powder has been used for thermoluminescent radiation dosimetry (TLD): when a sample of such is exposed to radiation, it accumulates crystal defects which, when heated, resolve via a release of bluish light whose intensity is proportional to the absorbed dose, thus allowing this to be quantified. Lithium fluoride is sometimes used in focal lenses of telescopes. 

The high non-linearity of lithium niobate also makes it useful in non-linear optics applications. It is used extensively in telecommunication products such as mobile phones and optical modulators, for such components as resonant crystals. Lithium applications are used in more than 60% of mobile phones. 

====Organic and polymer chemistry====
Organolithium compounds are widely used in the production of polymer and fine-chemicals. In the polymer industry, which is the dominant consumer of these reagents, alkyl lithium compounds are catalysts/initiators. in anionic polymerization of unfunctionalized olefins. For the production of fine chemicals, organolithium compounds function as strong bases and as reagents for the formation of carbon-carbon bonds. Organolithium compounds are prepared from lithium metal and alkyl halides. 

Many other lithium compounds are used as reagents to prepare organic compounds. Some popular compounds include lithium aluminium hydride (LiAlH4), lithium triethylborohydride (LiBH(C2H5)3).

====Military applications====
Metallic lithium and its complex hydrides, such as Li, are used as high energy additives to rocket propellants. Lithium aluminum hydride can also be used by itself as a solid fuel. LiAl-hydride 

The launch of a torpedo using lithium as fuel

The Mark 50 Torpedo stored chemical energy propulsion system (SCEPS) uses a small tank of sulfur hexafluoride gas which is sprayed over a block of solid lithium. The reaction generates heat which is used to generate steam. The steam propels the torpedo in a closed Rankine cycle. 

Lithium hydride containing lithium-6 is used in hydrogen bombs. In the bomb, it is placed around the core of an atomic bomb. 

===Nuclear===
Lithium-6 is valued as a source material for tritium production and as a neutron absorber in nuclear fusion. Natural lithium contains about 7.5% lithium-6 from which large amounts of lithium-6 have been produced by isotope separation for use in nuclear weapons. Lithium-7 gained interest for use in nuclear reactor coolants. 

Lithium deuteride was used as fuel in the Castle Bravo nuclear device.
Lithium deuteride was the fusion fuel of choice in early versions of the hydrogen bomb. When bombarded by neutrons, both 6Li and 7Li produce tritium  this reaction, which was not fully understood when hydrogen bombs were first tested, was responsible for the runaway yield of the Castle Bravo nuclear test. Tritium fuses with deuterium in a fusion reaction that is relatively easy to achieve. Although details remain secret, lithium-6 deuteride still apparently plays a role in modern nuclear weapons, as a fusion material. 

Lithium fluoride, when highly enriched in the lithium-7 isotope, forms the basic constituent of the fluoride salt mixture LiF-BeF2 used in liquid fluoride nuclear reactors. Lithium fluoride is exceptionally chemically stable and LiF-BeF2 mixtures have low melting points. In addition, 7Li, Be, and F are among the few nuclides with low enough thermal neutron capture cross-sections not to poison the fission reactions inside a nuclear fission reactor. Beryllium and fluorine occur only as one isotope, 9Be and 19F respectively. These two, together with 7Li, as well as 2H, 11B, 15N, 209Bi, and the stable isotopes of C, and O, are the only nuclides with low enough thermal neutron capture cross sections aside from actinides to serve as major constituents of a molten salt breeder reactor fuel. 

In conceptualized nuclear fusion power plants, lithium will be used to produce tritium in magnetically confined reactors using deuterium and tritium as the fuel. Naturally occurring tritium is extremely rare, and must be synthetically produced by surrounding the reacting plasma with a 'blanket' containing lithium where neutrons from the deuterium-tritium reaction in the plasma will fission the lithium to produce more tritium:
:6Li + n  4He + 3T.

Lithium is also used as a source for alpha particles, or helium nuclei. When 7Li is bombarded by accelerated protons 8Be is formed, which undergoes fission to form two alpha particles. This feat, called "splitting the atom" at the time, was the first fully man-made nuclear reaction. It was produced by Cockroft and Walton in 1932. "'Splitting the Atom': Cockcroft and Walton, 1932: 9. Rays or Particles?" Department of Physics,University of Cambridge (Nuclear reactions and human-directed nuclear transmutation had been accomplished as early as 1917, but by using natural radioactive bombardment with alpha particles).

In 2013, the US Government Accountability Office said the Lithium-7 critical to the operation of 65 out of 100 American nuclear reactors places their ability to continue to provide electricity at some risk. The problem stems from the decay of US nuclear infrastructure. The US shut down most of its machinery in 1963, given a huge surplus, mostly consumed during the twentieth century. The report said it would take five years and $10 million to $12 million. 

Reactors that use lithium-7 heat water under high pressure and transfer heat through heat exchangers that are prone to corrosion. The reactors use lithium to counteract the corrosive effects of boric acid, which is added to the water to absorb excess neutrons. 

===Medicine===

Lithium is useful in the treatment of bipolar disorder. Lithium salts may also be helpful for related diagnoses, such as schizoaffective disorder and cyclic major depression. The active part of these salts is the lithium ion Li+. They may increase the risk of developing Ebstein's cardiac anomaly in infants born to women who take lithium during the first trimester of pregnancy. 

Lithium has also been researched as a possible treatment for cluster headaches. 

==Precautions==

Lithium is corrosive and requires special handling to avoid skin contact. Breathing lithium dust or lithium compounds (which are often alkaline) initially irritate the nose and throat, while higher exposure can cause a buildup of fluid in the lungs, leading to pulmonary edema. The metal itself is a handling hazard because of the caustic hydroxide produced when it is in contact with moisture. Lithium is safely stored in non-reactive compounds such as naphtha. 

===Regulation===
Some jurisdictions limit the sale of lithium batteries, which are the most readily available source of lithium for ordinary consumers. Lithium can be used to reduce pseudoephedrine and ephedrine to methamphetamine in the Birch reduction method, which employs solutions of alkali metals dissolved in anhydrous ammonia. 
Carriage and shipment of some kinds of lithium batteries may be prohibited aboard certain types of transportation (particularly aircraft) because of the ability of most types of lithium batteries to fully discharge very rapidly when short-circuited, leading to overheating and possible explosion in a process called thermal runaway. Most consumer lithium batteries have thermal overload protection built-in to prevent this type of incident, or their design inherently limits short-circuit currents. Internal shorts have been known to develop due to manufacturing defects or damage to batteries that can lead to spontaneous thermal runaway. 

==See also==
* Dilithium
* Lithium (medication)
* Lithium compounds
* Lithium-based grease
* Lithium-air battery
* Lithium-ion battery

==Notes==
 

==References==

==External links==
* Lithium at The Periodic Table of Videos (University of Nottingham)
* International Lithium Alliance
* USGS: Lithium Statistics and Information
* Lithium Supply & Markets 2009 IM Conference 2009 Sustainable lithium supplies through 2020 in the face of sustainable market growth
* University of Southampton, Mountbatten Centre for International Studies, Nuclear History Working Paper No5.

 



[[Leni Riefenstahl]]

Helene Bertha Amalie "Leni" Riefenstahl (; 22 August 1902  8 September 2003) was a German film director, photographer, actress and dancer widely known for directing the Nazi propaganda film Triumph of the Will. Riefenstahls prominence in the Third Reich, along with her personal association with Adolf Hitler, destroyed her film career following Germany's defeat in World War II, after which she was arrested but released without any charges. 

Triumph of the Will gave Riefenstahl instant and lasting international fame, as well as infamy. She directed eight films, two of which received significant coverage outside Germany. The propaganda value of her films made during the 1930s repels most modern commentators, but many film histories cite the aesthetics as outstanding. Koster, Ron, Leni Riefenstahls Film Dbut, 2004, retrieved 6 January 2008 New York Times, Janet Maslin, Just What Did Leni Riefenstahls Lens See?, 13 March 1994, retrieved 6 January 2008 Psymon, Leni Gallery, retrieved 6 January 2008 The Economist wrote that Triumph of the Will "sealed her reputation as the greatest female filmmaker of the 20th century". 

In the 1970s, Riefenstahl published her still photography of the Nuba tribes in Sudan in several books such as The Last of the Nuba. Active until her death at age 101, she published marine life stills and released the marine-based film Impressionen unter Wasser in 2002.

After her death, the Associated Press described Riefenstahl as an acclaimed pioneer of film and photographic techniques. Bulldog News, Hitlers Filmmaker Leni Riefenstahl Dead at 101 (after Associated Press), 9 September 2003, retrieved 5 January 2008 Der Tagesspiegel newspaper in Berlin noted, Leni Riefenstahl conquered new ground in the cinema. bbc.com, Leni Riefenstahl the Devil's Diva, 10 September 2003, retrieved 5 January 2008 The BBC said her documentaries were hailed as groundbreaking film-making, pioneering techniques involving cranes, tracking rails, and many cameras working at the same time. bbc.com, Film-maker Leni Riefenstahl dies, 9 September 2003, retrieved 4 January 2008. Text from article: "Her Nazi documentaries were hailed as groundbreaking film-making, pioneering techniques involving cranes, tracking rails, and many cameras working at the same time". 

==Early life==

Christened Helene Bertha Amalie also known as Leni Riefenstahl, was born into a prosperous German Protestant family on 22 August 1902. "Leni Riefenstahl" by Leni Riefenstahl; pages: 11, 104 Her affluent father, Alfred Reinfestahl owned a successful heating and ventilation company and he wanted his daughter, Leni to follow him into the world of business. Since Leni was the only child he had at that moment, he wanted her to carry on with the family name and also secure the abundant money he had made. However, her mother, Bertha Scherlach who had been a part time seamstress before her marriage had faith in Leni and believed that her future was in show business. Luckily for the Reinfestahl family, they brought a male child into the world three and half years later after Leni. Heinz Reinfestahl, Lenis brother was later killed at the Russians war front of Hitlers war when he was Thirty Six years old. Leni was one to have fallen in love in the Art field. At the Age of 4, she began to paint and write poetry. Leni was also athlethic that at the age of twelve, she decided to join a Nixe, a gymnastic and swim club. The more she grew, the more her mother perceived her talents in the artistic world. She knew her daughter would grow up to be successful in the field of Art and therefore gave her full support unlike Lenis father who was not interested in any artistic motives in his daughters life. In 1918, when she was 16, she attended a presentation of Snow White from which a developed a very deep interest and she concluded that she wanted to be a dancer. Her father could not agree less with her idea of becoming a dancer. He instead wanted to provide her with an education that could lead to a more dignifying profession rather than being a Dancer. But instead, his wife did not fail to continue to support her daughters passion. They went behind Alfreds back to enroll Leni in dance and ballet classes at the Grimm-Reiter Dance School in Berlin, where she quickly became a star pupil.

Riefenstahl gained a reputation on Berlin's dance circuit and even became more popular with times that she travelled. With more dancing, she began getting feet injuries that had to lead to a knee surgery. Although she was sad about her knee and was also sad at the fact that she might have to stop dancing as a result. Who could have told that this was a blessing in disguise? On a faithful day while she waited at the train station to go resolve her health problem with a family doctor, she came across a captivation poster that enchanted in a second. This moment had to a turning point in Lenis life. This poster in question was in relation of Der Berg des Schichsals: Ein Film von Dr. Arnold Fanck. Unknowing to her she had already missed her appointment to go see her family Doctor. That moment she decides she is done with dancing and would rather go into films. She began visiting the cinema watching pictures and also attending shows of films.

On one of her adventures, she met with Luis Trenker who was one of Arnold Fancks actors. She was also able to meet with Arnold Fanck on an arranged meeting by a friend of hers, Gunther Rahn. Arnold was working on a film in Berlin, where Leni expressed her love and passion for his works and was able to convince him on an acting skill and persuaded him to please feature her in one of his movies after he must have gone through her folder. She later received a package from Dr. Fanck which was a script to Arnold Fancks Der Heilige Berg. That was a dream come through.She made a series of films for Arnold Fanck. He trained her very well and also taught her ways to go about while editing a film. One of Arnold film that brought her outstandingly into limelight was, The White Hell of Pitz Palu (1929), co-directed by G. W. Pabst It saw her fame spread to countries outside of Germany. Riefenstahl produced and directed her own work called Das Blaue Licht (1932), co-written by Carl Mayer and Bla Balzs. This film won the Silver Medal at the Venice Film Festival. In the film, Riefenstahl played an innocent peasant girl who was hated by the villagers because they had the impressions that she was diabolic hence leading to the death of many beings in their village. She was being hated and casted away by so many. She always protected a glowing mountain grotto. The film attracted the attention of Hitler, who believed she epitomized the perfect German female. He saw the tremendous talent in her and the great works that she had done and invited her for a meeting.

==Career==

===Dancer and actress===
Riefenstahl took dancing lessons and attended dance academies from an early age and began her career as a self-styled and well-known interpretive dancer, traveling around Europe and working with director Max Reinhardt in a show funded by Jewish producer Harry Sokal. After injuring her knee while performing in Prague, she saw a film about mountains, entitled Mountain of Destiny (der Berg des Schicksals, 1924), and became fascinated with the possibilities of this sort of film. She went to the Alps to meet the film's director, Arnold Fanck, hoping to secure the lead in his next project. Instead, Riefenstahl met Luis Trenker who had starred in Fanck's films, who wrote to the director about her.
Das Blaue Licht poster, 1934
Riefenstahl went on to star in many of Fancks mountain films as an athletic and adventurous young woman with a suggestive appeal; she became an accomplished mountaineer during the winters of filming on mountains and learned filmmaking techniques. Riefenstahl went on to have a prolific career as an actress in silent films. She was popular with the German public and highly regarded by directors. In 1930, she lost the lead role in the Josef von Sternberg-directed The Blue Angel to her neighbour, Marlene Dietrich. Her last acting role before becoming a director was the 1933 U.S.-German co-productions of the Arnold Fanck-directed, German-language SOS Eisberg and the Tay Garnett-directed, English-language SOS Iceberg. The movies were filmed simultaneously and produced and distributed by Universal Studios. SOS Iceberg was Riefenstahls only English-language film role as an actress. One of her fans at this time was Adolf Hitler. Riefenstahl accompanied Fanck to the 1928 Olympic Games in St. Moritz, where she became interested in athletic photography and filming. 

When presented with the opportunity to direct Das Blaue Licht (The Blue Light) (1932), she took it. Breaking from Fanck's style of setting realistic stories in fairytale mountain settings, Riefenstahlworking with leftist screen writers Bla Balzs and Carl Mayerfilmed Das Blaue Licht as a romantic, wholly mystical tale which she thought of as more fitting to the terrain. She co-wrote, directed and starred in the film and produced it under the banner of her own company, Leni Riefenstahl Productions. Das Blaue Licht won the Silver Medal at the Venice Biennale and played to full audiences all over Europe. However, it was not universally well-received, for which Riefenstahl blamed the critics, many of them Jewish. Upon its 1938 re-release, the names of co-writer Bla Balzs and producer Harry Sokal, both Jewish, were removed from the credits; some reports claim this was at Riefenstahls behest. The director later turned over the name of her Jewish co-screenwriter to Nazi Propagandist Julius Streicher. Riefenstahl received invitations to travel to Hollywood to create films, but she refused the offers in order to stay in Germany with a boyfriend. 

===Propaganda films===

Triumph des Willens poster, 1934
Leni 
Riefenstahl with Heinrich Himmler at Nuremberg in 1934

Riefenstahl heard candidate Adolf Hitler speak at a rally in 1932 and was mesmerized by his talent as a public speaker. Describing the experience in her memoir, Riefenstahl wrote: "I had an almost apocalyptic vision that I was never able to forget. It seemed as if the Earth's surface were spreading out in front of me, like a hemisphere that suddenly splits apart in the middle, spewing out an enormous jet of water, so powerful that it touched the sky and shook the earth". Leni Riefenstahl  A Memoir, St. Martin's Press, 1993, ISBN 0-312-09843-X 
According to the Daily Express of 24 April 1934, Leni Riefenstahl had read Mein Kampf during the making of her film The Blue Light. This newspaper article quotes her as having commented, "The book made a tremendous impression on me. I became a confirmed National Socialist after reading the first page. I felt a man who could write such a book would undoubtedly lead Germany. I felt very happy that such a man had come". She wrote to Hitler requesting a meeting.
After meeting Hitler she was offered the opportunity to direct Sieg des Glaubens (Victory of Faith), an hour-long propaganda film about the fifth Nazi Party rally at Nuremberg in 1933. Riefenstahl agreed to direct the movie after returning from filming a movie in Greenland, and it was funded entirely by the Nazi Party as the credits to the film show quite clearly.
Hitler congratulates Riefenstahl in 1934
Soldiers march past a saluting Hitler in Riefenstahls film of the 1934 Nazi party rally in Nuremberg
Impressed with Riefenstahls work, Hitler asked her to film the upcoming 1934 Party rally in Nuremberg, the sixth such rally. At first, according to Riefenstahls memoir, she resisted and did not want to create further Nazi films; instead, she wanted to direct a feature film based on Hitlers favourite opera, Eugen d'Albert's Tiefland. Riefenstahl received private funding for the production of Tiefland, but the filming in Spain was derailed. Hitler was able to convince her to film Triumph instead, on the condition that she not be required to make further films for the party. She also told Hitler she wanted the freedom to act again: "I would not be able to go on living if I had to give up acting".

The resulting chronicle of the Nuremberg Rally, Triumph des Willens (named by Hitler), was generally recognized as an epic, innovative work of propaganda filmmaking. Triumph of the Will became a rousing success in Germany. It made Riefenstahl the first female film director to achieve international recognition.
In interviews for the 1993 film The Wonderful, Horrible Life of Leni Riefenstahl, Riefenstahl adamantly denied any deliberate attempt to create pro-Nazi propaganda and said she was disgusted that Triumph of the Will was used in such a way.

Despite vowing not to make any more films about the Nazi Party, in 1935, Riefenstahl made the 18-minute Day of Freedom: Armed Forces about the German army. Like Victory of Faith and Triumph of the Will this was filmed at the annual Nazi Party rally at Nuremberg. Riefenstahl never denied making this short 18 minute film. However she always claimed this film was a sub-set of Triumph of the Will added to mollify the German army which felt it was not represented well in the 1934 filming of Triumph of the Will. Over a million Germans had participated in the 1934 rally in Nuremberg. Later, yearly rallies held in Nuremberg got even bigger. The 1935 rally is noted for pronouncements about the status of Jews in Germany. These became known as the Nuremberg Laws which for Jews in Europe would soon become matters of life and death.

In 1936, Hitler invited Riefenstahl to film the Olympic Games in Berlin, a film which Riefenstahl claimed had been commissioned by the International Olympic Committee. She also went to Greece to take footage of the games' original site at Olympia, where she was aided by Greek photographer Nelly, along with route of the inaugural torch relay. This material became Olympia, a successful film which has since been widely noted for its technical and aesthetic achievements. She was one of the first filmmakers to use tracking shots in a documentary, placing a camera on rails to follow the athletes' movement, and she is noted for the slow motion shots included in the film. Riefenstahls work on Olympia has been cited as a major influence in modern sports photography. Riefenstahl filmed competitors of all races, including African-American Jesse Owens in what would later become famous footage.

Riefenstahl with Joseph Goebbels (1937)

Olympia was very successful in Germany after it premiered for Hitlers 49th birthday in 1938, and its international debut led Riefenstahl to embark on an American publicity tour in an attempt to secure commercial release. In 1937, Riefenstahl told a reporter for the Detroit News: "To me, Hitler is the greatest man who ever lived. He truly is without fault, so simple and at the same time possessed of masculine strength". She arrived in New York City in November 1938, five days before Kristallnacht, or 'night of broken glass'; when news of the event reached the U.S., Riefenstahl maintained that Hitler was innocent. On 18 November, she was received by Henry Ford in Detroit and Olympia was shown at "The Chicago Engineers Club" two days later. Avery Brundage stated that it was "The greatest Olympic film ever made" and Riefenstahl left for Hollywood, where she was received by the German Consul Georg Gyssling, on 24 November. She negotiated with Louis B. Mayer and on 8 December, Walt Disney brought her on a three-hour tour showing her the on-going production of Fantasia. "Olympia in America, 1938: Leni Riefenstahl, Hollywood, and the Kristallnacht" by Cooper C. Graham (LOC), Historical Journal of Film, Radio and Television, Vol. 13, No. 4,1993 

After the Goebbels Diaries surfaced, researchers learned that Riefenstahl had been friendly with Joseph Goebbels and his wife, Magda, attending the opera with them and coming to the Goebbels' parties. However, Riefenstahl maintained that Goebbels was upset that she had rejected his advances and was jealous of her influence on Hitler, seeing her as an internal threat; therefore, his diaries could not be trusted. By later accounts, Goebbels thought highly of Riefenstahls filmmaking but was angered with what he saw as her overspending on the Nazi-provided filmmaking budgets. 

==World War II==
During the Invasion of Poland, Riefenstahl was photographed in Poland wearing a military uniform and a pistol on her belt in the company of German soldiers; Riefenstahl in military uniform, image from: Steven Bach (2007). Leni  The Life and Work of Leni Riefenstahl. ;cinki Tamy, Polityka, 5 October 2003 she had gone to the site of the battle as a war correspondent. On 12 September 1939 she was in the town of Koskie when 30 civilians were executed there, in retaliation for an alleged attack on German soldiers. According to her memoir, Riefenstahl tried to intervene but a furious German soldier held her at gunpoint and threatened to shoot her on the spot. She claimed she did not realize the victims were Jews. Closeup photographs of a distraught Riefenstahl survive from that day. Nevertheless, by 5 October 1939, Riefenstahl was back in occupied Poland filming Hitlers victory parade in Warsaw. She left Poland and apparently chose not to make any Nazi-related movies after this, however. 

On 14 June 1940, the day Paris was declared an open city by the French and occupied by German troops, Riefenstahl wrote to Hitler in a telegram, With indescribable joy, deeply moved and filled with burning gratitude, we share with you, my Fhrer, your and Germany's greatest victory, the entry of German troops into Paris. You exceed anything human imagination has the power to conceive, achieving deeds without parallel in the history of mankind. How can we ever thank you? Die Neue Rechte, by Kay Sokolowsky, Konkret 3, 1999: "Mit unbeschreiblicher Freude, tief bewegt und erfllt mit heissem Dank, erleben wir mit Ihnen mein Fhrer, Ihren und Deutschlands grssten Sieg, den Einzug Deutscher Truppen in Paris. Mehr als jede Vorstellungskraft menschlicher Fantasie vollbringen Sie Taten, die ohnegleichen in der Geschichte der Menschheit sind, wie sollen wir Ihnen nur danken? Glckwnsche auszusprechen, das ist viel zu wenig, um Ihnen die Gefhle auszusprechen, die mich bewegen". She later explained: Everyone thought the war was over, and in that spirit I sent the cable to Hitler. Riefenstahl was friends with Hitler for 12 years, and reports vary as to whether she ever had an intimate relationship with him. See Infield, Glenn B. Eva and Adolf New York:1974--Grosset and Dunlap (Interviews with former SS officers who had been close to Hitler and Eva Braun) According to Ernst Hanfstaengl, who was a close friend of Hitler throughout the later 1920s and early 1930s, Riefenstahl tried to begin a relationship with Hitler early on but was turned down by him. For whatever reason, her relationship with Hitler had declined by 1944, when her brother Heinz died on the Russian Front of the war. 

After the Nuremberg rallies trilogy and Olympia, Riefenstahl began work on the movie she had tried and failed to direct once before, Tiefland. On Hitlers direct order the German government paid her 7 million reichsmarks in compensation. Jrgen Trimborn : Riefenstahl, Berlin 2002, page. 325 From 23 September until 13 November 1940 she filmed in Krn near Mittenwald. The extras playing Spanish women and farmers were drawn from gypsies (Sinti) detained in a camp at Salzburg-Maxglan who were forced to work with her. Filming at the Babelsberg Studios near Berlin began 18 months later in April 1942 and lasted into summer. This time Sinti and Roma from the Marzahn detention camp near Berlin were compelled to work as extras. Kein Vergessen, 70. Jahrestag der Errichtung des Zwangslagers fr Sinti und Roma in Berlin  Marzahn. The photo on page 13 shows Riefenstahl during the making of the film. See also: Leni Riefenstahls 'Gypsy Question', by Susan Tegel, in: journal Historical Journal of Film, Radio and Television, Volume 23, Issue 1 March 2003, pages 3  10 A surviving document from camp Marzahn shows a list of 65 inmates who were ordered to serve in the production. Sozialausgleichsabgabe fr die Zigeuner bei dem Film Tiefland ab 27.4.42 50 stills from the filming in Krn near Mittenwald were later found and from these, surviving prisoners were able to identify 29 camp inmates who worked for Riefenstahl and were then deported to Auschwitz-Birkenau in the first weeks of March 1943 following Himmlers December 1942 decree. In a decree dated 16 December 1942, Himmler ordered the deportation of Gypsies and part-Gypsies to AuschwitzBirkenau. See: Sinti and Roma, ed. Holocaust Museum Fourteen of them, with concentration camp numbers, were: Robert Adler (Z-5792); Karl Dews (Z-4145), Heini Ernst (Z-5696), Wilhelm Ritter (Z-4883), Albrecht Rose (Z-752), Charlotte Rosenberg (Z-5406), Werner Rosenberg (Z-4860), Otto Schmelzer (Z-5448); Karl Steinbach (Z-4875), Ludwig Weisenbach (Z-4857), Hermann Wei (Z-644), Johann Wei (Z-643), Willy Zander (Z-5933); Hans Zens (Z-178). Berliner Zeitung, 17 February 2001, Riefenstahls Liste. Zum gedenken an die ermordeten Komparsen, by Reimar Gilsenbach and Otto Rosenberg Almost to the end of her life, despite overwhelming evidence that concentration camp occupants had been forced to work on the movie unpaid, Riefenstahl continued to maintain all the film extras survived and that she had met them after the war. Leni Riefenstahl: A Life by Trimbonr, p. 206-8 Riefenstahl sued a filmmaker, Nina Gladitz, who said Riefenstahl personally chose the extras at their holding camp; Gladitz had found one of the Gypsy survivors and matched his memory with stills of the movie for a documentary Gladitz was filming. The German court found largely in favour of Gladitz, agreeing that Riefenstahl had known the extras were from a concentration camp, and they agreed with Riefenstahl on only one count (rejecting the claim that Riefenstahl had informed the Gypsies that they would be sent to the Auschwitz camp after filming was completed). 

This issue came up again in 2002, when Riefenstahl was one hundred years old and she was taken to court by a Roma group for denying the Nazis had exterminated gypsies. Riefenstahl apologized, saying, I regret that Sinti and Roma had to suffer during the period of National Socialism. It is known today that many of them were murdered in concentration camps.

The last time Riefenstahl saw Hitler was when she married Peter Jacob on 21 March 1944, shortly after she had introduced Jacob to Hitler in Kitzbhel, Austria. Riefenstahl and Jacob divorced in 1946; Jacob became involved with Henriette von Schirach.

In October 1944 the production of Tiefland moved to Barrandov Studios in Prague for interior filming. Lavish sets made these shots some of the most costly in the film but they were finished within days. The film was not edited and released until almost 10 years later.

As Germanys military collapsed in the spring of 1945 Riefenstahl left Berlin and was hitchhiking with a group of men, trying to reach her mother, when she was taken into custody by American troops. She walked out of a holding camp, beginning a series of escapes and arrests across the chaotic landscape. At last making it back home on a bicycle, she found that American troops had seized her house, then was surprised by how kindly they treated her. courses.washington.edu, Leni Riefenstahl  biography, retrieved 11 September 2008 

==Post-war life and career==

=== Detention and trials ===
Writer Budd Schulberg, assigned by the US Navy to the OSS for intelligence work while attached to John Fords documentary unit, was ordered to arrest Riefenstahl at her chalet in Kitzbhel, Austria, ostensibly to have her identify the faces of Nazi war criminals in German film footage captured by the Allied troops. Riefenstahl claimed she was not aware of the nature of the internment camps. According to Schulberg, She gave me the usual song and dance. She said, Of course, you know, I'm really so misunderstood. I'm not political. However, when Riefenstahl later claimed she had been forced to follow Goebbels orders under threat of being sent to a concentration camp, Schulberg asked her why she should have been afraid if she did not know concentration camps existed. When shown photographs of the camps, Riefenstahl reportedly reacted with horror and tears.

Riefenstahl continued to maintain she was fascinated by the National Socialists but politically nave and ignorant about any war crimes. From 1945 through 1948 she was held in sundry American and French-run detention camps and prisons along with house arrest but although Riefenstahl was tried four times by various postwar authorities, she was never convicted through denazification trials either for her alleged role as a propagandist or for the use of concentration camp inmates in her films. However, she was found to be a fellow traveler who was sympathetic to the Nazis.

Riefenstahl later said that her biggest regret was meeting Hitler: It was the biggest catastrophe of my life. Until the day I die people will keep saying, Leni is a Nazi, and Ill keep saying, But what did she do? Although she won more than 50 libel cases against people accusing her of collaborating with the Nazis, there are many unanswered questions about her relation to National Socialism in particular and fascism more generally.

=== Thwarted film projects ===
Most of the negatives for Riefenstahls finished films and other production materials relating to her unfinished projects were lost towards the end of the war. The French government confiscated all of her editing equipment, along with the production reels of Tiefland. After years of legal wrangling these were returned to her, but the French government had reportedly damaged some of the film stock whilst trying to develop and edit it and a few key scenes were missing (although Riefenstahl was surprised to find the original negatives for Olympia in the same shipment). She edited and dubbed what elements were left and Tiefland premiered on 11 February 1954 in Stuttgart, however, it was denied entry into the Cannes Film Festival. Although Riefenstahl lived for almost another half century, Tiefland was her last feature film. news.bbc.co.uk, Nazi propaganda photos withdrawn, 15 June 2005, retrieved 11 September 2008 

Riefenstahl tried many times (15 by her count) to make films during the 1950s and 1960s but was met with resistance, public protests and sharp criticism. Many of her filmmaking peers in Hollywood had fled Nazi Germany and were unsympathetic to her. Although both film professionals and investors were willing to support her work, most of the projects she attempted were stopped owing to ever-renewed and highly negative publicity about her past work for the Third Reich. In 1956, inspired by Ernest Hemingway's 1935 novel Green Hills of Africa, she began an ambitious film project in Africa drawn from another novel called Schwarze Fracht (Black Freight). While scouting shooting locations, she almost died from injuries received in a truck accident. After waking up from a coma in a Nairobi hospital, she finished writing the script there, but was soon thoroughly thwarted by uncooperative locals, the Suez Canal crisis, and bad weather (only test shots were ever made).

In 1954, Jean Cocteau insisted on Tiefland being shown at the Cannes Film Festival, which he was running that year. Cocteau greatly admired the film. In 1960, Riefenstahl unsuccessfully attempted to prevent filmmaker Erwin Leiser from juxtaposing scenes from Triumph of the Will with footage from concentration camps in his film Mein Kampf. Riefenstahl had high hopes for a collaboration with Cocteau called Friedrich und Voltaire, wherein Cocteau was to play two roles. They thought the film might symbolize the "love-hate relationship" between Germany and France. Cocteau's illness and 1963 death put an end to this project. A musical remake of The Blue Light with L. Ron Hubbard, a small-time U.S. pulp science fiction writer, also fell through. 

=== Photography and final film ===
In the 1960s, Riefenstahl became interested in Africa from Hemingway's book and from the photographs of George Rodger. Rodger, who had taken the first photographs of the Bergen-Belsen concentration camp, refused to help Riefenstahl meet Africans, citing their respective backgrounds. Riefenstahl took up photography, documenting a diverse array of subjects. She traveled many times to Africa to photograph the Nuba tribes in Sudan, with whom she sporadically lived, learning about their culture so she could photograph them more easily. She began a lifelong companionship with her cameraman Horst Kettner, who was 40 years her junior and assisted her with the photographs; they were together from the time she was 60 and he was 20. She was granted Sudanese citizenship for her services to the country, becoming the first foreigner to receive a Sudanese passport. Leni Riefenstahl interviewed by Kevin Brownlow Taschen 

Her books with photographs of the tribes were published in 1974 and 1976 as The Last of the Nuba and The People of Kau and were both international bestsellers. Leni Riefenstahl (obituary) The Times. 10 September 2003 While heralded by many as outstanding colour photographs, they were harshly criticized by Susan Sontag, who claimed in a review that they were further evidence of Riefenstahls fascist aesthetics. Fascinating Fascism, 1975 The Art Directors Club of Germany awarded Leni a gold medal for the best photographic achievement of 1975. She also sold the pictures to German magazines. She photographed the 1972 Olympic Games in Munich and rock star Mick Jagger and his wife Bianca for the Sunday Times. Years later she photographed Las Vegas entertainers Siegfried and Roy. She befriended Andy Warhol and was a Guest of Honour at the 1976 Olympic Games in Montreal. 

In her later years, Riefenstahl became known for her longevity and physical stamina, although she often suffered considerable pain from old injuries. At age 72, Riefenstahl began pursuing underwater photography after lying about her age to gain certification for scuba diving (she cut 20 years off her age). In 1978, she published a book of her sub-aquatic photographs, Korallengrten (Coral Gardens) followed by the 1990 book; Wunder unter Wasser (Wonder under Water). On 22 August 2002, her 100th birthday, Riefenstahl released a film called Impressionen unter Wasser (Underwater Impressions), an idealized documentary of life in the oceans and her first film in over 25 years. At age 100, she was still photographing marine life and gained the distinction of being the world's oldest scuba diver. Riefenstahl was a member of Greenpeace for 8 years. Harper's Index. Volume 1 

She survived a helicopter crash in Sudan in 2000 while trying to learn the fates of her Nuba friends during the Sudanese civil war and was airlifted to a Munich hospital. 

After Riefenstahl celebrated her 101st birthday on 22 August 2003 at the extravagant hotel in Feldafing, nearby her home at Lake Starnberg in the Bavarian province of Germany, which was an extraordinary festivity. The guest list consisted of 200 people including Germany most prominent socialites such as glitzy magicians Siegfried and Roy. Furthermore, the following day after her birthday celebration, she became ill.

According to her assistant Horst Kettner who was her domestic partner for 38 years; he stated that, Ms. Riefenstahl is in great pain and she has become very weak and is taking painkillers. Her health had been deteriorating for nearly a month. Leni Riefenstahl died in her sleep on the late evening of 8 September 2003 at her home in Pcking, Germany. She had been suffering from cancer for a while before her death. She was buried in Munich's Waldfriedhof cemetery.

There was varied response in the obituary pages of leading publications, although most recognized her technical breakthroughs in film making:

The Daily Telegraph wrote that she 
The Independent wrote that

The Independent also offered
 

== Views of critics ==
In his book The Story of Film, film scholar Mark Cousins claims, "Next to Orson Welles and Alfred Hitchcock, Leni Riefenstahl was the most technically talented Western film maker of her era".

Reviewer Gary Morris called Riefenstahl "an artist of unparalleled gifts, a woman in an industry dominated by men, one of the great formalists of the cinema on a par with Eisenstein or Welles". Bright Lights Film Journal, Lonesome Leni (film review), November 1999, retrieved 4 January 2008 Pauline Kael called Triumph and Olympia "the two greatest films ever directed by a woman". 

New York Times film critic Hal Erickson states that while the Triumph of the Wills Jewish Question is mainly unmentioned, filmmaker Leni Riefenstahl prefers to concentrate on cheering crowds, precision marching, military bands, and Hitlers climactic speech, all orchestrated, choreographed and illuminated on a scale that makes Griffith and DeMille look like poverty-row directors." Erickson, Hal. Rev. of Triumph of the Will, dir. Leni Riefenstahl. New York Times. Web The recurring topic of a female director with such prowess and force executing such a work was apparently resented by propaganda minister Joseph Goebbels but finally had to admit that her images, achieved through the use of 30 cameras and 120 assistants, were worth a thousand speeches. While it may be possibly the most powerful propaganda film ever made, Triumph of the Will is also, in retrospect, one of the most horrifying. 

New York Times film critic Hal Erickson says of Riefenstahl, Having proven her mettle with her still-astonishing propaganda epic Triumph of the Will, German filmmaker Leni Riefenstahl furthered her reputation with the two-part Olympia. Erickson, Hal. Rev. of Olympia, dir. Leni Riefenstahl. New York Times. Web. While the first half of the film is unique in its portrayal of non-true Aryan athletes, especially the emerging star of Jesse Owens, The second half of the film is the more impressive technically, with Riefenstahl utilizing an astonishing variety of camera speeds and angles to record the diving competition. Showing Riefenstahls work ethic and perseverance, her crew began Working 16 hours a day, seven days a week. Though, Riefenstahl and her staff were often denied desirable camera angles, they were forced to improvise with telephoto lenses. The results of this ingenuity are far more dramatically impressive than the up-close-and-personal approach taken by contemporary TV cameramen. 

Critic Judith Thurman says in her piece in the The New Yorker that Riefenstahls genius has rarely been questioned, even by critics who despise the service to which she lent it. Riefenstahl was a consummate stylist obsessed with bodies in motion, particularly those of dancers and athletes. Thurman, Judith. Where Theres A Will. The New Yorker 19 March 2007. Print. Her two most famous films, Olympia and Triumph of the Will are critiqued by Thurman, who says, In both, Riefenstahl relies heavily for her transitions on portentous cutaways to clouds, mist, statuary, foliage, and rooftops. Her reaction shots have a tedious sameness: shining, ecstatic facesnearly all young and Aryan, except for Hitlers. Thurman claims that very few people actually see Riefenstahls full work, saying many people, even film buffs, seem never to have seenor are unaware of never having seenRiefenstahls documentaries in their entirety, which leads people to believe that If, by definition, the trailer for a so-called masterpiece can never be greater than the film itself, then Riefenstahls legacy fails the test. 

Writer Richard Corliss wrote in Time magazine that he was "impressed by Riefenstahls standing as a total auteur: producer, writer, director, editor and, in the fiction films, actress." Corliss, Richard. "That Old Feeling: Leni's Triumph." Time 22 August 2002. Print. On the subject of her films being classic works, and not simply propaganda, Corliss argues that "The issues her films and her career raise are as complex and they are important, and her vilifiers tend to reduce the argument to one of a director's complicity in atrocity or her criminal ignorance." The reason, Corliss states, that people discredit her work, and continue to do so, is the fact that she is a woman, saying, "Riefenstahls sin, I suspect, was being a woman  a woman who, uniquely, dared to play the man's game of filmmaking. Play and win, for, by any disinterested standard, Triumph of the Will and Olympia are towering artistic achievements." Even though "she shot her last feature film, Tiefland, in the early 40s, and released it in 1954, Riefenstahl is still the world's most controversial director; her name summons the conflicts of defiant artistry and compromised morality." But regardless of political opinion "Riefenstahls visual style  heroic, sensuous, attuned to the mists and myths of nature" will always be celebrated, though at the time it was not in "critical fashion." "Finally, Riefenstahl was a woman, a beautiful woman. When she was seen with Hitler, their photos made the world's front pages. And the image stuck." 
In 2008, Yukihiko Yoshida did a study called Yoshida,Yukihiko, Leni Riefenstahl and German Expressionism: A Study of Visual Cultural Studies Using Transdisciplinary Semantic Space of Specialized Dictionaries ,Technoetic Arts: a journal of speculative research (Editor Roy Ascott),Volume 8, Issue3,intellect,2008 Leni Riefenstahl and German expressionism: research in Visual Cultural Studies using the trans-disciplinary semantic spaces of specialized dictionaries. The study took databases of images tagged with connotative and denotative keywords (a search engine) and found Riefenstahls imagery had the same qualities as imagery tagged degenerate in the title of the exhibition, "Degenerate Art" in Germany at 1937.

== Film biographies ==

In 1993, she was the subject of the Emmy Award-winning German documentary film The Wonderful, Horrible Life of Leni Riefenstahl, directed by Ray Mller. International Emmy Awards. 1993. IMDB. Retrieved 21 December 2012. Riefenstahl appeared in the film and answered several questions and detailed the production of her films. Wonderful, Horrible Life of Leni Riefenstahl (review) New York Times. 14 October 1993 The Wonderful Horrible Life Of Leni Riefenstahl (review) Chicago Sun-Times. 24 June 1994 The Wonderful, Horrible Life of Leni Riefenstahl was an idea she had. Leni was motivated by her old age and for some time was working on her memoirs, decided to commission this documentary to tell her life story about the struggles she had gone through in her personal life, her film-making career, and what people thought of her. In the documentary Leni Riefenstahl said that her biggest mistake was meeting Hitler: "It was the biggest catastrophe of my life. Until the day I die people will keep saying, 'Leni is a Nazi'. At one point Muller asked a specific question to Leni about what her films were meant to be and not what most people thought they were and she insisted that her films were never meant to advance the political program of National Socialism, that she looked at the world with the pure, disinterested eye of an artist, and cared only about the noble task of giving vivid cinematic form to contemporary events. She was also the subject of Mller's 2000 documentary film , documenting her return to Sudan to visit the Nuba.

The Guardian reported in April 2007 that British screenwriter Rupert Walters was writing a movie based on Riefenstahls life which would star actress Jodie Foster. The project had been in the works for more than seven years under the working title The Leni Riefenstahl Project. The project is co-produced by Primary Pictures and Foster's own Egg Pictures. Foster said in 1999, "There is no other woman in the 20th century who has been so admired and vilified simultaneously". The project had not been able to capture Riefenstahls consent while she was alive, since Riefenstahl requested the ability to veto any scenes she did not agree with; Riefenstahl also preferred Sharon Stone as the star of the movie rather than Foster. Both Foster and Madonna had sought the rights to Riefenstahls autobiography since the early 1990s. Director Paul Verhoeven corresponded with Riefenstahl about a separate film biography. In 2011, the director Steven Soderbergh revealed that he had spent 6 months working on a biopic of Riefenstahl. He ultimately abandoned the project over concerns of its commercial prospects and instead pursued the pandemic thriller, Contagion. Steven Soderbergh Reveals He Dropped A Leni Riefenstahl Biopic To Do Contagion Instead Indiewire. 11 March 2011 

== In popular culture ==
Riefenstahls filming merits are discussed between characters in the Quentin Tarantino film Inglourious Basterds. Tarantino explained the significant presence of Third Reich filmmaking in his film: Riefenstahl and Goebbels despised each other. He was in charge of every single person in the German film industry with the sole exception of her. Quentin Tarantino's 'Basterds' is a glorious mash-up LA Times. 16 August 2009 

Leni, an award winning play by Sarah Greenman, is based on the life and work of Leni Riefenstahl. It saw productions in Oakland, California in 2004, Portland, Oregon in 2007, Seattle, Washington in 2008, and was showcased at the New York Fringe Festival in 2007.

A play based on Riefenstahl, Playing Leni (originally titled Dysfictional Circumstances) by David Robson and John Stanton, won the Hotel Obligado Audience Choice Award for New Work at the 2010 Spark Showcase in Philadelphia. It subsequently received a staged reading at the Philly Fringe Festival and was produced in May 2011 by Madhouse Theater.

Riefenstahl was referenced a number of times in the movie-lampooning television show, Mystery Science Theater 3000. In a season 8 episode of the show, as the characters in the show watch the 1950s horror film The Leech Woman, the lead female character of the film is transformed to a younger version of herself with a potion. Robot Tom Servo, upon seeing the newly rejuvenated character, says: They turned her into Leni Riefenstahl! The director was also mentioned by an MST3k character as they watched a short 1950s film Century 21 Calling; at one point Crow rhetorically asks Did Leni Riefenstahl direct this? as the blond, idealized-teens enthusiastically cavort at the Seattle World's Fair.

== Works ==

=== Filmography ===

Year Film Credited as 
 Director Producer Writer Actor Role 
 1925 Ways to Strength and Beauty (Wege zu Kraft und Schnheit) Dancer 
 1926 The Holy Mountain (Der heilige Berg) Diotima 
 1927 The Great Leap (Der groe Sprung) Gita 
 1928 Das Schicksal derer von Habsburg (Fate of the House of Habsburg) Maria Vetsera 
 1929 The White Hell of Pitz Palu (Die weisse Hlle vom Piz Pal) Maria Maioni 
 1930 Storm over Mont Blanc (Strme ber dem Mont Blanc) Hella Armstrong 
 1931 Der weisse Rausch (The White Ecstasy) Leni 
 1932 The Blue Light (Das Blaue Licht) Junta 
 1933 S.O.S. Eisberg Ellen Lawrence 
 Der Sieg des Glaubens (Victory of Faith) 
 1935 (Day of Freedom: Our Armed Forces) 
 Triumph of the Will (Triumph des Willens) 
 1937 Wilde Wasser (Wild Water) 
 1938 Olympia 1. Teil  Fest der Vlker (Festival of Nations) Nude model (uncredited) 
 Olympia 2. Teil  Fest der Schnheit (Festival of Beauty) 
 1954 Tiefland (Lowlands) Martha 
 2002 Impressionen unter Wasser (Underwater Impressions) 
 Year Film Director Producer Writer Actor Role 

=== Photographer ===
* The Last of the Nuba (Harper, 1974; St. Martin's Press, 1995, ISBN 0-312-13642-0)
* The People of Kau (Harper, 1976; St. Martin's Press reprint edition, 1997, ISBN 0-312-16963-9)
* Vanishing Africa (Harmony First American edition, 1982, ISBN 0-517-54914-X)
* Africa (Taschen, 2002, ISBN 3-8228-1616-7)
* Riefenstahl Olympia (Taschen, 2002, ISBN 3-8228-1945-X)

=== Author ===
* Kampf in Schnee und Eis (Leipzig, 1933)
* Hinter den Kulissen des Reichsparteitags-Films Hinter den Kulissen des Reichsparteitags-Films complete online text and photos (Mnchen, 1935)
* Schnheit im olympischen Kampf (Berlin, 1937)
* Die Nuba Eng: The Last of the Nuba (Mnchen, 1973)
* Die Nuba von Kau Eng: The People of Kau (Mnchen, 1976)
* Korallengrten Eng: Coral Gardens (Mnchen, 1978)
* Mein Afrika Eng: Vanishing Africa (Mnchen, 1982)
* Leni Riefenstahl's Memoiren Eng: The Sieve of Time: The Memoirs of Leni Riefenstahl (Mnchen, 1987)
* Wunder unter Wasser Eng: Wonder under Water (Mnchen, 1990)

In translation:

* by Leni Riefenstahl, autobiography (Picador Reprint edition, 1995, ISBN 0-312-11926-7)
* The People of Kau by Leni Riefenstahl, English edition 1976, republished by St. Martin's Press in 1997, ISBN 0-312-16963-9
* The Last of the Nuba by Leni Riefenstahl, English edition 1976, republished by St. Martin's Press in 1995, ISBN 0-312-13642-0
* Coral Gardens by Leni Riefenstahl (Harpercollins 1st U.S. edition, 1978, ISBN 0-06-013591-3)

== See also ==
* Festliches Nrnberg
* Walter Frentz
* Manfred George
* Nuremberg rallies

== Notes and references ==

58) Leni Riefenstahl by Leni Riefenstahl
59) Leni Riefenstahl: A Life by Jurgen Trimborn
60) Leni: The Life & Works of Leni Riefenstahl by Streven Bach.

== Further reading ==
* Leni Riefenstahl Bibliography (via UC Berkeley)
* Over 1700 references in English, German and French
* Loiperdinger, Martin/David Culbert: "Leni Riefenstahl, the SA and the Nazi Party Rally Films, Nuremberg 19331934: 'Sieg des Glaubens' and 'Triumph des Willens' ", in: Historical Journal of Film and Television, 8/1/1988, 338.
* Loiperdinger, Martin: "Sieg des Glaubens. Ein gelungenes Experiment nationalsozialistischer Filmpropaganda", in: Zeitschrift fr Pdagogik, 31/1993, 3548.
* Fabe, Marilyn: Triumph of the Will. The Arrival of Hitler. Notes and Analysis. Mount Vernon/N.Y. 1975.
* Heinzelmann, Herbert: "Die Heilige Messe des Reichsparteitags. Zur Zeichensprache von Leni Riefenstahls 'Triumph des Willens' ", in: Bernd Organ/Wolfgang W. Wei: Faszination und Gewalt. Zur politischen sthetik des Nationalsozialismus, Nrnberg 1992.
* Loiperdinger, Martin/David Culbert: "Leni Riefenstahl, the SA and the Nazi Party Rally Films, Nuremberg 19331934: 'Sieg des Glaubens' and 'Triumph des Willens' ", in: Historical Journal of Film and Television, 8/1/1988, 338.
* Schwartzman, R.J.: Racial Theory and Propaganda in 'Triumph of the Will' ", in: Florida State University on Literatur and Film, 18/1993, 136153.
* Dassanowsky, Robert von: "Wherever you may run, he will find you: Leni Riefenstahl's Self-Reflection and Romantic Transcendence of Nazism in Tiefland." in Camera Obscura, 35 1996/97, 107-29.
* Dassanowsky, Robert von: "'A Mountain of a Ship': Locating the Bergfilm in James Cameron's 'Titanic' ", in: Cinema Journal 40, No. 4, Summer 2001, 18-35.
* Leni Riefenstahl  A Memoir, St. Martin's Press, 1993, ISBN 0-312-09843-X
* A Portrait of Leni Riefenstahl by Audrey Salkeld, 1996, ISBN 0-7126-7338-5
* The Wonderful, Horrible Life of Leni Riefenstahl, documentary film directed by Ray Mller (1994)
* Leni Riefenstahl: The fallen film goddess by Glenn B. Infield (Crowell, 1976, ISBN 0-690-01167-9)
* Leni Riefenstahl: The Seduction of Genius by Rainer Rother, translated by Martin H. Bott (Continuum International Publishing Group reprint edition, 2003, ISBN 0-8264-7023-8)
* The Films of Leni Riefenstahl by David B. Hinton, Scarecrow Press 3rd edition, 2000, ISBN 1-57886-009-1
* Leni Riefenstahl: Five Lives by Angelika Taschen, 2000, ISBN 3-8228-6216-9
* Leni Riefenstahl: A Life by Jurgen Trimborn, Translation by Edna McCown, Farrar, Straus and Giroux, 2007, ISBN 0-374-18493-3
* Yoshida,Yukihiko, Leni Riefenstahl and German Expressionism: A Study of Visual Cultural Studies Using Transdisciplinary Semantic Space of Specialized Dictionaries, Technoetic Arts: a journal of speculative research (Editor Roy Ascott),Volume 8, Issue3,intellect,2008
* , ISBN 0-375-40400-7

== External links ==

* 
* 
* 
* The Wonderful, Horrible Life of Leni Riefenstahl, 3-hour video on YouTube, with English subtitles and English narration.
* Biography from University of Washington 
* Das Blaue Licht: The Art of Leni Riefenstahl Unofficial biographical website endorsed by the Riefenstahl Estate
* Stills of Walter Riml, photographer of the film Das blaue Licht
* Women's History collection
* "Fascinating Fascism", a critical 1975 essay by Susan Sontag (out of Under the Sign of Saturn)
* List of documentaries about and or with Leni Riefenstahl (19652004)
* Leni Riefenstahl: Film Maker Extraordinaire or Nazi Stooge? National Centre for History Education  Australia
* Robert Dassanowsky's Tiefland article
* Das blaue Licht essay
* Deneulin Tiefland essay
* Leni Riefenstahl and her work, a bibliography
* Photographs of Leni Riefenstahl
* Olimpia and the photography of Willy Zielke
* "Leni Riefenstahl - propagandist for the Third Reich" Obituary by Stefan Steinberg on the World Socialist Web Site



[[Labatt Brewing Company]]

Labatt Brewing Company Ltd. () is a Canadian beer company founded by John Kinder Labatt in 1847 in London, Ontario. In 1995, it was purchased by Belgian brewer Interbrew; it is now part of Anheuser-Busch InBev. Labatt is the largest brewer in Canada.

In the United States, Labatt brand beers are sold under license by Labatt USA, which since 2009 has been fully independent of the Canadian firm and a subsidiary of the privately held North American Breweries of Rochester, New York.

== History ==
In 1915, Prohibition began in Canada when public bars were banned in Saskatchewan. A year later prohibition was instituted in Ontario as well, affecting all 64 breweries in the province. Although some provinces totally banned alcohol manufacture, some permitted production for export to the United States. Labatt survived by producing full strength beer for export south of the border and by introducing two "temperance ales" with less than two per cent alcohol for sale in Ontario. However, the Canadian beer industry suffered a second blow when Prohibition began in the U.S. in 1919. When Prohibition was repealed in Ontario in 1926, just 15 breweries remained and only Labatt retained its original management. This resulted in a strengthened industry position. In 1945 Labatt became a publicly traded company with the issuance of 900,000 shares.

John and Hugh Labatt, grandsons of founder John K. Labatt, launched Labatt 50 in 1950 to commemorate 50 years of partnership. The first light ale introduced in Canada, Labatt 50 was Canadas best-selling beer until 1979.

In 1951, Labatt launched its Pilsener Lager; when it was introduced in Manitoba, the beer was nicknamed "Blue" for the colour of its label and the company's support of Winnipeg's Canadian Football League (CFL) franchise, the Blue Bombers. The nickname stuck and in 1979 Labatt Blue claimed top spot in the Canadian beer market. It lost this status in the late eighties to Molson Canadian, but over the next decade, periodically regained top spot as consumer preferences fluctuated. In 2004, Budweiser took the top spot, pushing Blue to third for the first time in twenty-five years. http://www.cassies.ca/caselibrary/winners/MolsonsCase.pdf This Bud's for you, Canada | Macleans.ca - Culture - Media However, since Labatt has brewed Budweiser (and other Anheuser-Busch products) in Canada under licence since the 1980s, http://www.budweiser.ca/beers.php Labatt likely did not suffer from this shift. Moreover, Labatt Blue remains the best selling Canadian beer in the world based upon worldwide sales.

Labatt was also the majority owner of the Toronto Blue Jays from their inception in 1976 until 1995, when Interbrew purchased Labatt.

Labatt's innovations include the introduction of the first twist-off cap on a refillable bottle in 1984. In 1989, Labatt's had the opportunity to hire Canadian model Pamela Anderson as a Labatt's Blue Zone Girl after she was picked out of the crowd by a TV camera man at a BC Lions football game wearing a Blue Zone crop-top. Photographer and boyfriend, Dann Ilicic, produced the Blue Zone Girl poster on his own after Labatt's refused to have anything to do with it. Later, Labatt's did buy 1000 posters to deal with consumer demand.

In 1995, Labatt was acquired by the large Belgian multinational brewer InBev (then Interbrew), the world market leader.

Labatt is part-owner of Brewers Retail Inc., operator of The Beer Store retail chain, whichprotected by legislationhas over 90% market share of Ontario off-premise beer sales.

In early 2007, Labatt also acquired Lakeport Brewing Company of Hamilton, Ontario.

In 2009, the company sold Labatt USA, including the American rights to its core Labatt products (such as Blue, Blue Light, and Labatt 50) to North American Breweries, and agreed to brew those brands on Labatt USA's behalf until 2012. This sale was mandated by the U.S. Department of Justice for competitive reasons following InBev's merger with Anheuser-Busch, since Budweiser and Labatt Blue were both among the top brands in upstate New York, despite the latter having less than 1% market share in the U.S. overall. 

The sale did not include U.S. rights to Labatt products not carrying the "Labatt" label, such as Kokanee or Alexander Keith's, which are now distributed in the U.S. by Anheuser-Busch. Moreover, the underlying intellectual property (such as the Labatt trademarks) remains the property of the Canadian firm. Finally, the sale did not affect Labatt's Canadian operations in any way; Anheuser-Busch InBev retains full control of the Labatt brand portfolio within Canada.

According to a report by Beer Marketer's Insights and published by USA Today on December 9, 2013, sales of Labatt Blue declined by 28.3% between 2007 and 2012. The article listed Labatt Blue as one of "nine beers many Americans no longer drink." 

==Operations==
Canada
* London, Ontario
* St. John's, Newfoundland and Labrador
* Montreal, Quebec
* Halifax, Nova Scotia
* Creston, British Columbia
* Edmonton, Alberta
United States
* Buffalo, New York (Original and current United States Headquarters)
* Norwalk, Connecticut (One time US headquarters)

Labatts US headquarters were originally located in Buffalo for some years. Labatt then decided to relocate their headquarters to Norwalk, Connecticut for a time. In 2007 Labatt decided to relocate their US operations back to Buffalo due to strong sales in the city and closer proximity to their Ontario operations. Labatt USA is now owned by North American Breweries of Rochester, NY.

Labatt's Toronto brewery ceased operations in 2006 and was demolished by 2007, thus ending the brewery's ties to the city.

==Brands==
Labatt 50 is a 5% abv Blonde ale launched in 1950 to commemorate 50 years of partnership between the grandson of the brewer's founder. The first light-tasting ale introduced in Canada, Labatt 50 was Canadas best-selling beer until 1979 when, with the increasing popularity of lagers, it was surpassed by Labatt Blue. Labatt 50 is fermented using a special ale yeast, in use at Labatt since 1933.

Labatt Blue is a 5% abv pale lager. There are 11.5 USfloz of beer in a bottle of Labatt Blue. There are 355mL of beer in a standard can of Labatt Blue/Bleue in Canada with other volumes available in specific regions of the country.

Since Labatt Blue became Canadas bestselling beer, the companys flagship brand has entered in a number of international beer ratings competitions and has always performed notably well. In 2003, Labatt Blue received a Gold Quality Award at the World Quality Selections, organized yearly by Monde Selection. The Beer 

Labatt Blue Pond Hockey tournament in Buffalo, New York (2014)
== Corporate activities ==
Labatt has sponsored the construction of many buildings in London, including Labatt Park, the John Labatt Centre, and the John Labatt Visual Arts Centre at the University of Western Ontario (UWO). Bessie Labatt's son Arthur Labatt was the 19th chancellor of UWO (20042008). http://www.uwo.ca/univsec/board/seniorofficers_chancellors.pdf In 1998 Labatt announced a 20-year sponsorship agreement with the now defunct Montreal Expos (now the Washington Nationals), which included naming rights for a downtown Montreal ballpark which was never built. From 1992 to 1997 they sponsored the English football team Nottingham Forest F.C.. They also are the official beer and corporate sponsor of the OHL hockey franchise Plymouth Whalers. In the 1950s, the company sponsored a PGA Tour golf tournament, the Labatt Open. Labatt was a sponsor of the Williams F1 racing team in the early 1990s.

In 1983-86, Labatt sponsored Ken Westerfield, Canadian Frisbee champion and world record holder, to perform Frisbee shows throughout Ontario, as well as sponsor the World Guts (Frisbee) Championships on Toronto Islands in 1986.

Labatt is a beer partner of the NFL's Buffalo Bills, as well as the NHL's Buffalo Sabres, Carolina Hurricanes, Columbus Blue Jackets, New York Islanders, and Pittsburgh Penguins.

Labatt sponsors the annual Labatt Blue Buffalo Pond Hockey Tournament. The outdoor amateur hockey tournament features more than 800 players. 

In May 2009, Labatt gave their support to a seventh NHL team in Canada, which was pursued by Jim Balsillie.

== Marketing ==
Labatt Blue is sold in all provinces of Canada (most of the United States sells Labatt with sales particularly strong in the Midwest and Northeast along the Canadian border), although in Quebec it is sold under the name Labatt Bleue, with a slightly different logo. Aside from the name, and containing 4.9% alcohol/volume instead of 5.0%, the red maple leaf on the logo has also been changed to a red fleur-de-lis type of image. The business sponsored Nottingham Forest F.C. from 1992 (interchanging with Shipstones Brewery until 1994) to 1997. 

== See also ==
* Canadian beer
* Ken Westerfield Labatt Schooner Frisbee Team 1983-86

== References ==

== External links ==
* The Official Web site of Labatt Breweries of Canada
* The Official Site of Labatt Blue
* The Official Site of Labatt Bleue
* 1970s Labatt's Beer Commercial - From the Internet Archive.
* 2007 Labatt Blue Commercial (Fish)
* The Official Site of Kokanee
* The Official Site of Alexander Keith's
* The Official Site of Stella Artois
* The Official Site of Brahma

===Multimedia===
* CBC Archives CBC Radio reports on Interbrew's takeover of Labatt (From 1995).

 

[[Local color]]

Local color may refer to:

*Local Color (book), a 1950 note and sketch study by Truman Capote
*Local Color (album), a 1958 album by Mose Allison
*Local Color (film), a 2006 film starring Trevor Morgan
*Local color (literature) or regionalism, a genre of fiction or poetry
*Local color (visual art), the natural color of an object
*, a book by Bill Bachman and Tim Winton
*Local Color, European travel essays by Truman Capote published in 1950
*Local Color, a short-story collection by John Andrew Rice
*Local Color, an art exhibition by Tullio DeSantis
*Local-colour: The concept that local materials (specifically pigments) inform a community's worldview by artist Christopher van Donkelaar



[[Linear equation]]

Graph sample of linear equations.
A linear equation is an algebraic equation in which each term is either a constant or the product of a constant and (the first power of) a single variable.

Linear equations can have one or more variables. Linear equations occur abundantly in most subareas of mathematics and especially in applied mathematics. While they arise quite naturally when modeling many phenomena, they are particularly useful since many non-linear equations may be reduced to linear equations by assuming that quantities of interest vary to only a small extent from some "background" state. Linear equations do not include exponents.
 
This article considers the case of a single equation for which one searches the real solutions. All its content applies for complex solutions and, more generally for linear equations with coefficients and solutions in any field.

== One variable ==

A linear equation in one unknown x may always be rewritten
:

If a  0, there is a unique solution 
:

If a = 0, then either the equation does not have any solution, if b  0 (it is inconsistent), or every number is a solution, if b is also zero.

==Two variables==
A common form of a linear equation in the two variables x and y is

:

where m and b designate constants (parameters). The origin of the name "linear" comes from the fact that the set of solutions of such an equation forms a straight line in the plane. In this particular equation, the constant m determines the slope or gradient of that line, and the constant term b determines the point at which the line crosses the y-axis, otherwise known as the y-intercept.

Since terms of linear equations cannot contain products of distinct or equal variables, nor any power (other than 1) or other function of a variable, equations involving terms such as xy, x2, y1/3, and sin(x) are nonlinear.

=== Forms for 2D linear equations ===
Linear equations can be rewritten using the laws of elementary algebra into several different forms. These equations are often referred to as the "equations of the straight line." In what follows, x, y, t, and  are variables; other letters represent constants (fixed numbers).

====General (or standard) form====
In the general (or standard ) form the linear equation is written as:

: 

where A and B are not both equal to zero. The equation is usually written so that A  0, by convention. The graph of the equation is a straight line, and every straight line can be represented by an equation in the above form. If A is nonzero, then the x-intercept, that is, the x-coordinate of the point where the graph crosses the x-axis (where, y is zero), is C/A. If B is nonzero, then the y-intercept, that is the y-coordinate of the point where the graph crosses the y-axis (where x is zero), is C/B, and the slope of the line is &minus;A/B. The general form is sometimes written as:
: 
where a and b are not both equal to zero. The two versions can be converted from one to the other by moving the constant term to the other side of the equal sign.

====Slopeintercept form====
:

where m is the slope of the line and b is the y intercept, which is the y coordinate of the location where line crosses the y axis. This can be seen by letting x = 0, which immediately gives y = b. It may be helpful to think about this in terms of y = b + mx; where the line passes through the point (0, b) and extends to the left and right at a slope of m. Vertical lines, having undefined slope, cannot be represented by this form.

====Pointslope form====
:

where m is the slope of the line and (x1,y1) is any point on the line.

The point-slope form expresses the fact that the difference in the y coordinate between two points on a line (that is, y &minus; y1) is proportional to the difference in the x coordinate (that is, x &minus; x1). The proportionality constant is m (the slope of the line).

====Two-point form====
:
where (x1, y1) and (x2, y2) are two points on the line with x2  x1. This is equivalent to the point-slope form above, where the slope is explicitly given as (y2 &minus; y1)/(x2 &minus; x1).

Multiplying both sides of this equation by (x2 &minus; x1) yields a form of the line generally referred to as the symmetric form:
:

Expanding the products and regrouping the terms leads to the general form:
:

Using a determinant, one gets a determinant form, easy to remember:
:

====Intercept form====
: 
where a and b must be nonzero. The graph of the equation has x-intercept a and y-intercept b. The intercept form is in standard form with A/C = 1/a and B/C = 1/b. Lines that pass through the origin or which are horizontal or vertical violate the nonzero condition on a or b and cannot be represented in this form.

====Matrix form====
Using the order of the standard form
: 
one can rewrite the equation in matrix form:
:
Further, this representation extends to systems of linear equations.
: 
: 
becomes
:

Since this extends easily to higher dimensions, it is a common representation in linear algebra, and in computer programming. There are named methods for solving system of linear equations, like Gauss-Jordan which can be expressed as matrix elementary row operations.

====Parametric form====
:
and
:
Two simultaneous equations in terms of a variable parameter t, with slope 1=m = V / T, x-intercept 1=(VU - WT) / V and y-intercept 1=(WT - VU) / T.
This can also be related to the two-point form, where 1=T = p - h, U = h, 1=V = q - k, and W = k:

:
and
:
In this case t varies from 0 at point (h,k) to 1 at point (p,q), with values of t between 0 and 1 providing interpolation and other values of t providing extrapolation.

====2D vector determinant form====
The equation of a line can also be written as the determinant of two vectors. If and are unique points on the line, then will also be a point on the line if the following is true:

: 

One way to understand this formula is to use the fact that the determinant of two vectors on the plane will give the area of the parallelogram they form. Therefore, if the determinant equals zero then the parallelogram has no area, and that will happen when two vectors are on the same line.

To expand on this we can say that , and . Thus and , then the above equation becomes:

:
Thus, 
:

Ergo,
:
Then dividing both side by would result in the Two-point form shown above, but leaving it here allows the equation to still be valid when .

====Special cases====
: Horizontal Line y = b
This is a special case of the standard form where A = 0 and B = 1, or of the slope-intercept form where the slope m = 0. The graph is a horizontal line with y-intercept equal to b. There is no x-intercept, unless b = 0, in which case the graph of the line is the x-axis, and so every real number is an x-intercept.

: Vertical Line x = a
This is a special case of the standard form where A = 1 and B = 0. The graph is a vertical line with x-intercept equal to a. The slope is undefined. There is no y-intercept, unless a = 0, in which case the graph of the line is the y-axis, and so every real number is a y-intercept. This is the only type of line which is not the graph of a function (it obviously fails the vertical line test).

=== Connection with linear functions ===
A linear equation, written in the form y = f(x) whose graph crosses the origin (x,y) = (0,0), that is, whose y-intercept is 0, has the following properties:

:
and
:

where a is any scalar. A function which satisfies these properties is called a linear function (or linear operator, or more generally a linear map). However, linear equations that have non-zero y-intercepts, when written in this manner, produce functions which will have neither property above and hence are not linear functions in this sense. They are known as affine functions.

==More than two variables==

A linear equation can involve more than two variables. Every linear equation in n unknowns may be rewritten 
:
where, a1, a2, ..., a'n represent numbers, called the coefficients, x1, x2, ..., x'n are the unknowns, and b is called the constant term. When dealing with three or fewer variables, it is common to use x, y and z instead of x1, x2 and x3.

If all the coefficients are zero, then either b  0 and the equation does not have any solution, or b = 0 and every set of values for the unknowns is a solution.

If at least one coefficient is nonzero, a permutation of the subscripts allows to suppose a1  0, and rewrite the equation
:
In other words, if a'i  0, one may choose arbitrary values for all the unknowns except x'i, and express x'i in term of these values.

If n = 3 the set of the solutions is a plane in a three-dimensional space. More generally, the set of the solutions is an (n  1)-dimensional hyperplane in a n-dimensional Euclidean space (or affine space if the coefficients are complex numbers or belong to any field).

== See also ==
* Line (geometry)
* System of linear equations
* Linear equation over a ring
* Algebraic equation
* Linear belief function
* Linear inequality

== Notes ==

== References ==
* 

== External links ==
* Linear Equations and Inequalities Open Elementary Algebra textbook chapter on linear equations and inequalities.
* 



[[LMS]]

LMS may refer to:

==Science and technology==
* Labeled magnitude scale, a scaling technique
* Learning management system, software used in education
* Least mean squares filter, an adaptive filter algorithm for digital signal processing
* Leiomyosarcoma, a rare form of cancer
* Lenz microphthalmia syndrome
* Library management system, an integrated library system
* Licentiate in Medicine and Surgery, a medical degree in India
* LMS color space

==Organisations==
* Lancaster Mennonite School, a school in Lancaster, USA
* London Mathematical Society
* London, Midland and Scottish Railway
* London Missionary Society
* Lionville Middle School
==Entertainment==
* Last man standing (gaming), a type of video game
* Last Man Standing Coop, a Doom 3 cooperative-play modification
* LMS, a hip hop band made of children of reggae artist Denroy Morgan 

==Other uses==
* Leamington Spa railway station, England, by station code
* Local Mitigation Strategy
* Local Management of Schools, financial procedures in England and Wales created by the Education Reform Act 1988

==See also==
* Laboratory information management system (LIMS)



[[Limousine liberal]]

Limousine liberal is a pejorative American political term used to illustrate hypocrisy by a political liberal of upper class or upper middle class status; including calls for the use of mass transit while frequently using limousines or private jets, Time . "Limousine Liberal Hypocrisy" by Charles Krauthammer. Published March 16, 2007. claiming environmental consciousness but driving low MPG sports cars or SUVs, or ostensibly supporting public education while actually sending their children to private schools. NPR 

==Formation and early use==

===Procaccino Campaign===
Democratic New York City mayoral hopeful Mario Procaccino coined the term "limousine liberal" to describe incumbent Republican Mayor John Lindsay and his wealthy Manhattan backers during a heated 1969 campaign.

It was a populist/producerist epithet, carrying an implicit accusation that the people it described were insulated from all negative consequences of their programs purported to benefit the poor, and that the costs and consequences of such programs would be borne in the main by working class or lower middle class people who were not so poor as to be beneficiaries themselves. In particular, Procaccino criticized Lindsay for favoring unemployed blacks over working-class ethnic whites. The New York Times. "Mayoral Follies, The 1969 Edition " Published January 25, 1998. 

One Procaccino campaign memo attacked "rich super-assimilated people who live on Fifth Avenue and maintain some choice mansions outside the city and have no feeling for the small middle class shopkeeper, home owner, etc. They preach the politics of confrontation and condone violent upheaval in society because they are not touched by it and are protected by their courtiers". The Ungovernable City: John Lindsay and His Struggle to Save New York by Vincent J. Cannato, page 428. The Independent later stated that "Lindsay came across as all style and no substance, a 'limousine liberal' who knew nothing of the concerns of the same 'Silent Majority' that was carrying Richard Nixon to the White House at the very same time." The Independent. "Obituary: John Lindsay ".Written December 22, 2000 by Rupert Cornwell. 

==Later use==
In the 1970s, the term was applied to wealthy liberal supporters of open-housing and forced school busing who didn't make use of public schooling. "A liberal interpretation: The current definition of right- and left-" by Geoffrey Nunberg. Chicago Sun-Times. Published July 30, 2006. In Boston, Massachusetts, supporters of busing, such as Senator Ted Kennedy, sent their children to private schools or lived in affluent suburbs. To some South Boston residents, Kennedy's support of a plan that "integrated" their children with blacks and his apparent unwillingness to do the same with his own children, was hypocrisy. News/Features | 

By the late 1990s and early 21st century, the term has also come to be applied to those who support environmentalist or "green" goals, such as mass transit, yet drive large SUVs or literally have a limousine and driver. The Weekly Standard applied the term to Rep. Sheila Jackson Lee (D-TX 18) for being "routinely chauffeured the one short block to work--in a government car, by a member of her staff, at the taxpayers' expense." Sheila Jackson Lee, Limousine Liberal The term was also used disparagingly in a 2004 episode of Law & Order by Fred Thompson's character, Arthur Branch, to belittle his more liberal colleague, Serena Southerlyn. South Parks creators Trey Parker and Matt Stone poked fun at the tendency of some liberals to be more concerned with image than actually helping the earth in the episode "Smug Alert!"

The New York Observer applied the term to 2008 Democratic candidate John Edwards for paying $400 for a haircut and, according to the newspaper, "lectures about poverty while living in gated opulence". Is Edwards An Easy Mark? | The New York Observer 

In 2009, the term was applied by many commentators to former Senate Majority Leader and then-Obama cabinet appointee Tom Daschle for failing to pay back taxes and interest on the use of a limousine service. 

The term has often been applied to documentary filmmaker Michael Moore over the years by both critics on the left and right due to his habit of traveling around New York City in a limousine. Business Insider: The REAL Fun Was At The Michael Moore Afterparty Urban Dictionary entry Newsmax: Michael Moore: The Leni Riefenstahl of the Left 

Al Gore is often called a limousine liberal by his critics for his use of private jet planes and SUVs, while giving speeches calling for reductions in greenhouse gas emissions. In the May 16, 2007 edition of TIME magazine, the term was used in the allegation that that "His (Gore's) Tennessee mansion consumes 20 times the electricity used by the average American home" 

==See also==
*Champagne socialist
*Chardonnay socialist
*Chattering class
*Elitism
*Gauche caviar
*Liberal elite
*Propaganda
*Radical chic
*San Francisco values

==References==



[[Lewis and Clark Expedition]]

Route of the expedition
The Lewis and Clark Expedition, also known as the Corps of Discovery Expedition, was the first American expedition to cross what is now the western portion of the United States, departing in May, 1804 from near St. Louis on the Mississippi River, making their way westward through the continental divide to the Pacific coast.

The expedition was commissioned by President Thomas Jefferson shortly after the Louisiana Purchase in 1803, consisting of a select group of U.S. Army volunteers under the command of Captain Meriwether Lewis and his close friend Second Lieutenant William Clark. Their perilous journey lasted from May 1804 to September 1806. The primary objective was to explore and map the newly acquired territory, find a practical route across the Western half of the continent, and establish an American presence in this territory before Britain and other European powers tried to claim it.

The campaign's secondary objectives were scientific and economic: to study the area's plants, animal life, and geography, and establish trade with local Indian tribes. With maps, sketches and journals in hand, the expedition returned to St. Louis to report their findings to Jefferson. Woodger, Toropov, 2009 p.150 Ambrose, 1996, Chap. VI 

==Overview==
According to Jefferson himself, one goal was to find "the most direct & practicable water communication across this continent, for the purposes of commerce." Jefferson also placed special importance on declaring U.S. sovereignty over the land occupied by the many different tribes of Native Americans along the Missouri River, and getting an accurate sense of the resources in the recently completed Louisiana Purchase. Miller, 2006 p.108 Fenelon & Wilson, 2006 pp.9091 Lavender, 2001 pp.32, 90 Ronda, 1984 pp.82, 192 

Although the expedition did make notable contributions to science, Fritz, 2004 p.113 scientific research itself was not the main goal of the mission. Ronda, 1984 p.9 

References to Lewis and Clark "scarcely appeared" in history books even during the United States Centennial in 1876 and the expedition was largely forgotten. Ronda, 1984 pp.327328 Fresonke & Spence, 2004 pp.159162 Lewis and Clark began to gain new attention around the start of the 20th century. Both the 1904 Louisiana Purchase Exposition, in St. Louis, and the 1905 Lewis and Clark Centennial Exposition, in Portland, Oregon, showcased Lewis and Clark as American pioneers. However, the story remained relatively shallowa celebration of US conquest and personal adventuresuntil the mid-century, since which time it has been more thoroughly researched and retold in many forms to a growing audience. 

A complete and reliable set of the expedition's journals was finally compiled by Gary E. Moulton in 2004. Moulton, 2004 Ambrose, 1996 p.480 Saindon, 2003 pp.vi, 1040 In the 2000s the bicentennial of the expedition further elevated popular interest in Lewis and Clark. Today, no U.S. exploration party is more famous, and no American expedition leaders are more instantly recognizable by name. 

==Preparations==
Meriwether Lewis and William Clark
For years Jefferson had heard of and read accounts of the various ventures of other explorers in parts of the western frontier and consequently had a long held interest in further exploring this largely still unknown region of the continent. In the 1780s, while Minister to France, Jefferson met John Ledyard in Paris and discussed a proposed trip to the Pacific Northwest. Ambrose, 1996 p.69 Gray, 2004 p.358 Jefferson had also read Captain James Cook's A Voyage to the Pacific Ocean (London, 1784), an account of Cook's third voyage, and Le Page du Pratz's The History of Louisiana (London, 1763), all of which greatly influenced his decision to send an expedition. Like Captain Cook, Jefferson also wished to discover a practical route through the Northwest to the Pacific coast. However it was Alexander Mackenzie's Voyages from Montreal (1801), which informed Jefferson (who read the book at Monticello in 1802) of Britain's intent to control the lucrative fur trade of the Columbia River, and convinced him of the importance of securing the territory as soon as possible. DeVoto, 1997 p.xxix Schwantes, 1996 pp.5455 

Two years into his presidency, Jefferson asked Congress to fund an expedition through the Louisiana Purchase to the Pacific Ocean. He did not attempt to hide the Lewis and Clark expedition itself from Spanish, French, and British officials but rather claimed different reasons for the venture. He used a secret message to ask for funding due to poor relations with the opposition party in Congress. Rodriguez, 2002 p.xxiv Furtwangler, 1993 p.19 Ambrose, 1996 p.83 Bergon, 2003, p.xiv 

In 1803, Jefferson commissioned the Corps of Discovery, and named U.S. Army Captain Meriwether Lewis its leader, who in turn selected William Clark as second in command. Lewis demonstrated remarkable skills and potential as a frontiersman. As the expedition was gaining approval and funding Jefferson made efforts to prepare him for the long journey ahead. Woodger & Toropov, 2009 p.270 Jefferson chose Lewis to lead the expedition rather than a "qualified scientist" because, "It was impossible to find a character who to a complete science in botany, natural history, mineralogy & astronomy, joined the firmness of constitution & character, prudence, habits adapted to the woods & a familiarity with the Indian manners and character, requisite for this undertaking. All the latter qualifications Capt. Lewis has."

In 1803, Jefferson sent Lewis to study medicinal cures under Benjamin Rush, a physician and humanitarian. Jefferson also arranged for Lewis to be further educated by Andrew Ellicott, an astronomer who instructed him in the use of the sextant and other navigational instruments. Gass & MacGregor, 1807 p.7 Ambrose, 1996 pp.79, 89 Lewis however was not ignorant of science and had demonstrated to Jefferson a marked capacity to learn, especially with Jefferson as his teacher. At Monticello Jefferson possessed the largest library in the world on the subject of the geography of the North American continent, and Lewis had full access to that library. Lewis spent time consulting maps and books and conferring with Jefferson at Jefferson's library in Monticello.

Lewis and Clark met near Louisville in October 1803 at the Falls of the Ohio and before departing later in the month, the core "Nine Young Men" were enlisted into the Corps of Discovery. Ambrose, 1996 p.13 Homser, James Kendall, 1903 p.1 Their goals were to explore the vast territory acquired by the Louisiana Purchase and to establish trade and U.S. sovereignty over the native peoples along the River Missouri. Jefferson also wanted to establish a U.S. claim of "Discovery" to the Pacific Northwest and Oregon territory by documenting an American presence there before Europeans could claim the land. Kleber, 2001 pp.509510 Fritz, 2004 pp.15 Ronda, 1984 p.32 According to some historians, Jefferson understood he would have a better claim of ownership to the Pacific Northwest if the team gathered scientific data on animals and plants. Miller, 2006 pp.99100, 111 Bennett, 2002 p.4 However his main objectives were centered around finding an all-water route to the Pacific coast and commerce. Before their departure Jefferson's instructions to them stated:

The U.S. mint prepared special silver medals with a portrait of Jefferson and inscribed with a message of friendship and peace, called Indian Peace Medals or peace medals. The soldiers were to distribute them to the nations they met. These symbolized U.S. sovereignty over the indigenous inhabitants. The expedition also prepared advanced weapons to display their military firepower. Among these was an Austrian made .46 caliber Girandoni air rifle, a repeating rifle with a 20-round tubular magazine that was powerful enough to kill a deer. Saindon, 2003 pp.551552 Miller, 2006 p.106 Woodger, Toropov, 2009 pp.104, 265, 271 The expedition was prepared with sufficient black powder and lead for their flintlock firearms, knives, blacksmithing supplies, and cartography equipment. They also carried flags, gift bundles, medicine and other items they would need for their journey. Much time went into ensuring a sufficient supply of these items. 

The route of Lewis and Clark's expedition took them up the Missouri River to its headwaters, then on to the Pacific via the Columbia River, and may have been influenced by the purported transcontinental journey of Moncacht-Ap by the same route about a century before. Jefferson had a copy of Le Page's book detailing Moncacht-Ap's itinerary in his library, and Lewis carried a copy with him during the expedition. Le Page's description of Moncacht-Ap's route across the continent, which neglects to mention the need to cross the Rocky Mountains, may be the source of Lewis and Clark's mistaken belief that they could easily carry boats from the Missouri's headwaters to the westward-flowing Columbia. Lavender, 2001 pp.3031 

The historian John L. Loos of Louisiana State University wrote William Clark's Part in the Preparation of the Lewis and Clark Expedition, a 511-page manuscript published in 1954 by the Missouri Historical Society. 

==Journey==
Corps of Discovery meet Chinnoks on the Lower Columbia, October 1805 (Charles Marion Russel, c.1905.)
There were 33 people, including 29 participants in training at the 18031804 Camp Dubois (Camp Wood) winter staging area, then in the Indiana Territory, near present day Wood River, Illinois on the east bank of the Mississippi.
In March 1804, the Spanish in New Mexico learned from U.S. General James Wilkinson, later discovered to be a paid agent of the Spanish crown, that the Americans were encroaching on territory claimed by Spain. On August 1, they sent four armed expeditions of fifty two soldiers, mercenaries, and Indians from Santa Fe northward under Pedro Vial and Jos Jarvet, to intercept Lewis and Clark and imprison the entire expedition. When they reached the Pawnee settlement on the Platte River in central Nebraska they learned that the expedition had been there many days before, but because the expedition at that point was covering seventy to eighty miles a day Vial's attempt to intercept them was unsuccessful. Uldrich, 2004 p.82 Ambrose, 1996 p.402 

===Departure===

The Corps of Discovery departed from Camp Dubois at 4 p.m. on May 14, 1804, and met up with Lewis in St. Charles, Missouri, a short time later, marking the beginning of the voyage to the Pacific coast. The Corps followed the Missouri River westward. Soon they passed La Charrette, the last Euro-American settlement on the Missouri River.

The expedition followed the Missouri through what is now Kansas City, Missouri, and Omaha, Nebraska. On August 20, 1804, Sergeant Charles Floyd died, apparently from acute appendicitis. He was the only member of the expedition to die, and was among the first to sign up with the Corps of Discovery. He was buried at a bluff by the river, now named after him, in what is now Sioux City, Iowa. His burial site was marked with a cedar post on which was inscribed his name and day of death. A mile up the river the expedition camped at a small river which they named Floyd's River. Allen, Lewis & Clark, Vol. 1, 1916 pp.2627 Woodger & Toropov, 2009 p.142 Coues, Lewis, Clark, Jefferson 1893, Vol. 1 p.79 During the final week of August, Lewis and Clark reached the edge of the Great Plains, a place abounding with elk, deer, bison, and beavers.

The Lewis and Clark Expedition established relations with two dozen Indian nations, without whose help the expedition would have risked starvation during the harsh winters and/or become hopelessly lost in the vast ranges of the Rocky Mountains. Fritz, 2004 p.13 

The Americans and the Lakota nation (whom the Americans called Sioux or "Teton-wan Sioux") had problems when they met, and there was a concern the two sides might fight. According to Harry W. Fritz, "All earlier Missouri River travelers had warned of this powerful and aggressive tribe, determined to block free trade on the river. ... The Sioux were also expecting a retaliatory raid from the Omaha Indians, to the south. A recent Sioux raid had killed 75 Omaha men, burned 40 lodges, and taken four dozen prisoners." Fritz, 2004 p.14 

One of their horses disappeared, and they believed the Sioux were responsible. Afterward, the two sides met and there was a disagreement, and the Sioux asked the men to stay or to give more gifts instead before being allowed to pass through their territory. They came close to fighting several times, and both sides finally backed down and the expedition continued on to Arikara territory. Clark wrote they were "warlike" and were the "vilest miscreants of the savage race". Fritz, 2004 pp.1415 Ambrose, 1996 p.170 Ronda, 1984 pp.27, 40 Lavender, 2001 p.181 

In the winter of 180405, the party built Fort Mandan, near present-day Washburn, North Dakota. One chief asked Lewis and Clark to provide a boat for passage through their national territory. As tensions increased, Lewis and Clark prepared to fight, but the two sides fell back in the end. The Americans quickly continued westward (upriver), and camped for the winter in the Mandan nation's territory. After the expedition had set up camp, nearby Indians came to visit in fair numbers, some staying all night. For several days Lewis and Clark met in council with Mandan Indian chiefs. Here they met a French-Canadian fur trapper named Toussaint Charbonneau, and his young Shoshone wife Sacagawea. Charbonneau at this time began to serve as the expedition's translator. Peace was established between the expedition and the Mandan chiefs with the sharing of the Mandan peace pipe. Clark & Edmonds, 1983 p.12 By April 25 Captain Lewis wrote his progress report of the expedition's activities and observations of the Indian nations they have encountered to date: A Statistical view of the Indian nations inhabiting the Territory of Louisiana which outlined the names of various tribes, their locations, trading practices and water routes used, among other things. President Jefferson would later present this report to Congress. Allen, Lewis & Clark, Vol.1, 1916 pp.8182 

They followed the Missouri to its headwaters, and over the Continental Divide at Lemhi Pass. In canoes, they descended the mountains by the Clearwater River, the Snake River, and the Columbia River, past Celilo Falls and past what is now Portland, Oregon at the meeting of the Willamette and Columbia Rivers. Lewis and Clark used William Robert Broughton's 1792 notes and maps to orient themselves once they reached the lower Columbia River. The sighting of Mount Hood and other stratovolcanos confirmed that the expedition had almost reached the Pacific Ocean. 

Reconstruction of Fort Mandan, Lewis & Clark Memorial Park, North Dakota

===Pacific Ocean===

The expedition sighted the Pacific Ocean for the first time on November 7, 1805, arriving two weeks later. http://www.nps.gov/lewi/historyculture/index.htm The expedition faced its second bitter winter camped on the north side of the Columbia River, in an area that was storm wracked. Lack of food was a major factor. The elk, the party's main source of food, had retreated from their usual haunts into the mountains, and the party was now too poor to purchase enough food from neighboring tribes. Ambrose, 1996 p.326 On November 24, 1805 the party voted to move their camp to the south side of the Columbia River near modern Astoria, Oregon. Because Sacagawea, and Clark's slave York, were both allowed to participate in the vote, it may have been the first time in American history where a woman and a slave were allowed to vote. Clark & Edmonds, 1983 pp.5152 

On the south side of the Columbia River, two miles up stream on the west side of the Netul River (now Lewis and Clark River), they constructed Fort Clatsop. They did this not just for shelter and protection, but to officially establish the American presence there, with the American flag flying over the fort.: Harris, Buckley, 2012, p. 109 During the winter at Fort Clatsop Lewis committed himself to writing, filling many pages of his journals with valuable knowledge, mostly about botany, because of the all the abundant growth and forests that covered that part of the continent. Ambrose, 1996 p.330 The health of the men also became a problem, with many suffering from colds and flu. 

===Return trip===
Lewis was determined to remain at the fort until April 1 but was still anxious to move out at the earliest opportunity. By March 22 the stormy weather had subsided and the following morning, on March 23, 1806, the journey home began. The Corps began their journey homeward using canoes to ascend the Columbia River, and later by treking over land. Ambrose, 1996 p.334 Coues, Lewis, Clark, Jefferson 1893 pp.902904 

They made their way to Camp Chopunnish in Idaho, along the north bank of the Clearwater River, where the members of the expedition collected 65 horses in preparation to cross the Bitterroot Mountains, lying between modern day Idaho and western Montana. However the range was still covered in snow, which prevented the expedition from making the crossing. On April 11, while the Corps was waiting for the snow to diminish, Lewis' dog, Seaman, was stolen by Indians but was retrieved shortly. Worried that other such acts might follow, Lewis warned the chief that any other wrongdoing or mischievous acts would result in instant death.

On July 3, before crossing the Continental Divide, the Corps split into two teams so Lewis could explore the Marias River. Lewis' group of four met some men from the Blackfeet nation. During the night, the Blackfeet tried to steal their weapons. In the struggle, the soldiers killed two Blackfeet men. Lewis, Drouillard, and the Field brothers fled over 100 miles (160 km) in a day before they camped again.

Meanwhile, Clark had entered the Crow tribe's territory. In the night, half of Clark's horses disappeared, but not a single Crow had been seen. Lewis and Clark stayed separated until they reached the Yellowstone and Missouri Rivers on August 11. As the groups reunited, one of Clark's hunters, Pierre Cruzatte, mistook Lewis for an elk and fired, injuring Lewis in the thigh. Once together, the Corps were able to return home quickly via the Missouri River. They reached St. Louis on September 23, 1806.

==Results==

The Corps met their objective of reaching the Pacific, mapping and establishing their presence for a legal claim to the land. They established diplomatic relations and trade with at least two dozen indigenous nations. They did not find a continuous water to the Pacific Ocean. Fritz, 2004 pp.3335 

==Geography and science==
Famous map of Lewis and Clark's expedition. It changed mapping of northwest America by providing the first accurate depiction of the relationship of the sources of the Columbia and Missouri Rivers, and the Rocky Mountains around 1814.

The Lewis and Clark Expedition gained an understanding of the geography of the Northwest and produced the first accurate maps of the area. During the journey, Lewis and Clark drew about 140 maps. Stephen Ambrose says the expedition "filled in the main outlines" of the area. Ambrose, 1996 p.483 

The expedition documented natural resources and plants that had been previously unknown to Euro-Americans, though not to the indigenous peoples. Fritz, 2004 p.60 Lewis and Clark were the first Americans to cross the continental divide, and the first Americans to see Yellowstone, enter into Montana and produce an official description of these different regions. Ambrose, 1996 p.409 Woodger & Toropov, 2009 p.99 Their visit to the Pacific Northwest, maps, and proclamations of sovereignty with medals and flags were legal steps needed to claim title to each indigenous nation's lands under the Doctrine of Discovery. DeVoto, 1997 p.552 

Lewis and Clark's expedition had no greater advocate and no greater beneficiary than the American Philosophical Society (APS). Woodger, Toropov, 2012 p.29 Their duties, as assigned by Jefferson, were preeminently scientific. Specifically, they were instructed in geography, astronomy, ethnology, climatology, mineralogy, meteorology, botany, ornithology, and zoology. Fritz, 2004 p.59 

The expedition recorded more than 200 plants and animals that were new to science and noted at least 72 native tribes. Uldrich, 2004 p.37 

Jefferson had the expedition declare "sovereignty" and demonstrate their military strength to ensure native tribes would be subordinate to the U.S., as European colonizers did elsewhere. After the expedition, the maps that were produced allowed the further discovery and settlement of this vast territory in the years that followed. Fresonke & Spence, 2004 p.70 Fritz, 2004 p.88 

In 1807 Patrick Gass, a private in the US Army, published an account of the journey. He was promoted to Sergeant during the course of the expedition. Gass & MacGregor, 1807 pp.iv, 3 Paul Allen edited a two-volume history of the Lewis and Clark expedition that was published in 1814, in Philadelphia, but without mention of the actual author, banker Nicholas Biddle. Ambrose, 1996 pp.479480 Even then, the complete report was not made public until more recently. Lewis and Clark Journals The earliest authorized edition of the Lewis and Clark journals resides in the Maureen and Mike Mansfield Library at the University of Montana.

==Encounters with Indian nations==
One of the primary objectives of the Expedition as directed by President Jefferson was to observe and record the whereabouts, lives, activities and cultures of the various American Indian tribes that inhabited the newly acquired territory and the north west in general. The expedition encountered many different tribes along the way, many of whom offered their assistance, providing the expedition with their knowledge of the wilderness and with the acquisition of food. Along with the standard provisions of weapons, powder, tools and cooking utensils the expedition also had blank leather-bound journals and ink for the purpose of recording such encounters, as well as for scientific and geological information. They were also provided with various gifts of medals, ribbons, needles, mirrors and other artifacts which were intended to ease any tensions when negotiating their passage with the various Indian Chiefs they would encounter along their way. As many of the tribes had had previous friendly experiences with British and French fur traders in various isolated encounters along the Missouri and Columbia rivers the expedition subsequently did not encounter any hostilities with the exception of the Teton-Sioux tribe under Black Buffalo and the Partisan tribe on September 25, 1804. Both of these tribes were rivals and hoped to use the expedition to their own advantage and who both demanded tribute from the expedition for their passage over the river at that particular juncture. Captain Lewis made his first mistake by offering the Sioux chief gifts first which insulted and angered the Partisan chief. Communication was difficult since the expedition's only Sioux interpreter, Pierre Dorion, had stayed behind with the other party and was also involved with diplomatic affairs with another tribe. Consequently both chiefs were offered a few gifts but neither was satisfied. At that point some of the warriors from the Partisan tribe then took hold of their boat and one of the oars. Lewis took a firm stand, ordering a display of force, presenting arms; Captain Clark by gesture of brandishing his sword, threatening violent reprisal. Just before the situation erupted into a violent confrontation Black Buffalo ordered his warriors to back off. After the ensuing diplomacy and with the aid of better gifts and now a bottle of whiskey, of which some was consumed, the captains were able to negotiate their passage through without further incident. During the next two days the expedition made camp not far from Black Buffalo's tribe. When they attempted to leave there were other similar incidents, but they were averted with still more gifts, this time, of tobacco. Joesphy, 2006 p.vi Allen, Lewis & Clark, Vol.1, 1916 p.52 Ambrose, 1996 p.169 Woodger & Toropov, 2009 pp.8, 337338 

===Observations===
As the expedition encountered the various Indian tribes during the course of their journey they observed and recorded information regarding their lifestyles, customs and the social codes they lived by, as directed by President Jefferson. By western standards the Indian way of life seemed harsh and unforgiving as witnessed by members of the expedition. After many encounters and camping in close proximity to the Indian nations for extended periods of time during the winter months they soon learned first hand of their customs and social order.

===Sacagawea===
Statue of Sacagawea, a Shoshone woman who accompanied the Lewis and Clark Expedition

Sacagawea, sometimes called Sakajawea or Sakagawea (c. 1788December 20, 1812), was a Shoshone Indian woman who arrived with her husband Toussaint Charbonneau on the expedition to the Pacific Ocean.

On Feb. 11, 1805, a few weeks after her first contact with the expedition, Sacagawea went into labor and gave birth to a baby boy. Her labor was slow and painful and so the Frenchman Charbonneau, with whom she had arrived on the scene, suggested that she be given a potion of rattlesnake's rattle to aid in her delivery. Lewis happened to have some snakes rattle with him. A short time after administering the potion she delivered a healthy baby boy who was given the name Jean Baptiste Charbonneau. Coues, Lewis, Clark, Jefferson 1893, Vol.1 p.229 Clark & Edmonds, 1983 p.15 

When the expedition reached Maria's River, June 16, 1805, Sacagawea became dangerously ill. She was able to find some relief by drinking mineral water from the sulphur spring that fed into the river. Coues, Lewis, Clark, Jefferson 1893, Vol.1 p.377 

Though she has been discussed in literature frequently, much of the information is exaggeration or fiction. Scholars say she did notice some geographical features, but "Sacagawea...was not the guide for the Expedition, she was important to them as an interpreter and in other ways." Clark & Edmonds, 1983 p.16 The sight of a woman and her infant son would have been reassuring to some indigenous nations, and she played an important role in diplomatic relations by talking to chiefs, easing tensions, and giving the impression of a peaceful mission. Fritz, 2004 p.19 Clark & Edmonds, 1983 pp.16, 27 

In his writings, Meriwether Lewis presented a somewhat negative view of her, though Clark had a higher regard for her, and provided some support for her children in subsequent years. In the journals, they used the terms "squar" and "savages" to refer to Sacagawea and other indigenous peoples. Ronda, 1984 pp.258259 

===Aftermath===
Two months passed after the expedition's end before Jefferson made his first public statement to Congress and others giving a one sentence summary about the success of the expedition before getting into the justification for the expenses involved. In the course of their journey they acquired a knowledge of numerous tribes of Indians hitherto unknown; they informed themselves of the trade which may be carried on with them, the best channels and positions for it, and they are enabled to give with accuracy the geography of the line they pursued. Back east the botanical and zoological discoveries drew the intense interest of the American Philosophical Society who requested specimens, various artifacts traded with the Indians along with reports on plants and wildlife along with various seeds obtained. Jefferson used seeds from "Missouri hominy corn" along with a number of other unidentified seeds to plant at Monticello which he cultivated and studied. He later reported on the "Indian corn" he had grown as being an "excellent" food source. Ambrose, 1996, p. 418 The expedition helped establish the U.S. presence in the newly acquired territory and beyond and opened the door to further exploration, trade and scientific discoveries. Ambrose, 1996, p. 144 

==Legacy and honors==

Since the expedition Lewis and Clark have been commemorated and honored over the years on various coins, currency and commemorative postage stamps as well as in a number of other capacities.

 Lewis and Clark Expedition, 2004200th Anniversary issue ---- U.S. postage stamp commemorating the 200th anniversary of the Expedition Lewis and Clark Expedition 150th anniversary issue, 1954 ---- In February 1954, the 150th anniversary of the expedition's departure, Congressman Charles B. Hoeven of Iowa introduced a bill to the U.S.Congress authorizing the Lewis and Clark commemorative postage stamp. Along with Lewis and Clark the Indian woman Sacagawea and husband Toussaint Charbonneau are also depicted. American bison) on the Series of 1901 $10 Legal Tender]] Lewis and Clark Interpretive Center in Cape Disappointment State Park 

==Before Lewis and Clark==

In 1682 Ren-Robert Cavelier, Sieur de La Salle went down the Mississippi from the Great Lakes to the Gulf. The French then established a chain of posts along the Mississippi from New Orleans to the Great Lakes. There followed a number of French explorers including Pedro Vial and Pierre Antoine and Paul Mallet, among others. Vial may have preceded Lewis and Clark to Montana. In 1787, he gave a map of the upper Missouri River and locations of "territories transited by Pedro Vial" to Spanish authorities. Loomis & Nasatir 1967 pp.382386, map: p.290 

Early in 1792 the American explorer Robert Gray, sailing in the Columbia Rediviva, discovered the yet to be named Columbia River, naming it after his ship and claiming it for the United States. Later in 1792, the Vancouver Expedition had learned of Gray's discovery and using maps charted by Gray, Vancouver's expedition explored over 100 mi up the Columbia, into the Columbia River Gorge. It was the maps produced by these expeditions that Lewis and Clark used when they descended the lower Columbia to the Pacific coast. Ambrose, 1996 p.70, 91 Woodger, Toropov, 2009 pp.191, 351 Everything west from North Dakota to the Pacific was unknown to non-natives, except that the Rocky Mountains existed, that the upper Missouri seemed to flow from that direction, and that on the other side of the Rockies the large Columbia River entered the Pacific.

Alexander Mackenzie had crossed North America to the Pacific from Quebec in 1792-93. Encyclopedia Britannica: Sir Alexander Mackenzie. 

==See also==

* The Red River Expedition (1806) and the Pike Expedition were also commissioned by Jefferson.
* Jefferson National Expansion Memorial
* The Far Horizons, a movie of the expedition
* York (explorer)  the slave on the expedition
* Lewis and Clark Pass (Montana)  the only non motorized pass on the expeditions route

==Notes==

==References==

==Bibliography==

*Ebook (full view)

*Ebook (full view)

* Book 

* Book 

*book
 
* Book 

* Book 

*, Book 

* Book 

*Book 

* Book 

* Book 

* Book 

* Book 

* Book 
* , Book

* Book 

* Book 

* Book 

* Book 

* Book 

* Book 

* Book 

* Book 

* Book

* Book 

* URL

===Primary sources===
* E'books, Full view

* Ebook (full view)

* Book 

* Ebook (full view)

* -- Ebook (full view)

* -- Ebook (full view)

* -- Ebook (full view)

* -- Ebook (full view)

* Book

* Book 

== Further reading ==

* 
* 
* Online text of The Journals of Lewis and Clark, 18041806 by William Clark and Meriwether Lewis at Project Gutenberg
* 
* Book
* , Book
* 
* Tubbs, Stephenie Ambrose, (2008). Why Sacagawea Deserves the Day Off and Other Lessons from the Lewis and Clark Trail, University of Nebraska Press, Book
* Book

==External links==

* Full text of the Lewis and Clark journals online  edited by Gary E. Moulton, University of NebraskaLincoln
* 
* Lewis and Clark Expedition, a National Park Service Discover Our Shared Heritage Travel Itinerary
* "History of the Expedition Under the Command of Captains Lewis and Clark: To the Sources of the Missouri, thence Across the Rocky Mountains and down the River Columbia to the Pacific Ocean" published in 1814; from the World Digital Library
* Lewis & Clark Fort Mandan Foundation: Discovering Lewis & Clark

 



[[Latitude]]

A graticule on the Earth as a sphere or an ellipsoid. The lines from pole to pole are lines of constant longitude, or meridians. The circles parallel to the equator are lines of constant latitude, or parallels. The graticule determines the latitude and longitude of points on the surface.

In geography, latitude () is a geographic coordinate that specifies the north-south position of a point on the Earth's surface. Latitude is an angle (defined below) which ranges from 0 at the Equator to 90 (North or South) at the poles. Lines of constant latitude, or parallels, run eastwest as circles parallel to the equator. Latitude is used together with longitude to specify the precise location of features on the surface of the Earth. Two levels of abstraction are employed in the definition of these coordinates. In the first step the physical surface is modelled by the geoid, a surface which approximates the mean sea level over the oceans and its continuation under the land masses. The second step is to approximate the geoid by a mathematically simpler reference surface. The simplest choice for the reference surface is a sphere, but the geoid is more accurately modelled by an ellipsoid. The definitions of latitude and longitude on such reference surfaces are detailed in the following sections. Lines of constant latitude and longitude together constitute a graticule on the reference surface. The latitude of a point on the actual surface is that of the corresponding point on the reference surface, the correspondence being along the normal to the reference surface which passes through the point on the physical surface. Latitude and longitude together with some specification of height constitute a geographic coordinate system as defined in the specification of the ISO 19111 standard. The current full documentation of ISO 19111 may be purchased from http://www.iso.org but drafts of the final standard are freely available at many web sites, one such is available at the following
CSIRO 

Since there are many different reference ellipsoids the latitude of a feature on the surface is not unique: this is stressed in the ISO standard which states that "without the full specification of the coordinate reference system, coordinates (that is latitude and longitude) are ambiguous at best and meaningless at worst". This is of great importance in accurate applications, such as GPS, but in common usage, where high accuracy is not required, the reference ellipsoid is not usually stated.

In English texts the latitude angle, defined below, is usually denoted by the Greek lower-case letter phi ( or ). It is measured in degrees, minutes and seconds or decimal degrees, north or south of the equator. 

Measurement of latitude requires an understanding of the gravitational field of the Earth, either for setting up theodolites or for determination of GPS satellite orbits. The study of the figure of the Earth together with its gravitational field is the science of geodesy. These topics are not discussed in this article. (See for example the textbooks by Torge Torge, W (2001) Geodesy (3rd edition), published by de Gruyter, isbn=3-11-017072-8 and Hofmann-Wellenhof and Moritz.) Hofmann-Wellenhof, B and Moritz, H (2006). 'Physical Geodesy (second edition)' ISBN3211-33544-7. 

This article relates to coordinate systems for the Earth: it may be extended to cover the Moon, planets and other celestial objects by a simple change of nomenclature.

The following lists are available:
* List of cities by latitude
* List of countries by latitude

==Latitude on the sphere==

A perspective view of the Earth showing how latitude (&phi;) and longitude (&lambda;) are defined on a spherical model. The graticule spacing is 10 degrees.

===The graticule on the sphere===
The graticule formed by the lines of constant latitude and constant longitude is constructed with reference to the rotation axis of the Earth. The primary reference points are the poles where the axis of rotation of the Earth intersects the reference surface. Planes which contain the rotation axis intersect the surface in the meridians and the angle between any one meridian plane and that through Greenwich (the Prime Meridian) defines the longitude: meridians are lines of constant longitude. The plane through the centre of the Earth and orthogonal to the rotation axis intersects the surface in a great circle called the equator. Planes parallel to the equatorial plane intersect the surface in circles of constant latitude; these are the parallels. The equator has a latitude of 0, the North pole has a latitude of 90 north (written 90 N or +90), and the South pole has a latitude of 90 south (written 90 S or 90). The latitude of an arbitrary point is the angle between the equatorial plane and the radius to that point.

The latitude that is defined in this way for the sphere is often termed the spherical latitude to avoid ambiguity with auxiliary latitudes defined in subsequent sections.

===Named latitudes===
The orientation of the Earth at the December solstice.
Besides the equator, four other parallels are of significance:
::
 Arctic Circle 66 33 39 N 
 Tropic of Cancer 23 26 21 N 
 Tropic of Capricorn 23 26 21 S 
 Antarctic Circle 66 33 39\" S 

 
The plane of the Earth's orbit about the sun is called the ecliptic. The plane perpendicular to the rotation axis of the Earth is the equatorial plane. The angle between the ecliptic and the equatorial plane is called the inclination of the ecliptic, denoted by in the figure. The current value of this angle is 23 26 21. The Astronomical Almanac published annually by the National Almanac Office in the United States (http://asa.usno.navy.mil/) and the United Kingdom (http://astro.ukho.gov.uk/nao/publicat/asa.html). It is also called the axial tilt of the Earth since it is equal to the angle between the axis of rotation and the normal to the ecliptic.

The figure shows the geometry of a cross section of the plane normal to the ecliptic and through the centres of the Earth and the Sun at the December solstice when the sun is overhead at some point of the Tropic of Capricorn. The south polar latitudes below the Antarctic Circle are in daylight whilst the north polar latitudes above the Arctic Circle are in night. The situation is reversed at the June solstice when the sun is overhead at the Tropic of Cancer. The latitudes of the tropics are equal to the inclination of the ecliptic and the polar circles are at latitudes equal to its complement. Only at latitudes in between the two tropics is it possible for the sun to be directly overhead (at the zenith).

The named parallels are clearly indicated on the Mercator projections shown below.

===Map projections from the sphere===
On map projections there is no simple rule as to how meridians and parallels should appear. For example, on the spherical Mercator projection the parallels are horizontal and the meridians are vertical whereas on the Transverse Mercator projection there is no correlation of parallels and meridians with horizontal and vertical, both are complicated curves. The red lines are the named latitudes of the previous section.

 Normal Mercator Transverse Mercator 
 200px 200px 

For map projections of large regions, or the whole world, a spherical Earth model is completely satisfactory since the variations attributable to ellipticity are negligible on the final printed maps.

===Meridian distance on the sphere===

On the sphere the normal passes through the centre and the latitude () is 
therefore equal to the angle subtended at the centre by the meridian arc from the equator to the point concerned. If the meridian distance is denoted by m() then 
::
where R denotes the mean radius of the Earth. R is equal to 6,371 km or 3,959 miles. No higher accuracy is appropriate for R since higher precision results necessitate an ellipsoid model. With this value for R the meridian length of 1 degree of latitude on the sphere is 111.2 km or 69 miles. The length of 1 minute of latitude is 1.853 km, or 1.15 miles. (See nautical mile).

==Latitude on the ellipsoid==

===Ellipsoids===
In 1687 Isaac Newton published the Principia in which he proved that a rotating self-gravitating fluid body in equilibrium takes the form of an oblate ellipsoid. Isaac Newton:Principia Book III Proposition XIX Problem III, p. 407 in Andrew Motte translation, available on line at (This article uses the term ellipsoid in preference to the older term spheroid). Newton's result was confirmed by geodetic measurements in the eighteenth century. (See Meridian arc.) An oblate ellipsoid is the three-dimensional surface generated by the rotation of an ellipse about its shorter axis (minor axis). "Oblate ellipsoid of revolution" is abbreviated to ellipsoid in the remainder of this article. (Ellipsoids which do not have an axis of symmetry are termed tri-axial.)

Many different reference ellipsoids have been used in the history of geodesy. In pre-satellite days they were devised to give a good fit to the geoid over the limited area of a survey but, with the advent of GPS, it has become natural to use reference ellipsoids (such as WGS84) with centres at the centre of mass of the Earth and minor axis aligned to the rotation axis of the Earth. These geocentric ellipsoids are usually within 100m of the geoid. Since latitude is defined with respect to an ellipsoid, the position of a given point is different on each ellipsoid: one can't exactly specify the latitude and longitude of a geographical feature without specifying the ellipsoid used. Many maps maintained by national agencies are based on older ellipsoids so it is necessary to know how the latitude and longitude values are transformed from one ellipsoid to another. GPS handsets include software to carry out datum transformations which link WGS84 to the local reference ellipsoid with its associated grid.

===The geometry of the ellipsoid===

The shape of an ellipsoid of revolution is determined by the shape of the ellipse which is rotated about its minor (shorter) axis. Two parameters are required. One is invariably the equatorial radius, which is the semi-major axis, a. The other parameter is usually (1) the polar radius or semi-minor axis, b; or (2) the (first) flattening, f; or (3) the eccentricity, e. These parameters are not independent: they are related by
:
Many other parameters (see ellipse, ellipsoid) appear in the study of geodesy, geophysics and map projections but they can all be expressed in terms of one or two members of the set a, b, f and e. Both f and e are small and often appear in series expansions in calculations; they are of the order 1/300 and 0.08, respectively. Values for a number of ellipsoids are given in Figure of the Earth. Reference ellipsoids are usually defined by the semi-major axis and the inverse flattening, 1/f. For example, the defining values for the WGS84 ellipsoid, used by all GPS devices, are The WGS84 parameters are listed in the National Geospatial-Intelligence Agency publication TR8350.2 page 3-1. 
:*a (equatorial radius): 6,378,137.0 m exactly
:* 1/f (inverse flattening): 298.257,223,563 exactly
from which are derived
:* b (polar radius): 6,356,752.3142 m
:* e2 (eccentricity squared): 0.006,694,379,990,14
The difference of the major and minor semi-axes is about 21 km and as fraction of the semi-major axis it equals the flattening; on a computer the ellipsoid could be sized as 300px by 299px. This would be indistinguishable from a sphere shown as 300px by 300px, so illustrations always exaggerate the flattening.

===Geodetic and geocentric latitudes===
The definition of geodetic latitude (&phi;) and longitude (&lambda;) on an ellipsoid. The normal to the surface does not pass through the centre, except at the equator and at the poles.
The graticule on the ellipsoid is constructed in exactly the same way as on the sphere. The normal at a point on the surface of an ellipsoid does not pass through the centre, except for points on the equator or at the poles, but the definition of latitude remains unchanged as the angle between the normal and the equatorial plane. The terminology for latitude must be made more precise by distinguishing

:Geodetic latitude: the angle between the normal and the equatorial plane. The standard notation in English publications is &phi;. This is the definition assumed when the word latitude is used without qualification. The definition must be accompanied with a specification of the ellipsoid.
:Geocentric latitude: the angle between the radius (from centre to the point on the surface) and the equatorial plane. (Figure below). There is no standard notation: examples from various texts include &psi;, q, &phi;', &phi;c, &phi;g. This article uses &psi;.
:Spherical latitude: the angle between the normal to a spherical reference surface and the equatorial plane.
: Geographic latitude must be used with care. Some authors use it as a synonym for geodetic latitude whilst others use it as an alternative to the astronomical latitude.
:Latitude (unqualified) should normally refer to the geodetic latitude.

The importance of specifying the reference datum may be illustrated by a simple example. On the reference ellipsoid for WGS84, the centre of the Eiffel Tower has a geodetic latitude of 48 51 29 N, or 48.8583 N and longitude of 2 17 40 E or 2.2944E. The same coordinates on the datum ED50 define a point on the ground which is 140 m distant from Tower. A web search may produce several different values for the latitude of the Tower; the reference ellipsoid is rarely specified.

===Length of a degree of latitude===

In Meridian arc and standard texts it is shown that the distance along a meridian from latitude  to the equator is given by ( in radians)
::
The function in the first integral is the meridional radius of curvature.

The distance from the equator to the pole is
::
For WGS84 this distance is 10,001.965729 km.

The evaluation of the meridian distance integral is central to many studies in geodesy and map projection. It can be evaluated by expanding the integral by the binomial series and integrating term by term: see Meridian arc for details. The length of the meridian arc between two given latitudes is given by replacing the limits of the integral by the latitudes concerned. The length of a small meridian arc is given by Osborne, P (2013)The Mercator Projections (Chapters 5,6) Rapp, Richard H. (1991). Geometric Geodesy, Part I, Dept. of Geodetic Science and Surveying, Ohio State Univ., Columbus, Ohio.(Chapter 3) 
::

 
 0 110.574 km 111.320 km 
 15 110.649 km 107.550 km 
 30 110.852 km 96.486 km 
 45 111.132 km 78.847 km 
 60 111.412 km 55.800 km 
 75 111.618 km 28.902 km 
 90 111.694 km 0.000 km 

When the latitude difference is 1 degree, corresponding to /180 radians, the arc distance is about 
::

The distance in metres (correct to 0.01 metre) between latitudes ( deg) and ( deg) on the WGS84 spheroid is
::

The variation of this distance with latitude (on WGS84) is shown in the table along with the length of a degree of longitude: 
:: 
A calculator for any latitude is provided by (a) the U.S. government's National Geospatial-Intelligence Agency (NGA), Length of degree calculator - National Geospatial-Intelligence Agency and
(b) CSGnet. Length Of A Degree Of Latitude And Longitude Calculator 

==Auxiliary latitudes==

There are six auxiliary latitudes that have applications to special problems in geodesy, geophysics and the theory of map projections:
:* Geocentric latitude
:* Reduced (or parametric) latitude
:* Rectifying latitude
:* Authalic latitude
:* Conformal latitude
:* Isometric latitude
The definitions given in this section all relate to locations on the reference ellipsoid but the first two auxiliary latitudes, like the geodetic latitude, can be extended to define a three-dimensional geographic coordinate system as discussed below. The remaining latitudes are not used in this way; they are used only as intermediate constructs in map projections of the reference ellipsoid to the plane or in calculations of geodesics on the ellipsoid. Their numerical values are not of interest. For example no one would need to calculate the authalic latitude of the Eiffel Tower.

The expressions below give the auxiliary latitudes in terms of the geodetic latitude, the semi-major axis, a, and the eccentricity, e. (For inverses see below.) The forms given are, apart from notational variants, those in the standard reference for map projections, namely "Map projections: a working manual" by J. P. Snyder. This paper can be downloaded from USGS pages. Derivations of these expressions may be found in Adams Adams, Oscar S (1921). Latitude Developments Connected With Geodesy and Cartography, (with tables, including a table for Lambert equal area meridional projection). Special Publication No. 67 of the US Coast and Geodetic Survey. A facsimile of this publication is available from the US National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) at http://docs.lib.noaa.gov/rescue/cgs_specpubs/QB275U35no671921.pdf Warning: Adams uses the nomenclature isometric latitude for the conformal latitude of this article. and online publications by Osborne and Rapp. 

===Geocentric latitude===
The definition of geodetic (or geographic) and geocentric latitudes.
The geocentric latitude is the angle between the equatorial plane and the radius from the centre to a point on the surface. The relation between the geocentric latitude () and the geodetic latitude () is derived in the above references as
::
The geodetic and geocentric latitudes are equal at the equator and poles. The value of the squared eccentricity is approximately 0.0067 (depending on the choice of ellipsoid) and the maximum difference of (-) is approximately 11.5 minutes of arc at a geodetic latitude of 455.

===Reduced (or parametric) latitude===
Definition of the reduced latitude (&beta;) on the ellipsoid. 
The reduced or parametric latitude, , is defined by the radius drawn from the centre of the ellipsoid to that point Q on the surrounding sphere (of radius a) which is the projection parallel to the Earth's axis of a point P on the ellipsoid at latitude . It was introduced by Legendre A. M. Legendre, 1806, Analyse des triangles tracs sur la surface d'un sphrode, Mm. de l'Inst. Nat. de France, 130--161 (1st semester). and Bessel F. W. Bessel, 1825, Uber die Berechnung der geographischen Langen und Breiten aus geodatischen Vermessungen, Astron.Nachr., 4(86), 241-254, , translated into English by C. F. F. Karney and R. E. Deakin as The calculation of longitude and latitude from geodesic measurements, Astron. Nachr. 331(8), 852-861 (2010), E-print , http://adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/1825AN......4..241B. who solved problems for geodesics on the ellipsoid by transforming them to an equivalent problem for spherical geodesics by using this smaller latitude. Bessel's notation, , is also used in the current literature. The reduced latitude is related to the geodetic latitude by: 
::
The alternative name arises from the parameterization of the equation of the ellipse describing a meridian section. In terms of Cartesian coordinates p, the distance from the minor axis, and z, the distance above the equatorial plane, the equation of the ellipse is:
::
The Cartesian coordinates of the point are parameterized by 
::
Cayley suggested the term parametric latitude because of the form of these equations. A. Cayley, 1870, On the geodesic lines on an oblate spheroid, Phil. Mag. 40 (4th ser.), 329-340. 

The reduced latitude is not used in the theory of map projections. Its most important application is in the theory of ellipsoid geodesics. (Vincenty, Karney). C. F. F. Karney (2013), Algorithms for geodesics, J. Geodesy 87(1), 43&ndash;55, DOI: 10.1007/s00190-012-0578-z. 

===Rectifying latitude===
The rectifying latitude, , is the meridian distance scaled so that its value at the poles is equal to 90 degrees or /2 radians:
:: 
where the meridian distance from the equator to a latitude  is (see Meridian arc)
::
and the length of the meridian quadrant from the equator to the pole is
::
Using the rectifying latitude to define a latitude on a sphere of radius
::
defines a projection from the ellipsoid to the sphere such that all meridians have true length and uniform scale. The sphere may then be projected to the plane with an equirectangular projection to give a double projection from the ellipsoid to the plane such that all meridians have true length and uniform meridian scale. An example of the use of the rectifying latitude is the Equidistant conic projection. (Snyder, Section 16). The rectifying latitude is also of great importance in the construction of the Transverse Mercator projection.

===Authalic latitude===
The authalic (Greek for same area) latitude, , gives an area-preserving transformation to a sphere.
::
where
::
and
::
and the radius of the sphere is taken as
::
An example of the use of the authalic latitude is the Albers equal-area conic projection. (Snyder, Section 14).

===Conformal latitude===
The conformal latitude, , gives an angle-preserving (conformal) transformation to the sphere.
::,
where gd(x) is the Gudermannian function. (See also Mercator projection.)
The conformal latitude defines a transformation from the ellipsoid to a sphere of arbitrary radius such that the angle of intersection between any two lines on the ellipsoid is the same as the corresponding angle on the sphere (so that the shape of small elements is well preserved). A further conformal transformation from the sphere to the plane gives a conformal double projection from the ellipsoid to the plane. This is not the only way of generating such a conformal projection. For example, the 'exact' version of the Transverse Mercator projection on the ellipsoid is not a double projection. (It does, however, involve a generalisation of the conformal latitude to the complex plane).

===Isometric latitude===
The isometric latitude is conventionally denoted by  (not to be confused with the geocentric latitude): it is used in the development of the ellipsoidal versions of the normal Mercator projection and the Transverse Mercator projection. The name "isometric" arises from the fact that at any point on the ellipsoid equal increments of  and longitude  give rise to equal distance displacements along the meridians and parallels respectively. The graticule defined by the lines of constant  and constant , divides the surface of the ellipsoid into a mesh of squares (of varying size). The isometric latitude is zero at the equator but rapidly diverges from the geodetic latitude, tending to infinity at the poles. The conventional notation is given in Snyder (page 15): 
::
For the normal Mercator projection (on the ellipsoid) this function defines the spacing of the parallels: if the length of the equator on the projection is E (units of length or pixels) then the distance, y, of a parallel of latitude  from the equator is
::
The isometric latitude is closely related to the conformal latitude:
::

===Inverse formulae and series===
The formulae in the previous sections give the auxiliary latitude in terms of the geodetic latitude. The expressions for the geocentric and reduced latitudes may be inverted directly 
but this is impossible in the four remaining cases: the rectifying, authalic, conformal, and isometric latitudes. There are two methods of proceeding. The first is a numerical inversion of the defining equation for each and every particular value of the auxiliary latitude. The methods available are fixed-point iteration and Newton-Raphson root finding. The other, more useful, approach is to express the auxiliary latitude as a series in terms of the geodetic latitude and then invert the series by the method of Lagrange reversion. Such series are presented by Adams who uses Taylor series expansions and gives coefficients in terms of the eccentricity. Osborne derives series to arbitrary order by using the computer algebra package Maxima Maxima computer algebra system and expresses the coefficients in terms of both eccentricity and flattening. The series method is not applicable to the isometric latitude and one must use the conformal latitude in an intermediate step.

===Numerical comparison of auxiliary latitudes===
The following plot shows the magnitude of the difference between the geodetic latitude, (denoted as the "common" latitude on the plot), and the auxiliary latitudes other than the isometric latitude (which diverges to infinity at the poles). In every case the geodetic latitude is the greater. The differences shown on the plot are in arc minutes. The horizontal resolution of the plot fails to make clear that the maxima of the curves are not at 45 but calculation shows that they are within a few arc minutes of 45. Some representative data points are given in the table following the plot. Note the closeness of the conformal and geocentric latitudes. This was exploited in the days of hand calculators to expedite the construction of map projections. (Snyder, page 108).

400px

:
Approximate difference from geodetic latitude ( ) 
 Reduced Authalic Rectifying Conformal Geocentric 
 0 0.00&prime; 0.00&prime; 0.00&prime; 0.00&prime; 0.00&prime; 
 15 2.91&prime; 3.89&prime; 4.37&prime; 5.82&prime; 5.82&prime; 
 30 5.05&prime; 6.73&prime; 7.57&prime; 10.09&prime; 10.09&prime; 
 45 5.84&prime; 7.78&prime; 8.76&prime; 11.67&prime; 11.67&prime; 
 60 5.06&prime; 6.75&prime; 7.59&prime; 10.12&prime; 10.13&prime; 
 75 2.92&prime; 3.90&prime; 4.39&prime; 5.85&prime; 5.85&prime; 
 90 0.00&prime; 0.00&prime; 0.00&prime; 0.00&prime; 0.00&prime; 

==Latitude and coordinate systems==
The geodetic latitude, or any of the auxiliary latitudes defined on the reference ellipsoid, constitutes with longitude a two-dimensional coordinate system on that ellipsoid. To define the position of an arbitrary point it is necessary to extend such a coordinate system into three dimensions. Three latitudes are used in this way: the geodetic, geocentric and reduced latitudes are used in geodetic coordinates, spherical polar coordinates and ellipsoidal coordinates respectively.

===Geodetic coordinates===
 Geodetic coordinates P(&#632;,&lambda;,h)
At an arbitrary point P consider the line PN which is normal to the reference ellipsoid. The geodetic coordinates P(,,h) are the latitude and longitude of the point N on the ellipsoid and the distance PN. This height differs from the height above the geoid or a reference height such as that above mean sea level at a specified location. The direction of PN will also differ from the direction of a vertical plumb line. The relation of these different heights requires knowledge of the shape of the geoid and also the gravity field of the Earth.

===Spherical polar coordinates===

 Geocentric coordinate related to spherical polar
coordinates P(r, , ) 
The geocentric latitude  is the complement of the polar angle  in conventional spherical polar coordinates in which the coordinates of a point are P(r, , ) where r is the distance of P from the centre O,  is the angle between the radius vector and the polar axis and is longitude. Since the normal at a general point on the ellipsoid does not pass through the centre it is clear that points on the normal, which all have the same geodetic latitude, will have differing geocentic latitudes. Spherical polar coordinate systems are used in the analysis of the gravity field.

===Ellipsoidal coordinates===

Ellipsoidal coordinates P(u,&beta;,&lambda;)
The reduced latitude can also be extended to a three-dimensional coordinate system. For a point P not on the reference ellipsoid (semi-axes OA and OB) construct an auxiliary ellipsoid which is confocal (same foci F, F') with the reference ellipsoid: the necessary condition is that the product ae of semi-major axis and eccentricity is the same for both ellipsoids. Let u be the semi-minor axis (OD) of the auxiliary ellipsoid. Further let  be the reduced latitude of P on the auxiliary ellipsoid. The set (u,,) define the ellipsoid coordinates. (Torge Section 4.2.2). These coordinates are the natural choice in models of the gravity field for a uniform distribution of mass bounded by the reference ellipsoid.

===Coordinate conversions===
The relations between the above coordinate systems, and also Cartesian coordinates are not presented here. The transformation between geodetic and Cartesian coordinates may be found in Geodetic system. The relation of Cartesian and spherical polars is given in Spherical coordinate system. The relation of Cartesian and ellipsoidal coordinates is discussed in Torge. 

==Astronomical latitude==
Astronomical latitude () is the angle between the equatorial plane and the true vertical at a point on the surface. The true vertical, the direction of a plumb line, is also the direction of the gravity acceleration, the resultant of the gravitational acceleration (mass-based) and the centrifugal acceleration at that latitude (see Torge.) Astronomic latitude is calculated from angles measured between the zenith and stars whose declination is accurately known.

In general the true vertical at a point on the surface does not exactly coincide with either the normal to the reference ellipsoid or the normal to the geoid. The angle between the astronomic and geodetic normals is usually a few seconds of arc but it is important in geodesy. The reason why it differs from the normal to the geoid is, because the geoid is an idealized, theoretical shape "at mean sea level". Points on the real surface of the earth are usually above or below this idealized geoid surface and here the true vertical can vary slightly. Also, the true vertical at a point at a specific time is influenced by tidal forces, which the theoretical geoid averages out.

Astronomical latitude is not to be confused with declination, the coordinate astronomers used in a similar way to describe the locations of stars north/south of the celestial equator (see equatorial coordinates), nor with ecliptic latitude, the coordinate that astronomers use to describe the locations of stars north/south of the ecliptic (see ecliptic coordinates).

==See also==

*Altitude (mean sea level)
*American Practical Navigator
*Cardinal direction
*Degree Confluence Project
*Geodesy
*Geodetic system
*Geographic coordinate system
*Geographical distance
*Geotagging
*Great-circle distance
*Horse latitudes
*List of cities by latitude
*List of cities by longitude
*List of countries by latitude
*Longitude
*Natural Area Code
*Navigation
*Orders of magnitude (length)
*World Geodetic System

==Footnotes==

==External links==

*
*GEONets Names Server, access to the National Geospatial-Intelligence Agency's (NGA) database of foreign geographic feature names.
*Look-up Latitude and Longitude
*Resources for determining your latitude and longitude
*Convert decimal degrees into degrees, minutes, seconds - Info about decimal to sexagesimal conversion
*Convert decimal degrees into degrees, minutes, seconds
*Distance calculation based on latitude and longitude - JavaScript version
*
*Determination of Latitude by Francis Drake on the Coast of California in 1579
*Longitude and Latitude of Points of Interest
*Length Of A Degree Of Latitude And Longitude Calculator

Lines of latitude



[[Longitude]]

Longitude ( or , British also ), http://www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary/longitude
Oxford English Dictionary is a geographic coordinate that specifies the east-west position of a point on the Earth's surface. It is an angular measurement, usually expressed in degrees and denoted by the Greek letter lambda (). Points with the same longitude lie in lines running from the North Pole to the South Pole. By convention, one of these, the Prime Meridian, which passes through the Royal Observatory, Greenwich, England, was intended to establish the position of zero degrees longitude. The longitude of other places was to be measured as the angle east or west from the Prime Meridian, ranging from 0 at the Prime Meridian to +180 eastward and 180 westward. Specifically, it is the angle between a plane containing the Prime Meridian and a plane containing the North Pole, South Pole and the location in question. (This forms a right-handed coordinate system with the z axis (right hand thumb) pointing from the Earth's center toward the North Pole and the x axis (right hand index finger) extending from Earth's center through the equator at the Prime Meridian.)

A location's north-south position along a meridian is given by its latitude, which is (not quite exactly) the angle between the local vertical and the plane of the Equator.

If the Earth were perfectly spherical and homogeneous, then longitude at a point would just be the angle between a vertical north-south plane through that point and the plane of the Greenwich meridian. Everywhere on Earth the vertical north-south plane would contain the Earth's axis. But the Earth is not homogeneous, and has mountainswhich have gravity and so can shift the vertical plane away from the Earth's axis. The vertical north-south plane still intersects the plane of the Greenwich meridian at some angle; that angle is astronomical longitude, the longitude you calculate from star observations. The longitude shown on maps and GPS devices is the angle between the Greenwich plane and a not-quite-vertical plane through the point; the not-quite-vertical plane is perpendicular to the surface of the spheroid chosen to approximate the Earth's sea-level surface, rather than perpendicular to the sea-level surface itself.

==History==

Amerigo Vespucci's means of determining longitude
The measurement of longitude is important both to cartography and for ocean navigation. Mariners and explorers for most of history struggled to determine longitude. Finding a method of determining longitude took centuries, resulting in the history of longitude recording the effort of some of the greatest scientific minds. 

Latitude was calculated by observing with quadrant or astrolabe the altitude of the sun or of charted stars above the horizon, but longitude is harder.

Amerigo Vespucci was perhaps the first European to proffer a solution, after devoting a great deal of time and energy studying the problem during his sojourns in the New World:
As to longitude, I declare that I found so much difficulty in determining it that I was put to great pains to ascertain the east-west distance I had covered. The final result of my labours was that I found nothing better to do than to watch for and take observations at night of the conjunction of one planet with another, and especially of the conjunction of the moon with the other planets, because the moon is swifter in her course than any other planet. I compared my observations with an almanac. After I had made experiments many nights, one night, the twenty-third of August 1499, there was a conjunction of the moon with Mars, which according to the almanac was to occur at midnight or a half hour before. I found that...at midnight Mars's position was three and a half degrees to the east. Vespucci, Amerigo. "Letter from Seville to Lorenzo di Pier Francesco de' Medici, 1500." Pohl, Frederick J. Amerigo Vespucci: Pilot Major. New York: Columbia University Press, 1945. 76-90. Page 80. John Harrison solved the greatest problem of his day. 
By comparing the positions of the moon and Mars with their anticipated positions, Vespucci was able to crudely deduce his longitude. But this method had several limitations: First, it required the occurrence of a specific astronomical event (in this case, Mars passing through the same right ascension as the moon), and the observer needed to anticipate this event via an astronomical almanac. One needed also to know the precise time, which was difficult to ascertain in foreign lands. Finally, it required a stable viewing platform, rendering the technique useless on the rolling deck of a ship at sea. See Lunar distance (navigation).

In 1612 Galileo Galilei proposed that with sufficiently accurate knowledge of the orbits of the moons of Jupiter one could use their positions as a universal clock and this would make possible the determination of longitude, but the method he devised was impracticable for navigators on ships. In the early 18th century there were several maritime disasters attributable to serious errors in reckoning position at sea, such as the loss of four ships of the fleet of Sir Cloudesley Shovell in the Scilly naval disaster of 1707. Motivated by these disasters, in 1714 the British government established the Board of Longitude: prizes were to be awarded to the first person to demonstrate a practical method for determining the longitude of a ship at sea. These prizes motivated many to search for a solution.
Drawing of Earth with Longitudes
John Harrison, a self-educated English clockmaker then invented the marine chronometer, a key piece in solving the problem of accurately establishing longitude at sea, thus revolutionising and extending the possibility of safe long distance sea travel. "Longitude clock comes alive". BBC. March 11, 2002. Though the British rewarded John Harrison for his marine chronometer in 1773, chronometers remained very expensive and the lunar distance method continued to be used for decades. Finally, the combination of the availability of marine chronometers and wireless telegraph time signals put an end to the use of lunars in the 20th century.

Unlike latitude, which has the equator as a natural starting position, there is no natural starting position for longitude. Therefore, a reference meridian had to be chosen. It was a popular practice to use a nation's capital as the starting point, but other locations were also used. While British cartographers had long used the Greenwich meridian in London, other references were used elsewhere, including: El Hierro, Rome, Copenhagen, Jerusalem, Saint Petersburg, Pisa, Paris, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, and Washington D.C. In 1884 the International Meridian Conference adopted the Greenwich meridian as the universal Prime Meridian or zero point of longitude.

==Noting and calculating longitude==
Longitude is given as an angular measurement ranging from 0 at the Prime Meridian to +180 eastward and 180 westward. The Greek letter  (lambda), Coordinate Conversion " = Longitude east of Greenwich (for longitude west of Greenwich, use a minus sign)."John P. Snyder, Map Projections, A Working Manual, USGS Professional Paper 1395, page ix is used to denote the location of a place on Earth east or west of the Prime Meridian.

Each degree of longitude is sub-divided into 60 minutes, each of which is divided into 60 seconds. A longitude is thus specified in sexagesimal notation as 23 27 30 E. For higher precision, the seconds are specified with a decimal fraction. An alternative representation uses degrees and minutes, where parts of a minute are expressed in decimal notation with a fraction, thus: 23 27.500 E. Degrees may also be expressed as a decimal fraction: 23.45833 E. For calculations, the angular measure may be converted to radians, so longitude may also be expressed in this manner as a signed fraction of  (pi), or an unsigned fraction of 2.

For calculations, the West/East suffix is replaced by a negative sign in the western hemisphere. Confusingly, the convention of negative for East is also sometimes seen. The preferred conventionthat East be positiveis consistent with a right-handed Cartesian coordinate system, with the North Pole up. A specific longitude may then be combined with a specific latitude (usually positive in the northern hemisphere) to give a precise position on the Earth's surface.

Longitude at a point may be determined by calculating the time difference between that at its location and Coordinated Universal Time (UTC). Since there are 24 hours in a day and 360 degrees in a circle, the sun moves across the sky at a rate of 15 degrees per hour (360/24 hours = 15 per hour). So if the time zone a person is in is three hours ahead of UTC then that person is near 45 longitude (3 hours  15 per hour = 45). The word near was used because the point might not be at the center of the time zone; also the time zones are defined politically, so their centers and boundaries often do not lie on meridians at multiples of 15. In order to perform this calculation, however, a person needs to have a chronometer (watch) set to UTC and needs to determine local time by solar or astronomical observation. The details are more complex than described here: see the articles on Universal Time and on the equation of time for more details.

=== Singularity and discontinuity of longitude ===
Note that the longitude is singular at the Poles and calculations that are sufficiently accurate for other positions, may be inaccurate at or near the Poles. Also the discontinuity at the 180 meridian must be handled with care in calculations. An example is a calculation of east displacement by subtracting two longitudes, which gives the wrong answer if the two positions are on either side of this meridian. To avoid these complexities, consider replacing latitude and longitude with another horizontal position representation in calculation.

==Plate movement and longitude== 
The Earth's tectonic plates move relative to one another in different directions at speeds on the order of 50 to 100mm per year. So points on the Earth's surface on different plates are always in motion relative to one another, for example, the longitudinal difference between a point on the Equator in Uganda, on the African Plate, and a point on the Equator in Ecuador, on the South American Plate, is increasing by about 0.0014 arcseconds per year. These tectonic movements likewise affect latitude.

If a global reference frame such as WGS84 is used, the longitude of a place on the surface will change from year to year. To minimize this change, when dealing just with points on a single plate, a different reference frame can be used, whose coordinates are fixed to a particular plate, such as NAD83 for North America or ETRS89 for Europe.

==Length of a degree of longitude==

The length of a degree of longitude depends only on the radius of a circle of latitude. For a sphere of radius a that radius at latitude  is (cos ) times a, and the length of a one-degree (or /180 radians) arc along a circle of latitude is
:: 

 
 0 110.574 km 111.320 km 
 15 110.649 km 107.551 km 
 30 110.852 km 96.486 km 
 45 111.132 km 78.847 km 
 60 111.412 km 55.800 km 
 75 111.618 km 28.902 km 
 90 111.694 km 0.000 km 

When the Earth is modelled by an ellipsoid this arc length becomes Osborne, P (2008)The Mercator Projections(Chapter 5) Rapp, Richard H. (1991). Geometric Geodesy, Part I, Dept. of Geodetic Science and Surveying, Ohio State Univ., Columbus, Ohio.(Chapter 3) 
::
where e, the eccentricity of the ellipsoid, is related to the major and minor axes (the equatorial and polar radii respectively) by

::

An alternative formula is

:: 
:where 

Cos  decreases from 1 at the equator to zero at the poles, so the length of a degree of longitude decreases likewise. This contrasts with the small (1%) increase in the length of a degree of latitude, equator to pole. The table shows both for the WGS84 ellipsoid with a = 6,378,137.0 m and b = 6,356,752.3142 m. Note that the distance between two points 1 degree apart on the same circle of latitude, measured along that circle of latitude, is slightly more than the shortest (geodesic) distance between those points; the difference is less than 0.6 m.

==Ecliptic latitude and longitude==

Ecliptic latitude and longitude are defined for the planets, stars, and other celestial bodies in a broadly similar way to that in which terrestrial latitude and longitude are defined, but there is a special difference. 

The plane of zero latitude for celestial objects is the plane of the ecliptic. This plane is not parallel to the plane of the celestial equator, but rather is inclined to it by the obliquity of the ecliptic, which currently has a value of about 23 26. The closest celestial counterpart to terrestrial latitude is declination, and the closest celestial counterpart to terrestrial longitude is right ascension. These celestial coordinates bear the same relationship to the celestial equator as terrestrial latitude and longitude do to the terrestrial equator, and they are also more frequently used in astronomy than celestial longitude and latitude. 

The polar axis (relative to the celestial equator) is perpendicular to the plane of the Equator, and parallel to the terrestrial polar axis. But the (north) pole of the ecliptic, relevant to the definition of ecliptic latitude, is the normal to the ecliptic plane nearest to the direction of the celestial north pole of the Equator, i.e. 23 26 away from it. 

Ecliptic latitude is measured from 0 to 90 north (+) or south () of the ecliptic. Ecliptic longitude is measured from 0 to 360 eastward (the direction that the Sun appears to move relative to the stars), along the ecliptic from the vernal equinox. The equinox at a specific date and time is a fixed equinox, such as that in the J2000 reference frame.

However, the equinox moves because it is the intersection of two planes, both of which move. The ecliptic is relatively stationary, wobbling within a 4 diameter circle relative to the fixed stars over millions of years under the gravitational influence of the other planets. The greatest movement is a relatively rapid gyration of Earth's equatorial plane whose pole traces a 47 diameter circle caused by the Moon. This causes the equinox to precess westward along the ecliptic about 50 per year. This moving equinox is called the equinox of date. Ecliptic longitude relative to a moving equinox is used whenever the positions of the Sun, Moon, planets, or stars at dates other than that of a fixed equinox is important, as in calendars, astrology, or celestial mechanics. The 'error' of the Julian or Gregorian calendar is always relative to a moving equinox. The years, months, and days of the Chinese calendar all depend on the ecliptic longitudes of date of the Sun and Moon. The 30 zodiacal segments used in astrology are also relative to a moving equinox. Celestial mechanics (here restricted to the motion of solar system bodies) uses both a fixed and moving equinox. Sometimes in the study of Milankovitch cycles, the invariable plane of the solar system is substituted for the moving ecliptic. Longitude may be denominated from 0 to radians in either case.

==Longitude on bodies other than Earth==

Planetary co-ordinate systems are defined relative to their mean axis of rotation and various definitions of longitude depending on the body. The longitude systems of most of those bodies with observable rigid surfaces have been defined by references to a surface feature such as a crater. The north pole is that pole of rotation that lies on the north side of the invariable plane of the solar system (near the ecliptic). The location of the Prime Meridian as well as the position of body's north pole on the celestial sphere may vary with time due to precession of the axis of rotation of the planet (or satellite). If the position angle of the body's Prime Meridian increases with time, the body has a direct (or prograde) rotation; otherwise the rotation is said to be retrograde.

In the absence of other information, the axis of rotation is assumed to be normal to the mean orbital plane; Mercury and most of the satellites are in this category. For many of the satellites, it is assumed that the rotation rate is equal to the mean orbital period. In the case of the giant planets, since their surface features are constantly changing and moving at various rates, the rotation of their magnetic fields is used as a reference instead. In the case of the Sun, even this criterion fails (because its magnetosphere is very complex and does not really rotate in a steady fashion), and an agreed-upon value for the rotation of its equator is used instead.

For planetographic longitude, west longitudes (i.e., longitudes measured positively to the west) are used when the rotation is prograde, and east longitudes (i.e., longitudes measured positively to the east) when the rotation is retrograde. In simpler terms, imagine a distant, non-orbiting observer viewing a planet as it rotates. Also suppose that this observer is within the plane of the planet's equator. A point on the Equator that passes directly in front of this observer later in time has a higher planetographic longitude than a point that did so earlier in time.

However, planetocentric longitude is always measured positively to the east, regardless of which way the planet rotates. East is defined as the counter-clockwise direction around the planet, as seen from above its north pole, and the north pole is whichever pole more closely aligns with the Earth's north pole. Longitudes traditionally have been written using "E" or "W" instead of "+" or "" to indicate this polarity. For example, the following all mean the same thing:
*91
*91W
*+269
*269E.

The reference surfaces for some planets (such as Earth and Mars) are ellipsoids of revolution for which the equatorial radius is larger than the polar radius; in other words, they are oblate spheroids. Smaller bodies (Io, Mimas, etc.) tend to be better approximated by triaxial ellipsoids; however, triaxial ellipsoids would render many computations more complicated, especially those related to map projections. Many projections would lose their elegant and popular properties. For this reason spherical reference surfaces are frequently used in mapping programs.

The modern standard for maps of Mars (since about 2002) is to use planetocentric coordinates. The meridian of Mars is located at Airy-0 crater. Where is zero degrees longitude on Mars? - Copyright 2000 - 2010  European Space Agency. All rights reserved. 

Tidally-locked bodies have a natural reference longitude passing through the point nearest to their parent body: 0 the center of the primary-facing hemisphere, 90 the center of the leading hemisphere, 180 the center of the anti-primary hemisphere, and 270 the center of the trailing hemisphere. First map of extraterrestrial planet - Center of Astrophysics. However, libration due to non-circular orbits or axial tilts causes this point to move around any fixed point on the celestial body like an analemma.

==See also==

*American Practical Navigator
*Cardinal direction
*Geodesy
*Geodetic system
*Geographic coordinate system
*Geographical distance
*Geotagging
*Great-circle distance
*History of longitude
*Horse latitudes
*Latitude
*List of cities by latitude
*List of cities by longitude
*Meridian arc
*Natural Area Code
*Navigation
*Orders of magnitude
*World Geodetic System

==References==

== External links ==

* Resources for determining your latitude and longitude
* IAU/IAG Working Group On Cartographic Coordinates and Rotational Elements of the Planets and Satellites
*"Longitude forged": an essay exposing a hoax solution to the problem of calculating longitude, undetected in Dava Sobel's Longitude, from TLS, November 12, 2008.
* Board of Longitude Collection, Cambridge Digital Library - complete digital version of the Board's archive
* Longitude And Latitude Of Points of Interest
* Length Of A Degree Of Latitude And Longitude Calculator

*



[[Linus Torvalds]]

Linus Benedict Torvalds (; born December 28, 1969) is a Finnish American Citizen Linus, a September 13, 2010 post from LWN.net software engineer, who was the principal force behind the development of the Linux kernel. He later became the chief architect of the Linux kernel and now acts as the project's coordinator. He also created the revision control system Git as well as the diving log software Subsurface. He was honored, along with Shinya Yamanaka, with the 2012 Millennium Technology Prize by the Technology Academy Finland "in recognition of his creation of a new open source operating system for computers leading to the widely used Linux kernel". He is also the recipient of the 2014 IEEE Computer Society Computer Pioneer Award. 

==Biography==

===Early years===
Torvalds was born in Helsinki, Finland. He is the son of journalists Anna and Nils Torvalds, Torvalds and the grandson of poet Ole Torvalds. Both of his parents were campus radicals at the University of Helsinki in the 1960s. His family belongs to the Swedish-speaking minority (5.5% of Finland's population). Torvalds was named after Linus Pauling, the Nobel Prizewinning American chemist, although in the book Rebel Code: Linux and the Open Source Revolution, Torvalds is quoted as saying, "I think I was named equally for Linus the Peanuts cartoon character", noting that this makes him half "Nobel-prize-winning chemist" and half "blanket-carrying cartoon character". 

Torvalds attended the University of Helsinki between 1988 and 1996, graduating with a master's degree in computer science from NODES research group. His academic career was interrupted after his first year of study when he joined the Finnish Army, selecting the 11-month officer training program to fulfill the mandatory military service of Finland. In the army he held the rank of second lieutenant, with the role of a ballistic calculation officer. Torvalds, p. 29 In 1990, he resumed his university studies, and was exposed to UNIX for the first time, in the form of a DEC MicroVAX running ULTRIX. Torvalds, p. 53 His M.Sc. thesis was titled Linux: A Portable Operating System. 

His interest in computers began with a Commodore VIC-20. Torvalds, pp. 67 After the VIC-20 he purchased a Sinclair QL, which he modified extensively, especially its operating system. He programmed an assembly language and a text editor for the QL, as well as a few games. Torvalds, pp. 4146 Torvalds, Linus: GMOVE. Program listing. In MikroBitti 11/1986, p. 63. He is known to have written a Pac-Man clone named Cool Man. On January 5, 1991 he purchased an Intel 80386-based IBM PC Torvalds, p. 60 before receiving his MINIX copy, which in turn enabled him to begin work on Linux. 

===Later years===
After a visit to Transmeta in late 1996, Torvalds accepted a position at the company in California, where he would work from February 1997 until June 2003. He then moved to the Open Source Development Labs, which has since merged with the Free Standards Group to become the Linux Foundation, under whose auspices he continues to work. In June 2004, Torvalds and his family moved to Portland, Oregon, to be closer to the OSDL's Beaverton, Oregonbased headquarters.

From 1997 to 1999 he was involved in 86open helping to choose the standard binary format for Linux and Unix. In 1999 he was named by the MIT Technology Review TR100 as one of the world's top 100 innovators under age 35. 

In 1999 Red Hat and VA Linux, both leading developers of Linux-based software, presented Torvalds with stock options in gratitude for his creation. That same year both companies went public and Torvalds' share value temporarily shot up to roughly $20 million. 

His personal mascot is a penguin nicknamed Tux, Re: Linux Logo prototype., a Thu, May 9, 1996 message from Linus Torvalds (torvalds@cs.helsinki.fi) which has been widely adopted by the Linux community as the mascot of the Linux kernel. . linux.org 

Although Torvalds believes "open source is the only right way to do software", he also has said that he uses the "best tool for the job", even if that includes proprietary software. , 9:5010:00 He was criticized for his use and alleged advocacy of the proprietary BitKeeper software for version control in the Linux kernel. Torvalds subsequently wrote a free-software replacement for BitKeeper called Git.

In 2008 Torvalds stated that he used the Fedora distribution of Linux because it had fairly good support for the PowerPC processor architecture, which he had favoured at the time. His usage of Fedora was confirmed in a later 2012 interview. 

Currently, the Linux Foundation sponsors Torvalds so he can work full-time on improving Linux. About Us. The Linux Foundation. Retrieved on June 19, 2013. 

==The Linus/Linux connection==

Initially, Torvalds wanted to call the kernel he developed Freax (a combination of "free", "freak", and the letter X to indicate that it is a Unix-like system), but his friend Ari Lemmke, who administered the FTP server where the kernel was first hosted for download, named Torvalds' directory linux. 

==Authority and trademark==
As of 2006, approximately two percent of the Linux kernel was written by Torvalds himself. Because thousands have contributed to the Linux kernel, this percentage is one of the largest contributions to it. However, he stated in 2012 that his own personal contribution is mostly merging code written by others, with little programming. Torvalds retains the highest authority to decide which new code is incorporated into the standard Linux kernel. Henrik Ingo. Open Life: The Philosophy of Open Source. Ingram, 2005. 4245.Online version 

Torvalds owns the "Linux" trademark and monitors the use of it, chiefly through the Linux Mark Institute.

==Personal life==
Torvalds in 2002

Linus Torvalds is married to Tove Torvalds (ne Monni)a six-time Finnish national karate championwhom he first met in the autumn of 1993. Torvalds, p. 123 Linus was running introductory computer laboratory exercises for students and instructed the course attendants to send him an e-mail as a test, to which Tove responded with an e-mail asking for a date. Tove and Linus were later married and have three daughters, Patricia Miranda (born 1996), Daniela Yolanda (born 1998), and Celeste Amanda (born 2000), two of whom were born in the United States. The Linux kernel's reboot system call accepts their dates of birth (written in hexadecimal) as magic values. 

Torvalds describes himself as "completely a-religiousatheist", adding that "I find that people seem to think religion brings morals and appreciation of nature. I actually think it detracts from both. It gives people the excuse to say, 'Oh, nature was just created,' and so the act of creation is seen to be something miraculous. I appreciate the fact that, 'Wow, it's incredible that something like this could have happened in the first place.'" He later added that while in Europe religion is mostly a personal issue, in America it has become very politicized. When discussing the issue of church and state separation, Torvalds also said, "Yeah, it's kind of ironic that in many European countries, there is actually a kind of legal binding between the state and the state religion." 

In 2010, Torvalds became a United States citizen and registered to vote in the United States. He is unaffiliated with any U.S. political party, saying, "I have way too much personal pride to want to be associated with any of them, quite frankly." 

==Recognition==

===IEEE Computer Pioneer Award===
On 23 April 2014, the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers named Torvalds as the 2014 recipient of the IEEE Computer Society's Computer Pioneer Award. The Computer Pioneer Award was established in 1981 by the IEEE Computer Society Board of Governors to recognize and honor the vision of those whose efforts resulted in the creation and continued vitality of the computer industry. The award is presented to outstanding individuals whose main contribution to the concepts and development of the computer field was made at least 15 years earlier. 

===Internet Hall of Fame===
On April 23, 2012 at Internet Society's Global INET conference in Geneva, Switzerland, Torvalds was one of the inaugural inductees into the Internet Hall of Fame, one of ten in the Innovators category and thirty-three overall inductees. 

===Millennium Technology Prize===
On April 20, 2012, Torvalds was declared one of two winners of that year's Millennium Technology Prize, along with Shinya Yamanaka. The honor is widely described as technology's equivalent of the Nobel Prize.

===Academics===
In 1997, Torvalds received his Master degree (Laudatur Grade) from the Department of Computer Science at the University of Helsinki. Two years later he received honorary doctor status at Stockholm University, and in 2000 he received the same honor from his alma mater. Torvalds, p. 28 
University of Helsinki has named an auditorium after Torvalds and his computer is on display at the Department of Computer Science.

In August 2005, Torvalds received the Vollum Award from Reed College. 

===Industry===
In 1998 Torvalds received an EFF Pioneer Award. In 2000 he was awarded the Lovelace Medal from the British Computer Society. Talking to Torvalds, British Computer Society, September 2007. In 2001, he shared the Takeda Award for Social/Economic Well-Being with Richard Stallman and Ken Sakamura. In 2008, he was inducted into the Hall of Fellows of the Computer History Museum in Mountain View, California. He was awarded the C&C Prize by the NEC Corporation in 2010 for "contributions to the advancement of the information technology industry, education, research, and the improvement of our lives". 

===Media===
Time magazine has recognized Torvalds multiple times:
*In 2000, he was 17th in their Poll. 
*In 2004, he was named one of the most influential people in the world. 
*In 2006, the magazine's Europe edition named him one of the revolutionary heroes of the past 60 years. 

InfoWorld presented him with the 2000 Award for Industry Achievement. Nicholas Petreley. This year's Award for Industry Achievement goes to the creator of Linux, Linus Torvalds. InfoWorld. Jan 17, 2000. Page 82. In 2005 Torvalds appeared as one of "the best managers" in a survey by BusinessWeek. In 2006, Business 2.0 magazine named him one of "10 people who don't matter" because the growth of Linux has shrunk Torvalds' individual impact. 

In summer 2004, viewers of YLE (the Finnish Broadcasting Company) placed Torvalds 16th in the network's 100 Greatest Finns. In 2010, as part of a series called The Britannica Guide to the World's Most Influential People, Torvalds was listed among The 100 Most Influential Inventors of All Time (ISBN 9781615300037). 

===Space===
In 1996, the asteroid 9793 Torvalds was named after him. In 2003, the naming of an asteroid moon (Linus) was motivated in part by the fact that the discoverer was an enthusiastic Linux user.

===Patents===
As of March 2011, Torvalds has been granted 35 patents worldwide (application and granted patents). 

===Desktop environment criticism===

In 2005, on the official GNOME developmental mailing lists, Torvalds encouraged users to switch to K Desktop Environment 3 rather than use GNOME. However, Torvalds thought KDE Plasma Desktop 4.0 was a "disaster" because of its lack of maturity, and so he had switched to GNOME by 2009. Dissatisfied with his perceived loss of productivity, he switched to Xfce after the GNOME 3 release, making another harsh post against GNOME. Linus Torvalds Ditches GNOME 3 For Xfce - Slashdot. Linux.slashdot.org (August 3, 2011). Retrieved on June 19, 2013. After improved KDE versions were made, he switched back to KDE Plasma Desktop 4 but soon switched back to GNOME 3 stating that "it has been getting less painful" with Frippery and gnome-tweak-tool which he suggested to be merged into GNOME. Nick Heath. (March 4, 2013) Linus Torvalds switches back to Gnome 3.x desktop. ZDNet. Retrieved on June 19, 2013. 

===Possible NSA approach===
In September 2013, Torvalds was asked at the LinuxCon conference whether he had been approached by a US government agency to add backdoors into Linux; he responded with a verbal "no" while nodding his head "yes". Did NSA contact Linus for a backdoor in Linux? (updated) He later confirmed that it was obviously a joke. http://mashable.com/2013/09/19/linus-torvalds-backdoor-linux/ However, Linus' father Nils states:

==See also==
* Linus's Law
* TanenbaumTorvalds debate

==References==

==Bibliography==
* 

==Further reading==
* 

==External links==

*Linus' blog at blogspot.com
*
*Linus Torvalds and His Five Entrepreneurial Lessons
*
*
*Ten years of NODES
*Linus Torvalds: Linux succeeded thanks to selfishness and trust
*Torvalds interview



[[Trade union]]

A trade union (British English and Australian English  trades union is also used), labour union (Canadian English) or labor union (American English) is an organization of workers who have united together to achieve common goals such as protecting the integrity of its trade, achieving higher pay and benefits such as health care and retirement, increasing the number of employees an employer assigns to complete the work, safety standards, and better working conditions. The trade union, through its leadership, bargains with the employer on behalf of union members (rank and file members) and negotiates labour contracts (collective bargaining) with employers. The most common purpose of these associations or unions is "maintaining or improving the conditions of their employment". ch. I This may include the negotiation of wages, work rules, complaint procedures, rules governing hiring, firing and promotion of workers, benefits, workplace safety and policies.

Unions may organize a particular section of skilled workers (craft unionism), Poole, M., 1986. Industrial Relations: Origins and Patterns of National Diversity. London UK: Routledge. a cross-section of workers from various trades (general unionism), ibid. or attempt to organize all workers within a particular industry (industrial unionism). The agreements negotiated by a union are binding on the rank and file members and the employer and in some cases on other non-member workers. Trade unions traditionally have a constitution which details the governance of their bargaining unit and also have governance at various levels of government depending on the industry that binds them legally to their negotiations and functioning.

Originating in Europe, trade unions became popular in many countries during the Industrial Revolution, when the lack of skill necessary to perform most jobs shifted employment bargaining power almost completely to the employers' side, causing many workers to be mistreated and underpaid. Trade unions may be composed of individual workers, professionals, past workers, students, apprentices and/or the unemployed.

==Definition==

Since the publication of the History of Trade Unionism (1894) by Sidney and Beatrice Webb, the predominant historical view is that a trade union "is a continuous association of wage earners for the purpose of maintaining or improving the conditions of their employment." Karl Marx described trade unions thus; - ...the value of labour-power constitutes the conscious and explicit foundation of the trade unions, whose importance for the working class can scarcely be overestimated. The trade unions aim at nothing less than to prevent the reduction of wages below the level that is traditionally maintained in the various branches of industry. That is to say, they wish to prevent the price of labour-power from falling below its value (Capital V1, 1867, p. 1069).

A modern definition by the Australian Bureau of Statistics states that a trade union is "an organization consisting predominantly of employees, the principal activities of which include the negotiation of rates of pay and conditions of employment for its members." 

Yet historian R.A. Leeson, in United we Stand (1971), said:

Recent historical research by Bob James in Craft, Trade or Mystery (2001) puts forward the view that trade unions are part of a broader movement of benefit societies, which includes medieval guilds, Freemasons, Oddfellows, friendly societies, and other fraternal organizations.

The 18th century economist Adam Smith noted the imbalance in the rights of workers in regards to owners (or "masters"). In The Wealth of Nations, Book I, chapter 8, Smith wrote:

As Smith noted, unions were illegal for many years in most countries, although Smith argued that it should remain illegal to fix wages or prices by employees or employers. There were severe penalties for attempting to organize unions, up to and including execution. Despite this, unions were formed and began to acquire political power, eventually resulting in a body of labour law that not only legalized organizing efforts, but codified the relationship between employers and those employees organized into unions.

==History==
Early 19th century workplace militancy manifested in the Luddite riots, when unemployed workers destroyed labour saving machines
The origins of trade unions can be traced back to 18th century Britain, where the rapid expansion of industrial society then taking place, drew women, children, rural workers, and immigrants into the work force in large numbers and in new roles. This pool of unskilled and semi-skilled labour spontaneously organized in fits and starts throughout its beginnings, and would later be an important arena for the development of trade unions. Trade unions have sometimes been seen as successors to the guilds of medieval Europe, though the relationship between the two is disputed, as the masters of the guilds employed workers (apprentices and journeyman) who were not allowed to organize. (1928). The Guild and the Trade Union. The Age. 

Trade unions and collective bargaining were outlawed from no later than the middle of the 14th century when the Ordinance of Labourers was enacted in the Kingdom of England. As collective bargaining and early worker unions grew with the onset of the Industrial Revolution, the government began to clamp down on what it saw as the danger of popular unrest at the time of war. In 1799, the Combination Act was passed, which banned trade unions and collective bargaining by British workers. Although the unions were subject to often severe repression until 1824, they were already widespread in cities such as London. Workplace militancy had also manifested itself as Luddism and had been prominent in struggles such as the 1820 Rising in Scotland, in which 60,000 workers went on a general strike, which was soon crushed. Sympathy for the plight of the workers brought repeal of the acts in 1824, although the Combination Act 1825 severely restricted their activity.

By the 1810s, the first labour organizations to bring together workers of divergent occupations were formed. Possibly the first such union was the General Union of Trades, also known as the Philanthropic Society, founded in 1818 in Manchester. The latter name was to hide the organization's real purpose in a time when trade unions were still illegal. 

===National general unions===
Poster issued by the London Trades Council, advertising a demonstration held on June 2, 1873
The first attempts at setting up a national general union were made in the 1820s and 30s; the National Association for the Protection of Labour was established in 1830 by John Doherty, after an apparently unsuccessful attempt to create a similar national presence with the National Union of Cotton-spinners. The Association quickly enrolled approximately 150 unions, consisting mostly of textile related unions, but also including mechanics, blacksmiths, and various others. Membership rose to between 10,000 and 20,000 individuals spread across the five counties of Lancashire, Cheshire, Derby, Nottingham, and Leicester within a year. To establish awareness and legitimacy, the union started the weekly Voice of the People publication, having the declared intention "to unite the productive classes of the community in one common bond of union."

In 1834, the socialist Robert Owen established the Grand National Consolidated Trades Union. The organisation attracted a range of socialists from Owenites to revolutionaries and played a part in the protests after the Tolpuddle Martyrs' case, but soon collapsed.

More permanent trade unions were established from the 1850s, better resourced but often less radical. The London Trades Council was founded in 1860, and the Sheffield Outrages spurred the establishment of the Trades Union Congress in 1868, the first long-lived national trade union center. By this time, the existence and the demands of the trade unions were becoming accepted by liberal middle-class opinion. In Principles of Political Economy (1871) John Stuart Mill wrote:

"If it were possible for the working classes, by combining among themselves, to raise or keep up the general rate of wages, it needs hardly be said that this would be a thing not to be punished, but to be welcomed and rejoiced at. Unfortunately the effect is quite beyond attainment by such means. The multitudes who compose the working class are too numerous and too widely scattered to combine at all, much more to combine effectually. If they could do so, they might doubtless succeed in diminishing the hours of labour, and obtaining the same wages for less work. They would also have a limited power of obtaining, by combination, an increase of general wages at the expense of profits." Principles of Political Economy (1871)Book V, Ch.10, para. 5 
Labour union demonstrators held at bay by soldiers during the 1912 Lawrence textile strike in Lawrence, Massachusetts

===Legalisation and expansion===
Trade unions were finally legalised in 1871, after a Royal Commission on Trade Unions in 1867 agreed that the establishment of the organisations was to the advantage of both employers and employees.

This period also saw the growth of trade unions in other industrializing countries, especially the United States, Germany and France.

In the United States, the first effective nation-wide labour organisation was the Knights of Labor, in 1869, which began to grow after 1880. Legalisation occurred slowly as a result of a series of court decisions. The Federation of Organized Trades and Labor Unions began in 1881 as a federation of different unions that did not directly enroll workers. In 1886, it became known as the American Federation of Labor or AFL.

In Germany the Free Association of German Trade Unions was formed in 1897 after the conservative Anti-Socialist Laws of Chancellor Otto von Bismarck were repealed.

In France, labour organisation was illegal until 1884. The Bourse du Travail was founded in 1887 and merged with the Fdration nationale des syndicats (National Federation of Trade Unions) in 1895 to form the General Confederation of Labour (France).

==Prevalence==
Union election campaigns with an illegal firing increased during the Reagan administration 
The prevalence of unions in various countries can be assessed using the measure union density. The definition of union density is the proportion of paid workers who are union members. Johnson, S., 2004. An empirical examination of union density in six countries: Canada, Ecuador, Mexico, Nicaragua, the United States and Venezuela. Washington, DC, USA: Inter-American Development Bank, Research Network Working Paper R-487, p.5, available at: http://www.iadb.org/res/publications/pubfiles/pubR-487.pdf. 

Trade union density figures are provided below for various countries: Johnson, S., 2004. An empirical examination of union density in six countries: Canada, Ecuador, Mexico, Nicaragua, the United States and Venezuela. Washington, DC, USA: Inter-American Development Bank, Research Network Working Paper R-487, available at: http://www.iadb.org/res/publications/pubfiles/pubR-487.pdf. Hall-Jones, P., 2010. Unionism and Economic Performance. Internet article & statistics. Available at: http://www.newunionism.net/library/member%20contributions/news/Unionism%20and%20Economic%20Performance.htm OECD, 2010. Statistics on Trade Union Density. Paris, France: OECD.stat Extracts Website . Available at: http://stats.oecd.org/Index.aspx?DataSetCode=UN_DEN. 

==Trade unions by country==

===United Kingdom===

Moderate New Model Unions dominated the union movement from the mid-19th century and where trade unionism was stronger than the political labour movement until the formation and growth of the Labour Party in the early years of the 20th century.

Trade unionism in the United Kingdom was a major factor in economic crises during the 1960s and in particular the 1970s, culminating in the Winter of Discontent of late 1978 and early 1979, when a significant percentage of the nation's public sector workers went on strike. By this stage, some 12,000,000 workers in the United Kingdom were trade union members. However, the election of the Conservative Party led by Margaret Thatcher at the general election in May 1979, at the expense of Labour's James Callaghan, saw substantial trade union reform which saw the level of strikes fall. The level of trade union membership also fell sharply in the 1980s, and continued falling for most of the 1990s. The long decline of most of the industries in which manual trade unions were strong &ndash; e.g. steel, coal, printing, the docks &ndash; was one of the causes of this loss of trade union members. 

In 2011 there were 6,135,126 members in TUC-affiliated unions, down from a peak of 12,172,508 in 1980. Trade union density was 14.1% in the private sector and 56.5% in the public sector. 

===Germany===

Trade unions in Germany have a history reaching back to the German revolution in 1848, and still play an important role in the German economy and society. The most important labor organization is the German Confederation of Trade Unions (Deutsche Gewerkschaftsbund or DGB), which represents more than 6 million people (31 December 2011) and is the umbrella association of several single trade unions for special economic sectors.

===Scandinavia===
Workers on strike in Oslo, Norway, 2012
Trade unions (Swedish: Fackfreningar) has a long tradition in Scandinavian society. Beginning in the mid-1800s, trade unions today have a large impact on the nature of employment and worker's rights in many of the Nordic countries. One of the largest trade unions in Sweden is the Swedish Confederation of Trade Unions, (LO, Landsorganisationen), incorporating unions such as the Swedish Metal Worker's Union (IF Metall = Industrifacket Metall), The Swedish Electrician's Union (Svenska elektrikerfrbundet) and the Swedish Municipality Worker's Union (Svenska kommunalarbetarefrbundet).

Today, the highest rates of union membership are in the Scandinavian countries. In 2010, the percentage of workers belonging to a union (or total labor union "density") was 68.3% in Sweden and 54.8% in Norway, while it was 34.9% in Ireland and 18.4% in Germany. "Trade Union Density" OECD StatExtracts. 2010. Accessed: 28 April 2013. Excluding full-time students working part-time, Swedish union density was 70% in 2011, 2012 and 2013. Anders Kjellberg Kollektivavtalens tckningsgrad samt organisationsgraden hos arbetsgivarfrbund och fackfrbund, Department of Sociology, Lund University. Studies in Social Policy, Industrial Relations, Working Life and Mobility. Research Reports 2013:1, Appendix 3 Tables A-D (in English). Updated in 2014 In all the Nordic countries with a Ghent system - Sweden, Denmark and Finland - union density is about 70%. The considerably raised fees to Swedish union unemployment funds carried out by the new centre-right government in January 2007 caused large membership losses in both unemployment funds and trade unions. From 2006 to 2008 union density declined by six percentage points: from 77% to 71%. Anders Kjellberg "The Decline in Swedish Union Density since 2007" Nordic Journal of Working Life Studies (NJWLS) Vol. 1. No 1 (August 2011), pp. 67-93 

===United States===

Labor unions are legally recognized as representatives of workers in many industries in the United States. Their activity today centers on collective bargaining over wages, benefits, and working conditions for their membership, and on representing their members in disputes with management over violations of contract provisions. Larger unions also typically engage in lobbying activities and supporting endorsed candidates at the state and federal level.

Most unions in America are aligned with one of two larger umbrella organizations: the AFL-CIO created in 1955, and the Change to Win Federation which split from the AFL-CIO in 2005. Both advocate policies and legislation on behalf of workers in the United States and Canada, and take an active role in politics. The AFL-CIO is especially concerned with global trade issues.
Child laborers in an Indiana glass works. Trade unions have an objective interest in combating child labor.

In 2010, the percentage of workers belonging to a union in the United States (or total labor union "density") was 11.4%, compared to 18.3% in Japan, 27.5% in Canada, and 70% in Finland. Trade Union Density OECD. StatExtracts. Retrieved: 17 November 2011. Union membership in the private sector has fallen under 7% Union Members Summary Bureau of Labor Statistics, January 27, 2012 Retrieved: 26 February 2012  levels not seen since 1932. Unions allege that employer-incited opposition has contributed to this decline in membership. The most prominent unions are among public sector employees such as teachers and police. Members of unions are disproportionately older, male and residents of the Northeast, the Midwest, and California. Not With a Bang, But a Whimper: The Long, Slow Death Spiral of Americas Labor Movement| Richard Yeselson| June 6, 2012] Union workers average 10-30% higher pay than non-union in America after controlling for individual, job, and labor market characteristics. 8-31-2004 Union Membership Trends in the United States Gerald Mayer. Congressional Research Service. 8-31-2004 

The economist Joseph Stiglitz has asserted that, "Strong unions have helped to reduce inequality, whereas weaker unions have made it easier for CEOs, sometimes working with market forces that they have helped shape, to increase it". The decline in unionization since WWII in the United States has been associated with a pronounced rise in income and wealth inequality Stiglitz, Joseph E. (2012-06-04). The Price of Inequality: How Today's Divided Society Endangers Our Future (Kindle Locations 1148-1149). Norton. Kindle Edition. and, since 1967, with loss of middle class income. Madland, Walter, and Bunker, "As Union Membership Rates Decrease, Middle Class Incomes Shrink.", AFL-CIO, May 24, 2013. Barry T. Hirsch, David A. Macpherson, and Wayne G. Vroman, "Estimates of Union Density by State," Monthly Labor Review, Vol. 124, No. 7, July 2001. 

===Canada===
Labour unions have existed in Canada since the early 1800s. There is a record of skilled tradesmen in the Maritimes having a union organization during the War of 1812. Canadian unionism had early ties with Britain. Tradesmen who came from Britain brought traditions of the British trade union movement, and many British unions had branches in Canada. Canadian unionism ties with the United States eventually replaced those with Britain.

Collective bargaining was first recognized in 1937, following a strike by the United Auto Workers at the General Motors' plant in Oshawa, Ontario.
Justice Ivan Rand issued a landmark legal decision following a strike in Windsor, Ontario, involving 17,000 Ford workers. He granted the union the compulsory check-off of union dues. Rand ruled that all workers in a bargaining unit benefit from a union-negotiated contract. Therefore, he reasoned they must pay union dues, although they do not have to join the union.

The post-World War II era also saw an increased pattern of unionization in the public service. Teachers, nurses, social workers, professors, and cultural workers (those employed in museums, orchestras, and art galleries) all sought private-sector collective bargaining rights.
In the 1970s the federal government came under intense pressures to curtail labour cost and inflation. In 1975, the Liberal government under Prime Minister Trudeau introduced mandatory price and wage controls. Under the new law, wages increases were monitored and those ruled to be unacceptably high were rolled back by the government.

Pressures on unions continued into the 1980s and 90s. Private sector unions faced plant closures in many manufacturing industries and demands to reduce wages and increase productivity. Public sector unions came under attack by federal and provincial governments as they attempted to reduce spending, reduce taxes and balance budgets. Legislation was introduced in many jurisdictions reversing union collective bargaining rights, and many jobs were lost to contractors. Retrieved July 14, 2013. 

===Mexico===
Before the 1990s, unions in Mexico had been historically part of a state institutional system. Between 1940, till the 1980s worldwide spread of neo-liberalism through the Washington Consensus, the Mexican unions did not operate independently, but instead as part of a state institutional system, largely controlled by the ruling party. 

During these 40 years, the primary aim of the labor unions was not to benefit the workers, but to carry out the state's economic policy under their cosy relationship with the ruling party. This economic policy, which peaked in the 1950 and 1960s with the so-called "Mexican Miracle", saw rising incomes and improved standards of living but the primary beneficiaries were the wealthy. 

In the 1980s, Mexico began adhering to Washington Consensus policies, selling off state industries such as railroad and telecommunications to private industries. The new owners had an antagonistic attitude towards unions, which, accustomed to comfortable relationships with the state, were not prepared to fight back. A movement of new unions began to emerge under a more independent model, while the former institutionalized unions had become very corrupt, violent, and led by gangsters. From the 1990s onwards, this new model of independent unions prevailed, a number of them represented by the National Union of Workers. Dan La Botz U.S.-supported Economics Spurred Mexican Emigration, pt.1, interview at The Real News, May 1, 2010. 

Current old institutions like the Oil Workers Union and the National Education Workers' Union (Sindicato Nacional de Trabajadores de la Educacin, or SNTE) are examples of how the use of government benefits are not being applied to improve the quality in the investigation of the use of oil or the basic education in Mexico as long as their leaders show publicly that they are living wealthily. With 1.4 million members, the teachers' union is Latin America's largest; half of Mexico's government employees are teachers. It controls school curriculums, and all teacher appointments. Until recently, retiring teachers routinely "gave" their lifelong appointment to a relative or "sell" it for anywhere in between $4,700 and $11,800. 

===Costa Rica===

Costa Rican agricultural unions demonstration, January 2011
In Costa Rica, trade unions first appeared in the late 1800s to support workers in a variety of urban and industrial jobs, such as railroad builders and craft tradesmen. After facing violent repression, such as during the 1934 United Fruit Strike, unions gained more power following the 1948 Costa Rican Civil War. Today, Costa Rican unions are strongest in the public sector, including the fields of education and medicine, but also have a strong presence in the agricultural sector. In general, Costa Rican unions support government regulation of the banking, medical, and education fields, as well as improved wages and working conditions. 

===Colombia===

Until around 1990 Colombian trade unions were among the strongest in Latin America. American Center for International Labor Solidarity (2006), Justice For All: The Struggle for Worker Rights in Colombia, p11 However the 1980s expansion of paramilitarism in Colombia saw trade union leaders and members increasingly targeted for assassination, and as a result Colombia has been the most dangerous country in the world for trade unionists for several decades. An ILO mission in 2000 reported that "the number of assassinations, abductions, death threats and other violent assaults on trade union leaders and unionized workers in Colombia is without historical precedent". According to the Colombian Government, during the period 199199 there were 593 assassinations of trade union leaders and unionized workers while the National Trade Union School holds that 1 336 union members were assassinated."  ILO, 16 June 2000, Special ILO Representative for cooperation with Colombia to be appointed by Director-General "By the 1990s, Colombia had become the most dangerous country in the world for unionists"  Chomsky, Aviva (2008), Linked labor histories: New England, Colombia, and the making of a global working class, Duke University Press, p11 "Colombia has the worlds worst record on these assassinations..."  20 November 2008, Colombia: Not Time for a Trade Deal Between 2000 and 2010 Colombia accounted for 63.12% of trade unionists murdered globally. According to the International Trade Union Confederation (ITUC) there were 2832 murders of trade unionists between 1 January 1986 and 30 April 2010, International Trade Union Confederation, 11 June 2010, ITUC responds to the press release issued by the Colombian Interior Ministry concerning its survey meaning that "on average, men and women trade unionists in Colombia have been killed at the rate of one every three days over the last 23 years." International Trade Union Confederation (2010), Annual Survey of violations of trade union rights: Colombia 

===India===

In India the Trade Union movement is generally divided on political lines. According to provisional statistics from the Ministry of Labour, trade unions had a combined membership of 24,601,589 in 2002. As of 2008, there are 11 Central Trade Union Organisations (CTUO) recognised by the Ministry of Labour. [http://www.labourfile.org/superAdmin/Document/113/table%201.pdf ] 

===Japan===

2011 National Trade Union Council (Zenrokyo) May Day march, Tokyo
Labour unions emerged in Japan in the second half of the Meiji period as the country underwent a period of rapid industrialization. Nimura, K. The Formation of Japanese Labor Movement: 18681914 (Translated by Terry Boardman). Retrieved 11 June 2011 Until 1945, however, the labour movement remained weak, impeded by lack of legal rights, Cross Currents. Labor unions in Japan. CULCON. Retrieved 11 June 2011 anti-union legislation, management-organized factory councils, and political divisions between cooperative and radical unionists. Weathers, C. (2009). Business and Labor. In William M. Tsutsui (Ed.), A Companion to Japanese History (pp. 493510). Chichester, UK: Blackwell Publishing Ltd. In the immediate aftermath of the Second World War, the US Occupation authorities initially encouraged the formation of independent unions. Legislation was passed that enshrined the right to organize, Jung, L. (30 March 2011). National Labour Law Profile: Japan. ILO. Retrieved 10 June 2011 and membership rapidly rose to 5 million by February, 1947. The organization rate, however, peaked at 55.8% in 1949 and subsequently declined to 18.2% (2006). Japan Institute for Labour Policy and Training. Labor Situation in Japan and Analysis: 2009/2010. Retrieved 10 June 2011 The labour movement went through a process of reorganization from 1987 to 1991 Dolan, R. E. & Worden, R. L. (Eds.). Japan: A Country Study. Labor Unions, Employment and Labor Relations. Washington: GPO for the Library of Congress, 1994. Retrieved 12 June 2011 from which emerged the present configuration of three major labour union federations, Rengo, Zenroren, and Zenrokyo, along with other smaller national union organizations.

===Australia===
Supporters of Unions, such as the ACTU or Australian Labor Party, often credit trade unions with leading the labour movement in the early 20th century, which generally sought to end child labour practices, improve worker safety, increase wages for both union workers and non-union workers, raise the entire society's standard of living, reduce the hours in a work week, provide public education for children, and bring other benefits to working-class families. History of the ACTU. Australian Council of Trade Unions. 

==Structure and politics==
Cesar Chavez speaking at a 1974 United Farm Workers rally in Delano, California. The UFW during Chavez's tenure was committed to restricting immigration.
Unions may organize a particular section of skilled workers (craft unionism, traditionally found in Australia, Canada, Denmark, Norway, Sweden, Switzerland, the UK and the USA ), a cross-section of workers from various trades (general unionism, traditionally found in Australia, Belgium, Canada, Denmark, Netherlands, the UK and the USA ), or attempt to organize all workers within a particular industry (industrial unionism, found in Australia, Canada, Germany, Finland, Norway, South Korea, Sweden, Switzerland, the UK, and the USA ). These unions are often divided into "locals", and united in national federations. These federations themselves will affiliate with Internationals, such as the International Trade Union Confederation. However, in Japan, union organization is slightly different due to the presence of enterprise unions, i.e. unions that are specific to a specific plant or company. These enterprise unions, however, join industry-wide federations which in turn are members of Rengo, the Japanese national trade union confederation. 

In Western Europe, professional associations often carry out the functions of a trade union. In these cases, they may be negotiating for white-collar and/or professional workers, such as physicians, engineers, or teachers. Typically such trade unions refrain from politics or pursue a more liberal politics than their blue-collar counterparts. 

A union may acquire the status of a "juristic person" (an artificial legal entity), with a mandate to negotiate with employers for the workers it represents. In such cases, unions have certain legal rights, most importantly the right to engage in collective bargaining with the employer (or employers) over wages, working hours, and other terms and conditions of employment. The inability of the parties to reach an agreement may lead to industrial action, culminating in either strike action or management lockout, or binding arbitration. In extreme cases, violent or illegal activities may develop around these events.

Railway Strike 1886 - E St Louis.jpg|thumb|left|250px|The Great Southwest Railroad Strike of 1886 was a trade union strike involving more than 200,000 workers "[http://www.foxbusiness.com/markets/2011/08/09/10-biggest-strikes-in-american-history/ The 10 Biggest Strikes in American History". Fox Business. August 9, 2011 ]]
In other circumstances, unions may not have the legal right to represent workers, or the right may be in question. This lack of status can range from non-recognition of a union to political or criminal prosecution of union activists and members, with many cases of violence and deaths having been recorded both historically and contemporarily. ICFTU press release  regarding Cambodia. Amnesty International report 23 September 2005  fear for safety of SINALTRAINAL member Jos Onofre Esquivel Luna 

Unions may also engage in broader political or social struggle. Social Unionism encompasses many unions that use their organizational strength to advocate for social policies and legislation favourable to their members or to workers in general. As well, unions in some countries are closely aligned with political parties.

Unions are also delineated by the service model and the organizing model. The service model union focuses more on maintaining worker rights, providing services, and resolving disputes. Alternately, the organizing model typically involves full-time union organizers, who work by building up confidence, strong networks, and leaders within the workforce; and confrontational campaigns involving large numbers of union members. Many unions are a blend of these two philosophies, and the definitions of the models themselves are still debated.

In Britain, the perceived left-leaning nature of trade unions has resulted in the formation of a reactionary right-wing trade union called Solidarity which is supported by the far-right BNP. In Denmark, there are some newer apolitical "discount" unions who offer a very basic level of services, as opposed to the dominating Danish pattern of extensive services and organizing. See the website of the Danish discount union "Det faglige Hus" at http://www.detfagligehus.dk/ (website in Danish) 
A rally of the trade union UNISON in Oxford during a strike on 2006-03-28.
In contrast, in several European countries (e.g. Belgium, Denmark, the Netherlands, and Switzerland), religious unions have existed for decades. These unions typically distanced themselves from some of the doctrines of orthodox Marxism, such as the preference of atheism and from rhetoric suggesting that employees' interests always are in conflict with those of employers. Some of these Christian unions have had some ties to centrist or conservative political movements and some do not regard strikes as acceptable political means for achieving employees' goals. In Poland, the biggest trade union Solidarity emerged as an anti-communist movement with religious nationalist overtones Jacek Tittenbrun, The economic and social processes that led to the revolt of the Polish workers in the early eighties at Marxist.com and today it supports the right-wing Law and Justice party. Solidarno popiera Kaczyskiego jak kiedy Was at news.money.pl 

Although their political structure and autonomy varies widely, union leaderships are usually formed through democratic elections. Some research, such as that conducted by the Australian Centre for Industrial Relations Research and Training, argues that unionized workers enjoy better conditions and wages than those who are not unionized.

==Shop types==
Companies that employ workers with a union generally operate on one of several models:
* A closed shop (US) or a "pre-entry closed shop" (UK) employs only people who are already union members. The compulsory hiring hall is an example of a closed shop  in this case the employer must recruit directly from the union, as well as the employee working strictly for unionized employers.
* A union shop (US) or a "post-entry closed shop" (UK) employs non-union workers as well, but sets a time limit within which new employees must join a union.
* An agency shop requires non-union workers to pay a fee to the union for its services in negotiating their contract. This is sometimes called the Rand formula. In certain situations involving state public employees in the United States, such as California, "fair share laws" make it easy to require these sorts of payments.
* An open shop does not require union membership in employing or keeping workers. Where a union is active, workers who do not contribute to a union may include those who approve of the union contract (free riders) and those who don't. In the United States, state level right-to-work laws mandate the open shop in some states. In Germany only open shops are legal; that is, all discrimination based on union membership is forbidden. This affects the function and services of the union.

An EU case concerning Italy stated that, "The principle of trade union freedom in the Italian system implies recognition of the right of the individual not to belong to any trade union ("negative" freedom of association/trade union freedom), and the unlawfulness of discrimination liable to cause harm to non-unionized employees." Eurofound website "FREEDOM OF ASSOCIATION/TRADE UNION FREEDOM", http://www.eurofound.europa.eu/emire/ITALY/FREEDOMOFASSOCIATIONTRADEUNIONFREEDOM-IT.htm 

In Britain, previous to this EU jurisprudence, a series of laws introduced during the 1980s by Margaret Thatcher's government restricted closed and union shops. All agreements requiring a worker to join a union are now illegal. In the United States, the Taft-Hartley Act of 1947 outlawed the closed shop.

In 2006 the European Court of Human Rights found Danish closed-shop agreements to be in breach of Article 11 of the European Convention on Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms. It was stressed that Denmark and Iceland were among a limited number of contracting states that continue to permit the conclusion of closed-shop agreements. Eurofound, http://www.eurofound.europa.eu/eiro/2006/01/feature/dk0601104f.htm 

==Diversity of international unions==
Union law varies from country to country, as does the function of unions. For example, German and Dutch unions have played a greater role in management decisions through participation in corporate boards and co-determination than have unions in the United States. Moreover, in the United States, collective bargaining is most commonly undertaken by unions directly with employers, whereas in Austria, Denmark, Germany, or Sweden, unions most often negotiate with employers associations.

Concerning labour market regulation in the EU, Gold (1993) Gold, M., 1993. The Social Dimension  Employment Policy in the European Community. Basingstroke England UK: MacMillan Publishing and Hall (1994) Hall, M., 1994. Industrial relations and the social dimension of European Integration: Before and after Maastricht, pp. 281331 in Hyman, R. & Ferner A., eds.: New Frontiers in European Industrial Relations, Basil Blackwell Publishing have identified three distinct systems of labour market regulation, which also influence the role that unions play:
* In the Continental European System of labour market regulation, the government plays an important role as there is a strong legislative core of employee rights, which provides the basis for agreements as well as a framework for discord between unions on one side and employers or employers associations on the other. This model was said to be found in EU core countries such as Belgium, France, Germany, the Netherlands and Italy, and it is also mirrored and emulated to some extent in the institutions of the EU, due to the relative weight that these countries had in the EU until the EU expansion by the inclusion of 10 new Eastern European member states in 2004.
* In the Anglo-Saxon System of labour market regulation, the governments legislative role is much more limited, which allows for more issues to be decided between employers and employees and any union and/or employers associations which might represent these parties in the decision-making process. However, in these countries, collective agreements are not widespread; only a few businesses and a few sectors of the economy have a strong tradition of finding collective solutions in labour relations. Ireland and the UK belong to this category, and in contrast to the EU core countries above, these countries first joined the EU in 1973.
* In the Nordic System of labour market regulation, the governments legislative role is limited in the same way as in the Anglo-Saxon system. However, in contrast to the countries in the Anglo-Saxon system category, this is a much more widespread network of collective agreements, which covers most industries and most firms. This model was said to encompass Denmark, Finland, Norway and Sweden. Here, Denmark joined the EU in 1973, whereas Finland and Sweden joined in 1995. Wagtmann, M.A. (2010): Module 3, Maritime & Port Wages, Benefits, Labour Relations. International Maritime Human Resource Management textbook modules. Available at: https://skydrive.live.com/?cid=f90c069a3e6bb729&id=F90C069A3E6BB729%21107#cid=F90C069A3E6BB729&id=F90C069A3E6BB729%21182 

The United States takes a more laissez-faire approach, setting some minimum standards but leaving most workers' wages and benefits to collective bargaining and market forces. Thus it comes closest to the above Anglo-Saxon model. Also the Eastern European countries that have recently entered into the EU come closest to the Anglo-Saxon model.

In contrast, in Germany, the relation between individual employees and employers is considered to be asymmetrical. In consequence, many working conditions are not negotiable due to a strong legal protection of individuals. However, the German flavour or works legislation has as its main objective to create a balance of power between employees organized in unions and employers organized in employers associations. This allows much wider legal boundaries for collective bargaining, compared to the narrow boundaries for individual negotiations. As a condition to obtain the legal status of a trade union, employee associations need to prove that their leverage is strong enough to serve as a counterforce in negotiations with employers. If such an employees association is competing against another union, its leverage may be questioned by unions and then evaluated in a court trial. In Germany, only very few professional associations obtained the right to negotiate salaries and working conditions for their members, notably the medical doctors association Marburger Bund and the pilots association Vereinigung Cockpit. The engineers association Verein Deutscher Ingenieure does not strive to act as a union, as it also represents the interests of engineering businesses.

Beyond the classification listed above, unions' relations with political parties vary. In many countries unions are tightly bonded, or even share leadership, with a political party intended to represent the interests of the working class. Typically this is a left-wing, socialist, or social democratic party, but many exceptions exist, including some of the aforementioned Christian unions. In the United States, trade unions are almost always aligned with the Democratic Party with a few exceptions. For example, the International Brotherhood of Teamsters has supported Republican Party candidates on a number of occasions and the Professional Air Traffic Controllers Organization (PATCO) endorsed Ronald Reagan in 1980. In Britain tade union movement's relationship with the Labour Party frayed as party leadership embarked on privatisation plans at odds with what unions see as the worker's interests. However, it has strengthened once more after the Labour party's election of Ed Miliband who beat his brother David Miliband, to become leader of the party after Ed secured the trade union votes. Additionally, in the past, there was a group known as the Conservative Trade Unionists or CTU. A group formed of people who sympathized with right wing Tory policy but were Trade Unionists.

Historically, the Republic of Korea has regulated collective bargaining by requiring employers to participate, but collective bargaining has only been legal if held in sessions before the lunar new year.

==International unionisation==
The largest trade union federation in the world is the Brussels-based International Trade Union Confederation (ITUC), which has approximately 309 affiliated organizations in 156 countries and territories, with a combined membership of 166 million. The ITUC is a federation of national trade union centres, such as the AFL-CIO in the United States and the Trades Union Congress in the United Kingdom. Other global trade union organizations include the World Federation of Trade Unions.

National and regional trade unions organizing in specific industry sectors or occupational groups also form global union federations, such as Union Network International, the International Transport Workers Federation, the International Federation of Journalists or the International Arts and Entertainment Alliance.

==Criticisms==

Trade unions have been accused of benefiting insider workers, those having secure jobs, at the cost of outsider workers, consumers of the goods or services produced, and the shareholders of the unionized business.

In the United States, the outsourcing of labour to Asia, Latin America, and Africa has been partially driven by increasing costs of union partnership, which gives other countries a comparative advantage in labour, making it more profitable to purchase disorganised, low-wage labour from these countries. Milton Friedman, economist and advocate of laissez-faire capitalism, sought to show that unionisation produces higher wages (for the union members) at the expense of fewer jobs, and that, if some industries are unionized while others are not, wages will tend to decline in non-unionized industries. 

==Union publications==
Several sources of current news exist about the trade union movement in the world. These include LabourStart and the official website of the international trade union movement Global Unions. A source of international news about unions is RadioLabour which provides daily (Monday to Friday) news reports.

Labor Notes is the largest circulation cross-union publication remaining in the United States. It reports news and analysis about union activity or problems facing the labour movement. Another source of union news is the Workers Independent News, a news organization providing radio articles to independent and syndicated radio shows in the United States.

== Film ==
* The 2010 British film Made in Dagenham, starring Sally Hawkins, dramatizes the Ford sewing machinists strike of 1968 that aimed for equal pay for women.
* The 2000 film Bread and Roses deals with the struggle of poorly paid janitorial workers in Los Angeles and their fight for better working conditions and the right to unionize. 
* Hoffa, a 1992 American biographical film directed by Danny DeVito and based on the life of Teamsters Union leader Jimmy Hoffa. 
* The 1985 documentary film Final Offer by Sturla Gunnarsson and Robert Collision shows the 1984 union contract negotiations with General Motors.
* The 1979 film Norma Rae, directed by Martin Ritt and starring Sally Field, is based on the true story of Crystal Lee Jordan's successful attempt to unionize her textile factory.
* The 1978 film F.I.S.T., directed by Norman Jewison and starring Sylvester Stallone, is loosely based on the Teamsters Union and their former President Jimmy Hoffa.
* Bastard Boys, a 2007 dramatisation of the 1998 Australian waterfront dispute.
* The 1954 film On the Waterfront, directed by Elia Kazan, concerns union violence among longshoremen.
* Other documentaries: Made in L.A. (2007); American Standoff (2002); The Fight in the Fields (1997); (1979); Harlan County, USA (1976); The Inheritance (1964)
* Other dramatisations: 10,000 Black Men Named George (2002); Matewan (1987); American Playhouse  "The Killing Floor" (1985); Salt of the Earth (1954); The Grapes of Wrath (1940); Black Fury (1935); Metello (1970).

==See also==

* Eight-hour day
* Labour council
* Labor Management Reporting and Disclosure Act
* Labour movement
* List of trade unions
* New Unionism
* Salt (union organizing)
* Strike action
* Union busting

===Types===
* Craft unionism
* Directly Affiliated Local Union
* General union
* Industrial unionism
* Labour council
* National trade union center

===Federation===
* AFL-CIO
* Change to Win Federation
* Labor federation competition in the United States
* International Trade Union Confederation
* International Labor Rights Forum
* International Workers Association

==Notes==

==Further reading==
* Acocella, Nicola & Ciccarone, Giuseppe (1997), Trade unions, non neutrality and stagflation, in: Public Choice, n. 2, April.
* The Government of British Trade unions: A study of Apathy and the Democratic Process in the Transport and General Worker Union by Joseph Goldstein First published by George Allen and Unwin Ltd (London) in 1952, and subject of reprints  Foreword by Arthur Deakin 
* European Commission, Directorate General for Employment, Social Affairs & Inclusion: Industrial Relations in Europe 2010.
* The Early English Trade unions: Documents from Home Office Papers in the Public Record Office by A. Aspinall Published by Batchworth Press (London) in 1949 
* Magnificent Journey: The Rise of the Trade unions, by Francis Williams First published by Odhams Press (London) in 1954 
* Trade unions by Allan Flanders First published by Hutchinson (London) in 1952 and reprinted several times 
* Trade Union Government and Administration in Great Britain by B C Roberts First published by The School of Economics/Bell and Sons (London) in 1956 and reprinted 
* Union density and specialist/professional unions in Sweden by Anders Kjellberg, Lund University: Studies in Social Policy, Industrial Relations, Working Life and Mobility. Research Reports 2013:2 
* Union Power: The Growth and Challenge in Perspective by Claud Cockburn First published by William Kimber in 1976 (London) ISBN 0-7183-0113-7 
* Directory of Employer's Associations, Trade unions, Joint Organisations published by HMSO (Her Majesty's Stationery Office) on 1986 ISBN 113612508 
* "The Decline in Swedish Union Density since 2007" by Anders Kjellberg, Nordic Journal of Working Life Studies (NJWLS) Vol. 1. No 1 (August 2011), pp. 6793. 
* The History of the TUC (Trades Union Congress) 18681968: A pictorial Survey of a Social Revolution  Illustrated with Contemporary Prints, Documents and Photographs, edited by Lionel Birch Published in large paperback by Hamlyn/General Council of Trade Union Congress in 1968 with a foreword by George Woodcock 
* 
* Lipton, Charles (1967). The Trade Union Movement of Canada: 18271959. Third ed. Toronto, Ont.: New Canada Publications, 1973. N.B.: On verso of t.p.: "Originally published by Canadian Social Publications, Montral, Qubec, 1967." ISBN 0-919600-02-6 pbk.
* Panitch, Leo & Swartz, Donald (2003). From consent to coercion: The assault on trade union freedoms, third edition. Ontario: Garamound Press.
* Phil Dine (2007). State of the Unions: How Labor Can Strengthen the Middle Class, Improve Our Economy, and Regain Political Influence, McGraw-Hill Professional. ISBN 978-0-07-148844-0
* Charles A. Orr, "Trade Unionism in Colonial Africa" Journal of Modern African Studies, 4 (1966), pp. 6581
* 
* Keasbey, Lindley M. "American Journal of Sociology: Competition" Vol. 13, No. 5 (Mar., 1908), pp. 649660 online text available

==External links==

* LabourStart international trade union news service
* RadioLabour
* New Unionism Network
* Younionize Global Union Directory

;Australia
* Australian Council of Trade Unions (ACTU)  Australian Council of Trade Unions

;Europe
* Trade union membership 19932003  European Industrial Relations Observatory report on membership trends in 26 European countries
* Trade union membership 20032008  European Industrial Relations Observatory report on membership trends in 28 European countries
* Trade Union Ancestors  Listing of 5,000 UK trade unions with histories of main organisations, trade union "family trees" and details of union membership and strikes since 1900.
* TUC History online  History of the British union movement
* Trade EU  European Trade Directory
* Short history of the UGT in Catalonia

;United States
* Labor rights in the USA
* Labor Notes magazine

==References==

 



[[Liberal]]

Liberal may refer to:

==Politics==
* Liberalism, a political ideology
** Classical liberalism, a political or social philosophy advocating the freedom of the individual, parliamentary systems of government, nonviolent modification of political, social, or economic institutions to assure unrestricted development in all spheres of human endeavor, and governmental guarantees of individual rights and civil liberties. 
** Conservative liberalism, a variant of liberalism, combining liberal values and policies with conservative stances, or, more simply, representing the right-wing of the liberal movement
** Economic liberalism, the ideological belief in organizing the economy on individualist lines, such that the greatest possible number of economic decisions are made by private individuals and not by collective institutions.
** Social liberalism, the belief that liberalism should include social justice and that the legitimate role of the state includes addressing issues such as unemployment, health care, education, and the expansion of civil rights
* An adherent of a Liberal party
* Liberal democracy, a form of government based on limited majority rule
* Liberal Democratic Party, a common name for political parties around the world
* Liberalism (international relations), a theory of international relations
* European liberalism
* In the US, "liberalism" can refer to either or both of the following:
** Modern liberalism, the current American manifestation of the ideology
** Progressivism
* See also Liberalism by country

==Economics==
* Laissez-faire, an economic environment in which the government limits itself to enforcing private property rights and transactions between private parties are free from tariffs, government subsidies, and enforced monopolies
* Neoliberalism, a contemporary free-market political-economic philosophy
* Ordoliberalism, a German variant of neoliberalism that emphasises the need for the state to ensure that the free market produces results close to its theoretical potential

==Places==

=== United States ===

* Liberal, Kansas
* Liberal, Oregon

=== Elsewhere ===
* Liberal, Canada

==Other uses==
* Liberal religion, a religious tradition which embraces the theological diversity of a congregation rather than a single creed, authority, or writing
* Liberal Judaism, a religious outlook
* Liberal Christianity, a religious outlook
* Liberal Islam, a religious outlook
* Liberal arts, refers to those subjects which in classical antiquity were considered essential for a free citizen to study
* El Liberal, a daily newspaper published in Spain between 1879 and 1936
* Liberalism (book), a 1927 book by Ludwig von Mises

==See also==
* 
* 
* Conservative



[[Louisiana Purchase]]

1804 map of "Louisiana", edged on the west by the Rocky Mountains.

The Louisiana Purchase ( "Sale of Louisiana") was the acquisition by the United States of America in 1803 of 828,000 square miles (2,144,000 kilometers or 52,992,000 acres) of France's claim to the territory of Louisiana. The U.S. paid 50 million francs ($11,250,000) plus cancellation of debts worth 18 million francs ($3,750,000), for a total sum of 15 million dollars (around 4 cents per acre ) for the Louisiana territory ($ million in dollars, less than 42 cents per acre). Kennedy, Cohen, Bailey, 2008 Burgan, 2003, p.36 The Louisiana territory encompassed all or part of 15 present U.S. states and two Canadian provinces. The land purchased contained all of present-day Arkansas, Missouri, Iowa, Oklahoma, Kansas, and Nebraska; parts of Minnesota that were west of the Mississippi River; most of North Dakota; most of South Dakota; northeastern New Mexico; northern Texas; the portions of Montana, Wyoming, and Colorado east of the Continental Divide; Louisiana west of the Mississippi River, including the city of New Orleans; and small portions of land that would eventually become part of the Canadian provinces of Alberta and Saskatchewan.

France controlled this vast area from 1699 until 1762, the year it gave the territory to its ally Spain. Under Napoleon Bonaparte, France took back the territory in 1800 in the hope of building an empire in North America. A slave revolt in Haiti and an impending war with Britain, however, led France to abandon these plans and sell the entire territory to the United States, which had originally intended only to seek the purchase of New Orleans and its adjacent lands.

The purchase of the territory of Louisiana took place during the presidency of Thomas Jefferson. At the time, the purchase faced domestic opposition because it was thought to be unconstitutional. Although he agreed that the U.S. Constitution did not contain provisions for acquiring territory, Jefferson decided to go ahead with the purchase anyway in order to remove France's presence in the region and to protect both U.S. trade access to the port of New Orleans and free passage on the Mississippi River.

Ceremony at Place d'Armes, New Orleans marking transfer of Louisiana to the United States, 10 March 1804, as depicted by Thure de Thulstrup.

==Background==
Throughout the later half of the 18th century, Louisiana was a pawn on the chessboard of European politics. Herring, p. 99. It was originally claimed by Spain, but also claimed by the French, who established most of the colonists as part of New France. Following French defeat in the Seven Years' War, Spain gained control of the territory west of the Mississippi River. As the area was being gradually settled by United States migrants, many Americans, including Jefferson, assumed that it would be acquired "piece by piece." The risk of another power taking it from a weakened Spain would make "profound reconsideration" of this policy necessary. 

The city of New Orleans controlled the Mississippi River due to its location; other locations for ports were attempted, but did not succeed. New Orleans was already important for shipping agricultural goods to and from the parts of the United States west of the Appalachian Mountains. Pinckney's Treaty, signed with Spain on October 27, 1795, gave American merchants "right of deposit" in New Orleans, granting them use of the port to store goods for export. Americans used this right to transport products such as flour, tobacco, pork, bacon, lard, feathers, cider, butter, and cheese. The treaty also recognized American rights to navigate the entire Mississippi River, which had become vital to the growing trade of the western territories. Meinig, 2003 

In 1798 Spain revoked this treaty, prohibiting American use of New Orleans, and greatly upsetting the Americans. In 1801, Spanish Governor Don Juan Manuel de Salcedo took over from the Marquess of Casa Calvo, and restored the right to deposit goods from the United States. Napoleon Bonaparte had gained Louisiana for French ownership from Spain in 1800 under the Third Treaty of San Ildefonso, after being a Spanish colony since 1762. But the treaty was kept secret. Louisiana remained nominally under Spanish control until a transfer of power to France on November 30, 1803, just three weeks before the cession to the United States.

James Monroe and Robert R. Livingston traveled to Paris to negotiate the purchase of New Orleans in 1802. Their interest was only in gaining control of New Orleans and its environs; they did not anticipate the much larger purchase that would follow.

The Louisiana Purchase was by far the largest territorial gain in U.S. history, stretching from the Mississippi River to the Rocky Mountains. The purchase doubled the size of the United States. Before the Louisiana Purchase in 1803, Louisiana had been under control of the Spanish since 1763. Although Spain was Americas ally in the Revolution, they didnt want the Americans to settle on their land or territory. The Louisiana Purchase territory was home for many of the Cajuns after the British forced them to leave from their former home of Nova Scotia, Canada.

Although the purchase was thought of by some as unjust and unconstitutional, Jefferson believed there was no evidence of unconstitutional actions taking place during the purchase of what became fifteen states. In hindsight, the Louisiana Purchase could be considered one of Thomas Jeffersons greatest contributions to the United States. 
On April 18, 1802, Jefferson penned a letter to Robert Livingston. It was an intentional exhortation to make this supposedly mild diplomat strongly warn the French of their perilous course. The letter began:

Jeffersons letter went on with the same heat to a much quoted passage about the day that France takes possession of New Orleans. Not only did he say that day would be a low point in Frances history, for it would seal Americas marriage with the British fleet and nation, but he added, astonishingly, that it would start a massive shipbuilding program. Cerami, 2003, pp.57-58 

==Negotiation==
While the sale of the territory by Spain back to France in 1800 went largely unnoticed, fear of an eventual French invasion spread nationwide when, in 1801, Napoleon sent a military force to secure New Orleans. Southerners feared that Napoleon would free all the slaves in Louisiana, which could trigger slave uprisings elsewhere. Herring, p. 100. Though Jefferson urged moderation, Federalists sought to use this against Jefferson and called for hostilities against France. Undercutting them, Jefferson took up the banner and threatened an alliance with Britain, although relations were uneasy in that direction. In 1801 Jefferson supported France in its plan to take back Saint-Domingue, then under control of Toussaint Louverture after a slave rebellion.

Jefferson sent Livingston to Paris in 1801 after discovering the transfer of Louisiana from Spain to France under the Third Treaty of San Ildefonso. Livingston was authorized to purchase New Orleans.

In January 1802, France sent General Leclerc to Saint-Domingue to re-establish slavery which had been abolished in law and in the constitution of the French Republic of 1795, both in France and its colonies, to reduce the rights of free people of color and take back control of the island from Toussaint Louverture, who had maintained St. Domingue as French against invasion by the Spanish and British empires. Before the Revolution, France had derived enormous wealth from St. Domingue at the cost of the lives and freedom of the slaves. Napoleon wanted its revenues and productivity for France restored. Alarmed about the French actions and its intention to re-establish an empire in North America, Jefferson declared neutrality in relation to the Caribbean, refusing credit and other assistance to the French but allowing war contraband to get through to the rebels to prevent France from getting a foothold again. Tim Matthewson, "Jefferson and Haiti", The Journal of Southern History, 61 (1995): 221 

In November 1803, France withdrew its 7,000 surviving troops from Saint-Domingue (more than two-thirds of its troops died there) and gave up its ambitions in the western hemisphere. Matthewson (1995), 209 In 1804 Haiti declared its independence but, fearing a slave revolt at home, Jefferson and the US Congress refused to recognize the new republic, the second in the Western Hemisphere, and imposed a trade embargo against it. This, together with later claims by France to reconquer Haiti, encouraged by Britain, made it more difficult for Haiti to recover after ten years of wars. Tim Matthewson, "Jefferson and the Non-recognition of Haiti", American Philosophical Society, 140 (1996): 22-23 

In 1803, Pierre Samuel du Pont de Nemours, a French nobleman, began to help negotiate with France at the request of Jefferson. Du Pont was living in the United States at the time and had close ties to Jefferson as well as the prominent politicians in France. He engaged in back-channel diplomacy with Napoleon on Jefferson's behalf during a visit to France and originated the idea of the much larger Louisiana Purchase as a way to defuse potential conflict between the United States and Napoleon over North America. Duke, Marc; The du Ponts: Portrait of a Dynasty, pp. 7783, Saturday Review Press, 1977 ISBN 0-8415-0429-6 

Jefferson disliked the idea of purchasing Louisiana from France, as that could imply that France had a right to be in Louisiana. Jefferson had concerns that a U.S. President did not have the constitutional authority to make such a deal. He also thought that to do so would erode states' rights by increasing federal executive power. On the other hand, he was aware of the potential threat that France could be in that region and was prepared to go to war to prevent a strong French presence there.

Throughout this time, Jefferson had up-to-date intelligence on Napoleon's military activities and intentions in North America. Part of his evolving strategy involved giving du Pont some information that was withheld from Livingston. He also gave intentionally conflicting instructions to the two. Desperate to avoid possible war with France, Jefferson sent James Monroe to Paris in 1802 to negotiate a settlement, with instructions to go to London to negotiate an alliance if the talks in Paris failed. Spain procrastinated until late 1802 in executing the treaty to transfer Louisiana to France, which allowed American hostility to build. Also, Spain's refusal to cede Florida to France meant that Louisiana would be indefensible. Monroe had been formally expelled from France on his last diplomatic mission, and the choice to send him again conveyed a sense of seriousness.

Napoleon needed peace with Great Britain to implement the Treaty of San Ildefonso and take possession of Louisiana. Otherwise, Louisiana would be an easy prey for Britain or even for the United States. But in early 1803, continuing war between France and Britain seemed unavoidable. On March 11, 1803, Napoleon began preparing to invade Britain.

A slave revolt in Saint-Domingue (present-day Republic of Haiti) had been followed by the first French general emancipation of slaves in 1793-4, and had led to years of war against the Spanish and British empires which sought to conquer St. Domingue and enslave the emancipated population. An expeditionary force under Napoleon's brother-in-law Charles Leclerc in January 1802, supplemented by 20,000 troops over the next 21 months, had tried to re-conquer the territory and re-establish slavery. But yellow fever and the fierce resistance of black, mulatto and white revolutionaries destroyed the French army. This was the culmination of the only successful slave revolt in history, and Napoleon withdrew the surviving French troops in November 1803. In 1804 Haiti became the first independent black majority state in the New World. 

As Napoleon had failed to re-enslave the emancipated population of Haiti, he abandoned his plans to rebuild France's New World empire. Without sufficient revenues from sugar colonies in the Caribbean, Louisiana had little value to him. Spain had not yet completed the transfer of Louisiana to France, and war between France and Britain was imminent. Out of anger against Spain and the unique opportunity to sell something that was useless and not truly his yet, Napoleon decided to sell the entire territory. Herring, p. 101. 

Although the foreign minister Talleyrand opposed the plan, on April 10, 1803, Napoleon told the Treasury Minister Franois de Barb-Marbois that he was considering selling the entire Louisiana Territory to the United States. On April 11, 1803, just days before Monroe's arrival, Barb-Marbois offered Livingston all of Louisiana for $15 million, equivalent to about $ in present-day values.

The American representatives were prepared to pay up to $10 million for New Orleans and its environs, but were dumbfounded when the vastly larger territory was offered for $15 million. Jefferson had authorized Livingston only to purchase New Orleans. However, Livingston was certain that the United States would accept the offer. 

The Americans thought that Napoleon might withdraw the offer at any time, preventing the United States from acquiring New Orleans, so they agreed and signed the Louisiana Purchase Treaty on April 30, 1803. On July 4, 1803, the treaty reached Washington, D.C.. The Louisiana Territory was vast, stretching from the Gulf of Mexico in the south to Rupert's Land in the north, and from the Mississippi River in the east to the Rocky Mountains in the west. Acquiring the territory would double the size of the United States at a sum of less than 3 cents per acre.

==Domestic opposition and constitutionality==

Transfer of Louisiana by Ford P. Kaiser for the Louisiana Purchase Exposition (1904)

Some historians argue that Jefferson was a hypocrite in the Louisiana Purchase, primarily pointing to the fact that Jefferson was a strict constructionist in his views on the Constitution, yet allegedly took a loose constructionist view of the Constitution regarding the Louisiana Purchase. This argument goes as follows:

The American purchase of the Louisiana territory was not accomplished without domestic opposition. Jefferson's philosophical consistency was in question because of his strict interpretation of the Constitution. Many people believed he, and other Jeffersonians such as James Madison, were being hypocritical by doing something they surely would have argued against with Alexander Hamilton. The Federalists strongly opposed the purchase, favoring close relations with Britain over closer ties to Napoleon, and were concerned that the United States had paid a large sum of money just to declare war on Spain.

Both Federalists and Jeffersonians were concerned about whether the purchase was unconstitutional. Many members of the United States House of Representatives opposed the purchase. Majority Leader John Randolph led the opposition. The House called for a vote to deny the request for the purchase, but it failed by two votes, 5957. The Federalists even tried to prove the land belonged to Spain, not France, but available records proved otherwise. 

The Federalists also feared that the political power of the Atlantic seaboard states would be threatened by the new citizens of the west, bringing about a clash of western farmers with the merchants and bankers of New England. There was concern that an increase in the number of slave-holding states created out of the new territory would exacerbate divisions between north and south as well. A group of northern Federalists led by Massachusetts Senator Timothy Pickering went so far as to explore the idea of a separate northern confederacy.

Another concern was whether it was proper to grant citizenship to the French, Spanish, and free black people living in New Orleans, as the treaty would dictate. Critics in Congress worried whether these "foreigners", unacquainted with democracy, could or should become citizens. Nugent, pp.6568 

Most domestic objections were politically settled, overridden, or simply hushed up. One problem, however, was too important to argue down convincingly: Napoleon did not have the right to sell Louisiana to the United States. The sale violated the 1800 Third Treaty of San Ildefonso in several ways. Furthermore, France had promised Spain it would never sell or alienate Louisiana to a third party. Napoleon, Jefferson, Madison, and the members of Congress all knew this during the debates about the purchase in 1803. Spain protested strongly, and Madison made some attempt to justify the purchase to the Spanish government, but was unable to do so convincingly. So, he tried continuously until results had been proven remorsefully inadequate.

Spain's argument that Napoleon did not have a right to sell Louisiana was explicated by the historian Henry Adams, who wrote: "The sale of Louisiana to the United States was trebly invalid; if it were French property, Bonaparte could not constitutionally alienate it without the consent of the Chambers; if it were Spanish property, he could not alienate it at all; if Spain had a right of reclamation, his sale was worthless." Nugent p 66 The sale of course was not "worthless"the US actually did take possession. Furthermore the Spanish prime minister had authorized the U.S. to negotiate with the French government "the acquisition of territories which may suit their interests." Nugent p 67 Spain turned the territory over to France in a ceremony in New Orleans on November 30, a month before France turned it over to American officials.

Other historians counter the above arguments regarding Jeffersons alleged hypocrisy as follows:

Countries change their borders in two ways: (1) conquest, or (2) an agreement between nations, otherwise known as a treaty. The Louisiana Purchase was the latter, a treaty. The Constitution specifically grants the president the power to negotiate treaties (Art. II, Sec. 2), which is just what Jefferson did. Rossiter, Clinton, ed. The Federalist Papers, Federalist #64, pp. 362-3, Mentor, 1961. Samples, John, ed. James Madison and the Future of Limited Government, pp. 122, 127-9, Cato Institute, Washington, D.C., 2002. 

The treaty-making power had been discussed at the Constitutional Convention, specifically in regard to adding territory to the country, and Senate ratification of such treaties. Banning, Lance. The Sacred Fire of Liberty: James Madison and the Founding of the Federal Republic, pp. 7-9, 178, Cornell University Press, Ithaca and London, 1995. 

Jeffersons secretary of state, James Madison (the Father of the Constitution) assured Jefferson that the Louisiana Purchase was well within even the strictest interpretation of the Constitution. Secretary of the Treasury Albert Gallatin added that since the power to negotiate treaties was specifically granted to the president, the only way extending the countrys territory by treaty could not be a presidential power would be if it were specifically excluded by the Constitution (which it was not). Jefferson, as a strict constructionist, was right to be concerned about staying within the bounds of the Constitution, but felt the power of these arguments and became willing to acquiesce with satisfaction if the Congress approved the treaty. Banning, Lance. The Sacred Fire of Liberty: James Madison and the Founding of the Federal Republic, pp. 7-9, 178, 326-7, 330-3, 345-6, 360-1, 371, 384, Cornell University Press, Ithaca and London, 1995. Parker, Dana T. Thomas Jefferson a Hypocrite? Orange County Register, Local, p. 8, Apr. 13, 2011. Ketcham, 2003, pp.420-422 

The Senate quickly ratified the treaty, and the House, with equal alacrity, authorized the funding needed, as the Constitution specifies. 

The original treaty of the Louisiana Purchase
The opposition of New England Federalists to the Louisiana Purchase was primarily economic self-interest, not any legitimate concern over constitutionality or whether France owned Louisiana. The Northerners were not enthusiastic about Western farmers gaining another outlet for their crops that did not require the use of New England ports. Also, many Federalists were speculators in lands in upstate New York and New England, and were hoping to sell these lands to farmers, who might go west instead, if the Louisiana Purchase went through. They also feared that this would lead to Western states being formed, which would likely be Republican, and dilute the political power of New England Federalists. Lewis, Jr., James E. The Louisiana Purchase: Jeffersons Noble Bargain?, p. 79, UNC Press Books, 2003. 

When Spain later objected to the United States purchasing Louisiana from France, Madison responded that America had first approached Spain to purchase the property, and had been told by Spain itself that America would have to treat with France for the territory. Peterson, Merrill D. James Madison: A Biography in his Own Words, pp. 237-46, Newsweek, NY, NY, 1974. 

==Treaty signing==
Issue of 1953, commemorating the 150th Anniversary of signing

On Saturday, April 30, 1803, the Louisiana Purchase Treaty was signed by Robert Livingston, James Monroe, and Barb Marbois in Paris. Jefferson announced the treaty to the American people on July 4. After the signing of the Louisiana Purchase agreement in 1803, Livingston made this famous statement, "We have lived long, but this is the noblest work of our whole lives...From this day the United States take their place among the powers of the first rank." 

The United States Senate ratified the treaty with a vote of twenty-four to seven on October 20. The Senators who voted against the treaty were: Simeon Olcott and William Plumer of New Hampshire, William Wells and Samuel White of Delaware, James Hillhouse and Uriah Tracy of Connecticut, and Timothy Pickering of Massachusetts. On the following day, the Senate authorized President Jefferson to take possession of the territory and establish a temporary military government. In legislation enacted on October 31, Congress made temporary provisions for local civil government to continue as it had under French and Spanish rule and authorized the President to use military forces to maintain order. Plans were also set forth for several missions to explore and chart the territory, the most famous being the Lewis and Clark Expedition.

France turned New Orleans over on December 20, 1803 at The Cabildo. On March 10, 1804, a formal ceremony was conducted in St. Louis to transfer ownership of the territory from France to the United States.

Effective on October 1, 1804, the purchased territory was organized into the Territory of Orleans (most of which became the state of Louisiana) and the District of Louisiana, which was temporarily under the control of the governor and judges of the Indiana Territory.

==Boundaries==
The Purchase was one of several territorial additions to the U.S.
A dispute immediately arose between Spain and the United States regarding the extent of Louisiana. The territory's boundaries had not been defined in the 1762 Treaty of Fontainebleau that ceded it from France to Spain, nor the 1800 Third Treaty of San Ildefonso ceding it back to France, nor the 1803 Louisiana Purchase agreement ceding it to the United States. 

The United States claimed Louisiana included the entire western portion of the Mississippi River drainage basin to the crest of the Rocky Mountains and land extending southeast to the Rio Grande and West Florida. Spain insisted that Louisiana comprised no more than the western bank of the Mississippi River and the cities of New Orleans and St. Louis. The dispute was ultimately resolved by the Adams-Onis Treaty of 1819, with the United States gaining most of what it had claimed in the west.

The relatively narrow Louisiana of New Spain had been a special province under the jurisdiction of the Captaincy General of Cuba while the vast region to the west was in 1803 still considered part of the Commandancy General of the Provincias Internas. Louisiana had never been considered to be one of New Spain's internal provinces. 

If the territory included all the tributaries of the Mississippi on its western bank, the northern reaches of the Purchase extended into the equally ill-defined British possessionRupert's Land of British North America, now part of Canada. The Purchase originally extended just beyond the 50th parallel. However, the territory north of the 49th parallel (including the Milk River and Poplar River watersheds) was ceded to the UK in exchange for parts of the Red River Basin south of 49th parallel in the Anglo-American Convention of 1818.

The eastern boundary of the Louisiana purchase was the Mississippi River, from its source to the 31st parallel, although the source of the Mississippi was, at the time, unknown. The eastern boundary below the 31st parallel was unclear; the U.S. claimed the land as far as the Perdido River, and Spain claimed the border of its Florida Colony remained the Mississippi river. In early 1804, Congress passed the Mobile Act which recognized West Florida as being part of the United States. The AdamsOns Treaty with Spain (1819) resolved the issue upon ratification in 1821. Today, the 31st parallel is the northern boundary of the western half of the Florida Panhandle, and the Perdido is the western boundary of Florida.

Because the western boundary was contested at the time of the Purchase, President Jefferson immediately began to organize three missions to explore and map the new territory. All three started from the Mississippi River. The Lewis and Clark Expedition (1804) traveled up the Missouri River; the Red River Expedition (1806) explored the Red River basin; the Pike Expedition (1806) also started up the Missouri, but turned south to explore the Arkansas River watershed. The maps and journals of the explorers helped to define the boundaries during the negotiations leading to the AdamsOns Treaty, which set the western boundary as follows: north up the Sabine River from the Gulf of Mexico to its intersection with the 32nd parallel, due north to the Red River, up the Red River to the 100th meridian, north to the Arkansas River, up the Arkansas River to its headwaters, due north to the 42nd parallel and due west to its previous boundary.

Plan of Fort Madison, built in 1808 to establish U.S. control over the northern part of the Louisiana Purchase; drawn 1810.

==Slavery==
Governing the Louisiana Territory was more difficult than acquiring it. Its European peoples, of ethnic French, Spanish and Mexican descent, were largely Catholic; in addition, there was a large population of enslaved Africans made up of a high proportion of recent arrivals from Africa, as Spain had continued the international slave trade. This was particularly true of the area of the present-day state of Louisiana, which also contained a large number of free people of color. Both present-day Arkansas and Missouri also had some people holding slaves.

Some slaveholders feared that acquisition of the new territory might inspire American slaves to follow the example of those in Saint-Domingue and revolt. Southern slave-owners wanted the US to establish slavery laws in Louisiana, so they could be supported in taking their slaves to the new territory to undertake new agricultural developments, as well as to reduce the threat of future slave revolts. Herring, p. 104. 

The Louisiana Territory was broken into smaller portions for administration, and the territories passed slavery laws similar to those in the southern states but trying to encompass the preceding French and Spanish rule (for instance, Spain had prohibited slavery of Native Americans in 1769, but some slaves of mixed African-Native American descent were still being held in St. Louis when the US took over the Louisiana Territory). William E. Foley, "Slave Freedom Suits before Dred Scott: The Case of Marie Jean Scypion's Descendants", Missouri Historical Review, 79, no. 1 (October 1984), p. 1, at The State Historical Society of Missouri, accessed 18 February 2011 In a freedom suit that went from Missouri to the US Supreme Court, slavery of Native Americans was finally ended in 1836. The institutionalization of slavery under US territorial law in the Louisiana Territory contributed to the American Civil War a half century later. As states organized within the territory, the status of slavery in each state became a matter of contention in Congress, as southern states wanted slavery extended to the west, and northern states just as strongly opposed new states being admitted as slave states. The Missouri Compromise of 1820 was a temporary solution.

==Asserting U.S. possession==
After the early explorations, the U.S. government sought to establish control of the region, since trade along the Mississippi and Missouri rivers was still dominated by British and French traders from Canada and allied Indians, especially the Sauk and Fox. The United States adapted the former Spanish facility at Fort Bellefontaine as a fur trading post near St. Louis in 1804 for business with the Sauk and Fox. John C. Luttig, Journal of a Fur-trading Expedition on the Upper Missouri: 1812-1813, Kansas City, MO: The Missouri Historical Society, 1920 In 1808 two military forts with trading factories were built, Fort Osage along the Missouri River in western present-day Missouri and Fort Madison along the Upper Mississippi River in eastern present-day Iowa. Prucha, Francis P. (1969) The Sword of the Republic: The United States Army on the Frontier 17831846. Macmillan, New York With tensions increasing with Great Britain, in 1809 Fort Bellefontaine was converted to a US military fort, and used for that purpose until 1826.

During the War of 1812, Great Britain and allied Indians defeated U.S. forces in the Upper Mississippi; the US abandoned both Fort Osage and Fort Madison, as it did several U.S. forts built during the war, including Fort Johnson and Fort Shelby. After U.S. ownership of the region was confirmed in the Treaty of Ghent (1814), the U.S. built or expanded forts along the Mississippi and Missouri rivers, including adding to Fort Bellefontaine, and constructing Fort Armstrong (1816) and Fort Edwards (1816) in Illinois, Fort Crawford (1816) in Prairie du Chien Wisconsin, Fort Snelling (1819) in Minnesota, and Fort Atkinson (1819) in Nebraska. 

==Financing==
The American government used $3 million in gold as a down payment, and issued bonds for the balance to pay France for the purchase. Earlier that year, Francis Baring and Company of London had become the U.S. government's official banking agent in London. Because of this favored position, the US asked the Baring firm to handle the transaction. Francis Baring's son Alexander was in Paris at the time and helped in the negotiations. Another Baring advantage was a close relationship with Hope and Company of Amsterdam. The two banking houses worked together to facilitate and underwrite the Purchase. Because Napoleon wanted to receive his money as quickly as possible, the two firms received the American bonds and paid cash to France. 

(The original sales document of the Louisiana Purchase was exhibited in the entrance hall of the Barings London offices until the bank's collapse in 1995. It is now held by ING Group, which purchased Barings. The original handwritten proclamation signed by President Thomas Jefferson and Secretary of State James Madison, which informed the American public of the landmark deal of the Louisiana Purchase, was acquired in 1996 by Walter Scott, Jr. of Omaha, Nebraska, who holds it in his private collection. )

==Nature of sale==
The historian James Loewen is among those who assert that the United States purchased only France's claim to the Louisiana Territory, as the land belonged to the tribes who inhabited the area. In his view, the US acquired the lands slowly throughout the nineteenth century by purchases from individual Native American tribes and by wars against them. Loewen, James. Lies My Teacher Told Me. Touchstone, 2007, pp. 121122. ISBN 978-0-7432-9628-1 The question is discussed at length in the article on Aboriginal title in the United States, as well as in articles on the American Indian Wars and the U.S. Supreme Court case Johnson v. M'Intosh.

==The proceeds==
Despite issuing orders that the over 60 million francs were to be spent on the construction of five new canals in France, Bonaparte spent the whole amount on his planned invasion of the United Kingdom. 

==See also==

*Alaska Purchase
*Franco-American alliance
*List of French possessions and colonies
**New France
*Historic regions of the United States
*Territorial evolution of the United States
*Territories of the United States on stamps

==References==

==Bibliography==
*, Url
*, Book
*
*, Book
*, Book
*, Book
*, Book

Further reading:

* Url
*Lewis, James E. (2003). The Louisiana Purchase: Jefferson's Noble Bargain?, UNC Press Books, pp. 112, ISBN 9781882886234, Url
*Rodriguez, Junius P. The Louisiana Purchase: A Historical and Geographical Encyclopedia (2002)
* Marshall, 1914 A History of the Western Boundary of the Louisiana Purchase, 1819-1841
* Hermann, 1900 The Louisiana Purchase and our title west of the Rocky Mountains: with a review of annexation by the United States
* U.S. Dept. of State, 1903 State papers and correspondence bearing upon the purchase of the territory of Louisiana

==External links==

*Text of the Louisiana Purchase Treaty
*Library of Congress  Louisiana Purchase Treaty
*Teaching about the Louisiana Purchase
*Louisiana Purchase Bicentennial 18032003
*New Orleans/Louisiana Purchase 1803
*The Haitian Revolution and the Louisiana Purchase
*Lewis and Clark Trail
*Louisiana Purchase and Lewis & Clark student and teacher guide: dates, people, analysis, multimedia
*Case and Controversies in U.S. History, Page 42 Senator Pickering explains his opposition to the Louisiana Purchase, 1803.
*Booknotes interview with Jon Kukla on A Wilderness So Immense: The Louisiana Purchase and the Destiny of America, July 6, 2003.

 



[[Labor theory of value]]

The labor theories of value (LTV) are heterodox economic theories of value that argue the value of a commodity is only related to the labor needed to produce or obtain that commodity and not to other factors of production (except as those elements can be regarded as embodied labour.) Presently the concept is most often associated with Marxian economics, although it appears as a foundation to earlier classical economic theorists such as Adam Smith and David Ricardo and later also in anarchist economics.

==Definitions of value and labor==

When speaking in terms of a labor theory of value, value, without any qualifying adjective should theoretically refer to the amount of labor necessary to the production of a marketable commodity, including the labor necessary to the development of any real capital employed in the production. Both David Ricardo and Karl Marx attempted to quantify and embody all labor components in order to set the real price, or natural price of a commodity. e.g. see - Junankar, P. N., Marx's economics, Oxford : Philip Allan, 1982, ISBN 0-86003-125-X or Peach, Terry "Interpreting Ricardo", Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1993, ISBN 0-521-26086-8 The labor theory of value, as presented by Adam Smith, however, did not require the quantification of all past labor, nor did it deal with the labor needed to create the tools (capital) that might be employed in the production of a commodity. The Smith theory of value was very similar to the later utility theories in that Smith proclaimed that a commodity was worth whatever labor it would command in others (value in trade) or whatever labor it would "save" the self (value in use), or both. But this "value" is subject to supply and demand at a particular time.

The real price of every thing, what every thing really costs to the man who wants to acquire it, is the toil and trouble of acquiring it. What every thing is really worth to the man who has acquired it, and who wants to dispose of it or exchange it for something else, is the toil and trouble which it can save to himself, and which it can impose upon other people. (Wealth of Nations Book 1, chapter V)

Smith's theory of price (which for many is the same as value) has nothing to do with the past labor spent in the production of a commodity. It speaks only of the labor that can be "commanded" or "saved" at present. If there is no use for a buggy whip then the item is economically worthless in trade or in use, regardless of all the labor spent in its creation. Duncan (1995, 2000, 2004) has provided remarkable insights into how Smith's theory of value accounts for role of nature in generation of value.

===Distinctions of economically pertinent labor===

A person drinking water from a good stream at his doorstep must "spend" labor to gain this value, at least if this action is relevant to economics. In terms of modern orthodox terminology it is important to note that labor, at least in Smith's approach, is the opposite of utility..disutility, pain, toil etc. Labor that is pleasant in itself is only therefore partly labor, or perhaps not labor at all (however, see opportunity cost). Highly skilled labor, on the other hand, owes part of its produce to an "investment" in training, and is almost like capital (hence the modern concept of human capital). So many types of pleasant labor can be described as a result of an earlier and more painful investment.

In the example of a person going to a stream at his doorstep, if this is a pleasant activity, it is not labor. If it is not pleasant it could be relevant to economics because, for example, the house could be built closer to the stream, plumbing could be installed, a person could be employed to fetch water, or investment in a better path to the water might be worth considering.

But the above way of defining value is not the only one.

Value "in use" is the usefulness of this commodity, its utility. A classical paradox often comes up when considering this type of value. In the words of Adam Smith:

The word VALUE, it is to be observed, has two different meanings, and sometimes expresses the utility of some particular object, and sometimes the power of purchasing other goods which the possession of that object conveys. The one may be called 'value in use ;' the other, 'value in exchange.' The things which have the greatest value in use have frequently little or no value in exchange; and on the contrary, those which have the greatest value in exchange have frequently little or no value in use. Nothing is more useful than water: but it will purchase scarce any thing; scarce any thing can be had in exchange for it. A diamond, on the contrary, has scarce any value in use; but a very great quantity of other goods may frequently be had in exchange for it. (Wealth of Nations Book 1, chapter IV)

Value "in exchange" is the relative proportion with which this commodity exchanges for another commodity (in other words, its price in the case of money). It is relative to labor as explained by Adam Smith:

The value of any commodity, ... to the person who possesses it, and who means not to use or consume it himself, but to exchange it for other commodities, is equal to the quantity of labour which it enables him to purchase or command. Labour, therefore, is the real measure of the exchangeable value of all commodities (Wealth of Nations Book 1, chapter V; emphasis added).

Value (without qualification) as an intrinsic worth that stands without the process of exchange. Marx defined the value of the commodity by the third definition. In his terms, value is the 'socially necessary abstract labor' embodied in a commodity. In Ricardo and other classical economists, this definition serves as a measure of "real cost", "absolute value", or a "measure of value" invariable under changes in distribution and technology. Ricardo, David (1823), 'Absolute Value and Exchange Value', in "The Works and Correspondence of David Ricardo", Volume 4, Cambridge University Press, 1951 and Sraffa, Piero and Maurice Dobb (1951), 'Introduction', in "The Works and Correspondence of David Ricardo", Volume 1, Cambridge University Press, 1951. 

Ricardo, other classical economists, and Marx began their expositions with the assumption that value in exchange was equal to or proportional to this labor value. They thought this was a good assumption from which to explore the dynamics of development in capitalist societies.

Other supporters of the labor theory of value used the word "value" in the second sense, to represent "exchange value". Proudhon, Pierre J., 1851, General Idea of the Revolution in the 19th Century, study 6. 

==Conceptual model==

A simple model illustrating the concepts and workings of LTV could go as follows:

In a village in Somewhereia, everyone shares a set of skills and their produce is derived from local natural resources. Through custom or inclination each person pursues a particular trade, but is capable of pursuing any other in the village.

These people exchange their products on a regular basis. Each would know how long it took their fellow to produce their good, and how long it would take them to make it themselves. They would also know how much of their own product they would produce in the same amount of time and how much they would be able to exchange for that product.

If anyone tried to overcharge for a good, people would stop buying and make it themselves (or a competitor could enter the market and undercut them). Each person would thus be able to calculate whether it would be better for them to buy a good or make it themselves.

In this scenario prices and values would be equal. Friedrich Engels advances such a conceptual model in his Appendix to Marx' Capital v. III 

==LTV and the labor process==

Since the term value is understood in the LTV as denoting something created by labor, and its "magnitude" as something proportional to the quantity of labor performed, it is important to explain how the labor process both preserves value and adds new value in the commodities it creates. Unless otherwise noted, the description of the labor process and the role of the value of means of production in this section are drawn from chapter 7 of Capital vol1 . 

The value of a commodity increases in proportion to the duration and intensity of labor performed on average for its production. Part of what the LTV means by "socially necessary" is that the value only increases in proportion to this labor as it is performed with average skill and average productivity. So though workers may labor with greater skill or more productivity than others, these more skillful and more productive workers thus produce more value through the production of greater quantities of the finished commodity. Each unit still bears the same value as all the others of the same class of commodity. By working sloppily, unskilled workers may drag down the average skill of labor, thus increasing the average labor time necessary for the production of each unit commodity. But these unskillful workers cannot hope to sell the result of their labor process at a higher price (as opposed to value) simply because they have spent more time than other workers producing the same kind of commodities.

However, production not only involves labor, but also certain means of labor: tools, materials, power plants and so on. These means of labor  also known as means of production  are often the product of another labor process as well. So the labor process inevitably involves these means of production that already enter the process with a certain amount of value. Labor also requires other means of production that are not produced with labor and therefore bear no value: such as sunlight, air, uncultivated land, un-extracted minerals, etc. While useful, even crucial to the production process, these bring no value to that process. In terms of means of production resulting from another labor process, LTV treats the magnitude of value of these produced means of production as constant throughout the labor process. Due to the constancy of their value, these means of production are referred to, in this light, as constant capital.

Consider for example workers who take coffee beans, use a roaster to roast them, and then use a brewer to brew and dispense a fresh cup of coffee. In performing this labor, these workers add value to the coffee beans and water that comprise the material ingredients of a cup of coffee. The worker also transfers the value of constant capital  the value of the beans; some specific depreciated value of the roaster and the brewer; and the value of the cup  to the value of the final cup of coffee. Again, on average the worker can transfer no more than the value of these means of labor previously possessed to the finished cup of coffee In the case of instruments of labor, such as the roaster and the brewer (or even a ceramic cup) the value transferred to the cup of coffee is only a depreciated value calculated over the life of those instruments of labor according to some accounting convention. So the value of coffee produced in a day equals the sum of both the value of the means of labor  this constant capital  and the value newly added by the worker in proportion to the duration and intensity of their work.

Often this is expressed mathematically as:

:::::: ,

:where
:* is the constant capital of materials used in a period plus the depreciated portion of tools and plant used in the process. (A period is typically a day, week, year, or a single turnover: meaning the time required to complete one batch of coffee, for example.)
:* is the quantity of labor time (average skill and productivity) performed in producing the finished commodities during the period
:* is the value of the product of the period ( comes from the German word for value: wert)

Note: if the product resulting from the labor process is homogeneous (all similar in quality and traits, for example, all cups of coffee) then the value of the periods product can be divided by the total number of items (use-values or ) produced to derive the unit value of each item. where is the total items produced.

The LTV further divides the value added during the period of production, , into two parts. The first part is the portion of the process when the workers add value equivalent to the wages they are paid. For example, if the period in question is one week and these workers collectively are paid $1,000, then the time necessary to add $1,000 to  while preserving the value of  constant capital is considered the necessary labor portion of the period (or week): denoted . The remaining period is considered the surplus labor portion of the week: or . The value used to purchase labor-power, for example the $1,000 paid in wages to these workers for the week, is called variable capital (). This is because in contrast to the constant capital expended on means of production, variable capital can add value in the labor process. The amount it adds depends on the duration, intensity, productivity and skill of the labor-power purchased: in this sense the buyer of labor-power has purchased a commodity of variable use. Finally, the value added during the portion of the period when surplus labor is performed is called surplus value (). From the variables defined above, we find two other common expression for the value produced during a given period as:

::::
:::and
::::

The first form of the equation expresses the value resulting from production, focusing on the costs and the surplus value appropriated in the process of production, . The second form of the equation focuses on the value of production in terms of the valued added by the labor performed during the process .

==The relation between values and prices==
One issue facing the LTV is the relationship between value quantities on one hand and prices on the other. If a commodity's value is not the same as its price, and therefore the magnitudes of each likely differ, then what is the relation between the two, if any? Various LTV schools of thought provide different answers to this question. For example, some argue that value in the sense of the amount of labor embodied in a good acts as a center of gravity for price. As counter-intuitive as this may seem to those accustomed to neoclassical price theory, some empirical evidence suggests labor values are a better predictor of empirically recorded prices than prediction by any other means. see for example The Empirical Strength of the Labour Theory of Value 

However, most economists would say that cases where pricing is even approximately equal to the value of the labor embodied are only special cases, and not the general case. In the standard formulation, prices also normally include a level of income for "capital" and "land". These incomes are known as "profit" and "rent" respectively. Keep in mind thatlike the terms labor and valuethe terms price, capital, land, profit, and rent are used here in a theoretical way that does not always correspond to everyday use, even by accountants.)

In Book 1, chapter VI, Smith explains:

The real value of all the different component parts of price, it must be observed, is measured by the quantity of labour which they can, each of them, purchase or command. Labour measures the value not only of that part of price which resolves itself into labour, but of that which resolves itself into rent, and of that which resolves itself into profit.

The final sentence shows us how Smith sees value of a product as relative to labor of buyer or consumer, as opposite to Marx who sees the value of a product being proportional to labor of laborer or producer. And we value things, price them, based on how much labor we can avoid or command, and we can command labor not only in a simple way but also by trading things for a profit.

The demonstration of the relation between commodities' unit values and their respective prices is known in Marxian terminology as the transformation problem or the transformation of values into prices of production. The transformation problem has probably generated the greatest bulk of debate about the LTV. The problem with transformation is to find an algorithm where the magnitude of value added by labor, in proportion to its duration and intensity, is sufficiently accounted for after this value is distributed through prices that reflect an equal rate of return on capital advanced. If there is an additional magnitude of value or a loss of value after transformation compared with before then the relation between values (proportional to labor) and prices (proportional to total capital advanced) is incomplete. Various solutions and impossibility theorems have been offered for the transformation, but the debate has not reached any clear resolution.

LTV does not deny the role of supply and demand influencing price since the price of a commodity is something other than its value. In Value, Price and Profit (1865), Karl Marx quotes Adam Smith and sums up:

:It suffices to say that if supply and demand equilibrate each other, the market prices of commodities will correspond with their natural prices, that is to say, with their values as determined by the respective quantities of labor required for their production. Marx, Karl (1865). Value, Price and Profit. 

The LTV seeks to explain the level of this equilibrium. This could be explained by a cost of production argumentpointing out that all costs are ultimately labor costs, but this does not account for profit, and it is vulnerable to the charge of tautology in that it explains prices by prices. Piero Sraffa and Maurice H. Dobb (1951). "General Preface", The Works and Correspondence of David Ricardo, Vol. 1, Cambridge University Press Marx later called this "Smith's adding up theory of value".

Smith argues that labor values are the natural measure of exchange for direct producers like hunters and fishermen. Smith On Labour Value Marx, on the other hand, uses a measurement analogy, arguing that for commodities to be comparable they must have a common element or substance by which to measure them, Marx, Karl Value Price and Profit and that labor is a common substance of what Marx eventually calls commodity-values. 

Some statistical evidence for the theory has also been advanced by Anwar Shaikh. 

==The theory's development==

===Origins of the labor theory of value===
The labor theory of value has developed over many centuries. It had no single originator, but rather many different thinkers arrived at the same conclusion independently. Some writers trace its origin to Thomas Aquinas. In his Summa Theologiae (12651274) he expresses the view that "... value can, does and should increase in relation to the amount of labor which has been expended in the improvement of commodities." Scholars such as Joseph Schumpeter have cited Ibn Khaldun, who in his Muqaddimah (1377), described labor as the source of value, necessary for all earnings and capital accumulation. He argued that even if earning results from something other than a craft, the value of the resulting profit and acquired (capital) must (also) include the value of the labor by which it was obtained. Without labor, it would not have been acquired. Scholars have also pointed to Sir William Petty's Treatise of Taxes of 1662 Parrington vol 1 ch 3 and to John Locke's labor theory of property, set out in the Second Treatise on Government (1689), which sees labor as the ultimate source of economic value. Karl Marx himself credited Benjamin Franklin in his 1729 essay entitled "A Modest Enquiry into the Nature and Necessity of a Paper Currency" as being "one of the first" to advance the theory. Karl Marx,Value, Price, and Profit, 1865, Part VI. 

Pioneer Scottish economist Adam Smith accepted the theory for pre-capitalist societies but saw a flaw in its application to contemporary capitalism. He pointed out that if the "labor embodied" in a product equalled the "labor commanded" (i.e. the amount of labor that could be purchased by selling it), then profit was impossible. David Ricardo (seconded by Marx) responded to this paradox by arguing that Smith had confused labor with wages. "Labor commanded", he argued, would always be more than the labor needed to sustain itself (wages). The value of labor, in this view, covered not just the value of wages (what Marx called the value of labor power), but the value of the entire product created by labor. Ormazabal, Kepa M. (2006); Adam Smith on Labor and Value: Challenging the Standard Interpretation 

Ricardo's theory was a predecessor of the modern theory that equilibrium prices are determined solely by production costs associated with Neo-Ricardianism. The Neo-Ricardians(archive), New School University 

Based on the discrepancy between the wages of labor and the value of the product, the "Ricardian socialists"  Charles Hall, Thomas Hodgskin, John Gray, and John Francis Bray, and Percy Ravenstone Utopians and Socialists: Ricardian Socialists(archive), History of Economic Thought, New School University  applied Ricardo's theory to develop theories of exploitation.

Marx expanded on these ideas, arguing that workers work for a part of each day adding the value required to cover their wages, while the remainder of their labor is performed for the enrichment of the capitalist. The LTV and the accompanying theory of exploitation became central to his economic thought.

19th century American individualist anarchists based their economics on the LTV, with their particular interpretation of it being called "Cost the limit of price". They, as well as contemporary individualist anarchists in that tradition, hold that it is unethical to charge a higher price for a commodity than the amount of labor required to produce it. Hence, they propose that trade should be facilitated by using notes backed by labor.

===Adam Smith and David Ricardo===
Adam Smith held that, in a primitive society, the amount of labor put into producing a good determined its exchange value, with exchange value meaning in this case the amount of labor a good can purchase. However, according to Smith, in a more advanced society the market price is no longer proportional to labor cost since the value of the good now includes compensation for the owner of the means of production: "The whole produce of labour does not always belong to the labourer. He must in most cases share it with the owner of the stock which employs him." Smith quoted in Whitaker, Albert C. History and Criticism of the Labor Theory of Value, pp. 15-16 "Nevertheless, the 'real value' of such a commodity produced in advanced society is measured by the labor which that commodity will command in exchange. ... But disowns what is naturally thought of as the genuine classical labor theory of value, that labor-cost regulates market-value. This theory was Ricardos, and really his alone." Whitaker, Albert C. History and Criticism of the Labor Theory of Value, pp. 15-16 

Classical economist David Ricardo's labor theory of value holds that the value of a good (how much of another good or service it exchanges for in the market) is proportional to how much labor was required to produce it, including the labor required to produce the raw materials and machinery used in the process. David Ricardo stated it as, "The value of a commodity, or the quantity of any other commodity for which it will exchange, depends on the relative quantity of labour which is necessary for its production, and not as the greater or less compensation which is paid for that labour." (Ricardo 1817) In this heading Ricardo seeks to differentiate the quantity of labor necessary to produce a commodity from the wages paid to the laborers for its production. However, Ricardo was troubled with some deviations in prices from proportionality with the labor required to produce them. For example, he said "I cannot get over the difficulty of the wine, which is kept in the cellar for three or four years while constantly increasing in exchange value, or that of the oak tree, which perhaps originally had not 2 s. expended on it in the way of labour, and yet comes to be worth 100."(Quoted in Whitaker) Of course, a capitalist economy stabilizes this discrepancy until the value added to aged wine is equal to the cost of storage. If anyone can hold onto a bottle for four years and become rich, that would make it hard to find freshly corked wine. There is also the theory that adding to the price of a luxury product increases its exchange-value by mere prestige.

The labor theory as an explanation for value contrasts with the subjective theory of value, which says that value of a good is not determined by how much labor was put into it but by its usefulness in satisfying a want and its scarcity. Ricardo's labor theory of value is not a normative theory, as are some later forms of the labor theory, such as claims that it is immoral for an individual to be paid less for his labor than the total revenue that comes from the sales of all the goods he produces.

It is arguable to what extent these classical theorists held the labor theory of value as it is commonly defined. Whitaker, Albert C. Albert C. Whitaker, History and Criticism of the Labor Theory of Value Jstor.org King, Peter and Ripstein Arthur. Did Marx Hold a Labor Theory of Value? University of Toronto.ca For instance, David Ricardo theorized that prices are determined by the amount of labor but found exceptions for which the labor theory could not account. In a letter, he wrote: "I am not satisfied with the explanation I have given of the principles which regulate value." Adam Smith theorized that the labor theory of value holds true only in the "early and rude state of society" but not in a modern economy where owners of capital are compensated by profit. As a result, "Smith ends up making little use of a labor theory of value." Canterbery, E. Ray, A Brief History of Economics: Artful Approaches to the Dismal Science, World Scientific (2001), pp. 52-53 

=== Anarchism ===

Sample labor for labor note for the Cincinnati Time Store. Scanned from Equitable Commerce (1846) by Josiah Warren
Pierre Joseph Proudhon's mutualism "Thus, the classical solution of expressing the value of goods and services in terms of man hours, which was developed by the orthodox (political) economists of the time, was adopted by both Proudhon and Marx." http://www.inclusivedemocracy.org/dn/vol6/takis_proudhon.htm "Beyond Marx and Proudhon" by Takis Fotopoulos and American individualist anarchists such as Josiah Warren, Lysander Spooner and Benjamin Tucker "The most basic difference is that the individualist anarchists rooted their ideas in the labour theory of value while the "anarcho"-capitalists favour mainstream marginalist theory." An Anarchist FAQ adopted the liberal Labor Theory of Value of classical economics but used it to criticize capitalism instead favoring a non-capitalist market system. "Like Proudhon, they desired a (libertarian) socialist system based on the market but without exploitation and which rested on possession rather than capitalist private property"An Anarchist FAQ 

Josiah Warren is widely regarded as the first American anarchist, Palmer, Brian (2010-12-29) What do anarchists want from us?, Slate.com Riggenbach, Jeff (2011-02-25) Josiah Warren: The First American Anarchist, Mises Institute and the four-page weekly paper he edited during 1833, The Peaceful Revolutionist, was the first anarchist periodical published, William Bailie, Josiah Warren: The First American Anarchist  A Sociological Study, Boston: Small, Maynard & Co., 1906, p. 20 Cost the limit of price was a maxim coined by Josiah Warren, indicating a (prescriptive) version of the labor theory of value. Warren maintained that the just compensation for labor (or for its product) could only be an equivalent amount of labor (or a product embodying an equivalent amount). In Equitable Commerce, Warren writes, "If a priest is required to get a soul out of purgatory, he sets his price according to the value which the relatives set upon his prayers, instead of their cost to the priest. This, again, is cannibalism. The same amount of labor equally disagreeable, with equal wear and tear, performed by his customers, would be a just remuneration Thus, profit, rent, and interest were considered unjust economic arrangements Wendy McElroy, "Individualist Anarchism vs. "Libertarianism" and Anarchocommunism," in the New Libertarian, issue #12, October, 1984. In keeping with the tradition of Adam Smith's The Wealth of Nations, Smith writes: "The real price of every thing, what every thing really costs to the man who wants to acquire it, is the toil and trouble of acquiring it." Note, also, the sense of "labor" meaning "suffering." the "cost" of labor is considered to be the subjective cost; i.e., the amount of suffering involved in it. He put his theories to the test by establishing an experimental "labor for labor store" called the Cincinnati Time Store at the corner of 5th and Elm Streets in what is now downtown Cincinnati, where trade was facilitated by notes backed by a promise to perform labor. "All the goods offered for sale in Warren's store were offered at the same price the merchant himself had paid for them, plus a small surcharge, in the neighborhood of 4 to 7 percent, to cover store overhead." The store proved successful and operated for three years after which it was closed so that Warren could pursue establishing colonies based on mutualism. These included "Utopia" and "Modern Times." Warren said that Stephen Pearl Andrews' The Science of Society, published in 1852, was the most lucid and complete exposition of Warren's own theories. Charles A. Madison. "Anarchism in the United States". Journal of the History of Ideas, Vol. 6, No. 1. (Jan., 1945), pp. 53 

Mutualism is an economic theory and anarchist school of thought that advocates a society where each person might possess a means of production, either individually or collectively, with trade representing equivalent amounts of labor in the free market. Integral to the scheme was the establishment of a mutual-credit bank that would lend to producers at a minimal interest rate, just high enough to cover administration. Miller, David. 1987. "Mutualism." The Blackwell Encyclopedia of Political Thought. Blackwell Publishing. p. 11 Mutualism is based on a labor theory of value that holds that when labor or its product is sold, in exchange, it ought to receive goods or services embodying "the amount of labor necessary to produce an article of exactly similar and equal utility". Tandy, Francis D., 1896, Voluntary Socialism, chapter 6, paragraph 15. Mutualism originated from the writings of philosopher Pierre-Joseph Proudhon.

Collectivist anarchism as defended by Mikhail Bakunin defended a form of labor theory of value when it advocated a system where "all necessaries for production are owned in common by the labour groups and the free communes ... based on the distribution of goods according to the labour contributed". 

===Karl Marx===

Contrary to popular belief, cf E F Schumacher,Small is Beautiful, Pt 1, ch 1. Marx opposed "ascribing a supernatural creative power to labor", arguing that:

:Labor is not the source of all wealth. Nature is just as much a source of use values (and it is surely of such that material wealth consists!) as labor, which is itself only the manifestation of a force of nature, human labor power. Critique of the Gotha Program ch 1 

Here Marx was distinguishing between exchange value (the subject of the LTV) and use value.

Marx used the concept of "socially necessary abstract labor-time" to introduce a social perspective distinct from his predecessors and neoclassical economics. Whereas most economists start with the individual's perspective, Marx started with the perspective of society as a whole. "Social production" involves a complicated and interconnected division of labor of a wide variety of people who depend on each other for their survival and prosperity.
"Abstract" labor refers to a characteristic of commodity-producing labor that is shared by all different kinds of heterogeneous (concrete) types of labor. That is, the concept abstracts from the particular characteristics of all of the labor and is akin to average labor.

"Socially necessary" labor refers to the quantity required to produce a commodity "in a given state of society, under certain social average conditions or production, with a given social average intensity, and average skill of the labour employed." "Value, Price and Profit ch 6 That is, the value of a product is determined more by societal standards than by individual conditions. This explains why technological breakthroughs lower the price of commodities and put less advanced producers out of business. Finally, it is not labor per se, which creates value, but labor power sold by free wage workers to capitalists. Another distinction to be made is that between productive and unproductive labor. Only wage workers of productive sectors of the economy produce value. For the difference between wage workers and working animals or slaves confer: John R. Bell: Capitalism and the Dialectic - The Uno-Sekine Approach to Marxian Political Economy, p. 45. London, Pluto Press 2009 

==Criticisms==

Many liberal economists believe that the Marxist labor theory of value has been discredited. . First published Tue Aug 26, 2003; substantive revision Mon Jun 14, 2010. Accessed March 4, 2011. The labor theory of value has been seen by some to predict that profits will be higher in labor-intensive industries than in capital-intensive industries, and empirical data contradicts this. This is sometimes referred to as the "Great Contradiction." In volume 3 of Capital, Marx attempts to explain why profits are not distributed according to which industries are the most labor-intensive and why this is consistent with his theory. Whether or not this is consistent with the labor theory of value as presented in volume 1 has been a topic of debate. Bhm von Bawerk, "Karl Marx and the Close of His System" Karl Marx and the Close of His System According to Marx, surplus value is extracted by the capitalist class as a whole and then distributed according to the amount of total capital, not the just variable component. In the example given earlier, of making a cup of coffee, the constant capital involved in production is the coffee beans themselves, and the variable capital is the value added by the coffee maker. The value added by the coffee maker is dependent on its technological capabilities, and the coffee maker can only add so much total value to cups of coffee over its lifespan. The amount of value added to the product is thus the amortization of the value of the coffeemaker. We can also note that not all products have equal proportions of value added by amortized capital. Capital intensive industries such as finance may have a large contribution by capital, while labor-intensive industries like traditional agriculture would have a relatively small one. Ekelund, Jr., Robert B. and Robert F. Hebert (1997, 4th ed), A History of Economic Theory and Method, pp. 239-241 

Within anarchist economics some anarchists have rejected the labour theory of value. The difference between collectivist anarchism and anarchist communism is that under the former, a wage system is retained based on the amount of labor performed. Anarchist communism, like collectivist anarchism, also advocates for the socialization of production, but the distribution of goods as well. Instead of 'to each according to his labor', in anarcho-communism the community would supply the subsistence requirements to each member free of charge according to the maxim 'to each according to his needs'. This paragraph sourced by Shatz, Marshall; Guess, Raymond; Skinner, Quentin. The Conquest of Bread and Other Writings. Cambridge University Press. p. xvi Anarcho-communists believe that subsistence, productive and distributive property should be common or social possessions while personal property should be private possessions. What is Anarchism?, p. 217 

Nonetheless, many elements of the theory are still believed to be valid, or the theory is presented in a non-Marxist tradition. Confer: Weizscker, Carl Christian von (2010): A New Technical Progress Function (1962). German Economic Review 11/3 (first publication of an article written in 1962); Weizscker Carl Christian von, and Paul A. Samuelson (1971): A new labor theory of value for rational planning through use of the bourgeois profit rate. Proceedings of the National Acadademy of Sciences U S A. download of facsimile For instance mutualist anarchist theorist Kevin Carson's Studies in Mutualist Political Economy opens with an attempt to integrate marginalist critiques into the labor theory of value. Kevin A. Carson, Studies in Mutualist Political Economy chs. 1-3 

Some Post-Keynesian economists have been highly critical of the labor theory of value. Joan Robinson, who herself was considered an expert on the writings of Karl Marx, wrote that the labor theory of value was largely a tautology and "a typical example of the way metaphysical ideas operate". Joan Robinson, "Economic Philosophy" p39 

Others have argued that the labor theory of value, especially as it arises in the work of Karl Marx, is due to a failure to recognize the fundamentally dialectical nature of how human beings attribute value to objects. Pilkington writes that value is attributed to objects based on our desire for them and that this desire is always inter-subjective and socially determined. He writes that:

alue is attributed to objects due to our desire for them. This desire, in turn, is inter-subjective. We desire to gain medal or to capture enemy flag battle because it will win recognition in the eyes of our peers. medal an enemy flag are not valued for their objective properties, nor are they valued for the amount of labour embodied in them, rather they are desired for the symbolic positions they occupy in the inter-subjective network of desires.

Pilkington insists that this is an entirely different conception of value than the one we find in the marginalist theory found in many economics textbooks. He writes that "actors in marginalist analysis have self-contained preferences; they do not have inter-subjective desires". Philip Pilkington, Marx, Hegel, The Labour Theory of Value and Human Desire 

==See also==

*Abstract labor and concrete labor
*Cost the limit of price
*Division of labor
*Law of value
*Prices of production
*Producerism
*Productive and unproductive labor
*Social division of labor
*Surplus labor
*Surplus product
*Surplus value
*Transformation problem
*Value-form

===Competing theories===
*Anarcho-communism
*Criticisms of the labor theory of value
*Marginalism
*Neo-Ricardianism
*Subjective Theory of Value
*Entitlement theory

==Notes==

==References==

==Further reading==
* Bhaduri, Amit. 1969. "On the Significance of Recent Controversies on Capital Theory: A Marxian View." Economic Journal. 79(315) September: 532-9.
* von Bhm-Bawerk, Eugen Karl Marx and the Close of His System (Classic criticism of Marxist economic theory)
* . Capital and Interest: A Critical History of Economical Theory
* G. A. Cohen 'The Labour Theory of Value and the Concept of Exploitation', in his History Labour and Freedom
* Duncan, Colin A. M. 1996. The Centrality of Agriculture: Between Humankind and The Rest of Nature. Mc-Gill-Queens University Press, Montreal.
* --2000 The Centrality of Agriculture: History, Ecology and Feasible Socialism. Socialist Register, pp. 187205.
* --2004 Adam Smiths greenvision and the futureof global socialism. In Albritton, R; Shannon Bell; John R. Bell; and R. Westra New Socialisms: Futures Beyond Globalization. New York/London, Routledge. pp. 90104. 
* 
*Eldred, Michael (1984) Critique of Competitive Freedom and the Bourgeois-Democratic State: Outline of a Form-analytic Extension of Marx's Uncompleted System. With an Appendix 'Value-form Analytic Reconstruction of the Capital-Analysis' by Michael Eldred, Marnie Hanlon, Lucia Kleiber and Mike Roth, Kurasje, Copenhagen. Emended, digitized edition 2010 with a new Preface, lxxiii + 466 pp. ISBN 87-87437-40-6, ISBN 978-87-87437-40-0.
* Ellerman, David P. (1992) Property & Contract in Economics: The Case for Economic Democracy. Blackwell. Chapters 4,5, and 13 critiques of LTV in favor of the labor theory of property.
* Engels, F. (1880). Socialism: Utopian and Scientific
* Freeman, Alan: Price, value and profit - a continuous, general treatment. In: Alan Freeman, Guglielmo Carchedi (editors): Marx and non-equilibrium economics. Edward Elgar Publishing. Cheltenham, UK, Brookfield, US 1996. ISBN 9781858982687
* Hagendorf, Klaus: The Labour Theory of Value. A Historical-Logical Analysis. Paris: EURODOS; 2008.
* Hagendorf, Klaus: Labour Values and the Theory of the Firm. Part I: The Competitive Firm. Paris: EURODOS; 2009.
* Henderson, James M.; Quandt, Richard E. 1971: Microeconomic Theory - A Mathematical Approach. Second Edition/International Student Edition. McGraw-Hill Kogakusha, Ltd.
* Keen, Steven Use, Value, and Exchange: The Misinterpretation of Marx
* (edition: 1999 English edition)
* Capital, Complete in Three volumes. Frederick Engels, editor, 1867-1894. Definitive Kerr Edition, in English, as re-issued 1906-1909.
** Capital, Volume 1 1867
** Capital, Volume 2 1885
** Capital, Volume 3 1894
*  (1863) Theories of Surplus Value
*  Wage Labour and Capital
*  Critique of the Gotha Program
* Ormazabal, Kepa M (2004). Smith On Labour Value Bilbo, Biscay, Spain: University of the Basque Country Working Paper.
* Parrington Title Unavailable
* Prychitko, David L. Marxism see section 1: "The Labor Theory of Value"
* 

* Rubin, I.I. Commentary on Marx's form and content of value (accessible read)
* Shaikh, Anwar (1998). "The Empirical Strength of the Labour Theory of Value" in Conference Proceedings of Marxian Economics: A Centenary Appraisal, Riccardo Bellofiore (ed.), Macmillan, London
* 

* Vianello, F. , Labour theory of value, in: Eatwell, J. and Milgate, M. and Newman, P. (eds.): The New Palgrave: A Dictionary of Economics, Macmillan e Stockton, London e New York, ISBN 978-09-35-85910-2.
* Wolff, Jonathan (2003). Karl Marx in Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy
* 

==External links==
* The Marxists Internet Archive
* Robert Vienneau's LTV FAQ
* Jim Devine's alternative view of Marx's LTV
* Cotton, Corn, Labor
* ErnestMandel.org



[[Lunar Society of Birmingham]]

Soho House in Handsworth, Birmingham, a regular venue for meetings of the Lunar Society

The Lunar Society of Birmingham was a dinner club and informal learned society of prominent figures in the Midlands Enlightenment, including industrialists, natural philosophers and intellectuals, who met regularly between 1765 and 1813 in Birmingham, England. At first called the Lunar Circle, "Lunar Society" became the formal name by 1775. The name arose because the society would meet during the full moon, as the extra light made the journey home easier and safer in the absence of street lighting. The members cheerfully referred to themselves as "lunarticks", a pun on lunatics. Venues included Erasmus Darwin's home in Lichfield, Matthew Boulton's home, Soho House, and Great Barr Hall.

==Membership and status==
Matthew BoultonThe Lunar Society evolved through various degrees of organisation over a period of up to fifty years, but was only ever an informal group. No constitution, minutes, publications or membership lists survive from any period, and evidence of its existence and activities is found only in the correspondence and notes of those associated with it. Historians therefore disagree on what qualifies as membership of the Lunar Society, who can be considered to have been members, and even when the society can be said to have existed. Josiah Wedgwood, for example, is described by some commentators as being one of five "principal members" of the society, while others consider that he "cannot be recognized as full member" at all. Dates given for the establishment of the society range from "sometime before 1760" to 1775. Some historians argue that it had ceased to exist by 1791; others that it was still operating as late as 1813. 

Despite this uncertainty, fourteen individuals have been identified as having verifiably attended Lunar Society meetings regularly over a long period during its most productive eras: these are Matthew Boulton, Erasmus Darwin, Thomas Day, Richard Lovell Edgeworth, Samuel Galton, Jr., James Keir, Joseph Priestley, William Small, Jonathan Stokes, James Watt, Josiah Wedgwood, John Whitehurst and William Withering. 

Benjamin FranklinWhile the society's meetings provided its name and social focus, however, they were relatively unimportant in its activities, and far more activity and communication took place outside the meetings themselves  members local to Birmingham were in almost daily contact, more distant ones in correspondence at least weekly. A more loosely defined group has therefore been identified over a wider geographical area and longer time period, who attended meetings occasionally and who corresponded or co-operated regularly with multiple other members on group activities. These include Richard Kirwan, John Smeaton, Henry Moyes, John Michell, Pieter Camper, R. E. Raspe, John Baskerville, Thomas Beddoes, John Wyatt, William Thomson, Cyril V. Jackson, Jean-Andr Deluc, John Wilkinson, John Ash, Samuel More, Robert Bage, James Brindley, Ralph Griffiths, John Roebuck, Thomas Percival, Joseph Black, James Hutton, Benjamin Franklin, Joseph Banks, William Herschel, Daniel Solander, John Warltire, George Fordyce, Alexander Blair, Samuel Parr, Louis Joseph d'Albert d'Ailly, the seventh Duke of Chaulnes, Barthlemy Faujas de Saint-Fond, Grossart de Virly, Johann Gottling. and Joseph Wright Fraser, David. "Joseph Wright of Derby and the Lunar Society", in Egerton, Judy, Wright of Derby (London, 1990) 

This lack of a defined membership has led some historians to criticise a Lunar Society "legend", leading people to "confuse it and its efforts with the general growth of intellectual and economic activities in the provinces of eighteenth century Britain". Others have seen this both as real and as one of the society's main strengths: a paper read at the Science Museum in London in 1963 claimed that "of all the provincial philosophical societies it was the most important, perhaps because it was not merely provincial. All the world came to Soho to meet Boulton, Watt or Small, who were acquainted with the leading men of Science throughout Europe and America. Its essential sociability meant that any might be invited to attend its meetings." 

==Development==

===Origins 1755&ndash;1765===
 Joseph Wright of Derby, Erasmus Darwin (1770; Birmingham Museum and Art Gallery).The origins of the Lunar Society lie in a pattern of friendships that emerged in the late 1750s. Matthew Boulton and Erasmus Darwin met some time between 1757 and 1758, possibly through family connections, as Boulton's mother's family were patients of Darwin; or possibly though shared friendships, as both were admirers of the printer John Baskerville and friends of the astronomer and geologist John Michell, a regular visitor to Darwin's house in Lichfield. Darwin was a physician and poet who had studied at Cambridge and Edinburgh; Boulton had left school at fourteen and started work in his father's business making metal goods in Birmingham at the age of 21. Despite their different backgrounds they shared a common interest in experiment and invention, and their activities would show Darwin's theoretical understanding and Boulton's practical experience to be complementary. Soon they were visiting each other regularly and conducting investigations into scientific subjects such as electricity, meteorology and geology. 

Around the same time the Derby-based clockmaker John Whitehurst became a friend, first of Boulton and subsequently of Darwin, through his business supplying clock movements to Boulton's ormolu manufacturing operation. Although older than both Boulton and Darwin, by 1758 Whitehurst was writing to Boulton telling excitedly of a pyrometer he had built, and looking forward to visiting Birmingham "to spend one day with you in trying all necessary experiments". 

Boulton, Darwin and Whitehurst were in turn introduced by Michell to Benjamin Franklin when he travelled to Birmingham in July 1758 "to improve and increase Acquaintance among Persons of Influence", and Franklin returned in 1760 to conduct experiments with Boulton on electricity and sound. Although Michell seems to have withdrawn from the group when he moved to Leeds in 1767, Franklin was to remain a common link among many of the early members. 

===The Lunar circle 1765&ndash;1775===
William SmallThe nature of the group was to change significantly with the move to Birmingham in 1765 of the Scottish physician William Small, who had been Professor of Natural Philosophy at The College of William & Mary in Williamsburg, Virginia. There he had taught and been a major influence over Thomas Jefferson, and had formed the focus of a local group of intellectuals. His arrival with a letter of introduction to Matthew Boulton from Benjamin Franklin was to have a galvanising effect on the existing circle, which began to explicitly identify itself as a group and actively started to attract new members. 

The first of these was Josiah Wedgwood, who became a close friend of Darwin in 1765 while campaigning for the building of the Trent and Mersey Canal and subsequently closely modelled his large new pottery factory at Etruria on Boulton's Soho Manufactory. Another new recruit, Richard Lovell Edgeworth, met Darwin, Small and Boulton in 1766 through a shared interest in carriage design, and he in turn introduced his friend and fellow Rousseau-admirer Thomas Day, with whom he had studied at Corpus Christi, Oxford. In 1767 James Keir visited Darwin in Lichfield, where he was introduced to Boulton, Small, Wedgwood and Whitehurst and subsequently decided to move to Birmingham. 

The Lunar Circle also attracted more distant involvement. Joseph Priestley, then living in Leeds, became associated with the Society in 1767 when Darwin and Wedgwood became involved with his work on electricity. In the same year James Watt visited Birmingham on the recommendation of his business patron John Roebuck, being shown around the Soho Manufactory by Small and Darwin in Boulton's absence. Although neither Priestley nor Watt were to move to Birmingham for several years, both were to be in constant communication with the Birmingham members and central to the circle's activities from 1767. 

By 1768 the core group of nine individuals who would form the nucleus of the Lunar Society had come together with Small at their heart. The group at this time is sometimes referred to as the "Lunar circle", though this is a later description used by historians, and the group themselves used a variety of less specific descriptions, including "Birmingham Philosophers" or simply "fellow-schemers". 

===The Lunar Society 1775&ndash;1780===
William WitheringIf William Small's arrival in 1765 had been the catalyst to the development of the Lunar Circle as a cohesive group, his death  probably from malaria  in 1775 was to mark another change in its structure. Small had been the key link between the members, and in his absence those remaining moved to place the group on a more organised footing. Meetings were to be held on the Sunday nearest the full moon, lasting from two o'clock in the afternoon until eight o'clock in the evening. The first was probably that held on 31 December 1775, and the "Lunar" name is first recorded in 1776. 

The era also saw significant changes in membership. William Withering  like Small a physician  was already an acquaintance of Darwin, Boulton and Wedgwood when he moved from Stafford to Birmingham and became a member of the Society in 1776. John Whitehurst's move to London in 1775 had a less dramatic effect: he kept in regular contact with other members of the society and remained an occasional attender of meetings. 

The leading figure behind the establishment of the society as a more organised body during this early period seems to have been Matthew Boulton: his home at Soho House in Handsworth was the principal venue for meetings, and in 1776 he is recorded as planning "to make many Motions to the Members respecting new Laws, and regulations, such as will tend to prevent the decline of a society which I hope will be lasting." This reliance on Boulton was also to prove a weakness, however, as the period coincided with the peak of his work building up his steam engine business and he was frequently absent. Although the 1770s was one of the society's richest eras in terms of its collaborative achievements, the society's meetings declined from regular occurrences in 1775 to infrequent ones by the end of the decade. 

===Heyday of the Society 1780-1789===
Joseph Priestley, c. 1783
In late 1780 the nature of the society was to change again with the move to Birmingham of Joseph Priestley. Priestley had been closely associated with the group's activities for over a decade and was a strong advocate of the benefits of scientific societies. Shortly after his arrival Lunar meetings moved from Sunday afternoons to Mondays to accommodate Priestley's duties as a clergyman, while the society's dependence on Matthew Boulton was lessened by holding meetings at other members' houses in addition to Soho House. The result was to be the society's most productive era. 

Several other major new figures became associated with the society during this period. Samuel Galton, Jr., unusual as a Quaker who was also a gun-manufacturer, appears in the letters of other Lunar members as attending meetings from July 1781, and his daughter Mary Anne Schimmelpenninck was to provide one of the few first-hand accounts of the Lunar Society's activities. The botanist and physician Jonathan Stokes, who had known William Withering as a child, moved to Stourbridge and started attending Lunar Society meetings from 1783. His contribution to the society was significant but short-lived: after collaborating with Withering on his Botanical Arrangement of British Plants the two quarrelled bitterly and Stokes severed his relations with the main Lunar members by 1788. 

The society also lost several major figures over the period: Richard Lovell Edgeworth ceased regular involvement in the society's activities when he returned to Ireland in 1782, John Whitehurst died in London in 1788, and Thomas Day died the following year. Most significantly, Erasmus Darwin moved to Derby in 1781, but although he complained of being "cut off from the milk of science", he continued to attend Lunar Society meetings at least until 1788. 

===Decline 1789&ndash;1813===
The Priestley riots of 1791The outbreak of the French Revolution in 1789 caused political strains between members of the society, but it was the Priestley Riots of 1791 in Birmingham itself that saw a decisive falling off of the society's spirit and activities. Joseph Priestley himself was driven from the town, leaving England entirely for the United States in 1794, William Withering's house was invaded by rioters and Matthew Boulton and James Watt had to arm their employees to protect the Soho Manufactory. Lunar meetings were continued by the younger generation of the families of earlier Lunar members, including Gregory Watt, Matthew Robinson Boulton, Thomas Wedgwood and James Watt junior, and possibly Samuel Tertius Galton. Regular meetings are recorded into the nineteenth century - eight in 1800, five or six before August 1801 and at least one in 1802, while as late as 1809 Leonard Horner was describing "the remnant of the Lunar Society" as being "very interesting". While individual members continued to produce work of importance, however, the collaborative activity that marked the heyday of the society was noticeably absent. 

The society had definitely collapsed by 1813, however: in August of that year Samuel Galton, Jr. is recorded as having won a ballot for possession of the scientific books from the society's library. 

==Modern Lunar Societies==
William Bloye's gold-covered statue Boulton, Watt and Murdoch, in central Birmingham.Among memorials to the Society and its members are the Moonstones; two statues of Watt and a statue of Boulton, Watt and Murdoch by William Bloye; and the museum at Soho House &ndash; all in Birmingham, England.

In more recent times a new Lunar Society The Lunar Society was formed in Birmingham, England, by a group led by Dame Rachel Waterhouse. Its aim is to play a leading part in the development of the city and the wider region. Lunar Society award to Rachel Waterhouse In Italy, the Lunar Society Italia was formed to communicate science and astronomy. The Lunar Society Italia In Australia, The Lunaticks Society of Newcastle was formed by leading digital entrepreneurs, software developers, educators, film producers, creatives, investors to encourage creative thinking and new ideas in a digital age. The Lunaticks Society of Newcastle 

===University of Birmingham Lunar Society===
In the latter part of the 20th Century the University of Birmingham Lunar Society met every Thursday to debate and discuss all manner of topics in the Guild bar. In 2011, steps were undertaken to reform the discussion society as an alternative to the more regulated debate options available at the university. This was agreed by the University's Guild of Students in autumn 2012. The society now hosts symposiums every two weeks. Any member has always been welcome to suggest a topic for discussion. These meetings occur in a variety of environments from University rooms to local bars. In 2013 the society attempted to change the name of one of the rooms in the Guild of Students to 'The Lunar Room' in honour of the original Birmingham Lunar Society. Like the Oxford Union, the society has always traditionally put a huge emphasis on freedom of speech. 

Today, the Lunar Society is an informal academic association open to both undergraduate and graduate students, as well as professional academics, from the University of Birmingham. It has obtained a reputation for the variety of the topics discussed at its meetings. The Lunar Society puts itself forward as being committed to providing an open forum for academic discussion, which it does by hosting regular symposiums on a range of topics from current affairs to philosophy, science and art. The format for these symposiums is a round table style discussion. The society agrees to debate a series of topics in advance of the meeting, and every member is given an opportunity to participate in the discussion. To ensure the discussion retains order they are presided over by a chair. In keeping with the tradition of the society and to help with identification, the chair wears an academic robe. 

Freedom of speech has played an integral part of the societys history  the society was founded as a resistance to the more regulated debate societies on campus. To ensure this freedom of speech the society follows the Chatham House Rule: those who attend are free to use the content discussed at meetings but must not identify the speaker. 

The society is supported by a committee, who help coordinate topics, organise and publicise events, ensure a rotating chair and undertake fundraising. A number of noted University of Birmingham alumni have been involved with this societies committee. Former members of the society have gone on to senior positions in the media and business. https://www.facebook.com/groups/LunarSociety 

==See also==
* Scottish Enlightenment
* Science and invention in Birmingham
* Erasmus Darwin House

==References==

==Bibliography==

*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*

==External links==
* 
*Erasmus Darwin House, Lichfield
*Article in Science
*The Lunar Men who shaped the future (from the Birmingham Stories website)
*Soho House
*The modern Lunar Society
*Revolutionary Players website
*BBC Radio 4 In Our Time discussion
*The Lunar Society Italia
*The Lunaticks Society of Newcastle

*



[[Libya]]

Libya ( ), (Amazigh:  Libya), officially the State of Libya, is a country in the Maghreb region of North Africa bordered by the Mediterranean Sea to the north, Egypt to the east, Sudan to the southeast, Chad and Niger to the south, and Algeria and Tunisia to the west. The three traditional parts of the country are Tripolitania, Fezzan and Cyrenaica. With an area of almost 1.8 e6km2, Libya is the 17th largest country in the world. 

The largest city and capital, Tripoli, is home to 1.7 million of Libya's 6.4 million people. In 2009 Libya had the highest HDI in Africa and the fifth highest GDP (PPP) per capita in Africa, behind Equatorial Guinea, Seychelles, Gabon, and Botswana. Libya has the 10th-largest proven oil reserves of any country in the world and the 17th-highest petroleum production. 

A civil war and NATO-led military intervention in 2011 resulted in the ousting and death of the country's former leader, Muammar Gaddafi, and the collapse of his 42-year "First of September Al Fateh Revolution" and 34-year-old Jamahiriya state. As a result, Libya is currently undergoing political reconstruction, and is governed under an interim constitution drawn up by the National Transitional Council (NTC). Elections to a General National Congress were held on 7 July 2012, and the NTC handed power to the newly elected assembly on 8 August. The assembly has the responsibility of forming a constituent assembly to draft a permanent constitution for Libya, which will then be put to a referendum. 

==Etymology==

The name Libya ( or ; ; Libyan Arabic: ) was introduced in 1934 for Italian Libya, after the historical name for Northwest Africa, from the ancient Greek (). The name was based on earlier use in 1903 by Italian geographer Federico Minutilli. "Bibliografia della Libia"; Bertarelli (1929), p. 177. 

Libya gained independence in 1951 as the United Libyan Kingdom ( ), changing its name to the Kingdom of Libya ( ) in 1963. Following a coup d'tat led by Muammar Gaddafi in 1969, the name of the state was changed to the Libyan Arab Republic ( ). The official name was "Socialist People's Libyan Arab Jamahiriya" from 1977 to 1986, and "Great Socialist People's Libyan Arab Jamahiriya" ( ) from 1986 to 2011.

The National Transitional Council, established in 2011, referred to the state as simply "Libya". The UN formally recognized the country as "Libya" in September 2011, based on a request from the Permanent Mission of Libya citing the Libyan interim Constitutional Declaration of 3 August 2011. In November 2011, the ISO 3166-1 was altered to reflect the new country name "Libya" in English, "Libye (la)" in French. 

The current name, "State of Libya" ( ), was adopted unanimously by the General National Congress in January 2013. 

==History==

===Ancient Libya===

The temple of Zeus in the ancient Greek city of Cyrene.
The coastal plain of Libya was inhabited by Neolithic peoples from as early as 8000 BC. The Afro-Asiatic ancestors of the Berber people are assumed to have spread into the area by the Late Bronze Age. The earliest known name of such a tribe is that of the Garamantes, who were based in Germa. The Phoenicians were the first to establish trading posts in Libya. By the 5th century BC, the greatest of the Phoenician colonies, Carthage, had extended its hegemony across much of North Africa, where a distinctive civilization, known as Punic, came into being.

In 630 BC, the Ancient Greeks colonized Eastern Libya and founded the city of Cyrene. Within 200 years, four more important Greek cities were established in the area that became known as Cyrenaica. In 525 BC the Persian army of Cambyses II overran Cyrenaica, which for the next two centuries remained under Persian or Egyptian rule. Alexander the Great was greeted by the Greeks when he entered Cyrenaica in 331 BC, and Eastern Libya again fell under the control of the Greeks, this time as part of the Ptolemaic Kingdom.

After the fall of Carthage the Romans did not occupy immediately Tripolitania (the region around Tripoli), but left it under control of the kings of Numidia, until the coastal cities asked and obtained its protection. Bertarelli (1929), p. 202. Ptolemy Apion, the last Greek ruler, bequeathed Cyrenaica to Rome, which formally annexed the region in 74 BC and joined it to Crete as a Roman province. As part of the Africa Nova province, Tripolitania was prosperous, and reached a golden age in the 2nd and 3rd centuries, when the city of Leptis Magna, home to the Severan dynasty, was at its height. On the other side, Cyrenaica's first Christian communities were established by the time of the Emperor Claudius Bertarelli (1929), p. 417. but was heavily devastated during the Kitos War Rostovtzeff (1957), p. 364. and almost depopulated of Greeks and Jews alike, Cassius Dio, lxviii. 32 and, although repopulated by Trajan with military colonies, from then started its decadence. 

The decline of the Roman Empire saw the classical cities fall into ruin, a process hastened by the Vandals' destructive sweep through North Africa in the 5th century. When the Empire returned (now as East Romans) as part of Justinian's reconquests of the 6th century, efforts were made to strengthen the old cities, but it was only a last gasp before they collapsed into disuse. Cyrenaica, which had remained an outpost of the Byzantine Empire during the Vandal period, also took on the characteristics of an armed camp. Unpopular Byzantine governors imposed burdensome taxation to meet military costs, while the towns and public servicesincluding the water systemwere left to decay. By the beginning of the 7th century, Byzantine control over the region was weak, Berber rebellions were becoming more frequent, and there was little to oppose Muslim invasion. Rodd, Francis (1925). "Kahena, Queen of the Berbers: A Sketch of the Arab Invasion of Ifrikiya in the First Century of the Hijra". Bulletin of the School of Oriental Studies. University of London. Vol. 3, No. 4. pp. 731-2. 

===Islamic Libya===

The Atiq Mosque in Awjila is the oldest mosque in the Sahara.
Under the command of 'Amr ibn al-'As, the Rashidun army conquered Cyrenaica. Bertarelli (1929), p. 278. In 647 an army led by Abdullah ibn Saad took Tripoli from the Byzantines definitively. The Fezzan was conquered by Uqba ibn Nafi in 663. The Berber tribes of the hinterland accepted Islam, however they resisted Arab political rule. 

For the next several decades, Libya was under the purview of the Umayyad Caliph of Damascus until the Abbasids overthrew the Umayyads in 750, and Libya came under the rule of Baghdad. When Caliph Harun al-Rashid appointed Ibrahim ibn al-Aghlab as his governor of Ifriqiya in 800, Libya enjoyed considerable local autonomy under the Aghlabid dynasty. By the end of the 9th century, the Shiite Fatimids controlled Western Libya, and ruled the entire region in 972 and appointed Bologhine ibn Ziri as governor. Ibn Ziri's Berber Zirid dynasty ultimately broke away from the Shiite Fatimids, and recognised the Sunni Abbasids of Baghdad as rightful Caliphs. In retaliation, the Fatimids brought about the migration of thousands from two troublesome Arab Bedouin tribes, the Banu Sulaym and Banu Hilal to North Africa. This act drastically altered the fabric of the Libyan countryside, and cemented the cultural and linguistic Arabisation of the region. 

Zirid rule in Tripolitania was short-lived though, and already in 1001 the Berbers of the Banu Khazrun broke away. Tripolitania remained under their control until 1146, when the region was overtaken by the Normans of Sicily. Bertarelli (1929), p. 203. It was not until 1159 that the Moroccan Almohad leader Abd al-Mu'min reconquered Tripoli from European rule. For the next 50 years, Tripolitania was the scene of numerous battles between the Almohad rulers and insurgents of the Banu Ghaniya. Later, a general of the Almohads, Muhammad ibn Abu Hafs, ruled Libya from 1207 to 1221 before the later establishment of a Tunisian Hafsid dynasty independent from the Almohads. The Hafsids ruled Tripolitania for nearly 300 years. By the 16th century however, the Hafsids became increasingly caught up in the power struggle between Spain and the Ottoman Empire.

===Ottoman Tripolitania===

The Siege of Tripoli in 1551 allowed the Ottomans to capture the city from the Knights of St. John.
After a successful invasion of Tripoli by Habsburg Spain in 1510, and its handover to the Knights of St. John, the Ottoman admiral Sinan Pasha finally took control of Libya in 1551. His successor Turgut Reis was named the Bey of Tripoli and later Pasha of Tripoli in 1556. By 1565, administrative authority as regent in Tripoli was vested in a pasha appointed directly by the sultan in Constantinople/Istanbul. In the 1580s, the rulers of Fezzan gave their allegiance to the sultan, and although Ottoman authority was absent in Cyrenaica, a bey was stationed in Benghazi late in the next century to act as agent of the government in Tripoli. European slaves and large numbers of enslaved blacks transported from Sudan were also a feature of everyday life in Tripoli.

In time, real power came to rest with the pashas corps of janissaries. In 1611 the deys staged a coup against the pasha, and Dey Sulayman Safar was appointed as head of government. For the next hundred years, a series of deys effectively ruled Tripolitania. The two most important Deys were Mehmed Saqizli (r. 163149) and Osman Saqizli (r. 164972), both also Pasha, who ruled effectively the region. Bertarelli (1929), p. 204. The latter conquered also Cyrenaica. 

USS Enterprise of the Mediterranean Squadron capturing Tripolitan Corsair during the First Barbary War, 1801
Lacking direction from the Ottoman government, Tripoli lapsed into a period of military anarchy during which coup followed coup and few deys survived in office more than a year. One such coup was led by Turkish officer Ahmed Karamanli. The Karamanlis ruled from 1711 until 1835 mainly in Tripolitania, but had influence in Cyrenaica and Fezzan as well by the mid-18th century. Ahmad's successors proved to be less capable than himself, however, the region's delicate balance of power allowed the Karamanli. The 179395 Tripolitanian civil war occurred in those years. In 1793, Turkish officer Ali Benghul deposed Hamet Karamanli and briefly restored Tripolitania to Ottoman rule. However, Hamet's brother Yusuf (r. 17951832) reestablished Tripolitania's independence.

In the early 19th century war broke out between the United States and Tripolitania, and a series of battles ensued in what came to be known as the First Barbary War and the Second Barbary War. By 1819, the various treaties of the Napoleonic Wars had forced the Barbary states to give up piracy almost entirely, and Tripolitania's economy began to crumble. As Yusuf weakened, factions sprung up around his three sons; civil war soon resulted. Ottoman Sultan Mahmud II sent in troops ostensibly to restore order, marking the end of both the Karamanli dynasty and an independent Tripolitania. Bertarelli (1929), p. 205. Anyway, order was not recovered easily, and the revolt of the Libyan under Abd-El-Gelil and Gma ben Khalifa lasted until the death of the latter in 1858. The second period of direct Ottoman rule saw administrative changes, and what seemed as greater order in the governance of the three provinces of Libya.

===Italian Libya===

Australian defenders of Tobruk during World War II. Beginning on 10 April 1941, the Siege of Tobruk lasted for 240 days.
Omar Mukhtar was the leader of Libyan resistance in Cyrenaica against the Italian colonization.
After the Italo-Turkish War (19111912), Italy simultaneously turned the three regions into colonies. From 1912 to 1927, the territory of Libya was known as Italian North Africa. From 1927 to 1934, the territory was split into two colonies, Italian Cyrenaica and Italian Tripolitania, run by Italian governors. Some 150,000 Italians settled in Libya, constituting roughly 20% of the total population. 

In 1934, Italy adopted the name "Libya" (used by the Ancient Greeks for all of North Africa, except Egypt) as the official name of the colony (made up of the three provinces of Cyrenaica, Tripolitania and Fezzan). Idris al-Mahdi as-Senussi (later King Idris I), Emir of Cyrenaica, led the Libyan resistance to Italian occupation between the two world wars. Ilan Papp estimates that between 1928 and 1932 the Italian military "killed half the Bedouin population (directly or through disease and starvation in camps)." Ilan Papp, The Modern Middle East. Routledge, 2005, ISBN 0-415-21409-2, p. 26. Italian historian Emilio Gentile estimates 50,000 deaths resulting from the suppression of resistance. 

In June 1940, Italy entered World War II. Libya became the setting for the hard-fought North African Campaign that ultimately ended in defeat for Italy and its German ally in 1943.

From 1943 to 1951, Libya was under Allied occupation. The British military administered the two former Italian Libyan provinces of Tripolitana and Cyrenaca, while the French administered the province of Fezzan. In 1944, Idris returned from exile in Cairo but declined to resume permanent residence in Cyrenaica until the removal of some aspects of foreign control in 1947. Under the terms of the 1947 peace treaty with the Allies, Italy relinquished all claims to Libya. 

Omar Mukhtar was the resistance leader against the Italian colonization and became a national hero despite his capture and execution on 16 September 1931. His face is currently printed on the Libyan ten dinar note in memory and recognition of his patriotism.

===Independence, Kingdom of Libya and Libya under Gaddafi===

King Idris I led the country into independence in 1951 and became its first head of state
Muammar Gaddafi gained power in a 1969 coup and was "leader of the revolution" until his overthrow in 2011
On 24 December 1951, Libya declared its independence as the United Kingdom of Libya, a constitutional and hereditary monarchy under King Idris, Libya's only monarch. The discovery of significant oil reserves in 1959 and the subsequent income from petroleum sales enabled one of the world's poorest nations to establish an extremely wealthy state. Although oil drastically improved the Libyan government's finances, resentment among some factions began to build over the increased concentration of the nation's wealth in the hands of King Idris.

On 1 September 1969, a small group of military officers led by 27-year-old army officer Muammar Gaddafi staged a coup d'tat against King Idris, launching the Al Fateh Revolution. Gaddafi was referred to as the "Brother Leader and Guide of the Revolution" in government statements and the official Libyan press. 

In 1977, Libya officially became the "Great Socialist People's Libyan Arab Jamahiriya". Gaddafi officially passed power to the General People's Committees and henceforth claimed to be no more than a symbolic figurehead, but domestic and international critics claimed the reforms gave him virtually unlimited power. Dissidents against the new system were not tolerated, with punitive actions including capital punishment authorized by Gaddafi himself. The new "jamahiriya" governance structure he established was officially referred to as a form of direct democracy, though the government refused to publish election results. 

In February 1977, Libya started delivering military supplies to Goukouni Oueddei and the People's Armed Forces in Chad. The ChadianLibyan conflict began in earnest when Libya's support of rebel forces in northern Chad escalated into an invasion. Later that same year, Libya and Egypt fought a four-day border war that came to be known as the Libyan-Egyptian War, both nations agreed to a ceasefire under the mediation of the Algerian president Houari Boumedine. Hundreds of Libyans lost their lives in the war against Tanzania, when Gaddafi tried to save his friend Idi Amin. Gaddafi financed various other groups from anti-nuclear movements to Australian trade unions. 

From 1977 onward, per capita income in the country rose to more than US $11,000, the fifth-highest in Africa, while the Human Development Index became the highest in Africa and greater than that of Saudi Arabia. This was achieved without borrowing any foreign loans, keeping Libya debt-free. The Great Manmade River was also built to allow free access to fresh water across large parts of the country. In addition, financial support was provided for university scholarships and employment programs. 

Much of the countrys income from oil, which soared in the 1970s, was spent on arms purchases and on sponsoring dozens of paramilitaries and terrorist groups around the world. An airstrike failed to kill Gaddafi in 1986. Libya was finally put under United Nations sanctions after the bombing of a commercial flight killed hundreds of travellers. 

Gaddafi assumed the honorific title of "King of Kings of Africa" in 2008 as part of his campaign for a United States of Africa. By the early 2010s, in addition to attempting to assume a leadership role in the African Union, Libya was also viewed as having formed closer ties with Italy, one of its former colonial rulers, than any other country in the European Union. The eastern parts of the country have been "ruined" due to Gaddafi's economic theories, according to The Economist. 

===Revolution===

Demonstrations in Bayda on 22 July 2011
After the Arab Spring movements overturned the rulers of Tunisia and Egypt, Libya experienced a full-scale revolt beginning on 17 February 2011. By 20 February, the unrest had spread to Tripoli. On 27 February 2011, the National Transitional Council was established to administer the areas of Libya under rebel control. On 10 March 2011, France became the first state to officially recognise the council as the legitimate representative of the Libyan people. 

Pro-Gaddafi forces were able to respond militarily to rebel pushes in Western Libya and launched a counterattack along the coast toward Benghazi, the de facto centre of the uprising. The town of Zawiya, 48 km from Tripoli, was bombarded by air force planes and army tanks and seized by Jamahiriya troops, "exercising a level of brutality not yet seen in the conflict." The Independent, 9 March 2011 P.4 

Organs of the United Nations, including United Nations Secretary General Ban Ki-moon and the United Nations Human Rights Council, condemned the crackdown as violating international law, with the latter body expelling Libya outright in an unprecedented action urged by Libya's own delegation to the UN. 

On 17 March 2011 the UN Security Council passed Resolution 1973 with a 100 vote and five abstentions. The resolution sanctioned the establishment of a no-fly zone and the use of "all means necessary" to protect civilians within Libya. On 19 March, the first Allied act to secure the no-fly zone began when French military jets entered Libyan airspace on a reconnaissance mission heralding attacks on enemy targets. By 22 August 2011, rebel fighters had entered Tripoli and occupied Green Square, which they renamed Martyrs' Square in honour of those killed since 17 February 2011. On 20 October 2011 the last heavy fighting of the revolution came to an end in the city of Sirte, and Gadhafi, who had fled to Sirte was both captured and then killed by his rebel captors.

The liberation of Libya was celebrated on 23 October 2011, three days after the fall of Sirte. At least 30,000 Libyans died in the civil war. 

===Post-revolution era===

On 7 July 2012, Libyans voted in their first parliamentary elections since the end of Gaddafi's rule. On 8 August 2012, the National Transitional Council officially handed power to the wholly elected General National Congress, which was tasked with the formation of an interim government and the drafting of a new Libyan Constitution to be approved in a general referendum. 

On 25 August 2012, in what "appears to be the most blatant sectarian attack" since the end of the civil war, unnamed organized assailants bulldozed a Sufi mosque with graves, in broad daylight in the center of the Libyan capital Tripoli. It was the second such razing of a Sufi site in two days. 

On 11 September 2012, the 2012 Benghazi attack occurred, in which Islamic militants were able to successfully attack the American consulate in Benghazi and to kill the American ambassador to Libya, J. Christopher Stevens.

On 7 October 2012, Libya's Prime Minister-elect Mustafa A.G. Abushagur stepped down after failing a second time to win parliamentary approval for a new cabinet. On 14 October 2012, the General National Congress elected former GNC member and human rights lawyer Ali Zeidan as prime minister-designate. Zeidan was sworn in after his cabinet was approved by the GNC. 

On 25 March 2014 the Libyan government opened the debate on the restoration of the monarchy in the country. "The restoration of the monarchy is the solution that will guarantee the return to security and stability. Contacts have already been made, and we are in touch with dignitaries and tribal chiefs in Libya, and also with the grandson of King Al-Senussi, Prince Mohamed, who lives overseas," said the Libyan Foreign Minister, Mohamed Abdelaziz, during the meeting. As of January 2014, lawlessness, security issues, and regional factionalism remain as significant and seemingly ever increasing problems for the current interim government. http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/world-africa-24985595 

===2014 Libyan Uprising===

On 16 May 2014 retired Libyan general Khalifa Haftar launched an aerial and ground attack in Benghazi, targeting Islamic militant groups entrenched within the city in what has been referred to by some as the 2014 Libyan Uprising. This attack was made without any authorization from the central government. On 18 May 2014 in Tripoli, the parliament building was stormed by troops loyal to Haftar, in what the Libyan government described as an attempted coup. 

With the hope of quelling the violence and defusing the widening power struggle and stand-off with General Haftar, the election commission on 20 May 2014 announced parliamentary elections would be held on 25 June 2014. Haftar claims to be cleansing Libya of a certain radical militant Islamic terrorist element which he describes as having "infected the country", many from foreign sources. He has proclaimed the General National Council to be dissolved, and claims to aim for the establishment of a duly elected government without any ties to Islamist militias. Haftar's movement has been met with marches and demonstrations of support by thousands of Libyan citizens in Tripoli, Benghazi and in other Libyan cities. 

==Geography==

Libya extends over 1759540 km2, making it the 17th largest nation in the world by size. Libya is somewhat smaller than Indonesia in land area, and roughly the size of the U.S. state of Alaska. It is bound to the north by the Mediterranean Sea, the west by Tunisia and Algeria, the southwest by Niger, the south by Chad and Sudan and to the east by Egypt. Libya lies between latitudes 19 and 34N, and longitudes 9 and 26E.

At 1770 km, Libya's coastline is the longest of any African country bordering the Mediterranean. The portion of the Mediterranean Sea north of Libya is often called the Libyan Sea. The climate is mostly dry and desertlike in nature. However, the northern regions enjoy a milder Mediterranean climate. 

Natural hazards come in the form of hot, dry, dust-laden sirocco (known in Libya as the gibli). This is a southern wind blowing from one to four days in spring and autumn. There are also dust storms and sandstorms. Oases can also be found scattered throughout Libya, the most important of which are Ghadames and Kufra.

===Libyan Desert===
Libya is a predominantly desert country. Up to 90% of the land area is covered in desert.
The Libyan Desert, which covers much of Libya, is one of the most arid places on earth. In places, decades may pass without rain, and even in the highlands rainfall seldom happens, once every 510 years. At Uweinat, as of 2006 the last recorded rainfall was in September 1998. There is a large depression, the Qattara Depression, just south of the northernmost scarp, with Siwa Oasis at its western extremity. The depression continues in a shallower form west, to the oases of Jaghbub and Jalu.

Likewise, the temperature in the Libyan desert can be extreme; on 13 September 1922 the town of 'Aziziya, which is located southwest of Tripoli, recorded an air temperature of 57.8 C, considered to be a world record. In September 2012, however, the world record figure of 57.8 C was overturned by the World Meteorological Organization. 

There are a few scattered uninhabited small oases, usually linked to the major depressions, where water can be found by digging to a few feet in depth. In the west there is a widely dispersed group of oases in unconnected shallow depressions, the Kufra group, consisting of Tazerbo, Rebianae and Kufra. Aside from the scarps, the general flatness is only interrupted by a series of plateaus and massifs near the centre of the Libyan Desert, around the convergence of the Egyptian-Sudanese-Libyan borders.

Slightly further to the south are the massifs of Arkenu, Uweinat and Kissu. These granite mountains are ancient, having formed long before the sandstones surrounding them. Arkenu and Western Uweinat are ring complexes very similar to those in the Ar Mountains. Eastern Uweinat (the highest point in the Libyan Desert) is a raised sandstone plateau adjacent to the granite part further west. The plain to the north of Uweinat is dotted with eroded volcanic features. With the discovery of oil in the 1950s also came the discovery of a massive aquifer underneath much of the country. The water in this aquifer pre-dates the last ice ages and the Sahara desert itself. This area also contains the Arkenu structures, which have been hypothesized to be two impact craters. Cigolini, C, C Laiolo, and M Rossetti (2012) Endogenous and nonimpact origin of the Arkenu circular structures (al-Kufrah basin-SE Libya) Meteoritics & Planetary Science. 47(11):1772-1788. 

==Government and politics==

The legislature of Libya is the unicameral General National Congress, which has 200 seats. 

On 7 July 2012, Libyans voted in parliamentary elections, the first free elections in almost 40 years. Around thirty women were elected to become members of parliament. Early results of the vote showed the National Forces Alliance, led by former interim Prime Minister Mahmoud Jibril, as front runner. The Justice and Construction Party, affiliated to the Muslim Brotherhood, has done less well than similar parties in Egypt and Tunisia. It won 17 out of 80 seats that were contested by parties, but about 60 independents have since joined its caucus. 

As of January 2013, there was mounting public pressure on the National Congress to set up a drafting body to create a new constitution. Congress had not yet decided whether the members of the body would be elected or appointed. 

Following the 2012 elections, Freedom House improved Libya's rating from Not Free to Partly Free, and now considers the country to be an electoral democracy. 

Gaddafi merged civil and sharia courts in 1973. Civil courts now employ sharia judges who sit in regular courts of appeal and specialise in sharia appellate cases. Laws regarding personal status are derived from Islamic law. 

===Military===

The Libyan National Army comprises a ground army, an air force and a navy. It is currently being re-established by the Libyan government, as Libya's previous national army was defeated in the Libyan Civil War and disbanded. As of May 2012, an estimated 35,000 personnel have joined its ranks. 

As of November 2012, it was deemed to be still in the embryonic stage of development. President Mohammed el-Megarif promised that empowering the army and police force is the government's biggest priority. President el-Megarif also ordered that all of the country's militias must come under government authority or disband. 

Militias have so far refused to be integrated into a central security force. Many of these militias are disciplined, but the most powerful of them answer only to the executive councils of various Libyan cities. These militias make up the so-called Libyan Shield, a parallel national force, which operates at the request, rather than at the order, of the defence ministry. 

===Foreign relations===

Libya's foreign policies have fluctuated since 1951. As a Kingdom, Libya maintained a definitively pro-Western stance, and was recognized as belonging to the conservative traditionalist bloc in the League of Arab States (the present-day Arab League), of which it became a member in 1953. The government was also friendly towards Western countries such as the United Kingdom, United States, France, Italy, Greece, and established full diplomatic relations with the Soviet Union in 1955.

Although the government supported Arab causes, including the Moroccan and Algerian independence movements, it took little active part in the Arab-Israeli dispute or the tumultuous inter-Arab politics of the 1950s and early 1960s. The Kingdom was noted for its close association with the West, while it steered a conservative course at home. 

After the 1969 coup, Muammar Gaddafi closed American and British bases and partly nationalized foreign oil and commercial interests in Libya.

Gaddafi was known for backing a number of leaders viewed as anathema to Westernization and political liberalism, including Ugandan President Idi Amin, Central African Emperor Jean-Bdel Bokassa, Ethiopian strongman Haile Mariam Mengistu, Liberian President Charles Taylor, and Yugoslav President Slobodan Miloevi. 

Relations with the West were strained by a series of incidents for most of Gaddafi's rule, including the killing of London policewoman Yvonne Fletcher, the bombing of a West Berlin nightclub frequented by U.S. servicemen, and the bombing of Pan Am Flight 103, which led to UN sanctions in the 1990s, though by the late 2000s, the United States and other Western powers had normalised relations with Libya. 

Gaddafi's decision to abandon the pursuit of weapons of mass destruction after the Iraq War saw Iraqi dictator Saddam Hussein overthrown and put on trial led to Libya being hailed as a success for Western soft power initiatives in the War on Terror. In October 2010, Gaddafi apologized to African leaders on behalf of Arab nations for their involvement in the African slave trade. "Gaddafi apologizes for Arab slave traders". Press TV. 11 October 2010. 

Libya is included in the European Union's European Neighbourhood Policy (ENP) which aims at bringing the EU and its neighbours closer.

==Administrative divisions==

Districts of Libya since 2007
Historically the area of Libya was considered three provinces (or states), Tripolitania in the northwest, Barka (Cyrenaica) in the east, and Fezzan in the southwest. It was the conquest by Italy in the Italo-Turkish War that united them in a single political unit.

Since 2007, Libya has been divided into 22 districts (baladiyat):

==Economy==

The ENI Oil Bouri DP4 in the Bouri Field
The Libyan economy depends primarily upon revenues from the oil sector, which accounts for 80% of GDP and 97% of exports. Libya holds the largest proven oil reserves in Africa and is an important contributor to the global supply of light, sweet crude. Apart from petroleum, the other natural resources are natural gas and gypsum. The International Monetary Fund estimated Libya's real GDP growth at 122% in 2012 and 16.7% in 2013, after a 60% plunge in 2011. 

The World Bank defines Libya as an 'Upper Middle Income Economy', along with only seven other African countries. Substantial revenues from the energy sector, coupled with a small population, give Libya one of the highest per capita GDPs in Africa. This allowed the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya state to provide an extensive level of social security, particularly in the fields of housing and education. 

Libya faces many structural problems including a lack of institutions, weak governance, and chronic structural unemployment. The economy displays a lack of economic diversification and significant reliance on immigrant labour. Libya has traditionally relied on unsustainably high levels of public sector hiring to create employment. In the mid-2000s, the government employed about 70% of all national employees. Unemployment is the highest in the region at 21%, according to the latest census figures. According to an Arab League report, based on data from 2010, unemployment for women stands at 18% while for the figure for men is 21%, making Libya the only Arab country where there are more unemployed men than women. Libya has high levels of social inequality, high rates of youth unemployment and regional economic disparities. Water supply is also a problem, with some 28% of the population not having access to safe drinking water in 2000. 

Pivot irrigation in Kufra, southeast Cyrenaica
Libya imports up to 90% of its cereal consumption requirements, and imports of wheat in 2012/13 was estimated at about 1 million tonnes. The 2012 wheat production was estimated at about 200,000 tonnes. The government hopes to increase food production to 800,000 tonnes of cereals by 2020. However, natural and environmental conditions limit Libyas agricultural production potential. Before 1958, agriculture was the countrys main source of revenue, making up about 30% of GDP. With the discovery of oil in 1958, the size of the agriculture sector declined rapidly, comprising less than 5% GDP by 2005. 

The country joined OPEC in 1962. Libya is not a WTO member, but negotiations for its accession started in 2004. 

In the early 1980s, Libya was one of the wealthiest countries in the world; its GDP per capita was higher than some developed countries. Philips' Modern School Atlas, 1987, 1983 GNP per capita figures are quoted in a list. 

In the early 2000s officials of the Jamahiriya era carried out economic reforms to reintegrate Libya into the global economy. UN sanctions were lifted in September 2003, and Libya announced in December 2003 that it would abandon programs to build weapons of mass destruction. Other steps have included applying for membership of the World Trade Organization, reducing subsidies, and announcing plans for privatization. Authorities privatized more than 100 government owned companies after 2003 in industries including oil refining, tourism and real estate, of which 29 were 100% foreign owned. Many international oil companies returned to the country, including oil giants Shell and ExxonMobil. After sanctions were lifted there was a gradual increase of air traffic, and by 2005 there were 1.5 million yearly air travellers. Libya had long been a notoriously difficult country for Western tourists to visit due to stringent visa requirements. 

In 2007 Saif al-Islam Gaddafi, the second-eldest son of Muammar Gaddafi, was involved in a green development project called the Green Mountain Sustainable Development Area, which sought to bring tourism to Cyrene and to preserve Greek ruins in the area. 

In August 2011 it was estimated that it would take at least 10 years to rebuild Libya's infrastructure. Even before the 2011 war, Libya's infrastructure was in a poor state due to "utter neglect" by Gaddafi's administration, according to the NTC. By October 2012, the economy had recovered from the 2011 conflict, with oil production returning to near normal levels. Oil production was more than 1.6 million barrels per day before the war. By October 2012, the average oil production has surpassed 1.4 million bpd. The resumption of production was made possible due to the quick return of major Western companies, like Total, Eni, Repsol, Wintershall and Occidental. 

==Demographics==

A map indicating the ethnic composition of Libya in 1974
Libya is a large country with a relatively small population, but the population is concentrated very narrowly along the coast. Population density is about 50 persons per km (130/sq. mi.) in the two northern regions of Tripolitania and Cyrenaica, but falls to less than one person per km (2.6/sq. mi.) elsewhere. Ninety percent of the people live in less than 10% of the area, primarily along the coast. About 88% of the population is urban, mostly concentrated in the three largest cities, Tripoli, Benghazi and Misrata. Libya has a population of about 6.5 million, 27.7% of whom are under the age of 15. In 1984 the population was 3.6 million, an increase from the 1.54 million reported in 1964. 

There are about 140 tribes and clans in Libya. Family life is important for Libyan families, the majority of which live in apartment blocks and other independent housing units, with precise modes of housing depending on their income and wealth. Although the Libyan Arabs traditionally lived nomadic lifestyles in tents, they have now settled in various towns and cities. Because of this, their old ways of life are gradually fading out. An unknown small number of Libyans still live in the desert as their families have done for centuries. Most of the population has occupations in industry and services, and a small percentage is in agriculture.

According to the World Refugee Survey 2008, published by the U.S. Committee for Refugees and Immigrants, Libya hosted a population of refugees and asylum seekers numbering approximately 16,000 in 2007. Of this group, approximately 9,000 persons were from Palestine, 3,200 from Sudan, 2,500 from Somalia and 1,100 from Iraq. Libya reportedly deported thousands of illegal entrants in 2007 without giving them the opportunity to apply for asylum. Refugees faced discrimination from Libyan officials when moving in the country and seeking employment. 

===Ethnic groups===
The original inhabitants of Libya belonged predominantly to various Berber ethnic groups; however, the long series of foreign invasions  particularly by Arabs and Turks  have had a profound and lasting influence on Libya's demographics. Today, Libyans are primarily a mixture of Arab and Berber ethnicities, or a mixture of Arab and Turkish ethnicities. The Turkish minority are often called "Kouloughlis" and are concentrated in and around villages and towns. Other ethnic minorities include Libyan blacks, the Tuaregs, and the Tebou. 

Among foreign residents, the largest groups are citizens of other African nations  including North Africans (primarily Egyptians)  and Sub-Saharan Africans. In 2011, there were also an estimated 60,000 Bangladeshis, 30,000 Chinese and 30,000 Filipinos in Libya. Libya is home to a large illegal population which numbers more than one million, mostly Egyptians and Sub-Saharan Africans. Libya has a small Italian minority. Previously, there was a visible presence of Italian settlers, but many left after independence in 1947 and many more left in 1970 after the accession of Muammar Gaddafi. 

===Languages===

The main language spoken in Libya is Arabic (the Libyan dialect), and Modern Standard Arabic is also the official language;. Italian and English are sometimes spoken in the big cities, although Italian speakers are mainly among the older generation.

===Religion===

About 97% of the population in Libya are Muslims, who belong to the Sunni branch. Small numbers of Ibadi Muslims, Sufis and Ahmadis also exists in the country. http://www.islamopediaonline.org/country-profile/libya/religious-minorities/minority-muslim-groups 

Mosque in Ghadames, close to the Tunisian and Algerian border. 97% of Libyans are followers of Islam.
Before the 1930s, the Senussi Movement was the primary Islamic movement in Libya. This was a religious revival adapted to desert life. Its zawaaya (lodges) were found in Tripolitania and Fezzan, but Senussi influence was strongest in Cyrenaica. Rescuing the region from unrest and anarchy, the Senussi movement gave the Cyrenaican tribal people a religious attachment and feelings of unity and purpose. This Islamic movement, which was eventually destroyed by both Italian invasion and later the Gaddafi government, was very conservative and somewhat different from the Islam that exists in Libya today. Gaddafi asserted that he was a devout Muslim, and his government was taking a role in supporting Islamic institutions and in worldwide proselytising on behalf of Islam. 

There are small foreign communities of Christians. Coptic Orthodox Christianity, which is the Christian Church of Egypt, is the largest and most historical Christian denomination in Libya. There are about 60,000 Egyptian Copts in Libya. http://www.islamopediaonline.org/country-profile/libya/religious-minorities/christian-communities Most Copts in Libya are Egyptian with a small minority of them native Libyans who remained Christian after Islam came to Libya from Egypt. There are three Coptic Churches in Libya, one in Tripoli, one in Benghazi, and one in Misurata. The Coptic Church has grown in recent years in Libya as a small number of Libyans have converted to Christianity and the growing immigration of Egyptian Copts to Libya. There are an estimated 40,000 Roman Catholics in Libya who are served by two Bishops, one in Tripoli (serving the Italian community) and one in Benghazi (serving the Maltese community). There is also a small Anglican community, made up mostly of African immigrant workers in Tripoli; it is part of the Anglican Diocese of Egypt. People have been arrested on suspicion of being Christian missionaries, as proselytising is illegal. 

Libya was until recent times the home of one of the oldest Jewish communities in the world, dating back to at least 300 BC. In 1942, the Italian Fascist authorities set up forced labor camps south of Tripoli for the Jews, including Giado (about 3,000 Jews) and Gharyan, Jeren, and Tigrinna. In Giado some 500 Jews died of weakness, hunger, and disease. In 1942, Jews who were not in the concentration camps were heavily restricted in their economic activity and all men between 18 and 45 years were drafted for forced labor. In August 1942, Jews from Tripolitania were interned in a concentration camp at Sidi Azaz. In the three years after November 1945, more than 140 Jews were murdered, and hundreds more wounded, in a series of pogroms. By 1948, about 38,000 Jews remained in the country. Upon Libya's independence in 1951, most of the Jewish community emigrated.

===Largest cities===

==Culture==

Ancient Roman mosaic in Sabratha
Libya is culturally similar to its neighboring Maghrebian states. Libyans consider themselves very much a part of a wider Arab community. This is strengthened by Arabic being the only official language of the state. Under dictatorship the teaching of foreign languages previously taught in academic institutions was forbidden, along with even the use of the Berber language, leaving entire generations of Libyans with limitations in their comprehension of the English language.

Libyan Arabs have a heritage in the traditions of the previously nomadic Bedouin tribes and most Libyans will associate themselves with a particular family name originating from tribal or conquest based, typically from Ottoman forefathers, heritage.

There are few theaters or art galleries due to cultural repression and lack of infrastructure development under the regime of dictatorship. For many years there have been no public theaters, and only very few cinemas showing foreign films. The tradition of folk culture is still alive and well, with troupes performing music and dance at frequent festivals, both in Libya and abroad. 

A large number of Libyan television stations are devoted to political review, Islamic topics and cultural phenomena. A number of TV stations air various styles of traditional Libyan music. Tuareg music and dance are popular in Ghadames and the south. Libyan television broadcasts air programs mostly in Arabic though usually have time slots for English and French programs. A 1996 analysis by the Committee to Protect Journalists found Libyas media was the most tightly controlled in the Arab world during the country's dictatorship. However as of 2012 hundreds of TV stations have begun to air due to the collapse of censorship from the old regime and the initiation of "free media".

Traditional dancing in Bayda in 1976.
Many Libyans frequent the country's beach and they also visit Libya's archaeological sitesespecially Leptis Magna, which is widely considered to be one of the best preserved Roman archaeological sites in the world. The most common form of public transport between cities is the bus, though many people travel by automobile. There are no railway services in Libya, but these are planned for construction in the near future (see rail transport in Libya). The nation's capital, Tripoli, boasts many museums and archives; these include the Government Library, the Ethnographic Museum, the Archaeological Museum, the National Archives, the Epigraphy Museum and the Islamic Museum. The Red Castle Museum located in the capital near the coast and right in the city center, built in consultation with UNESCO, may be the country's most famous. 

===Cuisine===

Libyan cuisine is a vibrant fusion between the different Italian, Bedouin and traditional Arab culinary traditions. Pasta is a staple diet of the Western side of Libya whereas rice is generally the food staple of the east.

Common Libyan foods include several variations of red (tomato) sauce based pasta dishes (similar to the Italian Sugo all'arrabbiata dish); rice, usually with lamb or chicken (typically stewed, fried, grilled, or boiled in-sauce); couscous which is steam cooked whilst held over boiling red (tomato) sauce and meat (sometimes also containing courgettes/zucchini and chickpeas) which is typically served with it along with cucumber slices, lettuce and olives.

Bazeen, a dish made from barley flour and served with red tomato sauce, is customarily eaten communally, with several people sharing the same dish, usually by hand. This dish is commonly served at traditional weddings or festivities. Aseeda is a sweet version of Bazeen, made from white flour and served with a mix of honey, ghee or butter. Another favorite way to serve Aseeda is with 'rub' fresh date syrup and olive oil. Usba'an is animal tripe stitched and stuffed with rice and vegetable cooked in tomato based soup or steamed. Shurba is a red tomato sauce based soup, usually served with small grains of pasta. 

A very common snack eaten by Libyan is known as 'khubs bi' tun' literally meaning bread with tuna fish, served as usually a baked baguette or pita bread stuffed with tuna fish that has been mixed with Harissa (chili sauce) and usually olive oil. Many snack vendors prepare these sandwiches and they can be found all over Libya. Libyan restaurants may serve international cuisine, or may serve simpler fare such as lamb, chicken, vegetable stew, potatoes and macaroni. Due to severe lack of infrastructure, many under-developed areas and small towns do not have restaurants and instead food stores may be the only source to obtain food products. Alcohol consumption is illegal in the entire country. 

There are four main ingredients of traditional Libyan food: olives (and olive oil), palm dates, grains and milk. Grains are roasted, ground, sieved and used for making bread, cakes, soups and bazeen. Dates are harvested, dried and can be eaten as they are, made into syrup or slightly fried and eaten with bsisa and milk. After eating, Libyans often drink black tea. This is normally repeated a second time (for the second glass of tea), and in the third round the tea is served with roasted peanuts or roasted almonds known as 'shahi bil louse' (mixed with the tea in the same glass). 

==Education==

Al Manar Royal Palace in central Benghazi  the location of the University of Libya's first campus, founded by royal decree in 1955
Libya's population includes 1.7 million students, over 270,000 of whom study at the tertiary level. Basic education in Libya is free for all citizens, and is compulsory up to the secondary level. The adult literacy rate in 2010 was 89.2%. 

After Libya's independence in 1951, its first university  the University of Libya  was established in Benghazi by royal decree. In the 197576 academic year the number of university students was estimated to be 13,418. As of 2004, this number has increased to more than 200,000, with an extra 70,000 enrolled in the higher technical and vocational sector. The rapid increase in the number of students in the higher education sector has been mirrored by an increase in the number of institutions of higher education.

Since 1975 the number of universities has grown from two to nine and after their introduction in 1980, the number of higher technical and vocational institutes currently stands at 84 (with 12 public universities). Since 2007 some new private universities such as the Libyan International Medical University have been established. Although before 2011 a small number of private institutions were given accreditation, the majority of Libya's higher education has always been financed by the public budget. In 1998 the budget allocation for education represented 38.2% of Libya's total national budget. 

==Health==

In 2010, spending on healthcare accounted for 3.88% of the country's GDP. In 2009, there were 18.71 physicians and 66.95 nurses per 10,000 inhabitants. The life expectancy at birth was 74.95 years in 2011, or 72.44 years for males and 77.59 years for females. 

==See also==

* Outline of Libya
* List of heads of state of Libya
* List of heads of government of Libya
* List of Libyans
* Index of Libya-related articles

==Notes==

==References==

* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 

==External links==

* 
* 
* 
* Libya profile from the BBC News.
* 

 



[[Letter game]]

A letter game involves the exchange of written letters, or e-mails, between two or more participants. The first player writes a letter in the voice of a newly created character; in this first letter, the writer should establish their own identity and that of their correspondent, should set the scene, and should explain why they and their correspondent must communicate in written fashion. In subsequent letters, plot and character can be developed, but the writers should not talk about plot outside of the letters and the characters should never meet. Letter games can be a writing exercise or a form of collaborative fiction.

Novels written using or inspired by this type of letter game include Sorcery and Cecelia or The Enchanted Chocolate Pot, The Grand Tour or The Purloined Coronation Regalia, and The Mislaid Magician or Ten Years After, all three by Patricia Wrede and Caroline Stevermer; Freedom and Necessity, by Steven Brust and Emma Bull; and the children's books P.S. Longer Letter Later and Snail Mail No More by Paula Danziger and Ann M. Martin.

==See also==
* constrained writing
* epistolary novel
* Play-by-mail game
* Talecraft, story-telling card game



[[Law of noncontradiction]]

:This article uses forms of logical notation. For a concise description of the symbols used in this notation, see List of logic symbols.

In classical logic, the law of non-contradiction (LNC) (or the law of contradiction (PM) or the principle of non-contradiction (PNC), or the principle of contradiction) is the second of the three classic laws of thought. It states that contradictory statements cannot both be true in the same sense at the same time, e.g. the two propositions "A is B" and "A is not B" are mutually exclusive.

The principle was stated as a theorem of propositional logic by Russell and Whitehead in Principia Mathematica as:

:: 

The law of non-contradiction, along with its complement, the law of excluded middle (the third of the three classic laws of thought), are correlates of the law of identity (the first of the three laws). Because the law of identity partitions its logical Universe into exactly two parts, it creates a dichotomy wherein the two parts are "mutually exclusive" and "jointly exhaustive". The law of non-contradiction is merely an expression of the mutually exclusive aspect of that dichotomy, and the law of excluded middle, an expression of its jointly exhaustive aspect.

== Interpretations ==

One difficulty in applying the law of non-contradiction is ambiguity in the propositions. For instance, if time is not explicitly specified as part of the propositions A and B, then A may be B at one time, and not at another. A and B may in some cases be made to sound mutually exclusive linguistically even though A may be partly B and partly not B at the same time. However, it is impossible to predicate of the same thing, at the same time, and in the same sense, the absence and the presence of the same fixed quality.

=== Eastern philosophy ===
The law of non-contradiction is found in ancient Indian logic as a meta-rule in the Shrauta Sutras, the grammar of Pini, (cf. ) and the Brahma Sutras attributed to Vyasa. It was later elaborated on by medieval commentators such as Madhvacharya. 

=== Heraclitus ===
According to both Plato and Aristotle, Heraclitus was said to have denied the law of non-contradiction. This is quite likely if, as Plato pointed out, the law of non-contradiction does not hold for changing things in the world. If a philosophy of Becoming is not possible without change, then (the potential of) what is to become must already exist in the present object. In "We step and do not step into the same rivers; we are and we are not", both Heraclitus's and Plato's object simultaneously must, in some sense, be both what it now is and have the potential (dynamis) of what it might become. 

Unfortunately, so little remains of Heraclitus' aphorisms that not much about his philosophy can be said with certainty. He seems to have held that strife of opposites is universal both within and without, therefore both opposite existents or qualities must simultaneously exist, although in some instances in different respects. "The road up and down are one and the same" implies either the road leads both ways, or there can be no road at all. This is the logical complement of the law of non-contradiction. According to Heraclitus, change, and the constant conflict of opposites is the universal logos of nature.

=== Protagoras ===
Personal subjective perceptions or judgments can only be said to be true at the same time in the same respect, in which case, the law of non-contradiction must be applicable to personal judgments.
The most famous saying of Protagoras is: "Man is the measure of all things: of things which are, that they are, and of things which are not, that they are not". (80B1 DK). According to Plato's Theaetetus, section 152a. However, Protagoras was referring to things that are used by or in some way related to humans. This makes a great difference in the meaning of his aphorism. Properties, social entities, ideas, feelings, judgements, etc. originate in the human mind. However, Protagoras has never suggested that man must be the measure of stars, or the motion of the stars.

=== Parmenides ===
Parmenides employed an ontological version of the law of non-contradiction to prove that being is and to deny the void, change, and motion. He also similarly disproved contrary propositions. In his poem On Nature, he said,

The nature of the is or what-is in Parmenides is a highly contentious subject. Some have taken it to be whatever exists, some to be whatever is or can be the object of scientific inquiry. Curd, Patricia, "Presocratic Philosophy", The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Summer 2011 Edition), Edward N. Zalta (ed.), URL = http://plato.stanford.edu/archives/sum2011/entries/presocratics/ 

=== Socrates ===
In Plato's early dialogues, Socrates uses the elenctic method to investigate the nature or definition of ethical concepts such as justice or virtue. Elenctic refutation depends on a dichotomous thesis, one that may be divided into exactly two mutually exclusive parts, only one of which may be true. Then Socrates goes on to demonstrate the contrary of the commonly accepted part using the law of non-contradiction. According to Gregory Vlastos, Gregory Vlastos, 'The Socratic Elenchus', Oxford Studies in Ancient Philosophy I, Oxford 1983, 2758. the method has the following steps:
# Socrates' interlocutor asserts a thesis, for example "Courage is endurance of the soul", which Socrates considers false and targets for refutation.
# Socrates secures his interlocutor's agreement to further premises, for example "Courage is a fine thing" and "Ignorant endurance is not a fine thing".
# Socrates then argues, and the interlocutor agrees, that these further premises imply the contrary of the original thesis, in this case it leads to: "courage is not endurance of the soul".
# Socrates then claims that he has shown that his interlocutor's thesis is false and that its negation is true.

=== Plato's synthesis ===
Plato's version of the law of non-contradiction states that "The same thing clearly cannot act or be acted upon in the same part or in relation to the same thing at the same time, in contrary ways" (The Republic (436b)). In this, Plato carefully phrases three axiomatic restrictions on action or reaction: 1) in the same part, 2) in the same relation, 3) at the same time. The effect is to momentarily create a frozen, timeless state, somewhat like figures frozen in action on the frieze of the Parthenon. James Danaher, The Laws of Thought "The restrictions Plato places on the laws of thought (i.e., "in the same respect," and "at the same time,") are an attempt to isolate the object of thought by removing it from all other time but the present and all respects but one." 

This way, he accomplishes two essential goals for his philosophy. First, he logically separates the Platonic world of constant change Plato's Divided Line describes the four Platonic worlds from the formally knowable world of momentarily fixed physical objects. Cratylus, starting at 439e "A thing which is F at one time, or in one way, or in one relation, or from one point of view, will be all too often not-F, at another time, in another way" ("Metaphysical Paradox" in Gregory Vlastos, Platonic Studies, p.50) Second, he provides the conditions for the dialectic method to be used in finding definitions, as for example in the Sophist. So Plato's law of non-contradiction is the empirically derived necessary starting point for all else he has to say.

In contrast, Aristotle reverses Plato's order of derivation. Rather than starting with experience, Aristotle begins a priori with the law of non-contradiction as the fundamental axiom of an analytic philosophical system. Similarly, Kant remarked that Newton "by no means dared to prove this law a priori, and therefore appealed rather to experience" (Metaphysical Foundations, 4:449) This axiom then necessitates the fixed, realist model. Now, he starts with much stronger logical foundations than Plato's non-contrariety of action in reaction to conflicting demands from the three parts of the soul.

=== Aristotle's contribution ===
The traditional source of the law of non-contradiction is Aristotle's Metaphysics where he gives three different versions. p.487 
#ontological: "It is impossible that the same thing belong and not belong to the same thing at the same time and in the same respect." (1005b19-20)
#psychological: "No one can believe that the same thing can (at the same time) be and not be." (1005b23-24)
#logical: "The most certain of all basic principles is that contradictory propositions are not true simultaneously." (1011b13-14)

Aristotle attempts several proofs of this law. He first argues that every expression has a single meaning (otherwise we could not communicate with one another). This rules out the possibility that by "to be a man", "not to be a man" is meant. But "man" means "two-footed animal" (for example), and so if anything is a man, it is necessary (by virtue of the meaning of "man") that it must be a two-footed animal, and so it is impossible at the same time for it not to be a two-footed animal. Thus "it is not possible to say truly at the same time that the same thing is and is not a man" (Metaphysics 1006b 35). Another argument is that anyone who believes something cannot believe its contradiction (1008b).

:Why does he not just get up first thing and walk into a well or, if he finds one, over a cliff? In fact, he seems rather careful about cliffs and wells. 1008b, trans. Lawson-Tancred 

=== Leibniz and Kant ===
Leibniz and Kant adopted a different statement, by which the law assumes an essentially different meaning. Their formula is A is not not-A; in other words it is impossible to predicate of a thing a quality which is its contradictory. Unlike Aristotle's law this law deals with the necessary relation between subject and predicate in a single judgment. For example, in Gottlob Ernst Schulze's Aenesidemus, it is asserted, " nothing supposed capable of being thought may contain contradictory characteristics." Whereas Aristotle states that one or other of two contradictory propositions must be false, the Kantian law states that a particular kind of proposition is in itself necessarily false. On the other hand there is a real connection between the two laws. The denial of the statement A is not-A presupposes some knowledge of what A is, i.e. the statement A is A. In other words a judgment about A is implied.

Kant's analytical judgments of propositions depend on presupposed concepts which are the same for all people. His statement, regarded as a logical principle purely and apart from material facts, does not therefore amount to more than that of Aristotle, which deals simply with the significance of negation.

=== Modern logics ===
Traditionally, in Aristotle's classical logical calculus, in evaluating any proposition there are only two possible truth values, "true" and "false." An obvious extension to classical two-valued logic is a many-valued logic for more than two possible values. In logic, a many- or multi-valued logic is a propositional calculus in which there are more than two values. Those most popular in the literature are three-valued (e.g., ukasiewicz's and Kleene's), which accept the values "true", "false", and "unknown", finite-valued with more than three values, and the infinite-valued (e.g. fuzzy logic and probability logic) logics.

=== Dialetheism ===
Graham Priest advocates the view that under some conditions, some statements can be both true and false simultaneously, or may be true and false at different times. Dialetheism arises from formal logical paradoxes, such as the Liar's paradox and Russell's paradox.

== Alleged impossibility of its proof or denial ==

As is true of all axioms of logic, the law of non-contradiction is alleged to be neither verifiable nor falsifiable, on the grounds that any proof or disproof must use the law itself prior to reaching the conclusion. In other words, in order to verify or falsify the laws of logic one must resort to logic as a weapon, an act which would essentially be self-defeating. S.M. Cohen, Aristotle on the Principle of Non-Contradiction "Aristotle's solution in the Posterior Analytics is to distinguish between episteme (scientific knowledge) and nous (intuitive intellect). First principles, such as PNC, are not objects of scientific knowledge - since they are not demonstrable - but are still known, since they are grasped by nous". Since the early 20th century, certain logicians have proposed logics that deny the validity of the law. Collectively, these logics are known as "paraconsistent" or "inconsistency-tolerant" logics. But not all paraconsistent logics deny the law, since they are not necessarily completely agnostic to inconsistencies in general. Graham Priest advances the strongest thesis of this sort, which he calls "dialetheism".

In several axiomatic derivations of logic, Steven Wolfram, A New Kind Of Science, ISBN 1-57955-008-8 this is effectively resolved by showing that (P  P) and its negation are constants, and simply defining TRUE as (P  P) and FALSE as (P  P), without taking a position as to the principle of bivalence or the law of excluded middle.

Some, such as David Lewis, have objected to paraconsistent logic on the ground that it is simply impossible for a statement and its negation to be jointly true. See Lewis (1982). A related objection is that "negation" in paraconsistent logic is not really negation; it is merely a subcontrary-forming operator. See Slater (1995), Bziau (2000). 

== See also ==

* Contradiction
* First principle
* Identity (philosophy)
* Law of excluded middle
* Law of identity
* Laws of thought
* Liar's Paradox
* Peirce's law
* Principle of bivalence
* Principle of explosion
* Reductio ad absurdum
* Three classic laws of thought
* Oxymoron

== Notes ==

 

== References ==
*
*
*

== External links ==
* S.M. Cohen, "Aristotle on the Principle of Non-Contradiction", Canadian Journal of Philosophy, Vol. 16, No. 3
* James Danaher, "The Laws of Thought", The Philosopher, Vol. LXXXXII No. 1
* Paula Gottlieb, "Aristotle on Non-contradiction" (Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy)
* Laurence Horn, "Contradiction" (Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy)
* Graham Priest and Francesco Berto, "Dialetheism" (Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy)
* Graham Priest and Koji Tanaka, "Paraconsistent logic" (Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy)
* Peter Suber, "Non-Contradiction and Excluded Middle", Earlham College



[[Law of excluded middle]]

In logic, the law of excluded middle (or the principle of excluded middle) is the third of the three classic laws of thought. It states that for any proposition, either that proposition is true, or its negation is true.

The law is also known as the law (or principle) of the excluded third, in Latin principium tertii exclusi. Yet another Latin designation for this law is tertium non datur: "no third (possibility) is given".

The earliest known formulation is Aristotle's principle of non-contradiction, first proposed in On Interpretation, Geach p. 74 where he says that of two contradictory propositions (i.e. where one proposition is the negation of the other) one must be true, and the other false. On Interpretation, c. 9 He also states it as a principle in the Metaphysics book 3, saying that it is necessary in every case to affirm or deny, Metaphysics 2, 996b 2630 and that it is impossible that there should be anything between the two parts of a contradiction. Metaphysics 7, 1011b 2627 The principle was stated as a theorem of propositional logic by Russell and Whitehead in Principia Mathematica as:

. 

The principle should not be confused with the principle of bivalence, which states that every proposition is either true or false, and has only a semantical formulation.

== Classic laws of thought ==
The principle of excluded middle, along with its complement, the law of contradiction (the second of the three classic laws of thought), are correlates of the law of identity (the first of these laws). Because the principle of identity intellectually partitions the Universe into exactly two parts: "self" and "other", it creates a dichotomy wherein the two parts are "mutually exclusive" and "jointly exhaustive". The principle of contradiction is merely an expression of the mutually exclusive aspect of that dichotomy, and the principle of excluded middle is an expression of its jointly exhaustive aspect.

== Analogous laws ==
Some systems of logic have different but analogous laws. For some finite n-valued logics, there is an analogous law called the law of excluded n+1th. If negation is cyclic and "" is a "max operator", then the law can be expressed in the object language by (P  ~P  ~~P  ...  ~...~P), where "~...~" represents n1 negation signs and " ... " n1 disjunction signs. It is easy to check that the sentence must receive at least one of the n truth values (and not a value that is not one of the n). 

Other systems reject the law entirely.

== Examples ==
For example, if P is the proposition:

:Socrates is mortal.

then the law of excluded middle holds that the logical disjunction:

:Either Socrates is mortal, or it is not the case that Socrates is mortal.

is true by virtue of its form alone. That is, the "middle" position, that Socrates is neither mortal nor not-mortal, is excluded by logic, and therefore either the first possibility (Socrates is mortal) or its negation (it is not the case that Socrates is mortal) must be true.

An example of an argument that depends on the law of excluded middle follows. This well-known example of a non-constructive proof depending on the law of excluded middle can be found in many places, for example: Megill, Norm. Metamath: A Computer Language for Pure Mathematics, footnote on p. 17, and Davis 2000:220, footnote 2. We seek to prove that there exist two irrational numbers and such that

: is rational.

It is known that is irrational (see proof). Consider the number

:.

Clearly (excluded middle) this number is either rational or irrational. If it is rational, the proof is complete, and
: and .

But if is irrational, then let

: and .

Then

:,

and 2 is certainly rational. This concludes the proof.

In the above argument, the assertion "this number is either rational or irrational" invokes the law of excluded middle. An intuitionist, for example, would not accept this argument without further support for that statement. This might come in the form of a proof that the number in question is in fact irrational (or rational, as the case may be); or a finite algorithm that could determine whether the number is rational or not.

=== The Law in non-constructive proofs over the infinite ===

The above proof is an example of a non-constructive proof disallowed by intuitionists:

By non-constructive Davis means that "a proof that there actually are mathematic entities satisfying certain conditions would have to provide a method to exhibit explicitly the entities in question." (p. 85). Such proofs presume the existence of a totality that is complete, a notion disallowed by intuitionists when extended to the infinitefor them the infinite can never be completed:

Indeed, Hilbert and Brouwer both give examples of the law of excluded middle extended to the infinite. Hilbert's example: "the assertion that either there are only finitely many prime numbers or there are infinitely many" (quoted in Davis 2000:97); and Brouwer's: "Every mathematical species is either finite or infinite." (Brouwer 1923 in van Heijenoort 1967:336).

In general, intuitionists allow the use of the law of excluded middle when it is confined to discourse over finite collections (sets), but not when it is used in discourse over infinite sets (e.g. the natural numbers). Thus intuitionists absolutely disallow the blanket assertion: "For all propositions P concerning infinite sets D: P or ~P" (Kleene 1952:48).

:For more about the conflict between the intuitionists (e.g. Brouwer) and the formalists (Hilbert) see Foundations of mathematics and Intuitionism.

Putative counterexamples to the law of excluded middle include the liar paradox or Quine's Paradox. Certain resolutions of these paradoxes, particularly Graham Priest's dialetheism as formalised in LP, have the law of excluded middle as a theorem, but resolve out the Liar as both true and false. In this way, the law of excluded middle is true, but because truth itself, and therefore disjunction, is not exclusive, it says next to nothing if one of the disjuncts is paradoxical, or both true and false.

== History ==

=== Aristotle ===

Aristotle wrote that ambiguity can arise from the use of ambiguous names, but cannot exist in the facts themselves:

Aristotle's assertion that "...it will not be possible to be and not to be the same thing", which would be written in propositional logic as  (P  P), is a statement modern logicians could call the law of excluded middle (P  P), as distribution of the negation of Aristotle's assertion makes them equivalent, regardless that the former claims that no statement is both true and false, while the latter requires that any statement is either true or false.

However, Aristotle also writes, "since it is impossible that contradictories should be at the same time true of the same thing, obviously contraries also cannot belong at the same time to the same thing" (Book IV, CH 6, p. 531). He then proposes that "there cannot be an intermediate between contradictories, but of one subject we must either affirm or deny any one predicate" (Book IV, CH 7, p. 531). In the context of Aristotle's traditional logic, this is a remarkably precise statement of the law of excluded middle, P  P.

=== Leibniz ===

=== Bertrand Russell and Principia Mathematica ===

Bertrand Russell asserts a distinction between the "law of excluded middle" and the "law of noncontradiction". In The Problems of Philosophy, he cites three "Laws of Thought" as more or less "self-evident" or "a priori" in the sense of Aristotle:

::1. Law of identity: "Whatever is, is."
::2. Law of noncontradiction: "Nothing can both be and not be."
::3. Law of excluded middle: "Everything must either be or not be."

::These three laws are samples of self-evident logical principles... (p. 72)

It is correct, at least for bivalent logici.e. it can be seen with a Karnaugh mapthat Russell's Law (2) removes "the middle" of the inclusive-or used in his law (3). And this is the point of Reichenbach's demonstration that some believe the exclusive-or should take the place of the inclusive-or.

About this issue (in admittedly very technical terms) Reichenbach observes:

::The tertium non datur
::29. (x) ~f(x)
::is not exhaustive in its major terms and is therefore an inflated formula. This fact may perhaps explain why some people consider it unreasonable to write (29) with the inclusive-'or', and want to have it written with the sign of the exclusive-'or'

::30. (x) ~f(x), where the symbol "" signifies exclusive-or The original symbol as used by Reichenbach is an upside down V, nowadays used for AND. The AND for Reichenbach is the same as that used in Principia Mathematica -- a "dot" cf p. 27 where he shows a truth table where he defines "a.b". Reichenbach defines the exclusive-or on p. 35 as "the negation of the equivalence". One sign used nowadays is a circle with a + in it, i.e.  (because in binary, a  b yields modulo-2 addition -- addition without carry). Other signs are  (not identical to), or  (not equal to). 
::in which form it would be fully exhaustive and therefore nomological in the narrower sense. (Reichenbach, p. 376)

In line (30) the "(x)" means "for all" or "for every", a form used by Russell and Reichenbach; today the symbolism is usually x. Thus an example of the expression would look like this:

* (pig): (Flies(pig)  ~Flies(pig))
* (For all instances of "pig" seen and unseen): ("Pig does fly" or "Pig does not fly" but not both simultaneously)

==== A formal definition from Principia Mathematica ====

Principia Mathematica (PM) defines the law of excluded middle formally:

So just what is "truth" and "falsehood"? At the opening PM quickly announces some definitions:

This is not much help. But later, in a much deeper discussion, ("Definition and systematic ambiguity of Truth and Falsehood" Chapter II part III, p. 41 ff ) PM defines truth and falsehood in terms of a relationship between the "a" and the "b" and the "percipient". For example "This 'a' is 'b'" (e.g. "This 'object a' is 'red'") really means "'object a' is a sense-datum" and "'red' is a sense-datum", and they "stand in relation" to one another and in relation to "I". Thus what we really mean is: "I perceive that 'This object a is red'" and this is an undeniable-by-3rd-party "truth".

PM further defines a distinction between a "sense-datum" and a "sensation":

Russell reiterated his distinction between "sense-datum" and "sensation" in his book The Problems of Philosophy (1912) published at the same time as PM (19101913):

Russell further described his reasoning behind his definitions of "truth" and "falsehood" in the same book (Chapter XII Truth and Falsehood).

==== Consequences of the law of excluded middle in Principia Mathematica ====
From the law of excluded middle, formula 2.1 in Principia Mathematica, Whitehead and Russell derive some of the most powerful tools in the logician's argumentation toolkit. (In Principia Mathematica, formulas and propositions are identified by a leading asterisk and two numbers, such as "2.1".)

2.1 ~p  p "This is the Law of excluded middle" (PM, p. 101).

The proof of 2.1 is roughly as follows: "primitive idea" 1.08 defines p  q = ~p  q. Substituting p for q in this rule yields p  p = ~p  p. Since p  p is true (this is Theorem 2.08, which is proved separately), then ~p  p must be true.

2.11 p  ~p (Permutation of the assertions is allowed by axiom 1.4)
2.12 p  ~(~p) (Principle of double negation, part 1: if "this rose is red" is true then it's not true that "'this rose is not-red' is true".)
2.13 p  ~{~(~p)} (Lemma together with 2.12 used to derive 2.14)
2.14 ~(~p)  p (Principle of double negation, part 2)
2.15 (~p  q)  (~q  p) (One of the four "Principles of transposition". Similar to 1.03, 1.16 and 1.17. A very long demonstration was required here.)
2.16 (p  q)  (~q  ~p) (If it's true that "If this rose is red then this pig flies" then it's true that "If this pig doesn't fly then this rose isn't red.")
2.17 ( ~p  ~q )  (q  p) (Another of the "Principles of transposition".)
2.18 (~p  p)  p (Called "The complement of reductio ad absurdum. It states that a proposition which follows from the hypothesis of its own falsehood is true" (PM, pp. 103104).)

Most of these theorems&mdash;in particular 2.1, 2.11, and 2.14&mdash;are rejected by intuitionism. These tools are recast into another form that Kolmogorov cites as "Hilbert's four axioms of implication" and "Hilbert's two axioms of negation" (Kolmogorov in van Heijenoort, p. 335).

Propositions 2.12 and 2.14, "double negation":
The intuitionist writings of L. E. J. Brouwer refer to what he calls "the principle of the reciprocity of the multiple species, that is, the principle that for every system the correctness of a property follows from the impossibility of the impossibility of this property" (Brouwer, ibid, p. 335).

This principle is commonly called "the principle of double negation" (PM, pp. 101102). From the law of excluded middle (2.1 and 2.11), PM derives principle 2.12 immediately. We substitute ~p for p in 2.11 to yield ~p  ~(~p), and by the definition of implication (i.e. 1.01 p  q = ~p  q) then ~p  ~(~p)= p  ~(~p). QED (The derivation of 2.14 is a bit more involved.)

== Criticisms ==
Many modern logic systems replace the law of excluded middle with the concept of negation as failure. Instead of a proposition either being true or false, a proposition is either true or not able to be proven true. These two dichotomies only differ in logical systems that are not complete. The principle of negation as failure is used as a foundation for autoepistemic logic, and is widely used in logic programming. In these systems, the programmer is free to assert the law of excluded middle as a true fact, but it is not built-in a priori into these systems.

Mathematicians such as L. E. J. Brouwer and Arend Heyting have also contested the usefulness of the law of excluded middle in the context of modern mathematics. 
"Proof and Knowledge in Mathematics" by Michael Detlefsen 

== See also ==
* Law of bivalence
* Law of excluded fourth
* Laws of thought
* Liar's paradox
* Logical graphs: a graphical syntax for propositional logic
* Peirce's law: another way of turning intuition classical
* Law of excluded middle is untrue in many-valued logics such as ternary logic and fuzzy logic
* Intuitionistic logic
* Diaconescu's theorem
* Consequentia mirabilis

== Footnotes ==

== References ==
* Aquinas, Thomas, "Summa Theologica", Fathers of the English Dominican Province (trans.), Daniel J. Sullivan (ed.), vols. 1920 in Robert Maynard Hutchins (ed.), Great Books of the Western World, Encyclopdia Britannica, Inc., Chicago, IL, 1952. Cited as GB 1920.
* Aristotle, "Metaphysics", W.D. Ross (trans.), vol. 8 in Robert Maynard Hutchins (ed.), Great Books of the Western World, Encyclopdia Britannica, Inc., Chicago, IL, 1952. Cited as GB 8. 1st published, W.D. Ross (trans.), The Works of Aristotle, Oxford University Press, Oxford, UK.
* Martin Davis 2000, Engines of Logic: Mathematicians and the Origin of the Computer", W. W. Norton & Company, NY, ISBN 0-393-32229-7 pbk.
* Dawson, J., Logical Dilemmas, The Life and Work of Kurt Gdel, A.K. Peters, Wellesley, MA, 1997.
* van Heijenoort, J., From Frege to Gdel, A Source Book in Mathematical Logic, 18791931, Harvard University Press, Cambridge, MA, 1967. Reprinted with corrections, 1977.
* Luitzen Egbertus Jan Brouwer, 1923, On the significance of the principle of excluded middle in mathematics, especially in function theory with commentary, p. 334, van Heijenoort
* Andrei Nikolaevich Kolmogorov, 1925, On the principle of excluded middle, with commentary, p. 414, van Heijenoort
* Luitzen Egbertus Jan Brouwer, 1927, On the domains of definitions of functions,with commentary, p. 446, van Heijenoort Although not directly germane, in his (1923) Brouwer uses certain words defined in this paper.
* Luitzen Egbertus Jan Brouwer, 1927(2), Intuitionistic reflections on formalism,with commentary, p. 490, van Heijenoort
* Stephen C. Kleene 1952 original printing, 1971 6th printing with corrections, 10th printing 1991, Introduction to Metamathematics, North-Holland Publishing Company, Amsterdam NY, ISBN 0-7204-2103-9.
* Kneale, W. and Kneale, M., The Development of Logic, Oxford University Press, Oxford, UK, 1962. Reprinted with corrections, 1975.
* Alfred North Whitehead and Bertrand Russell, Principia Mathematica to *56, Cambridge at the University Press 1962 (Second Edition of 1927, reprinted). Extremely difficult because of arcane symbolism, but a must-have for serious logicians.
* Bertrand Russell, An Inquiry Into Meaning and Truth. The William James Lectures for 1940 Delivered at Harvard University.
* Bertrand Russell, The Problems of Philosophy, With a New Introduction by John Perry, Oxford University Press, New York, 1997 edition (first published 1912). Very easy to read: Russell was a wonderful writer.
* Bertrand Russell, The Art of Philosophizing and Other Essays, Littlefield, Adams & Co., Totowa, NJ, 1974 edition (first published 1968). Includes a wonderful essay on "The Art of drawing Inferences".
* Hans Reichenbach, Elements of Symbolic Logic, Dover, New York, 1947, 1975.
* Tom Mitchell, Machine Learning, WCB McGraw-Hill, 1997.
* Constance Reid, Hilbert, Copernicus: Springer-Verlag New York, Inc. 1996, first published 1969. Contains a wealth of biographical information, much derived from interviews.
* Bart Kosko, Fuzzy Thinking: The New Science of Fuzzy Logic, Hyperion, New York, 1993. Fuzzy thinking at its finest. But a good introduction to the concepts.
* David Hume, An Inquiry Concerning Human Understanding, reprinted in Great Books of the Western World Encyclopdia Britannica, Volume 35, 1952, p. 449 ff. This work was published by Hume in 1758 as his rewrite of his "juvenile" Treatise of Human Nature: Being An attempt to introduce the experimental method of Reasoning into Moral Subjects Vol. I, Of The Understanding first published 1739, reprinted as: David Hume, A Treatise of Human Nature, Penguin Classics, 1985. Also see: David Applebaum, The Vision of Hume, Vega, London, 2001: a reprint of a portion of An Inquiry starts on p. 94 ff

== External links ==
* "Contradiction" entry in the Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy



[[Lowball]]

Lowball was an early type of railway signal which indicated danger or a need to stop. The ball signal was a light or indicator suspended from a rope, that could move upwards and downwards, held by a weighted ball. The lowball signal was indicated when the weighted ball, and therefore signal, was at the end of its rope in the low position, indicating stop. Yoshinori Kon, "The Current Status of Signal Control Systems, and Research and Development" JR EAST Technical Review (Technology and Planning Department
East Japan Railway Company) 3 Winter 2004:3644 at 3637 pdf. 

It can also refer to:

*Low-ball, a persuasion technique
*Lowball (poker), a variant of the card game poker, in which hand values are reversed so that the lowest-valued hand wins
*Lowball estimate, also known as cost underestimation, the estimation of the lower bound of a venture's cost
*Lowball glass, a short glass tumbler used for serving certain varieties of alcoholic beverages

==References==

==See also==
* Highball



[[Line of scrimmage]]

American football line of scrimmage, prior to a play
Canadian football line of scrimmage, prior to a play

In American and Canadian football, a line of scrimmage is an imaginary transverse line (across the width of the football field) beyond which a team cannot cross until the next play has begun. Its location is based on the spot where the ball is placed after the end of the most recent play and following the assessment of any penalty yards.

A line of scrimmage is parallel to the goal lines and touches one edge of the ball where it sits on the ground prior to the snap. Under NFL, NCAA, and NFHS rules, there are actually two lines of scrimmage at the outset of each play: one that restricts the offense and one that restricts the defense. The area between the two lines (representing the length of the ball as extended to both sidelines) is called the neutral zone. Only the center, the offensive player who snaps the ball, is allowed to have any part of his body in the neutral zone. In order for there to be a legal beginning of a play, a certain number of the players on the offensive team, including certain eligible receivers, must be at, on or within a few inches off their line of scrimmage.

In Canadian football, the team on defense must line up no nearer than a yard to the line of scrimmage. In American football, they must only be beyond the line.

Many fans and commentators refer colloquially to the entire neutral zone as the "line of scrimmage," although this is technically not correct. Others use the general term to refer specifically to the defensive line of scrimmage, since it is the line relevant to the measurement of progress toward the goal. Referees, when explaining a penalty, will refer to "the previous spot" instead of the "line of scrimmage" in order to avoid confusion.

Modern video techniques Sportvision 1st & Ten graphics system. enable broadcasts of American football to display a visible line on the screen representing the line of scrimmage. The line is tapered according to camera angle and gets occluded by players and other objects as if the line was painted on the field. The line may represent the line of scrimmage or the minimum distance that the ball must be moved for the offensive team to achieve a first down.

==See also==
* Scrummage
* Glossary of American football
* Walter Camp, formal originator (1880) of the line of scrimmage
* Comparison of Canadian and American football
* Front line, for the military analog

==Footnotes==



[[Lateral pass]]

In American football and Canadian football a lateral pass or lateral (officially backward pass in American football and onside pass in Canadian football), occurs when the ball carrier throws the football to a teammate in a direction parallel to or away from the opponents' goal line. A lateral pass is distinguished from a forward pass, in which the ball is thrown forward, towards the opposition's end zone. In a lateral pass the ball is not advanced, but unlike a forward pass a lateral may be attempted from anywhere on the field by any player to any player at any time.

While the forward pass is an invention of the North American games, the lateral and backward pass is also a part of rugby union and rugby league, where such passes are the norm. Compared to its use in rugby, laterals and backward passes are less common in North American football, due to a much greater focus on ball control in American football strategy; they are most commonly used by the quarterback, after taking the snap, to quickly transfer ("pitch") the ball a short distance to a nearby running back (or, rarely, wide receiver) on a rushing play. Laterals are also often seen as part of a last-minute desperation strategy or as part of a trick play.

==Rules==
While a forward pass may only be thrown once per down by the team on offense from within or behind the neutral zone, there are no restrictions on the use of lateral passes; any player legally carrying the ball may throw a lateral pass from any position on the field at any time, any player may receive such a pass, and any number of lateral passes may be thrown on a single play. Additionally, a player receiving a lateral pass may throw a forward pass if he is still behind the neutral zone, subject to the forward pass rules. NFL Rules Digest: Forward Pass, NFL.com. 

Unlike a forward pass, if a backward pass hits the ground or an official, play continues and, as with a fumble, a backward pass that has hit the ground may be recovered and advanced by either team. NFL Rules Digest: Backward Pass, NFL.com. Backward passes can also be intercepted. A lateral may be underhand or overhand as long as the ball is not advanced in the pass.

A ball that is passed exactly sideways is considered a backwards pass. If it hits the ground, the person throwing or "pitching" the lateral pass will be subjected to the fumble designation in the statistics in the NFL, even if the ball is dropped or muffed by a teammate, although in college football this can be credited to whichever player the statistician feels is most responsible. http://www.nfl.com/rulebook/backwardpass NFL Rules Digest: Backward Pass NCAA Football Statisticians Manual If the ball hits the ground after travelling even slightly forward, however, it is then incomplete instead of a fumble.

==Alternate uses==
The oxymoron "forward lateral" is used to describe an attempted "lateral" (backward pass) that actually goes forward. In most cases, it is illegal.

A variant, the hook and lateral, where a forward pass is immediately passed backward to a second receiver to fool the defense, is used on occasion.

==Famous plays in history==
The lateral pass rule, or rather the lack of restrictions contained therein, has given rise to some of the most memorable and incredible plays in football history. Both collegiate and NFL football have certain examples of football lore which involve laterals.

One famous college play involving the backward passes is simply known as The Play. In the 1982 Big Game between Stanford and California, with four seconds left and trailing by one point, Cal ran the ball back on a kickoff all the way for the game-winning touchdown using five backward passes, eventually running through the Stanford Band, who had already taken the field (believing the game was over after Stanford players appeared to have tackled a Cal ball-carrier). The game remains controversial to this day because of Stanford's contention that the Cal player's knee was down before he passed the ball during the second lateral and that the fifth lateral was an illegal forward pass.

A well-known and controversial NFL lateral pass occurred during the Music City Miracle play at the end of the 2000 playoff game between the Tennessee Titans and the Buffalo Bills. The play was a true lateral (the ball did not move forward or backward in the pass), but because the receiver was a step ahead of the passer and reached back to catch the ball it gave the appearance of an illegal forward pass.

Another well known backward pass in the NFL was the River City Relay in a game between the New Orleans Saints and the Jacksonville Jaguars on December 21, 2003. With time winding down the Saints threw backward passes and brought the ball down the length of the field for a touchdown, but kicker John Carney missed the extra point, which would have tied the game, so the Saints lost by one point, 2019.

In a Division III college football game on October 27, 2007, Trinity University was trailing by two points with two seconds left in a game against conference rival Millsaps College. Starting from their own 40-yard line, Trinity called a play for a short pass across the middle. The receiver pitched the ball backward, with a sequence of additional backward passes as players were in danger of being tackled. The "Mississippi Miracle" ultimately included 15 backward passes as it covered 60 yards for the winning touchdown. 

==References==



[[Lavandula]]

Lavandula (common name lavender) is a genus of 39 species of flowering plants in the mint family, Lamiaceae. It is native to the Old World and is found from Cape Verde and the Canary Islands, southern Europe across to northern and eastern Africa, the Mediterranean, southwest Asia to southeast India. Many members of the genus are cultivated extensively in temperate climates as ornamental plants for garden and landscape use, for use as culinary herbs, and also commercially for the extraction of essential oils. The most widely cultivated species, Lavandula angustifolia is often referred to as lavender, and there is a colour named for the shade of the flowers of this species.

==Description==
The genus includes annual or short-lived herbaceous perennial plants, and suffrutescent perennials, subshrubs or small shrubs. 

Leaf shape is diverse across the genus. They are simple in some commonly cultivated species; in others they are pinnately toothed, or pinnate, sometimes multiple pinnate and dissected. In most species the leaves are covered in fine hairs or indumentum, which normally contain the essential oils. 

Flowers are borne in whorls, held on spikes rising above the foliage, the spikes being branched in some species. Some species produce coloured bracts at the apices. The flowers may be blue, violet or lilac in the wild species, occasionally blackish purple or yellowish. The calyx is tubular. The corolla is also tubular, usually with five lobes (the upper lip often cleft, and the lower lip has two clefts). 

==Nomenclature and taxonomy==
L. stoechas, L. pedunculata and L. dentata were known in Roman times. From the Middle Ages onwards, the European species were considered two separate groups or genera, Stoechas (L. stoechas, L. pedunculata, L. dentata) and Lavandula (L. spica and L. latifolia), until Linnaeus combined them. He only recognised five species in Species Plantarum (1753), L. multifida and L. dentata (Spain) and L. stoechas and L. spica from Southern Europe. L. pedunculata was included within L. stoechas.

By 1790 L. pinnata and L. carnosa were recognised. The latter was subsequently transferred to Anisochilus. By 1826 Frdric Charles Jean Gingins de la Sarraz listed 12 species in three sections, and by 1848 eighteen species were known. 

One of the first modern major classifications was that of Dorothy Chaytor in 1937 at Kew. The six sections she proposed for 28 species still left many intermediates that could not easily be assigned. Her sections included Stoechas, Spica, Subnudae, Pterostoechas, Chaetostachys and Dentatae. However all the major cultivated and commercial forms resided in the Stoechas and Spica sections. There were four species within Stoechas (Lavandula stoechas, L. dentata, L. viridis and L. pedunculata) while Spica had three (L. officinalis (now L. angustifolia), L. latifolia and L. lanata). She believed that the garden varieties were hybrids between true lavender L. angustifolia and spike lavender (L. latifolia).
 Chaytor D A. A taxonomic study of the genus Lavandula. 1937 

More recently work has been done by Upson and Andrews, and currently Lavandula is considered to have three subgenera.
*Subgenus Lavandula is mainly of woody shrubs with entire leaves. It contains the principal species grown as ornamental plants and for oils. They are found across the Mediterranean region to northeast Africa and western Arabia.
*Subgenus Fabricia consists of shrubs and herbs, and it has a wide distribution from the Atlantic to India. It contains some ornamental plants.
*Subgenus Sabaudia constitutes two species in the southwest Arabian peninsula and Eritrea, which are rather distinct from the other species, and are sometimes placed in their own genus Sabaudia.

In addition there are numerous hybrids and cultivars in commercial and horticultural usage. 

==Etymology==
The English word lavender is generally thought to be derived from Old French lavandre, ultimately from the Latin lavare (to wash), referring to the use of infusions of the plants. Concise Oxford Dictionary The botanic name Lavandula as used by Linnaeus is considered to be derived from this and other European vernacular names for the plants. However it is suggested that this explanation may be apocryphal, and that the name may actually be derived from Latin livere, "blueish". The alternative derivation of the name lavender from Latin livere and medieval Latin lavindula is given in Upson and Andrews, where it is presented as a conjecture. The problems with the standard derivation are also described; such as that there is no knowledge of the common use of lavender for washing by Greeks and Romans. 

The names widely used for some of the species, "English lavender", "French lavender" and "Spanish lavender" are all imprecisely applied. "English lavender" is commonly used for L. angustifolia, though some references say the proper term is "Old English Lavender". Hillier The name "French lavender" may be used to refer to either L. stoechas or to L. dentata. "Spanish lavender" may be used to refer to L. stoechas, L. lanata or L. dentata.

==Cultivation==
A bee on a lavender flower
The most common form in cultivation is the common or English lavender Lavandula angustifolia (formerly named L. officinalis). A wide range of cultivars can be found. Other commonly grown ornamental species are L. stoechas, L. dentata, and L. multifida (Egyptian lavender).

Because the cultivated forms are planted in gardens worldwide, they are occasionally found growing wild as garden escapes, well beyond their natural range. Commonly such adventitious establishment is apparently harmless at best, but in some cases Lavandula species have become invasive; for example, in Australia Lavandula stoechas has become a cause for concern; it occurs widely throughout the continent, and has been declared a noxious weed in Victoria since 1920. Carr, G.W, Yugovic, J.V and Robinson, K.E.. `Environmental Weed Invasions in Victoria - conservation and management implications' 1992 Pub: Department of Conservation and Environment and Ecological Horticulture, Victoria, Australia It also is regarded as a weed in parts of Spain. Csurches S., Edwards R.; National Weeds Program, Potential Environmental Weeds in Australia, Candidate Species for Preventative Control; Queensland Department of Natural Resources. January 1998 ISBN 0-642-21409-3 Also 

Lavenders flourish best in dry, well-drained, sandy or gravelly soils in full sun. All types need little or no fertilizer and good air circulation. In areas of high humidity, root rot due to fungus infection can be a problem. Organic mulches can trap moisture around the plants' bases, encouraging root rot. Gravelly materials such as crushed rocks give better results. Kathleen Norris Brenzel, Editor, The Sunset Western Garden Book, 7th Edition 

==Lavender oil==

Commercially the plant is grown mainly for the production of essential oil of lavender. This has antiseptic and anti-inflammatory properties. These extracts are also used as fragrances for bath products.

English lavender (Lavandula angustifolia) yields an essential oil with sweet overtones, and can be used in balms, salves, perfumes, cosmetics, and topical applications. Lavandin, Lavandula  intermedia (also known as Dutch lavender), yields a similar essential oil, but with higher levels of terpenes including camphor, which add a sharper overtone to the fragrance.

The lavandins Lavandula  intermedia are a class of hybrids of L. angustifolia and L. latifolia. Mark Griffiths, Index of Garden Plants (Portland, Oregon: Timber Press, 1994. ISBN 0-333-59149-6.) The lavandins are widely cultivated for commercial use, since their flowers tend to be bigger than those of English lavender and the plants tend to be easier to harvest, but lavandin oil is regarded by some to be of a lower quality than that of English lavender, with a perfume less sweet. National Non-Food Crops Centre. "Lavender". Retrieved on 2009-04-23. 

==Culinary use==
Lavender infused cupcakes 
It is grown as a condiment and used in salads and dressings. Flowers yield abundant nectar from which bees make a high-quality honey. Monofloral honey is produced primarily around the Mediterranean, and is marketed worldwide as a premium product. Flowers can be candied and are sometimes used as cake decorations. Lavender flavours baked goods and desserts (it pairs especially well with chocolate), and is also used to make "lavender sugar". Purple Haze Lavender Farm - Cooking with Lavender Lavender flowers are occasionally blended with black, green, or herbal teas.

Though it has many other traditional uses in southern France, lavender is not used in traditional southern French cooking. It does not appear at all in the best-known compendium of Provenal cooking, J.-B. Reboul's Cuisinire Provenale J.-B. Reboul; Cuisinire Provenale (1910) In the 1970s, a herb blend called herbes de Provence usually including lavender was invented by spice wholesalers, and lavender has more recently become popular in cookery.

Lavender lends a floral and slightly sweet flavour to most dishes, and is sometimes paired with sheep's-milk and goat's-milk cheeses. For most cooking applications the dried buds, which are also referred to as flowers, are used. Some chefs experiment with the leaves but only the buds contain the essential oil of lavender, from which the scent and flavour of lavender are derived. In the United States, both lavender syrup and dried lavender buds are used to make lavender scones and marshmallows.

==Medical uses==
Bunches of lavender repel insects

The essential oil was used in hospitals during World War I. Mrs. M. Grieve, A Modern Herbal, Vol. II (New York: Dover Publications, Inc., 1971; ISBN 0-486-22799-5) 

Lavender is used extensively with herbs and aromatherapy. Infusions are believed to soothe insect bites, burns, and headaches. Bunches of lavender repel insects. In pillows, lavender seeds and flowers aid sleep and relaxation. An infusion of flowerheads added to a cup of boiling water is used to soothe and relax at bedtime. Lavender oil (or extract of Lavender) is used to treat acne when diluted 1:10 with water, rosewater, or witch hazel; it also treats skin burns and inflammatory conditions.

A study published in 2010 investigated anxiolytic effects and influence on sleep quality. Lavender oil with a high percentage of linalool and linalyl acetate, in the form of capsules, was generally well tolerated. It showed meaningful efficacy in alleviating anxiety and related sleep disturbances. 

Lavender oil is approved for use as an anxiolytic in Germany under the name Lasea. A survey paper on lavender and the nervous system published in 2013 states that, "there is growing evidence suggesting that lavender oil may be an effective medicament in treatment of several neurological disorders." 

Lavender may be very effective with wounds; however, Lavender Honey (created from bees feeding on lavender plants), instead of lavender essential oil has the best effects of uninfected wounds. 

==Health precautions==

The U.S. National Institutes of Health (NIH) states that lavender is considered likely safe in food amounts and possibly safe in medicinal amounts. NIH does not recommend the use of lavender while pregnant or breast-feeding because of lack of knowledge of its effects. It recommends caution if young boys use lavender oil because of possible hormonal effects leading to gynecomastia, and states that lavender can cause skin irritation. 

=== Gynecomastia ===

A study was published in 2007 on the use of lavender and gynecomastia in prepubescent boys. Three young boys developed gynecomastia while using products containing lavender. The boys stopped using the products, and the gynecomastia went away. The researchers found that lavender and tea tree oil can cause estrogenic and antiandrogenic activities in cell cultures, and the paper states that "repeated topical exposure to lavender and tea tree oils probably caused prepubertal gynecomastia in these boys." After the study was published The New England Journal of Medicine received letters disputing the paper's findings, and the authors were allowed to respond. 

The Aromatherapy Trade Council of the UK and the Australian Tea Tree Association have published rebuttals. 

The Aromatherapy Trade Council's rebuttal states among other things that:

*It isn't likely that there would be sufficient lavender in the personal care products used in the three cases to cause an endocrine effect.

*The gyncomastia might have come from another source. The rebuttal states that although endocrine disruptors such as medications, oral contraceptives, marijuana and soy products were considered other disruptors such as organochloride pesticides, PCBs, polychlorinated dioxins, alkyl phenols, pthalates, and parabens were not. The paper states that it is not clear that the lavender and/or tea tree oil caused the gynecomastia but say that, "other components in these products may also possess endocrine-disrupting activity that contributed to the gynecomastia, but those components were not tested because we chose to evaluate only the component that was found in all the products used by the patients (lavender oil) and a chemically similar component that was found in some of the products (tea tree oil)." 
 
*The rebuttal points out that lavender is in widespread use saying, "considering that some 200 tonnes per annum are produced of both lavender and tea tree oil, that most of this goes into personal care products, and that very little of the evidence presented for these 3 cases is convincing, the press reports of caution are premature."

The Australian Tea Tree Industry Association rebuttal states that various other plants have estrogen inducing effects in essential oil form, including, "soy, hops, garbanzo beans, red clover, lentils, flaxseed, sunflower seeds, alfalfa sprouts, liquorice, and ginseng." 

A study published in 2010 from the Research Institute for Fragrance Materials did not find estrogenic activity from lavender oil in laboratory animals. A newer version of the paper became available in 2013.

=== Skin Irritant ===

In 2004 a study was published which found that, "lavender oil is cytotoxic to human skin cells in vitro". On the other hand, aromatherapist Robert Tisserand points out in a blog post that: "Any type of in vitro test is only suggestive of a possible effect. You can never assume that the same effect will take place in the living body." 

A review published in 2005 on lavender essential oil states that, "Lavender is traditionally regarded as a 'safe' oil and, although it was recently reported that lavender oil, and its major constituent linalyl acetate, are toxic to human skin cells in vitro, contact dermatitis to lavender oil appears to occur at only a very low frequency." 

=== Photosensitivity ===

A study was published in 2007 which looked a the relationship between various fragrances and photosensitivity. The study stated that lavender is known "to elicit cutaneous phototoxic reactions". However, the research did not find that lavender induced photohaemolysis. 

==Other uses==
Lavender products for sale at the San Francisco Farmers Market.
Flower spikes are used for dried flower arrangements. The fragrant, pale purple flowers and flower buds are used in potpourris. Lavender is also used extensively as herbal filler inside sachets used to freshen linens. Dried and sealed in pouches, lavender flowers are placed among stored items of clothing to give a fresh fragrance and to deter moths. Dried lavender flowers have become recently popular for wedding confetti. Lavender is also popular in scented waters and sachets.

==In history and culture==
The ancient Greeks called the lavender herb nardus, after the Syrian city of Naarda (possibly the modern town of Dohuk, Iraq). It was also commonly called nard. The origin of most of these quotes comes from Dr. William Thomas Fernie, in his book "Herbal Simples" (Bristol Pub., 1895. ASIN: B0014W4WNE). A digital copy of the book can be read online via google books.
 'By the Greeks the name Nardus is given to Lavender, from Naarda, a city of Syria near the Euphrates, and many persons call the plant "Nard." St. Mark mentions this as Spikenard, a thing of great value. In Pliny's time, blossoms of the Nardus sold for a hundred Roman denarii (or L.3 2s. 6d.) the pound. This Lavender or Nardus was called Asarum by the Romans, because it was not used in garlands or chaplets. It was formerly believed that the asp, a dangerous kind of viper, made Lavender its habitual place of abode, so that the plant had to be approached with great caution.' The species originally grown was L. stoechas. 

Lavender was one of the holy herbs used in the biblical Temple to prepare the holy essence, and nard ('nerd' in Hebrew) is mentioned in the Song of Solomon (4,14)

 nard and saffron, 
 calamus and cinnamon, 
 with every kind of incense tree, 
 with myrrh and aloes,
 and all the finest spices. The assumption of the history of Lavender, originating from Naarda, along with the facts about the price in Roman time, are quoted widely throuout the web (over 350 entries in a google search) calling the city Naarda, Nerdus or Nardus. The Bible has many mentions of a fragrant plant called "Nerd" and the Mishna recited daily in Jewish prayers, refers to "Shibolet Nerd" (Hebrew for "Nard Spike") as one of the herbs used for making the holy essence at the biblical Temple. Dr. Fernie is the first known to link "Nard" with the city of Nerdus - Naarda, one of the major cities of Jewish study and origin of the Talmud, during the years 150-1100 a.d. Since Naarda or Neharde'a - river of 'A - was on a canal between the Euphrates and Tigris rivers, it could never have been a Syrian city, but rather in present day Iraq, somewhere in the Baghdad area. Dr Fernie refers widely to Jewish studies, probably quoted from a former botanist Robert Turner. 

During Roman times, flowers were sold for 100 denarii per pound, which was about the same as a month's wages for a farm laborer, or fifty haircuts from the local barber. Its late Latin name was lavandrius, from lavanda (things to be washed), from the verb lavre (to wash). Note however that Upson and Andrews refer to research on bathing in the Roman Empire, and state that there is no mention of the use of lavender in works on this subject. 
The Greeks discovered early on that lavender if crushed and treated correctly would release a relaxing fume when burned. 

In medieval times powdered lavender was used as a condiment. Grieve 

==Taxonomic table==
Different lavender cultivars grown at Snowshill, Cotswolds.
This is based on the classification of Upson and Andrews, 2004.

 I. Subgenus Lavandula Upson & S. Andrews subgen. nov. :i. Section Lavandula (3 species) :* Lavandula angustifolia Mill. :: subsp. angustifolia from Catalonia and the Pyrenees. :: subsp. pyrenaica from southeast France and adjacent areas of Italy. :* Lavandula latifolia Medik - native to central and eastern Spain, southern France, northern Italy. :* Lavandula lanata Boiss. - native to southern Spain. :Hybrids :* Lavandula  chaytorae Upson & S. Andrews nothosp. nov. (L. angustifolia subsp. angustifolia  L. lanata ) :* Lavandula  intermedia Emeric ex Loisel. (L. angustifolia subsp. angustifolia  L. latifolia ) :ii. Section Dentatae Suarez-Cerv. & Seoane-Camba (1 species) :* Lavandula dentata L. from eastern Spain, northern Algeria and Morocco, southwestern Morocco. :: var. dentata (rosea, albiflora), candicans (persicina) :iii. Section Stoechas Ging. (3 species) :* Lavandula stoechas L. :: subsp. stoechas from mostly coastal regions of eastern Spain, southern France, western Italy, Greece, Mediterranean Turkey, Levantine coast, and most Mediterranean islands. :: subspp. luisieri native to coastal and inland Portugal and adjacent Spain. :* Lavandula pedunculata Mill.(Cav.) :: subsp. pedunculata - Spain and Portugal. :: subsp. cariensis - from western Turkey. :: subsp. atlantica - from montane Morocco. :: subsp. lusitanica - southern Portugal and southwestern Spain. :: subsp. sampaiana - from Portugal and southwest Spain. :* Lavandula viridis L'Her. - native to southwest Spain, southern Portugal, and possibly also to Madeira. :Intersectional hybrids (Dentatae and Lavendula) :* Lavandula  heterophylla Viv. (L. dentata  L. latifolia ) :* Lavandula  allardii :* Lavandula  ginginsii Upson & S. Andrews nothosp. nov. (L. dentata  L. lanata ) II. Subgenus Fabricia (Adams.) Upson & S. Andrews, comb.nov. :iv. Section Pterostoechas Ging. (16 species) :* Lavandula multifida L. - is native to a wide range including Morocco, southern Portugal and Spain, norther Algeria, Tunisia, Tripolitania, Calabria and Sicily, with isolated populations in the Nile valley. :* Lavandula canariensis Mill., from the Canaries. :: subsp. palmensis - from La Palma. :: subsp. hierrensis - from El Hierro. :: subsp. canariensis - from Tenerife. :: subsp. canariae - from Gran Canaria. :: subsp. fuerteventurae - from Fuerteventura. :: subsp. gomerensis - from La Gomera. :: subsp. lancerottensis - from Lanzarote. :* Lavandula minutolii Bolle-Canary Isles. :: subsp. minutolii :: subsp. tenuipinna :* Lavandula bramwellii Upson & S. Andrews - from Gran Canaria. :* Lavandula pinnata L. - from the Canaries and also Madeira. :* Lavandula buchii Webb & Berthel. - Tenerife. :* Lavandula rotundifolia Benth. - Cape Verde Islands. :* Lavandula maroccana Murb. - Atlas mountains of Morocco. :* Lavandula tenuisecta Coss. ex Ball - Atlas mountains in Morocco. :* Lavandula rejdalii Upson & Jury - Morocco. :* Lavandula mairei Humbert - Morocco. :* Lavandula coronopifoliaPoir. - This has a wide distribution, from Cape Verde across North Africa, the northeast of tropical Africa, Arabia to eastern Iran. :* Lavandula saharica Upson & Jury - southern Algeria and nearby regions. :* Lavandula antineae Maire - central Sahara region. :: subsp. antinae :: subsp. marrana :: subsp. tibestica :* Lavandula pubescens Decne. - from Egypt and Eritrea, Sinai, Israel and Palestine, Jordan, western Arabian peninsula to Yemen. :* Lavandula citriodora A.G. Mill. - southwestern Arabian peninsula. :Hybrids :* Lavandula  christiana Gattef. & Maire (L. pinnata  L. canariensis) :v. Section Subnudae Chaytor (10 species) :* Lavandula subnuda Benth. - from the mountains of Oman and the United Arab Emirates. :* Lavandula macra Baker - southern Arabian peninsula and northern Somalia. :* Lavandula dhofarensis A.G. Mill. - from Dhofar in southern Oman. :: subsp. dhofarensis :: subsp. ayunensis :* Lavandula samhanensis Upson & S. Andrews sp. nov. - Dhofar, Oman. :* Lavandula setifera T. Anderson - from coastal regions of Yemen and Somalia. :* Lavandula qishnensis Upson & S. Andrews sp. nov. - southern Yemen. :* Lavandula nimmoi Benth. - from Socotra. :* Lavandula galgalloensis A.G. Mill. - northern Somalia. :* Lavandula aristibracteata A.G. Mill. - northern Somalia. :* Lavandula somaliensis Chaytor - northern Somalia. :vi. Section Chaetostachys Benth. (2 species) :* Lavandula bipinnata (Roth) Kuntze - from the Deccan peninsula and central north India. :* Lavandula gibsonii J. Graham - Western Ghats, India. :vii. Section Hasikenses Upson & S. Andrews, sect. nov. (2 species) :* Lavandula hasikensis A.G. Mill. - Oman. :* Lavandula sublepidota Rech. f. - Far, in southern Iran. III. Subgenus Sabaudia (Buscal. & Muschl.) Upson & S. Andrews, comb. et stat. nov. :viii. Section Sabaudia (Buscal. & Muschl.) Upson & S. Andrews, comb. et stat. nov. (2 species) :* Lavandula atriplicifolia Benth. - western Arabian peninsula, Egypt. :* Lavandula erythraeae (Chiov.) Cufod. - from Eritrea. 

==Gallery==

File:Lavender02.jpg|Lavender flower
File:LavendarFlower.jpg|Flower of cultivated lavender; Lavandula stoechas
File:Lavender_fields_in_India.jpg|Lavander garden, India
File:vaucluselavender.jpg|A field of lavender in France
File:Lavender field.JPG|A field of lavender in England

==See also==
*Lavender oil
*Lavender (color)

==References==

==Sources==
* Chaytor D A. A taxonomic study of the genus Lavandula. 1937
* Upson T, Andrews S. The Genus Lavandula. Royal Botanic Gardens, Kew 2004
* United States Department of Agriculture GRIN: Lavandula

==External links==

*Medicinal use from University of Maryland Medical Center

 


[[Melissa officinalis]]

Lemon balm (Melissa officinalis), also known as balm or balm mint, is a perennial herb in the mint family Lamiaceae, native to south-central Europe and the Mediterranean region.

It grows to 70150 cm tall. The leaves have a gentle lemon scent, related to mint. During summer, small white flowers full of nectar appear. It is not to be confused with bee balm (which is genus Monarda). The white flowers attract bees, hence the genus name Melissa (Greek for 'honey bee'). Its flavour comes from citronellal (24%), geranial (16%), linalyl acetate (12%) and caryophyllene (12%).

==Cultivation==
In North America, M. officinalis has escaped cultivation and spread into the wild. United States Department of Agriculture, "PLANTS Profile for Melissa officinalis," http://plants.usda.gov/java/profile?symbol=MEOF2. Retrieved July 2, 2010. 

Lemon balm seeds require light and at least 20C (70F) to germinate. Lemon balm grows in clumps and spreads vegetatively, as well as by seed. In mild temperate zones, the stems of the plant die off at the start of the winter, but shoot up again in spring. Lemon balm grows vigorously and should not be planted where it will spread into other plantings.

M. officinalis may be the "honey-leaf" () mentioned by Theophrastus. Theophrastus, Enquiry into Plants, VI.1.4, identified as "M. officinalis" in the index of the Loeb Classical Library edition by Arthur F. Hort, 1916 etc. It was in the herbal garden of John Gerard, 1596. As "Melissa" (Common Blam) in both issues of Gerard's Catalogus, 1596, 1599: Benjamin Daydon Jackson, A catalogue of plants cultivated in the garden of John Gerard, in the years 1596-1599, 1876; 
The many cultivars of M. officinalis include:
* M. officinalis 'Citronella'
* M. officinalis 'Lemonella'
* M. officinalis 'Quedlinburger'
* M. officinalis 'Lime'
* M. officinalis Variegata
* M. officinalis Aurea
(M. officinalis Quedlinburger Niederliegende is an improved variety bred for high essential oil content.)

== Usage ==

=== Culinary use ===

Lemon balm is often used as a flavouring in ice cream and herbal teas, both hot and iced, often in combination with other herbs such as spearmint. It is also frequently paired with fruit dishes or candies. It can be used in fish dishes and is the key ingredient in lemon balm pesto.
It might be a better, healthier preservative than butylated hydroxy anisole in sausages. de Ciriano M.G.-I., Rehecho S., Calvo M.I., Cavero R.Y., Navarro I., Astiasarn I., Ansorena D.,"Effect of lyophilized water extracts of Melissa officinalis on the stability of algae and linseed oil-in-water emulsion to be used as a functional ingredient in meat products", Meat Science 2010 85:2 (373-377) 

===Uses in traditional and alternative medicine===
Melissa (M. officinalis) essential oil

In the traditional Austrian medicine, M. officinalis leaves have been prescribed for internal (as tea) or external (essential oil) application for the treatment of disorders of the gastrointestinal tract, nervous system, liver, and bile. 

Lemon balm is the main ingredient of Carmelite Water, which is still for sale in German pharmacies. 

Lemon balm essential oil is very popular in aromatherapy. The essential oil is commonly codistilled with lemon oil, citronella oil, or other oils.

===Research into possible effects on humans===

High doses of purified lemon balm extracts were found to be effective in the amelioration of laboratory-induced stress in human subjects, producing "significantly increased self-ratings of calmness and reduced self-ratings of alertness." The authors further report a "significant increase in the speed of mathematical processing, with no reduction in accuracy" following the administration of a 300-mg dose of extract. 

Lemon balm is believed to inhibit the absorption of the thyroid medication thyroxine. University of Maryland Medical Centre, "Lemon Balm" 

Recent research found a daily dose of the tea reduced oxidative stress status in radiology staff who were exposed to persistent low-dose radiation during work. After only 30 days of taking the tea daily, consuming lemon balm tea resulted in a significant improvement in plasma levels of catalase, superoxide dismutase, and glutathione peroxidase, and a marked reduction in plasma DNA damage, myeloperoxidase, and lipid peroxidation. 

The crushed leaves, when rubbed on the skin, are used as a mosquito repellent. 

Lemon balm is also used medicinally as an herbal tea, or in extract form. It is used as an anxiolytic, mild sedative, or calming agent. At least one study has found it to be effective at reducing stress, although the study's authors call for further research. Lemon balm extract was identified as a potent in vitro inhibitor of GABA transaminase, which explains anxiolytic effects. The major compound responsible for GABA transaminase inhibition activity in lemon balm was then found to be rosmarinic acid. 

Lemon balm and preparations thereof also have been shown to improve mood and mental performance. These effects are believed to involve muscarinic and nicotinic acetylcholine receptors. Positive results have been achieved in a small clinical trial involving Alzheimer patients with mild to moderate symptoms. Essential oils obtained from Melissa officinalis leaf showed high acetylcholinesterase and butyrylcholinesterase co-inhibitory activities. Chaiyana W., Okonogi S."Inhibition of cholinesterase by essential oil from food plant". Phytomedicine. 19 (8-9) (pp 836-839), 2012. 

Its antibacterial properties have also been demonstrated scientifically, although they are markedly weaker than those from a number of other plants studied. The extract of lemon balm was also found to have exceptionally high antioxidant activity. 

Lemon balm is mentioned in the scientific journal Endocrinology, where it is explained that Melissa officinalis exhibits antithyrotropic activity, inhibiting TSH from attaching to TSH receptors, hence making it of possible use in the treatment of Graves' disease or hyperthyroidism. 

==Chemistry==
Lemon balm contains eugenol, tannins, and terpenes. Melissa officinalis also contains 1-octen-3-ol, 10-alpha-cadinol, 3-octanol, 3-octanone, alpha-cubebene, alpha-humulene, beta-bourbonene, caffeic acid, caryophyllene, caryophyllene oxide, catechinene, chlorogenic acid, cis-3-hexenol, cis-ocimene, citral A, citral B, citronellal, copaene, delta-cadinene, eugenyl acetate, gamma-cadinene, geranial, geraniol, geranyl acetate, germacrene D, isogeranial, linalool, luteolin-7-glucoside, methylheptenone, neral, nerol, octyl benzoate, oleanolic acid, pomolic acid, protocatechuic acid, rhamnazine, rosmarinic acid, rosmarinin acid, stachyose, succinic acid, thymol, trans-ocimene and ursolic acid. Lemon balm contains harmine. 

== Gallery ==

Image:Melissa officinalis BB-1913.jpg
Image:Melissa officinalis01.jpg|Leaves
Image:Melissa officinalis1.jpg|Leaves
Image:Melissa officinalis2.JPG|Leaves
Image:Melissa officinalis3.JPG|Plant
Image:Melissa-officinalis-(Lemon-Balm)-flower-Vis-UV-IR-comparison.jpg|Spectral comparison showing nectar guide visible in UV

==References==

==External links==
*Mrs M. Grieve, A Modern Herbal: Lemon Balm
*Lemon Balm List of Chemicals (Dr. Duke's)
*Lemon Balm Medical Reference
*Colgate Herbal Uses Melissa



[[Liliales]]

Liliales (older name: Lilia) is an order of monocotyledonous flowering plants. This order of necessity includes the family Liliaceae, but both the family and the order have had a widely disputed history, with the circumscription varying greatly from one taxonomist to another. Well known plants from the order include Lilium (lily), tulip, the North American wildflower Trillium, and greenbrier.

The APG III system (2009) places this order in the clade monocots. In APG III, the family Luzuriagaceae is combined with the family Alstroemeriaceae and the family Petermanniaceae is recognized. APG III uses this circumscription: 
* order Liliales
*: family Alstroemeriaceae
*: family Campynemataceae
*: family Colchicaceae
*: family Corsiaceae
*: family Liliaceae
*: family Melanthiaceae
*: family Petermanniaceae
*: family Philesiaceae
*: family Ripogonaceae
*: family Smilacaceae

Thus circumscribed, this order consists mostly of herbaceous plants, but lianas and shrubs occur. They are mostly perennial plants, with food storage organs such as corms or rhizomes. The family Corsiaceae is notable for being heterotrophs.

The order has worldwide distribution. The larger families (with more than 100 species) are roughly confined to the Northern Hemisphere, or are distributed worldwide, centering on the north. On the other hand, the smaller families (with up to 10 species) are confined to the Southern Hemisphere, or sometimes just to Australia or South America. The total number of species in the order is now about 1300.

As with any herbaceous group, the fossil record of the Liliales is rather scarce. There are several species from the Eocene, such as Petermanniopsis anglesaensis or Smilax, but their identification is not definite. Another known fossil is Ripogonum scandens from the Miocene. Due to the scarcity of data, it seems impossible to determine precisely the age and the initial distribution of the order. It is assumed that the Liliales originate from the Lower Cretaceous, over 100 million years ago. The initial diversification to the families took place between 82 and 48 million years ago (Vinnersten and Bremer, 2001).

==Older classifications==
The APG II system (2003) places this order in the clade monocots and uses this circumscription: 
* order Liliales
*: family Alstroemeriaceae
*: family Campynemataceae
*: family Colchicaceae
*: family Corsiaceae
*: family Liliaceae
*: family Luzuriagaceae
*: family Melanthiaceae
*: family Philesiaceae
*: family Ripogonaceae
*: family Smilacaceae

The APG system (1998) also placed the order in the clade monocots, but with a slightly different circumscription (missing the family Corsiaceae):
* order Liliales
*: family Alstroemeriaceae
*: family Campynemataceae
*: family Colchicaceae
*: family Liliaceae
*: family Luzuriagaceae
*: family Melanthiaceae
*: family Philesiaceae
*: family Ripogonaceae 
*: family Smilacaceae

The Cronquist system (1981) placed the order in subclass Liliidae in the class Liliopsida monocotyledons of division Magnoliophyta angiosperms. It used a much wider circumscription (many of the plants here are assigned to Asparagales and Dioscoreales by APG II):
* order Liliales
*: family Agavaceae
*: family Aloaceae
*: family Cyanastraceae
*: family Dioscoreaceae
*: family Haemodoraceae
*: family Hanguanaceae
*: family Iridaceae
*: family Liliaceae
*: family Philydraceae
*: family Pontederiaceae
*: family Smilacaceae
*: family Stemonaceae
*: family Taccaceae
*: family Velloziaceae
*: family Xanthorrhoeaceae

The Thorne system (1992) placed the order in superorder Lilianae in subclass Liliidae monocotyledons of class Magnoliopsida dicotyledons and used this circumscription:
* order Liliales
*: family Alstroemeriaceae
*: family Campynemataceae
*: family Colchicaceae
*: family Iridaceae
*: family Liliaceae
*: family Melanthiaceae
*: family Trilliaceae

The Dahlgren system placed the order in superorder Lilianae in subclass Liliidae monocotyledons of class Magnoliopsida angiosperms and used this circumscription:
* order Liliales
*: family Alstroemeriaceae
*: family Calochortaceae
*: family Colchicaceae
*: family Iridaceae
*: family Liliaceae
*: family Uvulariaceae

In the Engler system (1964 update) a similar order was named Liliiflorae, placed in the class Monocotyledoneae of the subdivision Angiospermae.

The Wettstein system, last revised in 1935, used names similar to those in the Engler system: the order was named Liliiflorae placed in the class Monocotyledones of the subdivision Angiospermae. In circumscription the order was fairly similar to that of Cronquist.

Earlier names for this order include the Coronarieae of the Bentham & Hooker system.

==References==

* ISBN 0-87893-403-0.
* 
* P. J. Rudall, K. L. Stobart, W.-P. Hong, J. G. Conran, C. A. Furness, G. C. Kite, M. W. Chase (2000) Consider the Lilies: Systematics of Liliales. In: ISBN 0-643-06437-0.
* Excerpts
* (Available online: )

 



[[Laurales]]

The Laurales are an order of flowering plants. They are magnoliids, related to the Magnoliales.

The order includes about 2500-2800 species from 85-90 genera, which comprise seven families of trees and shrubs. Most of the species are tropical and subtropical, though a few genera reach the temperate zone. The best known species in this order are those of the Lauraceae (for example bay laurel, cinnamon, avocado, and Sassafras), and the ornamental shrub Calycanthus of the Calycanthaceae.

The earliest lauraceous fossils are from to the early Cretaceous. It is possible that the ancient origin of this order is one of the reasons for its highly diverged morphology. Indeed, presently no single morphological property is known, which would unify all the members of Laurales. The presently accepted classification is based on molecular and genetic analysis.

==Classification==
The first botanist to think of the Laurales as a natural group was H. Hallier in 1905. He viewed them as being derived from the Magnoliales. During some or all of the 20th century, the Laurales generally included Amborella and the plants now classified in Austrobaileyales and Chloranthaceae. They were not removed until the advent of molecular data in the late 20th century; their previous inclusion made it harder to determine the relationships within the Laurales and between the Laurales and other groups. Full text (pdf).
 

The following families are included in the Angiosperm Phylogeny Group system (APG III): 

 order Laurales : family Atherospermataceae : family Calycanthaceae : family Gomortegaceae : family Hernandiaceae : family Lauraceae : family Monimiaceae : family Siparunaceae 
 The current composition and phylogeny of the Laurales. 

Under the older Cronquist system, the Laurales included a slightly different set of families (current placement, where different, in brackets):

* Family Amborellaceae (Family Amborellaceae, unplaced)
* Family Calycanthaceae
* Family Gomortegaceae
* Family Hernandiaceae
* Family Idiospermaceae (= Calycanthaceae pro parte)
* Family Lauraceae
* Family Monimiaceae (Cronquist included Atherospermataceae and Siparunaceae in Monimiaceae)
* Family Trimeniaceae (Austrobaileyales)

==References==

* K.J. Perleb (1826). Lehrbuch der Naturgeschichte des Pflanzenreichs p. 174. Magner, Freiburg im Breisgau, Deutschland.
* Renner, Susanne S. (May 2001) Laurales. In: Nature Encyclopedia of Life Sciences. London: Nature Publishing Group. , Full text (pdf).
* Endress P.K., Igersheim A. (1997). Gynoecium diversity and systematics of the Laurales. Botanical Journal of the Linnean Society 125 (2): 93-168. .

 


[[Limerick (disambiguation)]]

Limerick is a city in Ireland. It may also refer to:

* Limerick (poetry)
* Limerick (song)

==Places==
;Ireland
*Limerick F.C., an Irish soccer team 
*County Limerick

;Canada
*Limerick, Ontario
*Limerick, Saskatchewan

;United States
*Camanche, California, formerly Limerick
*San Ramon, California, formerly Limerick
*Limerick, Louisville, Kentucky
*Limerick, Maine
*New Limerick, Maine
*Limerick Township, Pennsylvania
**Limerick Nuclear Power Plant

==Constituencies==
;Before 1801
:*Askeaton (Parliament of Ireland constituency)
:*Kilmallock (Parliament of Ireland constituency)
:*Limerick City (Parliament of Ireland constituency)
:*Limerick County (Parliament of Ireland constituency)
;1801&ndash;1885
:*Limerick City (UK Parliament constituency)
:*County Limerick (UK Parliament constituency)
;1885&ndash;1922
:*Limerick City (UK Parliament constituency)
:*East Limerick (UK Parliament constituency)
:*West Limerick (UK Parliament constituency)
;1921&ndash;1923
:*KerryLimerick West (Dil ireann constituency)
:*Limerick CityLimerick East (Dil ireann constituency)
;1923&ndash;1948
:*Limerick (Dil ireann constituency)
;1948&ndash;
:*Limerick East (Dil ireann constituency)
:*Limerick West (Dil ireann constituency)

==People==
*Patricia Nelson Limerick, an American historian
*Earl of Limerick, a British noble title

==Other==
* Limerick lace, a variety of needle lace



[[Lamiales]]

The Lamiales are an order in the asterid group of dicotyledonous flowering plants. It includes about 24,000 species divided into about 20 families. Well-known or economically important members of this order include lavender, lilac, olive, jasmine, the ash tree, teak, snapdragon, sesame, psyllium, garden sage, and a number of table herbs such as mint, basil, and rosemary.

==Characteristics==
Although exceptions occur, species in this order typically have the following characteristics:

*superior ovary composed of two fused carpels
*five petals fused into a tube
*bilaterally symmetrical, often bilabiate corollas
*four (or fewer) fertile stamens

==Taxonomic history==
The Lamiales previously had a restricted circumscription (e.g., by Arthur Cronquist) that included the major families Lamiaceae (Labiatae), Verbenaceae, and Boraginaceae, plus a few smaller families. Recent phylogenetic work has shown the Lamiales are polyphyletic with respect to order Scrophulariales and the two groups are now usually combined in a single order that also includes the former orders Hippuridales and Plantaginales. Lamiales has become the preferred name for this much larger combined group. The placement of the Boraginaceae is unclear, but phylogenetic work shows this family does not belong in Lamiales.

Also, the circumscription of family Scrophulariaceae, formerly a paraphyletic group defined primarily by plesiomorphic characters and from within which numerous other families of the Lamiales were derived, has been radically altered to create a number of smaller, better-defined, and putatively monophyletic families.

==References==

==External links==
*Lamiales
*A parsimony analysis of the Asteridae sensu lato based on rbcL sequences
*Disintegration of the Scrophulariaceae (deals with relationships throughout Lamiales)
*L. Watson and M.J. Dallwitz (1992 onwards). The families of flowering plants: descriptions, illustrations, identification, information retrieval. http://delta-intkey.com
*http://www.biologie.uni-hamburg.de/b-online/vascular/acanth.htm 2002-09-06
*http://www.biologie.uni-hamburg.de/b-online/d52/52e.htm 2002-09-06
*http://www.biologie.uni-hamburg.de/b-online/d52/52efam.htm 2002-09-06
*http://www.science.siu.edu/parasitic-plants/Relation-Scroph.html
*http://www.rbgkew.org.uk/web.dbs/genlist.html 2002-09-06

 



[[Lee Harvey Oswald]]

Lee Harvey Oswald (October 18, 1939  November 24, 1963) was, according to five government investigations, These were investigations by: the Federal Bureau of Investigation (1963), the Warren Commission (1964), the House Select Committee on Assassinations (1979), the Secret Service, and the Dallas Police Department. the sniper who assassinated John F. Kennedy, the 35th President of the United States, in Dallas, Texas, on November 22, 1963.

Oswald was a former U.S. Marine who defected to the Soviet Union in October 1959. He lived in the Soviet Union until June 1962, at which time he returned to the United States. Oswald was initially arrested for the murder of police officer J. D. Tippit, who was killed on a Dallas street approximately 45 minutes after President Kennedy was shot. Oswald would later be charged with the assassination of President Kennedy as well but denied shooting anybody, claiming he was a patsy. Lee Oswald claiming innocence (film), Youtube.com Warren Commission Hearings, vol. 20, p. 366, Kantor Exhibit No. 3Handwritten notes made by Seth Kantor concerning events surrounding the assassination Two days later, while being transferred from police headquarters to the county jail, Oswald was shot and mortally wounded by Dallas nightclub owner Jack Ruby in full view of television cameras broadcasting live.

In 1964, the Warren Commission concluded that Oswald acted alone in assassinating Kennedy, firing three shots. This conclusion was supported by prior investigations carried out by the Federal Bureau of Investigation, the Secret Service, and Dallas Police Department. John F. Kennedy, Dallas Police Department Collection 

Despite forensic, ballistic, and eyewitness evidence supporting the lone gunman theory, public opinion polls taken over the years have shown that a majority of Americans believe that Oswald did not act alone, but conspired with others to kill the president, and the assassination has spawned numerous conspiracy theories. In 1979, the House Select Committee on Assassinations concluded that Oswald fired the shots that killed Kennedy, but differed from previous investigations in concluding that "scientific acoustical evidence establishes a high probability that two gunmen fired at President John F. Kennedy". House Select Committee on Assassinations Final Report, pp. 65-75. The House Select Committee's acoustical evidence has since been discredited. 

==Early life==

===Childhood===
Lee Harvey Oswald was born in New Orleans, Louisiana, on October 18, 1939, Warren Commission Hearings, vol. 23, p. 799, CE 1963, Schedule showing known addresses of Lee Harvey Oswald from the time of his birth. to World War I veteran Robert Edward Lee Oswald (March 4, 1896  August 19, 1939) and Marguerite Frances Claverie (July 19, 1907  January 17, 1981). Robert had died of a heart attack two months prior to Lee's birth. Lee's elder brother Robert Jr. (born April 7, 1934) is also a former Marine. Through Marguerite's first marriage to Edward John Pic, Jr., Lee and Robert Jr. are the half-brothers of Air Force veteran John Edward Pic (January 17, 1932  April 25, 2000). 

In 1944, Marguerite moved the family from New Orleans to Dallas, Texas. Oswald entered the 1st grade in 1945 and over the next half-dozen years attended several different schools in the Dallas and Fort Worth areas through the 6th grade. Oswald took an IQ test in the 4th grade and scored 103; "on achievement tests in 4 to 6, he twice did best in reading and twice did worst in spelling." 

As a child, Oswald was described by several people who knew him as withdrawn and temperamental. In August 1952, when Oswald was 12, his mother took him to New York City where they lived for a short time with Oswald's half-brother, John. Oswald and his mother were later asked to leave after an argument in which Oswald allegedly struck his mother and threatened John's wife with a pocket knife. Warren Commission Hearings, vol. 22, p. 687, CE 1382, Interview with Mrs. John Edward Pic. 

Oswald attended the 7th grade in the The Bronx, New York, but was often truant, which led to a psychiatric assessment at a juvenile reformatory. The reformatory psychiatrist, Dr. Renatus Hartogs, described Oswald as immersed in a "vivid fantasy life, turning around the topics of omnipotence and power, through which tries to compensate for his present shortcomings and frustrations." Dr. Hartogs detected a "personality pattern disturbance with schizoid features and passive-aggressive tendencies" and recommended continued treatment. 

In January 1954, Oswald's mother returned to New Orleans, taking Oswald with her. Warren Commission Hearings, vol. 25, p. 123, CE 2223, Big Brothers of New York, Inc., Case file of Lee Harvey Oswald. At the time, there was a question pending before a New York judge as to whether Oswald should be removed from the care of his mother to finish his schooling, Warren Commission Hearings, Testimony of Mrs. Marguerite Oswald. 
although Oswald's behavior appeared to improve during his last months in New York. Carro Exhibit No. 1 Continued at Kennedy Assassination Home Page. Warren Commission Hearings, Testimony of John Carro. 

In New Orleans, Oswald completed the 8th and 9th grades. He entered the 10th grade in 1955 but quit school after one month. After leaving school, Oswald worked for several months as an office clerk and messenger in New Orleans. In July 1956, Oswald's mother moved the family to Fort Worth, Texas, and Oswald re-enrolled in the 10th grade for the September session at Arlington Heights High School in Fort Worth. A few weeks later in October, Oswald quit school at age 17 to join the Marines (see below); he never received a high school diploma.
By the age of 17, he had resided at 22 different locations and attended 12 different schools. 
The schools were: 
* 1st grade: Benbrook Common School (Fort Worth, Texas), October 31, 1945
* 1st grade (again): Covington Elementary School (Covington, Louisiana), Sep. 1946Jan. 1947
* 1st grade (end): Clayton Public School (Ft Worth, TX), Jan.May 1947
* 2nd grade: Clayton Public School (Ft Worth, TX), Sept. 1947
* 2nd grade (end): Clark Elementary School (Ft Worth, TX), March 1948
* 3rd grade: Arlington Heights Elementary School (Ft Worth, TX), Sept. 1948
* 4th grade: Ridglea West Elementary School (since renamed Luella Merrett, Ft Worth), Sep. 1949
* 5th grade: Ridglea West Elementary School (Ft Worth), Sep. 1950
* 6th grade: Ridglea West Elementary School (Ft Worth), Sep. 1951
* 7th grade: Trinity Evangelical Lutheran School (Bronx, NYC, NY), Aug. 1952
* 7th grade: Public School 117 (Bronx, NY), Sep. 1952 (attended 17 of 64 days)
* 7th grade (end): Public School 44 (Bronx, NY), March 23, 1953
:: Reformatory: Youth House (NYC, NY), April/May 1953.
* 8th grade: Public School 44 (Bronx, NY), Sep 14, 1953
* 8th grade (end): Beauregard Junior High School (New Orleans), Jan 13, 1954
* 9th grade: Beauregard Junior High School (New Orleans), Sep. 1954June 1955
* 10th grade: Warren Easton High School (New Orleans), Sep.Oct. 1955 (Warren appendix 13)
:: (tried to enlist in U.S. Marines using affidavit claiming age 17)
:: (worked as clerk/messenger in New Orleans, rather than school)
* 10th grade (again): Arlington Heights High School (Ft Worth, TX), Sep.Oct. 1956. Final withdrawal from high school, 10th grade. (Warren appendix 13)
 

Though the young Oswald had trouble spelling and writing coherently, Warren Commission Report, Chapt. 7, p. 383. he read voraciously. By age 15, he claimed to be a Marxist, writing in his diary, "I was looking for a key to my environment, and then I discovered socialist literature. I had to dig for my books in the back dusty shelves of libraries." At 16 he wrote to the Socialist Party of America for information on their Young People's Socialist League, saying he had been studying socialist principles for "well over fifteen months." Warren Commission Hearings, CE 2240, FBI transcript of letter from Lee Oswald to the Socialist Party of America, October 3, 1956. 
However, Edward Voebel, "whom the Warren Commission had established was Oswald's closest friend during his teenage years in New Orleans..... said that reports that Oswald was already 'studying Communism' were a 'lot of baloney.' " Voebel said that "Oswald commonly read 'paperback trash.'" Oswald, David Ferrie and the Civil Air Patrol, United States House Select Committee on Assassinations, vol. 9, 4, p. 107. Testimony of Edward Voebel, Warren Commission Hearings, vol. 8, pp. 10, 12. Summers, Anthony. Not in Your Lifetime, (New York: Marlowe & Company, 1998), p. 235. ISBN 1-56924-739-0 

As a teenager, in 1955, Oswald attended Civil Air Patrol meetings in New Orleans. Oswald's fellow cadets recalled him attending C.A.P. meetings "three or four" times, or "10 or 12 times" over a one- or two-month period. Oswald, David Ferrie and the Civil Air Patrol, House Select Committee on Assassinations - Appendix to Hearings, Volume 9, 4, pp. 107-115. Summers 1998, p. 234. PBS Frontline "Who Was Lee Harvey Oswald", broadcast on PBS stations, November 1993 (various dates). 

===Marine Corps===
Oswald when he served in the US Marine Corps
David Ferrie (second from left) with Lee Harvey Oswald (far right) in the New Orleans Civil Air Patrol in 1955.
Oswald enlisted in the United States Marine Corps on October 24, 1956, just after his seventeenth birthday. Because he was underage, his brother Robert Jr. signed the forms as his guardian. Oswald also named his mother and his half-brother John as beneficiaries. Oswald idolized his older brother Robert Jr.; a photograph taken after Lee Harvey's arrest by Dallas police shows him wearing his brother's Marine Corps ring. Bob Goodman, Triangle of Fire (Laquerian Publishing Co., 1993). 
John Pic (Oswald's half-brother) testified to the Warren Commission that Oswald's enlistment was motivated by wanting "to get from out and under ... the yoke of oppression from my mother." Warren Commission Report, Chapter 7, p. 384, Lee Harvey Oswald: Background and Possible Motives, Return to New Orleans and Joining the Marine Corps. 

Oswald's enlistment papers record his vital statistics as 5 ft in height, 135 lb in weight, with hazel eyes and brown hair. His primary training was radar operation, a position requiring a security clearance. A May 1957 document states that he was "granted final clearance to handle classified matter up to and including CONFIDENTIAL after careful check of local records had disclosed no derogatory data." Warren Commission Hearings, vol. 19, Folsom Exhibit No. 1, p. 665, Administrative Remarks. 
In the Aircraft Control and Warning Operator Course he finished seventh in a class of thirty. The course "included instruction in aircraft surveillance and the use of radar." Marines Warren Commission Report, Appendix 13, page 682683. Summers 1998, p. 91. 
He was assigned first to Marine Corps Air Station El Toro in July 1957, Warren Commission Hearings, Marine Corps service record of Lee Harvey Oswald. then to Naval Air Facility Atsugi in Japan in September as part of Marine Air Control Squadron 1.

Like all Marines, Oswald was trained and tested in shooting and he scored 212 in December 1956, slightly above the requirements for the designation of sharpshooter. In May 1959 he scored 191, which reduced his rating to marksman. Warren Commission Report, Chapter 4: The Assassin, Oswald's Marine Training 

Oswald was court-martialed after accidentally shooting himself in the elbow with an unauthorized .22 handgun, then court-martialed again for fighting with a sergeant whom he thought was responsible for his punishment in the shooting matter. He was demoted from private first class to private and briefly imprisoned in the brig. He was later punished for a third incident: while on night-time sentry duty in the Philippines, he inexplicably fired his rifle into the jungle. Gerald Posner "Case Closed" Random House, New York, 1993 pg. 28 

Slightly built, Oswald was nicknamed Ozzie Rabbit after the cartoon character; he was also called Oswaldskovich Affidavit of James Botelho because he espoused pro-Soviet sentiments. In November 1958, Oswald transferred back to El Toro where his unit's function "was to serveil for aircraft, but basically to train both enlisted men and officers for later assignment overseas." An officer there said that Oswald was a "very competent" crew chief and was "brighter than most people." Testimony of John E. Donovan, Warren Commission Hearings, vol. 8, pp. 290-298. Summers 1998, p. 94. 

While in the Marines, Oswald made an effort to teach himself rudimentary Russian. Although this was an unusual endeavor, in February 1959, he was invited to take a Marine proficiency exam in written and spoken Russian. His level at the time was rated "poor." Summers 1998, pp. 94, 99. On September 11, 1959, he received a hardship discharge from active service, claiming his mother needed care, and was put on reserve. Warren Commission Hearings, vol. 19, Folsom Exhibit No. 1, p. 85, Request for Dependency Discharge.
 

 

==Adult life and early crimes==

===Defection to the Soviet Union===
In October 1959, just before turning 20, Oswald traveled to the Soviet Union, a trip he planned well in advance. Along with his self-taught Russian, he had saved $1,500 of his Marine Corps salary. Warren Commission Hearings, vol. 22, p. 705, CE 1385, Notes of interview of Lee Harvey Oswald conducted by Aline Mosby in Moscow in November 1959. Oswald: "When I was working in the middle of the night on guard duty, I would think how long it would be and how much money I would have to save. It would be like being out of prison. I saved about $1500." During Oswald's 2 years and 10 months of service in the Marine Corps he received $3,452.20, after all taxes, allotments and other deductions as well as his GED. Warren Commission Hearings, vol. 26, p. 709, CE 3099, Certified military pay records for Lee Harvey Oswald for the period October 24, 1956, to September 11, 1959.
 
Oswald spent two days with his mother in Fort Worth, then embarked by ship from New Orleans on September 20 to Le Havre, France, and immediately proceeded to the United Kingdom. Arriving in Southampton on October 9, he told officials he had $700 and planned to remain in the United Kingdom for one week before proceeding to a school in Switzerland. However, on the same day, he flew to Helsinki, where he was issued a Soviet visa on October 14. Oswald left Helsinki by train on the following day, crossed the Soviet border at Vainikkala, and arrived in Moscow on October 16. Lee Harvey Oswald in Russia, The Journey From USA to USSR at Russian Books His visa, valid only for a week, was due to expire on October 21. 

Almost immediately after arriving, Oswald told his Intourist guide of his desire to become a Soviet citizen. When asked why by the various Soviet officials he encounteredall of whom, by Oswald's account, found his wish incomprehensiblehe said that he was a communist, and gave what he described in his diary as "vauge answers about 'Great Soviet Union'". Warren Commission Hearings, vol. 16, p. 94, CE 24, Lee Harvey Oswald's "Historic Diary", entries of October 16, 1959 to October 21, 1959. On October 21, the day his visa was due to expire, he was told that his citizenship application had been refused, and that he had to leave the Soviet Union that evening. Distraught, Oswald inflicted a minor but bloody wound to his left wrist in his hotel room bathtub soon before his Intourist guide was due to arrive to escort him from the country, according to his diary because he wished to kill himself in a way that would shock her. Delaying Oswald's departure because of his self-inflicted injury, the Soviets kept him in a Moscow hospital under psychiatric observation until October 28, 1959. Warren Commission Hearings, vol. 16, p. 95, CE 24, Lee Harvey Oswald's "Historic Diary", entries of October 21, 1959 to October 28, 1959. 
Apartment building where Oswald lived in Minsk
According to Oswald, he met with four more Soviet officials that same day, who asked if he wanted to return to the United States; he insisted to them that he wanted to live in the Soviet Union as a Soviet national. When pressed for identification papers, he provided his Marine Corps discharge papers. Warren Commission Hearings, vol. 16, p. 96, CE 24, Lee Harvey Oswald's "Historic Diary", entries of October 28, 1959 to October 31, 1959. 

On October 31, Oswald appeared at the United States embassy in Moscow, declaring a desire to renounce his U.S. citizenship. Lee Harvey Oswald in Russia, Moscow Part 1 at Russian Books
 
Warren Commission Hearings, vol. 18, p. 108, CE 912, Declaration of Lee Harvey Oswald, dated November 3, 1959, requesting that his U.S. citizenship be revoked.
 "I have made up my mind," he said; "I'm through." He told the U.S. embassy interviewing officer, Richard Edward Snyder, that " he had been a radar operator in the Marine Corps and that he had voluntarily stated to unnamed Soviet officials that as a Soviet citizen he would make known to them such information concerning the Marine Corps and his specialty as he possessed. He intimated that he might know something of special interest." Foreign Service Dispatch from the American Embassy in Moscow to the Department of State, Warren Commission Hearings, vol. 18, p. 98, CE 908 
(Such statements led to Oswald's hardship/honorable military reserve discharge being changed to undesirable.) Warren Commission Hearings, CE 780, Documents from Lee Harvey Oswald's Marine Corps file. 
The Associated Press story of the defection of a former U.S. Marine to the Soviet Union was reported on the front pages of some newspapers in 1959. "Texas Marine Gives Up U.S. For Russia", The Miami News, October 31, 1959, p1 

Though Oswald had wanted to attend Moscow State University, he was sent to Minsk to work as a lathe operator at the Gorizont Electronics Factory, which produced radios, televisions, and military and space electronics. Stanislau Shushkevich, who later became independent Belarus's first head of state, was also engaged by Gorizont at the time, and was assigned to teach Oswald Russian. Oswald received a government-subsidized, fully furnished studio apartment in a prestigious building and an additional supplement to his factory payall in all, an idyllic existence by working-class Soviet standards, Lee Harvey Oswald in Russia, Minsk Part 3 at Russian Books though he was kept under constant surveillance. Lee Harvey Oswald in Russia, Minsk Part 2 at Russian Books 

Oswald grew bored in Minsk. Warren Commission Report, Chapter 7 
He wrote in his diary in January 1961: "I am starting to reconsider my desire about staying. The work is drab, the money I get has nowhere to be spent. No nightclubs or bowling alleys, no places of recreation except the trade union dances. I have had enough." Warren Commission Hearings, vol. 16, p. 102, CE 24, Lee Harvey Oswald's "Historic Diary", entry of January 431, 1961. 
Shortly afterwards, Oswald (who had never formally renounced his U.S. citizenship) wrote to the U.S. Embassy in Moscow requesting return of his American passport, and proposing to return to the U.S. if any charges against him would be dropped. Warren Commission Hearings, vol. 18, p. 131, CE 931, Undated letter from Lee Harvey Oswald to the American Embassy in Moscow.
 

In March 1961, Oswald met Marina Nikolayevna Prusakova, a 19-year-old pharmacology student; they married less than six weeks later in April. Though later reports described her uncle, with whom she was living, as a colonel in the KGB, he was a lumber industry expert in the Russian Ministry of Internal Affairs (MVD) with a bureaucratic rank of Polkovnik. Priscilla Johnson McMillan, Marina and Lee, Harper & Row, 1977, pp. 6465. ISBN 978-0-06-012953-8. United States House Select Committee on Assassinations, Hearings, vol. 2 p. 207, Testimony of Marina Oswald Porter, September 13, 1978. 
The Oswalds' first child, June, was born on February 15, 1962. On May 24, 1962, Oswald and Marina applied at the U.S. Embassy in Moscow for documents enabling her to immigrate to the U.S. and, on June 1, the U.S. Embassy gave Oswald a repatriation loan of $435.71. The Warren Report, Appendix 8, p. 712, Biography of Lee Harvey Oswald 
Oswald, Marina, and their infant daughter left for the United States, where they received no attention from the press, much to Oswald's disappointment. "Young Ex-Marine Asks To Be Russian Citizen", Oakland Tribune, October 31, 1959, p. 1. "Ex-Marine Requests Citizenship", New York Times, November 1, 1959, p. 3. "Texan in Russia: He Wants to Stay", Dallas Morning News, November 1, 1959, sec. 1, p. 9. "Brother Tries to Telephone, Halt Defector", Oakland Tribune November 2, 1959, p. 8. "U.S. Boy Prefers Russia", Syracuse Herald-Journal, December 11, 1959, p. 46. "Third Yank Said Quitting Soviet Union, San Mateo Times, June 8, 1962, p. 8. "Marine Returning", The Lima News, June 9, 1962, p. 1. 

===Dallas-Fort Worth===
The Oswalds soon settled in the Dallas/Fort Worth area, where Lee's mother and brother lived. Lee began a manuscript on Soviet life, though he eventually gave up the project. Biography of Lee Harvey Oswald, Warren Report, Appendix 13, p. 714. The Oswalds also became acquainted with a number of anti-Communist Russian and East European migrs in the area. Biography of Lee Harvey Oswald, Warren Report, Appendix 13, p. 716. Summers 1998, p. 152. In testimony to the Warren Commission, Alexander Kleinlerer said that the Russian migrs sympathized with Marina, while merely tolerating Oswald, whom they regarded as rude and arrogant. Warren Commission Hearings, vol. 11, p. 123, Affidavit of Alexander Kleinlerer: "Anna Meller, Mrs. Hall, George Bouhe, and the deMohrenschildts, and all that group had pity for Marina and her child. None of us cared for Oswald because of his political philosophy, his criticism of the United States, his apparent lack of interest in anyone but himself, and because of his treatment of Marina." 

Although the Russian migrs eventually abandoned Marina when she made no sign of leaving Lee, Warren Commission Hearings, vol. 11, p. 298, Testimony of Mrs. Lee Harvey Oswald. Warren Commission Hearings, vol. 2, p. 307, Testimony of Mrs. Katherine Ford. Warren Commission Hearings, vol. 9, p. 252, Testimony of George de Mohrenschildt. Warren Commission Hearings, vol. 9, p. 238, Testimony of George de Mohrenschildt. Warren Commission Hearings, vol. 9, p. 266, Testimony of George de Mohrenschildt. Oswald found an unlikely friend in 51-year-old Russian migr George de Mohrenschildt, a well-educated petroleum geologist with international business connections George de Mohrenschildt. Staff Report of the House Select Committee on Assassinations, vol. 12, 4, p. 5354, 1979.
 Summers 1998, pp. 152-160. A native of Russia, de Mohrenschildt later was to tell the Warren Commission that Oswald had a "...remarkable fluency in Russian." Warren Commission Hearings, vol. 9, p. 226, Testimony of George S. de Mohrenschildt. Marina, meanwhile, befriended Ruth Paine, Warren Commission Hearings, vol. 2, p. 435, Testimony of Ruth Hyde Paine. a Quaker who was trying to learn Russian, and her husband Michael Paine, who worked for Bell Helicopter. Warren Commission Hearings, vol. 2, p. 385, Testimony of Michael R. Paine. 

In July 1962, Oswald was hired by Dallas' Leslie Welding Company; he disliked the work and quit after three months. In October, he was hired by the graphic-arts firm of Jaggars-Chiles-Stovall as a photoprint trainee. A fellow employee at Jaggars-Chiles-Stovall testified that Oswald's rudeness at his new job was such that fights threatened to break out, and that he once saw Oswald reading a Russian-language publication. Warren Commission Hearings, vol. 10, pp. 199-205, Testimony of Dennis Hyman Ofstein. 
 Warren Commission Hearings, Testimony of Dennis Hyman Ofstein: 'I would say he didn't get along with people and that several people had words with him at times about the way he barged around the plant, and one of the fellows back in the photosetter department almost got in a fight with him one day, and I believe it was Mr. Graef that stepped in and broke it up before it got started...' Oswald was fired during the first week of April 1963. 
Some have suggested that Oswald might have used equipment at the firm to forge identification documents. Warren Commission Hearings, vol. 19, p. 288, Photograph of the face sides of a Selective Service System Notice of Classification. Warren Commission Hearings, vol. 10, p. 201, Testimony of Dennis Hyman Ofstein. Summers 1998, pp. 52-53. 

===Edwin Walker assassination attempt===
In March 1963, Oswald purchased a 6.5 mm caliber Carcano rifle by mail-order, using the alias "A. Hidell", The Assassin, Warren Commission Report, pp. 118119, as well as a .38 Smith & Wesson Model 10 revolver by the same method. Questioned Documents, Warren Commission Report, Appendix 10, p. 567571. 

The Warren Commission concluded that on April 10, 1963, Oswald attempted to kill retired U.S. Major General Edwin Walker, firing his rifle at Walker through a window, from less than 100 ft away, as Walker sat at a desk in his home; the bullet struck the window-frame and Walker's only injuries were bullet fragments to the forearm. (The United States House Select Committee on Assassinations stated that the "evidence strongly suggested" that Oswald carried out the shooting.) Findings of the Select Committee on Assassinations, HSCA Final Report, p. 61. 

General Walker was an outspoken anti-communist, segregationist, and member of the John Birch Society. In 1961, Walker had been relieved of his command of the 24th Division of the U.S. Army in West Germany for distributing right-wing literature to his troops. Scott, Peter Dale. Deep Politics and the Death of JFK, (Los Angeles: University of California Press, 1993), pp. 34, 50. ISBN 0-520-20519-7 Summers 1998, pp. 161162. Walker's later actions in opposition to racial integration at the University of Mississippi led to his arrest on insurrection, seditious conspiracy, and other charges. He was temporarily held in a mental institution on orders from President Kennedy's brother, Attorney General Robert Kennedy, but a grand jury refused to indict him. Summers 1998, p. 162. 

Marina Oswald testified that her husband told her that he traveled by bus to General Walker's house and shot at Walker with his rifle. Testimony of Mrs. Lee Harvey Oswald, Warren Commission Hearings, volume 1, pg. 17. She said that Oswald considered Walker to be the leader of a "fascist organization." "Warren Commission Hearings, vol. 1, p. 16, Testimony of Mrs. Lee Harvey Oswald. A note Oswald left for Marina on the night of the attempt, telling her what to do if he did not return, was not found until ten days after the Kennedy assassination. Warren Commission Hearings, vol. 23, p. 392393, CE 1785, Secret Service report dated December 5, 1963, on questioning of Marina Oswald about note Oswald wrote before he attempted to kill General Walker. Testimony of Ruth Hyde Paine, Warren Commission Hearings, vol. 9, p. 393394. "Oswald Notes Reported Left Before Walker Was Shot At", Dallas Morning News, December 31, 1963, sec. 1, p. 6. Summers 1998, pp. 163-164. 

Before the Kennedy assassination, Dallas police had no suspects in the Walker shooting, 
but Oswald's involvement was suspected within hours of his arrest following the assassination. "Officials Recall Sniper Shooting at Walker Home", Dallas Morning News, November 23, 1963, sec. 1, p. 15. The Walker bullet was too damaged to run conclusive ballistics studies on it, "FBI Unable to Link Walker Slug, Rifle", Dallas Morning News, December 20, 1963, sec. 1, p. 7. but neutron activation analysis later showed that it was "extremely likely" that it was made by the same manufacturer and for the same rifle make as the two bullets which later struck Kennedy. United States House Select Committee on Assassinations,

Testimony of Dr. Vincent P. Guinn:
:Mr. WOLF. In your professional opinion, Dr. Guinn, is the fragment removed from General Walker's house a fragment from a WCC (Western Cartridge Company) Mannlicher-Carcano bullet?
:Dr. GUINN. I would say that it is extremely likely that it is, because there are very few, very few other ammunitions that would be in this range. I don't know of any that are specifically this close as these numbers indicate, but somewhere near them there are a few others, but essentially this is in the range that is rather characteristic of WCC Mannlicher-Carcano bullet lead. 

George de Mohrenschildt testified that he "knew that Oswald disliked General Walker." Testimony of George de Mohrenschildt, Warren Commission Hearings, vol. 9, p. 249. Regarding this, De Mohrenschildt and his wife Jeanne, recalled an incident that occurred the weekend following the Walker assassination attempt. The De Mohrenschildts testified that on April 14, 1963, just before Easter Sunday, they were visiting the Oswalds at their new apartment and had brought them a toy Easter bunny to give to their child. As Oswald's wife, Marina was showing Jeanne around the apartment, they discovered Oswald's rifle standing upright, leaning against the wall inside a closet. Jeanne told George that Oswald had a rifle, and George joked to Oswald, "Were you the one who took a pot-shot at General Walker?" When asked about Oswald's reaction to this question, George de Mohrenschildt told the Warren Commission that Oswald "smiled at that." Testimony of George de Mohrenschildt, Warren Commission Hearings, vol. 9, pp. 249-250. When George's wife, Jeanne was asked about Oswald's reaction, she said, "I didn't notice anything"; she continued, "we started laughing our heads off, big joke, big George's joke." Testimony of Jeanne de Mohrenschildt, Warren Commission Hearings, vol. 9, pp. 314-317. Jeanne de Mohrenschildt testified that this was the last time she or her husband ever saw the Oswalds. Testimony of Jeanne de Mohrenschildt, Warren Commission Hearings, vol. 9, p. 314. Summers 1998, p. 172. 

===New Orleans===
Oswald rented an apartment in this building in Uptown New Orleans c. MaySeptember 1963
Oswald passing out "Fair Play for Cuba" leaflets in New Orleans, August 16, 1963Oswald's mugshot following his arrest in New Orleans, August 9, 1963

Oswald returned to New Orleans on April 24, 1963. The Warren Report, Chapter 7, p. 403, Lee Harvey Oswald  Background and Possible Motives; Personal Relations Marina's friend, Ruth Paine, drove her by car from Dallas to join Oswald in New Orleans the next month in May. The Warren Report, Chapter 6, p. 284, Investigation of Possible Conspiracy; Background of Lee Harvey Oswald On May 10, Oswald was hired by the Reily Coffee Company whose owner, William Reily, was a backer of the Crusade to Free Cuba Committee, an anti-Castro organization. Scott, Peter Dale. Deep Politics and the Death of JFK, (Los Angeles: University of California Press, 1993), p. 95. ISBN 0-520-20519-7 Summers 1998, pp. 220-221. Oswald worked as a machinery greaser at Reily, but he was fired in July "...because his work was not satisfactory and because he spent too much time loitering in Adrian Alba's garage next door, where he read rifle and hunting magazines." The Warren Report, Chapter 7, pp. 403404, Lee Harvey Oswald  Background and Possible Motives; Personal Relations Summers 1998, p. 219. 

On May 26, Oswald wrote to the New York City headquarters of the pro-Castro Fair Play for Cuba Committee, proposing to rent "a small office at my own expense for the purpose of forming a FPCC branch here in New Orleans." Lee (Vincent T.), Exhibit No. 2, Warren Commission Hearings, vol. 20, p. 512. Three days later, the FPCC responded to Oswald's letter advising against opening a New Orleans office "at least not ..... at the very beginning." Lee (Vincent T.), Exhibit No. 3, Warren Commission Hearings, vol. 20, p. 515. In a follow-up letter, Oswald replied, "Against your advice, I have decided to take an office from the very beginning." Lee (Vincent T.), Exhibit No. 4, Warren Commission Hearings, vol. 20, p. 518. 

As the sole member of the New Orleans chapter of the Fair Play for Cuba Committee, Oswald ordered the following items from a local printer: 500 application forms, 300 membership cards, and 1,000 leaflets with the heading, "Hands Off Cuba." FBI Report of Investigation of Lee Harvey Oswald's Activities for Fair Play for Cuba Committee in New Orleans, Warren Commission Hearings, vol. 25, pp. 770, 773. According to Lee Oswald's wife Marina, Lee told her to sign the name "A.J. Hidell" as chapter president on his membership card. Political Activities, Warren Commission Report, Chapter 7, p. 407. 

On August 5 and 6, according to anti-Castro militant Carlos Bringuier, Oswald visited him at a store he owned in New Orleans. Bringuier was the New Orleans delegate for the anti-Castro organization Directorio Revolucionario Estudantil (DRE). Bringuier would later tell the Warren Commission that he believed Oswald's visits were an attempt by Oswald to infiltrate his group. Warren Commission Hearings, vol. 10, pp. 3437, Testimony of Carlos Bringuier. On August 9, Oswald turned up in downtown New Orleans handing out pro-Castro leaflets. Bringuier confronted Oswald, claiming he was tipped off about Oswald's leafleting by a friend. A scuffle ensued and Oswald, Bringuier, and two of Bringuier's friends were arrested for disturbing the peace. Summers 1998, p. 211. Before leaving the police station, Oswald asked to speak with an FBI agent. Agent John Quigley arrived and spent over an hour talking to Oswald. Marrs, Jim. Crossfire: The Plot that Killed Kennedy, (New York: Carroll & Graf, 1989), p. 146. ISBN 0-88184-648-1 Summers 1998, pp. 217-218. 

A week later, on August 16, Oswald again passed out Fair Play for Cuba leaflets with two hired helpers, this time in front of the International Trade Mart. The incident was filmed by WDSU, a local TV station. Summers 1998, pp. 211212. The next day, Oswald was interviewed by WDSU radio commentator William Stuckey, who probed Oswald's background. Douglas, James. JFK and the Unspeakable, (New York: Simon and Schuster, 2008), p. 65. ISBN 978-1-4391-9388-4 A few days later, Oswald accepted Stuckey's invitation to take part in a radio debate with Carlos Bringuier and Bringuier's associate Edward Scannell Butler, head of the right-wing Information Council of the Americas (INCA). Warren Commission Hearings, vol. 21, p. 633, Stuckey Exhibit 3, Literal transcript of an audio-tape recording of a debate among Lee Harvey Oswald, Carlos Bringuier, and Edward Butler on August 21, 1963, Radio station WDSU, New Orleans. Summers 1998, p. 212. 

One of Oswald's Fair Play for Cuba leaflets had the address "544 Camp Street" hand-stamped on it, apparently by Oswald himself. 544 Camp Street and Related Events, House Select Committee on Assassinations  Appendix to Hearings, vol. 10, 13, p. 123. The address was in the "Newman Building" which, from October 1961 to February 1962, housed a militant anti-Castro group, the Cuban Revolutionary Council. 544 Camp Street and Related Events, House Select Committee on Assassinations  Appendix to Hearings, vol. 10, 13, pp. 1234. Marrs, Jim. Crossfire: The Plot that Killed Kennedy, (New York: Carroll & Graf, 1989), p. 235. ISBN 0-88184-648-1 Summers 1998, p. 222. Around the corner but located in the same building, with a different entrance, was the address 531 Lafayette Streetthe address of "Guy Banister Associates", a private detective agency run by former FBI agent Guy Banister. Banister's office was involved in anti-Castro and private investigative activities in the New Orleans area (a CIA file indicated that in September 1960, the CIA had considered "using Guy Banister Associates for the collection of foreign intelligence, but ultimately decided against it"). Marrs, Jim. Crossfire: The Plot that Killed Kennedy, (New York: Carroll & Graf, 1989), pp. 100, 236. ISBN 0-88184-648-1 544 Camp Street and Related Events, House Select Committee on Assassinations  Appendix to Hearings, vol. 10, 13, pp. 1267. Summers 1998, p. 230. 

In the late 1970s, the House Select Committee on Assassinations (HSCA) investigated the possible relationship of Oswald to Banister's office. While the committee was unable to interview Guy Banister (who died in 1964), the committee did interview his brother Ross Banister. Ross "told the committee that his brother had mentioned seeing Oswald hand out Fair Play for Cuba literature on one occasion. Ross theorized that Oswald had used the 544 Camp Street address on his literature to embarrass Guy." 544 Camp Street and Related Events, House Select Committee on Assassinations  Appendix to Hearings, vol. 10, 13, p. 128. 

Guy Banister's secretary, Delphine Roberts, told author Anthony Summers that she saw Oswald at Banister's office, and that he filled out one of Banister's "agent" application forms. She said, "Oswald came back a number of times. He seemed to be on familiar terms with Banister and with the office." Summers 1998, p. 229. The House Select Committee on Assassinations investigated Roberts' claims and said that "because of contradictions in Roberts' statements to the committee and lack of independent corroboration of many of her statements, the reliability of her statements could not be determined." 544 Camp Street and Related Events, House Select Committee on Assassinations  Appendix to Hearings, vol. 10, 8, p. 129. 

Oswald's 1963 New Orleans activities were later investigated by New Orleans District Attorney Jim Garrison, as part of his prosecution of Clay Shaw in 19671969. Garrison was particularly interested in an associate of Guy Banistera man named David Ferrie David Ferrie, House Select Committee on Assassinations  Appendix to Hearings, vol. 10, 12, p. 110. and his possible connection to Oswald, which Ferrie himself denied. FBI Interview of David Ferrie, November 25, 1963, Warren Commission Document 75, p. 286. Ferrie died before Garrison could complete his investigation. David Ferrie, House Select Committee on Assassinations  Appendix to Hearings, vol. 10, 12, p. 105. Charged with conspiracy in the JFK assassination, Shaw was found not guilty.

The Warren Commission examined Oswald's involvement with a New Orleans Civil Air Patrol troop he briefly attended in 1955 with high school friend Edward Voebel. Several witnesses testified that David Ferrie was the Civil Air Patrol unit's commander during at least some of the time that Oswald attended C.A.P. meetings. FBI Interview of Edward Voebel, November 25, 1963, Warren Commission Document 75, pp. 281283. New Orleans Police Department Interview of Edward Voebel, November 27, 1963, Warren Commission Hearings, vol. 22, pp. 826-827, Commission Exhibit 1413 Testimony of Edward Voebel, Warren Commission Hearings, vol. 8, pp. 14-15. Oswald, David Ferrie and the Civil Air Patrol, House Select Committee on Assassinations, Volume 9, 4, pp. 110-115. However, the FBI interviewed Ferrie shortly after the assassination and concluded there was no relationship of significance in regards to Oswald. FBI Interview of David Ferrie, November 25, 1963 & November 27, 1963, Warren Commission Document 75, pp. 285297, 199200. A more extensive investigation was done by the House Select Committee on Assassinations, which interviewed several of Oswald's former fellow cadets and others, none of whom recalled Ferrie and Oswald interacting. These fellow cadets said that Oswald attended some 8 to 10 C.A.P. meetings over a two-month period. In 1993, the PBS television program Frontline obtained a photograph taken in 1955 showing Oswald and Ferrie at a C.A.P. cookout with other cadets. PBS Frontline "Who Was Lee Harvey Oswald", broadcast on PBS stations, November 1993 (various dates). Summers 1998, pp. 233-234. 

===Mexico===
Marina's friend, Ruth Paine, transported Marina and her child by car from New Orleans to the Paine home in Irving, Texas, near Dallas, on September 23, 1963. Warren Commission Hearings, vol. 3, pp. 79, Testimony of Ruth Hyde Paine Resumed. Oswald stayed in New Orleans at least two more days to collect a $33 unemployment check. It is uncertain when he left New Orleans; he is next known to have boarded a bus in Houston on September 26bound for the Mexican border, rather than Dallasand to have told other bus passengers that he planned to travel to Cuba via Mexico. Mexico City, Warren Commission Report, Appendix 8, p. 732. Warren Commission Hearings, vol. 11, pp. 214215, Affidavit of John Bryan McFarland and Meryl McFarland. He arrived in Mexico City on September 27, where he applied for a transit visa at the Cuban Embassy, Warren Commission Hearings, vol. 25, p. 418, CE 2564, Cuban visa application of Lee Harvey Oswald, September 27, 1963. claiming he wanted to visit Cuba on his way to the Soviet Union. The Cuban embassy officials insisted Oswald would need Soviet approval, but he was unable to get prompt co-operation from the Soviet embassy.

After five days of shuttling between consulatesthat included a heated argument with an official at the Cuban consulate, impassioned pleas to KGB agents, and at least some CIA scrutiny (undated) Oswald's Foreign Activities (Coleman and Slawson to Rankin) (page 94) at The Assassination Archives and Research Center Oswald was told by a Cuban consular officer that he was disinclined to approve the visa, saying "a person like in place of aiding the Cuban Revolution, was doing it harm." Warren Commission Report, p. 413 Later, on October 18, the Cuban embassy approved the visa, but by this time Oswald was back in the United States and had given up on his plans to visit Cuba and the Soviet Union. Still later, eleven days before the assassination of President Kennedy, Oswald wrote to the Soviet embassy in Washington, D.C., saying, "Had I been able to reach the Soviet Embassy in Havana, as planned, the embassy there would have had time to complete our business." Oswald: Myth, Mystery, and Meaning, FRONTLINE, November 20, 2003 HSCA Appendix to Hearings, vol. 8, p. 358, Letter from Lee Oswald to Embassy of the U.S.S.R., Washington, D.C., November 9, 1963. CIA Report on Oswald's Stay in Mexico, December 13, 1963. (page 19) at The Assassination Archives and Research Center. 

While the Warren Commission concluded that Oswald had visited Mexico City and the Cuban and Soviet consulates, questions regarding whether someone posing as Oswald had appeared at the embassies were serious enough to be investigated by the House Select Committee on Assassinations. Later, the Committee agreed with the Warren Commission that Oswald had visited Mexico City and concluded that "the majority of evidence tends to indicate" that Oswald in fact visited the consulates, but the Committee could not rule out the possibility that someone else had used his name in visiting the consulates. House Select Committee on Assassinations, 1996 Release: Oswald, the CIA, and Mexico City ("Lopez Report"), p. 121. 

===Return to Dallas===
Texas School Book Depository, where Oswald was an employee
On October 2, 1963, Oswald left Mexico City by bus and arrived in Dallas the next day. Ruth Paine said that her neighbor told her, on October 14, that there was a job opening at the Texas School Book Depository, where her neighbor's brother, Wesley Frazier, worked. Mrs. Paine informed Oswald, who was interviewed at the Depository and was hired there on October 16 as a $1.25 an hour order filler. The Warren Report, Chapter 1, pp. 1415, Summary and Conclusions Oswald's supervisor, Roy S. Truly (1907-1985), said that Oswald "did a good day's work" and was an above-average employee. Warren Commission Hearings, vol. 3, p. 216, Testimony of Roy Sansom Truly. Summers 1998), p. 282. During the week, Oswald stayed in a Dallas rooming house (under the name "O.H. Lee"), but he spent his weekends with Marina at the Paine home in Irving. Oswald did not drive, but commuted to and from Dallas on Mondays and Fridays with his co-worker Wesley Frazier. On October 20, the Oswalds' second daughter, Audrey, was born.

FBI agents twice visited the Paine home in early November, when Oswald was not present, and spoke to Mrs. Paine. Warren Commission Report, p. 739. Oswald visited the Dallas FBI office about 2 to 3 weeks before the assassination, asking to see Special Agent James P. Hosty. When he was told that Hosty was unavailable, Oswald left a note that, according to the receptionist, read: "Let this be a warning. I will blow up the FBI and the Dallas Police Department if you don't stop bothering my wife" "Lee Harvey Oswald." The note allegedly contained some sort of threat, but accounts vary as to whether Oswald threatened to "blow up the FBI" or merely "report this to higher authorities". According to Hosty, the note said, "If you have anything you want to learn about me, come talk to me directly. If you don't cease bothering my wife, I will take the appropriate action and report this to the proper authorities." Agent Hosty said that he destroyed Oswald's note on orders from his superior, Gordon Shanklin, after Oswald was named the suspect in the Kennedy assassination. HSCA Final Assassinations Report, House Select Committee on Assassinations, pp. 195196. Summers 1998, pp. 283-286. 

==Kennedy and Tippit shootings==

In the days before Kennedy's arrival, several newspapers described the route of the presidential motorcade as passing the Book Depository. Dallas Morning News, November 19, 1963. Dallas Times Herald, November 19, 1963, p. A-13. On November 21 (a Thursday) Oswald asked Frazier for an unusual mid-week lift back to Irving, saying he had to pick up some curtain rods. The next morning (Friday) he returned to Dallas with Frazier; he left behind $170 and his wedding ring, Warren Commission Hearings, vol. I, p. 7273, Testimony of Marina Oswald. but took with him a paper bag. Frazier reported that Oswald told him the bag contained curtain rods, Testimony of Wesley Frazier, Warren Commission Hearings, vol. 2, pp. 226-227. Magen Knuth, The Long Brown Bag. The evidence demonstrated that the package actually contained the rifle used by Oswald in the assassination. National Archives, Report of the President's Commission on the Assassination of President Kennedy. Retrieved January 4, 2013. Bugliosi, Reclaiming History, pp. 95455. 

Witness Howard Brennan photographed in the same position where he was on November 22, 1963 across from the Texas School Book Depository. Circle "A" indicates where he saw a man fire a rifle at the presidential motorcade

Oswald's co-worker, Charles Givens, testified to the Commission that he last saw Oswald on the 6th floor of the TSBD at approximately 11:55 a.m.35 minutes before the assassination. Warren Commission Hearings, Testimony of Charles Givens. The Commission report stated that Oswald was not seen again "until after the shooting." However, in an FBI report taken the day after the assassination, Givens said that the encounter took place at 11:30 a.m. and that he later saw Oswald reading a newspaper in the first floor domino room at 11:50 a.m. FBI Interview of Charles Givens, November 23, 1963, Warren Commission Document 5, p. 329. Summers 1998), p. 58. William Shelley, a foreman at the Depository, also testified that he saw Oswald on the first floor talking on the telephone between 11:45 and 11:50 a.m. Janitor Eddie Piper also testified that he spoke to Oswald on the first floor at 12:00 p.m. Another co-worker, Bonnie Ray Williams, was on the sixth floor of the Depository eating his lunch and was there until at least 12:10 p.m. Warren Commission Hearings, vol. 3, p. 173, Testimony of Bonnie Ray Williams. He said that during that time he did not see Oswald, or anyone else, on the sixth floor and felt he was the only one up there. Summers 1998, pp. 59-60. However, he also said that some boxes in the southeast corner may have prevented him from seeing deep into the "sniper's nest." Warren Commission Hearings, vol. 3, p. 170, Testimony of Bonnie Ray Williams. Carolyn Arnold, the secretary to the Vice President of the TSBD, informed the FBI that as she left the building to watch the motorcade, she caught a glimpse of a man whom she believed was Oswald standing in the first floor hallway of the building just prior to the assassination. FBI Gemberling Report, November 30, 1963, Warren Commission Document 5, p. 41. In 1978, Arnold told author Anthony Summers that the FBI report misquoted her, and that she "clearly" saw Oswald sitting in the second floor lunchroom at 12:15 p.m or slightly after. However, no other depository employee reported seeing Oswald on the second floor between 12 noon and 12:30 pm (e.g., Mrs. Pauline Sanders, who left the second floor lunchroom at "approximately 12:20 pm," did not see Oswald at all that day). 

According to several government investigations, including the Warren Commission, as Kennedy's motorcade passed through Dallas's Dealey Plaza at about 12:30 p.m. on November 22, Oswald fired three rifle shots from the sixth-floor, southeast corner window of the Book Depository, The Shots from the Texas School Book Depository, Warren Commission Report, chapter 3, p. 117. killing the President and seriously wounding Texas Governor John Connally. One shot apparently missed the limousine entirely, another struck Kennedy and Texas Governor John Connally, and another struck Kennedy in the head. Warren Report, chapter 1, p. 19. Bystander James Tague received a minor facial injury from a small piece of curbstone that fragmented when struck by one of the bullets. Howard Brennan, a steamfitter who was sitting across the street from the Texas School Book Depository, notified police that as he watched the motorcade go by, he heard a shot come from above, and looked up to see a man with a rifle make another shot from a corner window on the sixth floor. He said he had seen the same man minutes earlier looking out the window. Warren Commission Hearings, vol. 3, p. 143, Testimony of Howard Brennan. Brennan gave a description of the shooter, Warren Commission Hearings, vol. 3, p. 145, Testimony of Howard Brennan and Dallas police subsequently broadcast descriptions at 12:45 p.m., 12:48 p.m., and 12:55 p.m. After the second shot was fired, Brennan recalled, "This man I saw previous was aiming for his last shot ... and maybe paused for another second as though to assure himself that he had hit his mark." 

According to the investigations, after the attack, Oswald hid and covered the rifle with boxes and descended using the rear stairwell. About ninety seconds after the shooting, in the second-floor lunchroom, Oswald encountered police officer Marrion Baker accompanied by Oswald's supervisor Roy Truly; Baker let Oswald pass after Truly identified him as an employee. According to Baker, Oswald did not appear to be nervous or out of breath. Warren Commission Hearings, vol. 3, p. 263, Testimony of Marrion L. Baker. Truly said that Oswald appeared "startled" when Baker aimed his gun at him. Summers 1998, p. 63. Mrs. Robert Reidclerical supervisor at the Depository, returning to her office within two minutes of the assassinationsaid that she saw Oswald who "was very calm" on the second floor with a Coke in his hands. Summers 1998, p. 64. As they walked past each other, Mrs. Reid said to Oswald, "The President has been shot" to which he mumbled something in response, but Reid did not understand him. Warren Commission Hearings, vol. 3, pp. 273275, Testimony of Mrs. Robert A. Reid Oswald is believed to have left the Depository through the front entrance just before police sealed it off. Oswald's supervisor, Roy Truly, later pointed out to officers that Oswald was the only employee that he was certain was missing. Warren Commission Hearings, Testimony of Roy Sansom Truly. Warren Commission Hearings, Testimony of J.W. Fritz 

At about 12:40 p.m., Oswald boarded a city bus but (probably due to heavy traffic) he requested a transfer from the bus driver and got off two blocks later. Bus transfer (.gif) at Kennedy Assassination Home Page Oswald took a taxicab to his rooming house, at 1026 North Beckley Avenue, arriving at about 1:00 p.m. He entered through the front door and, according to his housekeeper Earlene Roberts, immediately went to his room, "walking pretty fast". Warren Commission Hearings, vol. 6, pp. 438439, Testimony of Earlene Roberts. Roberts said that Oswald left "a very few minutes" later, zipping up a jacket he was not wearing when he had entered earlier. As Oswald left, Roberts looked out of the window of her house and last saw him standing at the northbound Beckley Avenue bus stop in front of her house. Warren Commission Hearings, vol. 7, p. 439, Affidavit of Earlene Roberts. Summers 1998, p. 66. ISBN 1-56924-739-0 

The Warren Commission concluded that at approximately 1:15 p.m., Dallas Patrolman J. D. Tippit drove up in his patrol car alongside Oswaldpresumably because Oswald resembled the police broadcast description of the man seen by witness Howard Brennan firing shots at the presidential motorcade. Patrolman Tippet's encounter with Oswald occurred near the corner of East 10th Street and North Patton Avenue. Oswald was 5 ft tall and weighed 150 lb. Warren Commission Hearings Vol. 26, p. 521. Warren Commission Report, Chapter 1, pg. 6. This location is about nine-tenths of a mile (1.4 km) southeast of Oswald's rooming housea distance that the Warren Commission concluded "Oswald could have easily walked." The Warren Report, Appendix 12, p. 648, Oswald's Movements Between 12:33 and 1:15 PM Tippit pulled alongside Oswald and "apparently exchanged words with through the right front or vent window." Warren Commission Report, Chapter 4, p. 165, The Assassin, The Killing of Patrolman J.D. Tippit. "Shortly after 1:15 p.m.", The first report of Tippit's shooting was transmitted over Police Channel 1 some time between 1:16 and 1:19 p.m., as indicated by verbal time stamps made periodically by the dispatcher. Specifically, the first report began 1 minute 41 seconds after the 1:16 time stamp. Before that, witness Domingo Benavides could be heard unsuccessfully trying to use Tippit's police radio microphone, beginning at 1:16. Dale K. Myers, With Malice: Lee Harvey Oswald and the Murder of Officer J.D. Tippit, 1998, p. 384. ISBN 0-9662709-7-5. Tippit exited his car and was immediately struck and killed by four shots. The third eyewitness was Jack Ray Tatum. OswaldTippit Associates, HSCA Appendix to Hearings, vol. 12, p. 4041. 
Numerous witnesses heard the shots and saw Oswald flee the scene holding a revolver; nine positively identified him as the man who shot Tippit and fled. Warren Commission Report, Chapter 4: The Assassin, Description of Shooting. By the evening of November 22, five of them (Helen Markham, Barbara Jeanette Davis, Virginia Davis, Ted Callaway, Sam Guinyard) had identified Lee Harvey Oswald in police lineups as the man they saw. A sixth (William Scoggins) did so the next day. Three others (Harold Russell, Pat Patterson, Warren Reynolds) subsequently identified Oswald from a photograph. Two witnesses (Domingo Benavides, William Arthur Smith) testified that Oswald resembled the man they had seen. One witness (L.J. Lewis) felt he was too distant from the gunman to make a positive identification. Warren Commission Hearings, CE 1968, Location of Eyewitnesses to the Movements of Lee Harvey Oswald in the Vicinity of the Tippit Killing. Four cartridge cases found at the scene were identified by expert witnesses before the Warren Commission and the House Select Committee as having been fired from the revolver later found in Oswald's possession, to the exclusion of all other weapons. However, the bullets taken from Tippit's body could not be positively identified as having been fired from Oswald's revolver as the bullets were too extensively damaged to make conclusive assessments. Warren Commission Hearings, vol. 3, pp. 466473, Testimony of Cortlandt Cunningham. Warren Commission Hearings, vol. 3, p. 511, Testimony of Joseph D. Nicol. Tippit Murder: Findings and Conclusions, 7 HSCA 376. 

===Capture===
Oswald being led from the Texas Theatre after his arrest inside
Shoe store manager Johnny Brewer testified that he saw Oswald "ducking into" the entrance alcove of his store. Suspicious of this activity, Brewer watched Oswald continue up the street and slip into the nearby Texas Theatre without paying. Testimony of Johnny Calvin Brewer, 7 H 35. He alerted the theater's ticket clerk, who telephoned police Testimony of Julia Postal, 7 H 11. at about 1:40 p.m.

As police arrived, the house lights were brought up and Brewer pointed out Oswald sitting near the rear of the theater. Police Officer Nick McDonald testified that he was the first to reach Oswald and that Oswald seemed ready to surrender saying, "Well, it is all over now." However, Officer McDonald said that Oswald pulled out a pistol tucked into the front of his pants, then pointed the pistol at him, and pulled the trigger. McDonald stated that the pistol did not fire because the pistol's hammer came down on the webbing between the thumb and index finger of his hand as he grabbed for the pistol. McDonald also said that Oswald struck him, but that he struck back and Oswald was disarmed. Warren Commission Hearings, Testimony of M. N. McDonald. . Brewer and McDonald testify on film to a reporter at the sites of the shoe store and inside the Texas Theater. As he was led from the theater, Oswald shouted he was a victim of police brutality. "Oswald and Officer McDonald:The Arrest of Lee Harvey Oswald". Retrieved June 21, 2011. 

At about 2 p.m., Oswald arrived at the Police Department building, where he was questioned by Detective Jim Leavelle about the shooting of Officer Tippit. When Captain J. W. Fritz heard Oswald's name, he recognized it as that of the Book Depository employee who was reported missing and was already a suspect in the assassination. Copy of an undated statement made by Richard M. Sims and E. L. Boyd concerning the events surrounding the assassination, 21 H 512514. Testimony of J.W. Fritz, 4 H 206. Oswald was formally arraigned for the murder of Officer Tippit at 7:10 p.m., and by the end of the night (shortly after 1:30 a.m.) he had been arraigned for the murder of President Kennedy as well. Warren Commission Report, Chapter 5: Detention and Death of Oswald, Chronology. p. 198. Tippit murder affidavit: text, cover. Kennedy murder affidavit: text, cover. 

Soon after his capture Oswald encountered reporters in a hallway. Oswald declared, "I didn't shoot anybody" and, "They've taken me in because of the fact that I lived in the Soviet Union. I'm just a patsy!" Later, at an arranged press meeting, a reporter asked, "Did you kill the President?" and Oswaldwho by that time had been advised of the charge of murdering Tippit, but had not yet been arraigned in Kennedy's deathanswered, "No, I have not been charged with that. In fact, nobody has said that to me yet. The first thing I heard about it was when the newspaper reporters in the hall asked me that question." As he was led from the room the question was called out, "What did you do in Russia?" and, "How did you hurt your eye?"; Oswald answered, "A policeman hit me." Warren Commission Hearings, vol. 20, p. 366, Kantor Exhibit No. 3  Handwritten notes made by Seth Kantor concerning events surrounding the assassination. Oswald claiming innocence (film). Lee Oswald's Midnight Press Conference], YouTube.com. 

==Police interrogation==
Selective Service System (draft) card in the name of "Alek James Hidell", found on Oswald when arrested. "A. Hidell" was the name used on both envelope and order slip to buy the alleged murder weapon (see CE 773), and "A. J. Hidell" was the alternate name on the New Orleans post office box rented June 11, 1963, by Oswald. [http://www.history-matters.com/archive/jfk/wc/wcvols/wh17/html/WH_Vol17_0362a.htm CE 697 shows "A. J. Hidell" as alternate name on Oswald New Orleans P.O. Box Both the alleged murder weapon and the pistol in Oswald's possession at arrest had earlier been shipped (at separate times) to Oswald's Dallas P.O. Box 2915, as ordered by "A. J. Hidell". This box had been rented by Oswald in Dallas under his own name of Oswald, but postal inspector Harry Holmes of the Dallas Post office testified that a notice of receipt for any package would have been left in a Dallas P.O. box, no matter who the listed-recipient for the package was, and thereafter anyone presenting the notice for the package to the office window, demonstrating they had access to the box, would have been able to receive any package for the box, without identification. See http://www.aarclibrary.org/publib/jfk/wc/wr/html/WCReport_0073a.htm Warren Report p. 121 of 912. ]]

Oswald was interrogated several times during his two days at Dallas Police Headquarters. He admitted that he went to his rooming house after leaving the book depository. He also admitted that he changed his clothes and armed himself with a .38 revolver before leaving his house to go to the theater. Summers, Anthony. Not in Your Lifetime, (New York: Marlowe & Company, 1998), p. 66. ISBN 1-56924-739-0 However, Oswald denied killing Kennedy and Tippit; denied owning a rifle; said two photographs of him holding a rifle and a pistol were fakes; denied telling his co-worker he wanted a ride to Irving to get curtain rods for his apartment (he said that the package contained his lunch); and denied carrying a long, bulky package to work the morning of the assassination. Oswald also denied knowing an "A. J. Hidell". Oswald was then shown a forged Selective Service System card bearing his photograph and the alias, "Alek James Hidell" that he had in his possession at the time of his arrest. Oswald refused to answer any questions concerning the card, saying "...you have the card yourself and you know as much about it as I do." Warren Commission Report, pp. 180182. vol. XVII of the Warren report with facsimile of card (CE 795) with Commission notation: "A spurious Selective Service System notice of classification card in the name "Alek James Hidell." See for the card (illustrated at right) 

The first interrogation of Oswald was conducted by FBI Special Agent James P. Hosty and Dallas Police Captain Will Fritz on Friday, November 22. Asked to account for himself at the time of the assassination, Oswald replied that he was eating his lunch in the first floor lounge (known as the "domino room"). He said that he then went to the second-floor lunchroom to buy a Coca-Cola from the soda machine there and was drinking it when he was encountered by Dallas motorcycle policeman (Marrion L. Baker). Warren Commission Hearings, vol. 4, Testimony of James P. Hosty, Jr., pp. 467468 Testimony of Capt. J.W. Fritz, pp. 213214 Commission Exhibit 2003 Dallas Police Department file on investigation of the assassination of the President, "Interrogation of Lee Harvey Oswald", vol. 4, p. 265. FBI Report of Capt. J.W. Fritz, Warren Report, appendix 11, p. 600. Oswald said that while he was in the domino room, he saw two "Negro employees" walking by, one he recognized as "Junior" and a shorter man whose name he could not recall. Junior Jarman and Harold Norman confirmed to the Warren Commission that they had "walked through" the domino room around noon during their lunch break. When asked if anyone else was in the domino room, Norman testified that somebody else was there, but he could not remember who it was. Jarman testified that Oswald was not in the domino room when he was there. Summers 1998, p. 59. During his last interrogation on November 24, according to postal inspector Harry Holmes, Oswald was again asked where he was at the time of the shooting. Holmes (who attended the interrogation at the invitation of Captain Will Fritz) said that Oswald replied that he was working on an upper floor when the shooting occurred, then went downstairs where he encountered Dallas motorcycle policeman (Marrion L. Baker). Testimony of Harry D. Holmes, Warren Commission Hearings, vol. 7, pp. 297-302. 

Oswald asked for legal representation several times while being interrogated, as well as in encounters with reporters. But when representatives of the Dallas Bar Association met with him in his cell on Saturday, he declined their services, saying he wanted to be represented by John Abt, chief counsel to the Communist Party USA, or by lawyers associated with the American Civil Liberties Union. Testimony of H. Louis Nichols, 7 H 328329. Testimony of Harry D. Holmes, 7 H 299300. Both Oswald and Ruth Paine tried to reach Abt by telephone several times Saturday and Sunday, Jesse E. Curry, Retired Dallas Police Chief Jesse Curry Reveals His Personal JFK Assassination File, Self-published, 1969, p. 74, affidavit of Dallas police officer Thurber T. Lord on August 20, 1964. Testimony of Ruth Hyde Paine, 3 H 8889. but Abt was away for the weekend. Testimony of John J. Abt, 10 H 116. Oswald also declined his brother Robert's offer on Saturday to obtain a local attorney. Robert L. Oswald, Lee: A Portrait of Lee Harvey Oswald by His Brother, CowardMcCann, 1967, p. 145. 

During an interrogation with Captain Fritz, when asked, "Are you a communist?", he replied, "No, I am not a communist. I am a Marxist." Bugliosi, Vincent (2008) Four Days in November: The Assassination of President John F. Kennedy pp.416-7, quote: "No, I am not a Communist," Oswald says. "I am a Marxist, but not a Marxist-Leninist. "Well, a Communist is a Leninist-Marxist," Oswald explains, "while I am a true Karl Marxist. I've read just about everything by or about Karl Marx." Smith, Jeffrey K. (2008) Rendezvous in Dallas: The Assassination of John F. Kennedy pp.239-40, quote: No, I am not a Communist. I am a Marxist, but not a Marxist-Leninist. Well, a Communist is a Leninist-Marxist, while I am a true Karl Marxist. I've read just about everything by or about Karl Marx. Kelley Exhibit A, 20 H 443; CE 2064, 24 H 490; 7 H 298, WCT Harry D. Holmes 

==Death==

Ruby about to shoot Oswald who is being moved by Dallas police. Det. Jim Leavelle is wearing the tan suit. Det. L.C. Graves is wearing the dark suit.
On Sunday, November 24, Oswald was being led through the basement of Dallas Police Headquarters toward an armored car that was to take him to the nearby county jail. At 11:21 a.m., Dallas nightclub operator Jack Ruby stepped from the crowd and shot Oswald in the chest, the bullet striking several organs, penetrating his stomach, and tearing his vena cava and aorta. The Nook: An Investigation of the Assassination of John F. Kennedy, Official Autopsy Report of Lee Harvey Oswald, November 24, 1963. Accessed 2013-01-09. Oswald was taken unconscious by ambulance to Parkland Memorial Hospitalthe same hospital where doctors tried to save President Kennedy's life two days earlier. Oswald died at 1:07 p.m. Oswald's death was announced on a TV news broadcast by Dallas police chief Jesse Curry (1913-1980). An autopsy was performed by the Dallas County Medical Examiner at 2:45 p.m. the same day. The stated cause of death in the autopsy report was "hemorrhage secondary to gunshot wound of the chest." The Nook: An Investigation of the Assassination of John F. Kennedy, Official Autopsy Report of Lee Harvey Oswald, November 24, 1963. Accessed 2013-01-02. 

A network television pool camera, there to cover the transfer, was broadcasting live; millions watching on NBC witnessed the shooting as it happened and on other networks within minutes afterward. 
The event was also captured in several well-known photographs.

===Ruby's motive===
Ruby later said he had been distraught over Kennedy's death and that his motive for killing Oswald was "...saving Mrs. Kennedy the discomfiture of coming back to trial." Testimony of Jack Ruby, Warren Commission Hearings, vol. 5, pp. 198200. Others have hypothesized that Ruby was part of a conspiracy. G. Robert Blakey, chief counsel 
for the House Select Committee on Assassinations from 1977 to 1979, said: "The most plausible explanation for the murder of Oswald by Jack Ruby was that Ruby had stalked him on behalf of organized crime, trying to reach him on at least three occasions in the forty-eight hours before he silenced him forever." 

===Burial===
Oswald's replacement gravestone
Oswald was buried on November 25 in Shannon Rose Hill Memorial Burial Park in Fort Worth. Directions to Lee Harvey Oswald's Grave at Kennedy Assassination Home Page Reporters present to report on the burial were asked by officials to act as pallbearers. Lee Harvey Oswald pallbearer recalls the weather and widow The Salt Lake Tribune, 2013-11-21. A marker inscribed simply Oswald replaces the stolen original tombstone, which gave Oswald's full name, and birth and death dates. His mother was buried beside him in 1981. 

A claim that a look-alike Russian agent was buried in place of Oswald led to his exhumation on October 4, 1981. Dental records confirmed that it was Oswald's body in the grave and he was reburied in a new coffin. In 2010, his original coffin was sold at auction for $87,468. 

==Official investigations==

===Warren Commission===
The Warren Commission, created by President Lyndon B. Johnson to investigate the assassination, concluded that Oswald acted alone in assassinating Kennedy (this view is known as the lone gunman theory). The Commission could not ascribe any one motive or group of motives to Oswald's actions:

The proceedings of the commission were closed, though not secret, and about 3% of its files have yet to be released to the public, which has continued to provoke speculation among researchers. "Two misconceptions about the Warren Commission hearing need to be clarified...hearings were closed to the public unless the witness appearing before the Commission requested an open hearing. No witness except one...requested an open hearing...Second, although the hearings (except one) were conducted in private, they were not secret. In a secret hearing, the witness is instructed not to disclose his testimony to any third party, and the hearing testimony is not published for public consumption. The witnesses who appeared before the Commission were free to repeat what they said to anyone they pleased, and all of their testimony was subsequently published in the first fifteen volumes put out by the Warren Commission." (Bugliosi, p. 332) 

===Ramsey Clark Panel===
In 1968, the Ramsey Clark Panel examined various photographs, X-ray films, documents, and other evidence, concluding that Kennedy was struck by two bullets fired from above and behind him, one of which traversed the base of the neck on the right side without striking bone, and the other of which entered the skull from behind and destroyed its right side. 1968 Panel Review of Photographs, X-Ray Films, Documents and Other Evidence Pertaining to the Fatal Wounding of President John E Kennedy on November 22, 1963, in Dallas, Texas (.txt) at Kennedy Assassination Home Page 

===House Select Committee===

In 1979, after a review of the evidence and of prior investigations, the United States House Select Committee on Assassinations (HSCA) largely concurred with the Warren Commission and was preparing to issue a finding that Oswald had acted alone in killing Kennedy. Bugliosi, Reclaiming History, p.376 However, late in the Committee's proceedings a dictabelt recording was introduced, purportedly recording sounds heard in Dealey Plaza before, during and after the shots were fired. After an analysis by the firm Bolt, Beranek and Newman appeared to indicate more than three gunshots, the HSCA revised its findings to assert a "high probability that two gunmen fired" at Kennedy and that Kennedy "was probably assassinated as the result of a conspiracy." Although the Committee was "unable to identify the other gunman or the extent of the conspiracy," it made a number of further findings regarding the likelihood or unlikelihood that particular groups, named in the findings, were involved. Findings of the Select Committee on Assassinations HSCA Final Report, pp. 3. Four of the twelve members of the HSCA dissented from this conclusion. 

The acoustical evidence has since been discredited. Officer H.B. McLain, from whose motorcycle radio the HSCA acoustic experts said the Dictabelt evidence came, Testimony of Mark Weiss and Ernest Aschkenasy, 5 HSCA 617. G. Robert Blakey and Richard N. Billings, The Plot to Kill the President, Times Books, 1981, p. 103. ISBN 978-0-8129-0929-6. has repeatedly stated that he was not yet in Dealey Plaza at the time of the assassination. Greg Jaynes, The Scene of the Crime, Afterward. McLain asked the Committee, "If it was my radio on my motorcycle, why did it not record the revving up at high speed plus my siren when we immediately took off for Parkland Hospital? "Separate Views of Hons. Samuel L. Devine and Robert W. Edgar", HSCA Report, pp. 492493. 

In 1982, a panel of twelve scientists appointed by the National Academy of Sciences, including Nobel laureates Norman Ramsey and Luis Alvarez, unanimously concluded that the acoustic evidence submitted to the HSCA was "seriously flawed", was recorded after the President had been shot, and did not indicate additional gunshots. Their conclusions were later published in the journal Science. 

In a 2001 article in the journal Science & Justice, D.B. Thomas wrote that the NAS investigation was itself flawed. He concluded with a 96.3 percent certainty that there were at least two gunmen firing at President Kennedy and that at least one shot came from the grassy knoll. Donald B. Thomas, "Echo Correlation Analysis and the Acoustic Evidence in the Kennedy Assassination Revisited", Science & Justice, vol. 41(1), 2001, pp. 21-32. Retrieved April 10, 2010. In 2005, Thomas' conclusions were rebutted in the same journal. Ralph Linsker and several members of the original NAS team reanalyzed the timings of the recordings and reaffirmed the earlier conclusion of the NAS report that the alleged shot sounds were recorded approximately one minute after the assassination. Linsker R., Garwin R.L., Chernoff H., Horowitz P., Ramsey N.F., "Synchronization of the acoustic evidence in the assassination of President Kennedy". Science & Justice, vol. 45(4), 2005, pp. 207226. In 2010, D.B. Thomas challenged in a book the 2005 Science & Justice article and restated his conclusion that there were at least two gunmen. 

==Other investigations and dissenting theories==
 
Image CE-133A, one of three known "backyard photos," the same image sent by Oswald (as a first-generation copy) to George de Mohrenschildt in April 1963, dated and signed on the back. Oswald holds two Marxist newspapers, The Militant and The Worker, and a Carcano rifle, with markings matching those on the rifle found in the Book Depository after the assassination.
Some critics have not accepted the conclusions of the Warren Commission and have proposed several other theories, such as that Oswald conspired with others, or was not involved at all and was framed.

In October 1981, with Marina's support, Oswald's grave was opened to test a theory propounded by writer Michael Eddowes: that during Oswald's stay in the Soviet Union he was replaced with a Soviet double; that it was this double, not Oswald, who killed Kennedy and who is buried in Oswald's grave; and that the exhumed remains would therefore not exhibit a surgical scar Oswald was known to carry. Dental records positively identified the exhumed corpse as Oswald's, and the scar was present. W. Tracy Parnell, The Exhumation of Lee Harvey Oswald. Contrary to reports, the skull of Oswald had been autopsied and this was also confirmed at the exhumation. W. Tracy Parnell, My Interview With Dr. Vincent J.M. Di Maio. 

===Public opinion===

A 2003 Gallup poll reported that 75% of Americans do not believe that Lee Harvey Oswald acted alone in assassinating President Kennedy. That same year an ABC News poll found that 70% of respondents suspected that the assassination involved more than one person. A 2004 Fox News poll found that 66% of Americans thought there had been a conspiracy while 74% thought there had been a cover-up. A Gallup Poll taken in mid-November 2013, showed 61% believed in a conspiracy, and only 30% thought Oswald acted alone. 

===Fictional trials===
Several films have fictionalized a trial of Oswald. The Trial of Lee Harvey Oswald (1964); The Trial of Lee Harvey Oswald (1977); and On Trial: Lee Harvey Oswald (1986) have fictionalized a trial of Oswald. In 1988, a 21-hour unscripted mock trial was held on television, argued by lawyers before a judge, Bugliosi, Reclaiming History with unscripted testimony from surviving witnesses to the events surrounding the assassination; the jury returned a verdict of guilty. In 1992 the American Bar Association conducted two mock Oswald trials. The first trial ended in a hung jury. In the second trial the jury acquitted Oswald.

==Backyard photos==

Lee Harvey Oswald's Carcano rifle, in the US National Archives
The "backyard photos", taken by Marina Oswald probably around March 31, 1963 using a camera belonging to Oswald, show Oswald holding two Marxist newspapersThe Militant and The Workerand a rifle, and wearing a pistol in a holster. Warren Commission Report, Chapter 4: The Assassin, Photograph of Oswald With Rifle Shown the pictures after his arrest, Oswald insisted they were forgeries, Warren Commission Report, Chapter 4: The Assassin, Denial of Rifle Ownership. but Marina testified in 1964 that she had taken the photographs at Oswald's request Warren Commission Hearings, vol. 1, p. 15, Testimony of Mrs. Lee Harvey Oswald. testimony she reaffirmed repeatedly over the decades. 
*Testimony of Marina Oswald Porter, Trial of Clay Shaw, Criminal District Court, Orleans Parish, Louisiana, February 21, 1969.
*United States House Select Committee on Assassinations, Deposition of Marina Oswald Porter (1977):
:Q. I want to mark these two photographs. On the back of the first one, which I would ask be marked JFK committee exhibit No. 1, it says in the bottom right-hand corner copy from the National Archives, records group No. 272, under that it says CE-133B. I will ask that be marked JFK exhibit No. 1. (The above referred to photograph was marked JFK committee exhibit No. 1 for identification.)
:Q. New, this second picture that I will ask to be marked says copy from the National Archives, record group No. 272, CE-133. I would ask that this be marked JFK committee exhibit No. 2. (The above referred to photograph was marked JFK committee exhibit No. 2 for identification.)
:By Mr. KLEIN:
:Q. I will show you those two photographs which are marked JFK exhibit No. 1 and exhibit No. 2, do you recognize those two photographs?
:A. I sure do. I have seen them many times.
:Q. What are they?
:A. That is the pictures that I took.
*United States House Select Committee on Assassinations, Hearings, vol. 2 p. 239, Testimony of Marina Oswald Porter (1978):
:Mr. McDONALD. Mrs. Porter, I have got two exhibits to show you, if the clerk would procure them from the representatives of the National Archives. We have two photographs to show you. They are Warren Commission Exhibits C-133-A and B, which have been given JFK Nos. F-378 and F-379. If the clerk would please hand them to you, and also if we could now have for display purposes JFK Exhibit F-179, which is a blowup of the two photographs placed in front of you. Mrs. Porter, do you recognize the photographs placed in front of you?
:Mrs. PORTER. Yes, I do.
:Mr. McDONALD. And how do you recognize them?
:Mrs. PORTER. That is the photograph that I made of Lee on his persistent request of taking a picture of him dressed like that with rifle.
*Marina Oswald Porter, interview with author Vincent Bugliosi and lawyer Jack Duffy, Dallas, Texas, November 30, 2000, reported in Bugliosi, Reclaiming History, p. 794. 
These photos were labelled CE 133-A and CE 133-B. CE 133-A shows the rifle in Oswald's left hand and newspapers in front of his chest in the other, while the rifle is held with the right hand in CE 133-B. Oswald's mother testified that on the day after the assassination she and Marina destroyed another photograph with Oswald holding the rifle with both hands over his head, with "To my daughter June" written on it. Warren Commission Hearings, vol. 1, p. 146, Testimony of Mrs. Marguerite Oswald. 

The HSCA obtained another first-generation print (from CE 133-A) on April 1, 1977, from the widow of George de Mohrenschildt. The words "Hunter of fascistsha ha ha!" written in block Russian were on the back. Also in English were added in script: "To my friend George, Lee Oswald, 5/IV/63 5, 1963." HSCA Appendix to Hearings, vol. 6, p. 151, Figure IV-21. Handwriting experts for the HSCA concluded the English inscription and signature were by Oswald. After two original photos, one negative and one first-generation copy had been found, the Senate Intelligence Committee located (in 1976) a third backyard photo (CE 133-C) showing Oswald with newspapers held away from his body in his right hand.

These photos, widely recognized as some of the most significant evidence against Oswald, have been subjected to rigorous analysis. HSCA Appendix to Hearings, vol. 6, "The Oswald Backyard Photographs". Photographic experts consulted by the HSCA concluded they were genuine, answering twenty-one points raised by critics. Marina Oswald has always maintained she took the photos herself, and the 1963 de Mohrenschildt print bearing Oswald's signature clearly indicate they existed before the assassination. Nonetheless, some continue to contest their authenticity. United States House Select Committee on Assassinations, Hearings, Testimony of Jack D. White. In 2009, after digitally analyzing the photograph of Oswald holding the rifle and paper, computer scientist Hany Farid concluded that the photo "almost certainly was not altered." 

== See also ==
* John F. Kennedy assassination
* John F. Kennedy assassination conspiracy theories

==Notes==

==References==

==Further reading==
* Bugliosi, Vincent. Reclaiming History: The Assassination of President John F. Kennedy Norton, 2007, 1632 p. ISBN 0-393-04525-0.
* Ford, Gerald. Portrait of the Assassin. New York: Simon and Schuster, 1965, ISBN 0-684-82663-1.
* Mailer, Norman. Oswald's Tale: An American Mystery. New York: Ballantine Books, (1995) ISBN 0-345-40437-8.
* McMillan, Priscilla Johnson. Marina and Lee New York: Harper & Row, 1977.
* Nechiporenko, Oleg M. Passport to Assassination: The Never-Before Told Story of Lee Harvey Oswald by the KGB Colonel Who Knew Him. New York: Carroll & Graf Publishers, 1993, ISBN 1-55972-210-X.
* Posner, Gerald. Case Closed: Lee Harvey Oswald and the Assassination of JFK Random House, 1993, hardcover, ISBN 0-679-41825-3

==External links==

* Frontline: Who Was Lee Harvey Oswald?
* American Experience: Oswald's Ghost
* Kennedy Assassination Home Page by John McAdams
* Lee Harvey Oswald: Lone Assassin or Patsy by John McAdams
* Lee Harvey Oswald Chronology by W. Tracy Parnell 
* Crime Library: Lee Harvey Oswald by David Krajicek
* Various photos of Oswald taken post mortem
* A Study of Lee Harvey Oswald: Psychological Capability of Murder, Bull N Y Acad Med. 1967 October; 43(10): 861888. by David Abrahamsen
* Report of the President's Commission on the Assassination of President Kennedy, Appendix 13: Biography of Lee Harvey Oswald
* 
* 



[[Lincoln, Nebraska]]

Lincoln is the capital and the second-most populous city of the state of Nebraska, after Omaha. Lincoln is also the county seat of Lancaster County and the home of the University of Nebraska. Lincoln's population in 2012 was estimated at 265,404.

Lincoln was founded in 1856 as the village of Lancaster, and became the county seat of the newly created Lancaster County in 1859. The capital of Nebraska Territory had been Omaha since the creation of the territory in 1854; however, most of the territory's population lived south of the Platte River. After much of the territory south of the Platte considered annexation to Kansas, the legislature voted to move the capital south of the river and as far west as possible. The village of Lancaster was chosen, in part due to the salt flats and marshes. 

Omaha interests attempted to derail the move by having Lancaster renamed after the recently assassinated President Abraham Lincoln. Many of the people south of the river had been sympathetic to the Confederate cause in the recently concluded Civil War, and it was assumed that the legislature would not pass the measure if the future capital were named after Abraham Lincoln. The choice to name the capital city "Lincoln" caused quite a stir among the constituents, whose sentiments were mixed regarding who should have won the Civil War. 

Lincoln topped the CDC list of healthiest U.S. cities in 2008, 
and in 2013, was #1 on the Gallup-Healthways list of "Happiest & Healthiest" cities. 
 (with link to Gallup study) 

==Geography==
Detailed map of Lincoln streets and features.
View from the International Space Station (ISS), top looking SW at NE Lincoln.
Lincoln is located at (40.810446, 96.680345). According to the United States Census Bureau, in 2013, the city has a total area of 91.77 sqmi, of which, 90.42 sqmi of it is land and 1.35 sqmi is water. 

Lincoln is one of the few large cities of Nebraska not located along either the Platte River or the Missouri River. The city was originally laid out near Salt Creek and among the nearly flat saline wetlands of northern Lancaster County. The city's growth over the years has led to development of the surrounding land, much of which is composed of gently rolling hills. In recent years, Lincoln's northward growth has encroached on the habitat of the endangered Salt Creek tiger beetle.

===Metropolitan area===
The Lincoln metropolitan area consists of Lancaster County and Seward County, which was added to the metropolitan area in 2003. Lincoln has very little development outside its city limits and has no contiguous suburbs (the largest town that can be considered a suburb of Lincoln is Waverly). This is due primarily to the fact that most land that would otherwise be developed as a suburban town has already been annexed by the city of Lincoln itself.

===Neighborhoods===
View of south Lincoln from the top of the Nebraska State Capitol.

Lincoln's neighborhoods, like in other cities, include both old and new development. Some neighborhoods in Lincoln were formerly small towns that Lincoln later annexed, including University Place, Belmont, Bethany, College View, Havelock, and Hartley. A number of Historic Districts are located near Downtown Lincoln while newer neighborhoods have appeared primarily in the south and east. As of December 2013, Lincoln had 45 registered neighborhood associations within the city limits. 

===Climate===
Located on the Great Plains far from the moderating influence of mountains or large bodies of water, Lincoln possesses a highly variable four-season humid continental climate (Kppen Dfa): winters are cold but relatively dry, summers are hot and occasionally humid. With little precipitation falling during winter, precipitation is concentrated in the warmer months, when thunderstorms frequently roll in, often producing tornadoes. Snow averages 25.9 in per season but seasonal accumulation has ranged from 7.2 in in 196768 to 54.3 in in 195960. tends to fall in light amounts, though blizzards are possible. Snow cover is usually not reliable due to both the low precipitation and the frequent thaws during winter; there is an average of 39 days with a snow depth of 1 in or more. The average window for freezing temperatures is October 5 thru April 25, allowing a growing season of 162 days. 

The monthly daily average temperature ranges from 24.6 F in January to 77.6 F in July. However, the city is subject both to episodes of bitter cold in winter and heat waves during summer, with 11.4 nights of sub-0 F lows, 41 days of 90 F+ highs, and 4.6 days of 100 F+ highs. The city straddles the boundary of USDA Plant Hardiness Zones 5b and 6a. Temperature extremes have ranged from 33 F on January 12, 1974 up to 115 F on July 25, 1936. Readings as high as 105 F or as low as 20 F occur somewhat rarely; the last occurrence of each was July 22, 2012 and February 3, 1996. 

==Demographics==

The U.S. Government designated Lincoln in the 1970s as a refugee-friendly city due to its stable economy, educational institutions, and size. Since then, refugees from Vietnam settled in Lincoln, and further waves came from other countries. "'We've Found Peace in This Land'." Parade. October 10, 2010. Retrieved August 17, 2011. More recently, Lincoln was named one of the "Top Ten most Welcoming Cities in America" by Welcoming America. 

===2010 census===
As of the census of 2010, there were 258,379 people, 103,546 households, and 60,300 families residing in the city. The population density was 2899.6 PD/sqmi. There were 110,546 housing units at an average density of 1240.6 /sqmi. The racial makeup of the city was 86.0% White, 3.8% African American, 0.8% Native American, 3.8% Asian, 0.1% Pacific Islander, 2.5% from other races, and 3.0% from two or more races. Hispanic or Latino of any race were 6.3% of the population.

There were 103,546 households of which 27.7% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 44.0% were married couples living together, 10.2% had a female householder with no husband present, 4.1% had a male householder with no wife present, and 41.8% were non-families. 31.3% of all households were made up of individuals and 8.8% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.36 and the average family size was 3.01.

 View of Downtown Lincoln and surrounding neighborhoods in 2005.
The median age in the city was 31.8 years. 22.7% of residents were under the age of 18; 15.7% were between the ages of 18 and 24; 27.9% were from 25 to 44; 22.9% were from 45 to 64; and 10.7% were 65 years of age or older. The gender makeup of the city was 50.0% male and 50.0% female.

===2000 census===
As of the census of 2000, there were 225,581 people, 90,485 households, and 53,567 families residing in the city. The population density was 3,022.2 inhabitants per square mile (1,166.9/km). There were 95,199 housing units at an average density of 1,275.4 per square mile (492.5/km). The racial makeup of the city was 89.25% White, 3.12% Asian, 3.09% African American, 0.68% Native American, 0.06% Pacific Islander, 1.81% from other races, and 1.99% from two or more races. Hispanic or Latino of any race were 3.61% of the population.

There were 90,485 households out of which 29.5% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 46.3% were married couples living together, 9.5% had a female householder with no husband present, and 40.8% were non-families. 30.4% of all households were made up of individuals and 8.5% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.36 and the average family size was 2.99.

The median age in Lincoln was 31 years. 23.0% of the residents were below the age of 18; 16.4% were aged from 18 to 24; 30.7% from 25 to 44; 19.5% from 45 to 64; and 10.4% were 65 years of age or older. For every 100 females there were 99.2 males; for every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 98.0 males.

As of 2000 the median income for a household in the city was $40,605, and the median income for a family was $52,558. Men had a median income of $33,899 versus $25,402 for women. The per capita income for the city was $20,984. About 5.8% of families and 10.1% of the population were below the poverty line, including 10.7% of those under age 18 and 6.0% of those age 65 or over.

==Economy==
Amigos Restaurant on N 48th & Leighton in Lincoln, NE

Lincoln's economy is fairly typical of a mid-sized American city; most economic activity is derived from service industries. The state government and the University of Nebraska-Lincoln are both large contributors to the local economy. Other prominent industries in Lincoln include medical, banking, information technology, education, call centers, insurance, and rail and truck transport. For April 2014, Lincoln's preliminary unemployment rate was 2.9% (not seasonally adjusted). 

One of the largest employers is the Bryan Health System, which consists of two major hospitals and several large outpatient facilities located across the city. Healthcare and medical jobs account for a substantial portion of Lincoln's employment: as of 2009, full-time healthcare employees in the city included 9,010 healthcare practitioners in technical occupations, 4,610 workers in healthcare support positions, 780 licensed and vocational nurses, and 150 medical and clinical laboratory technicians. 

Several national business were originally established in Lincoln; these include student lender Nelnet, Fort Western Stores and HobbyTown USA. Several regional restaurant chains began in Lincoln, including Amigos/Kings Classic, Runza Restaurants and Valentino's.

The Omaha-Lincoln areas make up a part of what it referred to as the Midwest Silicon Prairie. In 2013, Lincoln ranked No. 4 on Forbes list of the Best Places for Business and Careers. 

===Top employers===
According to the City's 2012 Comprehensive Annual Financial Report, the top employers in the city are:

 # Employer # of Employees 
 1 State of Nebraska 8,894 
 2 Lincoln Public Schools 7,515 
 3 University of NebraskaLincoln 6,006 
 4 BryanLGH Medical Center 3,865 
 5 United States Government 3,035 
 6 City of Lincoln 2,587 
 7 St. Elizabeth Regional Medical Center 2,259 
 8 Burlington Northern Railroad 1,800 
 9 B&R Stores, Inc. 1,506 
 10 State Farm Insurance 1,382 
 

==Arts, entertainment, and culture==
Lincoln's primary venues for live music include: Pinnacle Bank Arena, Pershing Auditorium (both for large tours and national acts), Bourbon Theatre, Duffy's Tavern, Red9 (opened in 2009, previously P.O. Pears), Knickerbockers, Duggan's Pub (local and regional acts; smaller venues), and the Zoo Bar (blues). The Pla-Mor Ballroom is a staple of Lincoln's music and dance scene, featuring its house band, the award-winning Sandy Creek Band.

The Lied Center is a venue for national tours of Broadway productions, concert music, and guest lectures. Lincoln has several performing arts venues. Plays are staged by UNL students in the Temple Building; community theater productions are held at the Lincoln Community Playhouse, the Loft at The Mill, and the Haymarket Theater.

Downtown Lincoln at night (14th and O Streets)

For movie viewing, Marcus Theatres owns 32 screens at four locations, and the University of Nebraska's Mary Riepma Ross Media Arts Center shows independent and foreign films. Standalone cinemas in Lincoln include the Joyo Theater and Rococo Theater. The Rococo Theater also hosts benefits and other engagements. The downtown section of O Street is Lincoln's primary bar and nightclub district.

Lincoln is the hometown of Zager and Evans, known for their international No. 1 hit record, "In the Year 2525". It is also the home town of several notable musical groups, such as Remedy Drive, VOTA, the Bathtub Dogs, For Against, Lullaby for the Working Class, Matthew Sweet, Dirtfedd, The Show is the Rainbow and Straight. Lincoln is also home to Maroon 5 guitarist James Valentine.

In 2012, the city was listed among the 10 best places to retire in the United States by U.S. News & World Report. The 10 Best Places to Retire in 2012 

===Sites of interest===
Nebraska State Capitol
The Capitol at night

*Nebraska State Capitol: designed by Bertram Grosvenor Goodhue and constructed between 1922 and 1932. The capitol building is a skyscraper topped by a golden dome. The tower is crowned by a 6-meter (20 ft) statue of a farmer sowing grain on a pedestal of wheat and corn (sculptor: Lee Lawrie), to represent the state's agricultural heritage. City zoning rules prevent any other building from rivaling it in height, making it a landmark not only within the city but for the surrounding area. Inside, there are many paintings and iridescent murals depicting the Native American heritage and the history and culture of the early pioneers who settled Nebraska. It is the second tallest U.S. State Capitol building behind the Louisiana State Capitol building in Baton Rouge. 

===Arboretums===
* Alice Abel Arboretum
* Joshua C. Turner Arboretum
* Maxwell Arboretum

===Attractions===
* Centennial Mall (currently under renovation) 
* Downtown Lincoln (nd) Downtown Lincoln Association webpage. Downtown Lincoln Association. Retrieved 3/6/08. 
* Deer Springs Winery 
* Governor's Mansion
* Historic Haymarket and West Haymarket
* Hyde Observatory
* James Arthur Vineyards
* Lincoln Children's Zoo (nd) Lincoln Children's Zoo website. Retrieved July 6, 2007. 
* Lux Center for the Arts 

===Event Venues/Arenas===
* Haymarket Park
* Ice Box
* Lancaster Event Center
* Pershing Center (through mid to late 2014) 
* Pinewood Bowl Theater (in Pioneers Park) 
* Pinnacle Bank Arena

===Historic Sites===
* Fairview, home of William Jennings Bryan
* Thomas P. Kennard House
* Wyuka Cemetery

===Museums===
* American Historical Society of Germans from Russia Museum
* Frank H. Woods Telephone Museum
Pinnacle Bank Arena
Sheldon Memorial Art Gallery
Fairview
* Lincoln Children's Museum (nd) Lincoln Children's Museum website. Retrieved July 6, 2007. 
* Museum of American Speed (nd) Museum of American Speed website. Retrieved July 6, 2007. 
* Museum of Nebraska History
* National Museum of Roller Skating (and the offices of USA Roller Sports)
* Schleich Red Wing Pottery Museum (nd) Schleich Red Wing Pottery Museum website. Retrieved July 6, 2007. 

===University of NebraskaLincoln===
* Bob Devaney Sports Center
* Eisentrager Howard Gallery 
* Great Plains Art Museum
* International Quilt Study Center & Museum
* Kimball Recital Hall
* The Kruger Collection in the College of Architecture 
* Lentz Center for Asian Culture
* Lester F. Larsen Tractor Test & Power Museum
* Lied Center for Performing Arts and Johnny Carson Theater 
* Love Library
* Mary Riepma Ross Media Arts Center, aka The Ross
* Memorial Stadium: Home of the Cornhuskers football team, the stadium was built in 1923.
* The Robert Hillestad Textiles Gallery 
* Sheldon Memorial Art Gallery: built in the early 1960s; architect Philip Johnson.
* UNL Botanical Garden & Arboretum (East Campus) 
* UNL Dairy Store
* University of Nebraska State Museum (Morrill Hall) and Mueller Planetarium, Nebraska's only fulldome digital planetarium. 

===Annual events===
*Mid February: Abraham Lincoln Birthday Celebration 
*Late February or early March: Nebraska High School State Swimming & Diving Championships; Lincoln Polar Plunge 
*March: Nebraska high school state boys' and girls' basketball tournaments
*April: Lincoln Earth Day 
*Mid April: ConStellation Science Fiction Convention
*First Saturday in May: Mayor's Run 
*First Sunday in May: Lincoln National Guard Marathon and Half-Marathon View of Downtown Lincoln from the top of the Nebraska State Capitol
*Third Saturday in May: James Arthur Vineyards Renaissance Festival 
*May 13 to July 17: Live thoroughbred horse racing at Lincoln Race Course 
*Early May to late October: The Farmers' Market in the Haymarket district.
*Early June: Cornhusker Boys' State and Cornhusker Girls' State; Havelock Charity Run; Celebrate Lincoln 
*Mid June: Formula SAE Lincoln 
*Tuesday evenings in June: Jazz in June, an outdoor summer concert series
*Third Friday in June, July, and August: Dock Stock 
*Late June: International Thespian Festival of the International Thespian Society at the University of Nebraska-Lincoln; Trail Trek 
*July 3: Uncle Sam Jam 
*Thursday evenings in July: Movies on the Green, movies shown on the green space near Kimball Hall
*Second half of July: Cornhusker State Games (multi-location event) 
*Early August: Lancaster County Fair
*Second weekend in August: Capital City Ribfest
*Late August: Annual Zombie Walk and Zombie Fest; Nebraska Mud Run 
*Late August to late November: Nebraska Cornhuskers football
*Early September: Sports Car Club of America Solo National Championship Sports Car Club of America Website, Sports Car Club of America, Inc. Autocross
*Late September/Early October: Lincoln Calling  Music Festival.
*Second Saturday in October: Pumpkin Run; Market to Market Relay Nebraska 
*Late October: Boo at the Zoo 
*November: Nebraska high school state football championships at Memorial Stadium; Nebraska High School State Volleyball Championships (beginning in 2014 )
*November 11: Veteran's Day Walk of Recognition, program at Auld Recreation Center
*Second Sunday in December: Nebraska State Christmas Tree Lighting Ceremony and Carol Sing 

==Sports teams==
Lincoln is best known for the university's football team, the Nebraska Cornhuskers. In total, the University of Nebraska fields 24 men's and women's teams in 14 NCAA Division I sports. Other sports teams are the Nebraska Wesleyan Prairie Wolves, a GPAC & NCAA Division III independent University; the Lincoln Saltdogs, an American Association independent minor league baseball team; the Lincoln Stars, a USHL junior ice hockey team; the Lincoln Haymakers, a member of the Champions Professional Indoor Football League; the No Coast Derby Girls, a member of the Women's Flat Track Derby Association.

==Parks/Recreation==
Sunken Gardens.

Lincoln has an extensive park system, with over 125 individual parks. The parks are connected by a 131 mi system of recreational trails. The MoPac Trail extends through Lincoln.
* Hamann Rose Garden 
* Iron Horse Park in the Haymarket
* Nine Mile Prairie 
* Pioneers Park and the Pioneers Park Nature Center
* Sunken Gardens (nd) Sunken Gardens webpage. City of Lincoln. Retrieved July 6, 2007. 
* Union Plaza 
* Veterans Memorial Garden
* Wilderness Park

Additionally, there are Holmes Park, Oak Lake Park, Max E. Roper Park, Tierra Park, Antelope Park (which contains the Lincoln Children's Zoo, and the Bicentennial Cascade Fountain), and Mahoney Park.

==Law and government==
East side of Old City Hall in Lincoln, 1942
Lincoln has a mayor-council government. The mayor and a seven-member city council are selected in nonpartisan elections. Four members are elected from city council districts; the remaining three members are elected at-large. Lincoln's health, personnel, and planning departments are joint city/county agencies; most city and Lancaster County offices are located in the County/City Building.

Since Lincoln is the state capital, many Nebraska state agencies and offices are located in Lincoln, as are several United States Government agencies and offices. The Nebraska Air and Army National Guard's Joint Force Headquarters are located in Lincoln. The city lies within the Lincoln Public Schools school district; the primary law enforcement agency for the city is the Lincoln Police Department. The Lincoln Fire and Rescue Department shoulders the city's fire fighting and ambulatory services while outlying areas of the city are supported by volunteer fire fighting units.

The city's public library system is Lincoln City Libraries, which has eight branches. Lincoln City Libraries circulates more than three million items per year to the residents of Lincoln and Lancaster County. Lincoln City Libraries is also home to Polley Music Library and the Jane Pope Geske Heritage Room of Nebraska authors.

==Education==

===Primary and secondary education===
Lincoln Public Schools is the sole public school district in the city. There are six traditional high schools in the district: Lincoln High, East, Northeast, North Star, Southeast, and Southwest. Additionally, Lincoln Public Schools is home to special interest high schools including the Arts and Humanities Focus Program, the Zoo School, the Information Technology Focus Program, and the Entrepreneurship Focus Program.

There are several private parochial elementary and middle schools located throughout the community. These schools, like Lincoln Public Schools, are broken into districts, but most will allow attendance outside of boundary lines.

Private high schools located in Lincoln are College View Academy, Lincoln Christian, Lincoln Lutheran, Parkview Christian and Pius X High School.

===Colleges and universities===
The University of NebraskaLincoln, the flagship campus of the University of Nebraska system, is the largest university in Nebraska. Other colleges and universities based in Lincoln are: BryanLGH College of Health Sciences, Nebraska Wesleyan University, Southeast Community College and Union College.

Colleges and universities with satellite locations in Lincoln are Bellevue University, Concordia University, Nebraska, College of Saint Mary, Doane College, and Kaplan University.

Memorial Stadium

==Local media==

===Television===
H. P. Lau Building in Haymarket DistrictLincoln has four licensed broadcast television stations:
*KLKN (Channels 8 and 31; 8.1 DT)  ABC; LWN affiliate 8.2
*KOLN (Channel 10; 10.1 DT)  CBS affiliate; MyTV 10.2
*KUON (Channel 12; 12.1 DT)  PBS affiliate, NET Television flagship station; NET2 12.2, NET3 12.3 
*KFXL (Channel 51)  Fox
The headquarters of Nebraska Educational Telecommunications (NET), which is affiliated with the Public Broadcasting Service, National Public Radio and Public Radio International, are in Lincoln.

Lincoln is one of the few cities without its own NBC affiliate; Omaha's WOWT serves as the city's default NBC affiliate on cable, while Hastings' KHAS-TV is available in satellite locals packages. Most of Omaha's other television stations can also be picked up in Lincoln with an antenna, and all are available on cable.

Lincoln also has analog TV translators for 3ABN on channel 27 and TBN on channel 29.

===Radio===
There are 18 radio stations in Lincoln.

FM stations include:
*KLCV (88.5)  Religious talk
*KZUM (89.3)  Independent Community Radio
*KRNU (90.3)  Alternative / College radio UNL
*KUCV (91.1)  National Public Radio
*K220GT (91.9)  Contemporary Christian
*KTGL (92.9)  Classic Rock
*KNTK (93.7)  Sports
*K233AN (94.5)  Contemporary Christian
*KZKX (96.9)  Country
*KFGE (98.1)  Country
*KIBZ (104.1)  Active Rock
*KLNC (105.3)  Adult Hits
*KFRX (106.3)  Top-40
*KBBK (107.3)  Hot AC
*KJFT-LP (107.9)  Chinese-language Religious

AM stations include:
*KFOR (1240)  News/Talk
*KLIN (1400)  News/Talk
*KLMS (1480)  Sports Talk

Most areas of Lincoln also receive radio signals from Omaha and other surrounding communities.

===Print===
The Lincoln Journal Star is the city's major daily newspaper. The Daily Nebraskan is the official campus paper of the University of Nebraska-Lincoln. The DailyER Nebraskan is the University of Nebraska-Lincoln's biweekly satirical paper. The Clocktower is the official campus paper of Union College.

==Transportation==
The Eagle Fruit Store and Capitol Hotel in downtown Lincoln during the 1940s.

===Rail===
Amtrak provides service to Lincoln, operating its California Zephyr daily in each direction between Chicago and Emeryville, California, using BNSF's Lincoln - Denver route through Nebraska. Freight service is provided by BNSF Railway, the Union Pacific Railroad and Lincoln's own Omaha, Lincoln and Beatrice Railway Company. Lincoln was also once served by the Chicago, Rock Island and Pacific Railroad (Rock Island), the Missouri Pacific Railroad (MoPac) and the Chicago and North Western Transportation Company (C&NW) (most of the abandoned right-of-way of these former railroads have since been turned into bicycle trails).

===Bus===
A public bus transit system, StarTran, operates in Lincoln. StarTran's fleet consists of 60 full-sized buses and 9 Handi-Vans. Lincoln is also served by Black Hills Stage Lines for regional bus service between Omaha and Denver. 

===Air===
The Lincoln Airport (KLNK/LNK) provides passengers with daily non-stop service to United Airlines hubs O'Hare International Airport and Denver International Airport as well as Delta Air Lines hub Minneapolis-Saint Paul International Airport. Regional jet service on Delta Air Lines to Salt Lake City and Atlanta was discontinued in 2009. In the past Allegiant Air departed Wednesdays and Saturdays to McCarran International Airport in Las Vegas aboard their fleet of MD-80s. However, this service has ended in Lincoln and has been transferred to the Central Nebraska Regional Airport. General aviation support is provided through several private aviation companies. The Lincoln Airport was also among the emergency landing sites for the NASA Space Shuttle. The Lincoln Airport has the 3rd longest runway in the world. "Space Shuttle Emergency Landing Sites". GlobalSecurity.org. Retrieved 2013-11-27. 

===Highway===
Lincoln is served by 20px Interstate 80 via 7.5 interchanges, connecting the city to San Francisco and Teaneck, New Jersey. Other Highways that serve the Lincoln area are 25px Interstate 180, 20px U.S. Highway 6, 20px U.S. Highway 34, 20px U.S. Highway 77 and nearby 20px Nebraska Highway 79. 20px Nebraska Highway 2 (East) is a primary trucking route that connects Kansas City (Interstate 29) to the I-80 corridor in Lincoln. A few additional minor State Highway segments reside within the city as well. 

==Notable people==

*E.C. "Teddy Blue" Abbott, member of the Montana Cowboy Hall of Fame (District 6); author of We Pointed Them North: Recollections of a Cowpuncher (1939); born in Cranwich, England (1860); grew up in Lincoln 
*Nancy Coover Andreasen, prominent neuroscientist and neuropsychiatrist, was born in Lincoln
*Fred Beebe, professional baseball player for five MLB teams 
*Michael Biehn, actor
*Shawn Bouwens, former American football player in the National Football League, played professionally for the Detroit Lions and Jacksonville Jaguars 
*Dan Brown, video blogger and entertainer with over 250,000 daily subscribers
*Johnny Carson, television host and comedian, was raised in Norfolk, Nebraska, attended college at the University of NebraskaLincoln
*Joba Chamberlain, pitcher for New York Yankees and Detroit Tigers, was born in Lincoln and graduated from Lincoln Northeast High School
*Dick Cheney, Vice President of the United States under George W. Bush, was born in Lincoln, raised in Casper, Wyoming
*Amasa Cobb, U.S. Representative from Wisconsin
*Amy Sue Cooper, U.S. Model, and Playboy Cyber Girl of the Year 2005
*Richard Cowan, United States Army soldier during World War II and posthumous recipient of Medal of Honor
*Mary and David Doyle, sibling actors
*Mignon G. Eberhart, mystery novelist
*Loren Eiseley, anthropologist, science writer, ecologist, and poet
*Jane English, member of Arkansas State Senate from North Little Rock; born in Lincoln in 1940
*Alex Gordon, MLB player, was born and raised in Lincoln
*Bob Kerrey, 35th Governor of Nebraska and a U.S. Senator from Nebraska 
*Helen Klanderud, former Mayor of Aspen, Colorado, from 2001-07 
*Lars Krutak, tattoo anthropologist, writer, photographer
*Tosca Lee, award-winning Christian fiction author of Demon: A Memoir and Havah: The Story of Eve
*Louise Le Baron, opera singer and Lincoln voice teacher
*Verne Lewellen, NFL player for Green Bay Packers
*Gilbert N. Lewis, physical chemist known for discovery of covalent bond
*John L. Loos, historian of Lewis and Clark Expedition, reared in Lincoln and received degrees from University of Nebraska 
*Gordon MacRae, actor and singer
*Danny Noonan, NFL player for Dallas Cowboys and Green Bay Packers 
*Dirk Obbink, lecturer in papyrology and Greek Literature at Oxford University and head of Oxyrhynchus Papyri Project
*Roscoe Pound, legal scholar and educator
* John Bennett Ramsey, businessman, father of JonBent Ramsey
*James Lee Rankin, United States Solicitor General (195661) 
*Shawn Redhage, basketball player for Perth Wildcats, grew up in Lincoln, graduated from Lincoln East High School in 1999, represented Australia at 2008 Summer Olympics
*Barrett Ruud, NFL linebacker for New Orleans Saints
*Bo Ruud, NFL linebacker for Cleveland Browns
*Brandon Sanderson, fantasy author
*Lindsey Shaw, actress, played Jennifer Mosely on Nickelodeon's sitcom, Ned's Declassified School Survival Guide, and Claire Tolchuck in Aliens in America
*Samuel K. Sloan, news director for award-winning Slice of SciFi podcast and SiriusXM satellite program
*Ted Sorensen, President John F. Kennedys special counsel and adviser and speechwriter, whom Kennedy once called his intellectual blood bank
*Charles Starkweather, spree killer who murdered 11 victims in Nebraska and Wyoming during a road trip with his underage girlfriend Caril Ann Fugate
*Ryland Steen, drummer for ska punk band Reel Big Fish
*Alex Stivrins, NBA player for Seattle SuperSonics, Phoenix Suns, Los Angeles Clippers, Milwaukee Bucks, and Atlanta Hawks
*Hilary Swank, two-time Academy Awardwinning actress, was born in Lincoln
*Matthew Sweet, solo pop rock artist
*Brandon Teena, transgender murder victim, subject of Boys Don't Cry
*Janine Turner, actress, was born in Lincoln and raised in Texas
*James Valentine, guitarist for band Maroon 5, was born and raised in Lincoln
*Robert Van Pelt, U.S. District Judge in District of Nebraska
*VOTA, contemporary Christian rock band signed to INO records
*Milton I. Wick, organized a book business in Lincoln that employed college students to sell books to farmers enterprise expanded to Iowa, Missouri, and Kansas, employing more than 500 students; also founded Wick Communications
*Don Wilson, radio and TV announcer for Jack Benny
*Mary Zimmerman, award-winning theatre director and playwright

==Environment==
In 2014, the Lincoln-Beatrice area was among the "Cleanest U.S. Cities for Ozone Air Pollution" in the American Lung Association's "State of the Air 2014" report. 

==See also==

*List of people from Lincoln, Nebraska

==Notes==

==References==

==External links==

*City of Lincoln, Nebraska
*Downtown Lincoln
*ExploreLincoln
*Great Plains Trail Network
*Lincoln Airport
*Lincoln Convention and Visitors Bureau
*Lincoln Partnership for Economic Development
*A Virtual Tour of The Nebraska State Capitol Building on Roundus

 



[[Letterboxing (hobby)]]

Letterboxing is an outdoor hobby that combines elements of orienteering, art, and puzzle solving. Letterboxers hide small, weatherproof boxes in publicly accessible places (like parks) and distribute clues to finding the box in printed catalogs, on one of several web sites, or by word of mouth. Individual letterboxes contain a notebook and a rubber stamp, preferably hand carved or custom made. Finders make an imprint of the letterbox's stamp in their personal notebook, and leave an impression of their personal signature stamp on the letterbox's "visitors' book" or "logbook"  as proof of having found the box and letting other letterboxers know who has visited. Many letterboxers keep careful track of their "find count".

==History==
The origin of letterboxing can be traced to Dartmoor, Devon, England in 1854. William Crossing in his Guide to Dartmoor states that a well known Dartmoor guide (James Perrott ) placed a bottle for visiting cards at Cranmere Pool on the northern moor in 1854. From this hikers on the moors began to leave a letter or postcard inside a box along the trail (sometimes addressed to themselves, sometimes a friend or relative)hence the name "letterboxing". The next person to discover the site would collect the postcards and post them. In 1938 a plaque and letterbox in Crossing's memory were placed at Duck's Pool on southern Dartmoor. 

The first Dartmoor letterboxes were so remote and well-hidden that only the most determined walkers would find them, allowing weeks to pass before the letter made its way home. Until the 1970s there were no more than a dozen such sites around the moor, usually in the most inaccessible locations. Increasingly, however, letterboxes have been located in relatively accessible sites and today there are thousands of letterboxes, many within easy walking distance of the road. As a result, the tradition of leaving a letter or postcard in the box has been forgotten.

Alec Finlay rubber stamp letterbox poem: "There is a fork in every path".

Today there is a club called the "100 Club", membership of which is open to anyone who has found at least 100 letterboxes on Dartmoor. Clues to the locations of letterboxes are published by the "100 Club" in an annual catalogue. Some letterboxes however remain "word of mouth" and the clues to their location can only be obtained from the person who placed the box. Some clues may also be found in other letterboxes or on the Internet, but this is more commonly for letterboxes in places other than Dartmoor, where no "100 Club" or catalogue exist. 

Letterboxing has become a popular sport, with thousands of walkers gathering for 'box-hunts' and while in some areas of Dartmoor it is particularly popular amongst children, some of the more difficult to find boxes and tougher terrain are better suited to more experienced adults.

Letterboxes can now be found in other areas of the United Kingdom including the North York Moors and have spread all over the world. The Scottish artist Alec Finlay has placed letterboxes with rubber stamp circle poems at locations around the world, including Yorkshire Sculpture Park.

Interest in letterboxing in the U.S. is generally considered to have started with a feature article in the Smithsonian Magazine Smithsonian Magazine in April 1998. Much of the terminology below is associated with letterboxing in the US and would be unfamiliar to UK letterboxers. The growing popularity of the somewhat similar activity of geocaching during the 2000s has increased interest in letterboxing as well.
Clues to American letterboxes are commonly published on several different websites.

==Gatherings==

Letterboxers organize events, usually called meets or gatherings. The first letterbox meet was held on Dartmoor, and they are now held twice yearly on "clock change days" (in March and October). Gatherings in the US are usually at parks or places with enough space for a large group of letterboxers to meet up and do exchanges (exchanging of personal stamps and/or personal travelers), as well as talk and discuss box ideas. Gatherings in the US usually have a special, one day "Event stamp." At some gatherings, boxes are created or donated to be planted nearby specifically for the gathering attendees to find.

The first gathering in North America was held in November, 1999, at The Inn at Long Trail in Killington, Vermont.

==Types==
There are now many different kinds of letterboxes, each with some specific distinction. While purists recognize only those letterboxes planted in the wild, many new variations exist. These include:
; Traditional Box
: A normal letterbox, hidden and uses clue to find it.

; Mystery box
: These are usually traditional boxes, but these "mystery" boxes have either vague starting areas, no starting areas, no descriptions, no clue -- any number of things to make the box extremely hard to find.

;Bonus Box
:The clues for these are usually found in a traditional box as an extra one to find. Usually planted in the same area as the traditional that hosts its clue. Clues can be distributed in any way.

;Word of Mouth Box (WOM) 
:The clue is given by word of mouth, or typed up, but a letterboxer can only receive the clue from the planter.

;Cuckoo clue
:A clue without a home. The clue is hidden in another letterbox (similar to clues for a bonus boxes), but the letterboxer that finds the clue is expected to move the clue to another nearby letterbox. The cuckoo clue typically contains directions to limit how far the clue should travel to find a new home.

; Hitchhiker 
: A traveling letterbox, it is placed in a traditional letterbox for another letterboxer to find. When found, it is stamped just like a traditional letterbox, but is then carried by the letterboxer to the next letterbox they find and then left in that letterbox for the next finder. The hitchhiker's stamp should also be recorded in the host letterbox's logbook, and vice versa.

; Personal Traveler
: Much like a traditional box, but instead of being planted, the box is kept with the creator at all times. If another letterboxer is met on the trail or at a meet it is attainable if requested. In the US this box is usually only attainable if the other letterboxer knows the password or passphrase which is sometimes cryptic, straightforward, almost non-existent, or silly.

In the US, letterboxes have developed new forms:

; Cootie
: Much like a hitchhiker, except instead of being carried from letterbox to letterbox, a letterboxer passes it to another letterboxer. It can be passed in a Personal Traveler, or planted on another letterboxer or their unattended bags on the trails or at gatherings. Most people are subtle about planting thembut not all.

;Flea
:Like a combination of a hitchhiker and a cootie. Either put in a traditional letterbox, like a hitchhiker, or put it on a person, like a cootie.

; Hitchhiker Hostel
: This is a traditional letterbox with special qualities. Namely, it is a "hostel" for hitchhikers, sized and specially designated to hold multiple hitchhikers at one time. Normally, there are at least one or two hitchhikers in the box at all times, and any letterboxer who takes a hitchhiker out is required to leave a new one in its place. A hitchhiker hostel has its own stamp and logbook, just like a traditional letterbox, and any hitchhiker that is placed within it should be stamped and recorded within the logbook, preferably with both the date of its being added to the hostel (in order to make it easier to move the older hitchhikers out), and the date it is removed.

; American Parasite (these should not be confused with English Parasites)
: A parasite is very much like a hitchhiker except, instead of being carried by a letterboxer between letterboxes on its own, it is carried along with a hitchhiker. When a letterboxer joins a parasite to a hitchhiker ("infecting" it), it is stamped into the hitchhiker. The parasite's stamp is also recorded in the logbook of the letterbox that a hitchhiker is placed in, "infecting" the letterbox, as well. In the event of being placed in a letterbox that has multiple hitchhikers in it (such as a hitchhiker hostel), the parasite "infects" all of the hitchhikers inside. The letterboxer that has done the moving also has the choice of sending the parasite along with a different hitchhiker. (This is a relatively new variation of letterbox, and has only just recently begun to take off.)

; Virtual
: Online letterboxes; actually a scavenger hunt of sorts for an image of a letterbox through different websites, collecting answers to questions posted as the clues to the box. Answers sometimes are unscrambled or simply emailed to the creator the final answer is put in a blank in a web address, which takes the finder to an image of the letterbox online.

; Limited time Box
: A letterbox that has only been planted for a short amount of time. (A few days or a week, any time length the planter wants.)

; Postal (PLB) 
: Boxes that are made just like traditional letterboxes, but instead of being planted in the wild, they are sent via postal mail to the people on sign up lists for the box, or around a "ring" of people in a postal ring, which is usually focused on a theme of some sort. Postals are also very often very well designed and organized, as well as ornate. Since the box is very unlikely to be stolen, go missing, or be damaged, creators of PLBs tend to get quite creative.

;Other
:Anything not described as any of the above listings. They could be bonus stamps inside boxes, a stamp you just have to ask for, etc.

; Circle poem
: A circle poem is a kind of 'art' letterbox developed in Britain. There are one hundred planned boxes, each of which contains a rubber stamp circle poem by the Scottish poet and artist, Alec Finlay. These are sited at locations around the world, and each has its own nominated keeper.

==Find counts==

A letterboxer's find count or PFX count is organized as follows:

*The P ("plants") count is the number of boxes the letterboxer has made and placed. 
*The F ("finds") count is the number of boxes the letterboxer has found in the wild. 
*The X ("exchanges") count is the number of exchanges the letterboxer has.

Some boxers list individual types of boxes in their PFX counts (e.g.: P12 F76 X45 E4 HH21 V4 would mean 12 plants, 76 finds, 45 exchanges, four events or event stamps, 21 hitchhikers, and four virtuals). Some include virtuals, hitchhikers, and other non-traditional boxes in a single find count, while some exclude them. Many letterboxers do not bother to keep count at all.

The "PFX count" is not a term associated with Dartmoor Letterboxing.

==See also==
* BookCrossing
* Encounter (game)
* Geocaching
* Orienteering
* Puzzlehunt
* Questing

==Further reading==
* Anne Swinscow has written several popular guide books on Dartmoor Letterboxing: Dartmoor Letterboxes ISBN 0-9509114-2-9; More Dartmoor Letterboxes ISBN 0-9509114-1-0 ; 101 Dartmoor Letterboxes: But Not How to Find Them! (with John Howard) ISBN 0-9509114-3-7.
*Janet Palmer has writtern a brief guide to Dartmoor Letterboxing: Let's Go Letterboxing: A Beginner's Guide (2nd revised edition) ISBN 1-898964-33-5.
* Alan Rowland has written a specialised guide to the letterboxes on Lundy published in 2006 ( the 20th Anniversary of) Lundy Letterboxes ISBN 0-9506117-8-4 
* The Letterboxer's Companion by Randy Hall was published in 2003 and focuses on letterboxing in North America; ISBN 0-7627-2794-2.
* Cranmere Pool: The First Dartmoor Letterbox by Chips Barber published by Obelisk Publications, UK (1994); ISBN 978-1-899073-03-0.
* Alec Finlay has published two booklets on circle poem letterboxing: Isles, Arcs & Ways (Isle of Thanet, England, 2005), ISBN 19044770404 ; and Hill of Streams (Cairnhead, Scotland, 2008).

==References==

==External links==
* Atlas Quest: Letterboxing listing database, forums and information site
* Letterboxing North America listing site



[[Legal technicality]]

The term legal technicality is a casual or colloquial phrase referring to a technical aspect of law. The phrase is not a term of art in the law; it has no exact meaning, nor does it have a legal definition. It implies that strict adherence to the letter of the law has prevented the spirit of the law from being enforced. However, as a vague term, the definition of a technicality varies from person to person, and it is often simply used to denote any portion of the law that interferes with the outcome desired by the user of the term. An example: In the case of U.S. v. Shipp, 214 US 386 (1909), the U.S. Supreme Court quoted a local newspaper as follows: 
*In the News, published the evening of March 19, there was an editorial reviewing the local proceedings, which concluded: 'All of this delay is aggravating to the community. The people of Chattanooga believe that Johnson is guilty, and that he ought to suffer the penalty of the law as speedily as possible. If by legal technicality the case is prolonged and the culprit finally escapes, there will be no use to plead with a mob here if another such crime is committed. Such delays are largely responsible for mob violence all over the country.'(U.S. v. SHIPP, 1909) The newspaper plainly was using the phrase "legal technicality" to refer to technical aspects of the law which the newspaper's editorial staff saw as an obstacle to its preferred outcome. 

Some legal technicalities govern legal procedure, enable or restrict access to courts, and/or enable or limit the discretion of a court in handing down judgment. These are aspects of procedural law. Other legal technicalities deal with aspects of substantive law, that is, aspects of the law that articulate specific criteria that a court uses to assess a party's compliance with or violation of, for example, one or more criminal laws or civil laws. In the U.S., for example, the Supreme Court has used the informal phrase "legal technicality" in its decisions 13 times in the last century. In every case the use of the words refers to merely "technicalities of the law". The three most recent uses are illustrative:
*(1) The function of counsel as a guide through complex legal technicalities long has been recognized by this Court. (U.S. v. Ash, 1973)
*(2) Furthermore, during the federal habeas corpus hearing Davis showed his awareness of legal technicalities.(used in a footnote, Davis v. North Carolina, 1966)
*(3) If recovery were denied in this case, the railroads, by the simple expedient of doing each other's work, could tie their employees up in legal technicalities..." (Shenker v. Baltimore and Ohio R.Co., 1963) 

==See also==
* Legal abuse
* Letter and spirit of the law
* Loophole

==References==



[[Lionhead Studios]]

Lionhead Studios is a British video game developer, formerly led by Peter Molyneux. It was acquired by Microsoft Studios in April 2006. Lionhead started as a breakaway from the developer Bullfrog, which was also founded by Molyneux. Lionhead's first game was Black & White, a god game with elements of artificial life and strategy games. Black & White was published by Electronic Arts in 2001. Lionhead Studios is named after Mark Webley's hamster, which died not long after the naming of the studio.

Black and White was followed up with the release of an expansion pack named . Lionhead then released the popular Fable, from satellite developer Big Blue Box. In 2005, Lionhead released The Movies and Black & White 2. On 6 April 2006, it was announced that Lionhead Studios was to be purchased by Microsoft. Their most recent game to be released is which was released on the 9 October 2012.

Milo and Kate was being developed for Kinect, though speculation arose concerning whether it was actually a game or a tech demo. Production has since been halted.

==Corporate structure==
For a period of three years, Lionhead established satellite companies, including Big Blue Box Studios (developers of Fable), Intrepid Games (developers of B.C., since suspended due to a massive overrun) and Black & White Studios (who have taken responsibility for the continuation of the Black & White series). Lionhead proper was working on three games: Fable, B&W2 and The Movies.

The "satellite" system has ceased to exist in any meaningful form since mid-2004, however, with Big Blue Box having been more or less integrated into the main company, and Intrepid essentially having been disbanded.

Lionhead was a privately held company until October 2004 (shortly before the suspension of B.C.) when a consortium of investors, including Ingenious Ventures, IDG Ventures Europe, and technology firm Add Partners, made a significant investment into the developer. This at a time when the company was in severe financial straits, as they had overrun development on two projects, Black & White 2 and Fable, and also canceled B.C. and a project with Jeff Minter named Unity.

Between September 2005 and April 2006, Lionhead successfully released two titles, Black & White 2 and The Movies, as well as an updated version of Fable (entitled (video game)#Fable: The Lost Chapters|Fable: The Lost Chapters]). These titles did not achieve a massive impact in sales, and this left the company vulnerable to a takeover bid. 

In April 2006 Lionhead Studios was acquired by Microsoft, signalling the end of independent development, and a focus on Microsoft's proprietary gaming platforms. Lionhead is a fairly independent part of Microsoft Studios, which has also acquired Rare Ltd. and Bungie Studios (Bungie Studios became an independent studio in late 2007, shortly after the release of Halo 3).

==Delays==
Lionhead has received a lot of media attention for delays to their games, in part due to the large amount of publicity and hype generated for their games. Various reports on this indicate a company tendency to re-design games mid-development and a tendency toward over-ambition, though few reports are official. The company is always on the cutting edge of developing new technology, especially in the area of AI, which adds considerably to their development schedules. Peter Molyneux, who often refers to himself as either the lead designer or creative director of Lionhead, often promises specific release dates early on in the development of his titles. This causes particular problems and disappointment among fans as many release dates are pushed back, sometimes more than once. Black & White missed several deadlines until it was finally released in 2001. A similar problem occurred with the release of The Movies which was intended for a 2004 release date but was eventually delayed to 2005.

==Criticism of pre-release changes==
Leading up to several Lionhead Studio game releases, Peter Molyneux's enthusiasm for talking openly about the development and design process of his games caused outcry online when certain features did not make it or were changed during development. He made a rule that he would not talk about game mechanics unless he could show them in game or present certain ideas as prototypes and/or experiments. 

Several products such as Black and White 2 and Fable had features changed or lacking in the final product.

Peter Molyneux said the following on the issue:

After Fable, there was a pretty dark time where people looked at the game and compared it with what I said in the press, and they felt cheated. I realised that we just couldn't keep on doing that. But that was very much a reflection of how we worked, because what I was talking about in the press was what we were experimenting with at that moment, and a lot of those experiments would sort of come out as you were making the game. So I'd be talking about trees growing, and then we'd cut trees growing, and people would, of course, feel cheated. So I made a rule: I will not talk about any concrete mechanics unless I can actually show you them in game. I'll talk about our ambitions to make the best role-playing game of all time, but if you see Fable 2 press you'll see that I talked about stuff as I demoed it. People understandably get enormously upset about it&mdash;it's like seeing a trailer for a film and seeing Batman die, but then he doesn't die in the film; it would just be wrong. So I think a lot of what we do is realise what weve done wrong and work to try and make that right. It's far better than thinking that we get things right all the time. 

==Awards==
* BAFTA Awards
** (2001) NominatedBritish Academy Awards for Games Networked / Black & White
** (2001) NominatedBritish Academy Awards for Best Original Score / Black & White
** (2001) WinnerBritish Academy Awards for Interactivity / Black & White
** (2001) NominatedBritish Academy Awards for Technical Innovation / Black & White
** (2001) NominatedBritish Academy Awards for Games PC / Black & White
** (2001) NominatedBritish Academy Awards for Music / Black & White
** (2001) NominatedBritish Academy Awards for Moving Images / Black & White
** (2004) Nominated British Academy Awards for Best Original Score / Fable 
** (2005) WinnerBritish Academy Awards for Simulation / The Movies
** (2006) Nominated British Academy Awards for Best Original Score / The Movies
** (2009) WinnerBritish Academy Awards for Action and Adventure / Fable II
** (2009) NominatedBritish Academy Awards for Best Game / Fable II
** (2009) NominatedBritish Academy Awards for Best Original Score / Fable II
** (2009) NominatedBritish Academy Awards for Story and Character / Fable II
** (2009) NominatedBritish Academy Awards for Technical Achievement / Fable II
** (2011) NominatedBritish Academy Awards for Best Original Score / Fable III

* Interactive Achievement Awards
** (2004) Peter Molyneux inducted into AIAS Hall of Fame
** (2004) Winner for Best Original Score / Fable
** (2005) FinalistOutstanding Achievement in Character / Story Development / Fable
** (2005) FinalistOutstanding Achievement in Original Music Composition / Fable
** (2005) WinnerPlay Magazine Overall Game of the Year / Fable
** (2009) FinalistOutstanding Achievement in Art Direction / Fable II
** (2009) FinalistOutstanding Achievement in Original Story / Fable II
** (2009) FinalistOutstanding Achievement in Game Design / Fable II
** (2009) Nominee for Best Original Score / Fable II
** (2009) FinalistOutstanding Achievement in Game Play Engineering / Fable II
** (2009) FinalistRole Playing Game of the Year / Fable II

* Others
** (2004) Winner1UP Awards Best of 2004 Best RPG / Fable
** (2004) WinnerIGN.com Best Original Score / Fable
** (2008) WinnerPETAs Annual Proggy Awards Most Animal-Friendly Video Game / Fable II
** (2009) WinnerIGN.com Best Original Score / Fable II

==Games==

Release Date Title(s) Genre(s) Platform(s) 
 2001 Black & White Real-time strategy, God game Microsoft Windows, Mac OS X 
 2002 Real-time strategy, God game Microsoft Windows, Mac OS X 
 2004 Fable Action role-playing game Xbox 
 2005 Fable: The Lost Chapters] Action role-playing game Microsoft Windows, Mac OS X, Xbox 
 2005 Black & White 2 Real-time strategy, God game Microsoft Windows, Mac OS X 
 2005 The Movies Business simulation game Microsoft Windows, Mac OS X 
 2006 Real-time strategy, God game Microsoft Windows, Mac OS X 
 2006 Business simulation game Microsoft Windows, Mac OS X 
 2008 Fable II Action role-playing game Xbox 360 
 2010 Fable III Action role-playing game, Simulation Microsoft Windows, Xbox 360 
 2012 Fable Heroes Action-adventure game Xbox 360 (Xbox Live Arcade) 
 2012 Action-adventure game Xbox 360 
 2014 Action role-playing game Xbox 360 
 TBA Fable Legends Real-time strategy, Action Xbox One 
 TBA Unannounced Non Fable Game http://www.eurogamer.net/articles/2014-01-21-yes-lionhead-is-working-on-something-that-isnt-fable-esque TBA TBA 

===Cancelled===
* Unity (GameCube)
* B.C. (Xbox)
* Black & White: Titan (Xbox, PlayStation 2)
* Black & White (PlayStation, Dreamcast)
* The Movies (GameCube, Xbox, PlayStation 2)
* Milo & Kate (Xbox 360 Kinect)
* Fable II (PC)

Peter Molyneux also discussed Justice and Survivor during an IGN interview. These projects never made it out of the concept stage. 

==Notes and references==

==External links==
* Lionhead Studios
* About Lionhead

 



[[Litigant]]

#Redirect lawsuit

[[Leading question]]

In common law systems that rely on testimony by witnesses, a leading question or suggestive interrogation is a question that suggests the particular answer or contains the information the examiner is looking to have confirmed. Their use is restricted in eliciting testimony in court, to reduce the ability of the examiner to direct or influence the evidence presented. Depending on the circumstances, leading questions can be objectionable or proper.

For example, this question is leading:
* Were you at KC's bar on the night of July 15?
It suggests what location the witness visited on the night in question. The same question in a non-leading form would be:
* Where were you on the night of July 15?
This form of question does not suggest to the witness the answer the examiner hopes to elicit. Leading questions might instead name a particular person rather than asking "who?", indicate a specific time rather than asking "when?", and so on.

Leading questions may often be answerable with a yes or no (though not all yes-no questions are leading). The propriety of leading questions generally depends on the relationship of the witness to the party conducting the examination. An examiner may generally ask leading questions of a hostile witness or on cross-examination (to elicit testimony which the witness might be reluctant to volunteer), but not on direct examination (to "coach" the witness to provide a particular answer).

Leading questions are distinct from loaded questions, which are objectionable because they contain implicit assumptions (such as "Have you stopped beating your wife?" indirectly asserting that the subject has beaten her at some point).

== Propriety ==

=== United States ===
While each state has its own rules of evidence, many states model their rules on the Federal Rules of Evidence, which themselves relate closely to the common-law mode of examination. Rule 611(c) of the Federal Rules of Evidence provides that:

:Leading questions should not be used on the direct examination of a witness except as may be necessary to develop the witness' testimony. Ordinarily leading questions should be permitted on cross-examination. When a party calls a hostile witness, an adverse party, or a witness identified with an adverse party, interrogation may be by leading questions.

Leading questions are the primary mode of examination of witnesses who are hostile to the examining party, and are not objectionable in that context. Examination of hostile witnesses usually takes place on cross-examination. As the rule recognizes, the examination of a "hostile witness, an adverse party, or a witness identified with an adverse party" will sometimes take place on direct examination, and leading questions are permitted.

In practice, judges will sometimes permit leading questions on direct examination of friendly witnesses with respect to preliminary matters that are necessary to provide background or context, and which are not in dispute; for example, a witness's employment or education. Leading questions may also be permitted on direct examination when a witness requires special handling, for example a child. However, the court must take care to be sure that the examining attorney is not coaching the witness through leading questions.

Although Rule 611(c) of the Federal Rules of Evidence (and comparable rules of many states) do not prohibit leading questions on re-direct, some states have expressly limited the use of leading questions on re-direct. As a practical matter, it rests within the trial court's discretion as to what leading questions may be asked on re-direct. Generally speaking, leading questions will be more liberally permitted on re-direct in order to establish a foundation and call the attention of the witness to specific testimony elicited on cross examination. Additionally, on re-direct, an interrogator will often ask questions which specifically seek to elicit whether an inference resulting from questioning on cross examinations is accurate. Although these type of questions will likely result in a "yes" or "no" response, they are properly understood to be direct questions, not leading questions, and are permissible.

== Exceptions to the no-leading-questions rule ==
# Where the witness is hostile to the examiner, or reluctant or unwilling to testify, in which situation the witness is unlikely to accept being "coached" by the questioner.
# To bring out preliminary matters (name, occupation, and other pedigree information).
# Where the memory of the witness has been exhausted and there is still information to be elicited.
# In a sensitive area, to avoid the witness from testifying to incompetent or prejudicial matter.

== See also ==
* Suggestive question, similar to leading question but manipulates the respondent to answer in a specific way.
* Fallacy of many questions
* Loaded question
* Push poll: push polling

== References ==

== External links ==
*Federal Rules of Evidence - Rule 611(c)
*The Straight Dope Mailbag: "What is a hostile witness?"



[[Lithuania]]

Lithuania (; ), officially the Republic of Lithuania (), is a country in Northern Europe, the largest of the three Baltic states. It is situated along the southeastern shore of the Baltic Sea, to the east of Sweden and Denmark. It borders Latvia to the north, Belarus to the east and south, Poland to the south, and Kaliningrad Oblast (a Russian exclave) to the southwest. Lithuania has an estimated population of 3 million as of 2013, and its capital and largest city is Vilnius. Lithuanians are a Baltic people. The official language, Lithuanian, and Latvian are the only two living languages in the Baltic branch of the Indo-European language family.

For centuries, the southeastern shore of the Baltic Sea was inhabited by various Baltic tribes. In the 1230s, the Lithuanian lands were united by Mindaugas, the King of Lithuania, and the first unified Lithuanian state, the Kingdom of Lithuania, was created on 6 July 1253. During the 14th century, the Grand Duchy of Lithuania was the largest country in Europe; present-day Lithuania, Belarus, Ukraine, and parts of Poland and Russia were the territories of the Grand Duchy. With the Lublin Union of 1569, Lithuania and Poland formed a voluntary two-state union, the PolishLithuanian Commonwealth. The Commonwealth lasted more than two centuries, until neighboring countries systematically dismantled it from 177295, with the Russian Empire annexing most of Lithuania's territory.

As World War I neared its end, Lithuania's Act of Independence was signed on 16 February 1918, declaring the establishment of a sovereign State of Lithuania. Starting in 1940, Lithuania was occupied first by the Soviet Union and then by Nazi Germany. As World War II neared its end in 1944 and the Germans retreated, the Soviet Union reoccupied Lithuania. On 11 March 1990, a year before formal break-up of the Soviet Union, Lithuania became the first Soviet republic to declare the restoration of independent State of Lithuania.

Lithuania is a member of the European Union, the Council of Europe, a full member of the Schengen Agreement and NATO. It is also a member of the Nordic Investment Bank, and part of Nordic-Baltic cooperation of Northern European countries. The United Nations Human Development Index lists Lithuania as a "very high human development" country. Lithuania has been among the fastest growing economies in the European Union and is ranked 17th in the world in the Ease of Doing Business Index.

== History ==

=== Prehistoric ===

The first people settled in the territory of Lithuania after the last glacial period in the 10th millennium BC. Over a millennium, the Proto-Indo-Europeans, who arrived in the 3rd  2nd millennium BC, mixed with the local population and formed various Baltic tribes. The first written mention of Lithuania is found in a medieval German manuscript, the Annals of Quedlinburg, in an entry dated 9 March 1009. 

=== Medieval ===
Initially inhabited by fragmented Baltic tribes, in the 1230s the Lithuanian lands were united by Mindaugas, who was crowned as King of Lithuania on 6 July 1253. Tomas Baranauskas. Lietuvos karalystei  750. 2001. After his assassination in 1263, pagan Lithuania was a target of the Christian crusades of the Teutonic Knights and the Livonian Order. Despite the devastating century-long struggle with the Orders, the Grand Duchy of Lithuania expanded rapidly, overtaking former Slavic principalities of Kievan Rus'.

By the end of the 14th century, Lithuania was one of the largest countries in Europe and included present-day Belarus, Ukraine, and parts of Poland and Russia. Paul Magocsi. History of the Ukraine. University of Toronto Press, 1996. p.128 The geopolitical situation between the west and the east determined the multicultural and multi-confessional character of the Grand Duchy of Lithuania. The ruling elite practiced religious tolerance and borrowed Chancery Slavonic language as an auxiliary language to the Latin for official documents.
Trakai Island Castle
Battle of Grunwald and Vytautas the Great in the centre

In 1385, the Grand Duke Jogaila accepted Poland's offer to become its king. Jogaila embarked on gradual Christianization of Lithuania and established a personal union between Poland and Lithuania. It implied that Lithuania, the fiercely independent land, was one of the last pagan areas of Europe to adopt Christianity.

After two civil wars, Vytautas the Great became the Grand Duke of Lithuania in 1392. During his reign, Lithuania reached the peak of its territorial expansion, centralization of the state began, and the Lithuanian nobility became increasingly prominent in state politics. In the great Battle of the Vorskla River in 1399, the combined forces of Tokhtamysh and Vytautas were defeated by the Mongols. Thanks to close cooperation, the armies of Lithuania and Poland achieved a great victory over the Teutonic Knights in 1410 at the Battle of Grunwald, one of the largest battles of medieval Europe. The New Encyclopdia Britannica v. 17 (1998) p. 545 

After the deaths of Jogaila and Vytautas, the Lithuanian nobility attempted to break the union between Poland and Lithuania, independently selecting Grand Dukes from the Jagiellon dynasty. But, at the end of the 15th century, Lithuania was forced to seek a closer alliance with Poland when the growing power of the Grand Duchy of Moscow threatened Lithuania's Russian principalities and sparked the MuscoviteLithuanian Wars and the Livonian War.

=== Modern ===
Map showing changes in the territory of Lithuania from the 13th century to the present day.
The PolishLithuanian Commonwealth was created in 1569. As a member of the Commonwealth, Lithuania retained its institutions, including a separate army, currency, and statutory laws. Stone, Daniel. The PolishLithuanian State: 13861795. University of Washington Press, 2001. p. 63 Eventually Polonization affected all aspects of Lithuanian life: politics, language, culture, and national identity. From the mid-16th to the mid-17th centuries, culture, arts, and education flourished, fueled by the Renaissance and the Protestant Reformation. From 1573, the Kings of Poland and Grand Dukes of Lithuania were elected by the nobility, who were granted ever increasing Golden Liberties. These liberties, especially the liberum veto, led to anarchy and the eventual dissolution of the state.

During the Northern Wars (16551661), the Lithuanian territory and economy were devastated by the Swedish army. Before it could fully recover, Lithuania was ravaged during the Great Northern War (17001721). The war, a plague, and a famine caused the deaths of approximately 40% of the country's population. Foreign powers, especially Russia, became dominant in the domestic politics of the Commonwealth. Numerous factions among the nobility used the Golden Liberties to prevent any reforms. Eventually, the Commonwealth was partitioned in 1772, 1792, and 1795 by the Russian Empire, Prussia, and Habsburg Austria.

The largest area of Lithuanian territory became part of the Russian Empire. After unsuccessful uprisings in 1831 and 1863, the Tsarist authorities implemented a number of Russification policies. They banned the Lithuanian press, closed cultural and educational institutions, and made Lithuania part of a new administrative region called Northwestern Krai. The Russification failed owing to an extensive network of book smugglers and secret Lithuanian home schooling.

After the Russo-Turkish War (18771878), when German diplomats assigned what were seen as Russian spoils of war to Turkey, the relationship between Russia and the German Empire became complicated. The Russian Empire resumed the construction of fortresses at its western borders for defence against a potential invasion from Germany in the West. On 7 July 1879 the Russian Emperor Alexander II approved of a proposal from the Russian military leadership to build the largest "first-class" defensive structure in the entire state  the 65 km2 Kaunas Fortress. Large numbers of Lithuanians went to the United States in 18671868 after a famine. A Lithuanian National Revival laid the foundations of the modern Lithuanian nation and independent Lithuania.

=== 20th and 21st centuries ===
The original 20 members of the Council of Lithuania after signing the Act of Independence of Lithuania, 16 February 1918.

During World War I, the Council of Lithuania (Lietuvos Taryba) declared the independence of Lithuania and the re-establishment of the Lithuanian State on 16 February 1918. Lithuania's foreign policy was dominated by territorial disputes with Poland and Germany. The Vilnius Region and Vilnius, the historical capital of Lithuania (and so designated in the Constitution of Lithuania), were seized by the Polish army during eligowski's Mutiny in October 1920 and annexed two years later by Poland. For 19 years Kaunas became the temporary capital of Lithuania. The Polish occupation of Vilnius was greatly resented by Lithuania; there were no diplomatic relations between the two states for most of the period between the two World Wars.

Acquired during the Klaipda Revolt of 1923, the Klaipda Region was ceded to Germany after a German ultimatum in March 1939. During the interwar period, the domestic affairs of Lithuania were controlled by the authoritarian President, Antanas Smetona and his party, the Lithuanian Nationalist Union, who came to power after the coup d'tat of 1926.

The Soviet Union returned Vilnius to Lithuania after the Soviet invasion of Eastern Poland in September 1939. In June 1940, the Soviet Union occupied and annexed Lithuania in accordance to the secret protocols of MolotovRibbentrop Pact. A year later the Soviet Union was attacked by Nazi Germany, leading to the Nazi occupation of Lithuania. The Nazis and their collaborators murdered around 190,000 Jews of Lithuania (91% of the pre-war Jewish community) during the Holocaust.

After the retreat of the German armed forces, the Soviets re-established the annexation of Lithuania in 1944. Under border changes promulgated at the Potsdam Conference in 1945, the former German Memelland, with its Baltic port Memel (Lithuanian: Klaipda), was again transferred to Lithuania, or as it was after 1945 the Lithuanian SSR. Most German residents of the area had fled in the final months of World War II.

The Soviets engaged in massive deportations of Lithuanians to Siberia, Andres Kng (13 April 1999) . A Report to the Jarl Hjalmarson Foundation seminar. complete nationalisation and collectivisation and general sovietization of everyday life. From 1944 to 1952 approximately 100,000 Lithuanian partisans fought a guerrilla war against the Soviet system. An estimated 30,000 partisans and their supporters were killed, and many more were arrested and deported to Siberian gulags. It is estimated that Lithuania lost 780,000 people during World War II. 

The advent of perestroika and glasnost in the late 1980s allowed the establishment of Sjdis, an anti-Communist independence movement. After a landslide victory in elections to the Supreme Soviet, members of Sjdis proclaimed Lithuania's independence on 11 March 1990, becoming the first Soviet republic to do so. The Soviet Union attempted to suppress the secession by imposing an economic blockade. Soviet troops attacked the Vilnius TV Tower, killing 14 Lithuanian civilians and wounding 600 others on the night of 13 January 1991 (January Events). On 31 July 1991 Soviet paramilitaries killed seven Lithuanian border guards on the Belarusian border in what became known as the Medininkai Massacre.

On 4 February 1991, Iceland became the first country to recognise Lithuanian independence. After the Soviet August Coup, independent Lithuania received wide official recognition and joined the United Nations on 17 September 1991. The last Soviet troops left Lithuania on 31 August 1993  even earlier than they departed from East Germany. Lithuania, seeking closer ties with the West, applied for NATO membership in 1994. After a transition from a planned economy to a free market one, Lithuania became a full member of NATO and the European Union in the spring of 2004 and a member of the Schengen Agreement on 21 December 2007.

== Geography ==

The Geographic Centre of Europe is in Lithuania
Lithuania lies in Northern Europe, on the eastern shores of the Baltic Sea

Lithuania is located in Northern Europe. It covers an area of 65200 km2. The country lies between latitudes 53 and 57 N, and mostly between longitudes 21 and 27 E (part of the Curonian Spit lies west of 21). It has around 99 km of sandy coastline, of which only about 38 km face the open Baltic Sea and which is the shortest among the Baltic Sea countries; the rest of the coast is sheltered by the Curonian sand peninsula. Lithuania's major warm-water port, Klaipda, lies at the narrow mouth of the Curonian Lagoon (Lithuanian: Kuri marios), a shallow lagoon extending south to Kaliningrad. The main and largest river, the Nemunas River, and some of its tributaries carry international shipping.

Lithuania lies at the edge of North European Plain. Its landscape has been smoothed by the glaciers of the last ice age. Lithuania's terrain is an alternation of moderate lowlands and highlands; its maximum elevation is Auktojas Hill at 294 m in the eastern part of the country. The terrain features numerous lakes, Lake Vitytis for example, and wetlands; a mixed forest zone covers nearly 33% of the country. The climate ranges between maritime and continental, with wet, moderate winters and mildly hot summers.

After a re-estimation of the boundaries of the continent of Europe in 1989, Jean-George Affholder, a scientist at the Institut Gographique National (French National Geographic Institute) determined that the Geographic Centre of Europe is located at . The method used for calculating this point was that of the centre of gravity of the geometrical figure of Europe. This point is located in Lithuania, specifically 26 km north of its capital city, Vilnius.

=== Climate ===

Auktaitija National Park
Sand dunes of Curonian Spit (UNESCO World Heritage Site)
Lithuania's climate, which ranges between maritime and continental, is relatively mild. Average temperatures on the coast are -2.5 C in January and 16 C in July. In Vilnius the average temperatures are -6 C in January and 23 C in July. During the summer, 20 C is common during the day while 14 C is common at night; in the past, temperatures have reached as high as 30 or. Some winters can be very cold. -20 C occurs almost every winter. Winter extremes are -34 C in coastal areas and -43 C in the east of Lithuania.

The average annual precipitation is 800 mm on the coast, 900 mm in the Samogitia highlands and 600 mm in the eastern part of the country. Snow occurs every year, it can snow from October to April. In some years sleet can fall in September or May. The growing season lasts 202 days in the western part of the country and 169 days in the eastern part. Severe storms are rare in the eastern part of Lithuania but common in the coastal areas.

The longest measured temperature records from the Baltic area cover about 250 years. The data show that there were warm periods during the latter half of the 18th century, and that the 19th century was a relatively cool period. An early 20th century warming culminated in the 1930s, followed by a smaller cooling that lasted until the 1960s. A warming trend has persisted since then. 

Lithuania experienced a drought in 2002, causing forest and peat bog fires. The country suffered along with the rest of Northwestern Europe during a heat wave in the summer of 2006.

== Politics ==

Dalia Grybauskait has been the President of Lithuania since 12 July 2009.
Since Lithuania declared the restoration of its independence on 11 March 1990, it has maintained strong democratic traditions. In the first general elections after the independence on 25 October 1992, 56.75% of the total number of voters supported the new constitution. Nuo 1991 m. iki iol paskelbt referendum rezultatai, Microsoft Word Document, Seimas. Retrieved 4 June 2006. There were intense debates concerning the constitution, especially the role of the president. A separate referendum was held on 23 May 1992 to gauge public opinion on the matter and 41% of all the eligible voters supported the restoration of the President of Lithuania. According to the explanation of Constitutional Court of Lithuania on 10 January 1998, the Republic of Lithuania is a parliamentary republic with some attributes of a semi-presidential system. Lietuvos Respublikos Konstitucinio Teismo nutarimas dl Lietuvos Respublikos Seimo 1996. Gruodio 10 D. nutarimo 

The Lithuanian head of state is the President, elected directly for a five-year term and serving a maximum of two consecutive terms. The post of president is largely ceremonial; main policy functions, however, include foreign affairs and national security. The president is also the commander-in-chief of the military. The President, with the approval of the parliamentary body, the Seimas, also appoints the Prime Minister and, on the latter's nomination, the rest of the cabinet, as well as a number of other top civil servants and the judges for all courts.
Seimas  (Parliament of Lithuania)

The current Lithuanian head of state, Dalia Grybauskait was elected on
17 May 2009, becoming the first female President in the country's history. This marked a dramatic shift in Baltic politics after its European neighbour, Latvia, elected their first female political leader late in the previous decade. 

The judges of the Constitutional Court (Konstitucinis Teismas), who serve nine-year terms, are appointed by the President (three judges), the Chairman of the Seimas (three judges), and the Chairman of the Supreme Court (three judges). The unicameral Lithuanian parliament, the Seimas, has 141 members who are elected to four-year terms. 71 of the members of this legislative body are elected in single member constituencies, and the other 70 are elected in a nationwide vote by proportional representation. A party must receive at least 5% of the national vote to be eligible for any of the 70 national seats in the Seimas.

=== Administrative divisions ===

The current administrative division was established in 1994 and modified in 2000 to meet the requirements of the European Union. Lithuania has a three-tier administrative division: the country is divided into 10 counties (Lithuanian: singular  apskritis, plural  apskritys) that are further subdivided into 60 municipalities (Lithuanian: singular  savivaldyb, plural  savivaldybs) which consist of over 500 elderships (Lithuanian: singular  seninija, plural  seninijos).

The county governors (Lithuanian: apskrities virininkas) institution and county administrations have been dissolved in 2010. (Republic of Lithuania Annul Law on County Governing), Seimas law database, 7 July 2009, Law no. XI-318. 

Municipalities are the most important administrative unit. Some municipalities are historically called "district municipalities", and thus are often shortened to "district"; others are called "city municipalities", sometimes shortened to "city". Each municipality has its own elected government. In the past, the election of municipality councils occurred once every three years, but it now takes place every four years. The council elects the mayor and appoints elders to govern the elderships. There is currently a proposal for direct election of mayors and elders, however that would require an amendment to the constitution. Justinas Vanagas, Seimo prioritetai i sesij  tiesioginiai mero rinkimai, gyventoj nuosavyb ir euras, Delfi.lt, 5 September 2005. Retrieved 3 June 2006. 

Elderships, numbering over 500, are the smallest units and do not play a role in national politics. They provide necessary public services close to their homes; for example, in rural areas the elderships register births and deaths. They are most active in the social sector: they identify needy individuals or families and distribute welfare or organise other forms of relief. Lietuvos Respublikos vietos savivaldos statymo pakeitimo statymas, Seimas law database, 12 October 2000, Law no. VIII-2018. Retrieved 3 June 2006. While the elderships have a potential of becoming a source of local initiative to tackle rural problems, complaints are made that elderships have no real power and receive too little attention. Indr Makaraityt, Europos Sjungos pinigai kaimo neigelbs, Atgimimas, Delfi.lt, 16 December 2004. Retrieved 4 June 2006. 

=== Foreign relations ===

Lithuania is a member of the European Union

Lithuania became a member of the United Nations on 18 September 1991, and is a signatory to a number of its organizations and other international agreements. It is also a member of the European Union, the Council of Europe, Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe, NATO and its adjunct North Atlantic Coordinating Council. Lithuania gained membership in the World Trade Organization on 31 May 2001. It also seeks membership in the OECD and other Western organizations.

Lithuania has established diplomatic relations with 149 countries. 

In 2011, Lithuania hosted the Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe Ministerial Council Meeting. In 2013, Lithuania assumed the role of the Presidency of the European Union.
The stamp is dedicated to Lithuania's presidency of the European Union. Post of Lithuania, 2013.
Lithuania is also an active member in the cooperation among Northern Europe countries. Lithuania is a member of Baltic Council, since its establishment in 1993. Baltic Council is a permanent organisation of international cooperation, located in Tallinn. It operates through the Baltic Assembly and Baltic Council of Ministers.

Lithuania also cooperates with Nordic and the two other Baltic countries through NB8 cooperation format. The similar format, called NB6 unites Nordic and Baltic countries members of EU. The main goal of NB6 cooperation is to discuss and agree on positions before presenting them in the Council of the European Union and the meetings of the EU Foreign Affairs Ministers.

The Council of the Baltic Sea States (CBSS) was established in 1992 in Copenhagen as an informal regional political forum, which main aim is to promote integration process and to affiliate close contacts between the countries of the region. The members of CBSS are Iceland, Sweden, Denmark, Norway, Finland, Germany, Lithuania, Latvia, Estonia, Poland, Russia and European Commission. The observer states are Belarus, France, Italy, Netherlands, Romania, Slovakia, Spain, United States, United Kingdom and Ukraine.
Lithuania is a member of the United Nations Security Council
The cooperation between the Nordic Council of Ministers and Lithuania is a political cooperation through which experience exchange contributes to realization of joint goals. One of its most important functions is to discover new trends and new possibilities for joint cooperation. The information office aims to represent Nordic concepts and demonstrate Nordic cooperation in Lithuania.

Lithuania, together with other two Baltic countries, is also a member of Nordic Investment Bank (NIB) and cooperates in NORDPLUS programme committed to education.

Baltic Development Forum (BDF) is an independent nonprofit organization that unites large companies, cities, business associations, and institutions in the Baltic Sea region. In 2010 the 12th Summit of the BDF was held in Vilnius. Baltic Development Forum. Retrieved on 3 April 2012. 

Since 1 July 2013, Lithuania has held the rotating Presidency of the Council of the European Union. In 2013, Lithuania was elected to United Nations Security Council. Chad, Chile, Lithuania, Nigeria and Saudi Arabia elected to serve on UN Security Council Lithuania is the first Baltic states country to be elected in such post. In addition, Lithuania started chairing the Council from 1 January 2014.

=== Military ===

Soldier of the Lithuanian National Defence Volunteer Forces
The Lithuanian Armed Forces is the name for the unified armed forces of Lithuanian Land Force, Lithuanian Air Force, Lithuanian Naval Force, Lithuanian Special Operations Force and other units: Logistics Command, Training and Doctrine Command, Headquarters Battalion, Military Police. Directly subordinated to the Chief of Defence are the Special Operations Forces and Military Police. The Reserve Forces are under command of the Lithuanian National Defence Volunteer Forces.

The Lithuanian Armed Forces consist of some 15,000 active personnel, which may be supported by reserve forces. Personnel size in 19982009 Ministry of National Defence Compulsory conscription ended in 2008 and Lithuania now relies solely on professional armed forces. The Lithuanian Armed Forces currently have deployed personnel on international missions in Afghanistan (over 200), Kosovo (1) and Somalia (1).
Lithuanian soldiers on the international NATO mission in Afghanistan
In March 2004, Lithuania became a full member of the NATO. Since then, fighter jets of NATO members are deployed in Zokniai airport and provide safety for the Baltic airspace.

Since the summer of 2005 Lithuania has been part of the International Security Assistance Force in Afghanistan (ISAF), leading a Provincial Reconstruction Team (PRT) in the town of Chaghcharan in the province of Ghor. The PRT includes personnel from Denmark, Iceland and USA. There are also special operation forces units in Afghanistan. They are placed in Kandahar province. Since joining international operations in 1994 Lithuania has lost two soldiers. 1st Lt. Normundas Valteris fell in Bosnia, as his patrol vehicle drove over a mine. Sgt. Arnas Jarmalaviius was fatally wounded during an attack on the camp of his Provincial Reconstruction Team in Afghanistan. In remembrance. Kariuomene.kam.lt. Retrieved on 24 December 2011. 

The Lithuanian National Defence Policy aims to guarantee the preservation of the independence and sovereignty of the state, the integrity of its land, territorial waters, airspace and its constitutional order. At the moment the main strategic goals is to be able to defend the country's interests and maintain the armed forces which would be ready to contribute, cooperate and participate with the other armed forces of NATO and European Union member states, and also increase their further capability to participate in NATO missions. 

The defence ministry is responsible for combat forces, search and rescue, and intelligence operations. The 5,000 border guards fall under the Interior Ministry's supervision and are responsible for border protection, passport and customs duties, and share responsibility with the navy for smuggling and drug trafficking interdiction. A special security department handles VIP protection and communications security.

== Economy ==

Graphical depiction of Lithuania's product exports in 28 color-coded categories.
In 2003, before joining the European Union, Lithuania had the highest economic growth rate amongst all candidate and member countries, reaching 8.8% in the third quarter. In 2004  7.4%; 2005  7.8%; 2006  7.8%; 2007  8.9%, 2008 Q1  7.0% growth in GDP reflects the impressive economic development and as a result is often termed as a Baltic Tiger. Department of Statistics to the Government of the Republic of Lithuania. , p. 20 However, 2009 marked a dramatic decline in GDP at 14.74% attributed to overheating of the economy. In 2010, the rate was 1.33%. As of June 2013, the unemployment rate is 10.4%. Darbo Rinka  Situacija. Ldb.lt (26 April 2011). Retrieved on 12 September 2011. 
Swedbank headquarters in Vilnius
Lithuania has a flat tax rate rather than a progressive scheme. According to Eurostat, Taxation trends in the European Union. eurostat.ec.europa.eu. 29 April 2013 the personal income tax (15%) and corporate tax (15%) rates in Lithuania are among the lowest in the EU. The country has the lowest implicit rate of tax on capital (5.5%) in the EU. Lithuania also has the lowest overall taxation as a percentage of GDP (26%) in the European Union 

Lithuanian income levels are somewhat lower than in older EU Member States but higher than in most new EU Member States that have joined in the last decade. According to Eurostat data, Lithuanian PPS GDP per capita stood at 72% of the EU average in 2012. 

Structurally, there is a gradual but consistent shift towards a knowledge-based economy with special emphasis on biotechnology (industrial and diagnostic). The major biotechnology companies and laser manufacturers (Ekspla, viesos Konversija) of the Baltics are concentrated in Lithuania. Also mechatronics and information technology (IT) are seen as prospective knowledge-based economy directions.

In 2009, Barclays established Technology Centre Lithuania  one of four strategic engineering centres supporting the Barclays Retail Banking businesses across the globe. Vilnius, Lithuania | Global locations|Barclays GRB. Lifeintechnology.co.uk. Retrieved on 12 September 2011. In 2011, Western Union officially opened their new European Regional Operating Centre in Vilnius. Western Union opens centre in Vilnius. Alfa.lt (6 May 2011). Retrieved on 12 September 2011. The stated position of the Lithuanian government is that the focus of Lithuanian economy is high added-value products and services. Lithuanian Innovation Strategy for 20102020. None. Retrieved on 12 September 2011. Among other international companies operating in Lithuania are: PricewaterhouseCoopers, Ernst & Young, Societe Generale, UniCredit, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Phillip Morris, Kraft Foods, Mars, Marks & Spencer, GlaxoSmithKline, United Colors of Benetton, Deichmann, Statoil, Neste Oil, Lukoil, Tele2, Hesburger and Modern Times Group. TeliaSonera, ICA and Carlsberg respectively own local telecommunications company Omnitel, retailer Rimi and beer breweries (vyturys, Kalnapilis and Utenos Alus). Lithuanian banking sector is dominated by the Scandinavian banks: Swedbank, SEB, Nordea, Danske Bank, DNB ASA.

Among the biggest private owned Lithuanian companies are: ORLEN Lietuva, Maxima Group, Achema Group, Lukoil Baltija, Linas Agro Group, Indorama Polymers Europe, Palink, Sanitex. Deloitte Central Europe Top 500, 2012. Vz.lt (13 September 2012). Retrieved on 12 July 2013. Corporate tax rate in Lithuania is 15% and 5% for small businesses. The government offers special incentives for investments into the high-technology sectors and high value-added products. Most of the trade Lithuania conducts is within the European Union and Russia.

The litas, the national currency, has been pegged to the euro since 2 February 2002 at the rate of EUR 1.00 = LTL 3.4528, Lietuvos Bankas. lb.lt and Lithuania is expecting to switch to the euro on 1 January 2015.

== Infrastructure ==

=== Communication ===

According to the Speedtest.net website, as of 30 October 2011 Lithuania ranks first in the world by the internet upload speed and download speed, schools and corporations ignored. The high speeds are largely due to the fact that Lithuania has the EU's and Europe's most available FTTH network. According to as yearly study published by the FTTH Council Europe in 2013, Winners and losers emerge in Europes race to a fibre future. FTTH Council Europe (20 February 2013) the country has connected 100% of households to the FTTH network. 31% of these households are subscribers to this network at the time of publishing. Lithuania has thus Europe's most available fibre network and also has the highest FTTH penetration. Sweden has the next highest FTTH penetration with 23%. 
In Vilnius, it is common to find free WiFi in taxis. 

=== Transport ===

Major highways in Lithuania
Construction of the dual-gauge railway track in Lithuania (Rail Baltica project)
The country boasts a well-developed modern infrastructure of railways, airports and four-lane highways. Lithuania has an extensive network of motorways. The best known motorways are A1, connecting Vilnius with Klaipda via Kaunas, as well as A2, connecting Vilnius and Panevys. One of the most used is the European route E67 highway running from Warsaw to Tallinn, via Kaunas and Riga.

The Port of Klaipda is the only commercial port in Lithuania. In a record year for the port, in 2011 45.5 million tons of cargo were handled (including Bting Oil Terminal figures), making it one of the biggest in the Baltic Sea. shortsea.lt 

Vilnius International Airport is the largest airport. It served 2.2 million passengers in 2012. Other international airports include Kaunas International Airport, Palanga International Airport and iauliai International Airport.

Lithuania received its first railway connection in the middle of the 19th century, when the Warsaw  Saint Petersburg Railway was constructed. It included a stretch from Daugavpils via Vilnius and Kaunas to Virbalis. The first and only still operating in the Baltic states Kaunas Railway Tunnel was completed in 1860. Lithuanian Railways' main network consists of 1749 km of 1520 mm broad gauge railway of which 122 km are electrified. They also operate 22 km of standard gauge lines. The Trans-European standard gauge Rail Baltica railway, linking HelsinkiTallinnRigaKaunasWarsaw and continuing on to Berlin is under construction now and by the end of 2013 will reach Kaunas.

=== Energy ===

Ignalina Nuclear Power Plant was a Soviet-era nuclear station. Unit No. 1 was closed in December 2004, as a condition of Lithuania's entry into the European Union; the plant is similar to the Chernobyl Nuclear Power Plant in its lack of a robust containment structure. The remaining unit, as of 2006, supplied about 70% of Lithuania's electrical demand. 
Unit No. 2 was closed down on 31 December 2009. Proposals have been made to construct another  Visaginas Nuclear Power Plant in Lithuania. However, a non-binding referendum held in October 2012 clouded the prospects for the Visaginas project, as the 63% of voters said no to new nuclear power plant. Nuclear Power in Lithuania | Lithuanian Nuclear Energy. World-nuclear.org. Retrieved on 4 May 2014. 

The country's main primary source of electrical power is Elektrnai Power Plant. Other primary sources of Lithuania's electrical power are Kruonis Pumped Storage Plant and Kaunas Hydroelectric Power Plant. Kruonis Pumped Storage Plant is the only in the Baltic states power plant to be used for regulation of the power systems operation with generating capacity of 900 MW for at least 12 hours. Veikla. kruoniohae.lt. Retrieved 7 January 2013 As of year 2012, 63% of electrical power was imported. litgrid.eu 

== Demographics ==

Population of Lithuania (in millions) from 19502010
Since the Neolithic period the native inhabitants of the Lithuanian territory have not been replaced by any other ethnic group, so there is a high probability that the inhabitants of present day Lithuania have preserved the genetic composition of their forebears relatively undisturbed by the major demographic movements, G. esnys (1991) "Anthropological roots of the Lithuanians".
Science, Arts and Lithuania, 1: pp. 410. although without being actually isolated from them. The Lithuanian population appears to be relatively homogeneous, without apparent genetic differences among ethnic subgroups. 

A 2004 analysis of MtDNA in the Lithuanian population revealed that Lithuanians are close to the Indo-European and Uralic-speaking populations of Northern Europe. Y-chromosome SNP haplogroup analysis showed Lithuanians to be closest to Latvians, Estonians, and Finns. 

According to 2009 estimates, the age structure of the population was as follows: 014 years, 14.2% (male 258,423/female 245,115); 1564 years: 69.6% (male 1,214,743/female 1,261,413); 65 years and over: 16.2% (male 198,714/female 376,771). The median age was 39.3 years (male: 36.8, female: 41.9). 

=== Ethnic groups ===

Ethnic Lithuanians make up about five-sixths of the countrys population and Lithuania has the most homogenous population in the Baltic States. According to the 2011 census, the population of Lithuania stands at 3,043,400, 84% of whom are ethnic Lithuanians who speak Lithuanian, which is the official language of the country. Several sizable minorities exist, such as Poles (6.6%), Russians (5.8%), Belarusians (1.2%) and Ukrainians (0.5%). 

Poles are the largest minority, concentrated in southeast Lithuania (the Vilnius region). Russians are the second largest minority, concentrated mostly in two cities. They constitute sizeable minorities in Vilnius (14%) and Klaipda (28%), and a majority in the town of Visaginas (52%). About 3,000 Roma live in Lithuania, mostly in Vilnius, Kaunas, and Panevys; their organizations are supported by the National Minority and Emigration Department. For centuries a small Tatar community has flourished in Lithuania. The Lithuanian Tatars article in The Red Book of the Peoples of the Russian Empire 

The official language is Lithuanian. Other languages, such as Russian, Polish, Belarusian and Ukrainian are spoken in the larger cities, in the alininkai district municipality and the Vilnius district municipality. Yiddish is spoken by members of the tiny remaining Jewish community in Lithuania. According to the Lithuanian population census of 2001, about 84% of the country's population speak Lithuanian as their native language, 8% are native speakers of Russian and 6% of Polish. More than 60% are fluent in Russian, while only about 16% say they can speak English. According to the Eurobarometer survey conducted in 2005, 80% of Lithuanians can speak Russian and 32% can speak English. Most Lithuanian schools teach English as the first foreign language, but students may also study German, or, in some schools, French or Russian. Schools where Russian or Polish are the primary languages of education exist in the areas populated by these minorities.

=== Urbanization ===

There has been a steady movement of population to the cities since the 1990s, encouraged by the planning of regional centres, such as Alytus, Marijampol, Utena, Plung, and Maeikiai. By the early 21st century, about two-thirds of the total population lived in urban areas. The largest city is Vilnius, followed by Kaunas, Klaipda, iauliai, and Panevys.

=== Health ===

As of 2012 Lithuanian life expectancy at birth was 70.7 years for males and 80.7 for females, and the infant mortality rate was 6.2 per 1,000 births. The annual population growth rate increased by 0.3% in 2007. At 30.4 people per 100,000, Lithuania has seen a dramatic rise in suicides in the post-Soviet years, and now records the third highest suicide rate in the world. Lithuania also has the highest homicide rate in the EU. 

=== Religion ===

Hill of Crosses near iauliai
St. Anne's Church and the church of the Bernardine Monastery in Vilnius
As per the 2011 census, 77.2% of Lithuanians belonged to the Roman Catholic Church. Department of Statistics to the Government of the Republic of Lithuania. . 15 March 2013. The Church has been the majority denomination since the Christianisation of Lithuania at the end of the 14th century. Some priests actively led the resistance against the Communist regime (symbolised by the Hill of Crosses).

In the first half of the 20th century, the Lutheran Protestant church had around 200,000 members, 9% of the total population, mostly Protestant Lithuanians and ethnic Germans from the former Memel Territory, but it has declined since 1945 with the removal of the German population. Small Protestant communities are dispersed throughout the northern and western parts of the country. Believers and clergy suffered greatly during the Soviet occupation, with many killed, tortured or deported to Siberia. Various Protestant churches have established missions in Lithuania since 1990. 4.1% are Orthodox (mainly among the Russian minority), 0.8% are Protestant and 6.1% have no religion.

Lithuania was historically home to a significant Jewish community and was an important center of Jewish scholarship and culture from the 18th century, until the community, numbering about 160,000 before World War II, was almost entirely annihilated during the Holocaust. The community numbered about 4,000 at the end of 2009. 

The census 2011 main results on religion are:
* Roman Catholic  77% (2.35 million)
* Orthodox  4% (125,200)
* Orthodox (Old Believers)  0.8% (23,300)
* Evangelical Lutherans  0.6% (18,400)
* Evangelical Reformists  0.2% (6,700)
* Other religions  0.8% (24,900)
* No religion  6% (186,700)
* Did not specify  10% Ethnicity, mother tongue and religion (Lithuanian) 

According to the most recent Eurobarometer Poll 2005, 49% of Lithuanian citizens responded that "they believe there is a God", 36% answered that "they believe there is some sort of spirit or life force", and 12% said that "they do not believe there is any sort of spirit, god, or life force".

=== Education ===

Vilnius University, one of the oldest universities in Eastern and Central Europe
The first documented school in Lithuania was established in 1387 at Vilnius Cathedral. The school network was influenced by the Christianization of Lithuania. Several types of schools were present in medieval Lithuania  cathedral schools, where pupils were prepared for priesthood; parish schools, offering elementary education; and home schools dedicated to educating the children of the Lithuanian nobility. Before Vilnius University was established in 1579, Lithuanians seeking higher education attended universities in foreign cities, including Krakw, Prague, and Leipzig, among others. During the Interbellum a national university  Vytautas Magnus University was founded in Kaunas.

The Ministry of Education and Science of the Republic of Lithuania proposes national educational policies and goals. These are sent to the Seimas for ratification. Laws govern long-term educational strategy along with general laws on standards for higher education, vocational training, law and science, adult education, and special education. County administrators, municipal administrators, and school founders (including non-governmental organizations, religious organizations, and individuals) are responsible for implementing these policies. By constitutional mandate, ten years of formal enrollment in an educational institution is mandatory, ending at age 16. 
Raudon Basic School, located in Raudon Castle
14,7% of the 2014 state budget was allocated to education expenses. Primary and secondary schools receive funding from the state via their municipal or county administrations. The Constitution of Lithuania guarantees tuition-free attendance at public institutions of higher education for students deemed 'good'; the number of such students has varied over the past decade, with 53,5% exempted from tuition fees in 2014. 

The World Bank designates the literacy rate of Lithuanian persons aged 15 years and older as 100% and, according to Eurostat Lithuania leads among other countries of EU by people with secondary education (93.3%). As of 2012, 34% of the population aged 25 to 64 had completed tertiary education; 59.1% had completed upper secondary and post-secondary (non-tertiary) education. According to Invest in Lithuania, Lithuania has twice as many people with higher education than the EU-15 average and the proportion is the highest in the Baltic. Also, 90% of Lithuanians speak at least one foreign language and half of the population speaks two foreign languages, mostly Russian and English. 

As with other Baltic nations, in particular Latvia, the large volume of higher education graduates within the country, coupled with the high rate of spoken second languages is contributing to an education brain drain. Many Lithuanians are choosing to emigrate seeking higher earning employment and studies throughout Europe. Since their inclusion into the European Union in 2004, Lithuania's population has fallen by approximately 180,000 people. 

As of 2008, there were 15 public universities in Lithuania, 6 private institutions, 16 public colleges, and 11 private colleges. Vilnius University is one of the oldest universities in Northern Europe and the largest university in Lithuania. Kaunas University of Technology is the largest technical university in the Baltic States and the 2nd largest university in Lithuania. Other universities include Kaunas University of Medicine, Lithuanian Academy of Music and Theatre, Lithuanian University of Educology, Vytautas Magnus University, Mykolas Romeris University, Lithuanian Academy of Physical Education, Vilnius Gediminas Technical University, The General Jonas Zemaitis Military Academy of Lithuania, Klaipda University, Lithuanian Veterinary Academy, Lithuanian University of Agriculture, iauliai University and Vilnius Academy of Art.

== Culture ==

=== Lithuanian language ===

The Lithuanian language (lietuvi kalba) is the official state language of Lithuania and is recognized as one of the official languages of the European Union. There are about 2.96 million native Lithuanian speakers in Lithuania and about 0.2 million abroad.

Lithuanian is a Baltic language, closely related to Latvian, although they are not mutually intelligible. It is written in an adapted version of the Roman script. Lithuanian is believed to be the linguistically most conservative living Indo-European tongue, retaining many features of Proto Indo-European. 

=== Literature ===

The first Lithuanian printed book The Simple Words of Catechism (1547, Knigsberg)
There is a great deal of Lithuanian literature written in Latin, the main scholarly language of the Middle Ages. The edicts of the Lithuanian King Mindaugas is the prime example of the literature of this kind. Letters of Gediminas is another crucial heritage of the Lithuanian Latin writings.

Lithuanian literary works in the Lithuanian language started being first published in the 16th century. In 1547 Martynas Mavydas compiled and published the first printed Lithuanian book The Simple Words of Catechism, which marks the beginning of printed Lithuanian literature. He was followed by Mikalojus Dauka with Katechizmas. In the 16th and 17th centuries, as in the whole Christian Europe, Lithuanian literature was primarily religious.

The evolution of the old (14th18th century) Lithuanian literature ends with Kristijonas Donelaitis, one of the most prominent authors of the Age of Enlightenment. Donelaitis poem The Seasons is the national epic and landmark of the Lithuanian fiction literature. Institute of Lithuanian Scientific Society. . Retrieved 16 February 2009 

With a mix of Classicism, Sentimentalism, and Romanticism, the Lithuanian literature of the first half of the 19th century is represented by Maironis, Antanas Baranauskas, Simonas Daukantas and Simonas Staneviius. During the Tsarist annexation of Lithuania in 19th century, the Lithuanian press ban was implemented, which led to the formation of the Knygneiai (Book smugglers) movement. This movement is thought to be the very reason the Lithuanian language and literature survived until today.

20th century Lithuanian literature is represented by Juozas Tumas-Vaigantas, Antanas Vienuolis, Bernardas Brazdionis and Vytautas Maernis and Justinas Marcinkeviius.

=== Arts and museums ===

Jonas Mekas is regarded as godfather of American avant-garde cinema
The Lithuanian Art Museum was founded in 1933 and is the largest museum of art conservation and display in Lithuania. Among other important museums is the Palanga Amber Museum, where amber pieces comprise a major part of the collection.

Perhaps the most renowned figure in Lithuania's art community was the composer Mikalojus Konstantinas iurlionis (18751911), an internationally renowned musician. The 2420 iurlionis asteroid, identified in 1975, honors his achievements. The M. K. iurlionis National Art Museum, as well as the only military museum in Lithuania, Vytautas the Great War Museum, are located in Kaunas.

=== Music ===

Lithuanian folk music belongs to Baltic music branch which is connected with neolithic corded ware culture. Two instrument cultures meet in the areas inhabited by Lithuanians: stringed (kankli) and wind instrument cultures. Lithuanian folk music is archaic, mostly used for ritual purposes, containing elements of paganism faith. There are three ancient styles of singing in Lithuania connected with ethnographical regions: monophony, heterophony and polyphony. Folk song genres: Sutartins, Wedding Songs, War-Historical Time Songs, Calendar Cycle and Ritual Songs and Work Songs.

Mikalojus Konstantinas iurlionis is the most renowned Lithuanian painter and composer. During his short life he created about 200 pieces of music. His works have had profound influence on modern Lithuanian culture. His symphonic poems In the Forest (Mike) and The Sea (Jra) were performed only posthumously.

Vytautas Mikinis (born 1954) is a professor, composer and choir director of the famous Lithuanian boys' choir uoliukas. He is very popular in Lithuania and abroad. He has written over 400 secular and about 160 religious works.

In Lithuania choral music is very important. Vilnius is the only city with three choirs laureates (Brevis, Jauna Muzika and Chamber Choir of the Conservatoire) at the European Grand Prix for Choral Singing. There is a long-standing tradition of the Lithuanian Song and Dance Festival (Dain vent). The first one took place in Kaunas in 1924. Since 1990, the festival has been organised every four years and summons roughly 30,000 singers and folk dancers of various professional levels and age groups from across the country. In 2008, Lithuanian Song and Dance Festival together with its Latvian and Estonian versions was inscribed as UNESCO Masterpiece of the Oral and Intangible Heritage of Humanity.

Marijonas Mikutaviius is famous for creating unofficial Lithuania sport anthem "Trys milijonai" (). 

=== Cuisine ===

Lithuanian cuisine features the products suited to the cool and moist northern climate of Lithuania: barley, potatoes, rye, beets, greens, berries, and mushrooms are locally grown, and dairy products are one of its specialties. Since it shares its climate and agricultural practices with Northern Europe, Lithuanian cuisine has some similarities to Scandinavian cuisine. Nevertheless, it has its own distinguishing features, which were formed by a variety of influences during the country's long and difficult history.

Because of their common heritage, Lithuanians, Poles, and Ashkenazi Jews share many dishes and beverages. Thus there are similar Lithuanian, Litvak, and Polish versions of dumplings (koldnai, kreplach or pierogi), doughnuts spurgos or (pczki), and blynai crepes (blintzes). German traditions also influenced Lithuanian cuisine, introducing pork and potato dishes, such as potato pudding (kugelis or kugel) and potato sausages (vdarai), as well as the baroque tree cake known as akotis. The most exotic of all the influences is Eastern (Karaite) cuisine, and the dishes kibinai and eburekai are popular in Lithuania. Torte Napoleon was introduced during Napoleon's passage through Lithuania in the 19th century.

=== Sports ===

Lithuania national basketball team is ranked 4th worldwide in FIBA Rankings.
17-year-old Rta Meilutyt  Olympic, multiple World and European champion.
Basketball is the national sport of Lithuania. The Lithuania national basketball team has had significant success in international basketball events. Having won a total of 10 medals in the EuroBasket, the World Championships and the Olympic Games, formerly Lithuania was even ranked 3rd worldwide in FIBA Rankings (now 4th). Lithuania has produced a number of NBA players: Arvydas Sabonis, arnas Mariulionis, ydrnas Ilgauskas, Darius Songaila, arnas Jasikeviius, Linas Kleiza and current NBA prospects Donatas Motiejnas of Houston Rockets and Jonas Valaninas of Toronto Raptors. Arvydas Sabonis was the first Lithuanian to be inducted into the prestigious Naismith Memorial Basketball Hall of Fame.

In 2013, the Lithuania national basketball team won silver medals in EuroBasket 2013. In 2011, Lithuania hosted the men's European Basketball Championship EuroBasket 2011. The historic Lithuanian basketball team Kauno algiris won the European basketball league Euroleague in 1999. BC algiris together with Vilniaus Lietuvos Rytas compete in Euroleague. Neptnas competes in the second-tier European competition Eurocup Basketball.

Swimming is currently experiencing an immense rise in popularity. The boom has been sparked by the success of Rta Meilutyt who, at the age of just 15, won the gold medal in the women's 100 metre breaststroke at the 2012 Summer Olympics in London.

Virgilijus Alekna is one of world top discus throwers. He has won two consecutive Olympic gold medals in the 2000 Sydney and 2004 Athens Olympics. In the 2008 Beijing Summer Olympics Alekna received the Bronze medal, and in London 2012 Alekna finished 4th. Austra Skujyt (Silver in heptathlon, 2004 Athens Olympics), Laura Asadauskait (Gold in pentathlon, London 2012, World championship Gold medal in Kaoshiung 2013) and Justinas Kinderis (World championship Gold medal in individual pentathlon, Kaoshiung 2013) are also world-class athletes.

Druskininkai Snow Arena

Simona Krupeckait is currently the country's most famous professional track cyclist. She is former world-record holder in 500m time trial and flying 200m time trial. Krupeckait has been named the Lithuanian Sportsman of the Year twice in 2009 and 2010.

Lithuania has a stellar NHL player Dainius Zubrus playing for New Jersey Devils. Riardas Berankis is the top ranked Lithuanian tennis player.

When it comes to non-Olympics sports, Viktorija milyt, the chess player, has grown to fame owing to her Grandmaster and Woman Grandmaster titles. In 2011, milyt has become the champion of the European Woman Chess Championship. Jurgis Kairys, the most renowned Lithuanian aviator, has won the bronze in unlimited freestyle aviation in the 2011 FAI World Aerobatic Championship. The other famous Lithuanian sportsman is ydrnas Savickas who is currently nominated as the Strongest Man in the World. Another notable Lithuanian athlete in mixed martial arts is Marius aromskis.

With the launch of the first indoor ski slope in Baltics, Snow Arena, the rise of popularity in winter sports is widely expected.

== See also ==
* Index of Lithuania-related articles
* List of Lithuanians
* Outline of Lithuania

== References ==

== External links ==

; Government
* The Lithuanian President  Official site of the President of the Republic of Lithuania
* The Lithuanian Parliament  Official site of the Parliament of the Republic of Lithuania
* The Lithuanian Government  Official site of the Government of the Republic of Lithuania
* Chief of State and Cabinet Members
* Statistics Lithuania  Official site of Department of Statistics to the Government of Lithuania

; General information

* 
* Lithuania from UCB Libraries GovPubs
* 
* Lithuania from the BBC News
* 
* 
* Lietuva.lt/en  Lithuanian internet gates
* Key Development Forecasts for Lithuania from International Futures

; Travel
* Lithuanian State Department of Tourism
* Travel Channel movie about Lithuanian  "Essential Lithuania 2010"
* www.travel.lt  The Official Lithuanian Travel Guide

 
*



[[Relativist fallacy]]

The relativist fallacy, also known as the subjectivist fallacy, is claiming that something is true for one person but not true for someone else. The fallacy is supposed to rest on the law of non-contradiction. The fallacy applies only to objective facts, or what are alleged to be objective facts, rather than to facts about personal tastes or subjective experiences, and only to facts regarded in the same sense and at the same time. On this formulation, the very name "relativist fallacy" begs the question against anyone who earnestly (however mistakenly or not) holds that there are no "objective facts." So some more work has to be done, in a non-question-begging way, to make it clear wherein, exactly, the fallacy lies.

There are at least two ways to interpret "the relativist fallacy": either as identical to relativism (generally), or as the ad hoc adoption of a relativist stance purely to defend a controversial position.

On the one hand, those discussions of the relativist fallacy which make the fallacy out to be identical to relativism (e.g., linguistic relativism or cultural relativism) are themselves committing a commonly identified fallacy of informal logic, namely, begging the question against an earnest, intelligent, logically competent relativist. It is itself a fallacy to describe a controversial view as a "fallacy"not, at least, without arguing that it is a fallacy. In any event, it will not do to argue as follows:
# To advocate relativism, even some sophisticated relativism, is to commit the relativist fallacy.
# If one commits a fallacy, one says something false or not worth serious consideration.
# Therefore, to advocate relativism, even some sophisticated relativism, is to say something false or not worth serious consideration.
This is an example of circular reasoning. The second step includes an argument from fallacy.

On the other hand, if someone adopts a simple relativist stance as an ad hoc defense of a controversial or otherwise compromised positionsaying, in effect, that "what is true for you is not necessarily true for me," and thereby attempting to avoid having to mount any further defense of the positionone might be said to have committed a fallacy. The accusation of having committed a fallacy might rest on either of two grounds: (1) the relativism on which the bogus defense rests is so simple and meritless that it straightforwardly contradicts the Law of Non-Contradiction; or (2) the defense (and thus the fallacy itself) is an example of ad hoc reasoning. It puts one in the position of asserting or implying that truth or standards of logical consistency are relative to a particular thinker or group and that under some other standard, the position is correct despite its failure to stand up to logic.

On any interpretation of the fallacy, in determining whether the relativist fallacy has been committed, one should distinguish between things which are true for a particular person, and things which are true about that person. Take, for example, the statement proffered by Jim, "More Americans than ever are overweight." One may introduce arguments for and against this proposition, based upon such things as standards of statistical analysis, the definition of "overweight," etc. It is a position which answers to objective logical debate. If Joe answers Jim, saying "That may be true for you, but it is not true for me," he has given an answer which is fallacious as well as being somewhat meaningless in the context of Jim's original statement.

Conversely, take the new statement by Jim, who is tall, " is grossly overweight." Joe, who is , and weighs an exact, well-conditioned , replies, "That may be true for you, but it is not true for me." In this context, Joe's reply is both meaningful and arguably accurate. As he is discussing something which is true about himself, he is not barred from making an argument which considers subjective facts, and so he does not commit the fallacy.

==References==
* Law, Stephen (2005) Thinking Tools: The Relativist Fallacy, Think: Philosophy for everyone (A journal of the Royal Institute of Philosophy) 3: 57-58 y

==See also==
* Formal fallacy
* Informal fallacy



[[False dilemma]]

A false dilemma (also called black-and/or-white thinking, bifurcation, denying a conjunct, the either-or fallacy, false dichotomy, fallacy of exhaustive hypotheses, the fallacy of false choice, the fallacy of the false alternative, or the fallacy of the excluded middle) is a type of informal fallacy that involves a situation in which limited alternatives are considered, when in fact there is at least one additional option. The opposite of this fallacy is argument to moderation.

The options may be a position that is between two extremes (such as when there are shades of grey) or may be completely different alternatives. Phrasing that implies two options (dilemma, dichotomy, black-and-white) may be replaced with other number-based nouns, such as a "false trilemma" if something is reduced to only three options, instead of two.

False dilemma can arise intentionally, when fallacy is used in an attempt to force a choice (such as, in some contexts, the assertion that "if you are not with us, you are against us"). But the fallacy can also arise simply by accidental omission of additional options rather than by deliberate deception.

Some philosophers and scholars believe that "unless a distinction can be made rigorous and precise it isn't really a distinction." Jacques Derrida (1991) Afterword: Toward An Ethic of Discussion, published in the English translation of Limited Inc., pp.123-4, 126 An exception is analytic philosopher John Searle, who called it an incorrect assumption which produces false dichotomies. Searle, John. (1983) The Word Turned Upside Down. The New York Review of Books, Volume 30, Number 16, October 27, 1983. Searle insists that "it is a condition of the adequacy of a precise theory of an indeterminate phenomenon that it should precisely characterize that phenomenon as indeterminate; and a distinction is no less a distinction for allowing for a family of related, marginal, diverging cases." Similarly, when two options are presented, they are often, though not always, two extreme points on some spectrum of possibilities; this can lend credence to the larger argument by giving the impression that the options are mutually exclusive, even though they need not be. Furthermore, the options in false dichotomies are typically presented as being collectively exhaustive, in which case the fallacy can be overcome, or at least weakened, by considering other possibilities, or perhaps by considering a whole spectrum of possibilities, as in fuzzy logic.

==Examples==

===Morton's fork===
Morton's fork, a choice between two equally unpleasant options, is often a false dilemma. The phrase originates from an argument for taxing English nobles:
: "Either the nobles of this country appear wealthy, in which case they can be taxed for good; or they appear poor, in which case they are living frugally and must have immense savings, which can be taxed for good." Evans, Ivor H. (1989). Brewer's Dictionary of Phrase & Fable, 14th edition, Harper & Row. ISBN 0-06-016200-7. 

This is a false dilemma and a catch-22, because it fails to allow for the possibility that some members of the nobility may in fact lack liquid assets, as well as the possibility that those who appear poor actually are poor.

===False choice===
The presentation of a false choice often reflects a deliberate attempt to eliminate several options which may occupy the middle ground on an issue. A common argument against noise pollution laws involves a false choice. It might be argued that in New York City noise should not be regulated, because if it were, the city would drastically change in a negative way. This argument assumes that, for example, a bar must be shut down for it to not cause disturbing levels of noise after midnight. This ignores the fact that the bar could simply lower its noise levels, and/or install soundproofing structural elements to keep the noise from excessively transmitting onto others' properties.

===Black-and-white thinking===

In psychology, a phenomenon related to the false dilemma is black-and-white thinking. Many people routinely engage in black-and-white thinking, an example of which is someone who labels other people as all good or all bad. AJ Giannini. Use of fiction in therapy. Psychiatric Times. 18(7):56-57,2001. 

==See also==

* Bivalence
* Correlative-based fallacies
* Degrees of truth
* Half-truth
* Hobson's choice
* Law of excluded middle
* Loaded question
* Lovehate relationship
* Multi-valued logic
* Nolan Chart
* Nondualism
* Obscurantism
* Pascal's Wager
* Perspectivism
* Principle of bivalence
* Rogerian argument
* Sorites paradox
* Strange loop
* Thinking outside the box
* Two-party system
* None of the above
* One-party system
* Show election
* Unreason

==References==

==External links==
* The Black-or-White Fallacy entry in The Fallacy Files



[[Loaded question]]

A loaded question or complex question fallacy is a question which contains a controversial or unjustified assumption (e.g., a presumption of guilt). 

Aside from being an informal fallacy depending on usage, such questions may be used as a rhetorical tool: the question attempts to limit direct replies to be those that serve the questioner's agenda. The traditional example is the question "Have you stopped beating your wife?" Whether the respondent answers yes or no, he will admit to having a wife and having beaten her at some time in the past. Thus, these facts are presupposed by the question, and in this case an entrapment, because it narrows the respondent to a single answer, and the fallacy of many questions has been committed. The fallacy relies upon context for its effect: the fact that a question presupposes something does not in itself make the question fallacious. Only when some of these presuppositions are not necessarily agreed to by the person who is asked the question does the argument containing them become fallacious. Hence the same question may be loaded in one context, but not in the other. For example the previous question would not be loaded if it was asked during a trial in which the defendant has already admitted to beating his wife. Douglas N. Walton, Informal logic: a handbook for critical argumentation, Cambridge University Press, 1989, ISBN 0-521-37925-3, pp. 3637 

This fallacy should be distinguished from that of begging the question, Fallacy: Begging the Question The Nizkor Project. Retrieved on: January 22, 2008 which offers a premise whose plausibility depends on the truth of the proposition asked about, and which is often an implicit restatement of the proposition. 

The term "loaded question" is sometimes used to refer to loaded language that is phrased as a question. This type of question does not necessarily contain a fallacious presupposition, but rather this usage refers to the question having an unspoken and often emotive implication. For example, "Are you a murderer?" would be such a loaded question, as "murder" has a very negative connotation. Such a question may be asked merely to harass or upset the respondent with no intention of listening to their reply, or asked with the full expectation that the respondent will predictably deny it.

==Defense==
A common way out of this argument is not to answer the question (e.g. with a simple 'yes' or 'no'), but to challenge the assumption behind the question. To use an earlier example, a good response to the question "Have you stopped beating your wife?" would be "I have never beaten my wife". This removes the ambiguity of the expected response, therefore nullifying the tactic. However, the askers of said questions have learned to get around this tactic by accusing the one who answers of dodging the question. A rhetorical question such as "Then please explain, how could I possibly have beaten a wife that I've never had?" can be an effective antidote to this further tactic, placing the burden on the deceptive questioner either to expose their tactic or stop the line of inquiry. In many cases a short answer is important. I neither did nor do I now makes a good example on how to answer the question without letting the asker interrupt and misshape the response.

==Historical examples==
Madeleine Albright (U.S. Ambassador to the U.N.) claims to have answered a loaded question (and later regretted not challenging it instead) on 60 Minutes on 12 May 1996. Lesley Stahl asked, regarding the effects of UN sanctions against Iraq, "We have heard that a half million children have died. I mean, that is more children than died in Hiroshima. And, you know, is the price worth it?"
Madeleine Albright: "I think that is a very hard choice, but the price, we think, the price is worth it." 
She later wrote of this response

I must have been crazy; I should have answered the question by reframing it and pointing out the inherent flaws in the premise behind it.  As soon as I had spoken, I wished for the power to freeze time and take back those words. My reply had been a terrible mistake, hasty, clumsy, and wrong.  I had fallen into a trap and said something that I simply did not mean. That is no ones fault but my own. 

President Bill Clinton, the moderator in a town meeting discussing the topic "Race In America", in response to a participant argument that the issue was not affirmative action but "racial preferences" asked the participant a loaded question: "Do you favor the United States Army abolishing the affirmative-action program that produced Colin Powell? Yes or no?" 

For another example, the New Zealand corporal punishment referendum, 2009 asked:

"Should a smack as part of good parental correction be a criminal offence in New Zealand?"

Murray Edridge, of Barnardos New Zealand, criticized the question as "loaded and ambiguous" and claimed "the question presupposes that smacking is a part of good parental correction". 

==See also==
* Complex question
* Entailment (pragmatics)
* False dilemma
* Gotcha journalism
* Implicature
* Leading question
* Mu (negative)
* Presupposition
* Suggestive question

==References==

==External links==
* Fallacy: Loaded Questions and Complex Claims Critical Thinking exercises. San Jose State University. 
* Logical Fallacy: Loaded Question The Fallacy Files



[[Ignoratio elenchi]]

Ignoratio elenchi, also known as irrelevant conclusion, Bishop Whately, cited by John Stuart Mill: A System of Logic. London Colchester 1959 (first: 1843), pp. 542. is the informal fallacy of presenting an argument that may or may not be logically valid, but fails nonetheless to address the issue in question.

Ignoratio elenchi falls into the broad class of relevance fallacies. It is one of the fallacies identified by Aristotle in his Organon. In a broader sense he asserted that all fallacies are a form of ignoratio elenchi. 

The phrase ignoratio elenchi is Latin meaning "an ignoring of a refutation". Here elenchi is the genitive singular of the Latin noun elenchus, which is from the Greek elenchos, meaning an argument of disproof or refutation. The translation in English of the Latin expression has varied somewhat. Hamblin proposed "misconception of refutation" or "ignorance of refutation" as a literal translation, Oesterle preferred "ignoring the issue", Irving Copi, Christopher Tindale and others used "irrelevant conclusion". 

An example might be a situation where A and B are debating whether the law permits A to do something. If A attempts to support his position with an argument that the law ought to allow him to do the thing in question, then he is guilty of ignoratio elenchi. H. W. Fowler, A Dictionary of Modern English Usage. Entry for ignoratio elenchi. 

Dr Johnson's unique "refutation" of Bishop Berkeley's immaterialism, his claim that matter did not actually exist but only seemed to exist, has been described as Ignoratio elenchi: 
Bagnall, Nicholas. Books: Paperbacks, The Sunday Telegraph 3 March 1996 during a conversation with Boswell, Johnson powerfully kicked a nearby stone and proclaimed of Berkeley's theory, "I refute it thus!" (See also ad lapidem.)

A related concept is that of the red herring, which is a deliberate attempt to divert a process of enquiry by changing the subject. Ignoratio elenchi is sometimes confused with straw man argument. For example, it has been incorrectly described as "attacking what the other fellow never said" (which is actually a straw man fallacy) by Peter Jay in an article in a 1996 article in New Statesman. Jay, Peter, Counterfeit coin, New Statesman, 23 August 1996 

==See also==
*Ad hominem
*Begging the question
*Chewbacca defense
*Enthymeme
*List of fallacies
*Non sequitur (logic)
*Reductio ad Hitlerum
*Red herring
*Sophism
*Straw man

==References==

==External links==

*Appeal to Authority Breakdown, Examples, Definitions, & More
*Nizkor Project: Red Herring
*Fallacy Files: Red Herring
*The Phrase Finder: Red Herring
*The Art of Controversy: Diversion (bilingual with the original German) by Arthur Schopenhauer
*Red herring in political speech
* Ignoratio Elechi on TV Tropes

Red Herring
 



[[Equivocation]]

Equivocation ("to call by the same name") is classified as an informal logical fallacy. It is the misleading use of a term with more than one meaning or sense (by glossing over which meaning is intended at a particular time). It generally occurs with polysemic words (words with multiple meanings).

It is often confused with amphiboly; the difference is that equivocation arises from an ambiguous definition of a word, while amphiboly refers to ambiguous sentence structure due to punctuation or syntax.

==Examples==

===Fallacious reasoning===
Equivocation is the use in a syllogism (a logical chain of reasoning) of a term several times, but giving the term a different meaning each time. For example:
:A feather is light.
:What is light cannot be dark.
:Therefore, a feather cannot be dark.

In this use of equivocation, the word "light" is first used as the opposite of "heavy", but then used as a synonym of "bright" (the fallacy usually becomes obvious as soon as one tries to translate this argument into another language). Because the "middle term" of this syllogism is not one term, but two separate ones masquerading as one (all feathers are indeed "not heavy", but it is not true that all feathers are "bright"), this type of equivocation is actually an example of the fallacy of four terms.

===Semantic shift===
The fallacy of equivocation is often used with words that have a strong emotional content and many meanings. These meanings often coincide within proper context, but the fallacious arguer does a semantic shift, slowly changing the context by treating, as equivalent, distinct meanings of the term.

===="Man"====
In English language, one equivocation is with the word "man", which can mean both "member of the species, Homo sapiens," and "male member of the species, Homo sapiens." The following sentence is a well-known equivocation:

:"Do women need to worry about man-eating sharks?", in which "man-eating" is construed to mean a shark that devours only male human beings.

===="Impossible"====
:"People testing for faster than light phenomena must not know it's impossible to travel faster than the speed of light."
Here, "impossible" is construed to mean that there's zero chance that relativity (the physics theory) is wrong. However, "it's impossible to travel faster than the speed of light" is taught to mean that based on relativity, there's no way (hence "impossible") to travel faster than the speed of light.

===Switch-referencing===
This occurs where the referent of a word or expression in a second sentence is different from that in the immediately preceding sentence, especially where a change in referent has not been clearly identified.

====Metaphor====
:All jackasses have long ears.
:Carl is a jackass.
:Therefore, Carl has long ears.

Here the equivocation is the metaphorical use of "jackass" to imply a stupid or obnoxious person instead of a male donkey.

===="Nothing is better than"====
:Margarine is better than nothing.
:Nothing is better than butter.
:Therefore, margarine is better than butter.

==Specific types of equivocation fallacies==
:See main articles: False attribution, Fallacy of quoting out of context, No true Scotsman.

==See also==
* Evasion (ethics)
* Fallacy of four terms
* If-by-whiskey
* Mental reservation
* Plausible deniability
* When a white horse is not a horse

==References==
* Logical Fallacy: Equivocation The Fallacy Files



[[Sampling bias]]

In statistics, sampling bias is a bias in which a sample is collected in such a way that some members of the intended population are less likely to be included than others. It results in a biased sample, a non-random sample Medical Dictionary - 'Sampling Bias' Retrieved on September 23, 2009 of a population (or non-human factors) in which all individuals, or instances, were not equally likely to have been selected. TheFreeDictionary  biased sample Retrieved on 2009-09-23. Site in turn cites: Mosby's Medical Dictionary, 8th edition. If this is not accounted for, results can be erroneously attributed to the phenomenon under study rather than to the method of sampling.

Medical sources sometimes refer to sampling bias as ascertainment bias. Page 34 in: Selection and linkage desequilibrium tests under complex demographies and ascertainment bias Francesc Calafell i Maj, Anna Ramrez i Soriano. July 2008 Ascertainment bias has basically the same definition, medilexicon Medical Dictionary - 'Ascertainment Bias' Retrieved on November 14, 2009 but is still sometimes classified as a separate type of bias. Panacek: Error in research Society for Academic Emergency Medicine. Retrieved on November 14, 2009 

==Distinction from selection bias==
Sampling bias is mostly classified as a subtype of selection bias, Dictionary of Cancer Terms  Selection Bias Retrieved on September 23, 2009 sometimes specifically termed sample selection bias, The effects of sample selection bias on racial differences in child abuse reporting Ards S, Chung C, Myers SL Jr. Child Abuse Negl. 1999 December;23(12):1209; author reply 1211-5. PMID 9504213 Sample Selection Bias Correction Theory Corinna Cortes, Mehryar Mohri, Michael Riley, and Afshin Rostamizadeh. New York University. Domain Adaptation and Sample Bias Correction Theory and Algorithm for Regression Corinna Cortes, Mehryar Mohri. New York University. but some classify it as a separate type of bias. Page 262 in: Behavioral Science. Board Review Series. By Barbara Fadem. ISBN 0-7817-8257-0, ISBN 978-0-7817-8257-9. 216 pages A distinction, albeit not universally accepted, of sampling bias is that it undermines the external validity of a test (the ability of its results to be generalized to the rest of the population), while selection bias mainly addresses internal validity for differences or similarities found in the sample at hand. In this sense, errors occurring in the process of gathering the sample or cohort cause sampling bias, while errors in any process thereafter cause selection bias.

However, selection bias and sampling bias are often used synonymously. Wallace/Maxcy-Rosenau-Last public health & preventive medicine (page 21) 15ed, illustrated. By Robert B. Wallace. ISBN 0-07-144198-0, ISBN 978-0-07-144198-8 

==Types of sampling bias==
* Selection from a specific real area. For example, a survey of high school students to measure teenage use of illegal drugs will be a biased sample because it does not include home-schooled students or dropouts. A sample is also biased if certain members are underrepresented or overrepresented relative to others in the population. For example, a "man on the street" interview which selects people who walk by a certain location is going to have an overrepresentation of healthy individuals who are more likely to be out of the home than individuals with a chronic illness. This may be an extreme form of biased sampling, because certain members of the population are totally excluded from the sample (that is, they have zero probability of being selected).
* Self-selection bias, which is possible whenever the group of people being studied has any form of control over whether to participate. Participants' decision to participate may be correlated with traits that affect the study, making the participants a non-representative sample. For example, people who have strong opinions or substantial knowledge may be more willing to spend time answering a survey than those who do not. Another example is online and phone-in polls, which are biased samples because the respondents are self-selected. Those individuals who are highly motivated to respond, typically individuals who have strong opinions, are overrepresented, and individuals that are indifferent or apathetic are less likely to respond. This often leads to a polarization of responses with extreme perspectives being given a disproportionate weight in the summary. As a result, these types of polls are regarded as unscientific.
* Pre-screening of trial participants, or advertising for volunteers within particular groups. For example a study to "prove" that smoking does not affect fitness might recruit at the local fitness center, but advertise for smokers during the advanced aerobics class, and for non-smokers during the weight loss sessions.
* Exclusion bias results from exclusion of particular groups from the sample, e.g. exclusion of subjects who have recently migrated into the study area (this may occur when newcomers are not available in a register used to identify the source population). Excluding subjects who move out of the study area during follow-up is rather equivalent of dropout or nonresponse, a selection bias in that it rather affects the internal validity of the study.
* Healthy user bias, when the study population is likely healthier than the general population, e.g. workers (i.e. someone in ill-health is unlikely to have a job as manual laborer).
* Berkson's fallacy, when the study population is selected from a hospital and so is less healthy than the general population. This can result in a spurious negative correlation between diseases: a hospital patient without diabetes is more likely to have another given disease such as cholecystis, since they must have had some reason to enter the hospital in the first place.
* Overmatching, matching for an apparent confounder that actually is a result of the exposure. The control group becomes more similar to the cases in regard to exposure than the general population.

===Symptom-based sampling===
The study of medical conditions begins with anecdotal reports. By their nature, such reports only include those referred for diagnosis and treatment. A child who can't function in school is more likely to be diagnosed with dyslexia than a child who struggles but passes. A child examined for one condition is more likely to be tested for and diagnosed with other conditions, skewing comorbidity statistics. As certain diagnoses become associated with behavior problems or intellectual disability, parents try to prevent their children from being stigmatized with those diagnoses, introducing further bias. Studies carefully selected from whole populations are showing that many conditions are much more common and usually much milder than formerly believed.

===Truncate selection in pedigree studies===
Simple pedigree example of sampling bias
Geneticists are limited in how they can obtain data from human populations. As an example, consider a human characteristic. We are interested in deciding if the characteristic is inherited as a simple Mendelian trait. Following the laws of Mendelian inheritance, if the parents in a family do not have the characteristic, but carry the allele for it, they are carriers (e.g. a non-expressive heterozygote). In this case their children will each have a 25% chance of showing the characteristic. The problem arises because we can't tell which families have both parents as carriers (heterozygous) unless they have a child who exhibits the characteristic. The description follows the textbook by Sutton. 

The figure shows the pedigrees of all the possible families with two children when the parents are carriers (Aa). 
* Nontruncate selection. In a perfect world we should be able to discover all such families with a gene including those who are simply carriers. In this situation the analysis would be free from ascertainment bias and the pedigrees would be under "nontruncate selection" In practice, most studies identify, and include, families in a study based upon them having affected individuals. 
* Truncate selection. When afflicted individuals have an equal chance of being included in a study this is called truncate selection, signifying the inadvertent exclusion (truncation) of families who are carriers for a gene. Because selection is performed on the individual level, families with two or more affected children would have a higher probability of becoming included in the study.
* Complete truncate selection is a special case where each family with an affected child has an equal chance of being selected for the study.

The probabilities of each of the families being selected is given in the figure, with the sample frequency of affected children also given. In this simple case, the researcher will look for a frequency of or for the characteristic, depending on the type of truncate selection used.

===The caveman effect===
An example of selection bias is called the "caveman effect". Much of our understanding of prehistoric peoples comes from caves, such as cave paintings made nearly 40,000 years ago. If there had been contemporary paintings on trees, animal skins or hillsides, they would have been washed away long ago. Similarly, evidence of fire pits, middens, burial sites, etc. are most likely to remain intact to the modern era in caves. Prehistoric people are associated with caves because that is where the data still exists, not necessarily because most of them lived in caves for most of their lives.

==Problems caused by sampling bias==

A biased sample causes problems because any statistic computed from that sample has the potential to be consistently erroneous. The bias can lead to an over- or underrepresentation of the corresponding parameter in the population. Almost every sample in practice is biased because it is practically impossible to ensure a perfectly random sample. If the degree of underrepresentation is small, the sample can be treated as a reasonable approximation to a random sample. Also, if the group that is underrepresented does not differ markedly from the other groups in the quantity being measured, then a random sample can still be a reasonable approximation.

The word bias has a strong negative connotation. Indeed, biases sometimes come from deliberate intent to mislead or other scientific fraud. In statistical usage, bias merely represents a mathematical property, no matter if it is deliberate or either unconscious or due to imperfections in the instruments used for observation. While some individuals might deliberately use a biased sample to produce misleading results, more often, a biased sample is just a reflection of the difficulty in obtaining a truly representative sample.

Some samples use a biased statistical design which nevertheless allows the estimation of parameters. The U.S. National Center for Health Statistics, for example, deliberately oversamples from minority populations in many of its nationwide surveys in order to gain sufficient precision for estimates within these groups. National Center for Health Statistics (2007). Minority Health. These surveys require the use of sample weights (see later on) to produce proper estimates across all ethnic groups. Provided that certain conditions are met (chiefly that the sample is drawn randomly from the entire sample) these samples permit accurate estimation of population parameters.

==Historical examples==

Example of biased sample, claiming as of June 2008, that only 54% of web browsers (Internet Explorer) in use do not pass the Acid2 test. The statistics are from visitors to one website comprising mostly web developers. 

A classic example of a biased sample and the misleading results it produced occurred in 1936. In the early days of opinion polling, the American Literary Digest magazine collected over two million postal surveys and predicted that the Republican candidate in the U.S. presidential election, Alf Landon, would beat the incumbent president, Franklin Roosevelt, by a large margin. The result was the exact opposite. The Literary Digest survey represented a sample collected from readers of the magazine, supplemented by records of registered automobile owners and telephone users. This sample included an over-representation of individuals who were rich, who, as a group, were more likely to vote for the Republican candidate. In contrast, a poll of only 50 thousand citizens selected by George Gallup's organization successfully predicted the result, leading to the popularity of the Gallup poll.

Another classic example occurred in the 1948 presidential election. On election night, the Chicago Tribune printed the headline DEWEY DEFEATS TRUMAN, which turned out to be mistaken. In the morning the grinning president-elect, Harry S. Truman, was photographed holding a newspaper bearing this headline. The reason the Tribune was mistaken is that their editor trusted the results of a phone survey. Survey research was then in its infancy, and few academics realized that a sample of telephone users was not representative of the general population. Telephones were not yet widespread, and those who had them tended to be prosperous and have stable addresses. (In many cities, the Bell System telephone directory contained the same names as the Social Register.) In addition, the Gallup poll that the Tribune based its headline on was over two weeks old at the time of the printing. Based on http://www.uh.edu/engines/epi1199.htm retrieved on September 29, 2007 

==Statistical corrections for a biased sample==
If entire segments of the population are excluded from a sample, then there are no adjustments that can produce estimates that are representative of the entire population. But if some groups are underrepresented and the degree of underrepresentation can be quantified, then sample weights can correct the bias.

For example, a hypothetical population might include 10 million men and 10 million women. Suppose that a biased sample of 100 patients included 20 men and 80 women. A researcher could correct for this imbalance by attaching a weight of 2.5 for each male and 0.625 for each female. This would adjust any estimates to achieve the same expected value as a sample that included exactly 50 men and 50 women, unless men and women differed in their likelihood of taking part in the survey.

==See also==

*Selection bias
*Cherry picking (fallacy)
*File drawer problem
*Friendship paradox
*Reporting bias
*Spectrum bias
*Censored regression model
*Truncated regression model

==References==

==External links==
* Sample selection and consistency of estimators. Examples of selection equations
* Reject Inference for removing Sampling Bias. Reject Inference and methods to apply the same.

Sampling bias


[[No true Scotsman]]

No true Scotsman is an informal fallacy, an ad hoc attempt to retain an unreasoned assertion. No True Scotsman, Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy When faced with a counterexample to a universal claim ("no Scotsman would do such a thing"), rather than denying the counterexample or rejecting the original universal claim, this fallacy modifies the subject of the assertion to exclude the specific case or others like it by rhetoric, without reference to any specific objective rule ("no true Scotsman would do such a thing") , creating an implied tautology. It can also be used to create unnecessary requirements.

==Examples==
A simple rendition of the fallacy: 

:Person A: "No Scotsman puts sugar on his porridge."
:Person B: "I am Scottish, and I put sugar on my porridge."
:Person A: "Well, no true Scotsman puts sugar on his porridge."

A cited example of a political application of the fallacy was asserting that "no democracy starts a war", then distinguishing between mature or "true" democracies, which never start wars, and "emerging democracies", which may start them. Spengler. "No true Scotsman starts a war", Asia Times Online, Jan 31, 2006 

==Origin==
The use of the term was advanced by British philosopher Antony Flew:

==See also==

*Begging the question
*Epistemic commitment
*Equivocation
*Loaded language

*Moving the goalposts
*Persuasive definition
*Reification (fallacy)
*Special pleading
*Tautology_(rhetoric)

==References==



[[Slippery slope]]

In logic and critical thinking, a slippery slope is a logical device, but is usually known under its fallacious form in which a person asserts that some event must inevitably follow from another without any rational argument or demonstrable mechanism for the inevitability of the event in question. A slippery slope argument states that a relatively small first step leads to a chain of related events culminating in some significant effect, much like an object given a small push over the edge of a slope sliding all the way to the bottom. The strength of such an argument depends on the warrant, i.e. whether or not one can demonstrate a process that leads to the significant effect. The fallacious sense of "slippery slope" is often used synonymously with continuum fallacy, in that it ignores the possibility of middle ground and assumes a discrete transition from category A to category B. Modern usage avoids the fallacy by acknowledging the possibility of this middle ground.

== Description ==
The argument takes on one of various semantical forms:
* In the classical form, the arguer suggests that making a move in a particular direction starts something on a path down a "slippery slope". Having started down the metaphorical slope, it will continue to slide in the same direction (the arguer usually sees the direction as a negative direction, hence the "sliding downwards" metaphor).
* Modern usage includes a logically valid form, in which a minor action causes a significant impact through a long chain of logical relationships. Note that establishing this chain of logical implication (or quantifying the relevant probabilities) makes this form logically valid. The slippery slope argument remains a fallacy if such a chain is not established.

=== Consequentialism and unintended consequences ===
The core of the slippery slope argument is that a specific rule or course of action is likely to result in unintended consequences and that these "unintended consequences" are undesirable (and, typically, worse than either inaction or another course of remediation). This criticism is a consequentialist criticism - interested in consequences or outcomes or results of a course of action - and does not impugn the character or intentions of the one(s) offering the "slippery slope" argument(s), the basis or bases or concerns underlying the offering of the arguments against a rule or course of action, nor the legitimacy of arguing against any specific rule or course of action.

=== Examples ===
Eugene Volokh's Mechanisms of the Slippery Slope (PDF version) analyzes various types of such slippage. Volokh uses the example "gun registration may lead to gun confiscation" to describe six types of slippage:

#
Slippery slope can also be used as a retort to the establishment of arbitrary boundaries or limitations. For example, someone who is unfamiliar with the possible negative consequences of price ceilings might argue that rent prices must be kept to $1,000 or less a month to be affordable to tenants in an area of a city. A retort invoking the slippery slope could go in two different directions:
* Once such price ceilings become accepted, they could be slowly lowered, eventually driving out the landlords and worsening the problem.
* If a $1,000 monthly rent is affordable, why isn't $1,025 or $1,050? By lumping the tenants into one abstract entity, the argument renders itself vulnerable to a slippery slope argument. A more careful argument in favor of price ceilings would statistically characterize the number of tenants who can afford housing at various levels based on income and choose a ceiling that achieves a specific goal, such as housing 80% of the working families in the area.

Sometimes a single action does indeed induce similar later action. For example, judiciary decisions may set legal precedents.

== Supporting analogies ==

Several common analogies support slippery slope arguments. Among these are analogies to physical momentum, to frictional forces and to mathematical induction.

=== Momentum or frictional ===
In the momentum analogy, the occurrence of event A will initiate a process which will lead inevitably to occurrence of event B. The process may involve causal relationships between intermediate events, but in any case the slippery slope schema depends for its soundness on the validity of some analogue for the physical principle of momentum. This may take the form of a domino theory or contagion formulation. The domino theory principle may indeed explain why a chain of dominoes collapses, but an independent argument is necessary to explain why a similar principle would hold in other circumstances.

An analogy similar to the momentum analogy is based on friction. In physics, the static co-efficient of friction is always greater than the kinetic co-efficient, meaning that it takes more force to make an object start sliding than to keep it sliding. Arguments that use this analogy assume that people's habits or inhibitions act in the same way. If a particular rule A is considered inviolable, some force akin to static friction is regarded as maintaining the status quo, preventing movement in the direction of abrogating A. If, on the other hand, an exception is made to A, the countervailing resistive force is akin to the weaker kinetic frictional force. Validity of this analogy requires an argument showing that the initial changes actually make further change in the direction of abrogating A easier.

=== Induction===
Another analogy resembles yet misinterprets mathematical induction. Consider the context of evaluating each one of a class of events A1, A2, A3,..., An (for example, is the occurrence of the event harmful or not?). We assume that for each k, the event Ak is similar to Ak+1, so that Ak has the same evaluation as Ak+1.

Therefore every Ak has the same evaluation as A1.

For example, the following arguments fit the slippery slope scheme with the inductive interpretation:

* If we grant a building permit to build a religious structure in our community, then there will be no bound on the number of building permits we will have to grant for religious structures and the nature of this city will change.

This argument instantiates the slippery slope scheme as follows: Ak is the situation in which k building permits are issued. One first argues that the situation of k permits is not significantly different from the one with k + 1 permits. Moreover, issuing permits to build 1000 religious structures in a city of 300,000 will clearly change the nature of the community.

In most real-world applications such as the one above, the nave inductive analogy is flawed because each building permit will not be evaluated the same way (for example, the more religious structures in a community, the less likely a permit will be granted for another).

== See also ==
*Boiling frog
*Butterfly effect
*Creeping normality
*Euthanasia and the slippery slope
*First they came ...
*Gateway drug theory
*Trivial objections
*Splitting (psychology)
*Foot-in-the-door technique
*Precedent
*Overton window
*Parade of horribles
*Broken windows theory
*Sorites paradox

== References ==

== Further reading == 

*.

*

== External links ==
*Propaganda Critic: Unwarranted extrapolation
*Nizkor: Slippery slope
*Fallacy files: slippery slope
*Slippery slope in politics



[[Argument from ignorance]]

 

Argument from ignorance (), also known as appeal to ignorance (in which ignorance stands for "lack of evidence to the contrary"), is a fallacy in informal logic. It asserts that a proposition is true because it has not yet been proven false (or vice versa). This represents a type of false dichotomy in that it excludes a third option, which is that there is insufficient investigation and therefore insufficient information to prove the proposition satisfactorily to be either true or false. Nor does it allow the admission that the choices may in fact not be two (true or false), but may be as many as four, (1) true, (2) false, (3) unknown between true or false, and (4) being unknowable (among the first three). In debates, appeals to ignorance are sometimes used to shift the burden of proof.

The fallaciousness of arguments from ignorance does not mean that one can never possess good reasons for thinking that something does not exist, an idea captured by philosopher Bertrand Russell's teapot, a hypothetical china teapot revolving about the sun between Earth and Mars; however this would fall more duly under the arena of pragmatism, wherein a position must be demonstrated or proven in order to be upheld, and therefore the burden of proof is on the argument's proponent. See also Occam's razor ("prefer the explanation with the fewest assumptions").

== Overview ==

===Basic argument===
Arguments that appeal to ignorance rely merely on the fact that the veracity of the proposition is not disproven to arrive at a definite conclusion. These arguments fail to appreciate that the limits of one's understanding or certainty do not change what is true. They do not inform upon reality. That is, whatever the reality is, it does not "wait" upon human logic or analysis to be formulated. Reality exists at all times, and it exists independently of what is in the mind of anyone. And the true thrust of science and rational analysis is to separate preconceived notion(s) of what reality is, and to be open at all times to the observation of nature as it behaves, so as truly to discover reality. This fallacy can be very convincing and is considered by some Gracyk's Explanations of basic fallacies to be a special case of a false dilemma or false dichotomy in that they both fail to consider alternatives. A false dilemma may take the form:

* If a proposition has not been disproven, then it cannot be considered false and must therefore be considered true.
* If a proposition has not been proven, then it cannot be considered true and must therefore be considered false.
Such arguments attempt to exploit the facts that (a) true things can never be disproven and (b) false things can never be proven. In other words, appeals to ignorance claim that the converse of these facts are also true. Therein lies the fallacy.

To reiterate, these arguments ignore the fact, and difficulty, that some true things may never be proven, and some false things may never be disproved with absolute certainty.
The phrase "the absence of evidence is not the evidence of absence" can be used as a shorthand rebuttal to the second form of the ignorance fallacy (i.e. P has never been absolutely proven and is therefore certainly false). Most often it is directed at any conclusion derived from null results in an experiment or from the non-detection of something. In other words, where one researcher may say their experiment suggests evidence of absence, another researcher might argue that the experiment failed to detect a phenomenon for other reasons.

===Matters of confusion===

Much confusion about arguments from ignorance can be caused when one side of a debate forgets that we often possess evidence of absence in practice.

The ignorance fallacy is sometimes confused (or combined) with logically valid contrapositive arguments. Contrapositive arguments rightly utilize the transposition rule of inference in classical logic to conclude something like: To the extent that C implies E then Not-E must also imply Not-C. In other words, if a cause always leads to an effect, then absence of the expected effect is evidence of absence of the cause. For example, if the causal proposition that If it's raining outside then the streets will be wet is assumed, then it can be assumed that if the streets are not wet then it is not raining outside. The inference that it cannot be raining outside because the streets are not getting wet is exactly as true, or perhaps exactly as untrue, as the original proposition. The statements are logically equivalent.

Carl Sagan explains in his book The Demon-Haunted World:

For instance, absence of evidence that it rained (i.e. water is the evidence) may be considered as positive evidence that it did not rain. Again, in science, such inferences are always made to some limited (sometimes extremely high) degree of probability and in this case absence of evidence is evidence of absence when the positive evidence should have been there but is not.

Arguments from ignorance can easily find their way into debates over the existence of God. It is a fallacy to draw conclusions based precisely on ignorance, since this does not satisfactorily address issues of philosophic burden of proof. But null results are not ignorance and can be used as evidence to achieve a given burden of proof.

==Related terms==

=== Contraposition and transposition ===
Contraposition is a logically valid rule of inference that allows the creation of a new proposition from the negation and reordering of an existing one. The method applies to any proposition of the type If A then B and says that negating all the variables and switching them back to front leads to a new proposition i.e. If Not-B then Not-A that is just as true as the original one and that the first implies the second and the second implies the first.

Transposition is exactly the same thing described in a different language.

=== Absence of evidence ===
Absence of evidence is the absence, or lack of, any kind of evidence that may show, indicate, suggest, or be used to infer or deduce a fact.

=== Evidence of absence ===

Evidence of absence is evidence of any kind that can be used to infer or deduce the non-existence or non-presence of something. For instance, if a doctor does not find any malignant cells in a patient this null result (finding nothing) is evidence of absence of cancer, even though the doctor has not actually detected anything per se. Such inductive reasoning is important to empiricism and science, but has well established limitations. The challenge thus becomes to try to identify when a researcher has received a null result (found nothing) because the thing does not exist (evidence of absence - objectively negative result), and when one simply lacks proper means of detection (absence of evidence - false negative).

=== Negative evidence ===
Negative evidence is sometimes used as an alternative to absence of evidence and is often meant to be synonymous with it. On the other hand, the term may also refer to evidence with a negative value, or null result equivalent to evidence of absence. It may even refer to positive evidence about something of an unpleasant nature.

=== Null result ===
Null result is a term often used in the field of science to indicate evidence of absence. A search for water on the ground may yield a null result (the ground is dry); therefore, it probably did not rain.

==Related arguments==

=== Argument from incredulity/Lack of imagination ===
Arguments from incredulity take the form:
# P is too incredible (or: I cannot imagine how P could possibly be true); therefore P must be false.
# I cannot imagine how P could possibly be false; therefore P must be true.
These arguments are similar to arguments from ignorance in that they too ignore and do not properly eliminate the possibility that something can be both incredible and still be true, or appear to be obvious and yet still be false.

=== Argument from self-knowing (auto-epistemic) ===
Arguments from self-knowing take the form:

# If P were true then I would know it; in fact I do not know it; therefore P cannot be true.
# If P were false then I would know it; in fact I do not know it; therefore P cannot be false.

In practice these arguments are often fallacious and rely on the veracity of the supporting premise. For example the argument that If I had just sat on a wild porcupine then I would know it; in fact I do not know it; therefore I did not just sit on a wild porcupine is probably not a fallacy and depends entirely on the veracity of the leading proposition that supports it. (See Contraposition and Transposition in the Related terms section in this article.)

== Distinguishing absence of evidence from evidence of absence ==
Absence of evidence is a condition in which no valid conclusion can be inferred from the mere absence of detection, normally due to doubt in the detection method. Evidence of absence is the successful variation: a conclusion that relies on specific knowledge in conjunction with negative detection to deduce the absence of something. An example of evidence of absence is checking your pockets for spare change and finding nothing, but being confident that the search would have found it if it was there.

===Formal argument===
By determining that a given experiment or method of detection is sensitive and reliable enough to detect the presence of X (when X is present) one can confidently exclude the possibility that X may be both undetected and present. This allows one to deduce that X cannot be present if a null result is received.

Thus there are only two possibilities, given a null result:
# Nothing detected, and X is not present.
# Nothing detected, but X is present (option eliminated by careful research design).

To the extent that option 2 can be eliminated, one can deduce that if X is not detected then X is not present and therefore the null result is evidence of absence.

== Examples ==

=== Absence of evidence ===
(These examples contain or represent missing information.)

* Statements that begin with "I can't prove it but ..." are often referring to some kind absence of evidence.
* "There is no evidence of foul play here" is a direct reference to the absence of evidence.
* "There is no evidence of aliens, and therefore, aliens do not exist" appeals to an absence of evidence

=== Negative results ===
* When the doctor says that the test results were negative, it is usually good news.
* Under "Termites" the inspector checked the box that read "no".
* The results of MichelsonMorley's experiment reported no shift at all in the interference pattern.

=== Evidence of absence ===
(These examples contain definite evidence that can be used to show, indicate, suggest, infer or deduce the non-existence or non-presence of something.)

* A biopsy shows the absence of malignant cells.
* The null result found by MichelsonMorley's famous experiment represents "strong evidence" that the luminiferous aether was not present.
* One very carefully inspects the back seat of one's car and finds no tigers.
* The train schedule does not say that the train stops here at 3:00pm on a Sunday.

=== Arguments from ignorance ===
(Draws a conclusion based on lack of knowledge or evidence without accounting for all possibilities)
* "I take the view that this lack (of enemy subversive activity in the west coast) is the most ominous sign in our whole situation. It convinces me more than perhaps any other factor that the sabotage we are to get, the Fifth Column activities are to get, are timed just like Pearl Harbor ... I believe we are just being lulled into a false sense of security."  Earl Warren, then California's Attorney General (before a congressional hearing in San Francisco on 21 February 1942)

=== In the field of science ===
* One looks in the back seat of one's car and finds no adult-sized kangaroos and then uses this negative/null adult-sized kangaroo detection results in conjunction with the previously determined fact (or just plain old proposition) that adult-sized kangaroos, if present, cannot evade such detection, to deduce a new fact that there are indeed no adult-sized kangaroos present in the back seat of said car.

=== Principles in law ===
* The presumption of innocence, if present, effectively removes the possibility that the accused may be both guilty and unproven, from consideration in judgment, and as such the accused is considered as innocent unless proven guilty. (See decision table below)
*# Innocent and guilt is unproven. Judged as innocent.
*# Innocent and guilt is proven. Judged as guilty. (Jury is biased, misled, makes error; law is incorrect; false evidence fabricated etc.)
*# Guilty and guilt is unproven. Judged as innocent. (Presumption of innocence)
*# Guilty and guilt is proven. Judged as guilty. (Innocent unless/until proven guilty is a summary of this and easier to remember.)

== Origin of the term ==
From Fallacies: classical and contemporary readings by Hans V. Hansen, Robert C. Pinto:
:"It is generally accepted that the philosopher John Locke introduced the term in his Essay Concerning Human Understanding:"
::"Another way that Men ordinarily use to drive others, and force them to submit their Judgments. And receive the Opinion in debate, is to require the Adversary to admit what they alledge as a Proof, or assign a better. And this I call Argumentum ad Ignorantum"  John Locke An Essay Concerning Human Understanding. John Locke. p 682 

==See also==
* Argument from silence
* False dilemma
* Indeterminacy problem
* Negation as failure
* Philosophic burden of proof

== References ==

==Sources==

*
*
*

== Further reading ==
* Fallacies: classical and contemporary readings by Hans V. Hansen, Robert C. Pinto
* Introduction to Logic by Irving Marmer Copi
* Essay Concerning Human Understanding Book IV by John Locke

==External links==
*Appeal to Authority Breakdown section on Appeal to Ignorance
*Fallacy Files article on Appeal to Ignorance



[[Libre]]

Libre is a loan word in English borrowed from French. As it does in that language, "libre" in English denotes "the state of being free", as in "having freedom" or "liberty".

From the mid-1990s onward, Quo vadis, libre software?. libre became increasingly used to distinguish "free" as in freedom from "free" as in free of charge (the gratis versus libre distinction). For example, the distinction is made in the free/libre and open source software (FLOSS), free culture, open knowledge and libre knowledge communities. An adage of the free software movement that explains this difference reads:

In these contexts, libre encompasses the essential freedoms defined in the free software definition, and is used to describe works which may be used, modified, copied and shared without permission from the copyright holder. Examples of terms that include the adjective libre: libre software, FLOSS, libre knowledge and libre cultural works. Public copyright licenses that guarantee these freedoms ("libre licences") often require attribution for contributors and sometimes include copyleft terms that ensure these essential freedoms remain in future derivative works. Works that are in the public domain are also considered libre. 

 

The word "libre" has been recommended as a substitute for "free" when the "freedom" sense is intended (not the gratis sense), and for "open" when the essential freedoms apply. 

Non-libre licences (sometimes called proprietary licences) are those which deny users at least one of the essential freedoms. For example, licences that forbid commercial use or derivative works are non-libre.

==Etymology==
Libre comes from the Latin word lber, via the French libre; it shares that root with liberty. It denotes "the state of being free", as in "having freedom" or "liberty". The Oxford English Dictionary (OED) describes libre as obsolete, OED.com, OED definition of libre: "Obs. Of the will: Free". but the word has come back into limited use. Libre appears in few English dictionaries. The Onelook dictionary website finds about 5 monoglot English dictionaries including "libre"; about 30 include "gratis". Its primary use in English is to distinguish the two meanings of free: free as in freedom and free as in free of charge.

==History==
Although the use of libre in English for this meaning is a relatively recent one, the concept of works that are free of permission restrictions is as old as print itself. The Diamond Sutra, the world's oldest dated printed book, includes the sentence:

Reverently to be made for universal free distribution by Wang Jie on behalf of his two parents on the 13th of the 4th moon of the 9th year of Xiantong 11th May, AD 868 

The use of libre in English to describe free software dates back at least to 1995. The term software libre has since been used by the European Commission. However, the concept of libre licensing existed well before the term was coined.

The first libre definition was the free software definition published by the Free Software Foundation in 1986. Although limited to software, its four freedoms effectively identified those freedoms required for all libre works and the free culture and libre knowledge movements have used very similar freedoms in their definitions of free content and libre knowledge. 

In 1994, Ram Samudrala published the Free Music Philosophy. Mirroring the free software movement, it called for artists to allow their songs and compositions to be distributed with fewer copyright restrictions.

In 1998, the term open source was suggested as a substitute to free software because it avoided the ambiguous double-meaning of free in English and was not as value-laden as the term free software. In that year, David A. Wiley coined the term OpenContent to describe both a particular licence and the broader concept of non-software libre works. Ironically, the OpenContent License is not libre because it forbids making copies for profit.

Drawing on Lawrence Lessigs Free Culture (published in 2002), the free culture movement promoted the distribution of cultural works under similar terms to those free software is distributed under. One of the more active manifestations of this movement has been Students for Free Culture.

==In other languages==

Romance languages that have the gratis versus libre distinction do not need a specialised term for "free as in freedom". The Indian free software community sometimes uses the term "Swatantra software", borrowing a word from Sanskrit. In Filipino, the word "libre" (borrowed from Spanish) has the same cost/freedom ambiguity as the English word "free". The term "malayang software" is sometimes used instead. 

==Libre resources==
Libre resources describes the works containing or communicating libre knowledge, such as files in an open format containing text, an image, sound, multimedia, etc. or combinations of these, accessible with libre software, and released under a libre licence.

===Libre knowledge===

Libre knowledge describes a set of principles and methodologies common to those who want knowledgeand the works explaining and sharing knowledgeto be free and open to use. Knowledge is taken to include data, content and general information, but also draws terms and processes from the open source movement.

Users of libre knowledge are free to
(0) use the work for any purpose 
(1) study its mechanisms, to be able to modify and adapt it to their own needs 
(2) make and distribute copies, in whole or in part 
(3) enhance and/or extend the work and share the result. 
Freedoms 1 and 3 require free file formats and free software as defined by the Free Software Foundation 

====Libre content====

Libre content describes non-software and non-data creative works, such as books, songs and movies. Free documentation is a term used by the Free Software Foundation to describe libre content that supports software, like manuals. Open content has also been used to describe these works, but it has come to be used to describe works with any added permissions over the copyright status quo.

Libre content avoids this ambiguity. The four freedoms that must be guaranteed by free content are adapted from the four freedoms Richard Stallman called for in software.

====Open data====

Open data describes data which is freely available to everyone to use and republish without violating copyright law or sui generis database rights.

===Free, libre and open-source software===

The concept of libre works arose with Richard Stallmans description of free software in 1985 and was codified in the 1986 free software definition. Libre software remain some of the most well known and successful examples of libre works, and are widely used in the community.

===Open source hardware===

Designs, inventions and physical technology available for public use and reuse are described as open hardware or open source hardware. However, whereas most libre works grant freedom under copyright law, open source hardware typically depends on exceptions to patent law.

===Free file formats===

A free file format is a published specification for storing digital data not encumbered by any copyright, trademark, patent or other restriction. 

===Free/libre protocols and open standards===

Libre protocols are communications protocols without legal or technical restrictions. Open standards are less strictly defined, but by some definitions the term describes technical standards without legal restrictions.

==Libre licences==
Libre licences are licences pertaining to copyright in which the copyright owner has granted the freedoms specified in the definitions of libre software, libre knowledge and libre cultural works. A libre resource (one so-licensed or in the public domain) is free of any restrictions which might prevent users from being able to exercise these freedoms (such as DRM or patent-encumbrance). For example, of the still active Creative Commons licences, Creative Commons Attribution, Attribution-ShareAlike and Zero are libre licences.

===Share-alike or copyleft===
The copyleft symbol

Copyleft describes a requirement on some libre licences that copies and modifications of the original work must be available under the same or similar licence. In this way, copyleft licences guarantee that all modifications and extensions of a libre work will be free as well. The GNU General Public License was the first copyleft licence and remains the most commonly used. When a libre licence has a share-alike term, it is a copyleft licence. For example, the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike licence is a copyleft licence.

Copyleft licences are also described as reciprocal or (pejoratively) as viral licences. One reason given for their use is that they are capable of growing the commons, by encouraging future works to be libre to take advantage of existing libre resources. 

===Permissive or copyfree===
The copyfree symbol

Permissive libre, copyfree, copycenter or academic licences are those libre licences which do not require derivative works to be licensed under the same licence as the original work. They also typically do not have other requirements that are common in copyleft licences, like restrictions on formats that the work can be available in or whether Digital Rights Management may be used on the product. The Copyfree Standard Definition, used by the Copyfree Initiative to certify copyfree licenses, disallows licenses that come with such copyleft requirements from certification.

===Public domain===
A public domain symbol

Public domain works are the least restricted libre works, although their status typically comes from the expiration of copyright rather than a libre licence. However, there are declarations that purport to place a work in the public domain or, in the case of the CC Zero licence, give it the same freedoms as works in the public domain.

Public domain libre software licences are sometimes described as beerware.

==Statements and symbols==
As well as the libre licences described above, which require copyright law to function, members of the libre movement have also created symbols and statements that purport to operate without a legal mechanism. Kopimi is described as 'symbol showing that you want to be copied.' Question Copyright artist-in-residence Nina Paley advocates Copyheart, a sentence intended to replace the usual copyright declaration on a work: '2010 by Author/Artist. Copying is an act of love. Please copy.' Regarding the lack of legal certainty provided by the statement, Paley writes:

We really dont think laws and imaginary property have any place in peoples love or cultural relations. Creating more legally binding licenses and contracts just perpetuates the problem of lawa.k.a. state forceintruding where it doesnt belong. That copyheart isnt a legally binding license is not a bugits a feature! 

Likewise, the Libre Society drafted two libre licences, but celebrated their lack of legal power. They are the Res Divini Juris Licence and the Res Communes Licence, but neither is in common use.

==Related concepts==

===Open educational resources===

There are competing definitions of open educational resources, but they describe at least resources that are accessible for no charge to students and educators, and typically under a public copyright licence that permits the resource to be shared and adapted.

As with open access, narrower definitions of open educational resources do exist. The William and Flora Hewlett Foundation definition describes open educational resources as either "resid in the public domain or released under an intellectual property license that permits their free use or re-purposing by others." Under this definition, all open educational resources would qualify as libre.

In practice, however, many open educational resourceseven those under public copyright licencesare not libre. MIT OpenCourseWare, for example, is under the Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike License.

===Open access===

In 2008, Peter Suber and Stevan Harnad, members of the open access community, proposed the use of the terms 'gratis open access' and 'libre open access' to resolve confusion within the open access community between resources that were open because they were free of price restrictions and those that were open because they were free of price and some permission restrictions. Gratis and libre open access 

Significantly, this definition of libre open access covered works for which any amount of permissions restrictions had been lifted. This definition breaks from the established use of the term libre to refer to free content and free software, where a specific threshold of permission must be reached.

The definition of open access reached in the Budapest, Bethesda and Berlin statements (referred to collectively as the 'BBB Definition') specifies the permission barriers that must be lowered for a work to be considered open access:

By "open access" to this literature, we mean its free availability on the public internet, permitting any users to read, download, copy, distribute, print, search, or link to the full texts of these articles, crawl them for indexing, pass them as data to software, or use them for any other lawful purpose, without financial, legal, or technical barriers other than those inseparable from gaining access to the internet itself. The only constraint on reproduction and distribution, and the only role for copyright in this domain, should be to give authors control over the integrity of their work and the right to be properly acknowledged and cited. (Budapest Open Access Initiative statement) 

work is open access where the copyright holder has given general permission to copy, use, distribute, transmit and display the work publicly and to make and distribute derivative works, in any digital medium for any responsible purpose, subject to proper attribution of authorship. (Bethesda and Berlin statements) 

All open access works that meet the BBB definition would qualify as libre. However, in the years following the BBB statements, some writers used the term "open access" in the BBB sense while others used it for works that were merely gratis or free of price restrictions. When Harnad wanted to write about all-rights-reserved gratis articles, he was faced with the option of referring to them as "open access" (in contravention of the BBB definitions) or redefining "open access" to include non-libre works.

The compromise arrived at by Suber and Harnad was to identify two classes of open access: gratis open access, which is merely free of charge, and libre open access, which is free of charge as well as free from one or more permission restrictions. However, the standard definition of libre requires that a work be free from a particular set of permission restrictions; some works that qualify as libre open access would not qualify as libre (for example, those with a Creative Commons NonCommercial or NoDerivatives licence term).

Suber continues to support the use of the Creative Commons Attribution licence for articles, a libre licence in every sense of the word. 

===Creative Commons===

Two Creative Commons licences, Attribution and Attribution-ShareAlike, are libre licences (they are marked as approved for free cultural works). Creative Commons Zero is also libre. The remaining four main licences are not libre.

==See also==
* Jimbo Wales' declaration of how Wikipedia is a free encyclopedia
* List of free content licenses
* Open design
* Open gaming
* Open government
* Open patent
* Open source curriculum
* Open source governance
* Open source journalism
* Open standard
* Alternative terms for free software

==References==

==External links==
*Berry, D. M & Moss, G. (2008). Libre Culture: Meditations on Free Culture. Canada: Pygmalion Books.
*Free Knowledge requires Free Software and Free File Formats



[[Leo (constellation)]]

Leo is one of the constellations of the zodiac, lying between Cancer to the west and Virgo to the east. Its name is Latin for lion, and to the ancient Greeks represented the Nemean Lion killed by the mythical Greek hero Heracles (known to the ancient Romans as Hercules) as one of his twelve labors. Its symbol is 20px (). One of the 48 constellations described by the 2nd century astronomer Ptolemy, Leo remains one of the 88 modern constellations today, and one of the most easily recognizable due to its many bright stars and a distinctive shape that is reminiscent of the crouching lion it depicts. The lion's mane and shoulders also form an asterism known as "the Sickle," which to modern observers may resemble a backwards "question mark."

==Notable features==
The constellation Leo as it can be seen by the naked eye (the bright object in the centre of the picture is the planet Jupiter). AlltheSky.com

===Stars===

Leo contains many bright stars, many of which were individually identified by the ancients. There are four stars of first or second magnitude, with render this constellation especially prominent:
* Regulus, designated Alpha Leonis, is a blue-white main-sequence star of magnitude 1.34, 77.5 light-years from Earth. It is a double star divisible in binoculars, with a secondary of magnitude 7.7. Its traditional name (Regulus) means "the little king". 
* Beta Leonis, called Denebola, is at the opposite end of the constellation to Regulus. It is a blue-white star of magnitude 2.23, 36 light-years from Earth. The name Denebola means "the lion's tail". 
* Algieba, Gamma Leonis, is a binary star with a third optical component; the primary and secondary are divisible in small telescopes and the tertiary is visible in binoculars. The primary is a gold-yellow giant star of magnitude 2.61 and the secondary is similar but at magnitude 3.6; they have a period of 600 years and are 126 light-years from Earth. The unrelated tertiary, 40 Leonis, is a yellow-tinged star of magnitude 4.8. Its traditional name, Algieba, means "the forehead". 
* Delta Leonis, called Zosma, is a blue-white star of magnitude 2.58, 58 light-years from Earth. Epsilon Leonis is a yellow giant of magnitude 3.0, 251 light-years from Earth.

* Zeta Leonis, called Adhafera, is an optical triple star. The brightest and only star designated Zeta Leonis, is a white giant star of magnitude 3.65, 260 light-years from Earth. The second brightest, 39 Leonis, is widely spaced to the south and of magnitude 5.8. 35 Leonis is to the north and of magnitude 6.0. 
* Iota Leonis is a binary star divisible in medium amateur telescopes; they are divisible in small amateur telescopes at their widest (2053-2063). To the unaided eye, Iota Leonis appears to be a yellow-tinged star of magnitude 4.0. The system, 79 light-years from Earth, has components of magnitude 4.1 and 6.7 with a period of 183. 
* Tau Leonis is a double star divisible in binoculars. The primary is a yellow giant of magnitude 5.0, 621 light-years from Earth. The secondary is a star of magnitude 8. 54 Leonis is a binary star 289 light-years from Earth, divisible in small telescopes. The primary is a blue-white star of magnitude 4.5 and the secondary is a blue-white star of magnitude 6.3.

The other named stars in Leo are Mu Leonis, Rasalas (an abbreviation of "Al Ras al Asad al Shamaliyy," meaning "The Lion's Head Toward the South"); and Theta Leonis, Chertan or Coxa ("hip"). William Tyler Olcott, Constellation of Words: Leo (available at http://www.constellationsofwords.com/Constellations/Leo.html, retrieved 11/20/13). 

Leo is also home to one bright variable star, the red giant R Leonis. It is a Mira variable with a minimum magnitude of 10 and normal maximum magnitude of 6; it periodically brightens to magnitude 4.4. R Leonis, 330 light-years from Earth, has a period of 310 days and a diameter of 450 solar diameters.

The star Wolf 359 (CN Leonis), one of the nearest stars to Earth at 7.8 light-years away, is in Leo. Wolf 359 is a red dwarf of magnitude 13.5; it periodically brightens by one magnitude or less because it is a flare star. Gliese 436, a faint star in Leo about 33 light years away from the Sun, is orbited by a transiting Neptune-mass extrasolar planet. 

The carbon star CW Leo (IRC +10216) is the brightest star in the night sky at the infrared N-band (10 m wavelength).

The star SDSS J102915+172927 (Caffau's star) is a population II star in the galactic halo seen in Leo. It is about 13 billion years old, making it one of the oldest stars in the Galaxy. It has the lowest metallicity of any known star.

Modern astronomers, including Tycho Brahe in 1602, excised a group of stars that once made up the "tuft" of the lion's tail and used them to form the new constellation Coma Berenices (Berenice's hair), although there was precedent for that designation among the ancient Greeks and Romans. L. Phil Simpson (Springer 2012) Guidebook to the Constellations: Telescopic Sights, Tales, and Myths, p. 235 (ISBN 9781441969415). 

===Deep-sky objects===
Messier 66
Leo contains many bright galaxies; Messier 65, Messier 66, Messier 95, Messier 96, Messier 105, and NGC 3628 are the most famous, the first two being part of the Leo Triplet.

The Leo Ring, a cloud of hydrogen and helium gas, is found in orbit of two galaxies found within this constellation.

M66 is a spiral galaxy that is part of the Leo Triplet, whose other two members are M65 and NGC 3628. It is at a distance of 37 million light-years and has a somewhat distorted shape due to gravitational interactions with the other members of the Triplet, which are pulling stars away from M66. Eventually, the outermost stars may form a dwarf galaxy orbiting M66. Both M65 and M66 are visible in large binoculars or small telescopes, but their concentrated nuclei and elongation are only visible in large amateur instruments.

M95 and M96 are both spiral galaxies 20 million light-years from Earth. Though they are visible as fuzzy objects in small telescopes, their structure is only visible in larger instruments. M95 is a barred spiral galaxy. M105 is about a degree away from the M95/M96 pair; it is an elliptical galaxy of the 9th magnitude, also about 20 million light-years from Earth.

NGC 2903 is a barred spiral galaxy discovered by William Herschel in 1784. It is very similar in size and shape to the Milky Way and is located 25 million light-years from Earth. In its core, NGC 2903 has many "hotspots", which have been found to be near regions of star formation. The star formation in this region is thought to be due to the presence of the dusty bar, which sends shock waves through its rotation to an area with a diameter of 2,000 light-years. The outskirts of the galaxy have many young open clusters. 

Leo is also home to some of the largest structures in the observable universe. Some of the structures found in the constellation are the ClowesCampusano LQG, U1.11, U1.54, and the Huge-LQG, which are all large quasar groups; the latter being the second largest structure known (see also HerculesCorona Borealis Great Wall).

===Meteor showers===
The Leonids occur in November, peaking on November 1415, and have a radiant close to Gamma Leonis. Its parent body is Comet Tempel-Tuttle, which causes significant outbursts every 35 years. The normal peak rate is approximately 10 meteors per hour.

The January Leonids are a minor shower that peaks between January 1 and 7. 

==History and mythology==
Leo was one of the earliest recognized constellations, with archaeological evidence that the Mesopotamians had a similar constellation as early as 4000 BCE. The Persians called Leo Ser or Shir; the Turks, Artan; the Syrians, Aryo; the Jews, Arye; the Indians, Simha, all meaning "lion". 
Greek stamp depicting a mosaical image of the encounter between Hercules and Leo,the Nemean Lion.
Some mythologists believe that in Sumeria, Leo represented the monster Khumbaba, who was killed by Gilgamesh. Tamra Andrews (Oxford University Press 2000) Dictionary of Nature Myths: Legends of the Earth, Sea, and Sky (ISBN 9780195136777). 

In Babylonian astronomy, the constellation was called UR.GU.LA, the "Great Lion"; the bright star Regulus was known as "the star that stands at the Lion's breast." Regulus also had distinctly regal associations, as it was known as the King Star. Babylonian Star-lore by Gavin White, Solaria Pubs, 2008 page 140 

In Greek mythology, Leo was identified as the Nemean Lion which was killed by Heracles (Hercules to the Romans) during the first of his twelve labours. The Nemean Lion would take women as hostages to its lair in a cave, luring warriors from nearby towns to save the damsel in distress, to their misfortune. The Lion was impervious to any weaponry; thus, the warriors' clubs, swords, and spears were rendered useless against it. Realizing that he must defeat the Lion with his bare hands, Hercules slipped into the Lion's cave and engaged it at close quarters. When the Lion pounced, Hercules caught it in midair, one hand grasping the Lion's forelegs and the other its hind legs, and bent it backwards, breaking its back and freeing the trapped maidens. Zeus commemorated this labor by placing the Lion in the sky. 

The Roman poet Ovid called it Herculeus Leo and Violentus Leo. Bacchi Sidus (star of Bacchus) was another of its titles, the god Bacchus always being identified with this animal. However, Manilius called it Jovis et Junonis Sidus (Star of Jupiter and Juno).

Early Hindu astronomers knew it as Ashlesha(nakshtra-sub constellation) and as Simha, the Tamil Simham.

==Astrology==

, the Sun appears in the constellation Leo from August 10 to Sept 10. In tropical astrology, the Sun is considered to be in the sign Leo from July 23 to August 23, and in sidereal astrology, from August 16 to September 17.
.

==Visualizations==
Leo, with Leo Minor above, as depicted in Urania's Mirror, a set of constellation cards published in London c.1825.

Leo is commonly represented as if the sickle-shaped asterism of stars is the back of the Lion's head. The sickle is marked by six stars: Epsilon Leonis, Mu Leonis, Zeta Leonis, Gamma Leonis, Eta Leonis, and Alpha Leonis. The lion's tail is marked by Beta Leonis (Denebola) and the rest of his body is delineated by Delta Leonis and Theta Leonis.

Diagram of H.A. Rey's alternative way to connect the stars of the constellation Leo. The lion is shown walking.
H.A. Rey has suggested an alternative way to connect the stars, which graphically shows a lion walking. The stars delta Leonis, gamma Leonis, eta Leonis, and theta Leonis form the body of the lion, with gamma Leonis being of the second magnitude and delta Leonis and theta Leonis being of the third magnitude. The stars gamma Leonis, zeta Leonis, mu Leonis, epsilon Leonis, and eta Leonis form the lion's neck, with epsilon Leonis being of the third magnitude. The stars mu Leonis, kappa Leonis, lambda Leonis, and epsilon Leonis form the head of the lion. Delta Leonis and beta Leonis form the lion's tail: beta Leonis, also known as Denebola, is the bright tip of the tail with a magnitude of two. The stars theta Leonis, iota Leonis, and sigma Leonis form the left hind leg of the lion, with sigma Leonis being the foot. The stars theta Leonis and rho Leonis form the right hind leg, with rho Leonis being the foot. The stars eta Leonis and alpha Leonis mark the lion's heart, with alpha Leonis, also known as Regulus, being the bright star of magnitude one. The stars eta Leonis and omicron Leonis form the right front foot of the Lion. H. A. Rey, The Stars &mdash; A New Way To See Them. Enlarged World-Wide Edition. Houghton Mifflin, Boston, 1997. ISBN 0-395-24830-2. 

==Namesakes==
USS Leonis (AK-128) was a United States Navy Crater class cargo ship named after the Latin version of this constellation name.

== Citations ==

==References==
*Star Names: Their Lore and Meaning, by Richard Allen Hinckley, Dover. ISBN 0-486-21079-0
* 
* Ian Ridpath and Wil Tirion (2007). Stars and Planets Guide, Collins, London. ISBN 978-0-00-725120-9. Princeton University Press, Princeton. ISBN 978-0-691-13556-4.
*Dictionary of Symbols, by Carl G. Liungman, W. W. Norton & Company. ISBN 0-393-31236-4

== External links ==

===Observer links===
*The Deep Photographic Guide to the Constellations: Leo
*Information from Windows to the Universe
*Star Map of Leo and Information from Students for Exploration and Development of Space
*Information about Leo from Chris Dolan
*Information from StarDate Online
*Leo's skymap and information from Gary Madison
*Star Map of Leo and basic information
*Pictures, Sky Map and detailed information from StarrySkies
*Leo Constellation at Constellation Guide

=== Science ===
*New planet discovery in Leo's constellation

=== Myths ===
*Star Tales  Leo
*Myth Info from comfychair.org
*Myth Info from TheGreekGods.org
*Myth Info from ColdWater Schools
*Myth Info from Star Watch GeoCity
*Myth Info from heavens-above.com

 



[[Libra (constellation)]]

Libra is a constellation of the zodiac. Its name is Latin for weighing scales, and its symbol is 20px (Unicode ). It is fairly faint, with no first magnitude stars, and lies between Virgo to the west and Scorpius to the east.

==Notable features==

===Stars===

The constellation Libra as it can be seen with the naked eye. AlltheSky.com

The brightest stars in Libra form a quadrangle that distinguishes it for the unaided observer. Alpha Librae, called Zubenelgenubi, is a binary star divisible in binoculars, 77 light-years from Earth. The primary is a blue-white star of magnitude 2.7 and the secondary is a white star of magnitude 5.2. Its traditional name means "the southern claw". Zubeneschamali (Beta Librae) is the corresponding "northern claw" to Zubenelgenubi. The brightest star in Libra, it is a green-tinged star of magnitude 2.6, 160 light-years from Earth. Gamma Librae is called Zubenelakrab, which means "the scorpion's claw", completing the suite of names referring to Libra's archaic status. It is an orange giant of magnitude 3.9, 152 light-years from Earth.

Libra is home to several other binary and double stars. Iota Librae is a complex multiple star, 377 light-years from Earth, with both optical and true binary components. The primary appears as a blue-white star of magnitude 4.5; it is a binary star indivisible in even the largest amateur instruments with a period of 23 years. The secondary, visible in small telescopes as a star of magnitude 9.4, is a binary with two components, magnitudes 10 and 11. There is an optical companion to Iota Librae; 25 Librae is a star of magnitude 6.1, 219 light-years from Earth and visible in binoculars. Mu Librae is a binary star divisible in medium-aperture amateur telescopes, 235 light-years from Earth. The primary is of magnitude 5.7 and the secondary is of magnitude 6.8.

There are many variable stars in Libra as well. Delta Librae is an Algol-type eclipsing variable star, 304 lightyears from Earth. It has a period of 2 days, 8 hours; its minimum magnitude of 5.9 and its maximum magnitude is 4.9. FX Librae, designated 48 Librae, is a shell star of magnitude 4.9. Shell stars, like Pleione and Gamma Cassiopeiae, are blue supergiants with irregular variations caused by their abnormally high speed of rotation. This ejects gas from the star's equator.

 Librae was formerly known as  Scorpii despite being well inside the boundaries of Libra. It was not redesignated as  Librae until 1851 (by Benjamin A. Gould).

===Deep-sky objects===
Libra is home to one bright globular cluster, NGC 5897. It is a loose cluster, 40,000 light-years from Earth; it is fairly large and has an integrated magnitude of 9.

===Planetary systems===
Libra is home to the star Gliese 581, which has a planetary system consisting of at least 6 planets. Both Gliese 581 d, and Gliese 581 g are debatably the most promising candidates for life, although Gliese 581 g's existences has been disputed and has not been entirely confirmed or agreed on in the scientific community. Gliese 581 c is considered to be the first Earth-like extrasolar planet to be found within its parent star's habitable zone. Gliese 581 e is possibly the smallest mass exoplanet orbiting a normal star found to date All of these exoplanets are of significance for establishing the likelihood of life outside of the Solar System. SPACE.com - Major Discovery: New Planet Could Harbor Water and Life 

The family of candidate habitable planets was extended in late September 2010 to include exoplanets around red dwarf stars because of Gliese 581 g, which is a tidally locked planet in the middle of the habitable zone. Weather studies show that tidally locked planets may still have the ability to support life. http://www.astro.washington.edu/users/jrad/521.pdf 

==History and mythology==
Libra as depicted in Urania's Mirror, a set of constellation cards published in London c.1825

Libra was known in Babylonian astronomy as MUL Zibanu (the "scales" or "balance"), or alternatively as the Claws of the Scorpion. The scales were held sacred to the sun god Shamash, who was also the patron of truth and justice. Babylonian Star-lore by Gavin White, Solaria Pubs, 2008, page 175 It was also seen as the Scorpion's Claws in ancient Greece. Since these times, Libra has been associated with law, fairness and civility. In Arabic zubn means "scorpion's claws", and likely similarly in other Semitic languages: this resemblance of words may be why the Scorpion's claws became the Scales. It has also been suggested that the scales are an allusion to the fact that when the sun entered this part of the ecliptic at the autumnal equinox, the days and nights are equal. Libra's status as the location of the equinox earned the equinox the name "First Point of Libra", though its position ended in 730 because of the precession of the equinoxes. P.K. Chen, A Constellation Album: Stars and Mythology of the Night Sky, p. 64 (2007, ISBN 978-1-931559-38-6). 

Libra is a constellation not mentioned by Eudoxus or Aratus. In Roman mythology, Libra is considered to depict the scales held by Astraea (identified as Virgo), the goddess of justice. Libra is mentioned by Manetho (3rd century B.C.) and Geminus (1st century B.C.), and included by Ptolemy in his 48 asterisms. Ptolemy catalogued 17 stars, Tycho Brahe 10, and Johannes Hevelius 20. It only became a constellation in ancient Rome, when it began to represent the scales held by Astraea, associated with Virgo.

Libra is the only zodiac sign that does not symbolize a living creature.

==Astrology==

, the Sun appears in the constellation Libra from October 31 to November 22. In tropical astrology, the Sun is considered to be in the sign Libra from September 23 to October 22, and in sidereal astrology, from October 16 to November 15.

==Visualizations==

Traditionally,  and  Librae are considered to represent the scales' balance beam, and  and  are the weighing pans.

H.A. Rey has suggested a way to connect the stars more fully to graphically show a balance. Beta Librae represents the top of the balance, Gamma Librae and Alpha Librae represent the balance beam. Upsilon Librae and Tau Librae represent the left plate of the balance, while Sigma Librae represents the right plate. All these stars are of the third magnitude.

==Namesakes==
USS Libra (AKA-12) was a United States navy ship named after the constellation.

== Citations ==

== References ==
* H. A. Rey, The Stars  A New Way To See Them. Enlarged World-Wide Edition. Houghton Mifflin, Boston, 1997. ISBN 0-395-24830-2.
* 
* Ian Ridpath and Wil Tirion (2007). Stars and Planets Guide, Collins, London. ISBN 978-0-00-725120-9. Princeton University Press, Princeton. ISBN 978-0-691-13556-4.

== External links ==

* The Deep Photographic Guide to the Constellations: Libra
* Libra constellation
* Star Tales  Libra
* Libra Constellation at Constellation Guide

 



[[Law of nature]]

Law of Nature may refer to:

*Physical law, a scientific generalization based upon empirical observation
*Natural law, any of a number of doctrines in moral, political and legal theory
*Scientific law, statements based on experimental observations and describe some aspect of the world, implying a causal relationship
*Laws of science, statements that describe, and predict phenomena as they appear in nature
*The Law of the Jungle, the idea that in nature, the only "law" is to do whatever is needed for survival



[[Roxen]]

Roxen is a medium-sized lake in south central Sweden, east of lake Vttern, part of the waterpath Motala strm and the Gta Canal. South of lake Roxen is the city Linkping.

Roxen, especially the western parts, is very good for bird watching. There are natural reserves at Kungsbro and Svartmynningen. 

==References==
 



[[Locomotive]]

Three body styles of diesel locomotive: cab unit, hood unit and box cab. These locomotives are operated by Pacific National in Australia.

R class steam locomotive number R707 as operated by the Victorian Railways of Australia.
A Green Cargo RC 4 class electric locomotive repainted in its original livery for the Swedish 150-year railway anniversary in 2006.

A locomotive or engine is a rail transport vehicle that provides the motive power for a train. The word originates from the Latin loco  "from a place", ablative of locus, "place" + Medieval Latin motivus, "causing motion", and is a shortened form of the term locomotive engine, first used in the early 19th century to distinguish between mobile and stationary steam engines.

A locomotive has no payload capacity of its own, and its sole purpose is to move the train along the tracks. How Payload Works. Auto.howstuffworks.com, Retrieved on 2014-01-31. In contrast, some trains have self-propelled payload-carrying vehicles. These are not normally considered locomotives, and may be referred to as multiple units, motor coaches or railcars. The use of these self-propelled vehicles is increasingly common for passenger trains, but rare for freight (see CargoSprinter). Vehicles which provide motive power to haul an unpowered train, but are not generally considered locomotives because they have payload space or are rarely detached from their trains, are known as power cars.

Traditionally, locomotives pull trains from the front. Increasingly common outside North America is push-pull operation, where one locomotive pulls the train from the front and another locomotive pushes it from behind. In this arrangement the locomotive at the rear of the train is controlled from a control cab at the front of the train. Push-pull operation is generally infeasible in North America as, even if mid-train or tail-end "helpers" are provided, the front-end might have over 26,000 hp, net for traction, whereas the mid-train and/or tail-end "helpers" might have only 9,000 hp, net for traction.
__TOC__

==Origins==

The first passenger railway, the Liverpool and Manchester Railway, in England.

Prior to locomotives, the motive force for railroads had been generated by various lower-technology methods such as human power, horse power, gravity or stationary engines that drove cable systems.

The first successful locomotives were built by Cornish inventor Richard Trevithick. In 1804 his unnamed steam locomotive hauled a train along the tramway of the Penydarren ironworks, near Merthyr Tydfil in Wales. Although the locomotive hauled a train of 10 LT of iron and 70 passengers in five wagons over 9 mi, it was too heavy for the cast iron rails used at the time. The locomotive only ran three trips before it was abandoned. Trevithick built a series of locomotives after the Penydarren experiment, including one which ran at a colliery in Tyneside in northern England, where it was seen by the young George Stephenson. Ellis, p. 12 

The first commercially successful steam locomotive was Matthew Murray's rack locomotive, Salamanca, built for the narrow gauge Middleton Railway in 1812. This was followed in 1813 by the Puffing Billy built by Christopher Blackett and William Hedley for the Wylam Colliery Railway, the first successful locomotive running by adhesion only. Puffing Billy is now on display in the Science Museum in London, the oldest locomotive in existence. Ellis, pp. 2022 

In 1814 George Stephenson, inspired by the early locomotives of Trevithick and Hedley persuaded the manager of the Killingworth colliery where he worked to allow him to build a steam-powered machine. He built the Blcher, one of the first successful flanged-wheel adhesion locomotives. Stephenson played a pivotal role in the development and widespread adoption of steam locomotives. His designs improved on the work of the pioneers. In 1825 he built the Locomotion for the Stockton and Darlington Railway, north east England, which became the first public steam railway. In 1829 he built The Rocket which was entered in and won the Rainhill Trials. This success led to Stephenson establishing his company as the pre-eminent builder of steam locomotives used on railways in the United Kingdom, the United States and much of Europe. Ellis, pp. 2430 The first inter city passenger railway, Liverpool and Manchester Railway, opened in 1830, making exclusive use of steam power for both passenger and freight trains.

==Comparison to multiple units (MU)==

===Advantages of locomotives===
An early design of electric locomotive showing the steeplecab arrangement: North Eastern Railway No.1, England from 1905

There are a few basic reasons to isolate locomotive train power, as compared to self-propelled vehicles. 

; Ease : Whether out of necessity to replace the locomotive due to failure, or for reason of needing to maintain the power unit, it is relatively easy to replace the locomotive with another, while not removing the entire train from service.
; Maximum utilization of power cars: Separate locomotives facilitate movement of costly motive power assets as needed; thereby avoiding the expense associated with tied up or idle power resources.
; Flexibility : Large locomotives can substitute for small locomotives when more power is required, for example, where grades are steeper. As needed, a locomotive can be used for either freight duties, or passenger service.
; Obsolescence cycles : Separating motive power from payload-hauling cars enables replacement without affecting the other. To illustrate, locomotives might become obsolete when their associated cars did not, and vice versa.
; Safety : In an accident, the locomotive may act as a buffer zone to the rest of the train. Depending on the obstacle encountered on the rail line, the heavier mass of a locomotive is less likely to deviate from its normal course. In the event of fire, it might be safer, for example, with diesel locomotives.
; Noise : A single source of tractive power (i.e., motors in one place), is quieter than multiple operational power units, where one or more motors are located under every carriage. The noise problem is particularly noticeable in diesel multiple units.
;Saves time : The motive power accompanies the cars the be hauled and consequently there is a saving in time.

===Advantages of multiple units===
There are several advantages of multiple unit (MU) trains compared to locomotives.

; Energy efficiency : Multiple units are more energy efficient than locomotive-hauled trains and more nimble, especially on down grades, as much more of the train's weight (sometimes all of it) is placed on driven wheels, rather than suffering the dead weight of unpowered coaches.
; No need to turn the locomotive : Many multiple units have cabs at both ends; therefore, the train may be reversed without uncoupling/re-coupling the locomotive, providing quicker turnaround times, reduced crew costs, and enhanced safety. In practice, the development of driving van trailers and cab cars has removed the need for locomotives to run-around, giving easy bi-directional operation and removing this MU advantage.
; Reliability : Multiple unit trains have multiple engines, where the failure of one engine usually does not prevent the train from continuing on its journey. A locomotive drawn passenger train typically has only a single power unit; the failure of this single unit temporarily disables the train. However, as is often the case with locomotive hauled freight trains, some passenger trains utilize multiple locomotives, and are thus able to continue at reduced speed after the failure of one locomotive.

==Locomotive classifications==

===Motive power===
Locomotives may generate their power from fuel (wood, coal, petroleum or natural gas), or they may take power from an outside source of electricity. It is common to classify locomotives by their source of energy. The common ones include:

====Steam====

The main components of a steam locomotive
A steam locomotive at the Gare du Nord, Paris, 1930
Locomotive 030-219 of Renfe in Miranda de Ebro, Spain
In the 19th century the first railway locomotives were powered by steam, usually generated by burning wood, coal, or oil. Because steam locomotives included one or more steam engines, they are sometimes referred to as "steam engines". The steam locomotive remained by far the most common type of locomotive until after World War II. Ellis, p. 355 

The first steam locomotive was built by Richard Trevithick; it first ran on 21 February 1804, although it was some years before steam locomotive design became economically practical. The first commercial use of a steam locomotive was Salamanca on the narrow gauge Middleton Railway in Leeds in 1812. In the USA, Mathias Baldwin started building stationary steam engines for commercial use and by 1830, opened his own workshop producing steam locomotives. Baldwin Locomotive Works became the world's largest by the early 1900s and built the most powerful steam locos in history. The locomotive Fairy Queen, built in 1855 runs between Delhi and Alwar in India and is the oldest steam locomotive in regular (albeit tourist-only) service in the world, and the oldest steam locomotive operating on a mainline. 

The all-time speed record for steam trains is held by an LNER Class A4 4-6-2 Pacific locomotive of the LNER in the United Kingdom, number 4468 Mallard, which pulling six carriages (plus a dynamometer car) reached 126 mph on a slight downhill gradient down Stoke Bank on 3 July 1938. Aerodynamic passenger locomotives in Germany attained speeds very close to this and due to the difficulties of adequately balancing and lubricating the running gear, this is generally thought to be close to the practicable limit for a direct-coupled steam locomotive. 

Before the middle of the 20th century, electric and diesel-electric locomotives began replacing steam locomotives. Steam locomotives are less efficient than their more modern diesel and electric counterparts and require much greater manpower to operate and service. British Rail figures showed the cost of crewing and fuelling a steam locomotive was some two and a half times that of diesel power, and the daily mileage achievable was far lower. As labour costs rose, particularly after the second world war, non-steam technologies became much more cost-efficient. By the end of the 1960s1970s, most western countries had completely replaced steam locomotives in passenger service. Freight locomotives generally were replaced later. Other designs, such as locomotives powered by gas turbines, have been experimented with, but have seen little use, mainly due to high fuel costs.

By the end of the 20th century, almost the only steam power remaining in regular use in North America and Western European countries was on heritage railways. These were largely aimed at tourists and/or railroad hobbyists, known as 'railfans' or 'railway enthusiasts'. An exception are the narrow gauge lines in Germany, which form part of the public transport system, running to all-year-round timetables. These railways retain steam for all or part of their motive power. Steam locomotives remained in commercial use in parts of Mexico into the late 1970s. Steam locomotives were in regular use until 2004 in the People's Republic of China, where coal is a much more abundant resource than petroleum for diesel fuel. India switched over from steam-powered trains to electric and diesel-powered trains in the 1980s, except heritage trains. In some mountainous and high altitude rail lines, steam engines remain in use because they are less affected by reduced air pressure than diesel engines. Steam locomotives remained in routine passenger use in South Africa until the late 1990s, but are now reserved to tourist trains. In Zimbabwe steam locomotives are still used on shunting duties around Bulawayo and on some regular freight services.

As of 2006, DLM AG (Switzerland) continues to manufacture new steam locomotives. DLM AG website 

====Gasoline====

Gasoline locomotives have been produced since the early 1900s. Gasoline locomotives. Time.com (1925-09-28). Retrieved on 2012-01-01. Direct drive gasoline locomotives. Yardlimit.railfan.net. Retrieved on 2012-01-01. 

====Diesel====

The EMD F40PHM-2 uses a Diesel-electric transmission designed by Electro-Motive Diesel.
Experimental diesel-powered locomotives were first built just after World War I. In the 1940s, they began to displace steam power on American railroads. Following the end of World War II, diesel power began to appear on railroads in many countries. The significantly better economics of diesel operation triggered a dash to diesel power, a process known as Dieselization. By the late 1960s, few major railroads in North America, Europe and Oceania continued to operate steam locomotives, although significant numbers still existed outside these areas.

As is the case with any vehicle powered by an internal combustion engine, diesel locomotives require a power transmission system to couple the output of the prime mover to the driving wheels. In the early days of diesel railroad propulsion development, electric, hydraulic and mechanical power transmission systems were all employed with varying degrees of success. Of the three, electric transmission has proven the most popular, and although diesel-hydraulic locomotives have certain advantages and are continuously used in some European countries, most modern Diesel-powered locomotives are diesel-electric.

Diesel locomotives require considerably less maintenance than steam, with a corresponding reduction in the number of personnel needed to keep the fleet in service. The best steam locomotives spent an average of three to five days per month in the shop for routine maintenance and running repairs. Heavy overhauls were frequent, often involving removal of the boiler from the frame for major repairs. In contrast, a typical diesel locomotive requires no more than eight to ten hours of maintenance per month. and may run for many years between heavy overhauls.

Diesel units do not pollute as much as steam trains; modern units produce low levels of exhaust emissions. Diesel-electric locomotives are often fitted with "dynamic brakes" that use the traction motors as electrical generators during braking to assist in controlling the speed of a train on a descending grade. This technology is similar to regenerative braking used in hybrid cars; the key difference is dynamic braking does not store the generated power, instead it is routed to resistors then converted into waste heat.

=====Slug or drone=====
A slug or drone locomotive is a non-powered unit attached to a diesel-electric locomotive to provide additional traction and braking capability. The slug has traction motors but no engine. Power is supplied by the attached locomotive (known as a 'mother'). At slow speeds, a diesel-electric prime mover can produce more power than its own traction motors can use; an installed slug increases the number of traction motors available, thereby using the created power more effectively.

Slugs are mainly used in rail yards for switching duties, in which case they are without a cab. Other slugs, designed for use on service trains, may be fitted with a cab, to enhance control, and also provide additional fuel storage for the mother locomotive. In recent years on service trains, conventional locomotives, remotely controlled from the lead locomotive configuration, have been used in place of slugs.

CP Rail used a prototype drone locomotive system called LOCOTROL, developed in the 1960s, which evolved into today's systems.

====Electric====

Fuse Electrique of 1893, body removed. Compounded pistons drove a Gramme-style dynamo powering electric motors on all axles. The small engine, right, was the exciter for the dynamo windings.
AC locomotive in Valtellina (18981902). Power supply: 3-phase 15 Hz AC, 3000V, (AC motor 70km/h). It was designed by Klmn Kand in Ganz Company, Hungary.
In 1893 in Paris Charles Brown assisted Jean Heilmann in evaluating AC and DC transmission systems for Fuse Electrique, a steam locomotive with electric transmission, and using this knowledge he designed a three-phase AC electric locomotive for Oerlikon, Zurich. Brown (by then in partnership with Walter Boveri) put these into service on the first electrified main line, the BurgdorfThun line, Switzerland, in 1899. Each thirty-tonne locomotive had two 150 hp motors. Duffy (2003: 117) 

In 1894, a Hungarian engineer Klmn Kand developed high-voltage three phase alternating current motors and generators for electric locomotives. His work on railway electrification was done at the Ganz electric works in Budapest. The first installation was on the Valtellina line, Italy, in 1902. Kand was the first who recognised that an electric train system can only be successful if it can use the electricity from public networks. After realising that, he also provided the means to build such a rail network by inventing a rotary phase converter suitable for locomotive usage.

The electric locomotive is supplied externally with electric power, either through an overhead pickup or through a third rail. While the capital cost of electrifying track is high, electric trains and locomotives are capable of higher performance and lower operational costs than steam or diesel power. Electric locomotives, because they tend to be less technically complex than diesel-electric locomotives, are both easier and cheaper to maintain and have extremely long working lives, usually 40 to 50 years: the last unit of the Italian E626 class, introduced in 1928, was retired 71 years later, in 1999. There are many other examples of electric locomotives operating for more than half a century with minimal overhaul, and it is not unusual for electric locomotives to be operating close to their centenary. The Finnish State Railroad is planning to phase out the Soviet-manufactured VR Class Sr1 engines, operative since 1973, in 2024, at which time they will have been over fifty years in line service.

A French TGV holds the world speed record for the fastest wheeled train, having reached 574.8 km/h on 3 April 2007. 

Some electric locomotives can also operate on battery power to enable short journeys or shunting on non-electrified lines or yards. Battery-powered locomotives are used in mines and other underground locations where diesel fumes or smoke would endanger crews, and where external electricity supplies cannot be used due to the danger of sparks igniting flammable gas. Battery locomotives are also used on many underground railways for maintenance operations, as they are required when operating in areas where the electricity supply has been temporarily disconnected.

====Hybrid locomotives====

In addition to locomotives that use a fueled power source (e.g. an internal combustion engine), and an electrical engine, Batteries being generally used only to start ICE-engine, not as buffer. Railway-technical.com (1997-11-03). Retrieved on 2012-01-01. there are hybrids, which additionally use a battery. Here, the battery acts as a temporary energy store, allowing, e.g., the implementation of regenerative braking and switching off of the hydrocarbon engine when idling, or stationary, (as used in automobiles such as the Toyota Prius).

====Steam-diesel hybrid locomotives====

Britain, Russia and Italy have tried steam-diesel hybrid locomotives, with limited success.

====Gas turbine-electric====

 
A gas turbine-electric locomotive, or GTEL, is a locomotive that uses a gas turbine to drive an electrical generator or alternator. The turbine (similar to a turboshaft engine) drives an output shaft, which drives the alternator via a system of gears. The produced electric current powers the traction motors. This type of locomotive was first experimented with in 1920, reaching its peak in the 1950s to 1960s. A related development is the gas turbine locomotive in which the turbine drives the wheels without an intermediate electrical device, at the cost of mechanical complexity.

Compared to a reciprocating engine, a turbine is mechanically simpler and lighter, but a turbine is efficient within a narrower range of rotational speeds than a reciprocating engine.

Gas turbine locomotives are very powerful, and very loud. Union Pacific Railroad operated the largest fleet of gas turbine-electric locomotives in the world, and was the only railroad to use them for hauling freight in regular service. Most other GTELs were built for small passenger trains; only a few have seen any real success in that role.

After the 1973 oil crisis and subsequent rise in fuel costs, gas turbine locomotives became uneconomical to operate. Subsequently, many were taken out of service, making this type of locomotive rare.

====Fuel cell-electric====

In 2002 the first 3.6 tonne, 17 kW hydrogen (fuel cell) -powered mining locomotive was demonstrated in Val-d'Or, Quebec. In 2007 the educational mini-hydrail in Kaohsiung, Taiwan went into service. The Railpower GG20B finally is another example of a fuel cell-electric locomotive.

====Atomic-Electric====
In the early 1950s, Dr. Lyle Borst of Utah University, was given funding by various US railroad line and manufacturers to study the feasibility of an electric drive locomotive, in which an on board atomic reactor produced the steam to generate the electricity. At that time, the dangers of atomic power were not fully understood; Borst believed the major stumbling block was the price of uranium. With the Borst atomic locomotive the center section would have a 200 ton reactor chamber and steel walls 5 feet thick to prevent releases of radioactivity in case of accidents. He estimated a cost to manufacture atomic locomotives with 7000 h.p. engines at approximately $1,200,000 each. "Atomic Locomotive Produces 7000 h.p." Popular Mechanics, April 1954, p. 86. Consequently, trains with onboard nuclear generators were generally deemed unfeasible due to prohibitive costs. Still, French electric trains run on grid power, which in France is mostly nuclear; thus, the French train network is indirectly nuclear-powered.

===Use===
A brass makers plaque from an Andrew Barclay locomotive of 1925.
The three main categories of locomotives are often subdivided in their usage in rail transport operations. There are passenger locomotives, freight locomotives and switcher (or shunting) locomotives. These categories determine the locomotive's combination of physical size, starting tractive effort and maximum permitted speed. Freight locomotives are normally designed to deliver high starting tractive effortneeded to start trains that may weigh as much as 15,000 LTand deliver sustained high power, at the sacrifice of maximum speed. Passenger locomotives develop less starting tractive effort but are able to operate at the high speeds demanded by passenger schedules. Mixed traffic locomotives (US English: general purpose or road switcher locomotives) are built to provide elements of both requirements. They do not develop as much starting tractive effort as a freight unit but are able to haul heavier trains than a passenger engine.

Most steam locomotives are reciprocating units, in which the pistons are coupled to the drivers (driving wheels) by means of connecting rods, with no intervening gearbox. Therefore, the combination of starting tractive effort and maximum speed is greatly influenced by the diameter of the drivers. Steam locomotives intended for freight service generally have relatively small diameter drivers, whereas passenger models have large diameter drivers (as large as 84 in in some cases).

With diesel-electric and electric locomotives, the gear ratio between the traction motors and axles is what adapts the unit to freight or passenger service, although a passenger unit may include other features, such as head end power (also referred to as hotel power or electric train supply) or a steam generator.

Some locomotives are designed specifically to work steep grade railways, and feature extensive additional braking mechanisms and sometimes rack and pinion. Steam locomotives built for steep rack and pinion railways frequently have the boiler tilted relative to the wheels, so that the boiler remains roughly level on steep grades.

=== Operational role ===

Locomotives occasionally work in a specific role, such as:
* Train engine is the technical name for a locomotive attached to the front of a railway train to haul that train. Alternatively, where facilities exist for push-pull operation, the train engine might be attached to the rear of the train;
* Pilot engine  a locomotive attached in front of the train engine, to enable Double-heading;
* Banking engine  a locomotive temporarily assisting a train from the rear, due to a difficult start or a sharp incline gradient;
* Light engine  a locomotive operating without a train behind it, for relocation or operational reasons.
* Station pilot  a locomotive used to shunt passenger trains at a railway station.

===Wheel arrangement===

Wheel arrangement is one type of classification. Common methods include the AAR wheel arrangement, UIC classification, and Whyte notation systems.

===Remote control locomotives===

In the second half of the twentieth century remote control locomotives started to enter service in switching operations, being remotely controlled by an operator outside of the locomotive cab.
The main benefit is one operator can control the loading of grain, coal, gravel, etc. into the cars. In addition, the same operator can move the train as needed. Thus, the locomotive is loaded or unloaded in about a third of the time.

==Locomotives in numismatics==
Locomotives have been a subject for collectors' coins and medals. One of the most famous and recent ones is the 25 euro 150 Years Semmering Alpine Railway commemorative coin. The obverse shows two locomotives: a historical and a modern one. This represents the technical development in locomotive construction between the years 1854 and 2004. The upper half depicts the Taurus, a high performance locomotive. Below is shown the first functional Alpine locomotive, the Engerth; constructed by Wilhelm Freiherr von Engerth.

==Gallery==

==See also==

==References==

==Bibliography==
*

==External links==
 
*An engineer's guide from 1891
*Animated engines, Steam Locomotive
* International Steam Locomotives
* Turning a Locomotive into a Stationary Engine, Popular Science monthly, February 1919, page 72, Scanned by Google Books: http://books.google.com/books?id=7igDAAAAMBAJ&pg=PA72

 

[[Lars Magnus Ericsson]]

Bust of L. M. Ericsson at Telefonplan in Stockholm

Lars Magnus Ericsson (5 May 1846  17 December 1926) was a Swedish inventor, entrepreneur and founder of telephone equipment manufacturer Ericsson (incorporated as Telefonaktiebolaget LM Ericsson).

Lars Magnus (ti onoma einai auto) was born in Vrmskog, Vrmland, and grew up in the small village of Vegerbol located between Karlstad and Arvika. At the age of 12, Ericsson's father died, forcing him to seek work as a miner. He worked until he had money enough to leave the village and move to Stockholm in 1867. He then worked for six years for an instrument maker named llers & Co. who mainly created telegraph equipment. Because of his skills, he was given two state scholarships to study instrument making abroad between 1872 and 1875. One of the companies he worked at was Siemens & Halske.

Upon his return to Sweden in 1876, he founded a small mechanical workshop together with his friend Carl Johan Andersson who had also worked at llers & Co.. This workshop was actually a former kitchen of some 13 m2 situated at Drottninggatan 15 in the most central part of Stockholm. Here, he started a telephone company by analyzing Bell company and Siemens telephones and creating his own copies in their image. It was not until they started cooperating with Henrik Tore Cedergren in 1883 that the company would start to grow into the Ericsson corporation.

In the year 1900 Lars Magnus retired from Ericsson at the age of 54. He kept his shares in the company until 1905 and then sold them all.

He is said to have been a demanding person, and disliked any direct publicity about his personality and did not wish to be idolized. He was, however, deeply respected by his employees. He was always a skeptic and cautious in business. He was also somewhat opposed to patents, as many of the products he made would not have been possible to do if the patent legislation had been overly effective. When his phones were copied by Norwegian companies he did not care, as his phones had in turn been largely copied from Siemens. He initially did not believe in a mass market for telephones, and saw it as a toy for the leisure class.

After his death in 1926, he was buried at Hgelby grd in Botkyrka. At his explicit request, there is no headstone marking his grave.

==References==



[[Lysator]]

right
Lysator is an academic computer club at Linkping University, Sweden with almost 600 members. It is an independent non-profit society, separate from the students' union and the faculties of the university.

== History ==

Lysator was founded 29 March 1973. The first computer used at Lysator was a Datasaab D21, delivered to Lysator on 25 May 1973. Later in the decade, members of Lysator developed and initially built a microcomputer, the Lys-16, which was advanced for its time due to its 16-bit word size. http://www.lysator.liu.se/history/lys16.html 

In February 1993, Lysator put up the first web server in Sweden, among the first 10&ndash;15 in the world.

On 30 July 2010, Lysator began migrating to a new 3U home rack, http://root.blogs.lysator.liu.se/2010/08/02/hemdisk-och-natverk/ increasing their available storage space from 700GB to 13TB. http://root.blogs.lysator.liu.se/2010/07/13/migrering-hemdisk-30-31-juli/ 

== Projects hosted by Lysator ==

Lysator has been a starting ground for many notable projects, some of which have since become independent from the club:
* Project Runeberg
* LysKOM
* Elfwood
* SvenskMud
* NannyMUD
* Sprite Animation Toolkit

== See also ==
* History of the Internet in Sweden

== References ==

== External links ==
* Homepage of Lysator
* History of Lysator



[[Latin hip hop]]

Latin hip hop or Latin rap is hip hop music recorded by artists of Latin American and Iberian (Spain and Portugal) origin.

==Latin rap on the West Coast==
In the late 1980s and early 1990s, most Latin rap came from the West Coast of the United States. Cuban-American artist Mellow Man Ace was the first Latino artist to have a major bilingual single attached to his 1989 debut. Mellow Man, referred to as the "Godfather of Latin rap" and a Hip Hop Hall of Fame inductee, brought mainstream attention to Spanglish rhyming with his 1989 platinum single "Mentirosa". In 1990, fellow West Coast artist Kid Frost further brought Latinos to the rap forefront with his single "La Raza." In 1991, Kid Frost, Mellow Man, A.L.T. and several other Latin rappers formed the rap super group Latin Alliance and released a self-titled album which featured the hit "Lowrider (On the Boulevard)". A.L.T. also scored a hit later that year with his remake of the song Tequila. Cypress Hill, of which Mellow Man Ace was a member before going solo, would become the first Latino rap group to reach platinum status in 1991. The group has since continued to release other gold and platinum albums. Ecuadorian born rapper Gerardo received heavy rotation on video and radio for his single "Rico, Suave". While commercially watered-down, his album enjoyed a status of being one of the first mainstream Spanglish CDs on the market. Johnny J was a multi-platinum songwriter, music producer & rapper who was perhaps best known for his production on Tupac Shakur's albums All Eyez on Me and Me Against the World. [ allmusic Credits] He also produced the 1990 single "Knockin' Boots" for his classmate Candyman's album Ain't No Shame in My Game, which eventually went platinum thanks to the single RIAA Database 

2012 and 2013 marked the rise of teen rappers such as Earl Sweatshirt and a corresponding rise by teen Latino rappers. In Texas, a group called Freshmen Records from the Rio Grande Valley along the Texas border with Mexico began producing ethnically unique hip hop tracks. NBC Latino Their single "Graduation" focuses on Hispanic identity in America.

==Latin rap in the East Coast and Miami==
On the East Coast, Latin artists such as the Beatnuts emerged in the early 1990s, with New Jersey native Chino XL earning recognition for his lyricism and equal controversy for his subject matter. In 1994, Platinum Producer and DJ Frankie Cutlass used his own label, Hoody Records, to produce his single Puerto Rico. The single exploded onto the underground club circuit to become an instant classic. Puerto Rico, a ready-made anthem for the Latino audiencewho embraced it enthusiasticallypaved the way for Latin Hip Hop artists just starting to carve out a niche in Americas music scene. In the late 1990s, Puerto Rican rapper Big Punisher became the first Latino solo artist to reach platinum sales for an LP with his debut album Capital Punishment, which included hit song Still Not a Player. Other Latin artists on the East Coast would follow and receive a great deal of support from Latino consumers including rappers such as Cuban Link and Immortal Technique. In Miami artists such as Don Dinero, A.B. Junior and Pitbull have been successful with rhymes in Spanish and English as well.

==Southwest and Chicano rap==
Latin rap (as well as its subgenre of Chicano rap) has thrived along the West Coast, Southwest and Midwestern states with little promotion due to the large Latino populations of those regions. During the '90s, Southern California Chicano artists, such as Kid Frost, A.L.T., A Lighter Shade of Brown, B-Real, Psycho Realm, Gunter, Delinquent Habits and Jonny Z received mainstream success. More recently, Texas artists such as Chingo Bling, Juan Gotti and South Park Mexican have enjoyed steady sales, and have headlined a number of successful Southwest tours. San Diego artist Lil Rob opened doors for Chicano rap by receiving mainstream attention for his singles "Summer Nights" and "Bring Out the Freak in You". Mav of Sol Camp and MC Magic are the most successful rappers to come out to the Southwest region. Baby Bash also had a huge impact with his single "Suga Suga". Artists Sinful of Tha Mexicanz, and Kemo the Blaxican have continued to improve the popularity of Spanglish rap on the West Coast.
Jonny Z is considered to be a pioneer of Latin hip-hop, due to him being one of the first Latinos combining Spanglish lyrics with freestyle, salsa, mambo, and regional Mexican banda. He scored four Billboard Hot Dance singles between 19931997, including one of the greatest Miami bass songs of all time, "Shake Shake (Shake That Culo)". Besides bass music, he also recorded the Chicano anthem "Orale". The Oxford encyclopedia of Latinos and Latinas in the United States Volume 2, Page 301 states: "A new style of Latina and Latino hip-hop was created in Miami and Texas by the bass rappers DJ Laz and Jonny Z, who mixed Latin styles with bass music". 

==Latin rap around the world==
The constant migration of people from one country to another has greatly influenced the dispersion of cultures and music across the globe. In the music realm, this can be heard with and Latin rap. The latter form of music has been a hit especially in countries with a large number of migrators to the United States who were only popular among Hispanic and Latino audiences. For example, Mexico has a growing hip hop scene with groups such as Control Machete, Cartel De Santa, and Molotov. Similarly, the movement has spread to Puerto Rico, a country where many of its residents have moved to New York, Miami and Chicago over the years. Latin rap which was very much derived from black hip hop was jumpstarted by a wave of rappers that included Ruben DJ and Vico C. Ruben DJ's hit, La Escuela, (The School) and Vico C's hit, La Recta Final, (The End of the Road) received considerable radio time during the late 1980s. In addition to Latin rap in Puerto Rico developing after African American hip-hop, and rap and reggae have a substantial impact on the genres (rap, and Latin rap) relate a certain message to their respective audiences. Puerto Rican rap emerged as a form of cultural and social protest within the Puerto Rican context. Giovannetti, Jorge L. "Popular Music and Culture in Puerto Rico: Jamaican and Rap Music as Cross-Cultural Symbols." In "Musical Migrations: Transnationalism and Cultural Hybridity in the Americas", ed. Frances R. Aparicio and Candida F Jaquez, 89. New York: Palgrave, 2003 This is similar to the way American and Jamaican youth used rap and reggae/dancehall as a means to communicate their feelings on social, cultural, and political issues. In essence, Puerto Rican rap became the voice of Puerto Rican youth like dancehall and rap music are methods of expression for their Jamaican and lower-class U.S. youth counterparts as they made it in France too since 2003 "1492 Army". 

There are many hip-hop scenes in Latin America, including a growing rap movement in Buenos Aires. Sounds and Colours 

Latin rap has also surfaced in the UK with a group called Cultura Londres which includes Richie Londres of Sol Invicto and Eric Bobo of Cypress Hill, as well as in Australia with Maya Jupiter.

==Freestyle==

In the mid-1980s, freestyle music was initially called Latin hip hop. This dance music genre, not to be confused with improvised freestyle rapping, was dominated, at the time, by electro funk beats and vaguely Latin melodic and percussion elements, over which Latino vocalists sang melodramatic pop vocals, usually in English even though it was started by African-Americans primarily. Freestyle was primarily popular among Latinos in the New York City and Miami club scenes, but achieved mainstream pop success with hits by The Cover Girls and Expos, among others. 

==See also==
* Chicano rap
* Cuban hip hop
* Dominican hip hop
* Haitian hip hop
* Merenrap

==References==

==External links==
* LatinRapper.com - Source for Latin rap news and interviews.
* BrownPride.com at BrownPride.com - A collection of texts and links about Latin rap.



[[Lighthouse of Alexandria]]

The Lighthouse of Alexandria, sometimes called the Pharos of Alexandria (in Ancient Greek,    ), was a lofty tower built by the Ptolemaic Kingdom between 280 and 247 BC and between 393 and tall. It was one of the tallest man-made structures on Earth for many centuries, and was regarded as one of the Seven Wonders of the Ancient World. Badly damaged by three earthquakes between 956 and 1323, it then became an abandoned ruin. It was the third longest surviving ancient wonder (after the Mausoleum at Halicarnassus and the still extant Great Pyramid of Giza) until in 1480 the last of its remnant stones were used to build the Citadel of Qaitbay on the site. In 1994, French archaeologists discovered some remains of the lighthouse on the floor of Alexandria's Eastern Harbour. 

==Origin==
Three-dimensional reconstruction based on a comprehensive 2006 study
Pharos was a small island just off the coast of the Nile Delta's western edge. In 332 BC when Alexander the Great founded the city of Alexandria on an isthmus opposite to Pharos, he caused the island to be united to the coast by a mole nearly a mile long (1260 m) called the Heptastadion ("seven stadia"a stadium was a Greek unit of length measuring approximately 180 m).
The east side of the mole became the Great Harbour, now an open bay; on the west side lay the port of Eunostos, with its inner basin Kibotos, now vastly enlarged to form the modern harbour.
Today's city development lying between the present Grand Square and the modern Ras al-Tiin quarter is built on the silt which gradually widened and obliterated this mole, and Ras al-Tiin represents all that is left of the island of Pharos, the site of the lighthouse at its eastern point having been weathered away by the sea.

==Construction==
The Lighthouse on coins minted in Alexandria in the second century (1: reverse of a coin of Antoninus Pius, and 2: reverse of a coin of Commodus).

The lighthouse was constructed in the 3rd century BC. After Alexander the Great died of a fever at age 32, the first Ptolemy (Ptolemy I Soter) announced himself king in 305 BC, and commissioned its construction shortly thereafter. The building was finished during the reign of his son, the second Ptolemy (Ptolemy II Philadelphus). It took 12 years to complete, at a total cost of 800 talents, and served as a prototype for all later lighthouses in the world. The light was produced by a furnace at the top and the tower was said to have been built mostly with solid blocks of limestone. 
Strabo reported that Sostratus had a dedication inscribed in metal letters to the "Saviour Gods". Later Pliny the Elder wrote that Sostratus was the architect, which is disputed. In the second century AD the satirist Lucian wrote that Sostratus inscribed his name under plaster bearing the name of Ptolemy. This was so that when the plaster with Ptolemy's name fell off, Sostratus's name would be visible in the stone. 

==Height and description ==

Judith McKenzie writes that "The Arab descriptions of the lighthouse are remarkably consistent, although it was repaired a number of times especially after earthquake damage. The height they give varies only fifteen per cent from c 103 to 118m, on a base c. 30 by 30m square... the Arab authors indicate a tower with three tapering tiers, which they describe as square, octagonal and circular, with a substantial ramp". 

The fullest description of the lighthouse comes "from the Arab traveler Abou Haggag Youssef Ibn Mohammed el-Balawi el-Andaloussi, who visited the Pharos as a tourist in AH 561 (AD 1166 AD)." Clayton & Price 1988, p. 153. 

Constructed from large blocks of light-coloured stone, the tower was made up of three stages: a lower square section with a central core, a middle octagonal section, and, at the top, a circular section. At its apex was positioned a mirror which reflected sunlight during the day; a fire was lit at night. Extant Roman coins struck by the Alexandrian mint show that a statue of a Triton was positioned on each of the building's four corners. A statue of Poseidon or Zeus stood atop the lighthouse. Haas 1997, p. 144. The Pharos' masonry blocks were interlocked, sealed together using molten lead, to withstand the pounding of the waves. Beaver, Patrick (1971). A History of Lighthouses. London: Peter Davies Ltd, pp. 1011. ISBN 0-432-01290-7. 
A mosaic depicting the Pharos of Alexandria, from Olbia, Libya c. 4th century AD

==Destruction==

In 796, the lighthouse may have lost its upper tier, which apparently went without repair for about a century. There are reports that Sultan Ahmad ibn Tulun (868-884) then built a mosque with a dome in place of the upper tier, but this seems to conflict with travelling geographer Muhammad al-Idrisi's report that the structure still operated as a lighthouse on his visit in 1115 AD.

The lighthouse was badly damaged in the earthquake of 956, and then again in 1303 and 1323. The two earthquakes in 1303 and 1323 damaged the lighthouse to the extent that the Moroccan traveller Ibn Battuta reported no longer being able to enter the ruin (when he visited it in 1349). Finally the stubby remnant disappeared in 1480, when the then-Sultan of Egypt, Qaitbay, built a medieval fort on the larger platform of the lighthouse site using some of the fallen stone.

==Recent archaeological research==

French archaeologists led by Jean-Yves Empereur discovered remains of the lighthouse in late 1994 on the floor of Alexandria's Eastern Harbour. Some of these remains were brought up and were lying at the harbour on public view at the end of 1995. A Nova (TV series) program chronicled the discovery. Subsequent satellite imaging has revealed further remains. It is possible to go diving and see the ruins. The secretariat of the UNESCO Convention on the Protection of the Underwater Cultural Heritage are currently working with the Government of Egypt on an initiative to add the bay of Alexandria (to include remains of the lighthouse) on a World Heritage List of submerged cultural sites. Museums and Tourism | United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization 

==Significance==
Pharos became the etymological origin of the word 'lighthouse' in Greek (), Persian (Fns - ), many Romance languages such as French (phare), Italian and Spanish (faro), Romanian (far) and Portuguese (farol), and even some Slavic languages like Bulgarian (far). In Russian, a derived word means "headlight" (fara - ).

In 2008 it was suggested DIO volume 14 pages 3-12 and page 2 footnote. that the Pharos was the vertical yardstick used in the first precise measurement of the size of the earth.

==Pharos in culture==
The Pharos of Abusir, an ancient funerary monument thought to be modelled after the Pharos at Alexandria, with which it is approximately contemporaneous

The lighthouse remains a civic symbol of the city of Alexandria and of the Alexandria Governorate with which the city is more or less coterminous. A stylised representation of the Lighthouse appears on the flag and seal of the Governorate and on many public services of the city, including the seal of Alexandria University.

===In architecture===
* A well-preserved ancient tomb in the town of Abusir, 48 km southwest of Alexandria, is thought to be a scaled-down model of the Alexandria Pharos. Known colloquially under various names  the Pharos of Abusir, the Abusir funerary monument and Burg al-Arab (Arab's Tower)  it consists of a 3-story tower, approximately 20 m in height, with a square base, an octagonal midsection and cylindrical upper section, like the building upon which it was apparently modelled. It dates to the reign of Ptolemy II (285246 BC), and is therefore likely to have been built at about the same time as the Alexandria Pharos.
* The design of minarets in many early Egyptian Islamic mosques followed a similar three-stage design to that of the Pharos, attesting to the building's broader architectural influence. Petersen A.: Dictionary of Islamic Architecture, page 188. Routledge, 1996. 
* The George Washington Masonic National Memorial is fashioned after the ancient Lighthouse of Alexandria in Egypt. "*Ferris, Gary W. Presidential Places: A Guide to the Historic Sites of U.S. Presidents. Winston-Salem, N.C.: J.F. Blair, 1999. p.21" 

===In books===
*Julius Caesar, in his Civil Wars (Part III, Sections 111-112, esp. Section 112), describes the Pharos and how it was a key landmark to his subduing Ptolemy XIV's armies (48 BC), describing its strategic importance in his sentences "Now because of the narrowness of the strait there can be no access by ship to the harbour without the consent of those who hold the Pharos. In view of this, Caesar took the precaution of landing his troops while the enemy was preoccupied with fighting, seized the Pharos and posted a garrison there. The result was that safe access was secured for his corn supplies and reinforcements." was common for Caesar in his writings to refer to himself in the third person.
*The Romano-Jewish historian Josephus (37  c.100 AD) describes it in his book The Jewish War (4.10.5) when he gives a geographical overview of Egypt.
*It was described at length in the Zhufan Zhi (, "Records of Foreign Peoples") by Zhao Rugua (11701228), a Chinese customs inspector for the port city of Quanzhou during the Song Dynasty. Needham, Joseph (1986). Science and Civilization in China: Volume 5, Physics and Physical Technology, Part 3: Civil Engineering and Nautics. Taipei: Caves Books, Ltd. Page 662. 

==References==
Notes

Bibliography

* 
* 
* 
* 
* 

==Further reading==

* Alexandrie la Grande by B. Bernard, Cadogan, Paris, 1956.
* Pharos and Pharillon by E.M. Forster, London, 1923.
* Ptolemaic Alexandria by P.M. Fraser, Oxford, 1972 (rep. 1984).
* Pharos antike Islam und Occident: ein Beitrage zur Architekturgeschichte by H. Thiersch, Leipzig and Berlin, 1909.

==External links==

*The Lighthouse at Alexandria at history.com

Alexandria
Alexandria



[[Lighthouse]]

The lighthouse of Aveiro, west coast of Portugal
A lighthouse is a tower, building, or other type of structure designed to emit light from a system of lamps and lenses and used as a navigational aid for maritime pilots at sea or on inland waterways.

Lighthouses mark dangerous coastlines, hazardous shoals, reefs, safe entries to harbors, and can also assist in aerial navigation. Once widely used, the number of operational lighthouses has declined due to the expense of maintenance and replacement by modern electronic navigational systems.

==History==

===Ancient lighthouses===
Graphic reconstruction of the Pharos according to a 2006 study
Before the development of clearly defined ports mariners were guided by fires built on hilltops. Since raising the fire would improve the visibility, placing the fire on a platform became a practice that led to the development of the lighthouse. In antiquity, the lighthouse functioned more as an entrance marker to ports than as a warning signal for reefs and promontories, unlike many modern lighthouses. The most famous lighthouse structure from antiquity was the Pharos of Alexandria, although it collapsed during an earthquake centuries later.

The intact Tower of Hercules at A Corua and the ruins of the Roman lighthouse at Dover Castle in England give insight into ancient lighthouse construction; other evidence about lighthouses exists in depictions on coins and mosaics, of which many represent the lighthouse at Ostia. Coins from Alexandria, Ostia, and Laodicea in Syria also exist.

===Modern construction===
The modern era of lighthouses began at the turn of the 18th century, as lighthouse construction boomed in lockstep with burgeoning levels of transatlantic commerce. Advances in structural engineering and new and efficient lighting equipment allowed for the creation of larger and more powerful lighthouses, including ones exposed to the sea. The function of lighthouses shifted toward the provision of a visible warning against shipping hazards, such as rocks or reefs.

Winstanley's lighthouse at the Eddystone Rocks marked the beginning in a new phase of lighthouse development.
The Eddystone Rocks were a major shipwreck hazard for mariners sailing through the English Channel. The first lighthouse built there was an octagonal wooden structure, anchored by 12 iron stanchions secured in the rock, and was built by Henry Winstanley from 1696 to 1698. His lighthouse was the first tower in the world to have been fully exposed to the open sea. 

The civil engineer, John Smeaton, rebuilt the lighthouse from 175659; Majdalany, Fred: The Eddystone Light. 1960 his tower marked a major step forward in the design of lighthouses and remained in use until 1877. He modelled the shape of his lighthouse on that of an oak tree, using granite blocks. He pioneered the use of "hydraulic lime," a form of concrete that will set under water, and developed a technique of securing the granite blocks together using dovetail joints and marble dowels. The dovetailing feature served to improve the structural stability, although Smeaton also had to taper the thickness of the tower towards the top, for which he curved the tower inwards on a gentle gradient. This profile had the added advantage of allowing some of the energy of the waves to dissipate on impact with the walls. His lighthouse was the prototype for the modern lighthouse and influenced all subsequent engineers. 

John Smeaton's rebuilt version of the Eddystone Lighthouse, 1759. This represented a great step forward in lighthouse design.
One such influence was Robert Stevenson, himself a seminal figure in the development of lighthouse design and construction. His greatest achievement was the construction of the Bell Rock Lighthouse in 1810, one of the most impressive feats of engineering of the age. This structure was based upon Smeaton's design, but with several improved features, such as the incorporation of rotating lights, alternating between red and white. Stevenson worked for the Northern Lighthouse Board for nearly fifty years during which time he designed and oversaw the construction and later improvement of numerous lighthouses. He innovated in the choice of light sources, mountings, reflector design, the use of Fresnel lenses, and in rotation and shuttering systems providing lighthouses with individual signatures allowing them to be identified by seafarers. He also invented the movable jib and the balance crane as a necessary part for lighthouse construction.

Alexander Mitchell designed the first screw-pile lighthouse  his lighthouse was built on piles that were screwed into the sandy or muddy seabed. Construction of his design began in 1838 at the mouth of the Thames and was known as the Maplin Sands lighthouse, and first lit in 1841. Although its construction began later, the Wyre Light in Fleetwood, Lancashire, was the first to be lit (in 1840). 

===Lighting improvements===
Argand lamp with circular wick and glass chimney. (Illustration from Les Merveilles de la science by Louis Figuier).
The source of illumination had generally been wood pyres or burning coal. The Argand lamp, invented in 1782 by the Swiss scientist, Aim Argand, revolutionized lighthouse illumination with its steady smokeless flame. Early models used ground glass which was sometimes tinted around the wick. Later models used a mantle of thorium dioxide suspended over the flame, creating a bright, steady light. http://www.johnmoncrieff.co.uk/shop-2/products.php?cat=32 The Argand lamp used whale oil, colza, olive oil "Lamp." Encyclopaedia Britannica: or, a dictionary of Arts, Science, and Miscellaneous Literature. 6th ed. 1823 Web. 5 Dec. 2011 or other vegetable oil as fuel which was supplied by a gravity feed from a reservoir mounted above the burner. The lamp was first produced by Matthew Boulton, in partnership with Argand, in 1784 and became the standard for lighthouses for over a century.

South Foreland Lighthouse was the first tower to successfully use an electric light in 1875. The lighthouse's carbon arc lamps were powered by a steam-driven magneto. John Richardson Wigham was the first to develop a system for gas illumination of lighthouses. His improved gas 'crocus' burner at the Baily Lighthouse was 13 times more powerful than the most brilliant light then known. 

The vaporized oil burner was invented in 1901 by Arthur Kitson, and improved by David Hood at Trinity House. The fuel was vaporized at high pressure and burned to heat the mantle, giving an output of over six times the luminosity of traditional oil lights. The use of gas as iluminant became widely available with the invention of the Daln light by Swedish engineer, Gustaf Daln. He used Agamassan (Aga), a substrate, to absorb the gas allowing safe storage and hence commercial exploitation. Daln also invented the 'sun valve', which automatically regulated the light and turned it off during the daytime. The technology was the predominant form of light source in lighthouses from the 1900s through the 1960s, when electric lighting had become dominant. History - The Sun Valve 

===Optical systems===
Diagram depicting how a spherical Fresnel lens collimates light
With the development of the steady illumination of the Argand lamp, the application of optical lenses to increase and focus the light intensity became a practical possibility. William Hutchinson developed the first practical optical system in 1763, known as a catoptric system. This rudimentary system effectively collimated the emitted light into a concentrated beam, thereby greatly increasing the light's visibility. The ability to focus the light led to the first revolving lighthouse beams, where the light would appear to the mariners as a series of intermittent flashes. It also became possible to transmit complex signals using the light flashes.

French physicist and engineer Augustin-Jean Fresnel developed the multi-part Fresnel lens for use in lighthouses. His design allowed for the construction of lenses of large aperture and short focal length, without the mass and volume of material that would be required by a lens of conventional design. A Fresnel lens can be made much thinner than a comparable conventional lens, in some cases taking the form of a flat sheet. A Fresnel lens can also capture more oblique light from a light source, thus allowing the light from a lighthouse equipped with one, to be visible over greater distances.

The first Fresnel lens was used in 1823 in the Cordouan lighthouse at the mouth of the Gironde estuary; its light could be seen from more than 20 mi out. Watson, Bruce. "Science Makes a Better Lighthouse Lens." Smithsonian. August 1999 v30 i5 p30.
produced in Biography Resource Center. Farmington Hills, Mich.: Thomson Gale. 2005. Fresnels invention increased the luminosity of the lighthouse lamp by a factor of 4 and his system is still in common use.

===Recent===
The advent of electrification, and automatic lamp changers began to make lighthouse keepers obsolete. For many years, lighthouses still had keepers, partly because lighthouse keepers could serve as a rescue service if necessary. Improvements in maritime navigation and safety such as the Global Positioning System (GPS) have led to the phasing out of non-automated lighthouses across the world. Lighthouse Keepers in the Nineteenth Century In Canada, this trend has been stopped and there are still 50 staffed light stations, with 27 on the west coast alone. 

Remaining modern lighthouses are more functional and less picturesque; usually they use solar-charged batteries and have a single stationary flashing light sitting on a steel skeleton tower. 

===Famous lighthouse builders===
Sir James Douglass was a prolific lighthouse builder and designer in the late 19th century.

John Smeaton is noteworthy for having designed the third and most famous Eddystone Lighthouse but some builders are well known for their work in building multiple lighthouses. The Stevenson family (Robert, Alan, David, Thomas, David Alan, and Charles) made lighthouse building a three generation profession in Scotland. Irishman Alexander Mitchell invented and built a number of screwpile lighthouses despite his blindness. Englishman James Douglass was knighted for his work on lighthouses.

United States Army Corps of Engineers Lieutenant George Meade built numerous lighthouses along the Atlantic and Gulf coasts before gaining wider fame as the winning general at the Battle of Gettysburg. Colonel Orlando M. Poe, engineer to General William Tecumseh Sherman in the Siege of Atlanta, designed and built some of the most exotic lighthouses in the most difficult locations on the U.S. Great Lakes. Architects, Engineers and Contractors 

French merchant navy officer Marius Michel Pasha built almost a hundred lighthouses along the coasts of the Ottoman Empire in a period of twenty years after the Crimean War (18531856). 

==Lighthouse technology==

===Power===
In a lighthouse, the source of light is called the "lamp" (whether electric or fueled by oil) and the concentration of the light is by the "lens" or "optic". Originally lit by open fires and later candles, the Argand hollow wick lamp and parabolic reflector were introduced in the late 18th century.

Whale oil was also used with wicks as the source of light. Kerosene became popular in the 1870s and electricity and carbide (acetylene gas) began replacing kerosene around the turn of the 20th century. Carbide was promoted by the Daln light which automatically lit the lamp at nightfall and extinguished it at dawn.

===Lens===

Cape Meares Lighthouse; first-order Fresnel lens
Before modern strobe lights, lenses were used to concentrate the light from a continuous source. Vertical light rays of the lamp are redirected into a horizontal plane, and horizontally the light is focused into one or a few directions at a time, with the light beam swept around. As a result, in addition to seeing the side of the light beam, the light is directly visible from greater distances, and with an identifying light characteristic.

This concentration of light is accomplished with a rotating lens assembly. In early lighthouses, the light source was a kerosene lamp or, earlier, an animal or vegetable oil Argand lamp, and the lenses rotated by a weight driven clockwork assembly wound by lighthouse keepers, sometimes as often as every two hours. The lens assembly sometimes floated in liquid mercury to reduce friction. In more modern lighthouses, electric lights and motor drives were used, generally powered by diesel electric generators. These also supplied electricity for the lighthouse keepers. 

Efficiently concentrating the light from a large omnidirectional light source requires a very large diameter lens. This would require a very thick and heavy lens if a conventional lens were used. The Fresnel lens (pronounced ) focused 85% of a lamp's light versus the 20% focused with the parabolic reflectors of the time. Its design enabled construction of lenses of large size and short focal length without the weight and volume of material in conventional lens designs. 

Fresnel lenses are ranked by order, a measure of refracting power, with a first order lens being the largest, most powerful and expensive; and a sixth order lens being the smallest. The order is based on the focal length of the lens. A first order lens has the longest focal length, with the sixth being the shortest. Coastal lighthouses generally use first, second, or third order lenses, while harbor lights and beacons use fourth, fifth, or sixth order lenses. 

Some lighthouses, such as those at Cape Race, Newfoundland, and Makapuu Point, Hawaii, used a more powerful hyperradiant Fresnel lens manufactured by the firm of Chance Brothers.

In recent times, many Fresnel lenses have been replaced by rotating aerobeacons which require less maintenance. In modern automated lighthouses, this system of rotating lenses is often replaced by a high intensity light that emits brief omnidirectional flashes (concentrating the light in time rather than direction). These lights are similar to obstruction lights used to warn aircraft of tall structures. Recent innovations are "Vega Lights", and initial experiments with light-emitting diode (LED) panels. 

===Light characteristics===

In any of these designs an observer, rather than seeing a continuous weak light, sees a brighter light during short time intervals. These instants of bright light are arranged to create a light characteristic or, pattern specific to a lighthouse. Aids To Navigation Abbreviations For example, the Scheveningen Lighthouse flashes are alternately 2.5 and 7.5 seconds. Some lights have sectors of a particular color (usually formed by colored panes in the lantern) to distinguish safe water areas from dangerous shoals. Modern lighthouses often have unique reflectors or Racon transponders so the radar signature of the light is also unique.

==Building==

===Design===
Architect's design of Split Rock Lighthouse
Architecture of 1909 lighthouses in Finland

For effectiveness, the lamp must be high enough to be seen before the danger is reached by a mariner. The minimum height is calculated by trigonometric formula where H is the height above water in feet, and d is the distance to the horizon in nautical miles. How far is the horizon? 

Where dangerous shoals are located far off a flat sandy beach, the prototypical tall masonry coastal lighthouse is constructed to assist the navigator making a landfall after an ocean crossing. Often these are cylindrical to reduce the effect of wind on a tall structure, such as Cape May Light. Smaller versions of this design are often used as harbor lights to mark the entrance into a harbor, such as New London Harbor Light.

Where a tall cliff exists, a smaller structure may be placed on top such as at Horton Point Light. Sometimes, such a location can be too high, for example along the west coast of the United States, where frequent low clouds can obscure the light. In these cases, lighthouses are placed below clifftop to ensure that they can still be seen at the surface during periods of fog or low clouds, as at Point Reyes Lighthouse. Another victim of fog was the Old Point Loma lighthouse, which was replaced in 1891 with a lower lighthouse, New Point Loma lighthouse.

As technology advanced, prefabricated skeletal iron or steel structures tended to be used for lighthouses constructed in the 20th century. These often have a narrow cylindrical core surrounded by an open lattice work bracing, such as Finns Point Range Light.

Sometimes a lighthouse needs to be constructed in the water itself. Wave-washed lighthouses are masonry structures constructed to withstand water impact, such as Eddystone Lighthouse in Britain and the St. George Reef Light off California. In shallower bays, Screw-pile lighthouse ironwork structures are screwed into the seabed and a low wooden structure is placed above the open framework, such as Thomas Point Shoal Lighthouse. As screw piles can be disrupted by ice, steel caisson lighthouses such as Orient Point Light are used in cold climates. Orient Long Beach Bar Light (Bug Light) is a blend of a screw pile light that was converted to a caisson light because of the threat of ice damage. Lighthouse Construction Types 

In waters too deep for a conventional structure, a lightship might be used instead of a lighthouse, such as the former lightship Columbia. Most of these have now been replaced by fixed light platforms (such as Ambrose Light) similar to those used for offshore oil exploration. Lightships of the U.S. 

Image:Eddystonelighthouse.jpg|Eddystone Lighthouse, one of the first wave-washed lighthouses
Image:Adziogol hyperboloid Lighthouse by Vladimir Shukhov 1911.jpg|Hyperboloid design Adziogol Lighthouse by V.G.Shukhov, Ukraine, 1910

===Components===
Lighthouse lantern room from mid-1800s

While lighthouse buildings differ depending on the location and purpose, they tend to have common components.

A light station comprises the lighthouse tower and all outbuildings, such as the keeper's living quarters, fuel house, boathouse, and fog-signaling building. The Lighthouse itself consists of a tower structure supporting the lantern room where the light operates.

The lantern room is the glassed-in housing at the top of a lighthouse tower containing the lamp and lens. Its glass storm panes are supported by metal Astragal bars running vertically or diagonally. At the top of the lantern room is a stormproof ventilator designed to remove the smoke of the lamps and the heat that builds in the glass enclosure. A lightning rod and grounding system connected to the metal cupola roof provides a safe conduit for any lightning strikes.

Immediately beneath the lantern room is usually a Watch Room or Service Room where fuel and other supplies were kept and where the keeper prepared the lanterns for the night and often stood watch. The clockworks (for rotating the lenses) were also located there. On a lighthouse tower, an open platform called the gallery is often located outside the watch room (called the Main Gallery) or Lantern Room (Lantern Gallery). This was mainly used for cleaning the outside of the windows of the Lantern Room. 

Lighthouses near to each other that are similar in shape are often painted in a unique pattern so they can easily be recognized during daylight, a marking known as a daymark. The black and white barber pole spiral pattern of Cape Hatteras Lighthouse is one example. Race Rocks Light in western Canada is painted in horizontal black and white bands to stand out against the horizon.

===Range lights===

Range Lights in Nantucket, Massachusetts, indicating the observer is left of the desired channel
Aligning two fixed points on land provides a navigator with a line of position called a range in the U.S. and a transit in Britain. Ranges can be used to precisely align a vessel within a narrow channel such as in a river. With landmarks of a range illuminated with a set of fixed lighthouses, nighttime navigation is possible.

Such paired lighthouses are called range lights in the U.S. and leading lights in the United Kingdom. The closer light is referred to as the beacon or front range; the furthest away is called the rear range. The rear range light is almost always taller than the front.

When the vessel is on the correct course, the two lights line up vertically. But when the observer is out of position, the difference in alignment indicates the proper direction of travel to correct the course.

==Maintenance==
In the United States, lighthouses are maintained by the United States Coast Guard (USCG). Lighthouses: An Administrative History 
Those in England and Wales are looked after by Trinity House; in Scotland, by the Northern Lighthouse Board; and in Ireland by the Commissioners of Irish Lights. In Canada, they are managed by the Canadian Coast Guard. In Australia, lighthouses are conducted by the Australian Maritime Safety Authority.

The Soviet Union built a number of automated lighthouses powered by radioisotope thermoelectric generators in remote locations. They operated for long periods without external support with great reliability. AEI: September 1996, RTG Materials However numerous installations deteriorated, were stolen, or vandalized. Some cannot be found due to poor record keeping. Radioisotope Thermoelectric Generators - Bellona 

==Preservation==
As lighthouses became less essential to navigation, many of their historic structures faced demolition or neglect. In the United States, the National Historic Lighthouse Preservation Act of 2000 provides for the transfer of lighthouse structures to local governments and private non-profit groups, while the USCG continues to maintain the lamps and lenses. In Canada, the Nova Scotia Lighthouse Preservation Society won heritage status for Sambro Island Lighthouse, and sponsored the Heritage Lighthouse Protection Act to change Canadian federal laws to protect lighthouses. 

Many groups formed to restore and save lighthouses around the world. They include the World Lighthouse Society and the United States Lighthouse Society. Welcome to The United States Lighthouse Society A further international group is the Amateur Radio Lighthouse Society, which sends amateur radio operators to publicize the preservation of remote lighthouses throughout the world. Amateur Radio Lighthouse Society 

==Popular culture and symbolism==
Split Point Lighthouse, used in the popular Australian TV series Round the Twist

Visiting and photographing lighthouses are popular hobbies as is collecting ceramic replicas. Some lighthouses are popular travel destinations in their own right, and the buildings maintained as tourist attractions. In the U.S., National Lighthouse and Lightship Weekend is celebrated on the first weekend of August, and International Lighthouse and Lightship Weekend on the third weekend. Many lighthouses are open to the public and amateur radio operators communicate between them on these days.

Lighthouses are popular icons on vehicle license plates. Barnegat Lighthouse, Tuckerton Island Lighthouse, Thomas Point Shoal Light, Saybrook Breakwater Light, White Shoal Light, and Biloxi Light are so depicted. http://www.sunherald.com/306/story/114405.html 

To recognize the role of lighthouse keepers in maritime safety, the U.S. Coast Guard named a class of 175 ft coastal buoy tenders after famous U.S. lighthouse keepers. Fourteen ships in the class were built between 1996 and 2000. USCG: About Us - Aircraft & Cutters 

Due to their function as beacons of safety, organizations choose lighthouses as a symbol. The lighthouse is the symbol of Lighthouse International, a U.S. organization for the blind. Lighthouse International Lighthouses are often interpreted in dreams as beacons of truth or as male fertility and influence.

Lighthouses were once regarded as an archetypal public good, because ships could benefit from the light without being forced to pay. One reason the Confederacy broke off from the United States was the former's opposition to most taxpayer-funded internal improvements; yet even the Confederate States Constitution explicitly allowed public funds to be spent on lighthouses. The Avalon Project : Constitution of the Confederate States; March 11, 1861 

A widely disseminated urban legend tells of a radio conversation between a U.S. or British naval vessel and what is believed to be another ship on a collision course. The naval vessel insists the other ship change course, but the other ship continues to insist the naval vessel do so. After the captain of the naval vessel identifies himself and demands a course change, the other party responds with, "I'm a lighthouse. It's your call".

The Disney film Pete's Dragon featured a lighthouse and the resulting Helen Reddy song Candle on the Water alludes to it. The Australian television series Round the Twist also involved a family living at Split Point Lighthouse. The long-running American soap opera Guiding Light has featured a lighthouse in many of its opening title segments, and the fictional Springfield, Illinois has a lighthouse situated near the town. The Guiding Light Retrieved 16 July 2009. 

Their isolated and mysterious nature makes lighthouses a frequent setting of horror and suspense films, as well as adventure video games. Recently, a lighthouse played a pivotal role in Martin Scorsese's Shutter Island, and was featured in the final shot of the film.

An island with a lighthouse is the setting of Tove Jansson's novel Moominpappa at Sea and the isolated nature of the lighthouse surrounded by the sea also is a reference to the states of mind of the main characters of the novel.

St. Anthony's Lighthouse at St. Anthony's Head near Falmouth, Cornwall was featured in the title sequence of the children's live action puppet television program series Fraggle Rock created by Jim Henson.

The Adventures of Portland Bill was a British stop motion animated children's television series made in 1983. Set in a fictional lighthouse, the name its main character was a reference to the Portland Bill Lighthouse in Dorset. Many of the other characters were plays on the names of coastal regions, made familiar to the wider public by the BBC Radio 4 Shipping Forecast.

==Gallery==

Image:Joao Pessoa Paraiba Farol do Cabo Branco2.jpg|Cabo Branco Lighthouse in Joo Pessoa, Brazil is a major attraction at the easternmost inland point of the Americas
Image:Old Lighthouse Waitemata Harbour.jpg|A rarer type of lighthouse on stilts in the Hauraki Gulf of New Zealand. Mostly protected by nearby islands, Bean Rock lighthouse lights the way into the Waitemata Harbour.
Image:LeuchtturmVonMaspalomas.jpg|Lighthouse "El Faro", Maspalomas, Gran Canaria.
File:Lobito Lighthouse.jpg|Lighthouse "Lobito" in Lobito, Angola
File:Knarrarsviti Lighthouse.jpg| The Knarrarsviti Lighthouse is a two-staged tower, built in 1938-1939, located near the town of Stokkseyri. Iceland.
File:Vypin Lighthouse.jpg|The Vypin Lighthouse at Kochi, India. The structure (built in 1979) has an unusual cross section.
File:Rawley_Point_Lighthouse,_June_1,_northern_view.jpg|The Rawley Point Lighthouse near Two Rivers, Wisconsin at Point Beach State Forest shows an example of an octagonal skeletal structure.
File:Peggys Cove Nova Scotia 01.jpg| Peggys Point Lighthouse, Nova Scotia, Canada
File:The light at Gullringnes in Vard.jpg|Small non-attendant lighthouse at Gullringnes in Vard, North Norway.

==See also==
*List of lighthouses and lightvessels
*Day beacon
*Lens lantern
*Pintsch gas
*Pharology

==References==
;Notes

;Bibliography
* Bathurst, Bella. The lighthouse Stevensons. New York: Perennial, 2000. ISBN 0-06-093226-0
* Beaver, Patrick. A History of Lighthouses. London: Peter Davies Ltd, 1971. ISBN 0-432-01290-7.
* Crompton, Samuel, W; Rhein, Michael, J. The Ultimate Book of Lighthouses. San Diego, CA: Thunder Bay Press, 2002. ISBN 1-59223-102-0.
* Jones, Ray; Roberts, Bruce. American Lighthouses. Globe Pequot, 1998. 1st ed. ISBN 0-7627-0324-5.
* Stevenson, D. Alan. The world's lighthouses before 1820. London: Oxford University Press, 1959.

;Further reading
* Noble, Dennis. Lighthouses & Keepers: U. S. Lighthouse Service and Its Legacy. Annapolis: U.S. Naval Institute Press, 1997. ISBN 1-55750-638-8.
* Putnam, George R. Lighthouses and Lightships of the United States. Boston: Houghton Mifflin Co., 1933.
* Weiss, George. The Lighthouse Service, Its History, Activities and Organization. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins Press, 1926.

==External links==

*"Lighthouses Of Strange Designs, December 1930, Popular Science
* Research tool with details of over 14,700 lighthouses and navigation lights around the world with photos and links.
*Pharology Website: http://www.pharology.eu . Reference source for the history and development of lighthouses of the world.

 



[[Library of Alexandria]]

The Great Library of Alexandria, O. Von Corven, 19th century

The Royal Library of Alexandria, or Ancient Library of Alexandria, in Alexandria, Egypt, was one of the largest and most significant libraries of the ancient world. It was dedicated to the Muses, the nine goddesses of the arts. Murray, S. A., (2009). The library: An illustrated history. New York: Skyhorse Publishing, p.17 It flourished under the patronage of the Ptolemaic dynasty and functioned as a major center of scholarship from its construction in the 3rd century BC until the Roman conquest of Egypt in 30 BC. With collections of works, lecture halls, meeting rooms, and gardens, the library was part of a larger research institution called the Musaeum of Alexandria, where many of the most famous thinkers of the ancient world studied.

The library was created by Ptolemy I Soter, who was a Macedonian general and the successor of Alexander the Great. Murray, S. (2009). The library: An illustrated history. Chicago, IL: Skyhorse Publishing, (pp. 15). As a symbol of the wealth and power of Egypt, it employed many scribes to steal books from around the known world, copy them, and never returned them. Most of the books were kept as papyrus scrolls, and though it is unknown how many such scrolls were housed at any given time, their combined value was incalculable.

The library is famous for having been burned resulting in the loss of many scrolls and books, and has become a symbol of the destruction of cultural knowledge. A few sources differ on who is responsible for the destruction and when it occurred. Although there is a mythology of the burning of the Library at Alexandria, the library may have suffered several fires or acts of destruction over many years. Possible occasions for the partial or complete destruction of the Library of Alexandria include a fire set by Julius Caesar in 48 BC, an attack by Aurelian in the 270s AD, the decree of Coptic Pope Theophilus in 391 AD, and the decree of the second caliph Omar ibn Al-khattb in 640 AD.

After the main library was fully destroyed, ancient scholars used a "daughter library" in a temple known as the Serapeum, located in another part of the city. According to Socrates of Constantinople, Coptic Pope Theophilus destroyed the Serapeum in 391 AD.

==Structure==
Although the exact layout is not known, ancient sources describe the Library of Alexandria as comprising a collection of scrolls, a peripatos walk, a room for shared dining, a reading room, meeting rooms, gardens, and lecture halls. The influence of this model may still be seen today in the layout of university campuses. The library itself is known to have had an acquisitions department (possibly built near the stacks, or for utility closer to the harbour), and a cataloguing department. A hall contained shelves for the collections of papyrus scrolls known as bibliothekai (). According to popular description, an inscription above the shelves read: The place of the cure of the soul. Manguel, Alberto, The Library at Night. New Haven: Yale University Press, 2008, p. 26. 

The library was but one part of the Musaeum of Alexandria, which functioned as a sort of research institute. In addition to the library the Musaeum included rooms for the study of astronomy, anatomy, and even a zoo of exotic animals. The classical thinkers who studied, wrote, and experimented at the Musaeum include the fathers of mathematics, engineering, physiology, geography, and medicine. These included notable thinkers such as Euclid, Archimedes, Eratosthenes, Herophilus, Erasistratus, Hipparchus, Aedesia, Pappus, Theon, Hypatia, Aristarchus of Samos, and Saint Catherine. Idolphon.org 

==Collection==
It is now impossible to determine the collection's size in any era with any certainty. Papyrus scrolls constituted the collection, and although codices were used after 300 BC, the Alexandrian Library is never documented as having switched to parchment, perhaps because of its strong links to the papyrus trade. (The Library of Alexandria in fact had an indirect cause in the creation of writing parchment  due to the library's critical need for papyrus, little was exported and thus an alternate source of copy material became essential.) Murray, S. A., (2009). The library: An illustrated history. New York: Skyhorse Publishing, p.14 

A single piece of writing might occupy several scrolls, and this division into self-contained "books" was a major aspect of editorial work. King Ptolemy II Philadelphus (309246 BC) is said to have set 500,000 scrolls as an objective for the library. Tarn, W.W. 1928. Ptolemy II. The Journal of Egyptian Archaeology, 14(3/4), 246260. The Byzantine writer Tzetzes gives a similar figure in his essay On Comedy. Mark Antony supposedly gave Cleopatra over 200,000 scrolls for the library as a wedding gift, taken from the great Library of Pergamum, but this is regarded by some historians as a propagandist claim meant to show Antony's allegiance to Egypt rather than Rome. MacLeod Roy,The Library of Alexandria:Center of Learning in the Ancient World, New York:I.B Tauris & Co Ltd, 2005. No index of the library survives, and it is not possible to know with certainty how large and how diverse the collection may have been. For example, it is likely that even if the Library of Alexandria had hundreds of thousands of scrolls (and thus perhaps tens of thousands of individual works), some of these would have been duplicate copies or alternate versions of the same texts.

As a research institution the library filled its stacks with new works in mathematics, astronomy, physics, natural sciences and other subjects. Its empirical standards applied in one of the first and certainly strongest homes for serious textual criticism. As the same text often existed in several different versions, comparative textual criticism was crucial for ensuring their veracity. Once ascertained, canonical copies would then be made for scholars, royalty, and wealthy bibliophiles the world over, this commerce bringing income to the library. 

==History==
This Latin inscription regarding Tiberius Claudius Balbilus of Rome (d. c. AD 79) mentions the "ALEXANDRINA BYBLIOTHECE" (line eight).
Arguably one of the largest and most significant libraries of the ancient world, details about it are a mixture of history and legend. The library's main purpose was to show off the wealth of Egypt, with research as a lesser goal, but the library's contents were used to aid the ruler of Egypt. 

According to the earliest source of information, the pseudepigraphic Letter of Aristeas composed between c180 and 145 BC, the library was initially organized by Demetrius of Phaleron, Letter of Aristeas, 912. a student of Aristotle, under the reign of Ptolemy I Soter (c.367 BCc.283 BC). Other sources claim it was instead created under the reign of his son Ptolemy II (283246 BC). The Library was built in the Brucheion (Royal Quarter) in the style of Aristotle's Lyceum, adjacent to and in service of the Musaeum (a Greek Temple or "House of Muses", whence the term "museum"). Entry  at Liddell & Scott. 

The Library at Alexandria was in charge of collecting all the world's knowledge, and most of the staff was occupied with the task of translating works onto papyrus paper. It did so through an aggressive and well-funded royal mandate involving trips to the book fairs of Rhodes and Athens. Erksine, Andrew. 1995. "Culture and Power in Ptolemaic Egypt: The Museum and Library of Alexandria". Greece & Rome, 2nd ser., 42(1), 3848. According to Galen, any books found on ships that came into port were taken to the library, and were listed as "books of the ships". Galen, xvii.a, p.606. Official scribes then copied these writings; the originals were kept in the library, and the copies delivered to the owners. Other than collecting works from the past, the library served as home to a host of international scholars, well-patronized by the Ptolemaic dynasty with travel, lodging, and stipends for their whole families. Kennedy, George.The Cambridge History of Literary Criticism:Classical Criticism,New York: University of Cambridge Press, 1999. 

According to Galen, Ptolemy III requested permission from the Athenians to borrow the original scripts of Aeschylus, Sophocles and Euripides, for which the Athenians demanded the enormous amount of fifteen talents (450 kg) of a precious metal as guarantee. Ptolemy III happily paid the fee but kept the original scripts for the library. Galen, xvii.a, p.607. This story may also be construed erroneously to show the power of Alexandria over Athens during the Ptolemaic dynasty. This detail is due to the fact that Alexandria was a man-made bidirectional port between the mainland and the Pharos island, welcoming trade from the East and West, and soon found itself to be an international hub for trade, the leading producer of papyrus and, soon enough, books.

The editors at the Library of Alexandria are especially well known for their work on Homeric texts. The more famous editors generally also held the title of head librarian. These included Zenodotus, Apollonius of Rhodes, Eratosthenes, Aristophanes of Byzantium, and Aristarchus of Samothrace, among others. Whibley, Leonard; A Companion to Greek Studies 1916 pp. 122123. (While Callimachusthe first bibliographer and developer of the "Pinakes", popularly considered to be the first library catalogdid his most famous work at the Library of Alexandria, he was never the head librarian there. ) In the early 2nd century BC scholars began to abandon Alexandria for safer areas with more generous patronage, and in 145 BC Ptolemy VIII expelled all foreign scholars from Alexandria. 

===Destruction===

The Burning of the Library at Alexandria in 391 AD, an illustration from 'Hutchinsons History of the Nations', c. 1910
The famous burning of the Library of Alexandria, including the incalculable loss of ancient works, has become a symbol of the irretrievable loss of public knowledge. Although there is a mythology of "the burning of the Library at Alexandria", the library may have suffered several fires or acts of destruction of varying degrees over many years. Ancient and modern sources identify several possible occasions for the partial or complete destruction of the Library of Alexandria. 
 

During Caesar's Civil War, Julius Caesar was besieged at Alexandria in 48 BC. Many ancient sources describe Caesar setting fire to his own ships Pollard, Justin, and Reid, Howard. 2006. The Rise and Fall of Alexandria, Birthplace of the Modern World. Aulus Gellius. Attic Nights book 7 chapter 17 and state that this fire spread to the library, destroying it. Aulus Gellius. Attic Nights book 7 chapter 17. 

Bolstering this claim, in the 4th century both the pagan historian Ammianus See Amm. 22.6; cf. Dio 42.38. and the Christian historian Orosius wrote that the Bibliotheca Alexandrina had been destroyed by Caesar's fire. However, Florus and Lucan claim that the flames Caesar set only burned the fleet and some "houses near the sea". Years after Caesar's campaign in Alexandria, the Greek geographer Strabo claimed to have worked in the Alexandrian Library.

The library seems to have continued in existence to some degree until its contents were largely lost during the taking of the city by the Emperor Aurelian (270275 AD), who was suppressing a revolt by Queen Zenobia of Palmyra. Staff Report: "What happened to the great Library of Alexandria? The Straight Dope, 6 December 2005 During the course of the fighting, the areas of the city in which the main library was located were damaged. Some sources claim that the smaller library located at the Serapeum survived, though Ammianus Marcellinus wrote of the library in the Serapeum temple as a thing of the past, destroyed when Caesar sacked Alexandria. 

5th century scroll which illustrates the destruction of the Serapeum by Theophilus
Paganism was made illegal by an edict of the Emperor Theodosius I in 391 AD. The temples of Alexandria were closed by Patriarch Theophilus of Alexandria in AD 391. The historian Socrates of Constantinople describes that all pagan temples in Alexandria were destroyed, including the Serapeum. Since the Serapeum housed a part of the Great Library, some scholars believe that the remains of the Library of Alexandria were destroyed at this time. John Julius Norwich, Byzantium: The Early Centuries However, it is not known how many, if any, books were contained in it at the time of destruction, and contemporary scholars do not mention the library directly. Paulus Orosius, vi.15.32 

In 642 AD, Alexandria was captured by the Muslim army of Amr ibn al `Aas. Several later Arabic sources describe the library's destruction by the order of Caliph Omar. De Sacy, Relation de lEgypte par Abd al-Latif, Paris, 1810: "Above the column of the pillars is a dome supported by this column. I think this building was the portico where Aristotle taught, and after him his disciples; and that this was the academy that Alexander built when he built this city, and where was placed the library which Amr ibn-Alas burned, with the permission of Omar." Google books here. Translation of De Sacy from here. Other versions of Abd-el-Latif in English here. Samir Khalil, Lutilisation dal-Qif par la Chronique arabe dIbn al-Ibr ( 1286), in: Samir Khalil Samir (d.), Actes du IIe symposium syro-arabicum (Sayyidat al-Br, septembre 1998). tudes arabes chrtiennes, = Parole de l'Orient 28 (2003) 551598. An English translation of the passage in Al-Qifti by Emily Cottrell of Leiden University is at the Roger Pearse blog here Bar-Hebraeus, writing in the 13th century, quotes Omar as saying to Yay al-Naw: "If those books are in agreement with the Quran, we have no need of them; and if these are opposed to the Quran, destroy them." Ed. Pococke, p.181, translation on p.114. Online Latin text and English translation here. Latin: Quod ad libros quorum mentionem fecisti: si in illis contineatur, quod cum libro Dei conveniat, in libro Dei quod sufficiat absque illo; quod si in illis fuerit quod libro Dei repugnet, neutiquam est eo opus, jube igitur e medio tolli. Jussit ergo Amrus EbnolAs dispergi eos per balnea Alexandriae, atque illis calefaciendis comburi; ita spatio semestri consumpti sunt. Audi quid factum fuerit et mirare." Later scholars are skeptical of these stories, given the range of time that had passed before they were written down and the political motivations of the various writers. E. Gibbon, Decline and Fall, chapter 51: "It would be endless to enumerate the moderns who have wondered and believed, but I may distinguish with honour the rational scepticism of Renaudot, (Hist. Alex. Patriarch, p. 170: ) historia ... habet aliquid ut  ut Arabibus familiare est." However Butler says: "Renaudot thinks the story has an element of untrustworthiness: Gibbon discusses it rather briefly and disbelieves it." (ch.25, p.401) The civilisation of Arabs, Book no III, 1884, reedition of 1980, page 468 Lewis, Bernard. "The Vanished Library". The New York Review of Books. 37(14). 27 September 1990. 

==Legacy==

Although the various component parts of the physical library were destroyed, in fact the centres of academic excellence had already moved to various capital cities. Furthermore, it is possible that most of the material from the Library of Alexandria actually survived, by way of the Imperial Library of Constantinople, the Academy of Gondishapur, and the House of Wisdom. This material may then have been preserved by the Reconquista, which led to the formation of European Universities and the recompilation of ancient texts from formerly scattered fragments. 

==References==

==Sources==

* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 

==Further reading==

* 
* 
* Jochum, Uwe. "The Alexandrian Library and Its Aftermath" from Library History vol, pp. 512.
* 
* Parsons, Edward. The Alexandrian Library. London, 1952. Relevant online excerpt.
* Stille, Alexander: The Future of the Past (chapter: "The Return of the Vanished Library"). New York: Farrar, Straus and Giroux, 2002. pp. 246273.

==External links==
* James Hannam: The Mysterious Fate of the Great Library of Alexandria.
* 
* Papyrus fragment (P.Oxy.1241): An ancient list of head librarians.
* The Straight Dope Straight Dope Staff Report: "What happened to the great Library of Alexandria?"
* The BBC Radio 4 program In Our Time (BBC Radio 4) discussed The Library of Alexandria 12.03.2009
* Friends of the Library of Alexandria (official Mexican site)
* Bibliotheca Alexandrina (official site)
* The Burning of the Library of Alexandria
* David B. Hart: The Myth of the Great Library
* 

Alexandria



[[Library]]

Library at Melk Abbey in Austria
St. Florian Library at Melk Abbey in Austria

A library is an organized collection of sources of information and similar resources, made accessible to a defined community for reference or borrowing. It provides physical or digital access to material, and may be a physical building or room, or a virtual space, or both. "Library ... collection of books, public or private; room or building where these are kept; similar collection of films, records, computer routines, etc. or place where they are kept; series of books issued in similar bindings as set."--Allen, R. E., ed. (1984) The Pocket Oxford Dictionary of Current English. Oxford: Clarendon Press; p. 421 A library's collection can include books, periodicals, newspapers, manuscripts, films, maps, prints, documents, microform, CDs, cassettes, videotapes, DVDs, Blu-ray Discs, e-books, audiobooks, databases, and other formats. Libraries range in size from a few shelves of books to several million items. In Latin and Greek, the idea of bookcase is represented by Bibliotheca and Bibliothk (Greek: ): derivatives of these mean library in many modern languages, e.g. French bibliothque.

The first libraries consisted of archives of the earliest form of writingthe clay tablets in cuneiform script discovered in Sumer, some dating back to 2600 BC. Private or personal libraries made up of written books appeared in classical Greece in the 5th century BC. In the 6th century, at the very close of the Classical period, the great libraries of the Mediterranean world remained those of Constantinople and Alexandria.

A library is organized for use and maintained by a public body, an institution, a corporation, or a private individual. Public and institutional collections and services may be intended for use by people who choose not toor cannot afford topurchase an extensive collection themselves, who need material no individual can reasonably be expected to have, or who require professional assistance with their research. In addition to providing materials, libraries also provide the services of librarians who are experts at finding and organizing information and at interpreting information needs. Libraries often provide quiet areas for studying, and they also often offer common areas to facilitate group study and collaboration. Libraries often provide public facilities for access to their electronic resources and the Internet. Modern libraries are increasingly being redefined as places to get unrestricted access to information in many formats and from many sources. They are extending services beyond the physical walls of a building, by providing material accessible by electronic means, and by providing the assistance of librarians in navigating and analyzing very large amounts of information with a variety of digital tools.

==History==

===Early libraries===
Tablet from the Library of Ashurbanipal containing part of the Epic of Gilgamesh
The first libraries consisted of archives of the earliest form of writingthe clay tablets in cuneiform script discovered in temple rooms in Sumer, some dating back to 2600 BC. These archives, which mainly consisted of the records of commercial transactions or inventories, mark the end of prehistory and the start of history. Renfrew, Colin. Prehistory The Making Of The Human Mind, New York: Modern Library, 2008. 

Things were much the same in the government and temple records on papyrus of Ancient Egypt. The earliest discovered private archives were kept at Ugarit; besides correspondence and inventories, texts of myths may have been standardized practice-texts for teaching new scribes. There is also evidence of libraries at Nippur about 1900 BC and those at Nineveh about 700 BC showing a library classification system. The American International Encyclopedia, New York: J. J. Little & Ives, 1954; Volume IX 

Over 30,000 clay tablets from the Library of Ashurbanipal have been discovered at Nineveh, providing modern scholars with an amazing wealth of Mesopotamian literary, religious and administrative work. Among the findings were the Enuma Elish, also known as the Epic of Creation, "Epic of Creation", in Dalley, Stephanie. Myths from Mesopotamia. Oxford, 1989; pp. 233-81 which depicts a traditional Babylonian view of creation, the Epic of Gilgamesh, "Epic of Gilgamesh", in Dalley, Stephanie. Myths from Mesopotamia. Oxford, 1989; pp. 50135 a large selection of "omen texts" including Enuma Anu Enlil which "contained omens dealing with the moon, its visibility, eclipses, and conjunction with planets and fixed stars, the sun, its corona, spots, and eclipses, the weather, namely lightning, thunder, and clouds, and the planets and their visibility, appearance, and stations", Van De Mieroop, Marc. A History of the Ancient Near East ca. 3000323 BC. Oxford, UK: Blackwell Publishing, 2007: pg. 263
 and astronomic/astrological texts, as well as standard lists used by scribes and scholars such as word lists, bilingual vocabularies, lists of signs and synonyms, and lists of medical diagnoses.

Philosopher Laozi was keeper of books in the earliest library in China, which belonged to the Imperial Zhou dynasty. Mukherjee, A. K. Librarianship: Its Philosophy and History. Asia Publishing House (1966) p. 86 Also, evidence of catalogues found in some destroyed ancient libraries illustrates the presence of librarians. 

===Classical period===
Artistic rendering of the Library of Alexandria, based on some archaeological evidence
The Library of Alexandria, in Egypt, was the largest and most significant great library of the ancient world. Cosmos: A Personal Voyage, Sagan, C 1980, "Episode 1: The Shores of the Cosmic Ocean" It flourished under the patronage of the Ptolemaic dynasty and functioned as a major center of scholarship from its construction in the 3rd century BC until the Roman conquest of Egypt in 30 BC. The library was conceived and opened either during the reign of Ptolemy I Soter (323283 BC) or during the reign of his son Ptolemy II (283246 BC). Phillips, Heather A., "The Great Library of Alexandria?". Library Philosophy and Practice, August 2010 An early organization system was in effect at Alexandria. 

The Library of Celsus in Ephesus, Anatolia, now part of Seluk, Turkey was built in honor of the Roman Senator Tiberius Julius Celsus Polemaeanus (completed in 135 AD) by Celsus son, Gaius Julius Aquila (consul, 110 AD). The library was built to store 12,000 scrolls and to serve as a monumental tomb for Celsus.

Private or personal libraries made up of written books (as opposed to the state or institutional records kept in archives) appeared in classical Greece in the 5th century BC. The celebrated book collectors of Hellenistic Antiquity were listed in the late 2nd century in Deipnosophistae. All these libraries were Greek; the cultivated Hellenized diners in Deipnosophistae pass over the libraries of Rome in silence. By the time of Augustus there were public libraries near the forums of Rome: there were libraries in the Porticus Octaviae near the Theatre of Marcellus, in the temple of Apollo Palatinus, and in the Bibliotheca Ulpiana in the Forum of Trajan. The state archives were kept in a structure on the slope between the Roman Forum and the Capitoline Hill.

Private libraries appeared during the late republic: Seneca inveighed against libraries fitted out for show by illiterate owners who scarcely read their titles in the course of a lifetime, but displayed the scrolls in bookcases (armaria) of citrus wood inlaid with ivory that ran right to the ceiling: "by now, like bathrooms and hot water, a library is got up as standard equipment for a fine house (domus). Seneca, De tranquillitate animi ix.47. Libraries were amenities suited to a villa, such as Cicero's at Tusculum, Maecenas's several villas, or Pliny the Younger's, all described in surviving letters. At the Villa of the Papyri at Herculaneum, apparently the villa of Caesar's father-in-law, the Greek library has been partly preserved in volcanic ash; archaeologists speculate that a Latin library, kept separate from the Greek one, may await discovery at the site.

Remains of the Library of Celsus at Ephesus
In the West, the first public libraries were established under the Roman Empire as each succeeding emperor strove to open one or many which outshone that of his predecessor. Romes first public library was established by Asinius Pollio. Pollio was a lieutenant of Julius Caesar and one of his most ardent supporters. After his military victory in Illyria, Pollio felt he had enough fame and fortune to create what Julius Caesar had sought for a long time: a public library to increase the prestige of Rome and rival the one in Alexandria. Casson, L. (2001). Libraries in the ancient world. New Haven: Yale University Press; Ewald, L. A. (2004). Library Culture in Ancient Rome, 100 B.C.  A.D. 400. Kentucky Libraries, 68(1), 9-11;Buchanan, S. (2012). Designing the Research Commons: Classical Models for School Libraries. School Libraries Worldwide, 18(1), 56-69. Pollioss library, the Anla Libertatis, Ewald, 2004, p.9 which was housed in the Atrium Libertatis, was centrally located near the Forum Romanum. It was the first to employ an architectural design that separated works into Greek and Latin. All subsequent Roman public libraries will have this design. Casson, 2001, p. 80 At the conclusion of Romes civil wars following the death of Marcus Antonius in 30 BC, the Emperor Augustus sought to reconstruct many of Romes damaged buildings. During this construction, Augustus created two more public libraries. The first was the library of the Temple of Apollo on the Palatine, often called the Palatine library, and the second was the library of the Porticus of Octaviae Casson, 2001, p. 81; Buchanan, 2012, p. 61 

Two more libraries were added by the Emperor Tiberius on Palatine Hill and one by Vespasian after 70 AD. Vespasians library was constructed in the Forum of Vespasian, also known as the Forum of Peace, and became one of Romes principal libraries. The Bibliotheca Pacis was built along the traditional model and had two large halls with rooms for Greek and Latin libraries containing the works of Galen and Lucius Aelius. Casson, 2001, p.84; Buchanan, 2012, pp. 61-62 One of the best preserved was the ancient Ulpian Library built by the Emperor Trajan. Completed in 112/113 AD, the Ulpian Library was part of Trajans Forum built on the Capitoline Hill. Trajans Column separated the Greek and Latin rooms which faced each other. Ewald, 2004, p.10; Buchanan, 2012, p.62;Casson, p.61 The structure was approximately fifty feet high with the peak of the roof reaching almost seventy feet. Houston, G. W. (2008). Tiberius and the Libraries: Public Book Collections and Library Buildings in the Early Roman Empire. Libraries & the Cultural Record, 43, 247-269. 

Unlike the Greek libraries, readers had direct access to the scrolls, which were kept on shelves built into the walls of a large room. Reading or copying was normally done in the room itself. The surviving records give only a few instances of lending features. Most of the large Roman baths were also cultural centres, built from the start with a library, a two room arrangement with one room for Greek and one for Latin texts.

Libraries were filled with parchment scrolls as at Library of Pergamum and on papyrus scrolls as at Alexandria: the export of prepared writing materials was a staple of commerce. There were a few institutional or royal libraries which were open to an educated public (such as the Serapeum collection of the Library of Alexandria, once the largest library in the ancient world), but on the whole collections were private. In those rare cases where it was possible for a scholar to consult library books there seems to have been no direct access to the stacks. In all recorded cases the books were kept in a relatively small room where the staff went to get them for the readers, who had to consult them in an adjoining hall or covered walkway.

Han Chinese scholar Liu Xiang established the first library classification system during the Han Dynasty, and the first book notation system. At this time the library catalogue was written on scrolls of fine silk and stored in silk bags.

===Late Antiquity===
Malatestiana Library of Cesena, the first European civic library 
During the Late Antiquity and Middle Ages periods, there was no Rome of the kind that ruled the Mediterranean for centuries and spawned the culture that produced twenty-eight public libraries in the urbs Roma. Bischoff, B. and Gorman, M. (1994). Manuscripts and libraries in the age of Charlemagne. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. The empire had been divided then later re-united again under Constantine the Great who moved the capital of the Roman Empire in 330 AD to the city of Byzantium which was renamed Constantinople. Staikos, K. K. (2004). The history of the library in Western civilization. New Castle, Del.: Oak Knoll Press, p.12 The Roman intellectual culture that flourished in ancient times was undergoing a transformation as the academic world moved from laymen to Christian clergy. Staikos, 2007, p.8 As the West crumbled, books and libraries flourished and flowed east toward the Byzantine Empire. Murray, S.A.P.(2009). The Library: An illustrated history. New York: Sky Horse Publishing, p.24 There, four different types of libraries were established: imperial, patriarchal, monastic, and private. Papademetriou, G. C. (2000). "The Patriarchal libraries of Constantinople". Greek Orthodox Theological Review, 45(1-4), 171-190. Each had it own purpose and, as a result, their survival varied.

Christianity was a new force in Europe and many of the faithful saw Hellenistic culture as pagan. As such, many classical Greek works, written on scrolls, were left to decay as only Christian texts were thought fit for preservation in a codex, the progenitor of the modern book. Lyons, M. (2011). Books: A living history. London: Thames and Hudson, pp.35-36. In the East, however, this was not the case as many of these classical Greek and Roman texts were copied. Murray, 2009, p. 50 

In Byzantium, much of this work devoted to preserving Hellenistic thought in codex form was performed in scriptoriums by monks. Peterson, H. A. (2010). The genesis of monastic libraries. Libraries & the Cultural Record, 45(3), 320-332, p. 320. While monastic library scriptoriums flourished throughout the East and West, the rules governing them were generally the same Murray, 2009; Peterson, 2010. Barren and sun-lit rooms (because candles were a source of fire) were major features of the scriptorium that was both a model of production and monastic piety. Murray, 2009, pp. 36, -38 Monks scribbled away for hours a day, interrupted only by meals and prayers. Murray, 2009, p.36 With such production, medieval monasteries began to accumulate large libraries. These libraries were devoted solely to the education of the monks and were seen as essential to their spiritual development. Peterson, 2010, p.329 Although most of these texts that were produced were Christian in nature, many monastic leaders saw common virtues in the Greek classics. As a result, many of these Greek works were copied, and thus saved, in monastic scriptoriums. Peterson, 2010, pp. 330-331 

When Europe passed into the Dark Ages, Byzantine scriptoriums laboriously preserved Greco-Roman classics. As a result, Byzantium revived Classical models of education and libraries. Thompson, J.W. (1957). The medieval library. New York: Hafner Publishing Co., p. 311. The Imperial Library of Constantinople was an important depository of ancient knowledge. Constantine himself wanted such a library but his short rule denied him the ability to see his vision to fruition. His son Constantius II made this dream a reality and created an imperial library in a portico of the royal palace. Thompson, 1957, p. 312 He ruled for 24 years and accelerated the development of the library and the intellectual culture that came with such a vast accumulation of books. Staikos, 2007, pp. 30-31 

Constantius II appointed Themistius, a pagan philosopher and teacher, as chief architect of this library building program. Themistius set about a bold program to create an imperial public library that would be the centerpiece of the new intellectual capital of Constantinople. Stoikos, 2007, p. 33 Classical authors such as Plato, Aristotle, Demosthenes, Isocrates, Thucydides, Homer, and Zeno were sought. Themeistius hired calligraphers and craftsman to produce the actual codices. He also appointed educators and created a university-like school centered around the library. Staikos, 2007, pp. 32-33 

After the death of Constantius II, Julian the Apostate, a bibliophile intellectual, ruled briefly for less than three years. Despite this, he had a profound impact on the imperial library and sought both Christian and pagan books for its collections. Later, the Emperor Valens hired Greek and Latin scribes full-time with from the royal treasury to copy and repair manuscripts. Thompson, 1957, pp. 312-313 

At its height in the 5th century, the Imperial Library of Constantinople had 120,000 volumes and was the largest library in Europe. Thompson, 1957, p. 313 A fire in 477 consumed the entire library but it was rebuilt only to be burned again in 726, 1204, and in 1453 when Constantinople fell to the Ottoman Turks. Hillerbrand, H. J. (2006). On book burnings and book burners: Reflections on the power (and powerlessness) of ideas. Journal of the American Academy of Religion, (3), 593, p.603. 

Patriarchal libraries fared no better, and sometimes worse, than the Imperial Library. The Library of the Patriarchate of Constantinople was founded most likely during the reign of Constantine the Great in the 4th century. Staikos, 2007, p. 43 As a theological library, it was known to have employed a library classification system. Staikos, 2007, p. 44 It also served as a repository of several ecumenical councils such as the Council of Nicea, Council of Ephesus, and the Council of Chalcedon. The library, which employed a librarian and assistants, may have been originally located in the Patriarchs official residence before it was moved to the Thomaites Triclinus in the 7th century. While much is not known about the actual library itself, it is known that many of its contents were subject to destruction as religious in-fighting ultimately resulted in book burnings. Staikos, 2007, p. 44-45 

During this period, small private libraries existed. Many of these were owned by church members and the aristocracy. Staikos, 2007, p.429 Teachers also were known to have small personal libraries as well as wealthy bibliophiles who could afford the highly ornate books of the period. Thompson, 1957, pp.313-314 

Thus, in the 6th century, at the close of the Classical period, the great libraries of the Mediterranean world remained those of Constantinople and Alexandria. Cassiodorus, minister to Theodoric, established a monastery at Vivarium in the toe of Italy (modern Calabria) with a library where he attempted to bring Greek learning to Latin readers and preserve texts both sacred and secular for future generations. As its unofficial librarian, Cassiodorus not only collected as many manuscripts as he could, he also wrote treatises aimed at instructing his monks in the proper uses of reading and methods for copying texts accurately. In the end, however, the library at Vivarium was dispersed and lost within a century.

Through Origen and especially the scholarly presbyter Pamphilus of Caesarea, an avid collector of books of Scripture, the theological school of Caesarea won a reputation for having the most extensive ecclesiastical library of the time, containing more than 30,000 manuscripts: Gregory Nazianzus, Basil the Great, Jerome and others came and studied there.

===Islamic lands===
Inside a Qur'anic Library in Chinguetti, Mauritania
By the 8th century first Iranians and then Arabs had imported the craft of papermaking from China, with a paper mill already at work in Baghdad in 794. By the 9th century public libraries started to appear in many Islamic cities. They were called "halls of Science" or dar al-'ilm. They were each endowed by Islamic sects with the purpose of representing their tenets as well as promoting the dissemination of secular knowledge. The 9th-century Abbasid Caliph al-Mutawakkil of Iraq, ordered the construction of a "zawiyat qurra"  an enclosure for readers which was "lavishly furnished and equipped". In Shiraz Adhud al-Daula (d. 983) set up a library, described by the medieval historian, al-Muqaddasi, as "a complex of buildings surrounded by gardens with lakes and waterways. The buildings were topped with domes, and comprised an upper and a lower story with a total, according to the chief official, of 360 rooms.... In each department, catalogues were placed on a shelf... the rooms were furnished with carpets". The libraries often employed translators and copyists in large numbers, in order to render into Arabic the bulk of the available Persian, Greek, Roman and Sanskrit non-fiction and the classics of literature.

This flowering of Islamic learning ceased centuries later when learning began declining in the Islamic world, after many of these libraries were destroyed by Mongol invasions. Others were victim of wars and religious strife in the Islamic world. However, a few examples of these medieval libraries, such as the libraries of Chinguetti in West Africa, remain intact and relatively unchanged. Another ancient library from this period which is still operational and expanding is the Central Library of Astan Quds Razavi in the Iranian city of Mashhad, which has been operating for more than six centuries.

The contents of these Islamic libraries were copied by Christian monks in Muslim/Christian border areas, particularly Spain and Sicily. From there they eventually made their way into other parts of Christian Europe. These copies joined works that had been preserved directly by Christian monks from Greek and Roman originals, as well as copies Western Christian monks made of Byzantine works. The resulting conglomerate libraries are the basis of every modern library today.

Buddhist scriptures, educational materials, and histories were stored in libraries in pre-modern Southeast Asia. In Burma, a royal library called the Pitaka Taik was legendarily founded by King Anawrahta; International dictionary of library histories, 29 in the 18th century, British envoy Michael Symes, on visiting this library, wrote that "it is not improbable that his Birman majesty may possess a more numerous library than any potentate, from the banks of the Danube to the borders of China". In Thailand libraries called ho trai were built throughout the country, usually on stilts above a pond to prevent bugs from eating at the books.

===European Middle Ages===
In the Early Middle Ages, monastery libraries developed, such as the important one at the Abbey of Montecassino in Italy. Books were usually chained to the shelves, reflecting the fact that manuscripts, which were created via the labour-intensive process of hand copying, were valuable possessions. 

Despite this protectiveness, many libraries loaned books if provided with security deposits (usually money or a book of equal value). Lending was a means by which books could be copied and spread. In 1212 the council of Paris condemned those monasteries that still forbade loaning books, reminding them that lending is "one of the chief works of mercy." The early libraries located in monastic cloisters and associated with scriptoria were collections of lecterns with books chained to them. Shelves built above and between back-to-back lecterns were the beginning of bookpresses. The chain was attached at the fore-edge of a book rather than to its spine. Book presses came to be arranged in carrels (perpendicular to the walls and therefore to the windows) in order to maximize lighting, with low bookcases in front of the windows. This "stall system" (i.e. fixed bookcases perpendicular to exterior walls pierced by closely spaced windows) was characteristic of English institutional libraries. In European libraries, bookcases were arranged parallel to and against the walls. This "wall system" was first introduced on a large scale in Spain's El Escorial.

Also, in Eastern Christianity monastery libraries kept important manuscripts. The most important of them were the ones in the monasteries of Mount Athos for Orthodox Christians, and the library of the Saint Catherine's Monastery in the Sinai Peninsula, Egypt for the Coptic Church.

===Renaissance===
Reading room of the Laurentian Library
From the 15th century in central and northern Italy, libraries of humanists and their enlightened patrons provided a nucleus around which an "academy" of scholars congregated in each Italian city of consequence. Malatesta Novello, lord of Cesena, founded the Malatestiana Library. Cosimo de Medici in Florence established his own collection, which formed the basis of the Laurentian Library. Survivor: the History of the Library, history-magazine.com In Rome, the papal collections were brought together by Pope Nicholas V, in separate Greek and Latin libraries, and housed by Pope Sixtus IV, who consigned the Bibliotheca Apostolica Vaticana to the care of his librarian, the humanist Bartolomeo Platina in February 1475. This section on Roman Renaissance libraries follows Kenneth M. Setton, "From Medieval to Modern Library" Proceedings of the American Philosophical Society 104.4, Dedication of the APS Library Hall, Autumn General Meeting, November 1959 (August 1960:371390) p. 372 ff. 

In the 16th century Sixtus V bisected Bramante's Cortile del Belvedere with a cross-wing to house the Apostolic Library in suitable magnificence. The 16th and 17th centuries saw other privately endowed libraries assembled in Rome: the Vallicelliana, formed from the books of Saint Filippo Neri, with other distinguished libraries such as that of Cesare Baronio, the Biblioteca Angelica founded by the Augustinian Angelo Rocca, which was the only truly public library in Counter-Reformation Rome; the Biblioteca Alessandrina with which Pope Alexander VII endowed the University of Rome; the Biblioteca Casanatense of the Cardinal Girolamo Casanate; and finally the Biblioteca Corsiniana founded by the bibliophile Clement XII Corsini and his nephew Cardinal Neri Corsini, still housed in Palazzo Corsini in via della Lungara. The Republic of Venice patronized the foundation of the Biblioteca Marciana, based on the library of Cardinal Basilios Bessarion. In Milan Cardinal Federico Borromeo founded the Biblioteca Ambrosiana.

This trend soon spread outside of Italy, for example Louis III, Elector Palatine founded the Bibliotheca Palatina of Heidelberg.

These libraries don't have as many volumes as the modern libraries. However, they keep many valuable manuscripts of Greek, Latin and Biblical works.

Tianyi Chamber, founded in 1561 by Fan Qin during the Ming Dynasty, is the oldest existing library in China. In its heyday it boasted a collection of 70,000 volumes of antique books.

===Enlightenment era libraries===
Thomas Bodley founded the Bodleian Library in 1602 as an early public library.
The 17th and 18th centuries include what is known as a golden age of libraries; during this some of the more important libraries were founded in Europe. Francis Trigge Chained Library of St. Wulfram's Church, Grantham, Lincolnshire was founded in 1598 by the rector of nearby Welbourne. [http://www2.granthamtoday.co.uk/sites/history/gh_wulf.html ] Thomas Bodley founded the Bodleian Library, which was open to the "whole republic of the learned", Norwich City library was established in 1608 and the British Library was established in 1753. Chetham's Library in Manchester, which claims to be the oldest public library in the English-speaking world, opened in 1653. Other early town libraries of the UK include those of Ipswich (1612), Bristol (founded in 1613 and opened in 1615), and Leicester (1632). Shrewsbury School also opened its library to townsfolk. Hobson, Anthony "Open Shelves", TLS, 8 December 2006, 9. The Mazarine Library and the Bibliothque Sainte-Genevive were founded in Paris, the Austrian National Library in Vienna, the National Central Library in Florence, the Prussian State Library in Berlin, the Zauski Library in Warsaw and the M.E. Saltykov-Shchedrin State Public Library in St Petersburg. 

At the start of the 18th century, libraries were becoming increasingly public and were more frequently lending libraries. The 18th century saw the switch from closed parochial libraries to lending libraries. Before this time, public libraries were parochial in nature and libraries frequently chained their books to desks. Kelly, Thomas (1966) Early Public Libraries: a history of public libraries in Great Britain before 1850 London: Library Association; p. 94 Libraries also were not uniformly open to the public. Predeek, Albert (1947) A History of Libraries in Great Britain and North America. Chicago: American Library Association; p. 58 

Even though the British Museum existed at this time and contained over 50,000 books, the national library was not open to the public, or even to a majority of the population. Access to the Museum depended on passes, of which there was sometimes a waiting period of three to four weeks. Moreover, the library was not open to browsing. Once a pass to the library had been issued, the reader was taken on a tour of the library. Many readers complained that the tour was much too short. Battles, Matthew (2003) Library: an unquiet history; p. 121 

====Subscription libraries====

The British Museum was established in 1751 and had a library containing over 50,000 books.
At the start of the 19th century, there were virtually no public libraries in the sense in which we now understand the term i.e. libraries provided from public funds and freely accessible to all. Kelly, Thomas (1966); p. 185 Only one important library in Britain, namely Chetham's Library in Manchester, was fully and freely accessible to the public. However, there had come into being a whole network of library provision on a private or institutional basis.

The increase in secular literature at this time encouraged the spread of lending libraries, especially the commercial subscription libraries. Many small, private book clubs evolved into subscription libraries, charging high annual fees or requiring subscribing members to purchase shares in the libraries. The materials available to subscribers tended to focus on particular subject areas, such as biography, history, philosophy, theology, and travel, rather than works of fiction, particularly the novel.

Unlike a public library, access was often restricted to members. Some of the earliest such institutions were founded in late 17th century England, such as Chetham's Library in 1653, Innerpeffray Library in 1680 and Thomas Plume's Library in 1704. In the American colonies, the Library Company of Philadelphia was started in 1731 by Benjamin Franklin in Philadelphia, PA.

The increasing production and demand for fiction promoted by commercial markets led to the rise of circulating libraries, which met a need that subscription libraries did not fulfil. William Bathoe claimed that his commercial venture was the Original Circulating library, opening doors at two locations in London in 1737. Raven, James. "Libraries for sociability: the advance of subscription library." The Cambridge History Of Libraries In Britain And Ireland. 3 vols. New York: Cambridge University Press, 2006, p. 251. Circulating libraries also charged subscription fees to users and offered serious subject matter as well as the popular novels, thus the difficulty in clearly distinguishing circulating from subscription libraries. Eliot, Simon. "Circulating libraries in the Victorian age and after." The Cambridge History Of Libraries In Britain And Ireland. 3 vols. New York: Cambridge University Press, 2006, p. 125-126. 

Biblioteka Zauskich, built in Warsaw in the mid 18th century.
Subscription libraries were democratic in nature; created by and for communities of local subscribers who aimed to establish permanent collections of books and reading materials, rather than selling their collections annually as the circulating libraries tended to do, in order to raise funds to support their other commercial interests. Even though the subscription libraries were often founded by reading societies, committees, elected by the subscribers, chose books for the collection that were general, rather than aimed at a particular religious, political or professional group. The books selected for the collection were chosen because they would be mutually beneficial to the shareholders. The committee also selected the librarians who would manage the circulation of materials. Forster, Geoffrey, and Alan Bell. "The subscription libraries and their members." The Cambridge History Of Libraries In Britain And Ireland. 3 vols. New York: Cambridge University Press, 2006, p. 147-148. 

In Britain there were more than 200 commercial circulating libraries open in 1800, more than twice the number of subscription and private proprietary libraries that were operating at the same time. Many proprietors pandered to the most fashionable clientele, making much ado about the sort of shop they offered, the lush interiors, plenty of room and long hours of service. "These 'libraries' would be called rental collections today." 

====Private libraries====
The Linen Hall Library was an 18th sentury subscription library. Pictured in 1888, shortly before its demolition.
Private subscription libraries functioned in much the same manner as commercial subscription libraries, though they varied in many important ways. One of the most popular versions of the private subscription library was a gentleman's only library. Membership was restricted to the proprietors or shareholders, and ranged from a dozen or two to between four and five hundred. Kelly, Thomas (1966); p. 128 

The Liverpool Subscription library was a gentlemen only library. In 1798, it was renamed the Athenaeum when it was rebuilt with a newsroom and coffeehouse. It had an entrance fee of one guinea and annual subscription of five shillings. Kelly, Thomas (1966); p. 126 An analysis of the registers for the first twelve years provides glimpses of middle-class reading habits in a mercantile community at this period. The largest and most popular sections of the library were History, Antiquities, and Geography, with 283 titles and 6,121 borrowings, and Belles Lettres, with 238 titles and 3,313 borrowings. Kelly, Thomas (1966); p. 133 Kaufman, Paul. Libraries and Their Users. Page 29. The Library Association. 1969. Print. 

 Circulating library and stationery shop, Gulgong, Australia 1870.
Private subscription libraries held a greater amount of control over both membership and the types of books in the library. There was almost a complete elimination of cheap fiction in the private societies. Kaufman, Paul (1969); p. 209 Subscription libraries prided themselves on respectability. The highest percentage of subscribers were often landed proprietors, gentry, and old professions. Allan, David (2008); p. 68 

Towards the end of the 18th century and in the first decades of the nineteenth the need for books and general education made itself felt among social classes created by the beginnings of the Industrial Revolution. Irwin, Raymond (1964); p. 53 The late 18th century saw a rise in subscription libraries intended for the use of tradesmen. In 1797, there was established at Kendal what was known as the Economical Library, "designed principally for the use and instruction of the working classes." Kelly, Thomas (1966); p. 127 There was also the Artizans' library established at Birmingham in 1799. The entrance fee was 3 shillings. The subscription was 1 shilling 6 pence per quarter. This was a library of general literature. Novels, at first excluded, were afterwards admitted on condition that they did not account for more than one-tenth of the annual income. 

===National libraries===

The Lindisfarne Gospels is but one of the treasures made available in the British Museum upon its establishment in 1753.
The first national libraries had their origins in the royal collections of the sovereign or some other supreme body of the state.

One of the first plans for a national library was devised by the Welsh mathematician John Dee, who in 1556 presented Mary I of England with a visionary plan for the preservation of old books, manuscripts and records and the founding of a national library, but his proposal was not taken up. Fell-Smith, Charlotte (1909) John Dee: 15271608. London: Constable and Company Available online 

The first true national library was founded in 1753 as part of the British Museum. 
This new institution was the first of a new kind of museum  national, belonging to neither church nor king, freely open to the public and aiming to collect everything. The museum's foundations lay in the will of the physician and naturalist Sir Hans Sloane, who gathered an enviable collection of curiosities over his lifetime which he bequeathed to the nation for 20,000. 

Sloane's collection included some 40,000 printed books and 7,000 manuscripts, as well as prints and drawings. The British Museum Act 1753 also incorporated the Cotton library and the Harleian library. These were joined in 1757 by the Royal Library, assembled by various British monarchs. Letter to Charles Long (1823), BMCE115/3,10. Scrapbooks and illustrations of the Museum. (Wilson, David, M.) (2002). The British Museum: A History. London: The British Museum Press, pg 346 

In France, the first national library was the Bibliothque Mazarine, which evolved from its origin as a royal library founded at the Louvre Palace by Charles V in 1368. The appointment of Jacques Auguste de Thou as librarian in the 17th century, initiated a period of development that made it the largest and richest collection of books in the world. The library opened to the public in 1692, under the administration of Abb Louvois, Minister Louvois's son. Abb Louvois was succeeded by the Abb Bignon, or Bignon II as he was termed, who instituted a complete reform of the library's system. Catalogues were made which appeared from 173953 in 11 volumes. The collections increased steadily by purchase and gift to the outbreak of the French Revolution, at which time it was in grave danger of partial or total destruction, but owing to the activities of Antoine-Augustin Renouard and Joseph Van Praet it suffered no injury. 

The library's collections swelled to over 300,000 volumes during the radical phase of the French Revolution when the private libraries of aristocrats and clergy were seized. After the establishment of the French First Republic in September 1792, "the Assembly declared the Bibliotheque du Roi to be national property and the institution was renamed the Bibliothque Nationale. After four centuries of control by the Crown, this great library now became the property of the French people." Paul M. Priebe. "From Bibliothque du Roi to Bibliothque Nationale: The Creation of a State Library, 17891793." The Journal of Library History (19741987), Vol. 17, No. 4 (Fall, 1982) 

===The modern public library===

James Silk Buckingham led the campaign for public libraries in the mid 19th century.
Although by the mid-19th century, England could claim 274 subscription libraries and Scotland, 266, the foundation of the modern public library system in Britain is the Public Libraries Act 1850. The Act first gave local boroughs the power to establish free public libraries and was the first legislative step toward the creation of an enduring national institution that provides universal free access to information and literature. In the 1830s, at the height of the Chartist movement, there was a general tendency towards reformism in the United Kingdom. The Capitalist economic model had created a significant amount of free time for workers, and the middle classes were concerned that the workers free time was not being well-spent. This was prompted more by Victorian middle class paternalism rather than by demand from the lower social orders. McMenemy (2009), pp. 24-26 Campaigners felt that encouraging the lower classes to spend their free time on morally uplifting activities, such as reading, would promote greater social good. 

In 1835, and against government opposition, James Silk Buckingham, MP for Sheffield and a supporter of the temperance movement, was able to secure the Chair of the Select Committee which would examine "the extent, causes, and consequences of the prevailing vice of intoxication among the labouring classes of the United Kingdom" and propose solutions. Francis Place, a campaigner for the working class, agreed that "the establishment of parish libraries and district reading rooms, and popular lectures on subjects both entertaining and instructive to the community might draw off a number of those who now frequent public houses for the sole enjoyment they afford". Select Committee on inquiry into drunkenness, Report (1834) Buckingham introduced to Parliament a Public Institution Bill allowing boroughs to charge a tax to set up libraries and museums, the first of its kind. Although this did not become law, it had a major influence on William Ewart MP and Joseph Brotherton MP, who introduced a bill which would  boroughs with a population of 10,000 or more to raise a d for the establishment of museums. Kelly & Kelly (1977), p. 77 This became the Museums Act 1845.

The advocacy of Ewart and Brotherton then succeeded in having a select committee set up to consider public library provision. The Report argued that the provision of public libraries would steer people towards temperate and moderate habits. With a view to maximising the potential of current facilities, the Committee made two significant recommendations. They suggested that the government should issue grants to aid the foundation of libraries and that the Museums Act 1845 should be amended and extended to allow for a tax to be levied for the establishment of public libraries. Minto (1932) chapters 3-4 Murison (1971) chapter 2 Hansard (1850) Col. 848 The Bill passed through Parliament as most MPs felt that public libraries would provide facilities for self-improvement through books and reading for all classes, and that the greater levels of education attained by providing public libraries would result in lower crime rates.

The earliest example in England of a library to be endowed for the benefit of users who were not members of an institution such as a cathedral or college was the Francis Trigge Chained Library in Grantham, Lincolnshire, established in 1598. The library still exists and can justifiably claim to be the forerunner of later public library systems. The beginning of the modern, free, open access libraries really got its start in the UK in 1847. Parliament appointed a committee, led by William Ewart, on Public Libraries to consider the necessity of establishing libraries through the nation: In 1849 their report noted the poor condition of library service, it recommended the establishment of free public libraries all over the country, and it led to the Public Libraries Act in 1850, which allowed all cities with populations exceeding 10,000 to levy taxes for the support of public libraries.

The turn of the 20th century witnessed a tremendous expansion in the provision of public libraries in the English-speaking world. Pictured, the Peter White Public Library built in 1905.
Salford Museum and Art Gallery first opened in November 1850 as "The Royal Museum & Public Library", as the first unconditionally free public library in England. Retrieved on 2008-09-05 The library in Campfield, Manchester was the first library to operate a free lending library without subscription in 1852. Norwich lays claims to being the first municipality to adopt the Public Libraries Act 1850 (which allowed any municipal borough with a population of 100,000 or more to introduce a halfpenny rate to establish public librariesalthough not to buy books). Norwich was the eleventh library to open, in 1857, after Winchester, Manchester, Liverpool, Bolton, Kidderminster, Cambridge, Birkenhead and Sheffield.

Another important act was the Education Act 1870, which increased literacy and thereby the demand for libraries. By 1877, more than 75 cities had established free libraries, and by 1900 the number had reached 300. This finally marks the start of the public library as we know it. And these acts influenced similar laws in other countries, such as the US. The first tax-supported public library in the United States was Peterborough, New Hampshire (1833) first supported by state funds then an "Act Providing for the Establishment of Public Libraries" in 1849. 

====Expansion====
Andrew Carnegie played an important role in financing public libraries across the English-speaking world.
The year 1876 is key in the history of librarianship in the United States. The American Library Association was formed, as well as The American Library Journal, Melvil Dewey published his decimal-based system of classification, and the United States Bureau of Education published its report, "Public libraries in the United States of America; their history, condition, and management." During the post-Civil War years, there was a rise in the establishment of public libraries, a movement led chiefly by newly formed women's clubs. They contributed their own collections of books, conducted lengthy fund raising campaigns for buildings, and lobbied within their communities for financial support for libraries, as well as with legislatures and the Carnegie Library Endowment founded in the 20th century. Paula D. Watson, Founding Mothers: The Contribution of Womans Organizations to Public Library Development in the United States, Library Quarterly, Vol. 64, Issue 3, 1994, p.236 They led the establishment of 7580 percent of the libraries in communities across the country. Teva Scheer, The Praxis Side of the Equation: Club Women and American Public Administration, Administrative Theory & Praxis, Vol. 24, Issue 3, 2002, p.525 

Philanthropists and businessmen, including John Passmore Edwards, Henry Tate and Andrew Carnegie, helped to increase the number of public libraries from the late 19th century. Carnegie alone built over 2000 libraries in the US, 660 Carnegie Libraries in Britain, in addition to many more in the Commonwealth. 

==Types==
Many institutions make a distinction between a circulating or lending library, where materials are expected and intended to be loaned to patrons, institutions, or other libraries, and a reference library where material is not lent out. Modern libraries are often a mixture of both, containing a general collection for circulation, and a reference collection which is restricted to the library premises. Also, increasingly, digital collections enable broader access to material that may not circulate in print, and enables libraries to expand their collections even without building a larger facility.

===Academic libraries===

An academic library is generally located on the campuses of colleges and universities and serve primarily the students and faculty of that and other academic institutions. Some academic libraries, especially those at public institutions, are accessible to members of the general public in whole or in part.

The University Library in Budapest.
Academic libraries are libraries that are hosted in post-secondary educational institutions, such as colleges and universities. The main functions of an academic library are to provide resources and research support for students and faculty of the educational institution. Specific course-related resources are usually provided by the library, such as copies of textbooks and article readings held on 'reserve' (meaning that they are loaned out only on a short-term basis, usually a matter of hours).

Academic libraries offer workshops and courses outside of formal, graded coursework, which are meant to provide students with the tools necessary to succeed in their programs. http://main.library.utoronto.ca/workshops/ These workshops may include help with citations, effective search techniques, journal databases, and electronic citation software. These workshops provide students with skills that can help them achieve success in their academic careers (and often, in their future occupations), which they may not learn inside the classroom.

The Robarts Library at the University of Toronto, Canada.
The academic library provides a quiet study space for students on campus; it may also provide group study space, such as meeting rooms. In North America, Europe, and other parts of the world, academic libraries are becoming increasingly digitally oriented. The library provides a "gateway" for students and researchers to access various resources, both print/physical and digital. Dowler, Lawrence (1997). Gateways to knowledge: the role of academic libraries in teaching, learning, and research. ISBN 0-262-04159-6. Academic institutions are subscribing to electronic journals databases, providing research and scholarly writing software, and usually provide computer workstations or computer labs for students to access journals, library search databases and portals, institutional electronic resources, internet access, and course- or task-related software (i.e. word processing and spreadsheet software). They are increasingly acting as an electronic repository for institutional scholarly research and academic knowledge, such as the collection and curation of digital copies of students' theses and dissertations. https://tspace.library.utoronto.ca/ 

===Children's libraries===
Children's libraries are special collections of books intended for juvenile readers and usually kept in separate rooms of general public libraries. Some children's libraries have entire floors or wings dedicated to them in bigger libraries while smaller ones may have a separate room or area for children. They are an educational agency seeking to acquaint the young with the world's literature and to cultivate a love for reading. Their work supplements that of the public schools. 

Services commonly provided by public libraries may include storytelling sessions for infants, toddlers, preschool children, or after-school programs, all with an intention of developing early literacy skills and a love of books. One of the most popular programs offered in public libraries are summer reading programs for children, families, and adults. Udomisor, I., Udomisor, E., & Smith, E. (2013). Management of Communication Crisis in a Library and Its Influence on Productivity. In Information and Knowledge Management (Vol. 3, No. 8, pp. 13-21) 

Another popular reading program for children is PAWS TO READ or similar programs where children can read to certified therapy dogs. Since animals are a calming influence and there is no judgment children learn confidence and a love of reading. Many states have these types of programs parents just have to ask their librarian to see if it is available at their local library. 

===National libraries===
National Library of Wales

A national or state library serves as a national repository of information, and has the right of legal deposit, which is a legal requirement that publishers in the country need to deposit a copy of each publication with the library. Unlike a public library, a national library rarely allows citizens to borrow books. Often, their collections include numerous rare, valuable, or significant works. There are wider definitions of a national library, putting less emphasis on the repository character. Line, Maurice B.; Line, J. (1979). "Concluding notes". National libraries, Aslib, pp. 317318 Lor, P. J.; Sonnekus, E. A. S. (1997). "Guidelines for Legislation for National Library Services", IFLA. Retrieved on 10 January 2009. 
The first national libraries had their origins in the royal collections of the sovereign or some other supreme body of the state.

Many national libraries cooperate within the National Libraries Section of the International Federation of Library Associations and Institutions (IFLA) to discuss their common tasks, define and promote common standards and carry out projects helping them to fulfil their duties. The national libraries of Europe participate in The European Library which is a service of the Conference of European National Librarians (CENL).

===Public lending libraries===
The public library of Police, Poland

A public library provides services to the general public. If the library is part of a countywide library system, citizens with an active library card from around that county can use the library branches associated with the library system. A library can serve only their city, however, if they are not a member of the county public library system. Much of the materials located within a public library are available for borrowing. The library staff decides upon the number of items patrons are allowed to borrow, as well as the details of borrowing time allotted. Typically, libraries issue library cards to community members wishing to borrow books. Often visitors to a city are able to obtain a public library card.

Many public libraries also serve as community organizations that provide free services and events to the public, such as reading groups and toddler story time. For many communities, the library is a source of connection to a vast world, obtainable knowledge and understanding, and entertainment. According to a study by the Pennsylvania Library Association, public library services play a major role in fighting rising illiteracy rates among youths. Celano, D., & Neumann, S. B. (2001). The role of public libraries in childrens literacy development:An evaluation report. Pennsylvania, PA: Pennsylvania Library Association. Public libraries are protected and funded by the public they serve.

As the number of books in libraries have steadily increased since their inception, the need for compact storage and access with adequate lighting has grown. The stack system involves keeping a library's collection of books in a space separate from the reading room. This arrangement arose in the 19th century. Book stacks quickly evolved into a fairly standard form in which the cast iron and steel frameworks supporting the bookshelves also supported the floors, which often were built of translucent blocks to permit the passage of light (but were not transparent, for reasons of modesty). The introduction of electrical lighting had a huge impact on how the library operated. The use of glass floors was largely discontinued, though floors were still often composed of metal grating to allow air to circulate in multi-story stacks. As more space was needed, a method of moving shelves on tracks (compact shelving) was introduced to cut down on otherwise wasted aisle space.

A community library in Ethiopia.
Library 2.0, a term coined in 2005, is the library's response to the challenge of Google and an attempt to meet the changing needs of users by using web 2.0 technology. Some of the aspects of Library 2.0 include, commenting, tagging, bookmarking, discussions, use of online social networks by libraries, plug-ins, and widgets. Inspired by web 2.0, it is an attempt to make the library a more user-driven institution.

Despite the importance of public libraries, they are routinely having their budgets cut by state legislature. Funding has dwindled so badly that many public libraries have been forced to cut their hours and release employees. 

===Reference libraries===
A reference library does not lend books and other items; instead, they must be read at the library itself. Typically such libraries are used for research purposes, for example at a university. Some items at reference libraries may be historical and even unique. Examples of reference libraries include the British Library in London and the Bodleian Library at Oxford University. Many lending libraries contain a "reference section", which holds books, such as dictionaries, which are common reference books, and are therefore not lent out. Such reference sections may be referred to as "reading rooms", which may also include newspapers and periodicals. 

Quaid-e-Azam Library in Bagh-e-Jinnah, Lahore, Pakistan

===Research libraries===
A research library is a collection of materials on one or more subjects. A research library supports scholarly or scientific research and will generally include primary as well as secondary sources; it will maintain permanent collections and attempt to provide access to all necessary materials. A research library is most often an academic or national library, but a large special library may have a research library within its special field and a very few of the largest public libraries also serve as research libraries. A large university library may be considered a research library; and in North America such libraries may belong to the Association of Research Libraries. In the United Kingdom they may be members of Research Libraries UK (RLUK). 

A research library can be either a reference library, which does not lend its holdings, or a lending library, which does lend all or some of its holdings. Some extremely large or traditional research libraries are entirely reference in this sense, lending none of their materials; most academic research libraries, at least in the US and the UK, now lend books, but not periodicals or other materials. Many research libraries are attached to a parental organization and serve only members of that organization.

===Special libraries===

All other libraries fall into the "special library" category. Many private businesses and public organizations, including hospitals, museums, research laboratories, law firms, and many government departments and agencies, maintain their own libraries for the use of their employees in doing specialized research related to their work. Depending on the particular institution, special libraries may or may not be accessible to the general public or elements thereof. In more specialized institutions such as law firms and research laboratories, librarians employed in special libraries are commonly specialists in the institution's field rather than generally trained librarians, and often are not required to have advanced degrees in specifically library-related field due to the specialized content and clientele of the library.

Some special libraries, such as governmental law libraries, hospital libraries, and military base libraries commonly are open to public visitors to the institution in question. Depending on the particular library and the clientele it serves, special libraries may offer services similar to research, reference, public, academic, or children's libraries, often with restrictions such as only lending books to patients at a hospital or restricting the public from parts of a military collection. Given the highly individual nature of special libraries, visitors to a special library are often advised to check what services and restrictions apply at that particular library.

Special libraries are distinguished from special collections, which are branches or parts of a library intended for rare books, manuscripts, and other special materials, though some special libraries have special collections of their own, typically related to the library's specialized subject area.

For more information on specific types of special libraries, see law libraries, medical libraries, music libraries, or transportation libraries.

==Organization==

Library shelves in Hong Kong, showing numbers of the classification scheme to help readers locate works in that section

Most libraries have materials arranged in a specified order according to a library classification system, so that items may be located quickly and collections may be browsed efficiently. Some libraries have additional galleries beyond the public ones, where reference materials are stored. These reference stacks may be open to selected members of the public. Others require patrons to submit a "stack request," which is a request for an assistant to retrieve the material from the closed stacks: see List of closed stack libraries (in progress).

Larger libraries are often divided into departments staffed by both paraprofessionals and professional librarians.
* Circulation (or Access Services)  Handles user accounts and the loaning/returning and shelving of materials. Morris, V. & Bullard, J. (2009). Circulation Services. In Encyclopedia of Library and Information Sciences (3rd ed.). 
* Collection Development  Orders materials and maintains materials budgets.
* Reference  Staffs a reference desk answering questions from users (using structured reference interviews), instructing users, and developing library programming. Reference may be further broken down by user groups or materials; common collections are children's literature, young adult literature, and genealogy materials.
* Technical Services  Works behind the scenes cataloging and processing new materials and deaccessioning weeded materials.
* Stacks Maintenance  Re-shelves materials that have been returned to the library after patron use and shelves materials that have been processed by Technical Services. Stacks Maintenance also shelf reads the material in the stacks to ensure that it is in the correct library classification order.

Card used by a user to sign-out a book

Basic tasks in library management include the planning of acquisitions (which materials the library should acquire, by purchase or otherwise), library classification of acquired materials, preservation of materials (especially rare and fragile archival materials such as manuscripts), the deaccessioning of materials, patron borrowing of materials, and developing and administering library computer systems. More long-term issues include the planning of the construction of new libraries or extensions to existing ones, and the development and implementation of outreach services and reading-enhancement services (such as adult literacy and children's programming).

The International Organization for Standardization (ISO) has published several standards regarding the management of libraries through its Technical Committee 46 (TC 46), which is focused on "libraries, documentation and information centers, publishing, archives, records management, museum documentation, indexing and abstracting services, and information science". The following is a partial list of some of them: 
* ISO 2789:2006 Information and documentationInternational library statistics
* ISO 11620:1998 Information and documentationLibrary performance indicators
* ISO 11799:2003 Information and documentationDocument storage requirements for archive and library materials
* ISO 14416:2003 Information and documentationRequirements for binding of books, periodicals, serials and other paper documents for archive and library useMethods and materials
* ISO/TR 20983:2003 Information and documentationPerformance indicators for electronic library services

==Buildings==
National Library of India, Kolkata, estb. 1836

Librarians have sometimes complained that some of the library buildings which have been used to accommodate libraries have been inadequate for the demands made upon them. In general this condition may have resulted from one or more of the following causes:
# an effort to erect a monumental building; most of those who commission library buildings are not librarians and their priorities may be different
# to conform it to a type of architecture unsuited to library purposes
# the appointment, often by competition, of an architect unschooled in the requirements of a library
# failure to consult with the librarian or with library experts

Much advancement has undoubtedly been made toward cooperation between architect and librarian, and many good designers have made library buildings their speciality, nevertheless it seems that the ideal type of library is not yet realizedthe type so adapted to its purpose that it would be immediately recognized as such, as is the case with school buildings at the present time. This does not mean that library constructions should conform rigidly to a fixed standard of appearance and arrangement, but it does mean that the exterior should express as nearly as possible the purpose and functions of the interior. 

==Usage==

Until the advent of digital catalogues, card catalogues were the traditional method of organizing the list of resources and their location within a large library
Dynix was an early, but long-lasting and popular, digital catalogue.
Patrons may not know how to fully use the library's resources. This can be due to some individuals' unease in approaching a staff member. Ways in which a library's content is displayed or accessed may have the most impact on use. An antiquated or clumsy search system, or staff unwilling or untrained to engage their patrons, will limit a library's usefulness. In the public libraries of the United States, beginning in the 19th century, these problems drove the emergence of the library instruction movement, which advocated library user education. One of the early leaders was John Cotton Dana. The basic form of library instruction is sometimes known as information literacy.

Libraries should inform their users of what materials are available in their collections and how to access that information. Before the computer age, this was accomplished by the card cataloguea cabinet (or multiple cabinets) containing many drawers filled with index cards that identified books and other materials. In a large library, the card catalogue often filled a large room. The emergence of the Internet, however, has led to the adoption of electronic catalogue databases (often referred to as "webcats" or as online public access catalogues, OPACs), which allow users to search the library's holdings from any location with Internet access. This style of catalogue maintenance is compatible with new types of libraries, such as digital libraries and distributed libraries, as well as older libraries that have been retrofitted. Electronic catalogue databases are criticized by some who believe that the old card catalogue system was both easier to navigate and allowed retention of information, by writing directly on the cards, that is lost in the electronic systems. This argument is analogous to the debate over paper books and e-books. While libraries have been accused of precipitously throwing out valuable information in card catalogues, most modern ones have nonetheless made the move to electronic catalogue databases. Large libraries may be scattered within multiple buildings across a town, each having multiple floors, with multiple rooms housing the resources across a series of shelves. Once a user has located a resource within the catalogue, they must then use navigational guidance to retrieve the resource physically; a process that may be assisted through signage, maps, GPS systems or RFID tagging.

Finland has the highest number of registered book borrowers per capita in the world. Over half of Finland's population are registered borrowers. In the US, public library users have borrowed on average roughly 15 books per user per year from 1856 to 1978. From 1978 to 2004, book circulation per user declined approximately 50%. The growth of audiovisuals circulation, estimated at 25% of total circulation in 2004, accounts for about half of this decline. Statistics on Book Circulation Per User of U.S. Public Libraries Since 1856 from galbithink.org 

===Shift to digital libraries===

Interior of the Bibliotheca Alexandrina, Alexandria, Egypt, showing both stacks and computer terminals

In the 21st century there has been increasing use of the Internet to gather and retrieve data. The shift to digital libraries has greatly impacted the way people use physical libraries. Between 2002 and 2004, the average American academic library saw the overall number of transactions decline approximately 2.2%. Applegate, Rachel. "Whose Decline? Which Academic Libraries are "Deserted" in Terms of Reference Transactions?" Reference & User Services Quarterly; 2nd ser. 48 (2008): 17689. Print. Libraries are trying to keep up with the digital world and the new generation of students that are used to having information just one click away. For example, the University of California Library System saw a 54% decline in circulation between 1991 to 2001 of 8,377,000 books to 3,832,000. University of California Library Statistics 199091, University-wide Library Planning, University of California Office of the President (July 1991): 12; University of California Library Statistics July 2001, 7, Ucop.edu. Retrieved 17 July 2005; University of California Library Statistics July 2004, 7, Ucop.edu. Retrieved 17 July 2005. 

These facts might be a consequence of the increased availability of e-resources. In 19992000, 105 ARL university libraries spent almost $100 million on electronic resources, which is an increase of nearly $23 million from the previous year. "ARL Libraries Spend Nearly $100 Million on Electronic Resources," ARL Bimonthly Report 219, Association of Research Libraries (December 2001) A 2003 report by the Open E-book Forum found that close to a million e-books had been sold in 2002, generating nearly $8 million in revenue. Striphas, Ted. The Late Age of Print: Everyday Book Culture From Consumerism to Control. New York City: Columbia University Press, 2009. Print. Another example of the shift to digital libraries can be seen in Cushing Academys decision to dispense with its library of printed booksmore than 20,000 volumes in alland switch over entirely to digital media resources. Striphas, Ted. "Books: "An Outdated Technology?" Weblog post. The Late Age of Print. 4 September 2009. Web. 19 November 2009. Thelateageofprint.org 

Stacks of the Jos Vasconcelos Library in Mexico City

One claim to why there is a decrease in the usage of libraries stems from the observation of the research habits of undergraduate students enrolled in colleges and universities. There have been claims that college undergraduates have become more used to retrieving information from the Internet than a traditional library. As each generation becomes more in tune with the Internet, their desire to retrieve information as quickly and easily as possible has increased. Finding information by simply searching the Internet could be much easier and faster than reading an entire book. In a survey conducted by NetLibrary, 93% of undergraduate students claimed that finding information online makes more sense to them than going to the library. Also, 75% of students surveyed claimed that they did not have enough time to go to the library and that they liked the convenience of the Internet. While the retrieving information from the Internet may be efficient and time saving than visiting a traditional library, research has shown that undergraduates are most likely searching only .03% of the entire web. Troll, Denise A. "How and Why are Libraries Changing?" Digital Library Federation. Library Information Technology  Carnegie Mellon, 9 January 2001. Web. 29 November 2009. Diglib.org The information that they are finding might be easy to retrieve and more readily available, but may not be as in depth as information from other resources such as the books available at a physical library.

In the mid-2000s Swedish company Distec invented a library book vending machine known as the GoLibrary, that offers library books to people where there is no branch, limited hours, or high traffic locations such as El Cerrito del Norte BART station in California.

===The Internet===
British Museum Reading Room
A library may make use of the Internet in a number of ways. A library may make the contents of its catalogues searchable online. Some specialised search engines such as Google Scholar offer a way to facilitate searching for academic resources such as journal articles and research papers. The Online Computer Library Center allows library records to be searched online through its WorldCat database. Grossman, W. M. (2009). "Why you can't find a library book in your search engine". The Guardian. Accessed: 23 March 2010 Websites such as LibraryThing and Amazon provide abstracts, reviews and recommendations of books. Libraries provide computers and Internet access to allow people to search for information online. Mostafa, J. (2005). Seeking Better Web Searches. Scientific American. Vol. 292. (2). pp. 5157 Online information access is particularly attractive to younger library users. Corradini, E. (2006). "Teenagers Analyse their Public Library". New Library World; Vol. 107 (1230/1231), pp. 481498. Emerald Group Publishing Limited. Retrieved 25 February 2010 Department for Children, Schools and Families. (2005). Youth Matters. Accessed: 7 March 2010 Nippold, M. A., Duthie, J. K. & Larsen, J. (2005). "Literacy as a Leisure Activity: Free-time preferences of Older Children and Young Adolescents". Language, Speech and Hearing Services in Schools. Vol. 5 (2), pp. 3438. In: Snowball, C. (2008). "Enticing Teenagers into the Library". Library Review; Vol. 57 (1), pp. 2535. Emerald Group Publishing Limited. Accessed: 25 February 2010 Museums, Libraries and Archives, Department of Culture, Media and Sport & Laser Foundation. (2006). A Research Study of 1435 year olds for the Future Development of Public Libraries. Accessed: 7 March 2010 

Digitization of books, particularly those that are out-of-print, in projects such as Google Books provides resources for library and other online users. Due to their holdings of valuable material, some libraries are important partners for search engines such as Google in realizing the potential of such projects and have received reciprocal benefits in cases where they have negotiated effectively. Darnton, R. (2009). "Google & the Future of Books". New York Review of Books; 55 (2). Accessed: 23 March 2010 As the prominence of and reliance on the Internet has grown, library services have moved the emphasis from mainly providing print resources to providing more computers and more Internet access. Garrod, P. (2004). "Public Libraries: the changing face of the public library". Ariadne; Issue 39. Accessed 26 March 2010 Libraries face a number of challenges in adapting to new ways of information seeking that may stress convenience over quality, Abram, S. & Luther, J. (2004). "Born with the Chip: the next generation will profoundly impact both library service and the culture within the profession". Library Journal. Accessed: 26 March 2010 reducing the priority of information literacy skills. Bell, S. (2005). "Backtalk: don't surrender library values". Library Journal. Accessed: 20 April 2010 The potential decline in library usage, particularly reference services, Novotny, E. (2002). "Reference service statistics and assessment. SPEC kit". Pennsylvania State University. Accessed: 16 March 2010 puts the necessity for these services in doubt.

Library scholars have acknowledged that libraries need to address the ways that they market their services if they are to compete with the Internet and mitigate the risk of losing users. Vrana, R., and Barbaric, A. (2007). "Improving visibility of public libraries in the local community: a study of five public libraries in Zagreb, Croatia". New Library World; 108 (9/10), pp. 435444. This includes promoting the information literacy skills training considered vital across the library profession. Kenney, B. (2004). "Googlizers vs. Resistors: library leaders debate our relationship with search engines". Library Journal. Accessed: 26 March 2010 However, marketing of services has to be adequately supported financially in order to be successful. This can be problematic for library services that are publicly funded and find it difficult to justify diverting tight funds to apparently peripheral areas such as branding and marketing. Hood, D. & Henderson, K. (2005). "Branding in the United Kingdom Public Library Service". New Library World; 106 (1208/1209), pp. 1628 

==Associations==

The International Federation of Library Associations and Institutions (IFLA) is the leading international association of library organisations. It is the global voice of the library and information profession, and its annual conference provides a venue for librarians to learn from one another. 

National associations of the English-speaking world include the American Library Association, the Australian Library and Information Association, the Canadian Library Association and the Research Libraries UK (a consortium of 30 university and other research libraries in the United Kingdom). Library bodies such as CILIP (formerly the Library Association, founded 1877) may advocate the role that libraries and librarians can play in a modern Internet environment, and in the teaching of information literacy skills. CILIP. (2010). An introduction to information literacy. London: CILIP. Accessed: 13 April 2010 Rowlands, I., Nicholas, D., Williams, P., Huntington, P., Fieldhouse, M., Gunter, B., Withey, R., Jamali, H. R., Dobrowolski, T., and Tenopir, C. (2008). "The Google generation: the information behaviour of the researcher of the future". Aslib Proceedings: New Information Perspectives. 60 (4), 290310. Available: http://www.emeraldinsight.com/Insight/ViewContentServlet?contentType=Article&Filename=/published/emeraldfulltextarticle/pdf/2760600401.pdf. 19 April 2010 

Library associations in Asia include the Indian Library Association (ILA), Indian Association of Special Libraries and Information Centers (IASLIC), Bengal Library Association (BLA), Kolkata, Pakistan Library Association, the Pakistan Librarians Welfare Organization, the Bangladesh Association of Librarians, Information Scientists and Documentalists, the Library Association of Bangladesh and the Sri Lanka Library Association (founded 1960).

Public library advocacy is support given to a public library for its financial and philosophical goals or needs. Most often this takes the form of monetary or material donations or campaigning to the institutions which oversee the library, sometimes by advocacy groups such as Friends of Libraries. Originally, library advocacy was centred on the library itself, but current trends show libraries positioning themselves to demonstrate they provide "economic value to the community." Miller, Ellen G. (2009). "Hard Times = A New Brand of Advocacy." Georgia Library Quarterly; 46:1. 

==Laws==

; United States
In the United States, state library agencies have oversight of the public library situation within their boundaries. State library legislation has concerned itself mainly with the following topics:
# founding of libraries
# their administration and supervision by library commissions, etc.
# development of school libraries
# development of country and rural libraries
# development of traveling libraries
Legislative reference bureaus and provision for popular lectures and for educational extension by means of the library are provided for by some states. 

==Islam==
Qur'an manuscript on display at the Bibliotheca Alexandrina
The centrality of the Qurn as the prototype of the written word in Islam bears significantly on the role of books within its intellectual tradition and educational system. An early impulse in Islam was to manage reports of events, key figures and their sayings and actions. Thus, "the onus of being the last 'People of the Book' engendered an ethos of " early on and the establishment of important book repositories throughout the Muslim world has occurred ever since.

Upon the spread of Islam, libraries in newly Islamic lands knew a brief period of expansion in the Middle East, North Africa, Sicily and Spain. Like the Christian libraries, they mostly contained books which were made of paper, and took a codex or modern form instead of scrolls; they could be found in mosques, private homes, and universities, from Timbuktu to Afghanistan and modern day Pakistan. In Aleppo, for example, the largest and probably the oldest mosque library, the Sufiya, located at the city's Grand Umayyad Mosque, contained a large book collection of which 10,000 volumes were reportedly bequeathed by the city's most famous ruler, Prince Sayf al-Dawla. Ibn al-Nadim's bibliography Fihrist demonstrates the devotion of medieval Muslim scholars to books and reliable sources; it contains a description of thousands of books circulating in the Islamic world circa 1000, including an entire section for books about the doctrines of other religions. Modern Islamic libraries for the most part do not hold these antique books; many were lost, destroyed by Mongols, Chief among the libraries destroyed by the Mongol hordes was that of the Shia Ismaili Muslim community who occupied a network of mountain fortresses  lead from the castle of Alamut  beginning from the end of the eleventh century to about 1256. The Fatimids and their successors at Alamut were great lovers and patrons of books, and their vast libraries attracted scholars of every creed from far and wide. The Imam al-Hakim even provided ink, pens, paper, and inkstands free of charge for all who sought learning in the House of Knowledge (dr al-ilm). We can only imagine the horror the Ismailis would have felt when they witnessed the destruction of the literary legacy they had so painstakingly fostered. Al-Maqrizi (d.845/1442) describes how great hills of ashes were formed when the slaves and maids of the Luwata Berber tribe burned the Fatimid books. As an act of further desecration, they used the precious bindings of the volumes to make sandals for their feet. Similarly, Juwayni exults at torching the Ismaili library of Alamut, the fame of which, he adds, had spread throughout the world. See, or removed to European libraries and museums during the colonial period. 

==See also==

===Lists of libraries===

==References==

==Further reading==
*Barnard, T. D. F. (ed.) (1967). Library Buildings: design and fulfilment; papers read at the Week-end Conference of the London and Home Counties Branch of the Library Association, held at Hastings, 21st-23 April 1967. London: Library Association (London and Home Counties Branch)
*Terry Belanger. Lunacy & the Arrangement of Books, New Castle, Del.: Oak Knoll Books, 1983; 3rd ptg 2003, ISBN 978-1-58456-099-9
*Bieri, Susanne & Fuchs, Walther (2001). Bibliotheken bauen: Tradition und Vision = Building for Books: traditions and visions. Basel: Birkhuser ISBN 3-7643-6429-7
*Ellsworth, Ralph E. (1973). Academic Library Buildings: a guide to architectural issues and solutions. 530 pp. Boulder: Associated University Press
*Fraley, Ruth A. & Anderson, Carol Lee (1985). Library Space Planning: how to assess, allocate, and reorganize collections, resources, and physical facilities. New York: Neal-Schuman Publishers ISBN 0-918212-44-8
* Irwin, Raymond (1947). The National Library Service the United Kingdom. London: Grafton & Co. x, 96 p.
* Lewanski, Richard C. (1967). Lilbrary Directories Library Science Dictionaries, in Bibliography and Reference Series, no. 4. 1967 ed. Santa Barbara, Calif.: Clio Press. N.B.: Publisher also named as the "American Bibliographical Center". 
*Mason, Ellsworth (1980). Mason on Library Buildings. Metuchen, N.J.: Scarecrow Press ISBN 0-8108-1291-6
*Monypenny, Phillip, and Guy Garrison (1966). The Library Functions of the States of the U.S.A.: Commentary on the Survey of Library Functions of the States, the auspices of the Survey and Standard Committee the American Association of State Libraries. Chicago, Ill.: American Library Association. xiii, 178 p.
*Orr, J. M. (1975). Designing Library Buildings for Activity; 2nd ed. London: Andre Deutsch ISBN 0-233-96622-6
*Thompson, Godfrey (1973). Planning and Design of Library Buildings. London: Architectural Press ISBN 0-85139-526-0
* 

==External links==

*
* LIBwebDirectory of library servers in 146 countries via WWW
* Centre for the History of the Book, hss.ed.ac.uk
* The Free Library
* 
* Libraries: Frequently Asked Questions, ibiblio.org
* A Library Primer, by John Cotton Dana, 1903, setting out the basics of organizing and running a library. (from Project Gutenberg)

 



[[Line Islands]]

Line Islands

The Line Islands, Teraina Islands or Equatorial Islands, is a chain of eleven atolls and low coral islands in the central Pacific Ocean, south of the Hawaiian Islands, that stretches for 2,350 km in a northwest-southeast direction, making it one of the longest island chains of the world. Eight of the islands form part of Kiribati, while the remaining three are United States territories grouped with the United States Minor Outlying Islands.

Those that are part of Kiribati are in the world's farthest forward time zone, . The time of day is the same as in Hawaii, but the date is one day ahead. The time is 26 hours ahead of some other islands in Oceania like Baker Island which uses .

The United States previously claimed all the Line Islands under the Guano Islands Act. This claim was relinquished under the Treaty of Tarawa, which recognised Kiribati's sovereignty over the majority of the chain.

The group is geographically divided into three subgroups; The Northern, Central, and Southern Line Islands. The Central Line Islands are sometimes grouped with the Southern Line Islands. The table below lists the islands from North to South.

 Atoll/Island/Reef Island Areakm Lagoonkm Population Coordinates Status 
 Northern Line Islands (Fanning's Group) 
 Kingman Reef 0.01 60 0 U.S. unincorporated territory 
 Palmyra Atoll 3.9 8 4 U.S. incorporated territory 
 Teraina (Washington Island) 9.55 2* 1,155 part of Kiribati 
 Tabuaeran (Fanning Island) 33.73 110 2,539 part of Kiribati 
 Kiritimati (Christmas Island) 388.39 217.61 5,115 part of Kiribati 
 Central Line Islands 
 Jarvis Island 5 - 0 U.S. unincorporated territory 
 Malden Island 39.3 13* 0 part of Kiribati 
 Filippo Reef - 1.5 0 outside EEZ (existence uncertain) 
 Starbuck Island 16.2 4* 0 part of Kiribati 
 Southern Line Islands 
 Caroline Island 3.76 6.3 0 part of Kiribati 
 Vostok Island 0.24 - 0 part of Kiribati 
 Flint Island 3.2 0.01* 0 part of Kiribati 
 Line Islands 503.28 422.42 8,813 

* The lagoon areas marked with an asterisk are contained within the island areas of the previous column because they are, unlike in the case of a typical atoll, inland waters completely sealed off from the sea.

of Kiribati CIA WFB.png|frame|]

Kiritimati is the largest atoll in the world in terms of land area. The islands were annexed by Britain in 1888 with a view to laying the Pacific cable, with Tabuaeran (then Fanning Island) as a relay station. The cable was laid and was operational between 1902 and 1963 except for a short period in 1914.

Copra and "Petfish" are the main export products (with seaweed).

==References==

 


[[Latin]]

__NOTOC__

Latin (; Latin: , ; the noun lingua, "tongue" and "language", and the adjective latinus, latina and latinum in its three genders, "Latin") is an
ancient Italic language originally spoken by the Italic Latins in Latium and Ancient Rome. Along with most European languages, it is a descendant of the ancient Proto-Indo-European language. Influenced by the Etruscan language and using the Greek alphabet as a basis, it took form as what is recognizable as Latin in the Italian Peninsula. Modern Romance languages are continuations of dialectal forms (vulgar Latin) of the language. Additionally many students, scholars, and some members of the Christian clergy speak it fluently, and it is still taught in some primary, secondary and post-secondary educational institutions around the world. 

Latin is still used in the creation of new words in modern languages of many different families, including English, and largely in biological taxonomy. Latin and its derivative Romance languages are the only surviving languages of the Italic language family. Other languages of the Italic branch were attested in the inscriptions of early Italy, but were assimilated to Latin during the Roman Republic.

The extensive use of elements from vernacular speech by the earliest authors and inscriptions of the Roman Republic make it clear that the original, unwritten language of the Roman Kingdom was an only partially deducible colloquial form, the predecessor to Vulgar Latin. By the arrival of the late Roman Republic, a standard, literate form had arisen from the speech of the educated, now referred to as Classical Latin. Vulgar Latin, by contrast, is the name given to the more rapidly changing colloquial language, which was spoken throughout the empire. 

Because of the Roman conquests, Latin spread to many Mediterranean and some northern European regions, and the dialects spoken in these areas, mixed to various degrees with the indigenous languages, developed into the modern Romance tongues. Classical Latin slowly changed with the decline of the Roman Empire, as education and wealth became ever scarcer. The consequent Medieval Latin, influenced by various Germanic and proto-Romance languages until expurgated by Renaissance scholars, was used as the language of international communication, scholarship, and science until well into the 18th century, when it began to be supplanted by vernaculars.

Latin is a highly inflected language, with three distinct genders, seven noun cases, four verb conjugations, six tenses, three persons, three moods, two voices, two aspects, and two numbers. A dual number ("a pair of") is present in Old Latin. The rarest of the seven cases is the locative, only marked in proper place names and a few common nouns. Otherwise, the locative function ("place where") has merged with the ablative. The vocative, a case of direct address, is marked by an ending only in words of the second declension. Otherwise, the vocative has merged with the nominative, except that the particle O typically precedes any vocative, marked or not.

As a result of this case ambiguity, different authors list different numbers of cases: 5, 6, or 7. Adjectives and adverbs are compared, and the former are inflected according to case, gender, and number. In view of the fact that adjectives are often used for nouns, the two are termed substantives. Although Classical Latin has demonstrative pronouns indicating different degrees of proximity ("this one here", "that one there"), it does not have articles. Later Romance language articles developed from the demonstrative pronouns, e.g. le and la (French) from ille and illa, and su and sa (Sardinian) from ipse and ipsa.

== Legacy ==

The Latin culture has been passed down through a number of broad genres.

=== Inscriptions ===

Some inscriptions have been published in an internationally agreed-upon, monumental, multi-volume series termed the "Corpus Inscriptionum Latinarum (CIL)". Authors and publishers vary, but the format is approximately the same: volumes detailing inscriptions with a critical apparatus stating the provenance and relevant information. The reading and interpretation of these inscriptions is the subject matter of the field of epigraphy. There are approximately 270,000 known inscriptions.

=== Literature ===

The works of several hundred ancient authors who wrote in Latin have survived in whole or in part, in substantial works or in fragments to be analyzed in philology. They are in part the subject matter of the field of Classics. Their works were published in manuscript form before the invention of printing and now exist in carefully annotated printed editions such as the Loeb Classical Library, published by Harvard University Press, or the Oxford Classical Texts, published by Oxford University Press.

Latin translations of modern literature such as The Hobbit, Treasure Island, Robinson Crusoe, Paddington Bear, Winnie the Pooh, The Adventures of Tintin, Asterix, Harry Potter, Walter the Farting Dog, Le Petit Prince, Max und Moritz, How the Grinch Stole Christmas, The Cat in the Hat, and a book of fairy tales, "fabulae mirabiles," are intended to garner popular interest in the language. Additional resources include phrasebooks and resources for rendering everyday phrases and concepts into Latin, such as Meissner's Latin Phrasebook.

=== Linguistics ===
Latin influence in English has been significant at all stages of its insular development. In the medieval period, much borrowing from Latin occurred through ecclesiastical usage established by Saint Augustine of Canterbury in the 6th century, or indirectly after the Norman Conquest through the Anglo-Norman language. From the 16th to the 18th centuries, English writers cobbled together huge numbers of new words from Latin and Greek words. These were dubbed inkhorn terms, as if they had spilled from a pot of ink. Many of these words were used once by the author and then forgotten. Some useful ones, though, survived, such as imbibe and extrapolate. Many of the most common polysyllabic English words are of Latin origin, through the medium of Old French.

Due to the influence of Roman governance and Roman technology on the less developed nations under Roman dominion, those nations adopted Latin phraseology in some specialized areas, such as science, technology, medicine, and law. For example, the Linnaean system of plant and animal classification was heavily influenced by Historia Naturalis, an encyclopedia of people, places, plants, animals, and things published by Pliny the Elder. Roman medicine, recorded in the works of such physicians as Galen, established that today's medical terminology would be primarily derived from Latin and Greek words, the Greek being filtered through the Latin. Roman engineering had the same effect on scientific terminology as a whole. Latin law principles have survived partly in a long list of legal Latin terms.

Many international auxiliary languages have been heavily influenced by Latin. Interlingua, which lays claim to a sizable following, is sometimes considered a simplified, modern version of the language. Latino sine Flexione, popular in the early 20th century, is Latin with its inflections stripped away, among other grammatical changes.

=== Education ===

A multi-volume Latin dictionary in the University Library of Graz

Throughout European history, an education in the Classics was considered crucial for those who wished to join literate circles. Instruction in Latin is an essential aspect of Classics. In today's world, a large number of Latin students in America learn from Wheelock's Latin: The Classic Introductory Latin Course, Based on Ancient Authors. This book, first published in 1956, was written by Frederic M. Wheelock, who received a PhD from Harvard University. Wheelock's Latin has become the standard text for many American introductory Latin courses.

The Living Latin movement attempts to teach Latin in the same way that living languages are taught, i.e., as a means of both spoken and written communication. It is available at the Vatican, and at some institutions in the U.S., such as the University of Kentucky and Iowa State University. The British Cambridge University Press is a major supplier of Latin textbooks for all levels, such as the Cambridge Latin Course series. It has also published a subseries of children's texts in Latin by Bell & Forte, which recounts the adventures of a mouse called Minimus.

In the United Kingdom, the Classical Association encourages the study of antiquity through various means, such as publications and grants. The University of Cambridge, the Open University (OU), a number of prestigious independent schools, for example Eton and Harrow, and Via Facilis, a London based charity, do still run Latin courses. In the United States and Canada, the American Classical League supports every effort to further the study of classics. Its subsidiaries include the National Junior Classical League (with more than 50,000 members), which encourages high school students to pursue the study of Latin, and the National Senior Classical League, which encourages students to continue their study of the classics into college. The league also sponsors the National Latin Exam. Classicist Mary Beard wrote in The Times Literary Supplement in 2006 that the reason for learning Latin is because of what was written in it. 

=== Official status ===
Latin has been and or is the official language of European states
* Poland - officially recognized and widely used Who only knows Latin can go across the whole Poland from one side to the other one just like he was at his own home, just like he was born there. So great happiness! I wish a traveler in England could travel without knowing any other language than Latin!, Daniel Defoe, 1728 Anatol Lieven, The Baltic Revolution: Estonia, Latvia, Lithuania and the Path to Independence, Yale University Press, 1994, ISBN 0-300-06078-5, Google Print, p.48 Kevin O'Connor, Culture And Customs of the Baltic States, Greenwood Press, 2006, ISBN 0-313-33125-1, Google Print, p.115 Karin Friedrich et al., The Other Prussia: Royal Prussia, Poland and Liberty, 15691772, Cambridge University Press, 2000, ISBN 0-521-58335-7, Google Print, p.88 between 9th and 18th centuries commonly used in foreign relations and popular as a second language among some of the nobility. Karin Friedrich et al., The Other Prussia: Royal Prussia, Poland and Liberty, 15691772, Cambridge University
Press, 2000, ISBN 0-521-58335-7, Google Print, p.88 
* Holy See - used in the diocese with Italian being the official language of Vatican City

== History of Latin ==

A number of historical phases of the language have been recognized, each distinguished by subtle differences in vocabulary, usage, spelling, morphology and syntax. There are no hard and fast rules of classification; different scholars emphasize different features. As a result, the list has variants, as well as alternative names. In addition to the historical phases, Ecclesiastical Latin refers to the styles used by the writers of the Roman Catholic Church, as well as by Protestant scholars, from Late Antiquity onward.

After the Roman Empire in Western Europe fell, tribes and kingdoms began to take form. As the Germanic people moved in to form kingdoms and provinces they needed a language to form laws. Since they brought no new ideas with them they "also, with the exception of Anglo-Saxons, allowed the Latin Language to remain as the only means of communication wherever they settled. Here, in all other spheres, they assimilated...As soon their kings gained a firm footing they surrounded themselves with rhetoricians, jurists and poets." Latin soon became corrupt but it was still Latin. 

The generally recognized main phases under their most frequent names are introduced below.

=== Archaic Latin ===

The earliest known is Old Latin, which was spoken from the Roman Kingdom to the middle Republican period, and is attested both in inscriptions and in some of the earliest extant literary works, such as the comedies of Plautus and Terence. During this period, the Latin alphabet was devised from the Etruscan alphabet. The writing style later changed from an initial right-to-left or boustrophedon to a left-to-right script. 

=== Classical Latin ===

During the late republic and into the first years of the empire, a new Classical Latin arose, a conscious creation of the orators, poets, historians and other literate men, who wrote the great works of classical literature, which were taught in grammar and rhetoric schools. Today's instructional grammars trace their roots to these schools, which served as a sort of informal language academy dedicated to maintaining and perpetuating educated speech. 

=== Vulgar Latin ===

Philological analysis of Archaic Latin works, such as those of Plautus, which contain snippets of everyday speech, indicates that a spoken language, Vulgar Latin (sermo vulgi ("the speech of the masses") by Cicero), existed at the same time as the literate Classical Latin. This informal language was rarely written, so philologists have been left with only individual words and phrases cited by Classical authors, as well as those found as graffiti. 

As vernacular Latin was free to develop on its own, there is no reason to suppose that the speech was uniform either diachronically or geographically. On the contrary, Romanized European populations developed their own dialects of the language. The Decline of the Roman Empire meant a deterioration in educational standards that brought about Late Latin, a post-classical stage of the language seen in Christian writings of the time. This language was more in line with the everyday speech not only because of a decline in education, but also because of a desire to spread the word to the masses.

Despite dialect variation (which is found in any sufficiently widespread language) the languages of Spain, France, Portugal and Italy retained a remarkable unity in phonological forms and developments, bolstered by the stabilizing influence of their common Christian (Roman Catholic) culture. It was not until the Moorish conquest of Spain in 711 cut off communications between the major Romance regions that the languages began to diverge seriously. The Vulgar Latin dialect that would later become Romanian diverged somewhat more from the other varieties due to its being largely cut off from the unifying influences in the western part of the Empire.

One way to determine whether a Romance language feature was in Vulgar Latin is to compare it with its parallel in Classical Latin. If it was not preferred in classical Latin, then it most likely came from the invisible contemporaneous vulgar Latin. For example, Romance "horse" (cavallo/cheval/caballo/cavalo) came from Latin caballus. However, classical Latin used equus. Caballus therefore was most likely the spoken form. 

Vulgar Latin began to diverge into distinct languages by the 9th century at the latest, when the earliest extant Romance writings begin to appear. They were, throughout this period, confined to everyday speech, as, subsequent to Late Latin, Medieval Latin was used for writing.

=== Medieval Latin ===

Latin Bible from 1407
Medieval Latin is the written Latin in use during that portion of the post-classical period when no corresponding Latin vernacular existed. The spoken language had developed into the various incipient Romance languages; however, in the educated and official world Latin continued without its natural spoken base. Moreover, this Latin spread into lands that had never spoken Latin, such as the Germanic and Slavic nations. It became useful for international communication between the member states of the Holy Roman Empire and its allies.

Without the institutions of the Roman empire that had supported its uniformity, medieval Latin lost its linguistic cohesion: for example, in classical Latin sum and eram are used as auxiliary verbs in the perfect and pluperfect passive, which are compound tenses. Medieval Latin might use fui and fueram instead. Furthermore the meanings of many words have been changed and new vocabularies have been introduced from the vernacular. Identifiable individual styles of classically incorrect Latin prevail. 

=== Renaissance Latin ===

Most 15th century printed books (incunabula) were in Latin, with the vernacular languages playing only a secondary role. 

The Renaissance briefly reinforced the position of Latin as a spoken language, through its adoption by the Renaissance Humanists. Often led by members of the clergy, they were shocked by the accelerated dismantling of the vestiges of the classical world and the rapid loss of its literature. They strove to preserve what they could. It was they who introduced the practice of producing revised editions of the literary works that remained by comparing surviving manuscripts, and they who attempted to restore Latin to what it had been. They corrected medieval Latin out of existence no later than the 15th century and replaced it with more formally correct versions supported by the scholars of the rising universities, who attempted, through scholarship, to discover what the classical language had been.

=== Early modern Latin ===

During the Early Modern Age, Latin still was the most important language of culture in Europe. Therefore, until the end of the 18th century the majority of books were written in Latin.

=== Modern Latin ===

The signs at Wallsend Metro station are in English and Latin as a tribute to Wallsend's role as one of the outposts of the Roman empire.

The largest organization that retains Latin in official and quasi-official contexts is the Catholic Church. Latin remains the language of the Roman Rite; the Tridentine Mass is celebrated in Latin, and although the Mass of Paul VI is usually celebrated in the local vernacular language, it can be and often is said in Latin, in part or whole, especially at multilingual gatherings. Latin is the official language of the Holy See, the primary language of its public journal, the Acta Apostolicae Sedis, and the working language of the Roman Rota. The Vatican City is also home to the world's only ATM that gives instructions in Latin. 

In the Anglican Church, after the publication of the Anglican Book of Common Prayer of 1559, a 1560 Latin edition was published for use at universities such as Oxford and the leading public schools, where the liturgy was still permitted to be conducted in Latin and there have been several Latin translations since. Most recently a Latin edition of the 1979 USA Anglican Book of Common Prayer has appeared. 

Some films of ancient settings, such as Sebastiane and The Passion of the Christ, have been made with dialogue in Latin for the sake of realism. Occasionally, Latin dialogue is used because of its association with religion or philosophy, in such film/TV series as The Exorcist and Lost ("Jughead"). Subtitles are usually shown for the benefit of those who do not understand Latin. There are also songs written with Latin lyrics. The libretto for the opera-oratorio Oedipus rex (opera) by Igor Stravinsky is in Latin.

Switzerland adopts the country's Latin short name "Helvetia" on coins and stamps, since there is no room to use all of the nation's four official languages. For a similar reason it adopted the international vehicle and internet code CH, which stands for Confoederatio Helvetica, the country's full Latin name.

The polyglot European Union has adopted Latin names in the logos of some of its institutions for the sake of linguistic compromise and as a sign of the continent's heritage (e.g. the EU Council: Consilium)
Many organizations today have Latin mottos, such as "Semper paratus" (always ready), the motto of the United States Coast Guard, and "Semper fidelis" (always faithful), the motto of the United States Marine Corps. Several of the states of the United States also have Latin mottos, such as "Montani semper liberi" (Mountaineers are always free), the state motto of West Virginia; "Sic semper tyrannis" (Thus always for tyrants), that of Virginia; "Qui transtulit sustinet" ("He who transplanted still sustains"), that of Connecticut; "Esse quam videri" (To be rather than to seem), that of North Carolina; "Si quaeris peninsulam amoenam, circumspice" ("If you seek a pleasant peninsula, look about you") that of Michigan. Another Latin motto is "Per ardua ad astra" (Through adversity/struggle to the stars), the motto of the RAF. Some schools adopt Latin mottos such as "Disce aut discede" of the Royal College, Colombo. Harvard University's motto is "Veritas" meaning (truth). Veritas was the goddess of truth, a daughter of Saturn, and the mother of Virtue.

Similarly Canada's motto "A mari usque ad mare" (from sea to sea) and most provincial mottos are also in Latin (for example, British Columbia's is Splendor Sine Occasu (splendor without diminishment).

Occasionally, some media outlets broadcast in Latin, which is targeted at enthusiasts. Notable examples include Radio Bremen in Germany, YLE radio in Finland and Vatican Radio & Television, all of which broadcast news segments and other material in Latin. 

There are many websites and forums maintained in Latin by enthusiasts. The Latin Wikipedia has more than 100,000 articles written in Latin.

Latin is taught in many high schools, especially in Europe and the Americas. It is compulsory in British Public Schools and Grammar Schools, the Italian Liceo classico and Liceo scientifico, the German Humanistisches Gymnasium, the Dutch gymnasium, the Boston Latin School and Boston Latin Academy. In the pontifical universities postgraduate courses of Canon law are taught in Latin and papers should be written in the same language.

== Phonology ==

No inherited verbal knowledge of the ancient pronunciation of Latin exists. It must be reconstructed. Among the data used for reconstruction listed by Allen are explicit statements by ancient authors, especially grammarians, about the pronunciation of a word, puns, ancient etymologies,
Latin words stated in other languages, and so forth. 

As with any language, pronunciation varied according to historical period. There are several schools of pronunciation in use today. The main division is between the "classical" pronunciation, and "Ecclesiastical" pronunciation. Standard practice in Latin education is to teach the pronunciation of classical Latin first. Most Latinists know the opening words of De Bello Gallico, Gallia est omnis divisa in partes tres ... and know that divisa is nowadays most often pronounced as "diwisa". It makes little difference whether the refrain of Oh come all ye faithful is sung as "venite, venite" or "wenite, wenite", although the first is more appropriate to the period. Period differences are generally taught with the works of their authors; however, the classical pronunciation is always generally acceptable.

=== Consonants ===
The consonant phonemes of classical Latin are shown in the following table. 

 Labial Dental Palatal Velar Glottal 
 plain labial 
 Plosive voiced /b/ /d/ // 
 voiceless /p/ /t/ /k/ /k/ 
 Fricative voiced /z/ 
 voiceless /f/ /s/ /h/ 
 Nasal /m/ /n/ 
 Rhotic /r/ 
 Approximant /l/ /j/ /w/ 

The period graphemes representing these phonemes are only a partial match to today's English alphabet, which, except for the capital letters, dates to the Middle Ages. Latin texts are nevertheless printed in it. The inscription from the Colosseum shown at the top of the article is a good example of the appearance of native Roman graphemes. Some notes concerning the mapping of Latin phonemes to English graphemes are given below.

 Latingrapheme Latinphone Notes 
 Never as in nice; without aspiration, as in Italian peccare or English \"sky\" 
 Never as in germ 
 Before /n/, as in dignus 'worthy' 
 Existed in two allophones: l exilis before /l/ and /i/, and l pinguis in all other positions, however the precise phonetic realisation of these allophones is uncertain. . 
 If /n/ occurs before /c/, /g/ or /x/, it is the velar nasal, (\"ng\" as in \"sing\"). Otherwise, it is the alveolar nasal, , however n was lost before f and s with compensatory vowel lengthening several centuries before the Imperial Age hence consul . that COSVL is a very common epigraphic variant for CONSVL. 
 Never as in English nation. 
 A labiovelar, considered one consonant. As such, it is possible for qu to be followed by a u, as in loquuntur \"they speak\". 
 This letter stood for both the consonant /w/ and the vowel /u/. is /w/ at the beginning of a syllable. E.g., uehebantur \"they were driving\", inuehebantur \"they were attacking verbally\", quattuor \"four\", which is disyllabic in verse. . A was also pronounced, but not written, between /u/ and a vowel: duo . . Loans to Germanic languages such as those represented by OE win \"wine\" and pea \"peacock\" suggest that in early Imperial times was pronounced as /w/ only shifting to /v/ in first few centuries AD but may still have been pronounced /w/ as late as the 5th century AD 
 Also . These are graphic variants. Like the previous, stood for both consonant /j/ and vowel /i/: iucundus \"pleasant\", periucundus \"very pleasant\". . 
 A double consonant, considered two consonants. 

Geminate (long) consonants are represented by doubled spelling: puella = ("girl"; similar to Italian nella), littera = ("letter", "character"; as in Italian petto), accidere = ("to happen"; stress on the second syllable; as in Italian ecco), addere = ("to add"), pessime = ("very/most badly") and the like.

It is also notable that consonants at the end of syllables close these syllables clearly; that means the latter are pronounced longer: e.g. amare = ("to love") has the quantitative structure short-long-short, whereas armare = ("to arm") shows long-long-short. This feature of classical Latin is crucial to the understanding and retracing of Latin poetical rhythms of classical and ensuing times, which are mainly based on syllable lengths, less on the word stresses.

=== Vowels ===

 Front Central Back 
 Close i   u 
 Mid e   o 
 Open a a 

: Vowels:

* = when short , and when long , 
* = (as in pet) when short , and (somewhat as in English they) when long , 
* = (as in pin) when short , and (as in machine) when long , 
* = (as in British English law) when short , and (somewhat as in holy) when long , 
* = (as in put) when short , and (as in true) when long , . Also .
* = (as in French lune), used for Latinized Greek loanwords, is always long , 

In inscriptions, and in upper case in handwriting, the letter u, whether as a consonant or as a vowel, was invariably written as V.

Classical Latin distinguished between long and short vowels, and the use of the apex, which indicates long vowels, was quite widespread during classical and postclassical times (, , I, , ). In modern texts, long vowels are often indicated by a macron , and short vowels are sometimes indicated by a breve . The vowel-length distinction began to fade by Late Latin.

A vowel followed by an or (maintained later by some Romance languages), either at the end of a word ( only) or before a fricative, is nasal, as in monstrum .

== Orthography ==

The Duenos Inscription, from the 6th century BC, is one of the earliest known Old Latin texts.

Latin was written in the Latin alphabet, derived from the Old Italic alphabet, which was in turn drawn from the Greek and ultimately the Phoenician alphabet. This alphabet has continued to be used over the centuries as the script for the Romance, Celtic, Germanic, Baltic, Finnic, and many Slavic languages (Polish, Slovak, Slovene, Croatian and Czech), and has been adopted by many languages around the world, including Vietnamese, the Austronesian languages, many Turkic languages, and most languages in sub-Saharan Africa, the Americas, and Oceania, making it by far the world's single most widely-used writing system.

The number of letters in the Latin alphabet has varied. When it was first derived from the Etruscan alphabet, it contained only 21. Later, G was added to represent , which had previously been spelled C; while Z ceased to be included in the alphabet due to non-use, as the language had no voiced alveolar fricative at the time. The letters Y and Z were later added to represent the Greek letters upsilon and zeta respectively in Greek loanwords. W was created in the 11th century from VV. It represented in Germanic languages, not in Latin, which still uses V for the purpose. J was distinguished from the original I only during the late Middle Ages, as was the letter U from V. Although some Latin dictionaries use J it is for the most part not used for Latin text as it was not used in classical times, although many other languages use it.

Classical Latin did not contain sentence punctuation, letter case, or interword spacing, though apices were sometimes used to distinguish length in vowels and the interpunct was used at times to separate words. So, a sentence originally written:

: 

or with interpunct as

: 
*
would be rendered in a modern edition as

: Lugete, O Veneres Cupidinesque

or with macrons

: Lgte,  Veners Cupdinsque.

and translated as

: Mourn, O Venuses and Cupids.

A replica of the Old Roman Cursive inspired by the Vindolanda tablets

The Roman cursive script is commonly found on the many wax tablets excavated at sites such as forts, an especially extensive set having been discovered at Vindolanda on Hadrian's Wall in Britain. Curiously enough, most of the Vindolanda tablets show spaces between words, though spaces were avoided in monumental inscriptions from that era.

=== Alternate scripts ===
Occasionally Latin has been written in other scripts:
* The disputed Praeneste fibula is a 7th-century BC pin with an Old Latin inscription written using the Etruscan script.
* The rear panel of the early eighth-century Franks Casket has an inscription that switches from Old English in Anglo-Saxon runes to Latin in Latin script and to Latin in runes.

== Grammar ==

Latin is a synthetic, fusional language, in the terminology of linguistic typology. In more traditional terminology, it is an inflected language, although the typologists are apt to say "inflecting". Thus words include an objective semantic element, and also markers specifying the grammatical use of the word. This fusion of root meaning and markers produces very compact sentence elements. For example, am, "I love," is produced from a semantic element, ama-, "love," to which -, a first person singular marker, is suffixed. English requires two words to express the same meaning.

The grammatical function can be changed by changing the markers: the word is "inflected" to express different grammatical functions. The semantic element does not change. Inflection uses affixing and infixing. Affixing is prefixing and suffixing. Latin inflections are never prefixed. For example, ambit, "he or she will love", is formed from the same stem, am-, to which a future tense marker, -bi-, is suffixed, and a third person singular marker, -t, is suffixed. There is an inherent ambiguity: -t may denote more than one grammatical category, in this case either masculine, feminine, or neuter gender. A major task in understanding Latin phrases and clauses is to clarify such ambiguities by an analysis of context. All natural languages contain ambiguities of one sort or another.

The inflections express gender, number, and case in adjectives, nouns, and pronounsa process called declension. Markers are also attached to fixed stems of verbs, to denote person, number, tense, voice, mood, and aspecta process called conjugation. Some words are uninflected, not undergoing either process, such as adverbs, prepositions, and interjections.

=== Nouns ===

There are seven Latin noun cases, which also apply to adjectives and pronouns. These mark a noun's syntactic role in the sentence by means of inflections, so word order is not as important in Latin as it is in other less inflected languages, such as English. The general structure and word order of a Latin sentence can therefore vary. The cases are as follows:

# Nominative  used when the noun is the subject or a predicate nominative. The thing or person acting; e.g., the girl ran: puella cucurrit, or cucurrit puella
# Genitive  used when the noun is the possessor of or connected with an object (e.g., "the horse of the man", or "the man's horse"in both of these instances, the word man would be in the genitive case when translated into Latin). Also indicates the partitive, in which the material is quantified (e.g., "a group of people"; "a number of gifts"people and gifts would be in the genitive case). Some nouns are genitive with special verbs and adjectives too (e.g., The cup is full of wine. Poculum plnum vn est. The master of the slave had beaten him. Dominus serv eum verberverat.)
# Dative-- used when the noun is the indirect object of the sentence, with special verbs, with certain prepositions, and if used as agent, reference, or even possessor. (e.g., The merchant hands the stola to the woman. Merctor fminae stolam trdit.)
# Accusative  used when the noun is the direct object of the subject, and as object of a preposition demonstrating place to which. (e.g., The man killed the boy. Hom necvit puerum.)
# Ablative  used when the noun demonstrates separation or movement from a source, cause, agent, or instrument, or when the noun is used as the object of certain prepositions; adverbial. (e.g., You walked with the boy. cum puer ambulvist.)
# Vocative  used when the noun is used in a direct address. The vocative form of a noun is the same as the nominative except for second-declension nouns ending in -us. The -us becomes an -e or if it ends in -ius (such as flius) then the ending is just - (fil) (as distinct from the nominative plural (fili)). (e.g., "Master!" shouted the slave. "Domine!" clmvit servus.)
# Locative  used to indicate a location (corresponding to the English "in" or "at"). This is far less common than the other six cases of Latin nouns and usually applies to cities, small towns, and islands smaller than the island of Rhodes, along with a few common nouns, such as the word domus, house. In the first and second declension singular, its form coincides with the genitive (Roma becomes Romae, "in Rome"). In the plural, and in the other declensions, it coincides with the ablative (Athnae becomes Athns, "at Athens"). In the case of the fourth declension word domus, the locative form, dom ("at home") differs from the standard form of all the other cases.

Latin lacks both definite and indefinite articles; thus puer currit can mean either "the boy is running" or "a boy is running". Latin sometimes uses prepositions, and sometimes does not, depending on the type of prepositional phrase being used.

=== Verbs ===

A regular verb in Latin belongs to one of four main conjugations. A conjugation is "a class of verbs with similar inflected forms." The conjugations are identified by the last letter of the verb's present stem. The present stem can be found by taking the -re (or -ri, in the case of a deponent verb) ending off of the present infinitive. The infinitive of the first conjugation ends in --re or --ri (active and passive respectively); e.g., amre, "to love," hortr, "to exhort"; of the second conjugation by --re or --r; e.g., monre, "to warn", verr, "to fear;" of the third conjugation by -ere, -; e.g., dcere, "to lead," t, "to use"; of the fourth by --re, --r; e.g., audre, "to hear," experr, "to attempt". Irregular verbs may not follow these types, or may be marked in a different way. The "endings" presented above are not the suffixed infinitive markers. The first letter in each case is the last of the stem, because of which the conjugations are also called the a-conjugation, e-conjugation and i-conjugation. The fused infinitive ending is -re or -r. Third-conjugation stems end in a consonant: the consonant conjugation. Further, there is a subset of the 3rd conjugation, the i-stems, which behave somewhat like the 4th conjugation, as they are both i-stems, one short and the other long. These stem categories descend from Indo-European, and can therefore be compared to similar conjugations in other Indo-European languages.

There are six general tenses in Latin (present, imperfect, future, perfect, pluperfect, and future perfect), three moods (indicative, imperative and subjunctive, in addition to the infinitive, participle, gerund, gerundive and supine), three persons (first, second, and third), two numbers (singular and plural), two voices (active and passive), and three aspects (perfective, imperfective, and stative). Verbs are described by four principal parts:

# The first principal part is the first person singular, present tense, indicative mood, active voice form of the verb. If the verb is impersonal, the first principal part will be in the third person.
# The second principal part is the present infinitive active.
# The third principal part is the first person singular, perfect indicative active form.
# The fourth principal part is the supine form, or alternatively, the nominative singular, perfect passive participle form of the verb. The fourth principal part can show either one gender of the participle, or all three genders (-us for masculine, -a for feminine, and -um for neuter), in the nominative singular. The fourth principal part will be the future participle if the verb cannot be made passive. Most modern Latin dictionaries, if only showing one gender, tend to show the masculine; however, many older dictionaries will instead show the neuter, as this coincides with the supine. The fourth principal part is sometimes omitted for intransitive verbs, although strictly in Latin these can be made passive if used impersonally, and the supine exists for these verbs.

There are six tenses in the Latin language. These are divided into two tense systems: the present system, which is made up of the present, imperfect, and future tenses, and the perfect system, which is made up of the perfect, pluperfect, and future perfect tenses. Each tense has a set of endings corresponding to the person and number referred to. This means that subject (nominative) pronouns are generally unnecessary, unless emphasis on the subject is needed.

The table below displays the common inflected endings for the indicative mood in the active voice in all six tenses.

 Tense 1st Person Singular 2nd Person Singular 3rd Person Singular 1st Person Plural 2nd Person Plural 3rd Person Plural 
 Present - -s -t -mus -tis -nt 
 Future -b, -am -bis, -s -bit, -et -bimus, -mus -bitis, -tis -bant, -ent 
 Imperfect -bam -bs -bat -bmus -btis -bant 
 Perfect - -ist -it -imus -istis -runt 
 Future Perfect -er -eris -erit -erimus -eritis -erint 
 Pluperfect -eram -ers -erat -ermus -ertis -erant 

==== Deponent verbs ====

A number of Latin words are deponent, causing their forms to be in the passive mood, while retaining an active meaning, e.g. hortor, hortr, horttus sum (to urge).

== Vocabulary ==

As Latin is an Italic language, most of its vocabulary is likewise Italic, deriving ultimately from PIE. However, because of close cultural interaction, the Romans not only adapted the Etruscan alphabet to form the Latin alphabet, but also borrowed some Etruscan words into their language, including persona (mask) and histrio (actor). Latin also included vocabulary borrowed from Oscan, another Italic language.

After the Fall of Tarentum (272 BC), the Romans began hellenizing, or adopting features of Greek culture, including the borrowing of Greek words, such as camera (vaulted roof), sumbolum (symbol), and balineum (bath). This hellenization led to the addition of "Y" and "Z" to the alphabet to represent Greek sounds. Subsequently the Romans transplanted Greek art, medicine, science and philosophy to Italy, paying almost any price to entice Greek skilled and educated persons to Rome, and sending their youth to be educated in Greece. Thus, many Latin scientific and philosophical words were Greek loanwords or had their meanings expanded by association with Greek words, as ars (craft) and . 

Because of the Roman Empires expansion and subsequent trade with outlying European tribes, the Romans borrowed some northern and central European words, such as beber (beaver), of Germanic origin, and bracae (breeches), of Celtic origin. The specific dialects of Latin across Latin-speaking regions of the former Roman Empire after its fall were influenced by languages specific to the regions. These spoken Latins evolved into particular Romance languages.

During and after the adoption of Christianity into Roman society, Christian vocabulary became a part of the language, formed either from Greek or Hebrew borrowings, or as Latin neologisms. Continuing into the Middle Ages, Latin incorporated many more words from surrounding languages, including Old English and other Germanic languages.

Over the ages, Latin-speaking populations produced new adjectives, nouns, and verbs by affixing or compounding meaningful segments. For example, the compound adjective, omnipotens, "all-powerful," was produced from the adjectives omnis, "all", and potens, "powerful", by dropping the final s of omnis and concatenating. Often the concatenation changed the part of speech; i.e., nouns were produced from verb segments or verbs from nouns and adjectives. 

== Phrases ==
Here the phrases are mentioned with accents to know where to stress. Ebbe Vilborg - Norstedts svensk-latinska ordbok - Second edition, 2009. In the Latin language, most of the Latin words are stressed at the second to last (penultimate) syllable, called in Latin paenultimus or syllaba paenultima. Tore Janson - Latin - Kulturen, historien, sprket - First edition, 2009. Lesser words are stressed at the third to last syllable, called in Latin antepaenultimus or syllaba antepaenultima. 

slve to one person / salvte to more than one person - hello

ve to one person / avte to more than one person - greetings

vle to one person / valte to more than one person - goodbye

cra ut vleas - take care

exopttus to male / exoptta to female, opttus to male / optta to female, grtus to male / grta to female, accptus to male / accpta to female - welcome

qumodo vles?, ut vles? - how are you?

bne - good

amabo te - please

bne vleo - I'm fine

mle - bad

mle vleo - I'm not good

queso (/) - please

ta, ta est, ta vro, sic, sic est, tiam - yes

non - no

grtias tbi, grtias tbi go - thank you

mgnas grtias, mgnas grtias go - big thanks

mximas grtias, mximas grtias go, ingntes grtias go - thank you very much

accpe sis to one person / accpite stis to more than one person, libnter - you're welcome

qua aette es? - how old are you?

25 nnos ntus to male / 25 nnos nta to female - 25 years old

loquersne ... - do you speak ...
*Latne? - Latin?
*Grece? (/) - Greek?
*nglice? () - English?
*Italine? - Italian?
*Hispnice? - Spanish?
*Theodsce? () - German?
*Snice? - Chinese?
*Iapnice? () - Japanese?
*Arbice? - Arabic?
*Prsice? - Persian?
*Indice? - Hindi?
*Rssice? - Russian?

bi latrna est? - where is the toilet?

mo te / te mo - I love you

== Numbers ==
In ancient times, numbers in Latin were only written with letters. Today, the numbers can be written with the Arabic numbers and also the Roman numbers. The numbers 1, 2 and 3, and from 200 to 900, are declined as nouns and adjectives.

 nus, na, num (masculine, feminine, neuter) I one 
 duo, duae, duo (m., f., n.) II two 
 trs, tria (m./f., n.) III three 
 quattuor IIII or IV four 
 qunque V five 
 sex VI six 
 septem VII seven 
 oct VIII eight 
 novem VIIII or IX nine 
 decem X ten 

While these numerals are common to see in the world some others more difficult and must be learned.

 qunqugint L Fifty (50) 
 Centum C One Hundred (100) 
 Qungent D Five Hundred (500) 
 Mlle M One Thousand (1000) 

The numbers from quattor to centum do not change their endings.

== Example text ==

Commentarii de Bello Gallico, also called De Bello Gallico, written by Gaius Julius Caesar, begins with the following passage:

Gallia est omnis divisa in partes tres, quarum unam incolunt Belgae, aliam Aquitani, tertiam qui ipsorum lingua Celtae, nostra Galli appellantur. Hi omnes lingua, institutis, legibus inter se differunt. Gallos ab Aquitanis Garumna flumen, a Belgis Matrona et Sequana dividit. Horum omnium fortissimi sunt Belgae, propterea quod a cultu atque humanitate provinciae longissime absunt, minimeque ad eos mercatores saepe commeant atque ea quae ad effeminandos animos pertinent important, proximique sunt Germanis, qui trans Rhenum incolunt, quibuscum continenter bellum gerunt. Qua de causa Helvetii quoque reliquos Gallos virtute praecedunt, quod fere cotidianis proeliis cum Germanis contendunt, cum aut suis finibus eos prohibent aut ipsi in eorum finibus bellum gerunt. Eorum una pars, quam Gallos obtinere dictum est, initium capit a flumine Rhodano, continetur Garumna flumine, Oceano, finibus Belgarum; attingit etiam ab Sequanis et Helvetiis flumen Rhenum; vergit ad septentriones. Belgae ab extremis Galliae finibus oriuntur; pertinent ad inferiorem partem fluminis Rheni; spectant in septentrionem et orientem solem. Aquitania a Garumna flumine ad Pyrenaeos montes et eam partem Oceani quae est ad Hispaniam pertinet; spectat inter occasum solis et septentriones.

== See also ==

* Classical compound
* Greek and Latin roots in English
* Hybrid word
* Latin mnemonics
* Latin school
* Lorem ipsum
* Romanization (cultural)
* Toponymy
* 

* Latin Wikipedia
* Gregorian Chant

Lists:

* List of Greek words with English derivatives
* List of Latin and Greek words commonly used in systematic names
* List of Latin abbreviations
* List of Latin phrases
* List of Latin words with English derivatives
* List of Latinised names

== Notes ==

== References ==

*

== External links ==

=== Language tools ===
* Searches Lewis & Short's A Latin Dictionary and Lewis's An Elementary Latin Dictionary. Online results.
* Genedict.net, genealogic dictionary and register of historical terms
* Identifies the grammatical functions of words entered. Online results.
* Identifies the grammatical functions of all the words in sentences entered, using Perseus.
* Displays complete conjugations of verbs entered in first-person present singular form.
* Identifies Latin words entered. Translates English words entered.
* Combines Whittakers Words, Lewis and Short, Bennett's grammar and inflection tables in a browser addon.
* 
* 

=== Courses ===
* Online Latin resources, Rosetta
* Online resources for Latin, Nova Roma
* Learn Latin Grammar, vocabulary and audio
* Latin Links and Resources, Compiled by Fr. Gary Coulter
* 
* No longer active.
* 
* (a course in ecclesiastical Latin).
* 
* Beginners' Latin on http://www.nationalarchives.gov.uk/
* Latin Language for Beginners podcast

=== Grammar and study ===
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 

=== Phonetics ===
* 
* 

=== Latin language news and audio ===
* Ephemeris, online Latin newspaper
* , Latin Language broadcast / audio downloads, from Finnish YLE Radio 1
* News in Latin, Radio Bremen
* Classics Podcasts in Latin and Ancient Greek, Haverford College
* Latinum Latin Language course and Latin Language YouTube Index

===Latin language online communities===
* Grex Latine Loquentium (Flock of those Speaking Latin)
* Circulus Latinus Interretialis (Internet Latin Circle)
* Latinum Schola

 
 



[[LiveScript]]

LiveScript is a functional language that compiles to JavaScript.



[[Lige (disambiguation)]]

Lige is a municipality and a city of Belgium. The term Lige may also refer to:
* Lige Island, in the Antarctic
* Lige (Paris Mtro), a subway station in Paris
* Lige (car), inspired by the 1950s classic sporting car era

In Belgium, Lige may also refer to:
* Lige (province), a province of Belgium
* Battle of Lige, the first battle of World War I
* Bishopric of Lige, a former state in the Low Countries
* University of Lige, a major public university
* LigeBastogneLige, a famous one-day road cycling race in Belgium
* Lige-Guillemins, the main train station of the city of Lige
* Lige Airport, the airport of the city of Lige

The term Ligeoise means of or related to Lige. (Note the reversed accent.) It may refer to:
* Revolution Ligeoise, the 17891794 revolution that ousted the Lige prince bishops
* Caf ligeois, a coffee based cold dessert
* Salade Ligeoise, a warm salad incorporating potato, green beans and fried bacon
* Ligeois, an eastern form of the Walloon language

==See also==
* Liege (disambiguation)



[[Local area network]]

A local area network (LAN) is a computer network that interconnects computers within a limited area such as a home, school, computer laboratory, or office building, using network media. The defining characteristics of LANs, in contrast to wide area networks (WANs), include their smaller geographic area, and non-inclusion of leased telecommunication lines.

ARCNET, Token Ring and other technology standards have been used in the past, but Ethernet over twisted pair cabling, and Wi-Fi are the two most common technologies currently used to build LANs.

==History==
A conceptual diagram of a local area network using 10BASE5 Ethernet

The increasing demand and use of computers in universities and research labs in the late 1960s generated the need to provide high-speed interconnections between computer systems. A 1970 report from the Lawrence Radiation Laboratory detailing the growth of their "Octopus" network gave a good indication of the situation.

Cambridge Ring was developed at Cambridge University in 1974 but was never developed into a successful commercial product.

Ethernet was developed at Xerox PARC in 1973&ndash;1975, and filed as . In 1976, after the system was deployed at PARC, Metcalfe and Boggs published a seminal paper, "Ethernet: Distributed Packet-Switching for Local Computer Networks." 

ARCNET was developed by Datapoint Corporation in 1976 and announced in 1977. It had the first commercial installation in December 1977 at Chase Manhattan Bank in New York. 

===Standards evolution===
The development and proliferation of personal computers using the CP/M operating system in the late 1970s, and later DOS-based systems starting in 1981, meant that many sites grew to dozens or even hundreds of computers. The initial driving force for networking was generally to share storage and printers, which were both expensive at the time. There was much enthusiasm for the concept and for several years, from about 1983 onward, computer industry pundits would regularly declare the coming year to be the year of the LAN. "'The Year of The LAN' is a long-standing joke, and I freely admit to being the comedian that first declared it in 1982...", Robert Metcalfe, InfoWorld Dec 27, 1993 "...you will remember numerous computer magazines, over numerous years, announcing 'the year of the LAN.'", Quotes in 1999 "...a bit like the Year of the LAN which computer industry pundits predicted for the good part of a decade...", Christopher Herot 

In practice, the concept was marred by proliferation of incompatible physical layer and network protocol implementations, and a plethora of methods of sharing resources. Typically, each vendor would have its own type of network card, cabling, protocol, and network operating system. A solution appeared with the advent of Novell NetWare which provided even-handed support for dozens of competing card/cable types, and a much more sophisticated operating system than most of its competitors. Netware dominated the personal computer LAN business from early after its introduction in 1983 until the mid-1990s when Microsoft introduced Windows NT Advanced Server and Windows for Workgroups.

Of the competitors to NetWare, only Banyan Vines had comparable technical strengths, but Banyan never gained a secure base. Microsoft and 3Com worked together to create a simple network operating system which formed the base of 3Com's 3+Share, Microsoft's LAN Manager and IBM's LAN Server - but none of these was particularly successful.

During the same period, Unix computer workstations from vendors such as Sun Microsystems, Hewlett-Packard, Silicon Graphics, Intergraph, NeXT and Apollo were using TCP/IP based networking. Although this market segment is now much reduced, the technologies developed in this area continue to be influential on the Internet and in both Linux and Apple Mac OS X networking&mdash;and the TCP/IP protocol has now almost completely replaced IPX, AppleTalk, NBF, and other protocols used by the early PC LANs.

===Cabling===
Early LAN cabling had been based on various grades of coaxial cable. Shielded twisted pair was used in IBM's Token Ring LAN implementation. In 1984, StarLAN showed the potential of simple unshielded twisted pair by using Cat3 cable&mdash;the same simple cable used for telephone systems. This led to the development of 10Base-T (and its successors) and structured cabling which is still the basis of most commercial LANs today. In addition, fiber-optic cabling is increasingly used in commercial applications. Generally a LAN network uses Gigabit Ethernet cabling to the hub or switch (wired router, cannot be wireless), then the router connection is bridged to the wireless router.

As cabling is not always possible, Wi-Fi is now very common in residential premises, and elsewhere where support for laptops and smartphones is important.
Cambridge Ring was developed at Cambridge University in 1974 but was never developed into a successful commercial product.

==Technical aspects==
Network topology describes the layout of interconnections between devices and network segments. At the Data Link Layer and Physical Layer, a wide variety of LAN topologies have been used, including ring, bus, mesh and star, but the most common LAN topology in use today is switched Ethernet. At the higher layers, the Internet Protocol (TCP/IP) has become the standard, replacing NetBEUI, IPX/SPX, AppleTalk and others.

Simple LANs generally consist of one or more switches. A switch can be connected to a router, cable modem, or ADSL modem for Internet access. Complex LANs are characterized by their use of redundant links with switches using the spanning tree protocol to prevent loops, their ability to manage differing traffic types via quality of service (QoS), and to segregate traffic with VLANs. A LAN can include a wide variety of network devices such as switches, firewalls, routers, load balancers, and sensors. 

LANs can maintain connections with other LANs via leased lines, leased services, or the Internet using virtual private network technologies. Depending on how the connections are established and secured in a LAN, and the distance involved, a LAN may also be classified as a metropolitan area network (MAN) or a wide area network (WAN).

==See also==

* IEEE 802 family of IEEE standards
* Ethernet physical layer
* LAN messenger
* LAN party
* Network card

==References==

== External links ==

 


[[Louis Pasteur]]

Louis Pasteur (, ; December 27, 1822  September 28, 1895) was a French chemist and microbiologist renowned for his discoveries of the principles of vaccination, microbial fermentation and pasteurization. He is remembered for his remarkable breakthroughs in the causes and preventions of diseases, and his discoveries have saved countless lives ever since. He reduced mortality from puerperal fever, and created the first vaccines for rabies and anthrax. His medical discoveries provided direct support for the germ theory of disease and its application in clinical medicine. He is best known to the general public for his invention of the technique of treating milk and wine to stop bacterial contamination, a process now called pasteurization. He is regarded as one of the three main founders of bacteriology, together with Ferdinand Cohn and Robert Koch, and is popularly known as the "father of microbiology". 

Pasteur also made significant discoveries in chemistry, most notably on the molecular basis for the asymmetry of certain crystals and racemization. He was the Director of the Pasteur Institute, established in 1887, till his death, and his body lies beneath the institute in a vault covered in depictions of his accomplishments in Byzantine mosaics. 

==Early life==
The house in which Pasteur was born, Dole
Louis Pasteur was born on December 27, 1822, in Dole, Jura, France, to a Catholic family of a poor tanner. He was the third child of Jean-Joseph Pasteur and Jeanne-Etiennette Roqui. In 1827, the family moved to Arbois, where he entered primary school in 1831. He was an average student in his early years, and not particularly academic, as his interests were fishing and sketching. His pastels and portraits of his parents and friends, made when he was 15, were later kept in the museum of the Pasteur Institute in Paris. In 1838, he left for Paris to join the Institution Barbet, but became homesick and returned in November. In 1839, he entered the Collge Royal de Besanon and earned his baccalaurat (BA) degree in 1840. He was appointed teaching assistant at the Besanon college while continuing a degree science course with special mathematics. He failed his first examination in 1841. He managed to pass the baccalaurat scientifique (general science) degree in 1842 from Dijon but with a poor grade in chemistry. After one failed attempt for the entrance test for the cole Normale Suprieure in Paris in 1842, he succeeded in 1844. In 1845 he received the licenci s sciences (Bachelor of Science) degree. In 1846, he was appointed professor of physics at the Collge de Tournon at Ardche, but Antoine Jrome Balard (one of the discoverers of the element bromine) wanted him back at the cole Normale Suprieure as a graduate assistant (prparateur) for chemistry courses. He joined Balard and simultaneously started his research in crystallography and in 1847, he submitted his two theses, one in chemistry and the other in physics. After serving briefly as professor of physics at the Dijon Lyce in 1848, he became professor of chemistry at the University of Strasbourg, where he met and courted Marie Laurent, daughter of the university's rector in 1849. They were married on May 29, 1849, and together had five children, only two of whom survived to adulthood; the other three died of typhoid. These personal tragedies were his motivations for curing infectious diseases. 

==Professional career==

Pasteur was appointed to the Chair of Chemistry in the faculty of sciences of the University of Strasbourg. In 1854, he was named dean of the new faculty of sciences at Lille University. It was on this occasion that Pasteur uttered his oft-quoted remark: "dans les champs de l'observation, le hasard ne favorise que les esprits prpars." (In the field of observation, chance favors only the prepared mind. L. Pasteur, "Discours prononc  Douai, le 7 dcembre 1854,  l'occasion de l'installation solennelle de la Facult des lettres de Douai et de la Facult des sciences de Lille" (Speech delivered at Douai on December 7, 1854 on the occasion of his formal inauguration to the Faculty of Letters of Douai and the Faculty of Sciences of Lille), reprinted in: Pasteur Vallery-Radot, ed., Oeuvres de Pasteur (Paris, France: Masson and Co., 1939), vol. 7, page 131. ) In 1856, he moved to Paris as the director of scientific studies at the cole Normale Suprieure where he took control from 1858 to 1867 and introduced a series of reforms. The examinations became more rigid, which led to better results, greater competition, and increased prestige. He raised the standard of scientific work, leading to two serious student revolts. In 1862, he was appointed professor of geology, physics, and chemistry at the cole nationale suprieure des Beaux-Arts, the position which held until his resignation in 1867. In Paris, he established the Pasteur Institute in 1887, in which he was its director for the rest of his life. 

==Research contributions==

===Molecular asymmetry===
Pasteur separated the left and right crystal shapes from each other to form two piles of crystals: in solution one form rotated light to the left, the other to the right, while an equal mixture of the two forms canceled each other's effect, and does not rotate the polarized light.
In Pasteur's early work as a chemist, he resolved a problem concerning the nature of tartaric acid (1848). L. Pasteur (1848) "Mmoire sur la relation qui peut exister entre la forme cristalline et la composition chimique, et sur la cause de la polarisation rotatoire" (Memoir on the relationship which can exist between crystalline form and chemical composition, and on the cause of rotary polarization)," Comptes rendus de l'Acadmie des sciences (Paris), vol. 26, pages 535538. L. Pasteur (1848) "Sur les relations qui peuvent exister entre la forme cristalline, la composition chimique et le sens de la polarisation rotatoire" (On the relations that can exist between crystalline form, and chemical composition, and the sense of rotary polarization), Annales de Chimie et de Physique, 3rd series, vol. 24, no. 6, pages 442459. George B. Kauffman and Robin D. Myers (1998)"Pasteur's resolution of racemic acid: A sesquicentennial retrospect and a new translation," The Chemical Educator, vol. 3, no. 6, pages (?). H. D. Flack (2009) "Louis Pasteur's discovery of molecular chirality and spontaneous resolution in 1848, together with a complete review of his crystallographic and chemical work," Acta Crystallographica, Section A, vol. 65, pages 371389. Joseph Gal: Louis Pasteur, Language, and Molecular Chirality. I. Background and Dissymmetry, Chirality 23 (2011) 116. A solution of this compound derived from living things (specifically, wine lees) rotated the plane of polarization of light passing through it. The mystery was that tartaric acid derived by chemical synthesis had no such effect, even though its chemical reactions were identical and its elemental composition was the same. This was the first time anyone had demonstrated chiral molecules.

===Germ theory of fermentation===
Pasteur demonstrated that fermentation is caused by the growth of micro-organisms, and the emergent growth of bacteria in nutrient broths is due not to spontaneous generation, but rather to biogenesis (Omne vivum ex vivo "all life from life").
Pasteur experimenting in his laboratory.
Bottle en col de cygne (swan neck duct) used by Pasteur

Institut Pasteur de Lille
He exposed boiled broths to air in vessels that contained a filter to prevent all particles from passing through to the growth medium, and even in vessels with no filter at all, with air being admitted via a long tortuous tube that would not allow dust particles to pass. Nothing grew in the broths unless the flasks were broken open, showing that the living organisms that grew in such broths came from outside, as spores on dust, rather than spontaneously generated within the broth. This was one of the last and most important experiments disproving the theory of spontaneous generation.

While Pasteur was not the first to propose the germ theory (Girolamo Fracastoro, Agostino Bassi, Friedrich Henle and others had suggested it earlier), he developed it and conducted experiments that clearly indicated its correctness and managed to convince most of Europe that it was true. Today, he is often regarded as the father of germ theory. 

Pasteur's research also showed that the growth of micro-organisms was responsible for spoiling beverages, such as beer, wine and milk. With this established, he invented a process in which liquids such as milk were heated to kill most bacteria and moulds already present within them. Claude Bernard and he completed the first test on April 20, 1862. This process was soon afterwards known as pasteurization. 

Beverage contamination led Pasteur to the idea that micro-organisms infecting animals and humans cause disease. He proposed preventing the entry of micro-organisms into the human body, leading Joseph Lister to develop antiseptic methods in surgery.

In 1865, two parasitic diseases called pbrine and flacherie were killing great numbers of silkworms at Alais (now Als). Pasteur worked several years proving that these diseases were caused by a microbe attacking silkworm eggs, and that eliminating the microbe in silkworm nurseries would eradicate the disease. 

Pasteur also discovered anaerobiosis, whereby some micro-organisms can develop and live without air or oxygen, called the Pasteur effect.

===Immunology and vaccination===
Pasteur's later work on diseases included work on chicken cholera. During this work, a culture of the responsible bacteria had spoiled and failed to induce the disease in some chickens he was infecting with the disease. Upon reusing these healthy chickens, Pasteur discovered he could not infect them, even with fresh bacteria; the weakened bacteria had caused the chickens to become immune to the disease, though they had caused only mild symptoms. 

His assistant, Charles Chamberland (of French origin), had been instructed to inoculate the chickens after Pasteur went on holiday. Chamberland failed to do this, but instead went on holiday himself. On his return, the month-old cultures made the chickens unwell, but instead of the infections being fatal, as they usually were, the chickens recovered completely. Chamberland assumed an error had been made, and wanted to discard the apparently faulty culture when Pasteur stopped him. Pasteur guessed the recovered animals now might be immune to the disease, as were the animals at Eure-et-Loir that had recovered from anthrax. 

In the 1870s, he applied this immunization method to anthrax, which affected cattle, and aroused interest in combating other diseases.
Louis Pasteur in his laboratory, painting by A. Edelfeldt in 1885

Pasteur publicly claimed he had made the anthrax vaccine by exposing the bacilli to oxygen. His laboratory notebooks, now in the Bibliothque Nationale in Paris, in fact show that he used the method of rival Jean-Joseph-Henri Toussaint, a Toulouse veterinary surgeon, to create the anthrax vaccine. This method used the oxidizing agent potassium dichromate. Pasteur's oxygen method did eventually produce a vaccine but only after he had been awarded a patent on the production of an anthrax vaccine.

The notion of a weak form of a disease causing immunity to the virulent version was not new; this had been known for a long time for smallpox. Inoculation with smallpox was known to result in far less scarring, and greatly reduced mortality, in comparison with the naturally acquired disease. Edward Jenner had also discovered vaccination using cowpox to give cross-immunity to smallpox in 1796, and by Pasteur's time this had generally replaced the use of actual smallpox material in inoculation. The difference between smallpox vaccination and anthrax or chicken cholera vaccination was that the weakened form of the latter two disease organisms had been "generated artificially", so a naturally weak form of the disease organism did not need to be found. This discovery revolutionized work in infectious diseases, and Pasteur gave these artificially weakened diseases the generic name of "vaccines", in honour of Jenner's discovery. Pasteur produced the first vaccine for rabies by growing the virus in rabbits, and then weakening it by drying the affected nerve tissue.

The rabies vaccine was initially created by Emile Roux, a French doctor and a colleague of Pasteur who had been working with a killed vaccine produced by desiccating the spinal cords of infected rabbits. The vaccine had been tested only on 11 dogs before its first human trial. This vaccine was first used on 9-year old Joseph Meister, on July 6, 1885, after the boy was badly mauled by a rabid dog. This was done at some personal risk for Pasteur, since he was not a licensed physician and could have faced prosecution for treating the boy. After consulting with colleagues, he decided to go ahead with the treatment. Three months later he examined Meister and found that he was in good health. Pasteur was hailed as a hero and the legal matter was not pursued. The treatment's success laid the foundations for the manufacture of many other vaccines. The first of the Pasteur Institutes was also built on the basis of this achievement. 

Legal risk was not the only kind Pasteur undertook. In The Story of San Michele, Axel Munthe writes of the rabies vaccine research:

Because of his study in germs, Pasteur encouraged doctors to sanitize their hands and equipment before surgery. Prior to this, few doctors or their assistants practiced these procedures.

==Pasteur Institute==

The Pasteur Institute was established by Pasteur to perpetuate his commitment to basic research and its practical applications. He brought together scientists with various specialties. The first five departments were directed by two normaliens (graduates of the cole Normale Suprieure): Emile Duclaux (general microbiology research) and Charles Chamberland (microbe research applied to hygiene), as well as a biologist, Ilya Ilyich Mechnikov (morphological microbe research) and two physicians, Jacques-Joseph Grancher (rabies) and Emile Roux (technical microbe research). One year after the inauguration of the institute, Roux set up the first course of microbiology ever taught in the world, then entitled Cours de Microbie Technique (Course of microbe research techniques). Since 1891 the Pasteur Institute had been extended to different countries, and currently there are 32 institutes in 29 countries in various parts of the world. 

==Faith and spirituality==
His grandson, Louis Pasteur Vallery-Radot, wrote that Pasteur had only kept from his Catholic background a spiritualism without religious practice, Pasteur Vallery-Radot, Letter to Paul Dupuy, 1939, quoted by Hilaire Cuny, Pasteur et le mystre de la vie, Paris, Seghers, 1963, p. 5354. Patrice Pinet, Pasteur et la philosophie, Paris, 2005, p. 134135, quotes analogous assertions of Pasteur Vallery-Radot, with references to Pasteur Vallery-Radot, Pasteur inconnu, p. 232, and Andr George, Pasteur, Paris, 1958, p. 187. According to Maurice Vallery-Radot (Pasteur, 1994, p. 378), the false quotation appeared for the first time in the Semaine religieuse ... du diocse de Versailles, October 6, 1895, p. 153, shortly after the death of Pasteur. although Catholic observers often said Louis Pasteur remained throughout his whole life an ardent Christian, and his son-in-law, in perhaps the most complete biography of Louis Pasteur, writes:

Maurice Vallery-Radot, grandson of the brother of the son-in-law of Pasteur and outspoken Catholic, also holds that Pasteur fundamentally remained Catholic. According to both Pasteur Vallery-Radot and Maurice Vallery-Radot, the following well-known quotation attributed to Pasteur is apocryphal: Pasteur Vallery-Radot, Letter to Paul Dupuy, 1939, quoted by Hilaire Cuny, Pasteur et le mystre de la vie, Paris, Seghers, 1963, p. 5354. "The more I know, the more nearly is my faith that of the Breton peasant. Could I but know all I would have the faith of a Breton peasant's wife". According to Maurice Vallery-Radot, Pasteur, 1994, p. 378. the false quotation appeared for the first time shortly after the death of Pasteur. In Pasteur's Semaine religieuse ... du diocse de Versailles, October 6, 1895, p. 153. However, despite his belief in God, it has been said that his views were that of a freethinker rather than a Catholic, a spiritual more than a religious man. He was also against mixing science with religion. 

== Principal works ==
Pasteur's principal works are: 

 French Title Year English Title 
 Etudes sur le Vin 1866 Studies on Wine 
 \"Etudes sur le Vinaigre\" 1868 Studies on Vinegar 
 \"Etudes sur la Maladie des Vers  Soie\" (2 volumes) 1870 Studies on Silk Worm Disease 
 ; \"Quelques Rflexions sur la Science en France\" 1871 Some Reflections on Science in France 
 \"Etudes sur la Bire\" 1876 Studies on Beer 
 \"Les Microbes organiss, leur rle dans la Fermentation, la Putrfaction et la Contagion\" 1878 Microbes organized, their role in fermentation, putrefaction and the Contagion 
 \"Discours de Rception de M.L. Pasteur  l'Acadmie franaise\" 1882 Speech by Mr L. Pasteur on reception to the Acadmie franaise 
 \"Traitement de la Rage\" 1886 Treatment of Rabies 

==Honours and final days==

Pasteur was frequently struck by strokes since 1868, and the one in 1894 severely impaired his health. Failing to fully recover from the shock, he died in 1895, near Paris. He was given a state funeral and was buried in the Cathedral of Notre Dame, but his remains were reinterred in a crypt in the Pasteur Institute in Paris, where the crypt is engraved with his life-saving works.

He was awarded the prize of 1,500 francs in 1853 by the Pharmaceutical Society for the synthesis of racemic acid. In 1856 the Royal Society of London presented him the Rumford Medal for his discovery of the nature of racemic acid and its relations to polarized light, and the Copley medal in 1874 for his work on fermentation. The French Academy of Sciences awarded him the Montyon Prizes in 1859 for experimental physiology, and the Jecker Prize in 1861 and the Alhumbert Prize in 1862 for his experimental refutation of spontaneous generation. Though he lost election in 1857 for membership to the French Academy of Sciences, he won it in 1862 in mineralogy section, and was appointed to permanent secretary of the physical science section of the academy in 1887. In 1873 he was elected to the Acadmie Nationale de Mdecine. He was elected to Littr's seat at the Acadmie franaise in 1881.

In 1873 he was made the commander in the Brazilian Order of the Rose.

Pasteur won the Leeuwenhoek medal, microbiology's highest Dutch honor in Arts and Sciences, in 1895. Both the Institute Pasteur and Universit Louis Pasteur were named after him.

He was made a Chevalier or Knight of the Legion of Honour in 1853, promoted to Commander in 1868, to Grand Officer in 1878 and made a Grand Croix of the Legion of Honor  one of only 75 in all of France - in 1881. 

On June 8, 1886, the Ottoman Sultan Abdul Hamid II awarded Pasteur with the Order of the Medjidie (I Class) and 10000 Ottoman liras. Sevan Nianyan: Yanl Cumhuriyet stanbul: Krmz Yaynlar 2009, S. 263. 

==Legacy==
Vulitsya Pastera or Pasteur Street in Odessa, Ukraine

In many localities worldwide, streets are named in his honor. For example, in the USA: Palo Alto and Irvine, California, Boston and Polk, Florida, adjacent to the University of Texas Health Science Center at San Antonio; Jonquire, Qubec; San Salvador de Jujuy and Buenos Aires (Argentina), Great Yarmouth in Norfolk, in the United Kingdom, Jericho and Wulguru in Queensland, (Australia); Phnom Penh in Cambodia; Ho Chi Minh City; Batna in Algeria; Bandung in Indonesia, Tehran in Iran, near the central campus of the Warsaw University in Warsaw, Poland; adjacent to the Odessa State Medical University in Odessa, Ukraine; Milan in Italy and Bucharest, Cluj-Napoca and Timioara in Romania. The Avenue Pasteur in Saigon, Vietnam, is one of the few streets in that city to retain its French name.

Avenue Louis Pasteur in the Longwood Medical and Academic Area in Boston, Massachusetts was named in his honor in the French manner with "Avenue" preceding the name of the dedicatee. Pasteur Foundation, Pasteur Memorials USA 

The Lyce Pasteur in Neuilly-sur-Seine, France, Lyce Louis Pasteur in Calgary, Canada and a large university hospital in Koice, Slovakia are also named after him.

His statue is erected at San Rafael High School in San Rafael, California.

A bronze bust of Pasteur resides on the French Campus of Kaiser Permanente's San Francisco Medical Center in San Francisco, California. The sculpture was designed by Harriet G. Moore and cast in 1984 by Artworks Foundry. 

==Controversies==

===Anthrax vaccine===

In 1995, the centennial of the death of Louis Pasteur, the New York Times ran an article titled "Pasteur's Deception". After having thoroughly read Pasteur's lab notes, the science historian Gerald L. Geison declared Pasteur had given a misleading account of the preparation of the anthrax vaccine used in the experiment at Pouilly-le-Fort. See Gerald Geison, The Private Science of Louis Pasteur, Princeton University Press, 1995. ISBN 0-691-01552-X. May 1995 NY Times Max Perutz published a vigorous defense of Pasteur in the New York Review of Books. Dec. 21, 1995 NY Review of Books , letters The fact is that Pasteur publicly claimed his success in developing anthrax vaccine in 1881. However his admirer-turned-rival, a veterinarian Toussaint was the one who developed the first vaccine. Toussaint isolated the Gram-negative bacteria cholera des poules (later named  to add irony  Pasteurella in honour of Pasteur) in 1879 and gave samples to Pasteur who used for his own works. In 1880 with his publishing on July 12 at the French Academy of Sciences, Toussaint presented his successful result with an attenuated vaccine against anthrax in dogs and sheep. Pasteur purely on grounds of jealousy contested the discovery by publicly displaying his vaccination method in Pouilly-le-Fort on 5 May 1881. The promotional experiment was a success and helped Pasteur sell his products, getting all the benefits and glory. 

===Experimental ethics===

Pasteur experiments are often cited as against medical ethics, especially on his vaccination of Meister. Firstly, he did not have any experience in medical practice, and more importantly, a medical license. This is often cited as a serious threat to his professional and personal reputation. Even his closest partner Dr. Emile Roux refused to participate in the unjust clinical trial. But Pasteur executed vaccination of the boy under the close watch of practising physician Jacques-Joseph Grancher, head of the paediatric clinic at Paris Children's Hospital. He was even not allowed to hold the syringe, although the inoculations were entirely under his supervision. It was Grancher who was responsible for the injections, and defended Pasteur before the French National Academy of Medicine in the issue. Still giving someone a clinical test without proper diagnosis was unjustifiable. (Meister had not shown symptoms of rabies at the time.) Secondly, he kept secrecy of his procedure and did not give proper pre-clinical trials. But these accussations were not entirely correct. He disclosed his methods to a small group of scientists. He also tested vaccination in 40 dogs before his use in human. 

==See also==

* Modern medicine
* Infection control
* Infectious disease
* Pasteur Institute
* Pasteurization
* The Story of Louis Pasteur (a 1936 biographical film)
* Ignaz Semmelweis proposed doctors wash their hands in the year 1847
* Listing of the works of Alexandre Falguire

==References==

==Further reading==

* 
* 
* 
* 
* Reynolds, Moira Davison. How Pasteur Changed History: The Story of Louis Pasteur and the Pasteur Institute (1994)
* 

==External links==

* The Institut Pasteur  Foundation Dedicated to the prevention and treatment of diseases through biological research, education and public health activities
* The Pasteur Foundation  A US nonprofit organization dedicated to promoting the mission of the Institut Pasteur in Paris. Full archive of newsletters available online containing examples of US Tributes to Louis Pasteur.
* Pasteur's Papers on the Germ Theory
* The Life and Work of Louis Pasteur, Pasteur Brewing
* The Pasteur Galaxy
* Louis Pasteur featured on the 5 French Franc banknote from 1966.
* Germ Theory and Its Applications to Medicine and Surgery, 1878
*Louis Pasteur (18221895) profile, AccessExcellence.org

The complete work of Pasteur, BNF (Bibliothque nationale de France)
* 
* 
* Comptes rendus de l'Acadmie des sciences Articles published by Pasteur 

 



[[Ludwig Wittgenstein]]

Ludwig Josef Johann Wittgenstein (26 April 1889  29 April 1951) was an Austrian-British philosopher who worked primarily in logic, the philosophy of mathematics, the philosophy of mind, and the philosophy of language. From 19291947, Wittgenstein taught at the University of Cambridge. Dennett, Daniel. "Ludwig Wittgenstein: Philosopher", Time magazine, 29 March 1999. During his lifetime he published just one slim book, the 75-page Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus (1921), one article, one book review and a children's dictionary. For his publications during his lifetime, see Monk, Ray. How to read Wittgenstein. W.W. Norton & Company. 2005, p. 5.
*For the number of words published in his lifetime, see Stern, David. "The Bergen Electronic Edition of Wittgenstein's Nachlass", The European Journal of Philosophy. Vol 18, issue 3, September 2010. His voluminous manuscripts were edited and published posthumously. Philosophical Investigations appeared as a book in 1953 and by the end of the century it was considered an important modern classic. A poll among some 400 american university and college philosophy teachers ranked it at number one in 1999; see Lackey, Douglas "What Are the Modern Classics? The Baruch Poll of Great Philosophy in the Twentieth Century", Philosophical Forum. 30 (4), December 1999, pp. 329346. For a summary of the poll, see here . Retrieved 3 September 2010. Philosopher Bertrand Russell described Wittgenstein as "the most perfect example I have ever known of genius as traditionally conceived; passionate, profound, intense, and dominating". For the Russell quote, see McGuinness, Brian. Wittgenstein: A Life : Young Ludwig 18891921. University of California Press, 1988, p. 118. 

Born in Vienna into one of Europe's richest families, he inherited a large fortune from his father in 1913. He gave some considerable sums to poor artists. In a period of severe personal depression after the first World War, he then gave away his entire fortune to his brothers and sisters. When his father died in 1913 and Ludwig inherited a considerable fortune... Then, after the First World War, in which he fought as a volunteer in the Austro-Hungarian army, he gave away his entire fortune to his brothers and sisters and, plagued by depression, sought refuge in Lower Austria, where he worked as an ordinary primary school teacher. Institute http://www.goethe.de/ges/phi/prt/en2341144.htm Duffy, Bruce. "The do-it-yourself life of Ludwig Wittgenstein", The New York Times, 13 November 1988, p. 4/10.
*For his selling his furniture, see "Ludwig Wittgenstein: Tractatus and Teaching", Cambridge Wittgenstein archive. Retrieved 4 September 2010. Three of his brothers committed suicide, with Wittgenstein contemplating it too. For the brothers' suicides, see Waugh, Alexander. "The Wittgensteins: Viennese whirl", The Daily Telegraph, 30 August 2008.
*Also see Gottlieb, Anthony. "A Nervous Splendor", The New Yorker, 9 April 2009. He left academia several times: serving as an officer on the frontline during World War I, where he was decorated a number of times for his courage; teaching in schools in remote Austrian villages, where he encountered controversy for hitting children when they made mistakes in mathematics; and working during World War II as a hospital porter in London, where he told patients not to take the drugs they were prescribed, and where he largely managed to keep secret the fact that he was one of the world's most famous philosophers. Monk, Ray. Ludwig Wittgenstein: The Duty of Genius. Free Press, 1990, pp. 232233, 431.
*For his commendation, see Waugh, Alexander. The House of Wittgenstein: a Family at War. Random House of Canada, 2008, p. 114. He described philosophy, however, as "the only work that gives me real satisfaction." Malcolm, (Additional note) p. 84. 

His philosophy is often divided into an early period, exemplified by the Tractatus, and a later period, articulated in the Philosophical Investigations. The early Wittgenstein was concerned with the logical relationship between propositions and the world, and believed that by providing an account of the logic underlying this relationship he had solved all philosophical problems. The later Wittgenstein rejected many of the assumptions of the Tractatus, arguing that the meaning of words is best understood as their use within a given language-game. PDF 

Wittgenstein's influence has been felt in nearly every field of the humanities and social sciences, yet there are diverging interpretations of his thought. In the words of his friend and colleague Georg Henrik von Wright: "He was of the opinion... that his ideas were generally misunderstood and distorted even by those who professed to be his disciples. He doubted he would be better understood in the future. He once said he felt as though he were writing for people who would think in a different way, breathe a different air of life, from that of present-day men." Malcolm, p. 6. 

==Background==

===The Wittgensteins===

Karl Wittgenstein was one of the richest men in Europe. 
According to a family tree prepared in Jerusalem after World War II, Wittgenstein's paternal great-grandfather was Moses Meier, a Jewish land agent who lived with his wife, Brendel Simon, in Bad Laasphe in the Principality of Wittgenstein, Westphalia. See Schloss Wittgenstein. Various sources spell Meier's name Maier and Meyer. In July 1808, Napoleon issued a decree that everyone, including Jews, must adopt an inheritable family surname, and so Meier's son, also Moses, took the name of his employers, the Sayn-Wittgensteins, and became Moses Meier Wittgenstein. Bartley, pp. 199200. His son, Hermann Christian Wittgensteinwho took the middle name "Christian" to distance himself from his Jewish backgroundmarried Fanny Figdor, also Jewish, who converted to Protestantism just before they married, and the couple founded a successful business trading in wool in Leipzig. Monk, pp. 45. Ludwig's grandmother, Fanny Figdor, was a first cousin of the famous violinist Joseph Joachim. Monk, p .5. They had 11 childrenamong them Wittgenstein's father. Karl Wittgenstein (18471913) became an industrial tycoon, and by the late 1880s was one of the richest men in Europe, with an effective monopoly on Austria's steel cartel. Bramann, Jorn K. and Moran, John. "Karl Wittgenstein, Business Tycoon and Art Patron", Frostburg State University. Retrieved 2 September 2010. Edmonds, Eidinow, "Wittgenstein's Poker", page 63 Thanks to Karl, the Wittgensteins became the second wealthiest family in Austria-Hungary, behind only the Rothschilds. As a result of his decision in 1898 to invest substantially overseas, particularly in the Netherlands, Switzerland and the US, the family was to an extent shielded from the hyperinflation that hit Austria in 1922. Monk, p. 7. Their wealth did still diminish due to post-1918 hyperinflation and the Great Depression, although even as late as 1938 they owned 13 mansions in Vienna alone. Edmonds, Eidinow, "Wittgenstein's Poker", page 102 

===Early life===

Ludwig's sister Margaret, painted by Gustav Klimt for her wedding portrait in 1905
Wittgenstein's mother was Leopoldine Kalmus, known among friends as Poldi. Her father was a Czech Jew and her mother was Austrian-Slovene Catholicshe was Wittgenstein's maternal grandmother and only non-Jewish grandparent, whose ancestry was Austrian, and so by Jewish law Wittgenstein was not Jewish. Ranjit Chatterjee, Wittgenstein and Judaism: A Triumph of Concealment, 2005, p.178 A Nervous Splendor : The New Yorker B. McGuinness, Wittgenstein: a life : young Ludwig 1889-1921 Wittgenstein, Leopoldine (Schenker Documents Online) She was an aunt of the Nobel Prize laureate Friedrich Hayek on her maternal side. Wittgenstein was born at 8:30 pm on 26 April 1889 in the so-called "Wittgenstein Palace" at Alleegasse 16, now the Argentinierstrasse, near the Karlskirche. For his mother's Roman Catholic background, see "Ludwig Wittgenstein: Background", Wittgenstein archive, University of Cambridge. Retrieved 2 September 2010.
*For his time and place of birth, see Edmonds, David and Eidinow, John. Wittgenstein's Poker. Faber and Faber, 2001, p. 57. Karl and Poldi had nine children in all. There were four girls: Hermine, Margaret (Gretl), Helene, and a fourth daughter who died as a baby; and five boys: Johannes (Hans), Kurt, Rudolf (Rudi), Paulwho became a concert pianist despite losing an arm in World War Iand Ludwig, who was the youngest of the family. Bartley, William Warren. Wittgenstein. Open Court, 1994, p. 16, first published 1973. 

The children were baptized as Catholics, and raised in an exceptionally intense environment. The family was at the center of Vienna's cultural life; Bruno Walter described the life at the Wittgensteins' palace as an "all-pervading atmosphere of humanity and culture". Monk, p. 8. Karl was a leading patron of the arts, commissioning works by Auguste Rodin and financing the city's exhibition hall and art gallery, the Secession Building. Gustav Klimt painted Wittgenstein's sister for her wedding portrait, and Johannes Brahms and Gustav Mahler gave regular concerts in the family's numerous music rooms. McGuinness, p. 18. 

For Wittgenstein, who highly valued precision and discipline, contemporary music was never considered acceptable at all. "Music", he said to his friend Drury in 1930, "came to a full stop with Brahms; and even in Brahms I can begin to hear the noise of machinery." Theodore Redpath, Ludwig Wittgenstein: A Student's Memoir, London: Duckworth, 1990, p. 112 Wittgenstein himself had absolute pitch, Edmonds, Eidinow, "Wittgenstein's Poker" and his devotion to music remained vitally important to him throughout his life: he made frequent use of musical examples and metaphors in his philosophical writings, and was unusually adept at whistling lengthy and detailed musical passages. He also learnt to play the clarinet in his thirties. 

===Family temperament; brothers' suicides===
From left, Helene, Rudi, Hermine, Ludwig (the baby), Gretl, Paul, Hans, and Kurt, around 1890
Ray Monk writes that Karl's aim was to turn his sons into captains of industry; they were not sent to school lest they acquire bad habits, but were educated at home to prepare them for work in Karl's industrial empire. Monk, p. 11ff. Three of the five brothers would later commit suicide. Kenny, Anthony. "Give Him Genius or Give Him Death", The New York Times, 30 December 1990.
*Also see "Ludwig Wittgenstein: Background", Wittgenstein archive, University of Cambridge. Retrieved 7 September 2010. Psychiatrist Michael Fitzgerald argues that Karl was a harsh perfectionist who lacked empathy, and that Wittgenstein's mother was anxious and insecure, unable to stand up to her husband. Fitzgerald, Michael. "Did Ludwig Wittgenstein have Asperger's syndrome?",
European Child & Adolescent Psychiatry, volume 9, number 1, pp. 6165. Johannes Brahms said of the family, whom he visited regularly: "They seemed to act towards one another as if they were at court". The family appeared to have a strong streak of depression running through it. Anthony Gottlieb tells a story about Paul practicing on one of the seven grand pianos in the Wittgensteins' main family mansion, when he suddenly shouted at Ludwig in the next room: "I cannot play when you are in the house, as I feel your skepticism seeping towards me from under the door!" Gottlieb, Anthony. "A Nervous Splendor", The New Yorker, 9 April 2009. 

Ludwig (bottom-right), Paul, and their sisters, late 1890s
The eldest brother, Hans, was hailed as a musical prodigy. At the age of four, writes Alexander Waugh, Hans could identify the Doppler effect in a passing siren as a quarter-tone drop in pitch, and at five started crying "Wrong! Wrong!" when two brass bands in a carnival played the same tune in different keys. But he died in mysterious circumstances in May 1902, when he ran away to America and disappeared from a boat in Chesapeake Bay, most likely having committed suicide. Waugh, pp. 2426.
*Also see Monk, p. 11ff. 

Two years later, aged 22 and studying chemistry at the Berlin Academy, the third eldest brother, Rudi, committed suicide in a Berlin bar. He had asked the pianist to play Thomas Koschat's "Verlassen, verlassen, verlassen bin ich" ("Forsaken, forsaken, forsaken am I"), For the Koschat song, see . Retrieved 11 September 2010. before mixing himself a drink of milk and potassium cyanide. He had left several suicide notes, one to his parents that said he was grieving over the death of a friend, and another that referred to his "perverted disposition". It was reported at the time that he had sought advice from the Scientific-Humanitarian Committee, an organization that was campaigning against Paragraph 175 of the German Criminal Code, which prohibited homosexual sex. His father forbade the family from ever mentioning his name again. Waugh, pp. 2223.
*For the primary source, see Hirschfield, Magnus. Jahrbuch fr sexuelle Zwischenstufen, Vol VI, 1904, p. 724, citing an unnamed Berlin newspaper, cited in turn by Bartley, p. 36.
*More details in Waugh, Alexander. "The Wittgensteins: Viennese whirl", The Daily Telegraph, 30 August 2008.
*Also see Gottlieb, Anthony. "A Nervous Splendor", The New Yorker, 9 April 2009. 

 \"I won't say 'See you tomorrow' because that would be like predicting the future, and I'm pretty sure I can't do that.\"  Wittgenstein, 1949 Drury, Recollections p. 160; cf. The Danger of Words (1973) p. ix, xiv) 

The second eldest brother, Kurt, an officer and company director, shot himself on 27 October 1918 at the end of World War I, when the Austrian troops he was commanding refused to obey his orders and deserted en masse. According to Gottlieb, Hermine had said Kurt seemed to carry "the germ of disgust for life within himself". Waugh, p. 128. Later Wittgenstein wrote: "I ought to have... become a star in the sky. Instead of which I have remained stuck on earth." McGuinness, Brian. Wittgenstein: a life : young Ludwig 1889&ndash;1921. University of California Press, 1988, p.156 

==19031906: Realschule in Linz==

===Realschule in Linz===
The Realschule in Linz
Wittgenstein was taught by private tutors at home until he was fourteen years old. Subsequently, for three years, he attended a school. After the deaths of Hans and Rudi, Karl relented, and allowed Paul and Ludwig to be sent to school. Waugh writes that it was too late for Wittgenstein to pass his exams for the more academic Gymnasium in Wiener Neustadt; having had no formal schooling, he failed his entrance exam and only barely managed after extra tuition to pass the exam for the more technically oriented K.u.k. Realschule in Linz, a small state school with 300 pupils. Waugh, p. 33.
*McGuinness, Brian. Wittgenstein: a life : young Ludwig 1889-1921. University of California Press, 1988, p. 51ff.
*K.u.k. stood for "Kaiserlich und kniglich. In 1903, when he was 14, he began his three years of formal schooling there, lodging nearby in term time with the family of a Dr. Srigl, a master at the local gymnasium, the family giving him the nickname Luki. McGuinness, p. 51. 

On starting at the Realschule, Wittgenstein had been moved forward a year. McGuinness, Brian. Wittgenstein: a life : young Ludwig 1889-1921. University of California Press, 1988, p. 51ff. Historian Brigitte Hamann writes that he stood out from the other boys: he spoke an unusually pure form of High German with a stutter, dressed elegantly, and was sensitive and unsociable. Hamann, Brigitte and Thornton, Thomas. Hitler's Vienna: A Dictator's Apprenticeship. Oxford University Press, 2000 (first published 1996 in German) pp. 1516, 79. Monk writes that the other boys made fun of him, singing after him: "Wittgenstein wandelt wehmtig widriger Winde wegen Wienwrts" Monk, pp.1415. ("Wittgenstein strolls wistfully Vienna-wards due to adverse winds"). In his leaving certificate, he received a top mark (5) in religious studies; a 2 for conduct and English, 3 for French, geography, history, mathematics and physics, and 4 for German, chemistry, geometry and freehand drawing. He had particular difficulty with spelling and failed his written German exam because of it. He wrote in 1931: "My bad spelling in youth, up to the age of about 18 or 19, is connected with the whole of the rest of my character (my weakness in study)." 

===Loss of faith===
It was while he was at the Realschule that he decided he had lost his faith in God. Monk, p. 18. He nevertheless believed in the importance of the idea of confession. He wrote in his diaries about having made a major confession to his oldest sister, Hermine, while he was at the Realschule; Monk writes that it may have been about his loss of faith. He also discussed it with Gretl, his other sister, who directed him to Arthur Schopenhauer's The World as Will and Representation. As a teenager, Wittgenstein adopted Schopenhauer's epistemological idealism. However, after his study of the philosophy of mathematics, he abandoned epistemological idealism for Gottlob Frege's conceptual realism. In later years, Wittgenstein was highly dismissive of Schopenhauer, describing him as an ultimately "shallow" thinker: "Schopenhauer has quite a crude mind... where real depth starts, his comes to an end". Culture & Value, p.24, 1933-4 

Wittgenstein's faith would undergo developmental transformations over time, much like his philosophical ideas; his relationship with Christianity and religion, in general, for which he professed a sincere and devoted reverence, was a decidedly complex one. Undoubtedly, amongst other Christian thinkers, Wittgenstein was influenced by St. Augustine, with whom he would occasionally converse in his Philosophical Investigations. Philosophically, Wittgenstein's thought often shows alignment with, if not direct adherence to, religious discourse, with which it shares a notable consistency. Bruce R. Ashford, "Wittgenstein's Theologians: A Survey of Ludwig Wittgenstein's Impact on Theology" For example, Wittgenstein would become one of the century's fiercest critics of Scientism. Ray Monk, "Wittgenstein's Forgotten Lesson" 

===Influence of Otto Weininger===
Austrian philosopher Otto Weininger (18801903)
While a student at the Realschule, Wittgenstein was influenced by Austrian philosopher Otto Weininger's 1903 book Geschlecht und Charakter (Sex and Character).
Weininger (18801903), who was also Jewish, argued that the concepts male and female exist only as Platonic forms, and that Jews tend to embody the platonic femininity. Whereas men are basically rational, women operate only at the level of their emotions and sexual organs. Jews, Weininger argued, are similar, saturated with femininity, with no sense of right and wrong, and no soul. Weininger argues that man must choose between his masculine and feminine sides, consciousness and unconsciousness, Platonic love and sexuality. Love and sexual desire stand in contradiction, and love between a woman and a man is therefore doomed to misery or immorality. The only life worth living is the spiritual oneto live as a woman or a Jew means one has no right to live at all; the choice is genius or death. Weininger committed suicide, shooting himself in 1903, shortly after publishing the book. Monk, pp. 1926. Many years later, as a professor at Cambridge, Wittgenstein distributed copies of Weininger's book to his bemused academic colleagues. He said that Weininger's arguments were wrong, but that it was the way in which they were wrong that was interesting. p216, Philosophical Tales, Cohen, M., Blackwell 2008 

===Jewish background and Hitler===

There is much debate about the extent to which Wittgenstein and his siblings, who were of 3/4 Jewish descent, saw themselves as Jews, and the issue has arisen in particular regarding Wittgenstein's schooldays, because Adolf Hitler was at the same school for part of the same time. For the view that Wittgenstein saw himself as completely German, not Jewish, see McGuinness, Brian. "Wittgenstein and the Idea of Jewishness", and for an opposing view, see Stern, David. "Was Wittgenstein Jewish?", both in James Carl Klagge. Wittgenstein: Biography and Philosophy. Cambridge University Press, 2001, pp. 231ff and p 237ff respectively. Laurence Goldstein argues it is "overwhelmingly probable" the boys met each other: that Hitler would have disliked Wittgenstein, a "stammering, precocious, precious, aristocratic upstart ...". Goldstein, Lawrence. Clear and Queer Thinking: Wittgenstein's Development and his Relevance to Modern Thought. Duckworth, 1999, p. 167ff. Also see "Clear and Queering Thinking", review in Mind, Oxford University Press, 2001. Other commentators have dismissed as irresponsible and uninformed any suggestion that Wittgenstein's wealth and unusual personality may have fed Hitler's antisemitism, in part because there is no indication that Hitler would have seen Wittgenstein as Jewish. McGinn, Marie. "Hi Ludwig", Times Literary Supplement, 26 May 2000. 

Wittgenstein and Hitler were born just six days apart, though Hitler had been held back a year, while Wittgenstein was moved forward by one, so they ended up two grades apart at the Realschule. Hitler started at the school on 17 September 1900, repeated the first year in 1901, and left in the autumn of 1905; see Kersaw, Ian. Hitler, 1889&ndash;1936. W. W. Norton & Company, 2000, p. 16ff.
*McGuinness, Brian. Wittgenstein: a life : young Ludwig 1889-1921. University of California Press, 1988, p. 51ff. Monk estimates they were both at the school during the 19041905 school year, but says there is no evidence they had anything to do with each other. Monk, p. 15.
*Brigitte Hamann argues in Hitler's Vienna (1996) that Hitler was bound to have laid eyes on Wittgenstein, because the latter was so conspicuous, though she told Focus magazine they were in different classes, and she agrees with Monk that they would have had nothing to do with one another. See Hamann, Brigitte and Thornton, Thomas. Hitler's Vienna: A Dictator's Apprenticeship. Oxford University Press, 2000, pp. 1516, 79, and Thiede, Roger. "Phantom Wittgenstein", Focus magazine, 16 March 1998. Several commentators have argued that a school photograph of Hitler may show Wittgenstein in the lower left corner, For examples, see Cornish, Kimberley. The Jew of Linz. Arrow, 1999.
*Blum, Michael; Rollig, Stella; and Nyanga, Steven. "Monument to the birth of the 20th century", Revolver, 2005. Blum's material is also on display in an exhibition in the OK Centrum fr Gegenwartskunst, Linz, and in the Galerija Nova, Zagreb, 2006. Retrieved 9 September 2010, and
*Gibbons, Luke. "An extraordinary family saga", Irish Times, 29 November 2008.
*For an opposing view, see Hamann, Brigitte and Thornton, Thomas. Hitler's Vienna: A Dictator's Apprenticeship. Oxford University Press, 2000, pp. 1516, 79.
*See the full image at the Bundesarchiv. Retrieved 8 September 2010. The archives give the date of the image as circa 1901. but Hamann says the photograph stems from 1900 or 1901, before Wittgenstein's time. Thiede, Roger. "Phantom Wittgenstein", Focus magazine, 16 March 1998.
*The German Federal Archives says the image was taken "circa 1901"; it identifies the class as 1B and the teacher as Oskar Langer. See the full image and description at the Bundesarchiv. Retrieved 6 September 2010. The archive gives the date as circa 1901, but wrongly calls it the Realschule in Leonding, near Linz. Hitler attended primary school in Leonding, but from September 1901 went to the Realschule in Linz itself. See Kershaw, Ian. Hitler, 1889-1936. W. W. Norton & Company, 2000, p. 16ff.
*Christoph Haidacher and Richard Schober write that Langer taught at the school from 1884 until 1901; see Haidacher, Christoph and Schober, Richard. Von Stadtstaaten und Imperien, Universittsverlag Wagner, 2006, p. 140. 

In his own writings See e.g. (MS 154) Wittgenstein frequently referred to himself as Jewish, at times as part of an apparent self-flagellation. For example, while berating himself for being a "reproductive" as opposed to "productive" thinker, he attributed this to his own Jewish sense of identity, writing: "The saint is the only Jewish genius. Even the greatest Jewish thinker is no more than talented. (Myself for instance)." Culture and Value, Ludwig Wittgenstein, (Oxford 1998), page 16e (see also, pages 15e-19e) While Wittgenstein would later claim that "y thoughts are 100% Hebraic", M.O'C. Drury, "Conversations with Wittgenstein", in Recollections of Wittgenstein, ed. R. Rhees, New York: Oxford University Press, revised edition, 1984,p. 161. as Hans Sluga has argued, if so, "his was a self-doubting Judaism, which had always the possibility of collapsing into a destructive self-hatred (as it did in Weininger's case) but which also held an immense promise of innovation and genius." Hans D. Sluga, The Cambridge companion to Wittgenstein, (Cambridge, 1996) page 2 

==19061913: University==

===Engineering at Berlin and Manchester===
The old Technische Hochschule in Charlottenburg, Berlin
He began his studies in mechanical engineering at the Technische Hochschule in Charlottenburg, Berlin, on 23 October 1906, lodging with the family of professor Dr. Jolles. He attended for three semesters, and was awarded a diploma on 5 May 1908. During his time at the Institute, Wittgenstein developed an interest in aeronautics. Monk, p. 27. He arrived at the Victoria University of Manchester in the spring of 1908 to do his doctorate, full of plans for aeronautical projects, including designing and flying his own plane. He conducted research into the behavior of kites in the upper atmosphere, experimenting at a meteorological observation site near Glossop. Monk, p. 29.
 He also worked on the design of a propeller with small jet engines on the end of its blades, something he patented in 1911 and which earned him a research studentship from the university in the autumn of 1908. Monk, pp. 3035. 
Wittgenstein stayed at the Grouse Inn in 1908 while engaged in research near Glossop. 

It was at this time that he became interested in the foundations of mathematics, particularly after reading Bertrand Russell's The Principles of Mathematics (1903), and Gottlob Frege's Grundgesetze der Arithmetik, vol. 1 (1893) and vol. 2 (1903). Beaney, Michael (ed.). The Frege Reader. Blackwell, 1997, pp. 194-223, 258289. Wittgenstein's sister Hermine said he became obsessed with mathematics as a result, and was anyway losing interest in aeronautics. He decided instead that he needed to study logic and the foundations of mathematics, describing himself as in a "constant, indescribable, almost pathological state of agitation". In the summer of 1911 he visited Frege at the University of Jena to show him some philosophy of mathematics and logic he had written, and to ask whether it was worth pursuing. Monk, p. 36ff. He wrote: "I was shown into Frege's study. Frege was a small, neat man with a pointed beard who bounced around the room as he talked. He absolutely wiped the floor with me, and I felt very depressed; but at the end he said 'You must come again', so I cheered up. I had several discussions with him after that. Frege would never talk about anything but logic and mathematics, if I started on some other subject, he would say something polite and then plunge back into logic and mathematics." Kanterian, p. 36. 

===Arrival at Cambridge===
The Wren Library, Trinity College, Cambridge
Wittgenstein wanted to study with Frege, but Frege suggested he attend the University of Cambridge to study under Russell, so on 18 October 1911 Wittgenstein arrived unannounced at Russell's rooms in Trinity College. O'Connor, J.J. and Robertson, E.F. "Ludwig Josef Johann Wittgenstein", St Andrews University. Retrieved 2 September 2010. Russell was having tea with C. K. Ogden, when, according to Russell, "an unknown German appeared, speaking very little English but refusing to speak German. He turned out to be a man who had learned engineering at Charlottenburg, but during this course had acquired, by himself, a passion for the philosophy of mathematics & has now come to Cambridge on purpose to hear me." He was soon not only attending Russell's lectures, but dominating them. The lectures were poorly attended and Russell often found himself lecturing only to C. D. Broad, E. H. Neville, and H. T. J. Norton. Wittgenstein started following him after lectures back to his rooms to discuss more philosophy, until it was time for the evening meal in Hall. Russell grew irritated; he wrote to his lover Lady Ottoline Morrell: "My German friend threatens to be an infliction." McGuinness, Brian. Wittgenstein: A Life : Young Ludwig 18891921. University of California Press, 1988, pp. 8889. 

Russell soon came to believe that Wittgenstein was a genius, especially after he had examined Wittgenstein's written work. He wrote in November 1911 that he had at first thought Wittgenstein might be a crank, but soon decided he was a genius: "Some of his early views made the decision difficult. He maintained, for example, at one time that all existential propositions are meaningless. This was in a lecture room, and I invited him to consider the proposition: 'There is no hippopotamus in this room at present.' When he refused to believe this, I looked under all the desks without finding one; but he remained unconvinced." Three months after Wittgenstein's arrival Russell told Morrell: "I love him & feel he will solve the problems I am too old to solve ... He is the young man one hopes for." Monk, p. 41. The role-reversal between him and Wittgenstein was such that he wrote in 1916, after Wittgenstein had criticized his own work: "His criticism, 'tho I don't think he realized it at the time, was an event of first-rate importance in my life, and affected everything I have done since. I saw that he was right, and I saw that I could not hope ever again to do fundamental work in philosophy." Russell, Bertrand. Autobiography. Routledge, 1998, p. 281. 

===Cambridge Moral Sciences Club and Apostles===
Bertrand Russell, in 1907

In 1912 Wittgenstein joined the Cambridge Moral Sciences Club, an influential discussion group for philosophy dons and students, delivering his first paper there on 29 November that year, a four-minute talk defining philosophy as "all those primitive propositions which are assumed as true without proof by the various sciences." Pitt, Jack. "Russell and the Cambridge Moral Sciences Club", "Russell: the Journal of Bertrand Russell Studies: Vol. 1, issue 2, article 3, winter 1982.
*Also see Klagge, James Carl and Nordmann, Alfred (eds.) Ludwig Wittgenstein: Public and Private Occasions. Rowman & Littlefield, 2003, p. 332, citing Michael Nedo and Michele Ranchetti (eds.). Ludwig Wittgenstein: sein Leben in Bildern und Texten. Suhrkamp, 1983, p. 89. He dominated the society and stopped attending entirely in the early 1930s after complaints that he gave no one else a chance to speak. Edmonds, David and Eidinow, John. Wittgenstein's Poker. Faber and Faber, 2001, p. 2228. 

The club became infamous within popular philosophy because of a meeting on 25 October 1946 at Richard Braithwaite's rooms in King's, where Karl Popper, another Viennese philosopher, had been invited as the guest speaker. Popper's paper was "Are there philosophical problems?", in which he struck up a position against Wittgenstein's, contending that problems in philosophy are real, not just linguistic puzzles as Wittgenstein argued. Accounts vary as to what happened next, but Wittgenstein apparently started waving a hot poker, demanding that Popper give him an example of a moral rule. Popper offered one"Not to threaten visiting speakers with pokers"at which point Russell told Wittgenstein he had misunderstood and Wittgenstein left. Popper maintained that Wittgenstein 'stormed out', but it had become accepted practice for him to leave early (because of his aforementioned ability to dominate discussion). It was the only time the philosophers, three of the most eminent in the world, were ever in the same room together. Eidinow, John and Edmonds, David. "When Ludwig met Karl...", The Guardian, 31 March 2001.
*"Wittgenstein's Poker by David Edmonds and John Eidinow", The Guardian, 21 November 2001. The minutes record that the meeting was "charged to an unusual degree with a spirit of controversy". Minutes of the Wittgenstein's poker meeting, University of Cambridge, shown on Flickr. Retrieved 7 September 2010. 

John Maynard Keynes also invited him to join the Cambridge Apostles, an elite secret society formed in 1820, which both Russell and G. E. Moore had joined as students, but Wittgenstein did not enjoy it and attended infrequently. Russell had been worried that Wittgenstein would not appreciate the group's unseriousness, style of humour, or the fact that the members were in love with one another. McGuinness, Brian. Wittgenstein: A Life: Young Ludwig 1889-1921. University of California Press, 1988, p. 118. He was admitted in 1912 but resigned almost immediately because he could not tolerate the level of the discussion on the Hearth Rug; they took him back though in the 1920s when he returned to Cambridge. (He also had trouble tolerating the discussions in the Moral Sciences Club.)

===Sexual orientation and relationship with David Pinsent===
Wittgenstein later confessed that, as a teenager in Vienna, he had had an affair with a woman. Monk, pp. 369. Wittgenstein is also widely regarded to have fallen in love with at least three men: David Hume Pinsent in 1912, Francis Skinner in 1930, and Ben Richards in the late 1940s. Monk, pp. 583586. Additionally, in the 1920s Wittgenstein became infatuated with a young Swiss woman, Marguerite Respinger, modelling a sculpture of her and proposing marriage, albeit on condition that they did not have children. Monk, pp. 238-40 and 318 

Wittgenstein's relationship with David Pinsent (18911918) occurred during an intellectually formative period, and is well documented. Bertrand Russell introduced Wittgenstein to Pinsent in the summer of 1912. A mathematics undergraduate and descendant of David Hume, Pinsent soon became Wittgenstein's closest friend. Goldstein, Laurence. Clear and queer thinking: Wittgenstein's development and his relevance to modern thought. Rowman & Littlefield, 1999, p. 179. The men worked together on experiments in the psychology laboratory about the role of rhythm in the appreciation of music, and Wittgenstein delivered a paper on the subject to the British Psychological Association in Cambridge in 1912. They also travelled together, including to Iceland in September 1912the expenses paid by Wittgenstein, including first class travel, the hiring of a private train, and new clothes and spending money for Pinsentand later to Norway. Pinsent's diaries provide valuable insights into Wittgenstein's personality - sensitive, nervous and attuned to the tiniest slight or change in mood from Pinsent. Monk, p. 58ff. *See Pinsent, David Hume and Von Wright, G.H. A Portrait of Wittgenstein as a Young Man: From the Diary of David Hume Pinsent 1912-1914. Blackwell, 1990. In his diaries Pinsent wrote about shopping for furniture with Wittgenstein in Cambridge when the latter was given rooms in Trinity; most of what they found in the stores was not minimalist enough for Wittgenstein's aesthetics: "I went and helped him interview a lot of furniture at various shops ... It was rather amusing: he is terribly fastidious and we led the shopman a frightful dance, Vittgenstein ejaculating "NoBeastly!" to 90 percent of what he shewed spelling us!" Kanterian, p. 40. 

He wrote in May 1912 that Wittgenstein had just begun to study the history of philosophy: "e expresses the most naive surprise that all the philosophers he once worshipped in ignorance are after all stupid and dishonest and make disgusting mistakes!" The last time they saw each other was at a Birmingham railway station on 8 October 1913, when they said goodbye before Wittgenstein left to live in Norway.

==19131920: World War I and the Tractatus==

===Work on Logik===
The original manuscript of Wittgenstein's Notes on Logic (1914) on display at the Wren Library, Trinity College, Cambridge
Karl Wittgenstein died on 20 January 1913, and after receiving his inheritance Wittgenstein became one of the wealthiest men in Europe. Monk, p. 71. He donated some of his money, at first anonymously, to Austrian artists and writers, including Rainer Maria Rilke and Georg Trakl. Wittgenstein came to feel that he could not get to the heart of his most fundamental questions while surrounded by other academics, and so in 1913 he retreated to the village of Skjolden in Norway, where he rented the second floor of a house for the winter. He later saw this as one of the most productive periods of his life, writing Logik (Notes on Logic), the predecessor of much of the Tractatus. While in Norway, Wittgenstein learned Norwegian to converse with the local villagers, and Danish to read the works of the Danish philosopher Sren Kierkegaard. Stewart, Jon. (Ed.) Kierkegaard's Influence on Philosophy: German and Scandinavian Philosophy. Ashgate Publishing, 2009, p. 216. 

At Wittgenstein's insistence, Moore, who was now a Cambridge don, visited him in Norway in 1914, reluctantly because Wittgenstein exhausted him. David Edmonds and John Eidinow write that Wittgenstein regarded Moore, an internationally-known philosopher, as an example of how far someone could get in life with "absolutely no intelligence whatever". Monk, p. 262. In Norway it was clear that Moore was expected to act as Wittgenstein's secretary, taking down his notes, with Wittgenstein falling into a rage when Moore got something wrong. When he returned to Cambridge, Moore asked the university to consider accepting Logik as sufficient for a bachelor's degree, but they refused, saying it wasn't formatted properly: no footnotes, no preface. Wittgenstein was furious, writing to Moore in May 1914: "If I am not worth your making an exception for me even in some STUPID details then I may as well go to Hell directly; and if I am worth it and you don't do it thenby Godyou might go there." Monk, p. 103. Moore was apparently distraught; he wrote in his diary that he felt sick and could not get the letter out of his head. McGuinness, Brian. Wittgenstein: A Life : Young Ludwig 1889&ndash;1921. University of California Press, 1988, p. 200. The two did not speak again until 1929. Edmonds, David and Eidinow, John. Wittgenstein's Poker. Faber and Faber, 2001, p. 4546. 

===Military service===
Austro-Hungarian supply line over the Vri pass, on the Italian front, October 1917
On the outbreak of World War I, Wittgenstein immediately volunteered for the Austro-Hungarian Army, first serving on a ship and then in an artillery workshop. In March 1916, he was posted to a fighting unit on the front line of the Russian front, as part of the Austrian 7th Army, where his unit was involved in some of the heaviest fighting, defending against the Brusilov Offensive. Monk, pp.137142. In action against British troops, he was decorated with the Military Merit with Swords on the Ribbon, and was commended by the army for "His exceptionally courageous behaviour, calmness, sang-froid, and heroism", which "won the total admiration of the troops." Waugh, p. 114. In January 1917, he was sent as a member of a howitzer regiment to the Russian front, where he won several more medals for bravery including the Silver Medal for Valour, First Class. In 1918, he was promoted to lieutenant and sent to the Italian front as part of an artillery regiment. For his part in the final Austrian offensive of June 1918, he was recommended for the Gold Medal for Valour, one of the highest honours in the Austrian army, but was instead awarded the Band of the Military Service Medal with Swords  it being decided that this particular action, although extraordinarily brave, had been insufficiently consequential to merit the highest honour. Monk, p. 154. 

Throughout the war, he kept notebooks in which he frequently wrote philosophical reflections alongside personal remarks, including his contempt for the character of the other soldiers. He discovered Leo Tolstoy's The Gospel in Brief at a bookshop in Tarnw, and carried it everywhere, recommending it to anyone in distress, to the point where he became known to his fellow soldiers as "the man with the gospels". Monk, pp. 44, 116, 382384.
*Also see Bill Schardt & David Large, "Wittgenstein, Tolstoy, and the Gospel in Brief", The Philosopher, Volume LXXXIX. 
In 1916 Wittgenstein read Dostoevsky's The Brothers Karamazov so often that he knew whole passages of it by heart, particularly the speeches of the elder Zosima, who represented for him a powerful Christian ideal, a holy man "who could see directly into the souls of other people".
 R. Monk, Wittgenstein: The Duty of Genius (London: Jonathan Cape, 1990), pp. 136.
*Also see Robert Hanna, "Kant, Wittgenstein, and Transcendental Philosophy". 
Russell said he returned from the war a changed man, one with a deeply mystical and ascetic attitude. Monk, p. 183. 

===Completion of the Tractatus===
In the summer of 1918 Wittgenstein took military leave and went to stay in one of his family's Vienna summer houses, Neuwaldegg. It was there in August 1918 that he completed the Tractatus, which he submitted with the title Der Satz (German: proposition, sentence, phrase, set, but also "leap") to the publishers Jahoda and Siegel. Bartley, pp. 3339, 45. 

A series of events around this time left him deeply upset. On 13 August, his uncle Paul died. On 25 October, he learned that Jahoda and Siegel had decided not to publish the Tractatus, and on 27 October, his brother Kurt killed himself, the third of his brothers to commit suicide. It was around this time he received a letter from David Pinsent's mother to say that Pinsent had been killed in a plane crash on 8 May. Bartley, pp. 3334. For an original report, see "Death of D.H. Pinsent", Birmingham Daily Mail, 15 May 1918: "Recovery of the Body. The body of Mr. David Hugh Pinsent, a civilian observer, son of Mr and Mrs Hume Pinsent, of Foxcombe Hill, near Oxford and Birmingham, the second victim of last Wednesday's aeroplane accident in West Surrey, was last night found in the Basingstoke Canal, at Frimley." Courtesy of "Wittgenstein in Birmingham", mikeinmono, 3 August 2009. Retrieved 7 September 2010. Wittgenstein was distraught to the point of being suicidal. He was sent back to the Italian front after his leave and, as a result of the defeat of the Austrian army, was captured by Allied forces on 3 November in Trentino. He subsequently spent nine months in an Italian prisoner of war camp.

He returned to his family in Vienna on 25 August 1919, by all accounts physically and mentally spent. He apparently talked incessantly about suicide, terrifying his sisters and brother Paul. He decided to do two things: to enroll in teacher training college as an elementary school teacher, and to get rid of his fortune. In 1914, it had been providing him with an income of 300,000 Kronen a year, but by 1919 was worth a great deal more, with a sizable portfolio of investments in the United States and the Netherlands. He divided it among his siblings, except for Margarete, insisting that it not be held in trust for him. His family saw him as ill, and acquiesced. 

==19201928: Teaching, the Tractatus, Haus Wittgenstein==

===Teacher training in Vienna===
In September 1919 he enrolled in the Lehrerbildungsanstalt (teacher training college) in the Kundmanngasse in Vienna. His sister Hermine said that Wittgenstein working as an elementary teacher was like using a precision instrument to open crates, but the family decided not to interfere. Monk, p. 169ff. Thomas Bernhard, more critically, wrote of this period in Wittgenstein's life: "the multi-millionaire as a village schoolmaster is surely a piece of perversity." Edmonds, Eidinow, "Wittgenstein's Poker", page 68 

===Teaching posts in Austria===
In the summer of 1920, Wittgenstein worked as a gardener for a monastery. At first he applied, under a false name, for a teaching post at Reichenau, was awarded the job, but he declined it when his identity was discovered. As a teacher, he wished to no longer be recognized as a member of the famous Wittgenstein family. In response, his brother Paul wrote: "It is out of the question, really completely out of the question, that anybody bearing our name and whose elegant and gentle upbringing can be seen a thousand paces off, would not be identified as a member of our family... That one can neither simulate nor dissimulate anything including a refined education I need hardly tell you." Waugh, p. 150 

In 1920, Wittgenstein was given his first job as a primary school teacher in Trattenbach, under his real name, in a remote village of a few hundred people. His first letters describe it as beautiful, but in October 1921, he wrote to Russell: "I am still at Trattenbach, surrounded, as ever, by odiousness and baseness. I know that human beings on the average are not worth much anywhere, but here they are much more good-for-nothing and irresponsible than elsewhere." Klagge, James Carl. Wittgenstein: Biography and Philosophy. Cambridge University Press, 2001, p. 185. He was soon the object of gossip among the villagers, who found him eccentric at best. He did not get on well with the other teachers; when he found his lodgings too noisy, he made a bed for himself in the school kitchen. He was an enthusiastic teacher, offering late-night extra tuition to several of the students, something that did not endear him to the parents, though some of them came to adore him; his sister Hermine occasionally watched him teach and said the students "literally crawled over each other in their desire to be chosen for answers or demonstrations". Malcolm, Norman. "Wittgensteins Confessions", London Review of Books, Vol. 3 No. 21, 19 November 1981. 

To the less able, it seems that he became something of a tyrant. The first two hours of each day were devoted to mathematics, hours that Monk writes some of the pupils recalled years later with horror. Monk, p. 195. They reported that he caned the boys and boxed their ears, and also that he pulled the girls' hair; Bartley, p. 107. This was not unusual at the time for boys, but for the villagers he went too far in doing it to the girls too; girls were not expected to understand algebra, much less have their ears boxed over it. The violence apart, Monk writes that he quickly became a village legend, shouting "Krautsalat!" when the headmaster played the piano, and "Nonsense!" when a priest was answering childrens' questions. Monk, pp. 196, 198. 

===Publication of the Tractatus===

The whole modern conception of the world is founded on the illusion that the so-called laws of nature are the explanations of natural phenomena. Thus people today stop at the laws of nature, treating them as something inviolable, just as God and Fate were treated in past ages. And in fact both were right and both wrong; though the view of the ancients is clearer insofar as they have an acknowledged terminus, while the modern system tries to make it look as if everything were explained 
  Wittgenstein, Tractatus, 6.371-2 

While Wittgenstein was living in isolation in rural Austria, the Tractatus was published to considerable interest, first in German in 1921 as Logisch-Philosophische Abhandlung, part of Wilhelm Ostwald's journal Annalen der Naturphilosophie, though Wittgenstein was not happy with the result and called it a pirate edition. Russell had agreed to write an introduction to explain why it was important, because it was otherwise unlikely to have been published: it was difficult if not impossible to understand, and Wittgenstein was unknown in philosophy. For the introduction, see Russell, Bertrand. Introduction, Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus, May 1922. In a letter to Russell, Wittgenstein wrote "The main point is the theory of what can be expressed (gesagt) by propsi.e. by language(and, which comes to the same thing, what can be thought) and what can not be expressed by pros, but only shown (gezeigt); which, I believe, is the cardinal problem of philosophy." Russell, Nieli. Wittgenstein: From Mysticism to Ordinary Language. SUNY Press, 1987, p. 199. But Wittgenstein was not happy with Russell's help. He had lost faith in Russell, finding him glib and his philosophy mechanistic, and felt he had fundamentally misunderstood the Tractatus. Edmonds, David and Eidinow, John. Wittgenstein's Poker. Faber and Faber, 2001, p. 35ff. 

An English translation was prepared in Cambridge by Frank Ramsey, a mathematics undergraduate at King's commissioned by C. K. Ogden. It was Moore who suggested Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus for the title, an allusion to Baruch Spinoza's Tractatus Theologico-Politicus. Initially there were difficulties in finding a publisher for the English edition too, because Wittgenstein was insisting it appear without Russell's introduction; Cambridge University Press turned it down for that reason. Finally in 1922 an agreement was reached with Wittgenstein that Kegan Paul would print a bilingual edition with Russell's introduction and the Ramsey-Ogden translation. This is the translation that was approved by Wittgenstein, but it is problematic in a number of ways. Wittgenstein's English was poor at the time, and Ramsey was a teenager who had only recently learned German, so philosophers often prefer to use a 1961 translation by David Pears and Brian McGuinness. For example, Ramsey translated "Sachverhalt" and "Sachlage" as "atomic fact" and "state of affairs" respectively. But Wittgenstein discusses non-existent "Sachverhalten", and there cannot be a non-existent fact. Pears and McGuinness made a number of changes, including translating "Sachverhalt" as "state of affairs" and "Sachlage" as "situation". The new translation is often preferred, but some philosophers use the original, in part because Wittgenstein approved it, and because it avoids the idiomatic English of Pears-McGuinness. See:
*White, Roger. Wittgenstein's Tractatus logico-philosophicus. Continuum International Publishing Group, 2006, p. 145.
*For a discussion about the relative merits of the translations, see Morris, Michael Rowland. "Introduction", Routledge philosophy guidebook to Wittgenstein and the Tractatus. Taylor & Francis, 2008; and Nelson, John O. "Is the Pears-McGuinness translation of the Tractatus really superior to Ogden's and Ramsey's?, Philosophical Investigations, 22:2, April 1999.
*See the three versions (Wittgenstein's German, published 1921; Ramsey-Ogden's translation, published 1922; and the Pears-McGuinness translation, published 1961) side by side here , University of Massachusetts. Retrieved 4 September 2010. 

An aim of the Tractatus is to reveal the relationship between language and the world: what can be said about it, and what can only be shown. Wittgenstein argues that language has an underlying logical structure, a structure that provides the limits of what can be said meaningfully, and therefore the limits of what can be thought. The limits of language, for Wittgenstein, are the limits of philosophy. Much of philosophy involves attempts to say the unsayable: "what we can say at all can be said clearly", he argues. Anything beyond thatreligion, ethics, aesthetics, the mysticalcannot be discussed. They are not in themselves nonsensical, but any statement about them must be. Grayling, A. C. Wittgenstein: A Very Short Introduction. Oxford University Press, 2001, p. 16ff. He wrote in the preface: "The book will, therefore, draw a limit to thinking, or rathernot to thinking, but to the expression of thoughts; for, in order to draw a limit to thinking we should have to be able to think both sides of this limit (we should therefore have to be able to think what cannot be thought)." Tractatus (Ogden translation), preface. 

The book is 75 pages long"As to the shortness of the book, I am awfully sorry for it ... If you were to squeeze me like a lemon you would get nothing more out of me", he told Ogdenand presents seven numbered propositions (17), with various sub-levels (1, 1.1, 1.11): For the comment to Ogden, see Monk, p. 207. 

#Die Welt ist alles, was der Fall ist.
#:The world is everything that is the case. The English is from the original Ogden/Ramsey translation. 
# Was der Fall ist, die Tatsache, ist das Bestehen von Sachverhalten.
#:What is the case, the fact, is the existence of atomic facts.
# Das logische Bild der Tatsachen ist der Gedanke.
#:The logical picture of the facts is the thought.
# Der Gedanke ist der sinnvolle Satz.
#:The thought is the signicant proposition.
# Der Satz ist eine Wahrheitsfunktion der Elementarstze.
#:Propositions are truth-functions of elementary propositions.
#Die allgemeine Form der Wahrheitsfunktion ist: . Dies ist die allgemeine Form des Satzes.
#:The general form of a truth-function is: . This is the general form of proposition.
#Wovon man nicht sprechen kann, darber mu man schweigen.
#:Whereof one cannot speak, thereof one must be silent.

===Visit from Frank Ramsey, Puchberg===
Frank P. Ramsey visited Wittgenstein in Puchberg am Schneeberg in September 1923.
In September 1922 he moved to a secondary school in a nearby village, Hassbach, but the people there were just as bad"These people are not human at all but loathsome worms", he wrote to a friendand he left after a month. In November he began work at another primary school, this time in Puchberg in the Schneeberg mountains. There, he told Russell, the villagers were "one-quarter animal and three-quarters human".

Frank P. Ramsey visited him on 17 September 1923 to discuss the Tractatus; he had agreed to write a review of it for Mind. Monk, pp. 212, 214216, 220221. He reported in a letter home that Wittgenstein was living frugally in one tiny whitewashed room that only had space for a bed, washstand, a small table, and one small hard chair. Ramsey shared an evening meal with him of coarse bread, butter, and cocoa. Wittgenstein's school hours were eight to twelve or one, and he had afternoons free. Mellor, D.H. "Cambridge Philosophers I: F. P. Ramsey", Philosophy 70, 1995, pp. 243262. After Ramsey returned to Cambridge a long campaign began among Wittgenstein's friends to persuade him to return to Cambridge and away from what they saw as a hostile environment for him. He was accepting no help even from his family. Ramsey wrote to John Maynard Keynes: "family are very rich and extremely anxious to give him money or do anything for him in any way, and he rejects all their advances; even Christmas presents or presents of invalid's food, when he is ill, he sends back. And this is not because they aren't on good terms but because he won't have any money he hasn't earned ... It is an awful pity." 

===Haidbauer incident, Otterthal===

He moved schools again in September 1924, this time to Otterthal, near Trattenbach; the socialist headmaster, Josef Putre, was someone Wittgenstein had become friends with while at Trattenbach. While he was there, he wrote a 42-page pronunciation and spelling dictionary for the children, Wrterbuch fr Volksschulen, published in Vienna in 1926 by Hlder-Pichler-Tempsky, the only book of his apart from the Tractatus that was published in his lifetime. "Ludwig Wittgenstein: Tractatus and Teaching", Cambridge Wittgenstein archive]. Retrieved 4 September 2010. A first edition sold in 2005 for 75,000. Ezard, John. "Philosopher's rare 'other book' goes on sale", The Guardian, 19 February 2005. 

An incident occurred in April 1926 and became known as Der Vorfall Haidbauer (the Haidbauer incident). Josef Haidbauer was an 11-year-old pupil whose father had died and whose mother worked as a local maid. He was a slow learner, and one day Wittgenstein hit him two or three times on the head, causing him to collapse. Wittgenstein carried him to the headmaster's office, then quickly left the school, bumping into a parent, Herr Piribauer, on the way out. Piribauer had been sent for by the children when they saw Haidbauer collapse; Wittgenstein had previously pulled Piribauer's daughter, Hermine, so hard by the ears that her ears had bled. Monk, pp. 224, 232233. Piribauer said that when he met Wittgenstein in the hall that day: "I called him all the names under the sun. I told him he wasn't a teacher, he was an animal-trainer! And that I was going to fetch the police right away!" 

Piribauer tried to have Wittgenstein arrested, but the village's police station was empty, and when he tried again the next day he was told Wittgenstein had disappeared. On 28 April 1926, Wittgenstein handed in his resignation to Wilhelm Kundt, a local school inspector, who tried to persuade him to stay; however, Wittgenstein was adamant that his days as a schoolteacher were over. Proceedings were initiated in May, and the judge ordered a psychiatric report; in August 1926 a letter to Wittgenstein from a friend, Ludwig Hnsel, indicates that hearings were ongoing, but nothing is known about the case after that. Alexander Waugh writes that Wittgenstein's family and their money may have had a hand in covering things up. Waugh writes that Haidbauer died shortly afterwards of haemophilia; Monk says he died when he was 14 of leukaemia. Waugh, p. 162. Monk, p. 232. 

Ten years later, in 1936, as part of a series of "confessions" he engaged in that year, Wittgenstein appeared without warning at the village saying he wanted to confess personally and ask for pardon from the children he had hit. He visited at least four of the children, including Hermine Piribauer, who apparently replied only with a "Ja, ja", though other former students were more hospitable. Monk writes that the purpose of these confessions was not "to hurt his pride, as a form of punishment; it was to dismantle it &ndash; to remove a barrier, as it were, that stood in the way of honest and decent thought." Of the apologies, Wittgenstein wrote, "This brought me into more settled waters... and to greater seriousness." Monk, pp. 370371. 

===The Vienna Circle===

The Tractatus was now the subject of much debate amongst philosophers, and Wittgenstein was a figure of increasing international fame. In particular, a discussion group of philosophers, scientists and mathematicians, known as the Vienna Circle, had built up largely as a result of the inspiration they had been given by reading the Tractatus. From 1926, with the members of the Vienna Circle, Wittgenstein would take part in many discussions. However, during these discussions, it soon became evident that Wittgenstein held a different attitude towards philosophy than the members of the Circle whom his work had inspired. For example, during meetings of the Vienna Circle, he would express his disagreement with the group's misreading of his work by turning his back to them and reading poetry aloud. The Limits of Scienceand Scientists In his autobiography, Rudolf Carnap describes Wittgenstein as the thinker who gave him the greatest inspiration. However, he also wrote that "there was a striking difference between Wittgenstein's attitude toward philosophical problems and that of Schlick and myself. Our attitude toward philosophical problems was not very different from that which scientists have toward their problems." As for Wittgenstein:

===Haus Wittgenstein===

\"I am not interested in erecting a building, but in presenting to myself the foundations of all possible buildings.\" 
  Wittgenstein Lewis Hyde, Making It, New York Times, 6 April 2008. 

Wittgenstein worked on Haus Wittgenstein between 1926 and 1929.
In 1926, Wittgenstein was again working as a gardener for a number of months, this time at the monastery of Htteldorf, where he had also enquired about becoming a monk. His sister, Margaret, invited him to help with the design of her new townhouse in Vienna's Kundmanngasse. Wittgenstein, his friend Paul Engelmann, and a team of architects developed a spare modernist house. In particular, Wittgenstein focused on the windows, doors, and radiators, demanding that every detail be exactly as he specified. When the house was nearly finished Wittgenstein had an entire ceiling raised 30mm so that the room had the exact proportions he wanted. Monk writes that "This is not so marginal as it may at first appear, for it is precisely these details that lend what is otherwise a rather plain, even ugly house its distinctive beauty.". Jeffries, Stuart. "A dwelling for the gods", The Guardian, 5 January 2002. 

It took him a year to design the door handles, and another to design the radiators. Each window was covered by a metal screen that weighed 150 kg, moved by a pulley Wittgenstein designed. Bernhard Leitner, author of The Architecture of Ludwig Wittgenstein, said there is barely anything comparable in the history of interior design: "It is as ingenious as it is expensive. A metal curtain that could be lowered into the floor." 

The house was finished by December 1928, and the family gathered there at Christmas to celebrate its completion. Wittgenstein's sister Hermine wrote: "Even though I admired the house very much....It seemed indeed to be much more a dwelling for the gods." Hyde, Lewis. "Making It". The New York Times, 6 April 2008. Wittgenstein said "the house I built for Gretl is the product of a decidedly sensitive ear and good manners, and expression of great understanding... But primordial life, wild life striving to erupt into the open - that is lacking." Monk, page 240 Monk comments that the same might be said of the technically excellent, but austere, terracotta sculpture Wittgenstein had modelled of Marguerite Respinger in 1926, and that, as Russell first noticed, this "wild life striving to be in the open" was precisely the substance of Wittgenstein's philosophical work. 

==19291941: Fellowship at Cambridge==

===PhD and fellowship===
At the urging of Ramsey and others, Wittgenstein returned to Cambridge in 1929. Keynes wrote in a letter to his wife: "Well, God has arrived. I met him on the 5.15 train." Monk, p. 255. Despite this fame, he could not initially work at Cambridge as he did not have a degree, so he applied as an advanced undergraduate. Russell noted that his previous residency was sufficient for a PhD, and urged him to offer the Tractatus as his thesis. It was examined in 1929 by Russell and Moore; at the end of the thesis defence, Wittgenstein clapped the two examiners on the shoulder and said, "Don't worry, I know you'll never understand it." Monk, p. 271. Moore wrote in the examiner's report: "I myself consider that this is a work of genius; but, even if I am completely mistaken and it is nothing of the sort, it is well above the standard required for the Ph.D. degree." R. B. Braithwaite George Edward Moore, 1873 - 1958, in Alice Ambrose and Morris Lazerowitz. G.E. Moore: Essays in Retrospect. Allen & Unwin, 1970. Wittgenstein was appointed as a lecturer and was made a fellow of Trinity College.

===Anschluss===

From 1936 to 1937, Wittgenstein lived again in Norway, Ludwig Wittgenstein: Return to Cambridge from the Cambridge Wittgenstein Archive where he worked on the Philosophical Investigations. In the winter of 1936/7, he delivered a series of "confessions" to close friends, most of them about minor infractions like white lies, in an effort to cleanse himself. In 1938, he travelled to Ireland to visit Maurice O'Connor Drury, a friend who became a psychiatrist, and considered such training himself, with the intention of abandoning philosophy for it. The visit to Ireland was at the same time a response to the invitation of the then Irish Taoiseach, amon de Valera, himself a mathematics teacher. De Valera hoped Wittgenstein's presence would contribute to an academy for advanced mathematics.

While he was in Ireland in March 1938, Germany annexed Austria in the Anschluss; the Viennese Wittgenstein was now a citizen of the enlarged Germany and a Jew under the 1935 Nuremberg racial laws, because three of his grandparents had been born as Jews. The Nuremberg Laws classified people as Jews (Volljuden) if they had three or four Jewish grandparents, and as mixed blood (Mischling) if they had one or two. It meant inter alia that the Wittgensteins were restricted in whom they could marry or have sex with, and where they could work. Waugh, pp. 137ff, 204209. 

After the Anschluss, his brother Paul left almost immediately for England, and later the US. The Nazis discovered his relationship with Hilde Schania, a brewer's daughter with whom he had had two children but whom he had never married, though he did later. Because she was not a Jew, he was served with a summons for Rassenschande (racial defilement). He told no one he was leaving the country, except for Hilde who agreed to follow him. He left so suddenly and quietly that for a time people believed he was the fourth Wittgenstein brother to have committed suicide. Waugh, pp. 224226. 

Wittgenstein began to investigate acquiring British or Irish citizenship with the help of Keynes, and apparently had to confess to his friends in England that he had earlier misrepresented himself to them as having just one Jewish grandparent, when in fact he had three. For the view that Wittgenstein saw himself as a Jew, see Stern, David. "Was Wittgenstein Jewish?", in James Carl Klagge. Wittgenstein: Biography and Philosophy. Cambridge University Press, 2001, p. 237ff. 

A few days before the invasion of Poland, Hitler personally granted Mischling status to the Wittgenstein siblings. In 1939 there were 2,100 applications for this, and Hitler granted only 12. Edmonds, David and Eidinow, John. Wittgenstein's Poker. Faber and Faber, 2001, pp. 98, 105. Anthony Gottlieb writes that the pretext was that their paternal grandfather had been the bastard son of a German prince, which allowed the Reichsbank to claim the gold, foreign currency, and stocks held in Switzerland by a Wittgenstein trust. Gretl, an American citizen by marriage, started the negotiations over the racial status of their grandfather, and the family's large foreign currency reserves were used as a bargaining tool. Paul had escaped to Switzerland and then the US in July 1938, and disagreed with the negotiations, leading to a permanent split between the siblings. After the war, when Paul was performing in Vienna, he did not visit Hermine who was dying there, and he had no further contact with Ludwig or Gretl. 

===Professor of philosophy===
After G. E. Moore resigned the chair in philosophy in 1939, Wittgenstein was elected, and acquired British citizenship soon afterwards. In July 1939 he travelled to Vienna to assist Gretl and his other sisters, visiting Berlin for one day to meet an official of the Reichsbank. After this, he travelled to New York to persuade Paul, whose agreement was required, to back the scheme. The required Befreiung was granted in August 1939. The unknown amount signed over to the Nazis by the Wittgenstein family, a week or so before the outbreak of war, included amongst many other assets, 1700 kg of gold. Edmonds, David and Eidinow, John. "Wittgenstein's Poker", Faber and Faber, London 2001, p. 98. There is a report Wittgenstein visited Moscow a second time in 1939, travelling from Berlin, and again met the philosopher Sophia Janowskaya. Moran, John. "Wittgenstein and Russia" New Left Review 73, MayJune 1972, pp. 8396. 

Norman Malcolm, at the time a post-graduate research fellow at Cambridge, describes his first impressions of Wittgenstein in 1938: 

Describing Wittgenstein's lecture program, Malcolm continues: 

After work, Wittgenstein would often relax by watching Westerns, where he preferred to sit at the very front of the cinema, or reading detective stories especially the ones written by Norbert Davis. Ray Monk, Ludwig Wittgenstein: The Duty of Genius, Vintage, London 1991, p. 528 
 Hoffmann, Josef. "Hard-boiled Wit: Ludwig Wittgenstein and Norbert Davis", CADS, no. 44, October 2003. Norman Malcolm wrote that he would rush to the cinema when class ended. Malcolm, p. 26. 

By this time, Wittgenstein's view on the foundations of mathematics had changed considerably. In his early 20s, Wittgenstein had thought logic could provide a solid foundation, and he had even considered updating Russell and Whitehead's Principia Mathematica. Now he denied there were any mathematical facts to be discovered. He gave a series of lectures on mathematics, discussing this and other topics, documented in a book, with lectures by Wittgenstein and discussions between him and several students, including the young Alan Turing. Diamond, Cora (ed.). Wittgenstein's Lectures on the Foundations of Mathematics. University Of Chicago Press, 1989. 

===World War II and Guy's Hospital===
Monk writes that Wittgenstein found it intolerable that a war was going on and he was teaching philosophy. He grew angry when any of his students wanted to become professional philosophers. For his desire that his students not pursue philosophy, see Malcolm, p. 28 

In September 1941 he asked John Ryle, the brother of the philosopher Gilbert Ryle, if he could get a manual job at Guy's Hospital in London. John Ryle was professor of medicine at Cambridge and had been involved in helping Guy's prepare for the Blitz. Wittgenstein told Ryle he would die slowly if left at Cambridge, and he would rather die quickly. He started working at Guy's shortly afterwards as a dispensary porter, meaning that he delivered drugs from the pharmacy to the wardswhere he apparently advised the patients not to take them. 

The hospital staff were not told he was one of the world's most famous philosophers, though some of the medical staff did recognize himat least one had attended Moral Sciences Club meetingsbut they were discreet. "Good God, don't tell anybody who I am!" Wittgenstein begged one of them. Monk, p. 432. Some of them nevertheless called him Professor Wittgenstein, and he was allowed to dine with the doctors. He wrote on 1 April 1942: "I no longer feel any hope for the future of my life. It is as though I had before me nothing more than a long stretch of living death. I cannot imagine any future for me other than a ghastly one. Friendless and joyless." Monk, p. 431ff. 

He had developed a friendship with Keith Kirk, a working-class teenage friend of Francis Skinner, the mathematics undergraduate he had had a relationship with until Skinner's death in 1941 from polio. Skinner had given up academia, thanks at least in part to Wittgenstein's influence, and had been working as a mechanic in 1939, with Kirk as his apprentice. Kirk and Wittgenstein struck up a friendship, with Wittgenstein giving him lessons in physics to help him pass a City and Guilds exam. During his period of loneliness at Guy's he wrote in his diary: "For ten days I've heard nothing more from K, even though I pressed him a week ago for news. I think that he has perhaps broken with me. A tragic thought!" Kirk had in fact got married, and they never saw one another again. Monk, pp. 442443. 

While Wittgenstein was at Guy's he met Basil Reeve, a young doctor with an interest in philosophy, who, with Dr R T Grant, was studying the effect of shock on air-raid casualties. When the blitz ended there were fewer casualties to study and in November 1942 Grant and Reeve moved to the Royal Victoria Infirmary, Newcastle upon Tyne, in order to study road traffic and industrial casualties. Grant offered Wittgenstein a position as a laboratory assistant at a wage of 4 per week, and he lived in Newcastle (at 28 Brandling Park, Jesmond Wittgenstein Upon Tyne Bill Schardt , Newcastle Philosophical Society. Retrieved December 2011 ) from 29 April 1943 until February 1944. Monk, p. 447ff. 

==19471951: Final years==

 \"Death is not an event in life: we do not live to experience death. If we take eternity to mean not infinite temporal duration but timelessness, then eternal life belongs to those who live in the present. Our life has no end in the way in which our visual field has no limits.\" 
  Wittgenstein, Tractatus, 6.431 

He resigned the professorship at Cambridge in 1947 to concentrate on his writing, and in 1947 and 1948 travelled to Ireland, staying at Ross's Hotel in Dublin and at a farmhouse in Red Cross, County Wicklow, where he began the manuscript volume MS 137, Band R. Seeking solitude he moved to "Rosro", a holiday cottage in Connemara owned by Maurice O'Connor-Drury. 

He also accepted an invitation from Norman Malcolm, then professor at Cornell University, to stay with him and his wife for several months at Ithaca, New York. He made the trip in April 1949, although he told Malcolm he was too unwell to do philosophical work: "I haven't done any work since the beginning of March & I haven't had the strength of even trying to do any." A doctor in Dublin had diagnosed anaemia and prescribed iron and liver pills. The details of Wittgenstein's stay in America are recounted in Norman Malcolm's Ludwig Wittgenstein: A Memoir. During his summer in America, Wittgenstein began his epistemological discussions, in particular his engagement with philosophical skepticism, that would eventually become the final fragments On Certainty.
The plaque at "Storey's End", 76 Storey's Way, Cambridge, where Wittgenstein died.
He returned to London, where he was diagnosed with an inoperable prostate cancer, which had spread to his bone marrow. He spent the next two months in Vienna, where his sister Hermine died on 11 February 1950; he went to see her every day, but she was hardly able to speak or recognize him. "Great loss for me and all of us", he wrote. "Greater than I would have thought." He moved around a lot after Hermine's death staying with various friends: to Cambridge in April 1950, where he stayed with G. H. von Wright; to London to stay with Rush Rhees; then to Oxford to see Elizabeth Anscombe, writing to Norman Malcolm that he was hardly doing any philosophy. He went to Norway in August with Ben Richards, then returned to Cambridge, where on 27 November he moved into "Storey's End", at 76 Storey's Way, the home of his doctor, Edward Bevan, and his wife Joan; he had told them he did not want to die in a hospital, so they said he could spend his last days in their home instead. Joan at first was afraid of Wittgenstein, but they soon became good friends. "Ludwig Wittgenstein: Final Years", Cambridge Wittgenstein archive. Retrieved 8 September 2010.
*Also see Malcolm, p. 79ff. 

By the beginning of 1951, it was clear that he had little time left. He wrote a new will in Oxford on 29 January, naming Rhees as his executor, and Anscombe and von Wright his literary administrators, and wrote to Norman Malcolm that month to say, "My mind's completely dead. This isn't a complaint, for I don't really suffer from it. I know that life must have an end once and that mental life can cease before the rest does." Malcolm, p. 79ff. In February he returned to the Bevans' home to work on MS 175 and MS 176. These and other manuscripts were later published as Remarks on Colour and On Certainty. He wrote to Malcolm on 16 April 13 days before his death: "An extraordinary thing happened to me. About a month ago I suddenly found myself in the right frame of mind for doing philosophy. I had been absolutely certain that I'd never again be able to do it. It's the first time after more than 2 years that the curtain in my brain has gone up.Of course, so far I've only worked for about 5 weeks & it may be all over by tomorrow; but it bucks me up a lot now." Malcolm, pp. 8081. 
Wittgenstein's grave at the Ascension Parish Burial Ground in Cambridge

===Death===
Wittgenstein began work on his final manuscript, MS 177, on 25 April 1951. It was his 62nd birthday on 26 April. He went for a walk the next afternoon, and wrote his last entry that day, 27 April. That evening, he became very ill; when his doctor told him he might live only a few days, he reportedly replied, "Good!" Joan stayed with him throughout that night, and just before losing consciousness for the last time on 28 April, he told her: "Tell them I've had a wonderful life". Norman Malcolm describes this as a "strangely moving utterance". 

Four of Wittgenstein's former students arrived at his bedsideBen Richards, Elizabeth Anscombe, Yorick Smythies, and Maurice O'Connor Drury. Anscombe and Smythies were Catholics; and, at the latter's request, a Dominican friar, Father Conrad Pepler, also attended. They were at first unsure what Wittgenstein would have wanted, but then remembered he had said he hoped his Catholic friends would pray for him, so they did, and he was pronounced dead shortly afterwards.

Wittgenstein was given a Catholic burial at Parish of the Ascension Burial Ground in Cambridge. A Guide to Churchill College, Cambridge: text by Dr. Mark Goldie, pages 62 and 63 (2009) Drury later said he had been troubled ever since about whether that was the right thing to do. Monk, pp. 576580. 

On his religious views, Wittgenstein was said to be greatly interested in Catholicism and was sympathetic to it. However, he did not consider himself to be a Catholic. According to Norman Malcolm, Wittgenstein saw Catholicism to be more a way of life rather than as a set of beliefs which he personally held, considering that he did not accept any religious faith. 

Wittgenstein was said to be agnostic, in a qualified sense, in the last years of his life. 

==1953: Publication of the Philosophical Investigations==

Illustration of a "duckrabbit", discussed in the Philosophical Investigations, section XI, part II
The Blue Book, a set of notes dictated to his class at Cambridge in 19331934, contains the seeds of Wittgenstein's later thoughts on language, and is widely read as a turning-point in his philosophy of language.

Philosophical Investigations was published in two parts in 1953. Most of Part I was ready for printing in 1946, but Wittgenstein withdrew the manuscript from his publisher. The shorter Part II was added by his editors, Elizabeth Anscombe and Rush Rhees. Wittgenstein asks the reader to think of language as a multiplicity of language-games within which parts of language develop and function. He argues that philosophical problems are bewitchments that arise from philosophers' misguided attempts to consider the meaning of words independently of their context, usage, and grammar, what he called "language gone on holiday". PI, 38. 

According to Wittgenstein, philosophical problems arise when language is forced from its proper home into a metaphysical environment, where all the familiar and necessary landmarks and contextual clues are removed. He describes this metaphysical environment as like being on frictionless ice: where the conditions are apparently perfect for a philosophically and logically perfect language, all philosophical problems can be solved without the muddying effects of everyday contexts; but where, precisely because of the lack of friction, language can in fact do no work at all. PI, 107. Wittgenstein argues that philosophers must leave the frictionless ice and return to the "rough ground" of ordinary language in use. Much of the Investigations consists of examples of how the first false steps can be avoided, so that philosophical problems are dissolved, rather than solved: "the clarity we are aiming at is indeed complete clarity. But this simply means that the philosophical problems should completely disappear." PI, 133. 

==Legacy==

Wittgenstein left a voluminous archive of unpublished papers, including 83 manuscripts, 46 typescripts and 11 dictations, amounting to an estimated 20 000 pages. Choosing among repeated drafts, revisions, corrections and lose notes editorial work has found nearly one third of the total suitable for print. Stern D., "The Bergen Electronic Edition of Wittgenstein's Nachlass", The European Journal of Philosophy. Vol 18, issue 3, September 2010. An Internet facility hosted at the University of Bergen allows to access images of almost all the material and to search the available transcriptions. The Wittgenstein Archives at the University of Bergen (WAB) In 2011 two new boxes of Wittgenstein papers were found. Cambridge University Press release: Unpublished Wittgenstein Archive explored 

Philosophical Investigations were the only nearly finished project and the book was published in 1953. In 1999, a survey among American university and college teachers ranked the Investigations as the most important book of 20th-century philosophy, standing out as "the one crossover masterpiece in twentieth-century philosophy, appealing across diverse specializations and philosophical orientations". Lackey, Douglas "What Are the Modern Classics? The Baruch Poll of Great Philosophy in the Twentieth Century", Philosophical Forum. 30 (4), December 1999, pp. 329346. For a summary of the poll, see here. Retrieved 3 September 2010. 

The Investigations also ranked 54th on a list of most influential twentieth-century works in cognitive science by the University of Minnesota's Center for Cognitive Sciences. 
Peter Hacker argues that Wittgenstein's influence on 20th century analytic philosophy can be attributed to his early influence on the Vienna Circle and later influence on the Oxford 'ordinary language' school and Cambridge philosophers. 

==Cultural references==
Wittgenstein is the subject of the 1993 film Wittgenstein, by English director Derek Jarman, which is loosely based on his life story as well as his philosophical thinking. The adult Wittgenstein is played by the Welsh actor Karl Johnson.

In the 2003 novel The Oxford Murders and in the film of the same name, the characters play with the idea of knowing the truth, in this case about a series of mathematically-linked murders. The two main characters are logicians - one a professor who studies and supports Wittgenstein's work, and the other his student, who disagrees.

Critic Terry Eagleton has described Wittgenstein as the philosopher of poets and composers, playwrights and novelists. For ethical and religious themes, see Barrett, Cyril. Wittgenstein on Ethics and Religious Belief. Blackwell, 1991, p. 138. 
*For Wittgenstein's philosophy as therapy, see: Peterman, James F. Philosophy as Therapy, SUNY Press, 1992, p. 13,ff.
*For the poetic and literary quality of his work, see: Perloff, Marjorie. Wittgenstein's Ladder: Poetic Language and the Strangeness of the Ordinary, University of Chicago Press, 1999; and Gibson, John and Wolfgang Huemer (eds.). The Literary Wittgenstein, Psychology Press, 2004, p 2.
*See also: Eagleton, Terry. "My Wittgenstein" in Stephen Regan (ed.). The Eagleton Reader, Wiley-Blackwell, 1997, pp. 337,ff

James Burke's The Day the Universe Changed contains a story: Someone apparently went up to the great philosopher Wittgenstein and said "What a lot of morons back in the Middle Ages must have been to have looked, every morning, at the dawn and to have thought what they were seeing was the Sun going around the Earth," when every school kid knows that the Earth goes around the Sun, to which Wittgenstein replied "Yeah, but I wonder what it would have looked like if the Sun had been going around the Earth?" Burke's point is that it "would have looked exactly the same: you see what your knowledge tells you you're seeing." The Day the Universe Changed at Documentary-Video; distributed by Ambrose Video Publishing, Inc., New York, NY 

==Works==

A collection of Ludwig Wittgenstein's manuscripts is held by Trinity College, Cambridge.
* Logisch-Philosophische Abhandlung, Annalen der Naturphilosophie, 14 (1921)
**Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus, translated by C.K. Ogden (1922)
* Philosophische Untersuchungen (1953)
** Philosophical Investigations, translated by G.E.M. Anscombe (1953)
* Bemerkungen ber die Grundlagen der Mathematik, ed. by G.H. von Wright, R. Rhees, and G.E.M. Anscombe (1956), a selection of his work on the philosophy of logic and mathematics between 1937 and 1944.
** Remarks on the Foundations of Mathematics, translated by G.E.M. Anscombe, rev. ed. (1978)
* Bemerkungen ber die Philosophie der Psychologie, ed. G.E.M. Anscombe and G.H. von Wright (1980)
** Remarks on the Philosophy of Psychology, Vols. 1 and 2, translated by G.E.M. Anscombe, ed. G.E.M. Anscombe and G.H. von Wright (1980), a selection of which makes up Zettel.
* The Blue and Brown Books (1958), notes dictated in English to Cambridge students in 19331935.
* Philosophische Bemerkungen, ed. by Rush Rhees (1964)
** Philosophical Remarks (1975)
** Philosophical Grammar (1978)
* Bemerkungen ber die Farben, ed. by G.E.M. Anscombe (1977)
** Remarks on Colour (1991), remarks on Goethe's Theory of Colours.
*On Certainty, collection of aphorisms discussing the relation between knowledge and certainty, extremely influential in the philosophy of action.
*Culture and Value, collection of personal remarks about various cultural issues, such as religion and music, as well as critique of Sren Kierkegaard's philosophy.
*Zettel, collection of Wittgenstein's thoughts in fragmentary/"diary entry" format as with On Certainty and Culture and Value.

;Works online
*Review of P. Coffey's Science of Logic (1913): a polemical book review, written in 1912 for the March 1913 issue of The Cambridge Review when Wittgenstein was an undergraduate studying with Russell. The review is the earliest public record of Wittgenstein's philosophical views.
*Wittgenstein Source: 5 000 pages of the Wittgenstein Nachlass online
*
*Google Edition of Remarks on Colour
*Some Remarks on Logical Form
*Cambridge (19323) lecture notes
*The Blue Book
*Lecture on Ethics
*

==See also==

*International Wittgenstein Symposium

==Notes==

==References==

*Bartley, William Warren. Wittgenstein. Open Court, 1994, first published 1973.
*Barrett, Cyril. Wittgenstein on Ethics and Religious Belief. Blackwell, 1991.
*Beaney, Michael (ed.). The Frege Reader. Blackwell, 1997.
*Braithwaite, R.B. "George Edward Moore, 1873 - 1958", in Alice Ambrose and Morris Lazerowitz. (eds.). G.E. Moore: Essays in Retrospect. Allen & Unwin, 1970.
*Diamond, Cora (ed.). Wittgenstein's Lectures on the Foundations of Mathematics. University Of Chicago Press, 1989.
*Creegan, Charles. Wittgenstein and Kierkegaard: Religion, Individuality and Philosophical Method. Routledge, 1989.
*Drury, Maurice O'Connor et al. The Danger of Words and Writings on Wittgenstein. Routledge and Kegan Paul, 1973.
*Drury, Maurice O'Connor. "Conversations with Wittgenstein", in Rush Rhees (ed.). Recollections of Wittgenstein: Hermine Wittgenstein--Fania Pascal--F.R. Leavis--John King--M. O'C. Drury. Oxford University Press, 1984.
*Edmonds, David and Eidinow, John. Wittgenstein's Poker. Ecco, 2001.
*Edwards, James C. Ethics Without Philosophy: Wittgenstein and the Moral Life. University Presses of Florida, 1982.
*Gellner, Ernest. Words and Things. Routledge & Kegan Paul, 1979, originally published 1959.
*Goldstein, Laurence. Clear and Queer Thinking: Wittgenstein's Development and his Relevance to Modern Thought. Rowman & Littlefield, 1999.
*Hamann, Brigitte and Thornton, Thomas. Hitler's Vienna: A Dictator's Apprenticeship. Oxford University Press, 2000.
*Kanterian, Edward. Ludwig Wittgenstein. Reaktion Books, 2007.
*Klagge, James Carl. Wittgenstein: Biography and Philosophy. Cambridge University Press, 2001.
*Klagge, James Carl and Nordmann, Alfred (eds.). Ludwig Wittgenstein: Public and Private Occasions. Rowman & Littlefield, 2003.
*Kripke, Saul. on Rules and Private Language|Wittgenstein on rules and private language: an elementary exposition]. Harvard University Press, 1982.
*Leitner, Bernhard. The Architecture of Ludwig Wittgenstein: A Documentation. Press of the Nova Scotia College of Art and Design, 1973.
*Malcolm, Norman. Ludwig Wittgenstein: A Memoir. Oxford University Press, 1958.
*McGuinness, Brian. Wittgenstein: A Life : Young Ludwig 1889-1921. University of California Press, 1988.
*Monk, Ray. Ludwig Wittgenstein: The Duty of Genius. Free Press, 1990.
*Nedo, Michael and Ranchetti, Michele (eds.). Ludwig Wittgenstein: sein Leben in Bildern und Texten. Suhrkamp, 1983.
*Perloff, Marjorie. Wittgenstein's Ladder: Poetic Language and the Strangeness of the Ordinary. University of Chicago Press, 1996.
*Peterman, James F. Philosophy as therapy. SUNY Press, 1992.
*Russell, Bertrand. Autobiography. Routledge, 1998.
*Russell, Bertrand. "Introduction", Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus, May 1922.
*Shanker, S., & Shanker, V. A. (eds.). Ludwig Wittgenstein: Critical Assessments. Croom Helm, 1986.
*Sluga, Hans D. (ed.). The Cambridge Companion to Wittgenstein. Cambridge University Press, 1996.
*Waugh, Alexander. The House of Wittgenstein: A Family at War. Random House of Canada, 2008.
*Whitehead, Alfred North and Russell, Bertrand. Principia Mathematica. Cambridge University Press, first published 1910.

==Further reading==

; Bergen and Cambridge archives
* Wittgenstein Archives at the University of Bergen. Retrieved 16 September 2010.
:* Wittgenstein News, University of Bergen. Retrieved 16 September 2010.
:* Wittgenstein Source, University of Bergen. Retrieved 16 September 2010.
* The Cambridge Wittgenstein Archive. Retrieved 16 September 2010.

; Papers about his Nachlass
*Stern, David. "The Bergen Electronic Edition of Wittgenstein's Nachlass", The European Journal of Philosophy. Vol 18, issue 3, September 2010.
*Von Wright. G.H. "The Wittgenstein Papers", The Philosophical Review. 78, 1969.

;Other
*Baker, G.P. and Hacker, P.M.S. Wittgenstein: Understanding and Meaning. Blackwell, 1980.
*Baker, G.P. and Hacker, P.M.S. Wittgenstein: Rules, Grammar, and Necessity. Blackwell, 1985.
*Baker, G.P. and Hacker, P.M.S. Wittgenstein: Meaning and Mind. Blackwell, 1990.
*Brockhaus, Richard R. Pulling Up the Ladder: The Metaphysical Roots of Wittgenstein's Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus. Open Court, 1990.
*Conant, James F. "Putting Two and Two Together: Kierkegaard, Wittgenstein and the Point of View for Their Work as Authors" in The Grammar of Religious Belief, edited by D.Z. Phillips. St. Martins Press, NY: 1996
*Engelmann, Paul. Letters from Ludwig Wittgenstein. Basil Blackwell, 1967
*Fraser, Giles. "Investigating Wittgenstein, part 1: Falling in love", The Guardian, 25 January 2010.
*Grayling, A. C. Wittgenstein: A Very Short Introduction. Oxford University Press, 2001.
*Hacker, P.M.S. Insight and Illusion: Themes in the Philosophy of Wittgenstein. Clarendon Press, 1986.
*Hacker, P.M.S. "Wittgenstein, Ludwig Josef Johann", in Ted Honderich (ed.). The Oxford Companion to Philosophy. Oxford University Press, 1995.
*Hacker, P.M.S. Wittgenstein's Place in Twentieth Century Analytic Philosophy. Blackwell, 1996.
*Hacker, P.M.S. Wittgenstein: Mind and Will. Blackwell, 1996.
*Jormakka, Kari. "The Fifth Wittgenstein", Datutop 24, 2004, a discussion of the connection between Wittgenstein's architecture and his philosophy.
*Levy, Paul. Moore: G.E. Moore and the Cambridge Apostles. Weidenfeld & Nicholson, 1979.
* Luchte, James. "Under the Aspect of Time (sub specie temporis): Heidegger, Wittgenstein, and the Place of the Nothing", Philosophy Today, Volume 53, Number 2 (Spring, 2009)
* Lurie, Yuval. Wittgenstein on the Human Spirit.. Rodopi, 2012.
*McGuinness, Brian. Wittgenstein in Cambridge: Letters and Documents 1911-1951. Wiley-Blackwell, 2008.
*Padilla Glvez, J., Wittgenstein, from a New Point of View. Wittgenstein-Studien. Frankfurt a.M.: Lang, 2003. ISBN 3-631-50623-6.
*Padilla Glvez, J., Philosophical Anthropology. Wittgenstein's Perspectives. Frankfurt a. M.: Ontos Verlag, 2010. ISBN 978-3-86838-067-5.
*Monk, Ray. How To Read Wittgenstein. Norton, 2005.
*Pears, David F. "A Special Supplement: The Development of Wittgensteins Philosophy", The New York Review of Books, 10 July 1969.
*Pears, David F. The False Prison, A Study of the Development of Wittgenstein's Philosophy, Volumes 1 and 2. Oxford University Press, 1987 and 1988.
*Richter, Duncan J. "Ludwig Wittgenstein (18891951)", Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy, 30 August 2004. Retrieved 16 September 2010.
*Scheman, Naomi and O'Connor, Peg (eds.). Feminist Interpretations of Ludwig Wittgenstein. Penn State Press, 2002.
*Schnbaumsfeld, Genia. A Confusion of the Spheres: Kierkegaard and Wittgenstein on Philosophy and Religion. Oxford University Press, 2007.
*Xanthos, Nicolas, "Wittgenstein's Language Games", in Louis Hebert (dir.), Signo (online), Rimouski (Quebec, Canada), 2006.

;Works referencing Wittgenstein
*Doctorow, E. L. City of God. Plume, 2001, depicts an imaginary rivalry between Wittgenstein and Einstein.
*Doxiadis, Apostolos and Papadimitriou, Christos. Logicomix. Bloomsbury, 2009.
*Duffy, Bruce. The World as I Found It. Ticknor & Fields, 1987, a recreation of Wittgenstein's life.
*Jarman, Derek. Wittgenstein, a biopic of Wittgenstein with a script by Terry Eagleton, British Film Institute, 1993.
*Kerr, Philip. A Philosophical Investigation, Chatto & Windus, 1992, a dystopian thriller set in 2012.
*Markson, David. Wittgenstein's Mistress. Dalkey Archive Press, 1988, an experimental novel, a first-person account of what it would be like to live in the world of the Tractatus.
*Wallace, David Foster. The Broom of the System. Penguin Books, 1987, a novel.

==External links==

* Trinity College Chapel
* 
* 
* Chronology of Wittgenstein's Life and Work (constructed day-by-day, one hundred years on)
* BBC Radio 4 programme on Wittgenstein (listen online)

 

* Wittgenstein, Ludwig



[[Luxemburg]]

Luxemburg may refer to:

==Geography==
* Luxembourg (European country)
* Luxembourg (city) (the capital of the country)
* Luxembourg (province) (Belgian Province)
* Luxemburg, Wisconsin
* Luxemburg, Iowa

==People==
* Rosa Luxemburg (Polish-Jewish-German Marxist theorist, socialist philosopher, and revolutionary)
* Wilhelmus Luxemburg (mathematician)



[[West Low German]]

West Low German, also known as Low Saxon (, ), is a group of dialects spoken in the northwest of Germany and adjacent territories of The Netherlands and Denmark. Together with East Low German it forms the Low German dialect group (German: Niederdeutsch or Plattdeutsch, Dutch: Nederduits).

==Extent==
The language area comprises the North German states of Lower Saxony, North Rhine-Westphalia (the Westphalian part), Bremen, Hamburg, Schleswig-Holstein and Saxony-Anhalt (the northwestern areas around Magdeburg) as well as the northeast of The Netherlands (i.e. Dutch Low Saxon, spoken in Groningen, Drenthe, Overijssel and northern Gelderland) and the Schleswigsch dialect spoken by the North Schleswig Germans in the southernmost part of Denmark.

In the south the Benrath line and Uerdingen line isoglosses form the border with the area, where West Central German variants of High German are spoken.

==List of dialects==

===Germany===
*West Low German
**Westphalian language around Mnster, including the Osnabrck region of Lower Saxony
**Eastphalian language, spoken in southeastern Lower Saxony (Hanover, Braunschweig, Gttingen) and in the Magdeburg Brde region
**Northern Low Saxon
***Schleswigsch Noble, Cecil A. M. (1983). Modern German dialects New York , Lang, p. 103-104 
***Holsteinisch Noble, Cecil A. M. (1983). Modern German dialects New York , Lang, p. 103-104 
****Hamburgisch
***Ollnborger Platt in the Oldenburg region Noble, Cecil A. M. (1983). Modern German dialects New York , Lang, p. 103-104 
***East Frisian Low Saxon in East Frisia Noble, Cecil A. M. (1983). Modern German dialects New York , Lang, p. 103-104 
***North Hanoveranian Noble, Cecil A. M. (1983). Modern German dialects New York , Lang, p. 103-104 
***Dithmarsch Noble, Cecil A. M. (1983). Modern German dialects New York , Lang, p. 103-104 
***Emslndisch Noble, Cecil A. M. (1983). Modern German dialects New York , Lang, p. 103-104 
Low Saxon language area in the Netherlands

===The Netherlands===

While Dutch is classified as a Low Franconian language, the Dutch Low Saxon varieties, which are also defined as Dutch dialects, form a dialect continuum with the Westphalian language. They consist of:
* Westerkwartiers, in western Groningen
* Gronings, in Groningen and northern Drenthe, by its Frisian substratum related to Friso-Saxon dialects
* Stellingwarfs in southeastern Friesland
* Midden-Drents
* Zuud-Drents
* Tweants and Tweants-Groafschops in the Twente region of Overijssel and the adjacent Achterhoek region of Gelderland
* Gelders-Overijssels
** Achterhooks
** Sallaans in the Salland region of western Overijssel
** Urkers on the former island of Urk in Flevoland
* Veluws in the Veluwe region of Gelderland

===Denmark===
* Schleswigsch dialect spoken in former South Jutland County (the northern part of the former Duchy of Schleswig) around Aabenraa (Apenrade)

== References ==



[[Lanthanum]]

Lanthanum is a chemical element with the symbol La and atomic number 57. Lanthanum is a silvery white metallic element and is the first element of the lanthanide series (or, on occasion, considered the first element of the 6th-period transition metals). It is found in some rare-earth minerals, usually in combination with cerium and other rare earth elements. Lanthanum is a malleable, ductile, and soft metal that oxidizes rapidly when exposed to air. It is produced from the minerals monazite and bastnsite using a complex multistage extraction process. Lanthanum compounds have numerous applications as catalysts, additives in glass, carbon lighting for studio lighting and projection, ignition elements in lighters and torches, electron cathodes, scintillators, tig welding electrodes, and others. Lanthanum carbonate (La2(CO3)3) has been approved as a medicine for treating renal failure.

==Properties==
===Physical properties===
Lanthanum is a soft, malleable, silvery white metal which has hexagonal crystal structure at room temperature. At 310 C, lanthanum changes to a face-centered cubic structure, and at 865 C into a body-centered cubic structure. Lanthanum is easily oxidized (a centimeter-sized sample will completely oxidize within a year) and is therefore used in elemental form only for research purposes. For example, single lanthanum atoms have been isolated by implanting them into fullerene molecules. If carbon nanotubes are filled with those lanthanum-encapsulated fullerenes and annealed, metallic nanochains of lanthanum are produced inside carbon nanotubes. 

===Chemical properties===
Lanthanum exhibits two oxidation states, +3 and +2, the former being much more stable. For example, LaH3 is more stable than LaH2. Lanthanum burns readily at 150 C to form lanthanum(III) oxide:

: 4 La + 3 O2  2 La2O3

However, when exposed to moist air at room temperature, lanthanum oxide forms a hydrated oxide with a large volume increase. 

Lanthanum is quite electropositive and reacts slowly with cold water and quite quickly with hot water to form lanthanum hydroxide:

:2 La (s) + 6 H2O (l)  2 La(OH)3 (aq) + 3 H2 (g)

Lanthanum metal reacts with all the halogens. The reaction is vigorous if conducted above 200 C:
:2 La (s) + 3 F2 (g)  2 LaF3 (s)
:2 La (s) + 3 Cl2 (g)  2 LaCl3 (s)
:2 La (s) + 3 Br2 (g)  2 LaBr3 (s)
:2 La (s) + 3 I2 (g)  2 LaI3 (s)

Lanthanum dissolves readily in dilute sulfuric acid to form solutions containing the La(III) ions, which exist as 3+ complexes: 

:2 La(s) + 3 H2SO4 (aq)  2 La3+(aq) + 3 SO (aq) + 3 H2 (g)

Lanthanum combines with nitrogen, carbon, sulfur, phosphorus, boron, selenium, silicon and arsenic at elevated temperatures, forming binary compounds. 
The electron configuration of the colourless La3+ ion is 4f0. 

===Isotopes===

Naturally occurring lanthanum is composed of one stable (139La) and one radioactive (138La) isotope, with the stable isotope, 139La, being the most abundant (99.91% natural abundance). 38 radioisotopes have been characterized with the most stable being 138La with a half-life of 1.05&times;1011 years, and 137La with a half-life of 60,000 years. Most of the remaining radioactive isotopes have half-lives that are less than 24 hours, and the majority of these have half-lives less than 1 minute. This element also has three meta states.

The isotopes of lanthanum range in atomic weight from 117 u (117La) to 155 u (155La).

== History ==
The word lanthanum comes from the Greek  = to lie hidden.
Lanthanum was discovered in 1839 by Swedish chemist Carl Gustav Mosander, when he partially decomposed a sample of cerium nitrate by heating and treating the resulting salt with dilute nitric acid. From the resulting solution, he isolated a new rare earth he called lantana. Lanthanum was isolated in relatively pure form in 1923. 

Lanthanum is the most strongly basic of all the trivalent lanthanides, and it was this property that allowed Mosander to isolate and purify the salts of this element. Basicity separation as operated commercially involved the fractional precipitation of the weaker bases (such as didymium) from nitrate solution by the addition of magnesium oxide or dilute ammonia gas. Purified lanthanum remained in solution. (The basicity methods were only suitable for lanthanum purification; didymium could not be efficiently further separated in this manner.) The alternative technique of fractional crystallization was invented by Dmitri Mendeleev, in the form of the double ammonium nitrate tetrahydrate, which he used to separate the less-soluble lanthanum from the more-soluble didymium in the 1870s. This system was used commercially in lanthanum purification until the development of practical solvent extraction methods that started in the late 1950s. (A detailed process using the double ammonium nitrates to provide 99.99% pure lanthanum, neodymium concentrates and praseodymium concentrates is presented in Callow 1967, at a time when the process was just becoming obsolete.) As operated for lanthanum purification, the double ammonium nitrates were recrystallized from water. When later adapted by Carl Auer von Welsbach for the splitting of didymium, nitric acid was used as a solvent to lower the solubility of the system. Lanthanum is relatively easy to purify, since it has only one adjacent lanthanide, cerium, which itself is very readily removed due to its potential tetravalency.

The fractional crystallization purification of lanthanum as the double ammonium nitrate was sufficiently rapid and efficient, that lanthanum purified in this manner was not expensive. The Lindsay Chemical Division of American Potash and Chemical Corporation, for a while the largest producer of rare earths in the world, in a price list dated October 1, 1958 priced 99.9% lanthanum ammonium nitrate (oxide content of 29%) at $3.15 per pound, or $1.93 per pound in 50-pound quantities. The corresponding oxide (slightly purer at 99.99%) was priced at $11.70 or $7.15 per pound for the two quantity ranges. The price for their purest grade of oxide (99.997%) was $21.60 and $13.20, respectively.

== Occurrence ==

Monazite
Although lanthanum belongs to the element group called rare earth metals, it is not rare at all. Lanthanum is available in relatively large quantities (32 ppm in Earths crust). "Rare earths" got their name because they were indeed rare as compared to the "common" earths such as lime or magnesia, and historically only a few deposits were known. Lanthanum is taken into consideration as a rare earth metal because the process to mine is difficult, time consuming and expensive. 

Monazite (Ce, La, Th, Nd, Y)PO4, and bastnsite (Ce, La, Y)CO3F, are the principal ores in which lanthanum occurs, in percentages of up to 25 to 38 percent of the total lanthanide content. In general, there is more lanthanum in bastnsite than in monazite. Until 1949, bastnsite was a rare and obscure mineral, not even remotely contemplated as a potential commercial source for lanthanides. In that year, the large deposit at the Mountain Pass rare earth mine in California was discovered. This discovery alerted geologists to the existence of a new class of rare earth deposit, the rare-earth bearing carbonatite, other examples of which soon surfaced, particularly in Africa and China.

==Production==

730px

Lanthanum is most commonly obtained from monazite and bastnsite. The mineral mixtures are crushed and ground. Monazite, because of its magnetic properties, can be separated by repeated electromagnetic separation. After separation, it is treated with hot concentrated sulfuric acid to produce water-soluble sulfates of rare earths. The acidic filtrates are partially neutralized with sodium hydroxide to pH 3-4. Thorium precipitates out of solution as hydroxide and is removed. After that, the solution is treated with ammonium oxalate to convert rare earths to their insoluble oxalates. The oxalates are converted to oxides by annealing. The oxides are dissolved in nitric acid that excludes one of the main components, cerium, whose oxide is insoluble in HNO3. Lanthanum is separated as a double salt with ammonium nitrate by crystallization. This salt is relatively less soluble than other rare earth double salts and therefore stays in the residue. 

The most efficient separation routine for lanthanum salt from the rare-earth salt solution is, however, ion exchange. In this process, rare-earth ions are adsorbed onto suitable ion-exchange resin by exchange with hydrogen, ammonium or cupric ions present in the resin. The rare earth ions are then selectively washed out by a suitable complexing agent, such as ammonium citrate or nitrilotriacetate. Lanthanum can also be separated from a solution of rare earth nitrates by liquid-liquid extraction with a suitable organic liquid, such as tributyl phosphalate. Currently, the most widely used extractant for the purification of lanthanum and the other lanthanides is the 2-ethylhexyl ester of 2-ethylhexylphosphonic acid; this has better handling characteristics than the previously used bis-2-ethylhexyl phosphate.

Lanthanum metal is obtained from its oxide by heating it with ammonium chloride or fluoride and hydrofluoric acid at 300-400 C to produce the chloride or fluoride:

:La2O3 + 6 NH4Cl  2 LaCl3 + 6 NH3 + 3 H2O

This is followed by reduction with alkali or alkaline earth metals in vacuum or argon atmosphere:

:LaCl3 + 3 Li  La + 3 LiCl

Also, pure lanthanum can be produced by electrolysis of molten mixture of anhydrous LaCl3 and NaCl or KCl at elevated temperatures. 

== Applications ==
A Coleman white gas lantern mantle burning at full brightness.
The first historical application of lanthanum was in gas lantern mantles. Carl Auer von Welsbach used a mixture of 60% magnesium oxide, 20% lanthanum oxide and 20% yttrium oxide which he called Actinophor, and patented in 1885. The original mantles gave a green-tinted light and were not very successful, and his first company, which established a factory in Atzgersdorf in 1887, failed in 1889. 

Modern uses of lanthanum include:
LaB6 hot cathode
Comparison of infrared transmittance of ZBLAN glass and silica
* One material used for anodic material of nickel-metal hydride batteries is La(Ni3.6Mn0.4Al0.3Co0.7. Due to high cost to extract the other lanthanides a mischmetal with more than 50% of lanthanum is used instead of pure lanthanum. The compound is an intermetallic component of the AB5 type. 
As most hybrid cars use nickel-metal hydride batteries, massive quantities of lanthanum are required for the production of hybrid automobiles. A typical hybrid automobile battery for a Toyota Prius requires 10 to 15 kg (22-33 lb) of lanthanum. As engineers push the technology to increase fuel mileage, twice that amount of lanthanum could be required per vehicle. 
* Hydrogen sponge alloys can contain lanthanum. These alloys are capable of storing up to 400 times their own volume of hydrogen gas in a reversible adsorption process. Heat energy is released every time they do so; therefore these alloys have possibilities in energy conservation systems. 
* Mischmetal, a pyrophoric alloy used in lighter flints, contains 25% to 45% lanthanum. 
* Lanthanum oxide and the boride are used in electronic vacuum tubes as hot cathode materials with strong emissivity of electrons. Crystals of LaB6 are used in high brightness, extended life, thermionic electron emission sources for electron microscopes and Hall effect thrusters. 
* Lanthanum fluoride (LaF3) is an essential component of a heavy fluoride glass named ZBLAN. This glass has superior transmittance in the infrared range and is therefore used for fiber-optical communication systems. 
* Cerium doped lanthanum bromide and lanthanum chloride are the recent inorganic scintillators which have a combination of high light yield, best energy resolution and fast response. Their high yield converts into superior energy resolution; moreover, the light output is very stable and quite high over a very wide range of temperatures, making it particularly attractive for high temperature applications. These scintillators are already widely used commercially in detectors of neutrons or gamma rays. 
* Carbon arc lamps use a mixture of rare earth elements to improve the light quality. This application, especially by the motion picture industry for studio lighting and projection, consumed about 25% of the rare-earth compounds produced until the phase out of Carbon arc lamps. 
* Lanthanum(III) oxide (La2O3) improves the alkali resistance of glass, and is used in making special optical glasses, such as infrared-absorbing glass, as well as camera and telescope lenses, because of the high refractive index and low dispersion of rare-earth glasses. Lanthanum oxide is also used as a grain growth additive during the liquid phase sintering of silicon nitride and zirconium diboride. 
* Small amounts of lanthanum added to steel improves its malleability, resistance to impact and ductility. Whereas addition of lanthanum to molybdenum decreases its hardness and sensitivity to temperature variations. 
* Small amounts of lanthanum are present in many pool products to remove the phosphates that feed algae. 
* Lanthanum oxide additive to tungsten is used in gas tungsten arc welding electrodes, as a substitute for radioactive thorium. 
* Various compounds of lanthanum and other rare-earth elements (oxides, chlorides, etc.) are components of various catalysis, such as petroleum cracking catalysts. 
* Lanthanum-barium radiometric dating is used to estimate age of rocks and ores, though the technique has limited popularity. 
* Lanthanum carbonate was approved as a medication (Fosrenol, Shire Pharmaceuticals) to absorb excess phosphate in cases of end-stage renal failure. 
* Lanthanum fluoride is used in phosphor lamp coatings. Mixed with europium fluoride, it is also applied in the crystal membrane of fluoride ion-selective electrodes. 
* Like horseradish peroxidase, lanthanum is used as an electron-dense tracer in molecular biology. 
* Lanthanum modified bentonite (or phoslock) is used to remove phosphates from water in lake treatments 

==Biological role==
Lanthanum has no known biological role. The element is very poorly absorbed after oral administration and when injected its elimination is very slow. Lanthanum carbonate was approved as a medication named Fosrenol to absorb excess phosphate in cases of end-stage renal failure. 

While lanthanum has pharmacological effects on several receptors and ion channels, its specificity for the GABA receptor is unique among divalent cations. Lanthanum acts at the same modulatory site on the GABA receptor as zinc- a known negative allosteric modulator. The lanthanum cation La3+ is a positive allosteric modulator at native and recombinant GABA receptors, increasing open channel time and decreasing desensitization in a subunit configuration dependent manner. 

== Precautions ==
Lanthanum has a low to moderate level of toxicity and should be handled with care. In animals, the injection of lanthanum solutions produces hyperglycemia, low blood pressure, degeneration of the spleen and hepatic alterations. The application in carbon arc light led to the exposure of people to rare earth element oxides and fluorides, sometimes led to pneumoconiosis. 

==See also==

==References==

==Books==
* The Industrial Chemistry of the Lanthanons, Yttrium, Thorium and Uranium, by R. J. Callow, Pergamon Press, 1967
* Extractive Metallurgy of Rare Earths, by C. K. Gupta and N. Krishnamurthy, CRC Press, 2005
* Nouveau Traite de Chimie Minerale, Vol. VII. Scandium, Yttrium, Elements des Terres Rares, Actinium, P. Pascal, Editor, Masson & Cie, 1959
* Chemistry of the Lanthanons, by R. C. Vickery, Butterworths 1953

==External links==

* WebElements.com &ndash; Lanthanum

 



[[Lutetium]]

Lutetium is a chemical element with the symbol Lu and atomic number 71. It is a silvery white metal, which resists corrosion in dry, but not in moist air. It is the last element in the lanthanide series (or, on occasion, considered the first element of the 6th-period transition metals), and traditionally counted among the rare earths. 

Lutetium was independently discovered in 1907 by French scientist Georges Urbain, Austrian mineralogist Baron Carl Auer von Welsbach, and American chemist Charles James. All of these men found lutetium as an impurity in the mineral ytterbia, which was previously thought to consist entirely of ytterbium. The dispute on the priority of the discovery occurred shortly after, with Urbain and von Welsbach accusing each other of publishing results influenced by the published research of the other; the naming honor went to Urbain as he published his results earlier. He chose the name lutecium for the new element but in 1949 the spelling of element 71 was changed to lutetium. In 1909, the priority was finally granted to Urbain and his names were adopted as official ones; however, the name cassiopeium (or later cassiopium) for element 71 proposed by von Welsbach was used by many German scientists until the 1950s.

Lutetium is not a particularly abundant element, though significantly more common than silver in the earth's crust; it has few specific uses. Lutetium-176 is a relatively abundant (2.5%) radioactive isotope with a half-life of about 38 billion years, and so used to determine the age of meteorites. Lutetium usually occurs in association with the element yttrium and is sometimes used in metal alloys and as a catalyst in various chemical reactions. 177Lu-DOTA-TATE is used for radionuclide therapy (see Nuclear medicine) on neuroendocrine tumours. 

==Characteristics==

===Physical properties===
A lutetium atom has 71 electrons, arranged in the configuration &#91;Xe&#93; 4f145d16s2. When entering a chemical reaction, the atom loses its two outermost electrons and the single 5d-electron; this is unusual since reactions of the other lanthanides invariably involve f-shell electrons. The lutetium atom is the smallest among the lanthanide atoms, due to the lanthanide contraction, and as a result lutetium has the highest density, melting point, and hardness of the lanthanides. Some of these properties can be explained by its position in the d-block, which gives the metal properties of some heavier transition metals. Occasionally, lutetium is classified as a transition metal on this basis, although the IUPAC classifies it as a lanthanide.

===Chemical properties and compounds===

Lutetium's compounds always contain the element in the oxidation state +3. Aqueous solutions of most lutetium salts are colorless and form white crystalline solids upon drying, with the common exception of the iodide. The soluble salts, such as nitrate, sulfate and acetate form hydrates upon crystallization. The oxide, hydroxide, fluoride, carbonate, phosphate and oxalate are insoluble in water. 

Lutetium metal is slightly unstable in air at standard conditions, but it burns readily at 150 C to form lutetium oxide. The resulting compound is known to adsorb water and carbon dioxide, and may be used to remove vapors of these compounds from closed atmospheres. Similar observations are made during reaction between lutetium and water (slow when cold and fast when hot); lutetium hydroxide is formed in the reaction. Lutetium metal is known to react with the four lightest halogens to form trihalides; all of them (except the fluoride) are soluble in water.

Lutetium dissolves readily in weak acids and dilute sulfuric acid to form solutions containing the colorless lutetium ions, which are coordinated by between seven and nine water molecules, the average being 3+. 

:2 Lu + 3 H2SO4  2 Lu3+ + 3 SO + 3 H2

===Isotopes===

Lutetium occurs on the Earth in form of two isotopes: lutetium-175 and lutetium-176. Out of these two, only the former is stable, making the element monoisotopic. The latter one, lutetium-176, decays via beta decay with a half-life of 3.78&times;1010 years; it makes up about 2.5% of natural lutetium. 
To date, 32 synthetic radioisotopes of the element have been characterized, ranging in mass from 149.973 (lutetium-150) to 183.961 (lutetium-184); the most stable such isotopes are lutetium-174 with a half-life of 3.31 years, and lutetium-173 with a half-life of 1.37 years. All of the remaining radioactive isotopes have half-lives that are less than 9 days, and the majority of these have half-lives that are less than half an hour. Isotopes lighter than the stable lutetium-175 decay via electron capture (to produce isotopes of ytterbium), with some alpha and positron emission); the heavier isotopes decay primarily via beta decay, producing hafnium isotopes. 

The element also has 42 nuclear isomers, with masses of 150, 151, 153162, 166180 (not every mass number corresponds to only one isomer). The most stable of them are lutetium-177m, with half-life of 160.4 days and lutetium-174m, with half-life of 142 days; this is longer than half-lives of the ground states of all radioactive lutetium isotopes, except only for lutetium-173, 174, and 176. 

==History==
Lutetium, derived from the Latin Lutetia (Paris), was independently discovered in 1907 by French scientist Georges Urbain, Austrian mineralogist Baron Carl Auer von Welsbach, and American chemist Charles James. They found it as an impurity in ytterbia, which was thought by Swiss chemist Jean Charles Galissard de Marignac to consist entirely of ytterbium. The scientists proposed different names for the elements: Urbain chose neoytterbium and lutecium, while Welsbach chose aldebaranium and cassiopeium. Both of these articles accused each other of publishing results based on the other party.

The International Commission on Atomic Weights, which was then responsible for the attribution of new element names, settled the dispute in 1909 by granting priority to Urbain and adopting his names as official ones, based on the fact that the separation of lutetium from Marignac's ytterbium was first described by Urbain; after Urbain's names were recognized, neoytterbium was reverted to ytterbium. Until the 1950s, some German chemists called lutetium by von Welsbach's name cassiopeium; in 1949, the spelling of element 71 was changed to lutetium. However, Welsbach's 1907 samples of lutetium had been pure, while Urbain's 1907 samples only contained traces of lutetium. This later misled Urbain into thinking that he had discovered element 72, which he named celtium, which was actually very pure lutetium. Charles James, who stayed out of the priority argument, worked on a much larger scale and possessed the largest supply of lutetium at the time. Pure lutetium metal was first produced in 1953. 

==Occurrence and production==
Monazite
Found with almost all other rare-earth metals but never by itself, lutetium is very difficult to separate from other elements. The principal commercially viable ore of lutetium is the rare earth phosphate mineral monazite: (Ce,La,etc.)PO4 which contains 0.0001% of the element. The abundance of lutetium in the Earth crust is only about 0.5 mg/kg. The main mining areas are China, United States, Brazil, India, Sri Lanka and Australia. The world production of lutetium (in the form of oxide) is about 10 tonnes per year. Pure lutetium metal is very difficult to prepare. It is one of the rarest and most expensive of the rare earth metals with the price about US$10,000 per kilogram, or about one-fourth that of gold. 

Crushed minerals are treated with hot concentrated sulfuric acid to produce water-soluble sulfates of rare earths. Thorium precipitates out of solution as hydroxide and is removed. After that the solution is treated with ammonium oxalate to convert rare earths into their insoluble oxalates. The oxalates are converted to oxides by annealing. The oxides are dissolved in nitric acid that excludes one of the main components, cerium, whose oxide is insoluble in HNO3. Several rare earth metals, including lutetium, are separated as a double salt with ammonium nitrate by crystallization. Lutetium is separated by ion exchange. In this process, rare-earth ions are sorbed onto suitable ion-exchange resin by exchange with hydrogen, ammonium or cupric ions present in the resin. Lutetium salts are then selectively washed out by suitable complexing agent. Lutetium metal is then obtained by reduction of anhydrous LuCl3 or LuF3 by either an alkali metal or alkaline earth metal. 
 
:2 LuCl3 + 3 Ca  2 Lu + 3 CaCl2

==Applications==
Because of the rarity and high price, lutetium has very few commercial uses. However, stable lutetium can be used as catalysts in petroleum cracking in refineries and can also be used in alkylation, hydrogenation, and polymerization applications.

Lutetium aluminium garnet (Al5Lu3O12) has been proposed for use as a lens material in high refractive index immersion lithography. Additionally, a tiny amount of lutetium is added as a dopant to gadolinium gallium garnet (GGG), which is used in magnetic bubble memory devices. Cerium-doped lutetium oxyorthosilicate (LSO) is currently the preferred compound for detectors in positron emission tomography (PET). Lutetium is used as a phosphor in LED light bulbs. 

Aside from stable lutetium, its radioactive isotopes have several specific uses. The suitable half-life and decay mode made lutetium-176 used as a pure beta emitter, using lutetium which has been exposed to neutron activation, and in lutetiumhafnium dating to date meteorites. The synthetic isotope lutetium-177 bound to octreotate (a somatostatin analogue), is used experimentally in targeted radionuclide therapy for neuroendocrine tumors. 

Lutetium tantalate (LuTaO4) is the densest known stable white material (density 9.81 g/cm3) and therefore is an ideal host for X-ray phosphors. The only denser white material is thorium dioxide, with density of 10 g/cm3, but the thorium it contains is radioactive.

==Precautions==
Like other rare-earth metals, lutetium is regarded as having a low degree of toxicity, but its compounds should be handled with care nonetheless: for example, lutetium fluoride inhalation is dangerous and the compound irritates skin. Lutetium nitrate may be dangerous as it may explode and burn once heated. Lutetium oxide powder is toxic as well if inhaled or ingested. 

Similarly to other group 3 elements and lanthanides, lutetium has no known biological role, but it is found even in humans, concentrating in bones, and to a lesser extent in the liver and kidneys. Lutetium salts are known to occur together with other lanthanide salts in nature; the element is the least abundant in the human body of all lanthanides. Human diets have not been monitored for lutetium content, so it is not known how much the average human takes in, but estimations show the amount is only about several micrograms per year, all coming from tiny amounts taken by plants. Soluble lutetium salts are mildly toxic, but insoluble ones are not. 

==See also==

==References==



[[Lawrencium]]

Lawrencium is a radioactive synthetic chemical element with the symbol Lr (formerly Lw) and atomic number 103. In the periodic table of the elements, it is a period 7 d-block element and the last element of the actinide series. Chemistry experiments have confirmed that lawrencium behaves as the heavier homologue to lutetium and is chemically similar to other actinides.

Lawrencium was first synthesized by the nuclear-physics team led by Albert Ghiorso on February 14, 1961, at the Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory of the University of California. The first atoms of lawrencium were produced by bombarding a three-milligram target consisting of three isotopes of the element californium with boron-10 and boron-11 nuclei from the Heavy Ion Linear Accelerator. The team suggested the name lawrencium (after Ernest Lawrence), and the symbol "Lw", but IUPAC changed the symbol to "Lr" in 1963. Silva, p. 1641. It was the final and the heaviest element of the actinide series to be synthesized.

All isotopes of lawrencium are radioactive; its most stable known isotope is lawrencium-266, with a half-life of approximately 11 hours. All its isotopes except for lawrencium-260, -261, -262, and -266 decay with a half-life of less than a minute.

==History==

===Discovery===
An attempt to synthesize lawrencium was performed in 1958 by the Lawrence Berkeley Laboratory. This attempt involved bombarding 244Cm with 14N. A follow-up on this experiment was not performed, as the target was destroyed. Later, in 1960, the Lawrence Berkeley Laboratory attempted to synthesize the element by bombarding 252Cf with 10B and 11B. The results of this experiment were not conclusive. 

Lawrencium was first synthesized by the nuclear-physics team of Albert Ghiorso, Torbjrn Sikkeland, Almon Larsh, Robert M. Latimer, and their co-workers on February 14, 1961, at the Lawrence Radiation Laboratory (now called the Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory) at the University of California. The first atoms of lawrencium were produced by bombarding a three-milligram target consisting of three isotopes of the element californium with boron-10 and boron-11 nuclei from the Heavy Ion Linear Accelerator (HILAC). The Berkeley team reported that the isotope 257Lr was detected in this manner, and that it decayed by emitting an 8.6 MeV alpha particle with a half-life of about eight seconds. This identification was later corrected to be 258Lr. 

: +   + 5 

In 1967, nuclear-physics researchers in Dubna, Russia, reported that they were not able to confirm assignment of an alpha emitter with a half-life of eight seconds to 257Lr. This isotope was later deduced to be 258Lr. Instead, the Dubna team reported an isotope with a half-life of about 45 seconds as 256Lr. 

: +   + 5 

The Russian Joint Institute for Nuclear Research created lawrencium-256 in 1965 by bombarding 243Am with 18O to form lawrencium-256. The scientists at the Joint Institute for Nuclear Research also discovered that the Lawrence Berkeley Laboratory's claims for the isotope they synthesized, its energy, and its half-life were mistaken. The Russians proposed the name "rutherfordium" for the new element in 1967. They also changed their data to fit the claims made by the Joint Institute for Nuclear Research. 

Further experiments have demonstrated an actinide chemistry for the new element, so by 1970 it was known that lawrencium is the last actinide. In 1971, the nuclear physics team at the University of California at Berkeley successfully performed a whole series of experiments aimed at measuring the nuclear decay properties of the lawrencium isotopes with mass numbers from 255 through 260. 

In 1971, the IUPAC granted the discovery of lawrencium to the Lawrence Berkeley Laboratory, even though they did not have ideal data for the element's existence. However, in 1992, the IUPAC Trans-fermium Working Group (TWG) officially recognized the nuclear physics teams at Dubna and Berkeley as the co-discoverers of lawrencium. Because the name "lawrencium" had been in use for a long time by this point, it was made official by the Transfermium Working Group. 

===Naming===
The origin of the name, ratified by the American Chemical Society, is in reference to the nuclear-physicist Ernest O. Lawrence, of the University of California, who invented the cyclotron particle accelerator. The symbol Lw was used originally, but the element was assigned the Lr symbol. In August 1997, the International Union of Pure and Applied Chemistry (IUPAC) ratified the name lawrencium and the symbol Lr during a meeting in Geneva. 

==Characteristics==

===Electronic structure===
Lawrencium is element 103 in the periodic table. It is the first member of the 6d-block; in accordance with the Madelung rule, its electronic configuration should be 7s25f146d1. However, results from quantum mechanical research have suggested that this configuration is incorrect, and is in fact 7s25f147p1. A direct measurement of this is not possible. Though early calculations gave conflicting results, more recent studies and calculations confirm the suggestion. 

A strict correlation between the periodic table blocks and the orbital-shell configurations for neutral atoms would classify lawrencium as a transition metal because it could be classed as a d-block element. However, lawrencium is classified as an actinide element according to the IUPAC recommendations. Provisional Recommendations for the Nomenclature of Inorganic Chemistry (2004). IUPAC.org (Broken link: please see this archived version instead). 

Lawrencium is expected to be a solid under normal conditions and assume a hexagonal close-packed crystal structure (c/a = 1.58), similar to its lighter congener lutetium, though this is not yet known experimentally. 

===Experimental chemical properties===

+Summary of all lawrencium compounds known Formula Names(s) 
 LrCl3 lawrencium trichloride ; lawrencium(III) chloride 

====Gaseous phase====
The first gaseous-phase studies of lawrencium were reported in 1969 by a nuclear physics team at the Flerov Laboratory of Nuclear Reactions (FLNR) in the Soviet Union. They used the nuclear reaction 243Am+18O to produce lawrencium nuclei, which they then exposed to a stream of chlorine gas, and a volatile chloride product was formed. This product was deduced to be 256LrCl3, and this confirmed that lawrencium is a typical actinide element. 

====Aqueous phase====
The first aqueous-phase studies of lawrencium were reported in 1970 by a nuclear physics team at the Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory in California. This team used the nuclear reaction 249Cf+11B to produce lawrencium nuclei. They were able to show that lawrencium forms a trivalent ion, similar to those of the other actinide elements, but in contrast with that of nobelium.
Further experiments in 1988 confirmed the formation of a trivalent lawrencium(III) ion using anion-exchange chromatography using -hydroxyisobutyrate (-HIB) complex. Comparison of the elution time with other actinides allowed a determination of 88.6  0.3 picometers for the ionic radius for Lr3+. Silva, p. 1645. 
Attempts to reduce lawrencium in the lawrencium(III) ionization state to lawrencium(I) using the potent reducing agent hydroxylamine hydrochloride were unsuccessful. Silva, p. 1646. 

==Nucleosynthesis==

===Fusion===
;205Tl(50Ti,xn)255-xLr (x=2?)
This reaction was studied in a series of experiments in 1976 by Yuri Oganessian and his team at the FLNR. Evidence was provided for the formation of 253Lr in the 2n exit channel.

;203Tl(50Ti,xn)253-xLr
This reaction was studied in a series of experiments in 1976 by Yuri Oganessian and his team at the FLNR.

;208Pb(48Ti,pxn)255-xLr (x=1?)
This reaction was reported in 1984 by Yuri Oganessian at the FLNR. The team was able to detect decays of 246Cf, a descendant of 254Lr.

;208Pb(45Sc,xn)253-xLr
This reaction was studied in a series of experiments in 1976 by Yuri Oganessian and his team at the FLNR. Results are not readily available.

;209Bi(48Ca,xn)257-xLr (x=2)
This reaction has been used to study the spectroscopic properties of 255Lr. The team at GANIL used the reaction in 2003 and the team at the FLNR used it between 2004 and 2006 to provide further information for the decay scheme of 255Lr. The work provided evidence for an isomeric level in 255Lr.

===Hot fusion===
;243Am(18O,xn)261-xLr (x=5)
This reaction was first studied in 1965 by the team at the FLNR. They were able to detect activity with a characteristic decay of 45 seconds, which was assigned to 256Lr or 257Lr. Later work suggests an assignment to 256Lr. Further studies in 1968 produced an 8.358.60 MeV alpha activity with a half-life of 35 seconds. This activity was also initially assigned to 256Lr or 257Lr and later to solely 256Lr.

;243Am(16O,xn)259-xLr (x=4)
This reaction was studied in 1970 by the team at the FLNR. They were able to detect an 8.37 MeV alpha activity with a half-life of 22s. This was assigned to 255Lr. 

;248Cm(15N,xn)263-xLr (x=3,4,5)
This reaction was studied in 1971 by the team at the LBNL in their large study of lawrencium isotopes. They were able to assign alpha activities to 260Lr,259Lr and 258Lr from the 3-5n exit channels.

;248Cm(18O,pxn)265-xLr (x=3,4)
This reaction was studied in 1988 at the LBNL in order to assess the possibility of producing 262Lr and 261Lr without using the exotic 254Es target. It was also used to attempt to measure an electron capture (EC) branch in 261mRf from the 5n exit channel.
After extraction of the Lr(III) component, they were able to measure the spontaneous fission of 261Lr with an improved half-life of 44 minutes. The production cross-section was 700 pb. On this basis, a 14% electron capture branch was calculated if this isotope was produced via the 5n channel rather than the p4n channel.
A lower bombarding energy (93 MeV c.f. 97 MeV) was then used to measure the production of 262Lr in the p3n channel. The isotope was successfully detected and a yield of 240 pb was measured. The yield was lower than expected compared to the p4n channel. However, the results were judged to indicate that the 261Lr was most likely produced by a p3n channel and an upper limit of 14% for the electron capture branch of 261mRf was therefore suggested.

;246Cm(14N,xn)260-xLr (x=3?)
This reaction was studied briefly in 1958 at the LBNL using an enriched 244Cm target (5% 246Cm). They observed a ~9 MeV alpha activity with a half-life of ~0.25 seconds. Later results suggest a tentative assignment to 257Lr from the 3n channel

;244Cm(14N,xn)258-xLr
This reaction was studied briefly in 1958 at the LBNL using an enriched 244Cm target (5% 246Cm). They observed a ~9 MeV alpha activity with a half-life of ~0.25s. Later results suggest a tentative assignment to 257Lr from the 3n channel with the 246Cm component. No activities assigned to reaction with the 244Cm component have been reported.

;249Bk(18O,xn)263-xLr (x=3)
This reaction was studied in 1971 by the team at the LBNL in their large study of lawrencium isotopes. They were able to detect an activity assigned to 260Lr. The reaction was repeated in 1988 to study the aqueous chemistry of lawrencium. A total of 23 alpha decays were measured for 260Lr, with a mean energy of 8.03 MeV and an improved half-life of 2.7 minutes. The calculated cross-section was 8.7 nb.

;252Cf(11B,xn)263-xLr (x=5,7??)
This reaction was first studied in 1961 at the University of California by Albert Ghiorso by using a californium target (52% 252Cf). They observed three alpha activities of 8.6, 8.4 and 8.2 MeV, with half-lives of about 8 and 15 seconds, respectively. The 8.6 MeV activity was tentatively assigned to 257Lr. Later results suggest a reassignment to 258Lr, resulting from the 5n exit channel. The 8.4 MeV activity was also assigned to 257Lr. Later results suggest a reassignment to 256Lr. This is most likely from the 33% 250Cf component in the target rather than from the 7n channel. The 8.2 MeV was subsequently associated with nobelium.

;252Cf(10B,xn)262-xLr (x=4,6)
This reaction was first studied in 1961 at the University of California by Albert Ghiorso by using a californium target (52% 252Cf). They observed three alpha activities of 8.6, 8.4 and 8.2 MeV, with half-lives of about 8 and 15 seconds, respectively. The 8.6 MeV activity was tentatively assigned to 257Lr. Later results suggest a reassignment to 258Lr. The 8.4 MeV activity was also assigned to 257Lr. Later results suggest a reassignment to 256Lr. The 8.2 MeV was subsequently associated with nobelium.

;250Cf(15N,xn)260-xLr (x=3)
This reaction was studied in 1971 at the LBNL. They were able to identify a 0.7 s alpha activity with two alpha lines at 8.87 and 8.82 MeV. This was assigned to 257Lr. 

;249Cf(11B,xn)260-xLr (x=4)
This reaction was first studied in 1970 at the LBNL in an attempt to study the aqueous chemistry of lawrencium. They were able to measure a Lr3+ activity. The reaction was repeated in 1976 at Oak Ridge and the 26s lifetime of 256Lr was confirmed by measurement of coincident X-rays.

;249Cf(12C,pxn)260-xLr (x=2)
This reaction was studied in 1971 by the team at the LBNL. They were able to detect an activity assigned to 258Lr from the p2n channel. 

;249Cf(15N,xn)260-xLr (x=2,3)
This reaction was studied in 1971 by the team at the LBNL. They were able to detect an activities assigned to 258Lr and 257Lr from the 2n and 3n and channels. The reaction was repeated in 1976 at Oak Ridge and the synthesis of 258Lr was confirmed.

;254Es + 22Ne  transfer
This reaction was studied in 1987 at the LLNL. They were able to detect new spontaneous fission (SF) activities assigned to 261Lr and 262Lr, resulting from transfer from the 22Ne nuclei to the 254Es target. In addition, a 5 ms SF activity was detected in delayed coincidence with nobelium K-shell X-rays and was assigned to 262No, resulting from the electron capture of 262Lr.

===Decay products===
Isotopes of lawrencium have also been identified in the decay of heavier elements. Observations to date are summarised in the table below:

+List of lawrencium isotopes produced as other nuclei decay products Parent nuclide Observed lawrencium isotope 
 294Uus, 290Uup, 286Uut, 282Rg, 278Mt, 274Bh, 270Db 266Lr 
 267Bh, 263Db 259Lr 
 278Uut, 274Rg, 270Mt, 266Bh, 262Db 258Lr 
 261Db 257Lr 
 272Rg, 268Mt, 264Bh, 260Db 256Lr 
 259Db 255Lr 
 266Mt, 262Bh, 258Db 254Lr 
 261Bh, 257Dbg,m 253Lrg,m 
 260Bh, 256Db 252Lr 

On 2 May 2014, scientists from the GSI Helmholtz Center for Heavy Ion Research in Darmstadt, Germany claimed to have confirmed the element's discovery. This also led to the discovery of the new isotope lawrencium-266, obtained from the alpha decay of dubnium-270 (which underwent spontaneous fission in the Dubna experiments). This isotope has a half-life of 11 hours and is one of the longest lived superheavy isotopes known to date, suggesting that it is perhaps on the shore of the island of stability. 

==Isotopes==

+Summary of all lawrencium isotopes known Isotope Year discovered discovery reaction 
 252Lr 2001 209Bi(50Ti,3n) 
 253Lrg 1985 209Bi(50Ti,2n) 
 253Lrm 2001 209Bi(50Ti,2n) 
 254Lr 1985 209Bi(50Ti,n) 
 255Lr 1970 243Am(16O,4n) 
 256Lr 1961? 1965? 1968? 1971 252Cf(10B,6n) 
 257Lr 1958? 1971 249Cf(15N,3n) 
 258Lr 1961? 1971 249Cf(15N,2n) 
 259Lr 1971 248Cm(15N,4n) 
 260Lr 1971 248Cm(15N,3n) 
 261Lr 1987 254Es + 22Ne 
 262Lr 1987 254Es + 22Ne 
 266Lr 2014 249Bk(48Ca,73n) 

Twelve isotopes of lawrencium plus one isomer have been synthesized with 266Lr being the longest-lived and the heaviest, with a half-life of 11 hours. 252Lr is the lightest isotope of lawrencium to be produced to date. Silva, p. 1642. 

===Nuclear isomerism===
A study of the decay properties of 257Db (see dubnium) in 2001 by Hessberger et al. at the GSI provided some data for the decay of 253Lr. Analysis of the data indicated the population of two isomeric levels in 253Lr from the decay of the corresponding isomers in 257Db. The ground state was assigned spin and parity of 7/2, decaying by emission of an 8794 keV alpha particle with a half-life of 0.57s. The isomeric level was assigned spin and parity of 1/2, decaying by emission of an 8722 keV alpha particle with a half-life of 1.49 s. 

Recent work on the spectroscopy of 255Lr formed in the reaction 209Bi(48Ca,2n)255Lr has provided evidence for an isomeric level.

==See also==

==References==

==Bibliography==
*

==External links==
*Chart of Nuclides. nndc.bnl.gov
* Los Alamos National Laboratory's Chemistry Division: Periodic Table  Lawrencium
* Lawrencium at The Periodic Table of Videos (University of Nottingham)



[[Lead]]

Lead is a chemical element in the carbon group with symbol Pb (from ) and atomic number 82. Lead is a soft and malleable metal, which is regarded as a heavy metal and an other metal. Metallic lead has a bluish-white color after being freshly cut, but it soon tarnishes to a dull grayish color when exposed to air. Lead has a shiny chrome-silver luster when it is melted into a liquid. It is also the heaviest non-radioactive element.

Lead is used in building construction, lead-acid batteries, bullets and shot, weights, as part of solders, pewters, fusible alloys, and as a radiation shield. Lead has the highest atomic number of all of the stable elements, although the next higher element, bismuth, has a half-life that is so long (over one billion times the estimated age of the universe) that it can be considered stable. Its four stable isotopes have 82 protons, a magic number in the nuclear shell model of atomic nuclei. The isotope is double magic.

If ingested, lead is poisonous to animals, including humans. It damages the nervous system and causes brain disorders. Excessive lead also causes blood disorders in mammals. Like the element mercury, another heavy metal, lead is a neurotoxin that accumulates both in soft tissues and the bones. Lead poisoning has been documented from ancient Rome, ancient Greece, and ancient China.

==Characteristics==
A sample of freshly solidified lead (from molten state)
Lead is a bright and silvery metal with a very slight shade of blue in a dry atmosphere. Upon contact with air, it begins to tarnish by forming a complex mixture of compounds depending on the conditions. The color of the compounds can vary. The tarnish layer can contain significant amounts of carbonates and hydroxycarbonates. Its characteristic properties include high density, softness, ductility and malleability, poor electrical conductivity compared to other metals, high resistance to corrosion, and ability to react with organic chemicals. 

Various traces of other metals change its properties significantly: the addition of small amounts of antimony or copper to lead increases the alloy's hardness and improves corrosion resistance from sulfuric acid. Some other metals, such as cadmium, tin, and tellurium, also improve hardness and fight metal fatigue. Sodium and calcium also have this ability, but they reduce the alloy's chemical stability. Finally, zinc and bismuth simply impair the corrosion resistance (0.1% bismuth content is the industrial usage threshold). Conversely, lead impurities mostly worsen the quality of industrial materials, although there are exceptions: for example, small amounts of lead improve the ductility of steel.

Lead has only one common allotrope, which is face-centered cubic, with the leadlead distance being 349 pm. At 327.5 C (621.5 F), lead melts; the melting point is above that of tin (232 C, 449.5 F), but significantly below that of germanium (938 C, 1721 F). The boiling point of lead is 1749 C (3180 F), which is below those of both tin (2602 C, 4716 F) and germanium (2833 C, 5131 F). Densities increase down the group: the Ge and Sn values (5.23 and 7.29 gcm3, respectively) are significantly below that of lead: 11.32 gcm3.

A lead atom has 82 electrons, having an electronic configuration of &#91;Xe&#93;4f145d106s26p2. In its compounds, lead (unlike the other group 14 elements) most commonly loses its two and not four outermost electrons, becoming lead(II) ions, Pb2+. Such unusual behavior is rationalized by considering the inert pair effect, which occurs because of the stabilization of the 6s-orbital due to relativistic effects, which are stronger closer to the bottom of the periodic table. Tin shows a weaker such effect: tin(II) is still a reducer.

The figures for electrode potential show that lead is only slightly easier to oxidize than hydrogen. Lead thus can dissolve in acids, but this is often impossible due to specific problems (such as the formation of insoluble salts).
Powdered lead burns with a bluish-white flame. As with many metals, finely divided powdered lead exhibits pyrophoricity. Toxic fumes are released when lead is burned.

===Isotopes===

Lead occurs naturally on Earth exclusively in the form of four isotopes: lead-204, -206, -207, and -208. All four can be radioactive as the hypothetical alpha decay of any would be exothermic, but the lower half-life limit has been put only for lead-204: over 1.4 years. This effect is, however, so weak that natural lead poses no radiation hazard. Three isotopes are also found in three of the four major decay chains: lead-206, -207 and -208 are final decay products of uranium-238, uranium-235, and thorium-232, respectively. Since the amounts of them in nature depend also on other elements' presence, the isotopic composition of natural lead varies by sample: in particular, the relative amount of lead-206 varies between 20.84% and 27.78%.

Aside from the stable ones, thirty-four radioisotopes have been synthesized: they have mass numbers of 178215. Lead-205 is the most stable radioisotope of lead, with a half-life of over 107 years. 47 nuclear isomers (long-lived excited nuclear states), corresponding to 24 lead isotopes, have been characterized. The most long-lived isomer is lead-204m2 (half-life of about 1.1 hours). 

===Chemical reactivity===
Lead is classified as an other metal and is also a member of the carbon group. Lead only forms a protective oxide layer although finely powdered highly purified lead can ignite in air. Melted lead is oxidized in air to lead monoxide. All chalcogens oxidize lead upon heating.

Fluorine does not oxidize cold lead. Hot lead can be oxidized, but the formation of a protective halide layer lowers the intensity of the reaction above 100 C (210 F). The reaction with chlorine is similar: thanks to the chloride layer, lead persistence against chlorine surpasses those of copper or steel up to 300 C (570 F).

Water in the presence of oxygen attacks lead to start an accelerating reaction. The presence of carbonates or sulfates results in the formation of insoluble lead salts, which protect the metal from corrosion. So does carbon dioxide, as the insoluble lead carbonate is formed; however, an excess of the gas leads to the formation of the soluble bicarbonate; this makes the use of lead pipes dangerous. Lead dissolves in organic acids (in the presence of oxygen) and concentrated (80%) sulfuric acid thanks to complexation; however, it is only weakly affected by hydrochloric acid and is stable against hydrofluoric acid, as the corresponding halides are weakly soluble. Lead also dissolves in quite concentrated alkalis (10%) because of the amphoteric character and solubility of plumbites.

==Compounds==

Lead compounds exist mainly in two main oxidation states, +2 and +4. The former is more common. Inorganic lead(IV) compounds are typically strong oxidants or exist only in highly acidic solutions.

===Oxides and sulfides===
Three oxides are known: lead(II) oxide or lead monoxide (PbO), lead tetroxide (Pb3O4) (sometimes called "minium"), and lead dioxide (PbO2). The monoxide exists as two allotropes: -PbO and -PbO, both with layer structure and tetracoordinated lead. The alpha polymorph is red-colored and has the PbO distance of 230 pm; the beta polymorph is yellow-colored and has the PbO distance of 221 and 249 pm (due to asymmetry). Both polymorphs can exist under standard conditions (beta with small (105 relative) impurities, such as Si, Ge, Mo, etc.). PbO reacts with acids to form salts, and with alkalis to give plumbites,  or 2. The monoxide oxidizes in air to trilead tetroxide, which at 550 C (1020 F) degrades back into PbO.

The dioxide may be prepared by, for example, halogenization of lead(II) salts. Regardless the polymorph, it has a black-brown color. The alpha allotrope is rhombohedral, and the beta allotrope is tetragonal. Both allotropes are black-brown in color and always contain some water, which cannot be removed, as heating also causes decomposition (to PbO and Pb3O4). The dioxide is a powerful oxidizer: it can oxidize hydrochloric and sulfuric acids. It does not react with alkaline solution, but reacts with solid alkalis to give hydroxyplumbates, or with basic oxides to give plumbates.

Reaction of lead salts with hydrogen sulfide yields lead monosulfide. The solid has the rocksalt-like simple cubic structure, which it keeps up to the melting point, 1114 C (2037 F). When heated in air, it oxidizes to the sulfate and then the monoxide. Lead monosulfide is almost insoluble in water, weak acids, and (NH4)2S/(NH4)2S2 solution is the key for separation of lead from analytical groups I to III ions, tin, arsenic, and antimony. However, it dissolves in nitric and hydrochloric acids, to give elemental sulfur and hydrogen sulfide, respectively. Upon heating under high pressures with sulfur, it gives the disulfide. In the compound, the lead atoms are linked octahedrally with the sulfur atoms. It is also a semiconductor. A mixture of the monoxide and the monosulfide when heated forms the metal. 

:2 PbO + PbS  3 Pb + SO2

===Halides and other salts===
A 3 kg lead weight used on a scuba diving weight belt. 

Heating lead carbonate with hydrogen fluoride yields the hydrofluoride, which decomposes to the difluoride when it melts. This white crystalline powder is more soluble than the diiodide, but less than the dibromide and the dichloride. The tetrafluoride, a yellow crystalline powder, is unstable.

Other dihalides are obtained upon heating lead(II) salts with the halides of other metals; lead dihalides precipitate to give white orthorhombic crystals (diiodide forms yellow hexagonal crystals). They can also be obtained by direct reaction of their constituent elements at temperature exceeding melting points of dihalides. Their solubility increases with temperature; adding more halides first decreases the solubility, but then increases due to complexation, with the maximum coordination number being 6. The complexation depends on halide ion numbers, atomic number of the alkali metal, the halide of which is added, temperature and solution ionic strength. The tetrachloride is obtained upon dissolving the dioxide in hydrochloric acid; to prevent the exothermic decomposition, it is kept under concentrated sulfuric acid. The tetrabromide may not, and the tetraiodide definitely does not exist. The diastatide has also been prepared. 

The metal is not attacked by sulfuric or hydrochloric acids. It dissolves in nitric acid with the evolution of nitric oxide gas to form dissolved Pb(NO3)2. It is a well-soluble solid in water; it is thus a key to receive the precipitates of halides, sulfate, chromate, carbonate, and basic carbonate Pb3(OH)2(CO3)2 salts of lead. 
|
===Organolead===

The best-known compounds are the two simplest plumbane derivatives: tetramethyllead (TML) and tetraethyllead (TEL). The homologs of these, as well as hexaethyldilead (HEDL), are of lesser stability. The tetralkyl derivatives contain lead(IV), where the PbC bonds are covalent. They thus resemble typical organic compounds.

Lead readily forms an equimolar alloy with sodium metal that reacts with alkyl halides to form organometallic compounds of lead such as tetraethyllead. The PbC bond energies in TML and TEL are only 167 and 145 kJ/mol; the compounds thus decompose upon heating, with first signs of TEL composition seen at 100 C (210 F). The pyrolysis yields of elemental lead and alkyl radicals; their interreaction causes the synthesis of HEDL. TML and TEL also decompose upon sunlight or UV light. In presence of chlorine, the alkyls begin to be replaced with chlorides; the R2PbCl2 in the presence of HCl (a by-product of the previous reaction) leads to the complete mineralization to give PbCl2. Reaction with bromine follows the same principle.

==History==
World lead production peaking in the Roman period and the rising Industrial Revolution 
Lead ingots from Roman Britain on display at the Wells and Mendip Museum
Lead mining in the upper Mississippi River region of the US in 1865

Lead has been commonly used for thousands of years because it is widespread, easy to extract and easy to work with. It is highly malleable as well as easy to smelt. Metallic lead beads dating back to 6400 BCE have been found in atalhyk in modern-day Turkey. In the early Bronze Age, lead was used with antimony and arsenic. 

The largest preindustrial producer of lead was the Roman economy, with an estimated annual output of 80,000 tonnes, which was typically won as a by-product of extensive silver smelting. see 1170f. Roman mining activities occurred in Central Europe, Roman Britain, the Balkans, Greece, Asia Minor and Hispania which alone accounted for 40% of world production. 

Roman lead pipes often bore the insignia of Roman emperors (see Roman lead pipe inscriptions). Lead plumbing in the Latin West may have been continued beyond the age of Theoderic the Great into the medieval period. Many Roman "pigs" (ingots) of lead figure in Derbyshire lead mining history and in the history of the industry in other English centers. The Romans also used lead in molten form to secure iron pins that held together large limestone blocks in certain monumental buildings. In alchemy, lead was thought to be the oldest metal and was associated with the planet Saturn. Alchemists accordingly used Saturn's symbol (the scythe, ) to refer to lead. 

Up to the 17th century, tin was often not distinguished from lead: lead was called plumbum nigrum (literally, "black lead"), while tin was called plumbum candidum (literally, "bright lead"). Their inherence through history can also be seen in other languages: the word "ow" in Polish and "olovo" in Czech mean lead, but in Russian the cognate "" (olovo) means tin. Lead's symbol Pb is an abbreviation of its Latin name plumbum for soft metals; the English words "plumbing", "plumber", "plumb", and "plumb-bob" also derive from this Latin root. 

Lead production in the US commenced as early as the late 1600s by Indians in The Southeast Missouri Lead District, commonly called the Lead Belt, is a lead mining district in the southeastern part of Missouri. Significant among Missouri's lead mining concerns in the district was the Desloge Family and Desloge Consolidated Lead Company in Desloge, Missouri and Bonne Terre  having been active in lead trading, mining and lead smelting from 1823 in Potosi to 1929.

==Occurrence==
Lead and zinc bearing carbonate and clastic deposits. Source: USGS
Lead is found in the solar atmosphere, and much more abundantly in the atmospheres of some hot subdwarfs. 

Metallic lead does occur in nature, but it is rare. Lead is usually found in ore with zinc, silver and (most abundantly) copper, and is extracted together with these metals. The main lead mineral is galena (PbS), which contains 86.6% lead by weight. Other common varieties are cerussite (PbCO3) and anglesite (PbSO4). 

===Ore processing===
Galena, lead ore

Most ores contain less than 10% lead, and ores containing as little as 3% lead can be economically exploited. Ores are crushed and concentrated by froth flotation typically to 70% or more. Sulfide ores are roasted, producing primarily lead oxide and a mixture of sulfates and silicates of lead and other metals contained in the ore. Charles A. Sutherland, Edward F. Milner, Robert C. Kerby, Herbert Teindl, Albert Melin Hermann M. Bolt "Lead" in Ullmann's Encyclopedia of Industrial Chemistry, 2005, Wiley-VCH, Weinheim. Lead oxide from the roasting process is reduced in a coke-fired blast furnace to the metal. Additional layers separate in the process and float to the top of the metallic lead. These are slag (silicates containing 1.5% lead), matte (sulfides containing 15% lead), and speiss (arsenides of iron and copper). These wastes contain concentrations of copper, zinc, cadmium, and bismuth that can be recovered economically, as can their content of unreduced lead. 

Metallic lead that results from the roasting and blast furnace processes still contains significant contaminants of arsenic, antimony, bismuth, zinc, copper, silver, and gold. The melt is treated in a reverberatory furnace with air, steam, and sulfur, which oxidizes the contaminants except silver, gold, and bismuth. The oxidized contaminants are removed by drossing, where they float to the top and are skimmed off. Since lead ores contain significant concentrations of silver, the smelted metal also is commonly contaminated with silver. Metallic silver as well as gold is removed and recovered economically by means of the Parkes process. Desilvered lead is freed of bismuth according to the Betterton-Kroll process by treating it with metallic calcium and magnesium, which forms a bismuth dross that can be skimmed off. Very pure lead can be obtained by processing smelted lead electrolytically by means of the Betts process. The process uses anodes of impure lead and cathodes of pure lead in an electrolyte of silica fluoride. 

===Production and recycling===
Production and consumption of lead is increasing worldwide. Total annual production is about 8 million tonnes; about half is produced from recycled scrap. The top lead producing countries, as of 2008, are Australia, China, USA, Peru, Canada, Mexico, Sweden, Morocco, South Africa and North Korea. Australia, China and the United States account for more than half of primary production. , 9.6 million tonnes of lead were produced, of which 4.1 million tonnes came from mining. "Mine Production: 4,117,000 tonnes; Metal Production: 9,604,000 tonnes; Metal Usage: 9,569,000 tonnes" from (See also their definitions of terms.) 

At current use rates, the supply of lead is estimated to run out in 42 years. Environmental analyst Lester Brown has suggested lead could run out within 18 years based on an extrapolation of 2% growth per year. This may need to be reviewed to take account of renewed interest in recycling, and rapid progress in fuel cell technology. According to the International Resource Panel's Metal Stocks in Society report, the global per capita stock of lead in use in society is 8 kg. Much of this is in more-developed countries (20150 kg per capita) rather than less-developed countries (14 kg per capita). 

===Ancient lead special use===
As lead when mined contains an unstable isotope, lead-210 which has a half life of 22 years. This makes lead slightly radioactive. As such ancient lead which has almost no radioactivity is sometimes desired for scientific experimentation. http://www.aspera-eu.org/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=418&Itemid=98 http://www.nature.com/news/2010/100415/full/news.2010.186.html 

==Applications==

===Elemental form===
Lead bricks are commonly used as radiation shielding.
Contrary to popular belief, pencil leads in wooden pencils have never been made from lead. The term comes from the Roman stylus, called the penicillus, a small brush used for painting. When the pencil originated as a wrapped graphite writing tool, the particular type of graphite being used was named plumbago (lit. act for lead, or lead mockup). 

Lead is used in applications where its low melting point, ductility and high density are advantageous. The low melting point makes casting of lead easy, and therefore small arms ammunition and shotgun pellets can be cast with minimal technical equipment. It is also inexpensive and denser than other common metals. 

Because of its high density and resistance from corrosion, lead is used for the ballast keel of sailboats. Its high density allows it to counterbalance the heeling effect of wind on the sails while at the same time occupying a small volume and thus offering the least underwater resistance. For the same reason it is used in scuba diving weight belts to counteract the diver's natural buoyancy and that of his equipment. It does not have the weight-to-volume ratio of many heavy metals, but its low cost increases its use in these and other applications.

Roman lead water pipes with taps
Lead pipe in Roman baths
Multicolor lead-glazing in a Tang dynasty Chinese sancai ceramic cup dating from the 8th century CE
Punched lead cast in a Venice bridge wall fixing the hard-metal connecting bar

More than half of the US lead production (at least 1.15 million tonnes in 2000) is used for automobiles, mostly as electrodes in the leadacid battery, used extensively as a car battery. Getting the Lead Out: Impacts of and Alternatives For Automotive Lead Uses, A report by Environmental Defense, Ecology Center, Clean Car Campaign (July 2003) 

Cathode (reduction)
:PbO2 + 4 H+ + + 2e  PbSO4 + 2 H2O
Anode (oxidation)
:Pb +  PbSO4 + 2e 

Lead is used as electrodes in the process of electrolysis. It is used in solder for electronics, although this usage is being phased out by some countries to reduce the amount of environmentally hazardous waste, and in high voltage power cables as sheathing material to prevent water diffusion into insulation. Lead is one of three metals used in the Oddy test for museum materials, helping detect organic acids, aldehydes, and acidic gases. It is also used as shielding from radiation (e.g., in X-ray rooms). Molten lead is used as a coolant (e.g., for lead cooled fast reactors). 

Lead is added to brass to reduce machine tool wear. In the form of strips, or tape, lead is used for the customization of tennis rackets. Tennis rackets of the past sometimes had lead added to them by the manufacturer to increase weight. It is also used to form glazing bars for stained glass or other multi-lit windows. The practice has become less common, not for danger but for stylistic reasons.
Lead, or sheet-lead, is used as a sound deadening layer in some areas in wall, floor and ceiling design in sound studios where levels of airborne and mechanically produced sound are targeted for reduction or virtual elimination. It is the traditional base metal of organ pipes, mixed with varying amounts of tin to control the tone of the pipe. 

Lead has many uses in the construction industry (e.g., lead sheets are used as architectural metals in roofing material, cladding, flashing, gutters and gutter joints, and on roof parapets). Detailed lead moldings are used as decorative motifs used to fix lead sheet. Lead is still widely used in statues and sculptures.
Lead is often used to balance the wheels of a car; this use is being phased out in favor of other materials for environmental reasons. Owing to its half-life of 22.20 years, the radioactive isotope 210Pb is used for dating material from marine sediment cores by radiometric methods. http://www.nrcresearchpress.com/doi/abs/10.1139/f83-069 

===Compounds===
Lead compounds are used as a coloring element in ceramic glazes, notably in the colors red and yellow. 
Lead is frequently used in polyvinyl chloride (PVC) plastic, which coats electrical cords. 

Lead is used in some candles to treat the wick to ensure a longer, more even burn. Because of the dangers, European and North American manufacturers use more expensive alternatives such as zinc. Lead glass is composed of 1228% lead oxide. It changes the optical characteristics of the glass and reduces the transmission of radiation. 

Some artists using oil-based paints continue to use lead carbonate white, citing its properties in comparison with the alternatives. Tetra-ethyl lead is used as an anti-knock additive for aviation fuel in piston-driven aircraft. Lead-based semiconductors, such as lead telluride, lead selenide and lead antimonide are finding applications in photovoltaic (solar energy) cells and infrared detectors. 

Lead, in either pure form or alloyed with tin, or antimony is the traditional material for bullets and shot in firearms use.

===Former applications===
Lead pigments were used in lead paint for white as well as yellow, orange, and red. Most uses have been discontinued due of the dangers of lead poisoning. Beginning April 22, 2010, US federal law requires that contractors performing renovation, repair, and painting projects that disturb more than six square feet of paint in homes, child care facilities, and schools built before 1978 must be certified and trained to follow specific work practices to prevent lead contamination. Lead chromate is still in industrial use. Lead carbonate (white) is the traditional pigment for the priming medium for oil painting, but it has been largely displaced by the zinc and titanium oxide pigments. It was also quickly replaced in water-based painting mediums. Lead carbonate white was used by the Japanese geisha and in the West for face-whitening make-up, which was detrimental to health. 

Lead was the principal component of the alloy used in hot metal typesetting. It was used for plumbing (hence the name) as well as a preservative for food and drink in Ancient Rome. Until the early 1970s, lead was used for joining cast iron water pipes and used as a material for small diameter water pipes. 

Tetraethyllead was used in leaded fuels to reduce engine knocking, but this practice has been phased out across many countries of the world in efforts to reduce toxic pollution that affected humans and the environment. 

Lead was used to make bullets for slings. Lead is used for shotgun pellets (shot). Waterfowl hunting in the US with lead shot is illegal and it has been replaced with steel and other non-toxic shot for that purpose. In the Netherlands, the use of lead shot for hunting and sport shooting was banned in 1993, which caused a large drop in lead emission, from 230 tonnes in 1990 to 47.5 tonnes in 1995, two years after the ban. 

Lead was a component of the paint used on children's toys  now restricted in the United States and across Europe (ROHS Directive). Lead solder was used as a car body filler, which was used in many custom cars in the 1940s60s. Hence the term Leadsled. Lead is a superconductor with a transition temperature of 7.2 K, and therefore IBM tried to make a Josephson effect computer out of a lead alloy. 

Lead was also used in pesticides before the 1950s, when fruit orchards were treated especially against the codling moth. A lead cylinder attached to a long line was used by sailors for the vital navigational task of determining water depth by heaving the lead at regular intervals. A soft tallow insert at its base allowed the nature of the sea bed to be determined, further aiding position finding. 

==Bioremediation==

Fish bones are being researched for their ability to bioremediate lead in contaminated soil. http://coastguard.dodlive.mil/2012/07/battling-lead-contamination-one-fish-bone-at-a-time/ The fungus Aspergillus versicolor is both greatly effective and fast, at removing lead ions. Several bacteria have been researched for their ability to reduce lead; including the sulfate reducing bacteria Desulfovibrio and Desulfotomaculum; which are highly effective in aqueous solutions. 

==Health effects==

Lead is a highly poisonous metal (regardless if inhaled or swallowed), affecting almost every organ and system in the body. The main target for lead toxicity is the nervous system, both in adults and children. Long-term exposure of adults can result in decreased performance in some tests that measure functions of the nervous system. Long-term exposure to lead or its salts (especially soluble salts or the strong oxidant PbO2) can cause nephropathy, and colic-like abdominal pains. It may also cause weakness in fingers, wrists, or ankles. Lead exposure also causes small increases in blood pressure, particularly in middle-aged and older people and can cause anemia. Exposure to high lead levels can severely damage the brain and kidneys in adults or children and ultimately cause death. In pregnant women, high levels of exposure to lead may cause miscarriage. Chronic, high-level exposure have shown to reduce fertility in males. Lead also damages nervous connections (especially in young children) and cause blood and brain disorders. Lead poisoning typically results from ingestion of food or water contaminated with lead; but may also occur after accidental ingestion of contaminated soil, dust, or lead-based paint. It is rapidly absorbed into the bloodstream and is believed to have adverse effects on the central nervous system, the cardiovascular system, kidneys, and the immune system. The component limit of lead (1.0 g/g) is a test benchmark for pharmaceuticals, representing the maximum daily intake an individual should have. However, even at this low level, a prolonged intake can be hazardous to human beings. Heavy Metals Testing By Usp. Caspharma.com. Retrieved on 2012-01-23. pharmaceutical  Britannica Online Encyclopedia. Britannica.com. Retrieved on 2012-01-23. The treatment for lead poisoning consists of dimercaprol and succimer. 

The concern about lead's role in cognitive deficits in children has brought about widespread reduction in its use (lead exposure has been linked to learning disabilities). Most cases of adult elevated blood lead levels are workplace-related. High blood levels are associated with delayed puberty in girls. Lead has been shown many times to permanently reduce the cognitive capacity of children at extremely low levels of exposure. 

During the 20th century, the use of lead in paint pigments was sharply reduced because of the danger of lead poisoning, especially to children. By the mid-1980s, a significant shift in lead end-use patterns had taken place. Much of this shift was a result of the U.S. lead consumers' compliance with environmental regulations that significantly reduced or eliminated the use of lead in non-battery products, including gasoline, paints, solders, and water systems. Lead use is being further curtailed by the European Union's RoHS directive. Lead may still be found in harmful quantities in stoneware, vinyl (such as that used for tubing and the insulation of electrical cords), and Chinese brass. Old houses may still contain substantial amounts of lead paint. White lead paint has been withdrawn from sale in industrialized countries, but the yellow lead chromate is still in use. Old paint should not be stripped by sanding, as this produces inhalable dust. 

Lead salts used in pottery glazes have on occasion caused poisoning, when acidic drinks, such as fruit juices, have leached lead ions out of the glaze. It has been suggested that what was known as "Devon colic" arose from the use of lead-lined presses to extract apple juice in the manufacture of cider. Lead is considered to be particularly harmful for women's ability to reproduce. Lead(II) acetate (also known as sugar of lead) was used in the Roman Empire as a sweetener for wine, and some consider this a plausible explanation for the dementia of many Roman emperors, and, that chronic lead poisoning contributed to the empire's gradual decline. (see Decline of the Roman Empire#Lead poisoning) 

===Biochemistry of poisoning===
In the human body, lead inhibits porphobilinogen synthase and ferrochelatase, preventing both porphobilinogen formation and the incorporation of iron into protoporphyrin IX, the final step in heme synthesis. This causes ineffective heme synthesis and subsequent microcytic anemia. At lower levels, it acts as a calcium analog, interfering with ion channels during nerve conduction. This is one of the mechanisms by which it interferes with cognition. Acute lead poisoning is treated using disodium calcium edetate: the calcium chelate of the disodium salt of ethylene-diamine-tetracetic acid (EDTA). This chelating agent has a greater affinity for lead than for calcium and so the lead chelate is formed by exchange. This is then excreted in the urine leaving behind harmless calcium. According to the Agency for Toxic Substance and Disease Registry, a small amount of ingested lead (1%) will store itself in bones, and the rest will be excreted by an adult through urine and feces within a few weeks of exposure. However, only about 32% of lead will be excreted by a child. 

Exposure to lead and lead chemicals can occur through inhalation, ingestion and dermal contact. Most exposure occurs through ingestion or inhalation; in the U.S. the skin exposure is unlikely as leaded gasoline additives are no longer used. Lead exposure is a global issue as lead mining and lead smelting are common in many countries. Most countries have stopped using lead-containing gasoline by 2007. Lead exposure mostly occurs through ingestion. Lead paint is the major source of lead exposure for children. As lead paint deteriorates, it peels, is pulverized into dust and then enters the body through hand-to-mouth contact or through contaminated food, water or alcohol. Ingesting certain home remedy medicines may also expose people to lead or lead compounds. Lead can be ingested through fruits and vegetables contaminated by high levels of lead in the soils they were grown in. Soil is contaminated through particulate accumulation from lead in pipes, lead paint and residual emissions from leaded gasoline that was used before the Environment Protection Agency issued the regulation around 1980. The use of lead for water pipes is problematic in areas with soft or (and) acidic water. Hard water forms insoluble layers in the pipes while soft and acidic water dissolves the lead pipes. Inhalation is the second major pathway of exposure, especially for workers in lead-related occupations. Almost all inhaled lead is absorbed into the body, the rate is 2070% for ingested lead; children absorb more than adults. Dermal exposure may be significant for a narrow category of people working with organic lead compounds, but is of little concern for general population. The rate of skin absorption is also low for inorganic lead. 

==See also==
* Adult Blood Lead Epidemiology and Surveillance
* Lead-Free Toys Act
* Medical geology
* Plumbosolvency
* RoHS directive
* Banning of leaded petrol

==References==

==Bibliography==
* 
* 

==Further reading==
* 
* 
* 
* 

==External links==

* 
* Chemistry in its element podcast (MP3) from the Royal Society of Chemistry's Chemistry World: Lead
* Lead at The Periodic Table of Videos (University of Nottingham)
* Lead-Free Wheels
* National Lead Free Wheel Weight Initiative| Waste Minimization|Wastes|US EPA
* CDC - NIOSH Pocket Guide to Chemical Hazards - Lead

 



[[Limestone]]

Limestone is a sedimentary rock composed largely of the minerals calcite and aragonite, which are different crystal forms of calcium carbonate (CaCO3). Most limestone are composed from skeletal fragments of marine organisms such as coral or foraminifera.

Limestone makes up about 10% of the total volume of all sedimentary rocks. The solubility of limestone in water and weak acid solutions leads to karst landscapes, in which water erodes the limestone over thousands to millions of years. Most cave systems are through limestone bedrock.

Limestone has numerous uses: as a building material, as aggregate for the base of roads, as white pigment or filler in products such as toothpaste or paints, and as a chemical feedstock.

The first geologist to distinguish limestone from dolomite was Belsazar Hacquet in 1778. 

== Description ==
Limestone quarry at Cedar Creek, Virginia, USA
Cutting the limestone blocks at a quarry in Gozo, Malta
La Zaplaz formations in the Piatra Craiului Mountains, Romania.
Like most other sedimentary rocks, most limestone is composed of grains. Most grains in limestone are skeletal fragments of marine organisms such as coral or foraminifera. Other carbonate grains comprising limestones are ooids, peloids, intraclasts, and extraclasts. These organisms secrete shells made of aragonite or calcite, and leave these shells behind after the organisms die.

Limestone often contains variable amounts of silica in the form of chert (chalcedony, flint, jasper, etc.) or siliceous skeletal fragment (sponge spicules, diatoms, radiolarians), and varying amounts of clay, silt and sand (terrestrial detritus) carried in by rivers.

Some limestones do not consist of grains at all, and are formed completely by the chemical precipitation of calcite or aragonite, i.e. travertine. Secondary calcite may be deposited by supersaturated meteoric waters (groundwater that precipitates the material in caves). This produces speleothems, such as stalagmites and stalactites. Another form taken by calcite is oolitic limestone, which can be recognized by its granular (oolite) appearance.

The primary source of the calcite in limestone is most commonly marine organisms. Some of these organisms can construct mounds of rock known as reefs, building upon past generations. Below about 3,000 meters, water pressure and temperature conditions cause the dissolution of calcite to increase nonlinearly, so limestone typically does not form in deeper waters (see lysocline). Limestones may also form in both lacustrine and evaporite depositional environments. Oilfield Glossary: Term 'evaporite'. Glossary.oilfield.slb.com. Retrieved on 2011-11-25. 

Calcite can be either dissolved or precipitated by groundwater, depending on several factors, including the water temperature, pH, and dissolved ion concentrations. Calcite exhibits an unusual characteristic called retrograde solubility, in which it becomes less soluble in water as the temperature increases.

Because of impurities, such as clay, sand, organic remains, iron oxide and other materials, many limestones exhibit different colors, especially on weathered surfaces.

Limestone may be crystalline, clastic, granular, or massive, depending on the method of formation. Crystals of calcite, quartz, dolomite or barite may line small cavities in the rock. When conditions are right for precipitation, calcite forms mineral coatings that cement the existing rock grains together, or it can fill fractures.

Travertine is a banded, compact variety of limestone formed along streams, particularly where there are waterfalls, and around hot or cold springs. Calcium carbonate is deposited where evaporation of the water leaves a solution supersaturated with the chemical constituents of calcite. Tufa, a porous or cellular variety of travertine, is found near waterfalls. Coquina is a poorly consolidated limestone composed of pieces of coral or shells.

During regional metamorphism that occurs during the mountain building process (orogeny), limestone recrystallizes into marble.

Limestone is a parent material of Mollisol soil group.

==Classification==
Two major classification schemes, the Folk and the Dunham, are used for identifying limestone and carbonate rocks.

===Folk classification===

Robert L. Folk developed a classification system that places primary emphasis on the detailed composition of grains and interstitial material in carbonate rocks. Based on composition, there are three main components: allochems (grains), matrix (mostly micrite), and cement (sparite). The Folk system uses two-part names; the first refers to the grains and the second is the root. It is helpful to have a petrographic microscope when using the Folk scheme, because it is easier to determine the components present in each sample. 

===Dunham classification===

The Dunham scheme focuses on depositional textures. Each name is based upon the texture of the grains that make up the limestone. Robert J. Dunham published his system for limestone in 1962; it focuses on the depositional fabric of carbonate rocks. Dunham divides the rocks into four main groups based on relative proportions of coarser clastic particles. Dunham names are essentially for rock families. His efforts deal with the question of whether or not the grains were originally in mutual contact, and therefore self-supporting, or whether the rock is characterized by the presence of frame builders and algal mats. Unlike the Folk scheme, Dunham deals with the original porosity of the rock. The Dunham scheme is more useful for hand samples because it is based on texture, not the grains in the sample. 

== Limestone landscape ==

The Cudgel of Hercules, a tall limestone rock (Pieskowa Skaa Castle in the background)

Limestone makes up about 10% of the total volume of all sedimentary rocks. 

Limestone is partially soluble, especially in acid, and therefore forms many erosional landforms. These include limestone pavements, pot holes, cenotes, caves and gorges. Such erosion landscapes are known as karsts. Limestone is less resistant than most igneous rocks, but more resistant than most other sedimentary rocks. It is therefore usually associated with hills and downland, and occurs in regions with other sedimentary rocks, typically clays.

Karst topography and caves develop in limestone rocks due to their solubility in dilute acidic groundwater. The solubility of limestone in water and weak acid solutions leads to karst landscapes. Regions overlying limestone bedrock tend to have fewer visible above-ground sources (ponds and streams), as surface water easily drains downward through joints in the limestone. While draining, water and organic acid from the soil slowly (over thousands or millions of years) enlarges these cracks, dissolving the calcium carbonate and carrying it away in solution. Most cave systems are through limestone bedrock. Cooling groundwater or mixing of different groundwaters will also create conditions suitable for cave formation.

Coastal limestones are often eroded by organisms which bore into the rock by various means. This process is known as bioerosion. It is most common in the tropics, and it is known throughout the fossil record (see Taylor and Wilson, 2003).

Bands of limestone emerge from the Earth's surface in often spectacular rocky outcrops and islands. Examples include the Burren in Co. Clare, Ireland; the Verdon Gorge in France; Malham Cove in North Yorkshire and the Isle of Wight, England; on Fr near the Swedish island of Gotland, the Niagara Escarpment in Canada/United States, Notch Peak in Utah, the Ha Long Bay National Park in Vietnam and the hills around the Lijiang River and Guilin city in China.

The Florida Keys, islands off the south coast of Florida, are composed mainly of oolitic limestone (the Lower Keys) and the carbonate skeletons of coral reefs (the Upper Keys), which thrived in the area during interglacial periods when sea level was higher than at present.

Unique habitats are found on alvars, extremely level expanses of limestone with thin soil mantles. The largest such expanse in Europe is the Stora Alvaret on the island of land, Sweden. Another area with large quantities of limestone is the island of Gotland, Sweden. Huge quarries in northwestern Europe, such as those of Mount Saint Peter (Belgium/Netherlands), extend for more than a hundred kilometers.

The world's largest limestone quarry is at Michigan Limestone and Chemical Company in Rogers City, Michigan. Michigan Markers. Michmarkers.com. Retrieved on 2011-11-25. 

== Uses ==

Limestone is very common in architecture, especially in Europe and North America. Many landmarks across the world, including the Great Pyramid and its associated complex in Giza, Egypt, are made of limestone. So many buildings in Kingston, Ontario, Canada were constructed from it that it is nicknamed the 'Limestone City'. On the island of Malta, a variety of limestone called Globigerina limestone was, for a long time, the only building material available, and is still very frequently used on all types of buildings and sculptures. Limestone is readily available and relatively easy to cut into blocks or more elaborate carving. It is also long-lasting and stands up well to exposure. However, it is a very heavy material, making it impractical for tall buildings, and relatively expensive as a building material.
The Great Pyramid of Giza, one of the Seven Wonders of the Ancient World has an outside cover made entirely from limestone.
Courthouse built of limestone in Manhattan, Kansas
A limestone plate with a negative map of Moosburg in Bavaria is prepared for a lithography print.
Limestone was most popular in the late 19th and early 20th centuries. Train stations, banks and other structures from that era are normally made of limestone. It is used as a facade on some skyscrapers, but only in thin plates for covering, rather than solid blocks. In the United States, Indiana, most notably the Bloomington area, has long been a source of high quality quarried limestone, called Indiana limestone. Many famous buildings in London are built from Portland limestone.

Limestone was also a very popular building block in the Middle Ages in the areas where it occurred, since it is hard, durable, and commonly occurs in easily accessible surface exposures. Many medieval churches and castles in Europe are made of limestone. Beer stone was a popular kind of limestone for medieval buildings in southern England.

Limestone and (to a lesser extent) marble are reactive to acid solutions, making acid rain a significant problem to the preservation of artifacts made from this stone. Many limestone statues and building surfaces have suffered severe damage due to acid rain. Acid-based cleaning chemicals can also etch limestone, which should only be cleaned with a neutral or mild alkaline-based cleaner.

Other uses include:
* It is the raw material for the manufacture of quicklime (calcium oxide), slaked lime (calcium hydroxide), cement and mortar.
* Pulverized limestone is used as a soil conditioner to neutralize acidic soils.
* It is crushed for use as aggregatethe solid base for many roads.
* Geological formations of limestone are among the best petroleum reservoirs;
* As a reagent in flue-gas desulfurization, it reacts with sulfur dioxide for air pollution control.
* Glass making, in some circumstances, uses limestone.
* It is added to toothpaste, paper, plastics, paint, tiles, and other materials as both white pigment and a cheap filler.
* It can suppress methane explosions in underground coal mines.
* Purified, it is added to bread and cereals as a source of calcium.
* Calcium levels in livestock feed are supplemented with it, such as for poultry (when ground up). 
* It can be used for remineralizing and increasing the alkalinity of purified water to prevent pipe corrosion and to restore essential nutrient levels. 
* Used in blast furnaces, limestone binds with silica and other impurities to remove them from the iron.
* It is often found in medicines and cosmetics.
* It is used in sculptures because of its suitability for carving.

==Degradation by organisms==

The cyanobacterium Hyella balani can bore through limestone; as can the green algae Eugamantia sacculata and the fungus Ostracolaba implexa. 

==Gallery==

Image:OrdOutcropTN.JPG|A stratigraphic section of Ordovician limestone exposed in central Tennessee, U.S. The less-resistant and thinner beds are composed of shale. The vertical lines are drill holes for explosives used during road construction.
Image:CarmelOoids.jpg|Thin-section view of a Middle Jurassic limestone in southern Utah. The round grains are ooids; the largest is 1.2 mm in diameter. This limestone is an oosparite.
Image:Limestone_etched_section_KopeFm_new.jpg|Photo and etched section of a sample of fossiliferous limestone from the Kope Formation (Upper Ordovician) near Cincinnati, Ohio.
Image:BrassfieldEncrinite042112.jpg|Biosparite limestone of the Brassfield Formation (Lower Silurian) near Fairborn, Ohio, showing grains mainly composed of crinoid fragments.

== See also ==

* Calcium carbonate
* Chalk
* Coral sand
* Dolomite
* Kurkar
* In Praise of Limestone
* List of types of limestone by location
* Sandstone

== References ==

== Further reading ==
* Taylor, P.D. and Wilson, M.A., 2003. Palaeoecology and evolution of marine hard substrate communities. Earth-Science Reviews 62: 1103.
* Folk RL, (1974) Petrology of Sedimentary Rocks, Hemphill Publishing, Austin, Texas
* Dunham, R.J., 1962, Classification of carbonate rocks according to depositional textures, in Ham W.E. (ed.), Classification of carbonate rocks: Am. Assoc. Petroleum Geologists Mem. 1,p. 108121
* Robert S. Boynton-Chemistry and technology of lime and limestone- Wiley (1980)  578 pages  ISBN 0471027715

 



[[Lbeck]]

The Hanseatic City of Lbeck (, Low German ) is the second-largest city in Schleswig-Holstein, in northern Germany, and one of the major ports of Germany. Situated on the river Trave, it was for several centuries the "capital" of the Hanseatic League ("Queen of the Hanse"). Because of its extensive Brick Gothic architecture, it is listed by UNESCO as a World Heritage Site. In 2005 it had a population of 213,983.

The old part of Lbeck is on an island enclosed by the Trave. The ElbeLbeck Canal connects the Trave with the Elbe River. Another important river near the town centre is the Wakenitz. The Autobahn 1 connects Lbeck with Hamburg and Denmark (Vogelfluglinie). The borough of Travemnde is a sea resort and ferry port on the coast of the Baltic Sea. Its central station links Lbeck to a number of railway lines, notably the line to Hamburg.

==History==

The area around Lbeck was settled after the last Ice Age. Several Neolithic dolmens can be found in the area.

Around AD 700 Slavic peoples started coming into the eastern parts of Holstein, which had previously been settled by Germanic inhabitants; the latter had moved on in the course of the Migration Period. In the early 9th century Charlemagne, whose efforts to Christianise the area were opposed by the Saxons, expelled the Saxons out and brought in Polabian Slavs, allied to Charlemagne, in their stead. Liubice ("lovely") was founded on the banks of the river Trave about four kilometres (4 km) north of the present-day city centre of Lbeck. In the 10th century it became the most important settlement of the Obotrite confederacy and a castle was built. The settlement was burned down in 1128 by the pagan Rani from Rgen.

The modern town was founded as a German settlement in 1143 by Adolf II, Count of Schauenburg and Holstein, on the river island Bucu. He built a new castle, which was first mentioned by Helmold in 1147. Adolf had to cede the castle to Henry the Lion in 1158. After Henry's fall from power in 1181, the town became an Imperial city for eight years. Emperor Barbarossa ordained that the city should have a ruling council of twenty members. With the council dominated by merchants, Lbeck's politics were led by pragmatic trade interests for centuries to come. The council survived into the 19th century.

The town and castle changed ownership for a period afterwards and were part of the Duchy of Saxony until 1192, of the County of Holstein until 1217, and as part of Denmark until the Battle of Bornhved in 1227.

Lbeck's seal, 1280
Around 1200 the port became the main point of departure for colonists leaving for the Baltic territories conquered by the Livonian Order and, later, Teutonic Order. In 1226 Emperor Frederick II elevated the town to the status of an Imperial Free City, by which it became the Free City of Lbeck.

In the 14th century Lbeck became the "Queen of the Hanseatic League", being by far the largest and most powerful member of this mediaeval trade organization. In 1375, Emperor Charles IV named Lbeck one of the five "Glories of the Empire", a title shared with Venice, Rome, Pisa and Florence. Several conflicts about trade privileges were fought by Lbeck and the Hanseatic League against Denmark and Norway with varying outcomes. While Lbeck and the Hanseatic League prevailed in conflicts in 1435 and 1512, Lbeck lost when it became involved in the Count's Feud, a civil war that raged in Denmark from 1534 to 1536. Lbeck also joined the Schmalkaldic League.

After its defeat in the Count's Feud, Lbeck's power slowly declined. The city remained neutral in the Thirty Years' War, but, the combination of the devastation from the decades-long war and the new transatlantic orientation of European trade, caused the Hanseatic League and thus Lbeck to decline in importance. But, after the Hanseatic League was de facto disbanded in 1669, Lbeck still remained an important trading town on the Baltic Sea.

The great Danish-German composer Dieterich Buxtehude (born in what is present-day Sweden) was appointed as the organist at the Marienkirche in Lbeck in 1668 and served in the post until at least 1703.

In the course of the war of the Fourth Coalition against Napoleon, troops under Bernadotte occupied the neutral Lbeck after a battle against Blcher on November 6, 1806. Under the Continental System, the bank went into bankruptcy. From 1811 to 1813, Lbeck was formally annexed as part of France until the Vienna Congress of 1815.

In 1937 the Nazis passed the so-called Greater Hamburg Act, whereby the nearby Free and Hanseatic City of Hamburg was expanded, to encompass towns that had formally belonged to the Prussian province of Schleswig-Holstein. To compensate Prussia for these losses (and partly because Hitler had a personal dislike for Lbeck after it had refused to allow him to campaign there in 1932 "Lbeck: The town that said no to Hitler", Simon Heffer, www.telegraph.co.uk, Retrieved 2010-06-28. ), Hitler ended the 711-year-long independence of Lbeck, and ensured that almost all its territory was incorporated into Schleswig-Holstein.
Lbeck, 16th century
Lbeck in 1641
During World War II, Lbeck was the first German city to be attacked in substantial numbers by the Royal Air Force (RAF). The attack on 28 March 1942 created a firestorm that caused severe damage to the historic centre. The Bombing of Lbeck in World War II destroyed three of the main churches and greater parts of the built-up area. Germany operated a POW camp for officers, Oflag X-C, near the city from 1940 until April 1945. The British Second Army entered Lbeck on 2 May 1945 and occupied it without resistance.

On 3 May 1945, one of the biggest disasters in naval history occurred in the Bay of Lbeck when RAF bombers sank three ships: the SS Cap Arcona, the SS Deutschland, and the SS Thielbek - which, unknown to them, were packed with concentration-camp inmates. About 7,000 people were killed.

Lbeck's population grew considerably from about 150,000 in 1939 to more than 220,000 after the war, owing to an influx of ethnic German refugees expelled from eastern Europe, the so-called former Eastern provinces of Germany.

Lbeck remained part of Schleswig-Holstein after the war (and consequently lay within West Germany). It was situated directly on what became the inner German border during the division of Germany into two states in the Cold War period. South of the city, the border followed the path of the river Wakenitz, which separated the Germanys by less than 10 m in many parts. The northernmost border crossing was in Lbeck's district of Schlutup. Lbeck spent decades restoring its historic city centre. In 1987 this area was designated as a UNESCO World Heritage Site.

Lbeck was the scene of a notable art scandal in the 1950s. Lothar Malskat was hired to restore the medieval frescoes of the cathedral of the Marienkirche, which were discovered after the cathedral had been badly damaged during World War II. Instead he painted new works which he passed off as restorations, fooling many experts. The West German government printed 2 million postage stamps depicting the frescoes. Among Malskat's additions were wild turkeys, unknown in Europe during the Middle Ages. Some experts initially considered this evidence for the early discovery of America by the Vikings. Malskat later revealed the deception himself. Gnter Grass featured this incident in his novel The Rat.

On the night of January 18, 1996, a fire broke out in a home for foreign refugees, killing 10 people and severely injuring more than 30 others, mostly children. Most of the shelter's inhabitants thought it was a racist attack, as they had encountered other overt hostility in the city. "Brandspuren im Gesicht, Ermittlungen zur Lbecker Asylheim-Katastrophe", Der Spiegel, 23/1996, June 3rd, 1996. The police and the local court were criticized at the time for ruling out racism as a possible motive before even beginning preliminary investigations. Hannoversche Allgemeine Zeitung, March 5th, 2005 The perpetrators have not been caught.

==Demographics==
As of 2010, the city had a population of 210,232, a slight decrease since 2006. The largest ethnic minority groups are Turks, Southern Europeans (mostly Greeks and Italians), Eastern Europeans (e.g. Poles, Russians), Arabs and several smaller groups. As in numerous other German cities, there is also a growing and vibrant Afro-German community. 
Population structure http://www.statistik-nord.de/index.php?id=552 

 Ancestry Number Percentage 
 Germans 176,650 84% 
 Turks 11,200 5,3% 
 Eastern Europeans 5,500 (3,000 Poles, 1,100 Russians, 1,400 others.) 2,6% 
 Southern Europeans 3,300 (1,300 Greeks, 1,000 Italians, 1,000 others.) 1,5% 
 Arabs 3,000 (1,000 Iraqis, 2,000 others.) 1,4% 
 East Asians 3,000 (500 Chinese, 2,500 others.) 1,4% 
 African/Afro-Germans 2,600 (500 Ghanaians, 400 Nigerians, 1,700 others.) 1,2% 
 others 5,460 2,6% 

==Main sights==
St. Mary's Church, Lbeck
Town Hall
Fehmarnbelt Lightship in front of the Concert and Congress Center
Hospital of the Holy Spirit, one of the oldest social institutions of Lbeck (1260)
A typical crow-stepped gabled town house

===Buildings===
Much of the old town has kept a medieval appearance with old buildings and narrow streets. At one time the town could only be entered via any of four town gates, of which today two remain, the well-known Holstentor (1478) and the Burgtor (1444).

The old town centre is dominated by seven church steeples. The oldest are the Lbecker Dom (the city's cathedral) and the Marienkirche (Saint Mary's), both from the 13th and 14th centuries.

Other sights include:
*the Lbecker Rathaus (Town Hall).
*Saint Catherine Church, Lbeck, a church that belonged to a former monastery, now the Katharineum, a Latin school.
*Thomas Mann's house.
*Gnter Grass' house.
*Church of St. Peter ("Petrikirche").
*Church of St. Lawrence, located on the site of a cemetery for people who died during the 16th century plague.
*Church of St. Jacob (Lbecker Jakobikirche, 1334).
*Church of the Sacred Heart (Propsteikirche Herz Jesu)
*Church of St. Aegidien ("Aegidienkirche").
*the Salzspeicher, historic warehouses where salt delivered from Lneburg awaited shipment to Baltic ports.

Like many other places in Germany, Lbeck has a long tradition of a Christmas market in December, which includes the famous handicrafts market inside the Heiligen-Geist-Hospital (Hospital of the Holy Spirit), located at the northern end of Knigstrasse.

===Museums===
Lbeck has many small museums, such as the St. Annen Museum, the Behnhaus and the Holstentor. Lbeck Museum of Theatre Puppets is a privately run museum. Waterside attractions are a lightvessel that served Fehmarnbelt and the Lisa von Lbeck, a reconstruction of a Hanseatic 15th century caravel.

==Food and drink==

Lbeck is famous for its marzipan industry. According to local legend, marzipan was first made in Lbeck, possibly in response either to a military siege of the city or a famine year. The story, perhaps apocryphal, is that the town ran out of all food except stored almonds and sugar, which were used to make loaves of marzipan "bread". Others believe that marzipan was actually invented in Persia a few hundred years before Lbeck claims to have invented it. The best known producer is Niederegger, which tourists often visit while in Lbeck, especially at Christmas time.

The Lbeck wine trade dates back to Hanseatic times. One Lbeck specialty is Rotspon, wine made from grapes processed and fermented in France and transported in wooden barrels to Lbeck, where it is stored, aged and bottled.

==Education==
Lbeck has three universities, the University of Lbeck, the Lbeck Academy of Applied Sciences, and the Lbeck Academy of Music. The Graduate School for Computing in Medicine and Life Sciences is a central faculty of the University and was founded by the German Excellence Initiative.
The International School of New Media is an affiliated institute of the University.

==Notable people==

* Robert Christian Av-Lallemant - explorer
* Hans Blumenberg  philosopher
* Willy Brandt  chancellor
* Ephraim Carlebach  rabbi
* Felix Carlebach  rabbi
* Joseph Carlebach  rabbi
* Friedrich Matthias Claudius - anatomist
* Bjrn Engholm  politician
* Walter Ewers - flying ace
* Christian Friedrich Heinecken  child prodigy
* Godfrey Kneller  painter
* Heinrich Mann  novelist
* Thomas Mann  novelist
* John Rugee  politician
* Sandra Vlker  swimmer
* Justus von Dohnnyi - actor
* Jrg Wontorra - sport journalist
* Dieterich Buxtehude  composer and organist
* Patrick Zimmerman - Soccer star at Georgia Military College in Milledgeville, GA
* Gnter Grass (born in Danzig in 1927 / Nobel Prize for Literature in 1999)
* Joo Carlos Antonio Frederico Zerrenner - Enterprising/ Industrial in Brazil ( Born 1843)

==Parts==
The city of Lbeck is divided into 10 zones. These again are arranged into altogether 35 urban districts. The 10 zones with their official numbers, their associated urban districts and the numbers of inhabitants of the quarters:

*01 City center (~ 12,000 Inhabitants)
*02 St. Jrgen (~ 40,000 Inhabitants)
** Hxtertor / Mhlentor / Grtnergasse, Strecknitz / Rothebek, Blankensee, Wulfsdorf, Beidendorf, Krummesse, Kronsforde, Niederbssau, Vorrade, Schiereichenkoppel, Oberbssau
*03 Moisling (~ 10,000 Inhabitants)
** Niendorf / Moorgarten, Reecke, Old-Moisling / Genin
*04 Buntekuh (~ 10,000 Inhabitants)
*05 St. Lorenz-South (~ 12,000 Inhabitants)
*06 St. Lorenz-North (~ 40,000 Inhabitants)
** Holstentor-North, Falkenfeld / Vorwerk / Teerhof, Grosteinrade / Schnbcken, Dornbreite / Krempelsdorf
*07 St. Gertrud (~ 40,000 Inhabitants)
** Burgtor / Stadtpark, Marli / Brandenbaum, Eichholz, Karlshof / Israelsdorf / Gothmund
*08 Schlutup (~ 6,000 Inhabitants)
*09 Kcknitz (~ 20,000 Inhabitants)
** Dnischburg / Siems / Rangenberg / Wallberg, Herrenwyk, Alt-Kcknitz / Dummersdorf / Roter Hahn, Poeppendorf
*10 Travemnde (~ 15,000 Inhabitants)
** Ivendorf, Alt-Travemnde / Rnnau, Priwall, Teutendorf, Brodten

The industrial Lbeck-Herrenwyk area was until the beginning of the 1990s the location of a big metallurgical plant. The gas produced by this plant was used for making electricity in the Lbeck-Herrenwyk power station. In 1992, the Lbeck-Herrenwyk power station was demolished after the bankruptcy and demolition of the metallurgical plant and since 1994 its site houses the static inverter plant of the HVDC Baltic Cable.

==International relations==

Lbeck is twinned with:

 * Kotka, Finland (since 1969) * Venice, Italy (since 1979 - friendship treaty) * Wismar, Germany (since 1987) * La Rochelle, France (since 1988) * Klaipda, Lithuania (since 1990) * Kawasaki, Kanagawa, Japan (since 1992 - friendship treaty) * Szczecin, Poland (since 1993) * Bergen, Norway (since 1996 - friendship treaty) * Visby, Sweden (since 1999) * Spokane, United States (Sister City 1980 - 2000, Friendship treaty) 

Lubec, Maine, the easternmost town in the United States, is named after Lbeck.

==See also==
* Cap Arcona
* Lbeck Airport
* Lbeck Hauptbahnhof
* Lbeck Nordic Film Days
* Lbeck law
* Lbeck Waste Treatment Facility
* Lbecker Nachrichten is Lbeck's only newspaper
* Oberschule zum Dom
* Ports of the Baltic Sea
* Schleswig-Holstein Musik Festival
* VfB Lbeck, football and sports club

==References==

==External links==

* 
* Official tourism site
* Lovebridge Lbeck

 



[[Laos]]

Laos ((, , , or ) These same pronunciations using Wikipedia's pronunciation respelling key: , , , . Lao Language:   , Sathalanalat Paxathipatai Paxaxon Lao), officially the Lao People's Democratic Republic, is a landlocked country in Southeast Asia, bordered by Burma and People's Republic of China to the northwest, Vietnam to the east, Cambodia to the south, and Thailand to the west. Its population was estimated to be around 6.5 million in 2012. 

A third of the population of Laos live below the international poverty line which means living on less than US$1.25 per day. Laos is a low income economy with it having one of the lowest annual incomes in the world. In 2013, Laos ranked the 138th place (tied with Cambodia) on the Human Development Index (HDI), indicating that Laos currently only has lower medium to low development. According to the Global Hunger Index, Laos currently ranks as the 25th hungriest nation in the world out of the list of the 56 nations with the worst hunger situation(s) in the world. Welthungerhilfe, IFPRI, and Concern Worldwide: 2013 Global Hunger Index - The challenge of hunger: Building Resilience to Achieve Food and Nutrition Security. Bonn, Washington D. C., Dublin. October 2013. Laos has had a poor human rights record most particularly dealing with the nation's acts of genocide being committed towards its Hmong population.

Laos traces its history to the kingdom of Lan Xang, which existed from the 14th to the 18th century when it split into three separate kingdoms. In 1893, it became a French protectorate, with the three kingdoms, Luang Phrabang, Vientiane and Champasak, uniting to form what is now known as Laos. It briefly gained independence in 1945 after Japanese occupation, but returned to French rule until it was granted autonomy in 1949. Laos became independent in 1953, with a constitutional monarchy under Sisavang Vong. Shortly after independence, a long civil war ended the monarchy, when the Communist Pathet Lao movement came to power in 1975.

Laos is a single-party socialist republic. It espouses Marxism and is governed by a single party communist politburo dominated by military generals. The Socialist Republic of Vietnam and the Vietnam People's Army continue to have significant influence in Laos. The capital city is Vientiane. Other large cities include Luang Prabang, Savannakhet, and Pakse. The official language is Lao. Laos is a multi-ethnic country with the politically and culturally dominant Lao people making up approximately 60% of the population, mostly in the lowlands. Various Mon-Khmer groups, the Hmong, and other indigenous hill tribes, accounting for 40% of the population, live in the foothills and mountains. Laos' strategy for development is based on generating electricity from its rivers and selling the power to its neighbors, namely Thailand, China, and Vietnam. Its economy is accelerating rapidly with the demands for its metals. 

It is a member of the Asia-Pacific Trade Agreement (APTA), Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN), East Asia Summit and La Francophonie. Laos applied for membership of the World Trade Organization (WTO) in 1997, and on 2 February 2013, it was granted full membership. Lao Peoples Democratic Republic and the WTO. WTO.org. 

==Etymology==
In the Lao language, the country's name is "Muang Lao" () or "Pathet Lao" (), both of which literally mean "Lao Country". The French, who united the three separate Lao kingdoms in French Indochina in 1893, named the country as the plural of the dominant and most common ethnic group (in French, the final "s" at the end of a word is usually silent, thus it would also be pronounced "Lao"). 

==History==

===Early history===
In 2009 an ancient skull was recovered from the Tam Pa Ling cave in the Annamite Mountains in northern Laos; the skull is at least 46,000 years old, making it the oldest modern human fossil found to date in Southeast Asia. "F. et al., Anatomically modern human in Southeast Asia (Laos) by 46 ka http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/22908291/", PNAS, 04 September 2012. Archaeological evidence suggests agriculturist society developed during the 4th millennium BC. Burial jars and other kinds of sepulchers suggest a complex society in which bronze objects appeared around 1500 BC, and iron tools were known from 700 BC. The proto-historic period is characterized by contact with Chinese and Indian civilizations. From the fourth to the eighth century, communities along the Mekong River began to form into townships called muang. 

===Lan Xang===

Pha That Luang in Vientiane is the national symbol of Laos.
Statue of Fa Ngum, founder of the Lan Xang kingdom

Laos traces its history to the kingdom of Lan Xang (Million Elephants), founded in the 14th century, by a Lao prince Fa Ngum, who with 10,000 Khmer troops, took over Vientiane. Ngum was descended from a long line of Lao kings, tracing back to Khoun Boulom. He made Theravada Buddhism the state religion and Lan Xang prospered. Within 20 years of its formation, the kingdom expanded eastward to Champa and along the Annamite mountains in Vietnam. His ministers, unable to tolerate his ruthlessness, forced him into exile to the present-day Thai province of Nan in 1373, where he died. Fa Ngum's eldest son, Oun Heuan, came to the throne under the name Samsenthai and reigned for 43 years. During his reign, Lan Xang became an important trade centre. After his death in 1421, Lan Xang collapsed into warring factions for the next 100 years.

In 1520, Photisarath came to the throne and moved the capital from Luang Prabang to Vientiane to avoid a Burmese invasion. Setthathirat became king in 1548, after his father was killed, and ordered the construction of what would become the symbol of Laos, That Luang. Setthathirat disappeared in the mountains on his way back from a military expedition into Cambodia and Lan Xang began to rapidly decline. It was not until 1637, when Sourigna Vongsa ascended the throne, that Lan Xang would further expand its frontiers. His reign is often regarded as Laos's golden age. When he died, leaving Lan Xang without an heir, the kingdom divided into three principalities. Between 1763 and 1769, Burmese armies overran northern Laos and annexed Luang Phrabang, while Champasak eventually came under Siamese suzerainty.

Chao Anouvong was installed as a vassal king of Vientiane by the Siamese. He encouraged a renaissance of Lao fine arts and literature and improved relations with Luang Phrabang. Under Vietnamese pressure, he rebelled against the Siamese. The rebellion failed and Vientiane was ransacked. Anouvong was taken to Bangkok as a prisoner, where he died.

A Siamese military campaign in Laos in 1876 was described by a British observer as having been "transformed into slave-hunting raids on a large scale". "Slavery in Nineteenth-Century Northern Thailand: Archival Anecdotes and Village Voices". The Kyoto Review of Southeast Asia 

==French Laos==

In the late 19th century, Luang Prabang was ransacked by the Chinese Black Flag Army. France rescued King Oun Kham and added Luang Phrabang to the 'Protectorate' of French Indochina. Shortly after, the Kingdom of Champasak and the territory of Vientiane were also added to the protectorate. King Sisavang Vong of Luang Phrabang became ruler of a unified Laos and Vientiane once again became the capital. Laos never had any importance for France other than as a buffer state between British-influenced Thailand and the more economically important Annam and Tonkin.
During their rule, the French introduced the corvee, a system that forced every male Lao to contribute 10 days of manual labour per year to the colonial government. Laos produced tin, rubber, and coffee, but never accounted for more than 1% of French Indochina's exports. By 1940, around 600 French citizens lived in Laos. Most of the French who came to Laos as officials, settlers or missionaries developed a strong affection for the country and its people, and many devoted decades to what they saw as bettering the lives of the Lao. Some took Lao wives, learned the language, became Buddhists and "went native" - something more acceptable in the French Empire than in the British. With the racial attitudes typical of Europeans at this time, however, they tended to classify the Lao as gentle, amiable, childlike, naive and lazy, regarding them with what one writer called "a mixture of affection and exasperation."

The country declared its independence on 12 October 1945, but the French under Charles de Gaulle re-asserted control. In 1950 Laos was granted semi-autonomy as an "associated state" within the French Union. France remained in de facto control until 22 October 1953, when Laos gained full independence as a constitutional monarchy.

===Independence===
King Sisavang Vong of Laos

Pathet Lao soldiers in Vientiane
In 1955, the U.S. Department of Defense created a special Programs Evaluation Office to replace French support of the Royal Lao Army against the communist Pathet Lao as part of the U.S. containment policy.

In 1960, amidst a series of rebellions, fighting broke out between the Royal Lao Army and the Pathet Lao. A second Provisional Government of National Unity formed by Prince Souvanna Phouma in 1962 proved to be unsuccessful, and the situation steadily deteriorated into large scale civil war between the Royal Laotian government and the Pathet Lao. The Pathet Lao were backed militarily by the NVA and Vietcong.

Laos was also dragged into the Vietnam War since parts of Laos were invaded and occupied by North Vietnam for use as a supply route for its war against the South. In response, the United States initiated a bombing campaign against the North Vietnamese positions, supported regular and irregular anticommunist forces in Laos and supported South Vietnamese incursions into Laos.

In 1968 the North Vietnamese Army launched a multi-division attack to help the Pathet Lao to fight the Royal Lao Army. The attack resulted in the army largely demobilizing, leaving the conflict to irregular forces raised by the United States and Thailand.

Massive aerial bombardment against Pathet Lao and invading NVA communist forces was carried out by the United States to prevent the collapse of Laos' central government, the Royal Kingdom of Laos, and to prevent the use of the Ho Chi Minh Trail to attack U.S. forces in South Vietnam and the Republic of Vietnam. As of 2008, Laos is the most heavily bombed country, per capita, in the world. An average of one B-52 bomb-load was dropped on Laos every eight minutes, 24 hours a day, between 1964 and 1973. Due to the particularly heavily impact of cluster bombs during this war, Laos was a strong advocate of the Convention on Cluster Munitions to ban the weapons and assist victims, and hosted the First Meeting of States Parties to the convention in November 2010. 

In 1975 the Pathet Lao, along with the Vietnam People's Army and backed by the Soviet Union, overthrew the royalist Lao government, forcing King Savang Vatthana to abdicate on 2 December 1975. He later died in captivity. Between 20,000 and 70,000 Laotians died during the Civil War. T. Lomperis, From People's War to People's Rule, (1996), estimates 35,000 total. Eckhardt, William, in World Military and Social Expenditures 1987-88 (12th ed., 1987) by Ruth Leger Sivard. Rummel, Rudolph J.: Death By Government (1994) Obermeyer (2008), "Fifty years of violent war deaths from Vietnam to Bosnia", British Medical Journal. 

On 2 December 1975, after taking control of the country, the Pathet Lao government under Kaysone Phomvihane renamed the country as the Lao People's Democratic Republic and signed agreements giving Vietnam the right to station armed forces and to appoint advisers to assist in overseeing the country. Laos was requested in 1979 by the Socialist Republic of Vietnam to end relations with the People's Republic of China, leading to isolation in trade by China, the United States, and other countries.

The conflict between Hmong rebels and the Vietnam People's Army of the Socialist Republic of Vietnam (SRV), as well as the SRV-backed Pathet Lao continued in various pockets in key areas of Laos, including in Saysaboune Closed Military Zone, Xaisamboune Closed Military Zone near Vientiane Province and Xieng Khouang Province. The government of Laos has been accused of committing genocide, human rights and religious freedom violations against the Hmong in collaboration with the Vietnamese army, Hamilton-Merritt, Jane (1999) Tragic Mountains: The Hmong, the Americans, and the Secret Wars for Laos, 19421992, Indiana University Press, pp. 337460, ISBN 0253207568. with up to 100,000 killed out of a population of 400,000. Statistics of Democide Rudolph Rummel From 1975 to 1996, the United States resettled some 250,000 Lao refugees from Thailand, including 130,000 Hmong. Laos (04/09). U.S. Department of State. (See: Indochina refugee crisis)

==Geography==

Mekong River flowing through Luang Prabang
Rice fields in Laos
Laos is the only landlocked country in Southeast Asia, and it lies mostly between latitudes 14 and 23N (a small area is south of 14), and longitudes 100 and 108E. Its thickly forested landscape consists mostly of rugged mountains, the highest of which is Phou Bia at 2818 m, with some plains and plateaus. The Mekong River forms a large part of the western boundary with Thailand, whereas the mountains of the Annamite Range form most of the eastern border with Vietnam and the Luang Prabang Range the northwestern border with the Thai highlands. There are two plateaux, the Xiangkhoang in the north and the Bolaven Plateau at the southern end. The climate is tropical and influenced by the monsoon pattern. 

There is a distinct rainy season from May to November, followed by a dry season from December to April. Local tradition holds that there are three seasons (rainy, cold and hot) as the latter two months of the climatologically defined dry season are noticeably hotter than the earlier four months. The capital and largest city of Laos is Vientiane and other major cities include Luang Prabang, Savannakhet, and Pakse.

In 1993 the Laos government set aside 21% of the nation's land area for habitat conservation preservation. The country is one of four in the opium poppy growing region known as the "Golden Triangle". According to the October 2007 UNODC fact book Opium Poppy Cultivation in South East Asia, the poppy cultivation area was 15 km2, down from 18 km2 in 2006.

Laos can be considered to consist of three geographical areas: north, central, and south. 

===Administrative divisions===

Laos is divided into 17 provinces (khoueng) and one prefecture (kampheng nakhon) which includes the capital city Vientiane (Nakhon Louang Viangchan).
Provinces are further divided into districts (muang) and then villages (ban). An 'urban' village is essentially a town. 

  Subdivisions Capital Area (km) Population 1 Attapeu Attapeu (Samakkhixay District) 10,320 114,300 2 Bokeo Ban Houayxay (Houayxay District) 6,196 149,700 3 Bolikhamsai Paksan (Paksane District) 14,863 214,900 4 Champasak Pakse (Pakse District) 15,415 575,600 5 Hua Phan Xam Neua (Xamneua District) 16,500 322,200 6 Khammouane Thakhek (Thakhek District) 16,315 358,800 7 Luang Namtha Luang Namtha (Namtha District) 9,325 150,100 8 Luang Prabang Luang Prabang (Louangprabang District) 16,875 408,800 9 Oudomxay Muang Xay (Xay District) 15,370 275,300 10 Phongsali Phongsali (Phongsaly District) 16,270 199,900 11 Sayabouly Sayabouly (Xayabury District) 16,389 382,200 12 Salavan Salavan (Salavan District) 10,691 336,600 13 Savannakhet Savannakhet (Khanthabouly District) 21,774 721,500 14 Sekong Sekong (Lamarm District) 7,665 83,600 15 Vientiane Capi. Vientiane City 3,920 726,000 16 Vientiane Prov. Phonhong (Phonhong District) 15,927 373,700 17 Xieng Khouang Phonsavan (Pek District) 15,880 229,521 A clickable map of Laos exhibiting its provinces and prefecture. 

===Environmental problems===
Laos is increasingly suffering from environmental problems, with deforestation a particularly significant issue, as expanding commercial exploitation of the forests, plans for additional hydroelectric facilities, foreign demand for wild animals and nonwood forest products for food and traditional medicines, and a growing population all create increasing pressure.

The United Nations Development Programme warns that: "Protecting the environment and sustainable use of natural resources in Lao PDR is vital for poverty reduction and economic growth." 

In April 2011, The Independent newspaper reported that Laos had started work on the controversial Xayaburi Dam on the Mekong River without getting formal approval. Environmentalists say the dam will adversely affect 60 million people and Cambodia and Vietnamconcerned about the flow of water further downstreamare officially opposed to the project. The Mekong River Commission, a regional intergovernmental body designed to promote the "sustainable management" of the river, famed for its giant catfish, carried out a study that warned if Xayaburi and subsequent schemes went ahead, it would "fundamentally undermine the abundance, productivity and diversity of the Mekong fish resources". Neighbouring Vietnam warned that the dam would harm the Mekong Delta, which is the home to nearly 20 million people and supplies around 50% of Vietnam's rice output and over 70% of both its seafood and fruit outputs. 

Milton Osborne, Visiting Fellow at the Lowy Institute for International Policy who has written widely on the Mekong, warns: "The future scenario is of the Mekong ceasing to be a bounteous source of fish and guarantor of agricultural richness, with the great river below China becoming little more than a series of unproductive lakes." 

Illegal logging is also a major problem. Environmental groups estimate that 500000 m3 of logs find their way from Laos to Vietnam every year, with most of the furniture eventually exported to western countries. 

A 1992 government survey indicated that forests occupied about 48% of Laos' land area. Forest coverage decreased to 41% in a 2002 survey. Lao authorities have said that, in reality, forest coverage might be no more than 35% because of various development projects such as dams, on top of the losses to illegal logging. 

==Government and politics==

Thongsing Thammavong
The Lao People's Democratic Republic, along with China, Cuba, Vietnam, and North Korea is one of the world's five remaining socialist states. The only legal political party is the Lao People's Revolutionary Party (LPRP). The head of state is President Choummaly Sayasone, who is also the General Secretary of the Lao People's Revolutionary Party. The head of government is Prime Minister Thongsing Thammavong, who is also a senior member of the Politburo. Government policies are determined by the party through the all-powerful eleven-member Politburo of the Lao People's Revolutionary Party and the 61-member Central Committee of the Lao People's Revolutionary Party. Important government decisions are vetted by the Council of Ministers. The Socialist Republic of Vietnam maintains significant influence over the Politburo of Laos and the one-party communist state apparatus and military.

Laos's first, French-written and monarchical constitution was promulgated on 11 May 1947, and declared Laos to be an independent state within the French Union. The revised constitution of 11 May 1957 omitted reference to the French Union, though close educational, health and technical ties with the former colonial power persisted. The 1957 document was abrogated on 3 December 1975, when a communist People's Republic was proclaimed. A new constitution was adopted in 1991 and enshrined a "leading role" for the LPRP. In 1990, deputy minister for science & technology Thongsouk Saysangkhi resigned from the government and party, calling for political reform. He died in captivity in 1998. 

In 1992 elections were held for a new 85-seat National Assembly with members, nominated by the one-party communist government, elected by secret ballot to five-year terms. The elections were widely disputed and questioned by Lao and Hmong opposition and dissident groups abroad and in Laos and Thailand. This National Assembly, which essentially acts as a rubber stamp for the LPRP, approves all new laws, although the executive branch retains authority to issue binding decrees. The most recent elections took place in April 2011. The assembly was expanded to 99 members in 1997, to 115 members in 2006 and finally to 132 members during the 2011 elections.

===Infrastructure===
Rivers are an important means of transport in Laos

The main international airports are Vientiane's Wattay International Airport and Luang Prabang International Airport with Pakse International Airport also having a few international flights. The national airline is Lao Airlines. Other carriers serving the country include Bangkok Airways, Vietnam Airlines, AirAsia, Thai Airways International, and China Eastern Airlines.

Much of the country lacks adequate infrastructure. Laos has no railways, except a short link to connect Vientiane with Thailand over the ThaiLao Friendship Bridge. A short portage railway, the Don DetDon Khon narrow gauge railway was built by the French in Champasak Province but has been closed since the 1940s. In the late 1920s, work began on the ThakhekTan Ap railway that would have run between Thakhek, Khammouane Province and Tn p Railway Station, Qung Bnh Province, Vietnam through the M Gi Pass. However, the scheme was aborted in the 1930s. The major roads connecting the major urban centres, in particular Route 13, have been significantly upgraded in recent years, but villages far from major roads can be reached only through unpaved roads that may not be accessible year-round.

There is limited external and internal telecommunication, but mobile phones have become widespread in urban centres. In many rural areas electricity is at least partly available. Songthaews (pick-up trucks with benches) are used in the country for long-distance and local public transport.

Wattay International Airport in Vientiane

Laos has made particularly noteworthy progress increasing access to sanitation and has already met its 2015 Millennium Development Goal (MDG) target. O'Meally, Simon (2010). Lao PDR's progress in rural sanitation. London: Overseas Development Institute Laos' predominantly rural (68%, source: Department of Statistics, Ministry of Planning and Investment, 2009) population makes investing in sanitation difficult. In 1990 only 8% of the rural population had access to improved sanitation. Access rose rapidly from 10% in 1995 to 38% in 2008. Between 1995 and 2008 approximately 1,232,900 more people had access to improved sanitation in rural areas. Laos' progress is notable in comparison to similar developing countries. This success is in part due to small-scale independent providers emerging in a spontaneous manner or having been promoted by public authorities. The authorities in Laos have recently developed an innovative regulatory framework for PublicPrivate partnership contracts signed with small enterprises, in parallel with more conventional regulation of State-owned water enterprises. 

===Military===

The Lao People's Armed Forces (LPAF) is small, poorly funded, and ineffectively resourced; its mission focus is border and internal security, primarily in countering ethnic Hmong insurgent and opposition groups; with the Lao People's Revolutionary Party and the government, the Lao People's Army (LPA) is the third pillar of state machinery and, as such, is expected to suppress political and civil unrest and similar national emergencies. The LPA also has upgraded skills to respond to avian influenza outbreaks; there is no perceived external threat to the state and the LPA maintains strong ties with the neighbouring Vietnamese military (2008).

The army of 130,000 is equipped with 25 main battle tanks. The army marine section, equipped with 16 patrol crafts, has 600 personnel. The air force, with 3,500 personnel, is equipped with anti-aircraft missiles and 24 combat aircraft. Militia self-defence forces number approximately 100,000 organized for local defence. The small arms used by the army include the Soviet AKM assault rifle, PKM machine gun, Makarov PM pistol, and RPD light machine gun.

From its founding, until the present, the LPA receives significant support, training, advisers, troop support and assistance from the Socialist Republic of Vietnam and the Vietnam People's Army.

On 17 May 2014 the Defense Minister, who was also Deputy Prime Minister, Major General Douangchay Phichit, along with other top ranking officials was killed in a plane crash in the north of the country. The officials were to participate in a ceremony to mark the liberation of the Plain of Jars from the former Royal Lao government forces. Their Russian-built Antonov AN 74-300 with 20 people on board crashed in Xiengkhouang province. 

===Hmong conflict===
The government of Laos has been accused of committing human rights violations and genocide against that countrys Hmong ethnic minority. 

Some Hmong groups fought as CIA-backed units on the Royalist side in the Laos civil war. After the Pathet Lao took over the country in 1975, the conflict continued in isolated pockets. In 1977, a communist newspaper promised the party would hunt down the American collaborators and their families to the last root. 

As many as 200,000 Hmong went into exile in Thailand, with many ending up in the USA. A number of Hmong fighters hid out in mountains in Xiangkhouang Province for many years, with a remnant emerging from the jungle in 2003. 

In 1989, the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR), with the support of the United States government, instituted the Comprehensive Plan of Action, a programme to stem the tide of Indochinese refugees from Laos, Vietnam, and Cambodia. Under the plan, the status of the refugees was to be evaluated through a screening process. Recognized asylum seekers were to be given resettlement opportunities, while the remaining refugees were to be repatriated under guarantee of safety.
Hmong girls in Laos in 1973
After talks with the UNHCR and the Thai government, Laos agreed to repatriate the 60,000 Lao refugees living in Thailand, including several thousand Hmong people. Very few of the Lao refugees, however, were willing to return voluntarily. "Laos agrees to voluntary repatriation of refugees in Thailand," U.P.I., 5 June 1991. Pressure to resettle the refugees grew as the Thai government worked to close its remaining refugee camps. While some Hmong people returned to Laos voluntarily, with development assistance from UNHCR, allegations of forced repatriation surfaced. "Lao Refugees Return Home Under European Union Repatriation Program," Associated Press Worldstream, 22 11, 1994. Karen J, "HOUSE PANEL HEARS CONCERNS ABOUT HMONG," States News Service, 26 April 1994. Of those Hmong who did return to Laos, some quickly escaped back to Thailand, describing discrimination and brutal treatment at the hands of Lao authorities. Hamilton-Merritt, Jane (1993). Tragic Mountains, Indiana University Press, pp. xixxxi ISBN 0253207568. 

In 1993, Vue Mai, a former Hmong soldier who had been recruited by the U.S. Embassy in Bangkok to return to Laos as proof of the repatriation programme's success, disappeared in Vientiane. According to the U.S. Committee for Refugees, he was arrested by Lao security forces and was never seen again.

Following the Vue Mai incident, debate over the Hmong's planned repatriation to Laos intensified greatly, especially in the United States, where it drew strong opposition from many American conservatives and some human rights advocates. In a 23 October 1995 National Review article, Michael Johns, the former Heritage Foundation foreign policy expert and Republican White House aide, labelled the Hmong's repatriation a Clinton administration "betrayal", describing the Hmong as a people "who have spilled their blood in defense of American geopolitical interests." Johns, Michael (23 October 1995) "Acts of Betrayal: Persecution of Hmong". National Review. Debate on the issue escalated quickly. In an effort to halt the planned repatriation, the Republican-led U.S. Senate and House of Representatives both appropriated funds for the remaining Thailand-based Hmong to be immediately resettled in the United States; Clinton, however, responded by promising a veto of the legislation.

In their opposition of the repatriation plans, both Democrat and Republican Members of Congress also challenged the Clinton administration's position that the government of Laos was not systematically violating Hmong human rights. U.S. Representative Steve Gunderson (R-WI), for instance, told a Hmong gathering: "I do not enjoy standing up and saying to my government that you are not telling the truth, but if that is necessary to defend truth and justice, I will do that." Republicans also called several Congressional hearings on alleged persecution of the Hmong in Laos in an apparent attempt to generate further support for their opposition to the Hmong's repatriation to Laos. Democratic Congressman Bruce Vento, Senator Paul Wellstone, Dana Rohrabacher and others also raised concerns.

Although some accusations of forced repatriation were denied, Reports on results of investigations of allegations concerning the welfare of Hmong refugees and asylum seekers in Thailand and Laos Refugee and Migration Affairs Unit, United States Embassy (Thailand), 1992. Retrieved 27 July 2007 thousands of Hmong people refused to return to Laos. In 1996 as the deadline for the closure of Thai refugee camps approached, and under mounting political pressure, the United States agreed to resettle Hmong refugees who passed a new screening process. Gunderson, Steve (18 May 1996) "State Department Outlines Resettlement Guidelines for Hmong Refugees", Congressional Press Releases. Around 5,000 Hmong people who were not resettled at the time of the camp closures sought asylum at Wat Tham Krabok, a Buddhist monastery in central Thailand where more than 10,000 Hmong refugees had already been living. The Thai government attempted to repatriate these refugees, but the Wat Tham Krabok Hmong refused to leave and the Lao government refused to accept them, claiming they were involved in the illegal drug trade and were of non-Lao origin. "Laos refuses to take back Thai-based Hmong refugees", Deutsche Presse-Agentur, 20 August 1998. 

Following threats of forcible removal by the Thai government, the United States, in a significant victory for the Hmong, agreed to accept 15,000 of the refugees in 2003. "Refugee Admissions Program for East Asia" Bureau of Population, Refugees, and Migration, 16 January 2004, archived 17 January 2009 from the original Several thousand Hmong people, fearing forced repatriation to Laos if they were not accepted for resettlement in the United States, fled the camp to live elsewhere within Thailand where a sizable Hmong population has been present since the 19th century. History of the Hmong Resettlement Task Force. Hmong Resettlement Task Force, archived 21 October 2008 from the original 

In 2004 and 2005, thousands of Hmong fled from the jungles of Laos to a temporary refugee camp in the Thai province of Phetchabun. These Hmong refugees, many of whom are descendants of the former-CIA Secret Army and their relatives, claim that they have been attacked by both the Lao and Vietnamese military forces operating inside Laos as recently as June 2006. The refugees claim that attacks against them have continued almost unabated since the war officially ended in 1975, and have become more intense in recent years.

Lending further support to earlier claims that the government of Laos was persecuting the Hmong, filmmaker Rebecca Sommer documented first-hand accounts in her documentary, Hunted Like Animals, Hunted like animals Rebecca Sommer Film Clips and in a comprehensive report which includes summaries of claims made by the refugees and was submitted to the UN in May 2006. REPORT on the situation in the Xaysomboun Special Zone and 1100 Hmong-Lao refugees who escaped to Petchabun, Thailand during 20042005 Rebecca Sommer, May 2006 

The European Union, Thailand: EU Presidency Declaration on the situation of Hmong refugees EU@UN (1 February 2007) UNHCHR, and international groups have since spoken out about the forced repatriation. Hmong refugees facing removal from Thailand The Wire  Amnesty International's monthly magazine, March 2007, archived 13 October 2007 from the original "Deportation of Hmong Lao refugees stopped in last minute", Gesellschaft fr bedrohte Vlker, 30 January 2007 "Hmong: UNHCR Protests Refugee Deportation", Unrepresented Nations and Peoples Organization, 5 February 2007 The Thai foreign ministry has said that it will halt deportation of Hmong refugees held in Detention Centres Nong Khai, while talks are underway to resettle them in Australia, Canada, the Netherlands and the United States. 

For the time being, countries willing to resettle the refugees are hindered to proceed with immigration and settlement procedures because the Thai administration does not grant them access to the refugees. Plans to resettle additional Hmong refugees in the United States have been complicated by provisions of President George W. Bush's Patriot Act and Real ID Act, under which Hmong veterans of the Secret War, who fought on the side of the United States, are classified as terrorists because of their historical involvement in armed conflict.

On 27 December 2009, the New York Times reported that the Thai military was preparing to forcibly return 4,000 Hmong asylum seekers to Laos by the end of the year: the BBC later reported that repatriations had started. Both United States and United Nations officials have protested this action. Outside government representatives have not been allowed to interview this group over the last three years. Mdecins Sans Frontires has refused to assist the Hmong refugees because of what they have called "increasingly restrictive measures" taken by the Thai military. "Burning Issue: Don't Just Voice Concerns, Offer Solutions", The Nation, 23 December 2009 The Thai military jammed all cellular phone reception and disallowed any foreign journalists from the Hmong camps. 

===Human rights===

The Constitution that was promulgated in 1991 and amended in 2003 contains most key safeguards for human rights. For example, Article 8 makes it clear that Laos is a multiethnic state and is committed to equality between ethnic groups. The Constitution also has provisions for gender equality and freedom of religion, for freedom of speech, press and assembly. On 25 September 2009, Laos ratified the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, nine years after signing the treaty. The stated policy objectives of both the Lao government and international donors remain focused toward achieving sustainable economic growth and poverty reduction. The government of Laos, however, frequently does not abide by its own constitution and the rule of law, since the judiciary and judges are appointed by the communist party in Laos, and there is no independent judicial branch. Human rights violations remain serious according to Amnesty International, Human Rights Watch, The Centre for Public Policy Analysis and other independent human rights organizations and non-governmental organizations (NGOs).

However, Amnesty International has raised concerns about the ratification record of the Laos Government on human rights standards and its lack of cooperation with the UN human rights mechanisms and legislative measures which impact negatively on human rights. It has also raised concerns in relation to freedom of expression, poor prison conditions, restrictions on freedom of religions, protection of refugees and asylum-seekers and the death penalty. 

In October 1999, 30 young people were arrested for attempting to display posters calling for peaceful economic, political and social change in Laos. Five of them were arrested and subsequently sentenced to up to 10 years imprisonment on charges of treason. One has since died due to his treatment by prison guards, while one has been released. The surviving three men should have been released by October 2009, but their whereabouts remains unknown. 

Laos and Vietnamese (SRV) troops were reported to have raped and killed four Christian Hmong women in Xieng Khouang province in 2011, according to the US and Southeast-based non-governmental public policy research organization The Centre for Public Policy Analysis. CPPA also said other Christian and independent Buddhist and animist believers were being persecuted. 

The Centre for Public Policy Analysis, Amnesty International, Human Rights Watch, U.S. Commission on International Religious Freedom, the Lao Veterans of America, Inc. and other non-governmental organizations (NGO)s have reported egregious human rights violations, religious persecution, the arrest and imprisonment of political and religious dissidents as well as extrajudicial killings, in Laos by government military and security forces. "Laos: Attacks Intensify Against Lao, Hmong People". Business Wire, Washington, D.C. (4 March 2013) Human rights advocates including Vang Pobzeb, Kerry and Kay Danes and others have also raised concerns about human rights violations, torture, the arrest and detention of political prisoners as well as the detention of foreign prisoners in Laos including at the infamous Phonthong Prison in Vientiane. Concerns have also been raised about the high-profile abduction of Laotian civic activist Sombath Somphone in Laos by Lao security forces and police in December 2012.

==Economy==

About 80% of Laos population practices subsistence agriculture.
The Lao economy depends heavily on investment and trade with its neighbours, Thailand, Vietnam, and, especially in the north, China. Pakxe has also experienced growth based on cross-border trade with Thailand and Vietnam. In 2009, despite the fact that the government is still officially communist, the Obama administration in the US declared Laos was no longer a marxist-lenninist state and lifted bans on Laotian companies receiving financing from the U.S. Export Import Bank. In 2011, the Lao Securities Exchange began trading. In 2012, the government initiated the creation of the Laos Trade Portal, a website incorporating all information traders need to import and export goods into the country.

Subsistence agriculture still accounts for half of the GDP and provides 80% of employment. Only 4.01% of the country is arable land, and a mere 0.34% used as permanent crop land, Field Listing  Land use, CIA World Factbook. the lowest percentage in the Greater Mekong Subregion. About Greater Mekong Subregion at Asian Development Bank Rice dominates agriculture, with about 80% of the arable land area used for growing rice. Rice: The Fabric of Life in Laos. Lao_IRRI Project Approximately 77% of Lao farm households are self-sufficient in rice. Barclay, Adam and Shrestha, Samjhana (AprilJune 2006) "Genuinely Lao", Rice Today. 

Through the development, release and widespread adoption of improved rice varieties, and through economic reforms, production has increased by an annual rate of 5% between 1990 and 2005, "Fifteen years of support for rice research in Lao PDR"
Asia brief: Filling the rice basket in Lao PRD partnership results
Genuinely Lao, Prepared by IRRIs International Programs Management Office and Lao PDR achieved a net balance of rice imports and exports for the first time in 1999. 
Lao PDR may have the greatest number of rice varieties in the Greater Mekong Subregion. Since 1995 the Lao government has been working with the International Rice Research Institute of the Philippines to collect seed samples of each of the thousands of rice varieties found in Laos. 
Morning market in Vientiane
The economy receives development aid from the IMF, ADB, and other international sources; and also foreign direct investment for development of the society, industry, hydropower and mining (most notably of copper and gold). Tourism is the fastest-growing industry in the country. Economic development in Laos has been hampered by brain drain, with a skilled emigration rate of 37.4% in 2000. 

Laos is rich in mineral resources and imports petroleum and gas. Metallurgy is an important industry, and the government hopes to attract foreign investment to develop the substantial deposits of coal, gold, bauxite, tin, copper, and other valuable metals. In addition, the country's plentiful water resources and mountainous terrain enable it to produce and export large quantities of hydroelectric energy. Of the potential capacity of approximately 18,000 megawatts, around 8,000 megawatts have been committed for exporting to Thailand and Vietnam. 

The country's most widely recognised product may well be Beerlao which is exported to a number of countries including neighbours Cambodia and Vietnam. It is produced by the Lao Brewery Company.

===Tourism===

View from near the sanctuary on the main upper level of Wat Phu, looking back towards the Mekong River
The tourism sector has grown rapidly, from 80,000 international visitors in 1990, to 1.876 million in 2010. Tourism is expected to contribute US$679.1 million to gross national product in 2010, rising to US$1.5857 billion by 2020. In 2010, one in every 10.9 jobs was in the tourism sector. Export earnings from international visitors and tourism goods are expected to generate 15.5% of total exports or US$270.3 million in 2010, growing in nominal terms to US$484.2 million (12.5% of total) in 2020. 
Hmong girls on the Plain of Jars
Laos has become popular with tourists for its relaxed style of living and for retaining elements of the "original Asia" lost elsewhere. The official tourism slogan is "Simply Beautiful". The main attractions for tourists include Buddhist culture and colonial architecture in Luang Prabang; gastronomy and ancient temples in the capital of Vientiane; backpacking in Muang Ngoi Neua and Vang Vieng; ancient and modern culture and history in The Plain of Jars region (main article: Phonsavan); Laos Civil War history in Sam Neua; trekking and visiting hill tribes in a number of areas including Phongsaly and Luang Namtha; spotting tigers and other wildlife in Nam Et-Phou Louey; caves and waterfalls near Thakhek; relaxation, the Irrawaddy dolphin and Khone Phapheng Falls at Si Phan Don or, as they are known in English, the Four Thousand Islands; Wat Phu, an ancient Khmer temple complex; and the Bolaven Plateau for waterfalls and coffee.

Luang Prabang and Wat Phu are both UNESCO World Heritage sites, with the Plain of Jars expected to join them once more work to clear UXO has been completed. Major festivals include Laos New Year which is celebrated around 1315 April and involves a water festival similar but more subdued than that of Thailand and other South-East Asian countries.

The Lao National Tourism Administration, related government agencies and the private sector are working together to realise the vision put forth in the country's National Ecotourism Strategy and Action Plan. This includes decreasing the environmental and cultural impact of tourism; increasing awareness in the importance of ethnic groups and biological diversity; providing a source of income to conserve, sustain and manage the Lao protected area network and cultural heritage sites; and emphasising the need for tourism zoning and management plans for sites that will be developed as ecotourism destinations. 

Laos is known for its silk and local handicraft product, both of which are on display in Luang Prabang's night market, among other places. Another speciality is mulberry tea.

==Demographics==

Buddhist monks collecting alms at dawn in Luang Prabang
The term "Laotian" does not necessarily refer to the Lao language, ethnic Lao people, language or customs, but is a political term that also includes the non-ethnic Lao groups within Laos and identifies them as "Laotian" because of their political citizenship. Laos has the youngest population of any country in Asia with a median age of 21.6 years.

Laos' population was estimated at 6.5 million in 2012, dispersed unevenly across the country. Most people live in valleys of the Mekong River and its tributaries. Vientiane prefecture, the capital and largest city, had about 740,010 residents in 2008. The country's population density was 27/km2. 

===Ethnicity===

The people of Laos are often considered by their altitudinal distribution (lowlands, midlands and upper high lands) as this approximates ethnic groups.

====Lao Loum (lowland people)====

More than half of the nation's population, 60%, is ethnic Laothe principal lowland inhabitants, and the politically and culturally dominant people of Laos. The Lao belong to the Tai linguistic group who began migrating southward from China in the first millennium AD. 10% belong to other "lowland" groups, which together with the Lao people make up the Lao Loum.

====Lao Theung (midland people)====
A Ho (Hani) woman and her child, Phongsaly Province
In the central and southern mountains, Mon-Khmer tribes, known as Lao Theung or mid-slope Laotians, predominate. Other terms are Khmu, Khamu (Kammu) or Kha as the Lao Loum refer to them as indicating their Austroasiatic origins. However, the latter is considered pejorative, meaning 'slave'. They were the indigenous inhabitants of northern Laos. Some Vietnamese, Chinese and Thai minorities remain, particularly in the towns, but many left after independence in the late 1940s, many of whom relocated either to Vietnam, Hong Kong, or to France. Lao Theung constitute about 30% of the population. 

====Lao Soung (highland people)====
Hill people and minority cultures of Laos such as the Hmong, Yao (Mien), Dao, Shan, and several Tibeto-Burman speaking peoples have lived in isolated regions of Laos for many years. Mountain/hill tribes of mixed ethno/cultural-linguistic heritage are found in northern Laos which include the Lua and Khmu people who are indigenous to Laos. Today, the Lua people are considered endangered. Collectively, they are known as Lao Soung or highland Laotians. Lao Soung account for only about 10% of the population. 

====Leaders of ethnic minorities in Laos====
* Ong Keo
* Ong Kommadam
* Pa Chay Vue

===Languages===
Buddhist Monks in front of Wat Sen, Luang Prabang
Buddhist shrine in Vientiane
The official and dominant language is Lao, a tonal language of the Tai linguistic group. However, only slightly more than half of the population can speak Lao, the remainder speaking various ethnic minority languages, particularly in rural areas. The written language is based on Khmer writing script. Languages like Khmu and Hmong are spoken by minorities, particularly in the midland and highland areas. A number of Laotian sign languages are used in areas with high rates of congenital deafness.

French is still commonly used in government and commerce and over a third of Laos' students are educated through the medium of French with French being compulsory for all other students. Throughout the country signage is bilingual in Laotian and French, with French being predominant. English, the language of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN), has become increasingly studied in recent years. 

===Health===

Male life expectancy at birth was at 60.85 and female life expectancy was at 64.76 in 2012. Laos. CIA  The World Factbook. Cia.gov. Retrieved on 27 January 2013. Healthy life expectancy was at 54 in 2007. In 2008, 43% of the population did not have access to an improved water resource, by 2010 this had been reduced to 33% of the population. Government expenditure on health is at about 4% of the GDP. Its amount was at US$ 18 (PPP) in 2006. 

===Religion===

Of the people of Laos 67% are Theravada Buddhist, 1.5% are Christian, and 31.5% are other or unspecified (mostly practitioners of Satsana Phi) Pew Research Center's Global Religious Landscape 2010 - Religious Composition by Country. according to the 2005 census. Buddhism has long been one of the most important social forces in Laos. Theravada Buddhism has coexisted peacefully since its introduction to the country with the local polytheism.

===Education===

The adult literacy rate exceeds two thirds. The male literacy rate exceeds the female literacy rate. In 2004 the net primary enrollment rate was at 84%. The National University of Laos is the Laos state's public university.
The total literacy rate is 73% (2010 estimate).

==Culture==

An example of Lao cuisine
Laotian women wearing sinhs as parts of their xout lao
Lao dancers during New Year

Theravada Buddhism is a dominant influence in Lao culture. It is reflected throughout the country from language to the temple and in art, literature, performing arts, etc. Many elements of Lao culture predate Buddhism, however. For example, Laotian music is dominated by its national instrument, the khaen, a type of bamboo pipe that has prehistoric origins. The khaen traditionally accompanied the singer in lam, the dominant style of folk music. Among the various lam styles, the lam saravane is probably the most popular.

Sticky Rice is a characteristic staple food and has cultural and religious significance to the Lao people. Sticky rice is generally preferred over jasmine rice, and sticky rice cultivation and production is thought to have originated in Laos. There are many traditions and rituals associated with rice production in different environments, and among many ethnic groups. For example, Khammu farmers in Luang Prabang plant the rice variety Khao Kam in small quantities near the hut in memory of dead parents, or at the edge of the rice field to indicate that parents are still alive. 

Sinh is a traditional garment worn by Laotian women in daily life. It is a hand-woven silk skirt which can identify the woman who wears it in a variety of ways. In particular, it can indicate which region the wearer is from.

===Marriage===
Polygamy is officially a crime in Laos, though the penalty is minor. The constitution and Family Code bars the legal recognition of polygamous marriages, stipulating that monogamy is to be the principal way to contract a marriage in the country. Polygamy, however, is still customary among some Hmong people. 

===Media===
All newspapers are published by the government, including two foreign language papers: the English-language daily Vientiane Times and the French-language weekly Le Rnovateur. Additionally, the Khao San Pathet Lao, the country's official news agency, publishes English and French versions of its eponymous paper. Laos currently has nine daily newspapers, 90 magazines, 43 radio stations, and 32 TV stations operating throughout the country. Vientiane Times, 18 February 2011 As of 2011, Nhn Dn (The People) and the Xinhua News Agency are the only foreign media organisations permitted to open offices in Laosboth opened bureaus in Vientiane in 2011. Vietnamese newspaper opens office in Laos. Laovoices.com (19 July 2011). Retrieved on 27 January 2013 . 

The Lao government heavily controls all media channels in order to prevent critique of its actions. Lao citizens who have criticized the government have been subjected to enforced disappearances, arbitrary arrests and torture. Country Reports on Human Rights Practices. State.gov (19 April 2013). Retrieved on 28 July 2013. Asia Times Online :: Off the air in Laos. Atimes.com (22 February 2012). Retrieved on 28 July 2013. Internet cafes are now common in the major urban centres and are especially popular with the younger generation.

Since the founding of the Lao PDR only very few films have been made in Laos. One of the first commercial feature length films was the 2008 Sabaidee Luang Prabang. Australian filmmaker Kim Mordount's first feature film was made in Laos and features a Laotian cast speaking their native language. Entitled The Rocket, the film appeared at the 2013 Melbourne International Film Festival (MIFF) and won three awards at the Berlin International Film Festival. Recently a few local production companies have succeeded to produce Lao feature films and gain international recognition. Among them are Lao New Wave Cinema's "At The Horizon" directed by Anysay Keola, that was screened at the OzAsia Film Festival and Lao Art Media's Chanthaly directed by Mattie Do, which was screened at the 2013 Fantastic Fest. 

===Sport===
The largest Stadium in Laos, New Laos National Stadium.
The martial art of Muay Lao, the national sport, is a form of kickboxing similar to other styles of Southeast Asia such as Thai Muay Thai, Burmese Lethwei, Malaysian Tomoi, and Cambodian Pradal Serey.

Association football has grown to be the most popular sport in Laos. The Lao League is now the top professional league for association football clubs in the country. Since the start of the League, Lao Army FC has been the most successful club with 8 titles, the highest number of championship wins.

==See also==

* Outline of Laos
* Index of Laos-related articles
* Emblem of Laos
* French colonial empire
* Drug policy in Laos
* Indochina refugee crisis
* Lao People's Army
* List of freedom indices
* List of Laos-related topics
* North Vietnamese invasion of Laos
* Scouts Lao

==Notes and references==

==External links==

* 
* 
* Chief of State and Cabinet Members
* 
* Country Profile at BBC News
* Laos at UCB Libraries GovPubs
* Laos at Encyclopdia Britannica
* Laos at Tageo
;Specialist
* Laos National Tourism Administration
* Key Development Forecasts for Laos from International Futures
* Water festival  a cultural specialty of Laos

 



[[History of Laos]]

The official History of Laos as introduced in government textbooks, is conventionally traced to the establishment of the kingdom of Lan Xang by Fa Ngum in 1353. This is a relatively conservative date to begin the history of the nation, providing a contrast to the course taken by Thai historiography (which reaches back implausibly far into proto-history). 

By the 14th century, when this "official history" begins, the speakers of early Lao-related languages had probably developed a reasonable base of population among the prior inhabitants of (what is now) Laos over the prior century or two. The borders of the modern state of Laos were established by the French colonial government in the late 19th and early 20th centuries.

==Prehistory==
In 2009 an ancient skull was recovered from Tam Pa Ling cave in the Annamite Mountains in northern Laos which is at least 46,000 years old, making it the oldest modern human fossil found to date in Southeast Asia. Demeter F., et al. (2012) Anatomically modern human in Southeast Asia (Laos) by 46 ka. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 109(36):1437514380. A study conducted in the Ngeubhinh Mouxeu rock-shelter of the Luang Namtha province, although not confirmed, might provide evidence for the area being inhabited possibly as far back as 56,000 BP. Zeitoun V, Forestier H, Pierret A, Chiemsisouraj C, Lorvankham M, Latthagnot A, Chanthamoungkhoun T and Norkhamsomphou S 2012. Multi-millennial occupation in northwestern Laos: Preliminary results of excavations at the Ngeubhinh Mouxeu rock-shelter. Comptes Rendus Palevol 11(4) 

Archeological evidence suggests agriculturist society developed during the 4th millennium B.C. Burial jars and other kinds of sepulchers suggest a complex society in which bronze objects appeared around 1500 B.C., and iron tools were known from 700 B.C. The proto-historic period is characterized by contact with Chinese culture and the civilizations of Greater India. From the fourth to the eighth century, communities along the Mekong River began to form into townships, or Muang as they were called. 

==Early history==

 Southeast Asia c.1400 CE, showing Lan Xang kingdom in teal, Khmer Empire in red, Ayutthaya Kingdom in violet, Sukhothai kingdom in orange, Champa in yellow, Kingdom of Lanna in purple, Dai Viet in blue.

The known history of the region follows from the Tai migration. In the 13th century, Tai people constructed their first states, drawing together different tribal communities under rulers claiming quasi-divine authority and kingly status.

The earlier inhabitation of the land by peoples such as the Mon kingdom of Dvaravati and Proto-Khmer peoples was given a great deal of emphasis in the histories of Laos written during the French colonial period. However, post-colonial historiography has instead sought to represent all peoples of Laos as equally "indigenous", relating the early history in terms of a complex interaction with the (admittedly more ancient) Cambodian kingdoms to the south, and praising the Proto-Khmer as Lao nationalists for their heroism and modern struggles against the French and Americans (see, e. g., the Ong Keo Rebellion starting circa 1902).

Both French colonial history and post-colonial (Communist) history sought to reverse the obvious racism of earlier, popular accounts that when the Lao migrated into the country, they simply conquered and enslaved the native inhabitants (viz., primarily Proto-Khmer people, described in such a context with the derogatory term "Kha-That". See Khmu people and McCarthy's account of Lan Xang's origins). This traditional view has almost no factual basis, but remains a commonly heard pseudo-history, and a special concern for teachers to address (or redress) in the classroom. Vatthana Pholsena provides a survey of the historiography on this point in Post-War Laos, 2006, Silkworm Books.

The earliest Laos legal document (and the earliest sociological evidence about the existence of the Lao people) is known as "the laws of Khun Borom" (also spelled "Khun Bulom"), still preserved in manuscript form. Traditional Lao Literature 

This set of memoriter laws is composed in a type of indigenous blank verse, and reflects the state of proto-Lao society as early as the 9th century, possibly prior to their adoption of Theravada Buddhism, and prior to (or coeval with) their southward migration into the territory now comprising modern Laos (from North-Western Vietnam).

While some Lao people regard Borom/Bulom as a subject of myth only, Western scholars regard him as an historical figure, albeit there is very little factually known about him aside from the fact of his bare existence and the description of a very primitive kingdom in his laws.

In general terms, these ancient laws describe an agrarian society in which life revolves around subsistence agriculture with domesticated water-buffaloes (the gayal). The strict punishments set down for stealing or killing a neighbor's elephant reflect that these were (evidently) an expensive and important possession of the time.

It is generally assumed that, as late as the 16th century, King Photisarath helped establish Theravada Buddhism as the predominant religion of the country. However, this aspect of official history may now have to change given recent archaeological discoveries in Cambodia and Vietnam, showing intact Pali inscriptions as early as the 9th century. (See: JPTS, Vol. XXIII, 1997: Peter Skilling, "New Paali Inscriptions from Southeast Asia")

While there can be no doubt that animism and fragments of Shiva-worship were popular in ancient Laos, evidence increasingly indicates a long, gradual process leading to the ascendancy of Buddhism (rather than a single king converting the country). The reverse also did occur, as with the historical layers of statuary and inscriptions at Wat Phu Champassak; the oldest are in Sanskrit, and worship Shiva, while the later evidence is Buddhist, subsequently reverting to animism (with the most recent statues simply depicting giant elephants and lizards, with no references to the organized religions of India, and neither Sanskrit nor Pali text).

It is significant to note that all of these official histories exclude the (possible and actual) influence of Chinese folk religion in the region. In fact, the ancient Lao calendar and Thai calendar are both of Chinese origin (adapted from the "Heavenly Stem Branch Calendar"), and do not reflect Indian cosmology. These calendars were both part of the royal religion (preserved in epigraphy) and, apparently, part of popular religion (fortune telling) for centuries.

==Before full independence in 1953==
In the 17th century Lan Xang entered a period of decline and the late 18th century Siam (now Thailand) established control over much of what is now Laos. The region was divided into three dependent states centered on Luang Prabang in the north, Vientiane in the center, and Champassak in the south. The Vientiane Lao rebelled in 1828 but were defeated, and the area was incorporated into Siam. Following its occupation of Vietnam, France absorbed Laos into French Indochina via treaties with Siam in 1893 and 1904.

During World War II, the Japanese occupied French Indochina. When Japan surrendered, Lao nationalists declared Laos independent, but by early 1946, French troops had reoccupied the country and conferred limited autonomy on Laos. During the First Indochina War, the Indochinese Communist Party formed the Pathet Lao resistance organization committed to Lao independence. Laos gained full independence on 22 October 1953.

==The period of the Kingdom of Laos==
Elections were held in 1955, and the first coalition government, led by Prince Souvanna Phouma, was formed in 1957. The coalition government collapsed in 1958. In 1960 Captain Kong Le staged a coup when the cabinet was away at the royal capital of Luang Prabang and demanded reformation of a neutralist government. The second coalition government, once again led by Souvanna Phouma, was not successful in holding power. Rightist forces under General Phoumi Nosavan drove out the neutralist government from power later that same year. The North Vietnamese invaded Laos between 19581959 to create the Ho Chi Minh Trail.

A second Geneva conference, held in 1961-62, provided for the independence and neutrality of Laos, but the agreement meant little in reality and the war soon resumed. Growing North Vietnamese military presence in the country increasingly drew Laos into the Second Indochina War (1954-1975). As a result for nearly a decade, eastern Laos was subjected to some of the heaviest bombing in the history of warfare , as the U.S. sought to destroy the Ho Chi Minh Trail that passed through Laos and defeat the Communist forces. The North Vietnamese also heavily backed the Pathet Lao and repeatedly invaded Laos. The government and army of Laos were backed by the USA during the conflict and the United States formed and trained irregular forces.

Shortly after the Paris Peace Accords led to the withdrawal of U.S. forces from Vietnam, a ceasefire between the Pathet Lao and the government led to a new coalition government. However, North Vietnam never withdrew from Laos and the Pathet Lao remained little more than a proxy army for Vietnamese interests. After the fall of South Vietnam to communist forces in April 1975, the Pathet Lao with the backing of North Vietnam were able to take total power with little resistance. On December 2, 1975, the king was forced to abdicate his throne and the Lao People's Democratic Republic was established.

===Conflict===
The Military Regions Laos was divided into five military regions:

Military Region I at Luang Prabang was dominated by the royal family and the former commander in Chief of the Royal Laos Army, General Oune Rathikul. The region commander was Brigadier General Tiao Say~vong, a half brother of the king. The region was located in northwest Laos and covered four provinces: Phong Saly,Houa Khong, Sayaboury and Luang Prabang.

Military Region II, in the northeastern section of Laos, was under Major General Vang P.ao, the Meo guertilla war hero of Laos. It covered two provinces: Houa Phan (Samneua), and Xieng Khouang. The headquarters was at Long Cheng, northwest of the Plain of Jars.

Military Region III in central Laos was headquartered at Savannakhet and covered two provinces; Khammouane(Thakitek) and Savannakhet. This region was commanded by General Bounpon and later by Brigadier General Nouphet Dao Heuang, in July 1971. The real power in this region was the Insixiengmay family led by Minister Leuam Insixiengmay, Vice Premier and Minister of Education.( his wife is elder sister of Mom bouanphan who is a wife of Chao Boun oum na champasack)

Military Region IV, with headquarters at Pakse, included the six provinces of southern Laos: Saravane, Attopeu, Champassak, Sedone,Khong Sedone, and Sithandone (Khong Island). It was dominated by the Nachampassak family led by Prince Boun Oum Nachampassak. The commander of Military Region IV was Major General Phasouk S. Rassaphak, a member of the Champassak family. He commanded this area for almost a decade and a half until finally replaced by the author, Brigadier General Soutchay Vongsavanh, in July 1971.

Military Region V contained Borikhane and Vientiane Provinces, the capital province of Laos, was headquartered at Chinaimo Army Camp and was led by Major General Kouprasith Abhay until he was replaced by Brigadier General Thongligh Chokbeng Boun in July 1971.

==The period of the Communist government/contemporary period (1945-)==

The new communist government led by Kaysone Phomvihane imposed centralized economic decision-making and incarcerated many members of the previous government and military in "re-education camps" which also included the Hmongs. While nominally independent, the communist government was for many years effectively little more than a puppet regime run from Vietnam. 

The government's policies prompted about 10 percent of the Lao population to leave the country. Laos depended heavily on Soviet aid channeled through Vietnam up until the Soviet collapse in 1991. In the 1990s the communist party gave up centralised management of the economy but still has a monopoly of political power.

==See also==
*Dai people
*Dong Son culture
*History of Laos to 1945
*History of Laos since 1945
*Khmuic peoples
*Lao People's Revolutionary Party
*List of Presidents of Laos
*List of monarchs of Laos
*North Vietnamese invasion of Laos
*Peopling of Laos
*Politics of Laos
*Prime Minister of Laos

==References==

==External links==
* Digital Library of Lao Manuscripts - an online library of historical Lao manuscripts and related background information
* History of Laos
* Laos Travel Guide History of Laos
* 
*

 



[[Geography of Laos]]

right
Detailed map of Laos
Laos is a landlocked nation in Southeast Asia, northeast of Thailand, west of Vietnam, that covers 236,800 square kilometers in the center of the Southeast Asian peninsula, is surrounded by Burma (Myanmar), Cambodia, the People's Republic of China, Thailand, and Vietnam. 

Its location has often made it a buffer between more powerful neighboring states, as well as a crossroads for trade and communication. Migration and international conflict have contributed to the present ethnic composition of the country and to the geographic distribution of its ethnic groups.

Geographic coordinates:

==Topography==
Most of the western border of Laos is demarcated by the Mekong River, which is an important artery for transportation. The Dong falls at the southern end of the country prevent access to the sea, but cargo boats travel along the entire length of the Mekong in Laos during most of the year. Smaller power boats and pirogues provide an important means of transportation on many of the tributaries of the Mekong. 

The Mekong has thus not been an obstacle but a facilitator for communication, and the similarities between Laos and northeast Thai societysame people, same languagereflect the close contact that has existed across the river for centuries. Also, many Laotians living in the Mekong Valley have relatives and friends in Thailand. 

Prior to the twentieth century, Laotian kingdoms and principalities encompassed areas on both sides of the Mekong, and Thai control in the late nineteenth century extended to the left bank. Although the Mekong was established as a border by French colonial forces, travel from one side to the other has been significantly limited only since the establishment of the Lao People's Democratic Republic (LPDR, or Laos) in 1975.

A topographic map of Laos.

The eastern border with Vietnam extends for 2,130 kilometers, mostly along the crest of the Annamite Chain, and serves as a physical barrier between the Chinese-influenced culture of Vietnam and the Indianized states of Laos and Thailand. These mountains are sparsely populated by tribal minorities who traditionally have not acknowledged the border with Vietnam any more than lowland Lao have been constrained by the 1,754-kilometer Mekong River border with Thailand. Thus, ethnic minority populations are found on both the Laotian and Vietnamese sides of the frontier. Because of their relative isolation, contact between these groups and lowland Lao has been mostly confined to trading.

Laos shares its shortonly 541 kilometerssouthern border with Cambodia, and ancient Khmer ruins at Wat Pho and other southern locations attest to the long history of contact between the Lao and the Khmer. In the north, the country is bounded by a mountainous 423-kilometer border with China and shares the 235-kilometer-long Mekong River border with Burma.

The topography of Laos is largely mountainous, with the Annamite Range in the northeast and east and the Luang Prabang Range in the northwest, among other ranges typically characterized by steep terrain. Elevations are typically above 500 meters with narrow river valleys and low agricultural potential. This mountainous landscape extends across most of the north of the country, except for the plain of Vientiane and the Plain of Jars in the Xiangkhoang Plateau. 

The southern "panhandle" of the country contains large level areas in Savannakht and Champasak provinces that are well suited for extensive paddy rice cultivation and livestock raising. Much of Khammouan Province and the eastern part of all the southern provinces are mountainous. Together, the alluvial plains and terraces of the Mekong and its tributaries cover only about 20% of the land area.

Only about 4% of the total land area is classified as arable. The forested land area has declined significantly since the 1970s as a result of commercial logging and expanded swidden, or slash-and-burn, farming.

===List of mountains in Laos===
*Phou Bia, 2,819 m
*Phu Xai Lai Leng, 2,720 m
*Rao Co, 2,286 m
*Phu Soi Dao, 2,120 m
*Phou Khe, 2,079 m
*Shiceng Dashan, 1,830 m
*Dong Ap Bia, 937 m

==Climate==
Climate data for Vientiane.

Laos has a tropical monsoon climate, with a pronounced rainy season from May through October, a cool dry season from November through February, and a hot dry season in March and April. Generally, monsoons occur at the same time across the country, although that time may vary significantly from one year to the next. 

Rainfall varies regionally, with the highest amounts-- 3700 mm annuallyrecorded on the Bolovens Plateau in Champasak Province. City rainfall stations have recorded that Savannakht averages 1440 mm of rain annually; Vientiane receives about 1700 mm, and Louangphrabang (Luang Prabang) receives about 1360 mm. 

Rainfall is not always adequate for rice cultivation and the relatively high average precipitation conceals years where rainfall may be only half or less of the norm, causing significant declines in rice yields. Such droughts often are regional, leaving production in other parts of the country unaffected. 

Temperatures range from highs around 40 C along the Mekong in March and April to lows of 5 C or less in the uplands of Xiangkhoang and Phngsali in January.

==Transportation routes==

Because of its mountainous topography and lack of development, Laos has few reliable transportation routes. This inaccessibility has historically limited the ability of any government to maintain a presence in areas distant from the national or provincial capitals and has limited interchange and communication among villages and ethnic groups. 

The Mekong and Nam Ou are the only natural channels suitable for large-draft boat transportation, and from December through May low water limits the size of the draft that may be used over many routes. Laotians in lowland villages located on the banks of smaller rivers have traditionally traveled in pirogues for fishing, trading, and visiting up and down the river for limited distances. 

Otherwise, travel is by ox-cart over level terrain or by foot. The steep mountains and lack of roads have caused upland ethnic groups to rely entirely on pack baskets and horse packing for transportation.

The road system is not extensive. A rudimentary network begun under French colonial rule and continued from the 1950s has provided an important means of increased intervillage communication, movement of market goods, and a focus for new settlements. In mid-1994, travel in most areas was difficult and expensive, and most Laotians traveled only limited distances, if at all. As a result of ongoing improvements in the road system started during the early 1990s, it is expected that in the future villagers will more easily be able to seek medical care, send children to schools at district centers, and work outside the village.

==Natural resources==
Hundreds of active fires burning across the hills and valleys of Burma Thailand, Laos, and Vietnam (labelled with red dots).
Clear-cut hillside along the Mekong River
Expanding commercial exploitation of forests, plans for additional hydroelectric facilities, foreign demands for wild animals and nonwood forest products for food and traditional medicines, and a growing population have brought new and increasing attention to the forests. Traditionally, forests have been important sources of wild foods, herbal medicines, and timber for house construction. 

Even into the 1990s, the government viewed the forest as a valued reserve of natural products for noncommercial household consumption. Government efforts to preserve valuable hardwoods for commercial extraction have led to measures to prohibit swidden cultivation throughout the country. Further, government restrictions on clearing forestland for swidden cropping in the late 1980s, along with attempts to gradually resettle upland swidden farming villages (ban) to lowland locations suitable for paddy rice cultivation, had significant effects on upland villages. 

Traditionally, villages rely on forest products as a food reserve during years of poor rice harvest and as a regular source of fruits and vegetables. By the 1990s, however, these gathering systems were breaking down in many areas. At the same time, international concern about environmental degradation and the loss of many wildlife species unique to Laos has also prompted the government to consider the implications of these developments.

Natural resources: timber, hydropower, gypsum, tin, gold, gemstones

Land use:
arable land: 5.91%
permanent crops: 0.42%
other: 93.67% (2011)

Irrigated land: 3,100 km (2005)

Total renewable water resources: 333.5 km3 (2011)

==Area and boundaries==
The Mekong at Luang Prabang, Laos 

Area:
total: 236,800 km
land: 230,800 km
water: 6,000 km

Area - comparative: slightly larger than Minnesota slightly larger than half of Yukon

Land boundaries:
total: 5,083 km
border countries: Burma 235 km, Cambodia 541 km, the People's Republic of China 423 km, Thailand 1,754 km, Vietnam 2,130 km

Coastline: 0 km (landlocked)

Maritime claims: none (landlocked)

Elevation extremes:
lowest point: Mekong River 70 m
highest point: Phou Bia 2,817 m

==Environmental concerns==
On November 30, 2001, MODIS captured this image of southeastern Asia. In eastern Thailand, the brown coloring that dominates the center of the image and mimics the country's border with Laos and Cambodia, speaks of the massive deforestation that occurs in this region. One of southeastern Asia's prominent environmental concerns, deforestation has played a major role in flooding in the region.

Natural hazards: floods, droughts, blight and earthquakes in the northern areas.

Air pollution agricultural burning ("slash and burn"), garbage burning

Environment - current issues: unexploded ordnance; deforestation; soil erosion; a majority of the population does not have access to potable water

Environment - international agreements:
party to: Biodiversity, Climate Change, Climate Change-Kyoto Ptorocol, Desertification, Endangered Species, Environmental Modification, Law of the Sea, Ozone Layer Protection
signed, but not ratified: none of the selected agreements

==See also==
*Laos
*National Biodiversity Conservation Areas
*Zomia (geography)

==References==
*
*

 



[[Demographics of Laos]]

A street market in Luang Prabang.
This article is about the demographic features of the population of Laos, including population density, ethnicity, education level, health of the populace, economic status, religious affiliations and other aspects of the population.

Laos' population was estimated at about 6,48 million in July 2011, dispersed unevenly across the country. Most people live in valleys of the Mekong River and its tributaries. Vientiane Prefecture, which includes Vientiane, the capital and largest city of the country, had about 569,000 residents in 1999. The country's population density is 23.4/km.

In March 2005, the total population was 5.62 million (2.82 million females, 2.80 million males) in the 2005 census, an increase of 1 047 000 since the previous 1995 census.
 Population Census 2005 

== Overview ==
The demographic makeup of the population is uncertain as the government divides the people into three groups according to the altitude at which they live, rather than according to ethnic origin. The lowland Lao (Lao Loum) account for 68%, upland Lao (Lao Theung) for 22%, and the highland Lao (Lao Soung, including the Hmong and the Yao) for 9%. Ethnic Vietnamese constitutes about 2% of the population.

Ethnic Lao, the principal lowland inhabitants and politically and culturally dominant group, make up the bulk of the Lao Loum and around 60% of the total population. The Lao are a branch of the Tai people who began migrating southward from China in the first millennium A.D. In the north, there are mountain tribes of MiaoYao, Austro-Asiatic, Tibeto-Burman - Hmong, Yao, Akha, and Lahu who migrated into the region in the 19th century. Collectively, they are known as Lao Sung or highland Lao. In the central and southern mountains, MonKhmer tribes known as Lao Theung or upland Lao, predominate. Some Vietnamese and Chinese minorities remain, particularly in the towns, but many left in two waves - after independence in the late 1940s and again after 1975.

The predominant religion is Theravada Buddhism. Animism is common among the mountain tribes. Buddhism and spirit worship coexist easily. There also is a small number of Christians and Muslims.

The official and dominant language is Lao, a tonal language of the Tai linguistic group. Midslope and highland Lao speak an assortment of tribal languages. French, once common in government and commerce, has declined in usage, while knowledge of English - the language of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) - has increased in recent years.

With a median age of 19.3, Laos has the youngest population of Asia.

Demographics of Laos, Data of FAO, year 2005 ; Number of inhabitants in thousands.

Lao men drinking lauhai(in Lao) or bujkdong(in Khmuic), a type of lao rice whiskey which is ancient khmuic rice beer.
A primary school in a village in northern rural Laos

==Population==
According to the 2010 Revision of the UN World Population Prospects, Population Division of the Department of Economic and Social Affairs of the United Nations Secretariat, World Population Prospects: The 2010 Revision the population of Laos increased from 1.7 million in 1950 to 6.2 million in 2010. Until the year 2000 the proportion of children 014 years of age was over 40% of the total population. Due to decreasing fertility rates this proportion decreased to 34.5% in 2010. The proportion of elderly people is still very low (3.9%), although the proportion doubled between 1950 and 2010.

 Total population Population aged 014(%) Population aged 1564(%) Population aged 65+(%) 
 1950 1 683 40.4 57.4 2.1 
 1955 1 897 41.4 56.2 2.4 
 1960 2 130 42.1 55.3 2.6 
 1965 2 391 42.2 54.9 2.9 
 1970 2 691 41.9 55.0 3.1 
 1975 3 042 42.1 54.7 3.2 
 1980 3 235 43.9 52.5 3.5 
 1985 3 648 44.0 52.4 3.6 
 1990 4 192 43.7 52.7 3.6 
 1995 4 795 43.6 52.8 3.6 
 2000 5 317 42.3 54.0 3.7 
 2005 5 753 39.1 57.1 3.8 
 2010 6 201 34.5 61.6 3.9 

==Vital statistics==

===UN estimates ===

 Period Live births per year Deaths per year Natural change per year CBR1 CDR1 NC1 TFR1 IMR1 
 1950-1955 80 000 37 000 43 000 44.8 20.9 23.9 5.94 167.1 
 1955-1960 87 000 40 000 47 000 43.2 20.1 23.1 5.96 160.1 
 1960-1965 96 000 44 000 52 000 42.4 19.3 23.1 5.97 153.5 
 1965-1970 107 000 47 000 60 000 42.3 18.7 23.6 5.98 147.0 
 1970-1975 122 000 52 000 70 000 42.5 18.1 24.4 5.99 140.5 
 1975-1980 132 000 54 000 78 000 42.2 17.2 25.0 6.15 132.4 
 1980-1985 145 000 56 000 90 000 42.2 16.2 26.0 6.36 122.6 
 1985-1990 165 000 56 000 109 000 42.1 14.4 27.7 6.27 107.6 
 1990-1995 180 000 53 000 127 000 40.0 11.9 28.1 5.88 88.3 
 1995-2000 170 000 48 000 122 000 33.6 9.4 24.2 4.81 70.8 
 2000-2005 154 000 44 000 110 000 27.8 7.9 19.9 3.70 58.2 
 2005-2010 144 000 39 000 105 000 24.1 6.6 17.5 3.02 44.5 
 1 CBR = crude birth rate (per 1000); CDR = crude death rate (per 1000); NC = natural change (per 1000); TFR = total fertility rate (number of children per woman); IMR = infant mortality rate per 1000 births 

==Ethnic groups==
In Luang Prabang, a young woman at the time of a Hmong Meeting Festival
Specialists are largely in agreement as to the ethnolinguistic classification of the ethnic groups of Laos. Indigenous Peoples Development Planning Document For the purposes of the 1995 census, the government of Laos recognized 149 ethnic groups within 47 main ethnicities. whereas the Lao Front for National Construction (LFNC) recently revised the list to include 49 ethnicities consisting of over 160 ethnic groups. The term ethnic minorities is used by some to classify the non-Lao ethnic groups, while the term indigenous peoples is not used by the Lao PDR. These 160 ethnic groups speak a total of 82 distinct living languages. Ethnologue report for Laos 

Lao 55%, Khmu 11%, Hmong 8%, Vietnamese 2%, other (over 100 minor ethnic groups) 26% (2005 census).

+ Population of Laos according to ethnic group in 1995 and 2005 
 Ethnicgroup Language family census 1995 UN Demographic Yearbooks census 2005 
 Number % Number % 
 Lao Tai-Kadai 2,403,891 52.5 3,067,005 54.6 
 Khmu Mon-Khmer 500,957 11.0 613,893 10.9 
 Hmong Hmong-Mien 315,465 6.9 415,946 8.0 
 Thai Tai-Kadai 215,254 3.8 
 Puthai Tai-Kadai 472,458 10.3 187,391 3.3 
 L Tai-Kadai 119,191 2.6 123,054 2.2 
 Katang Mon-Khmer 95,440 2.1 118,276 2.1 
 Makong Mon-Khmer 92,321 2.0 117,872 2.1 
 Akha (Kor) Tibeto-Burman 66,108 1.4 90,698 1.6 
 Xuay 45,498 1.0 42,834 0.8 
 Singsily 37,447 0.7 
 Taoey Mon-Khmer 30,876 0.7 32,177 0.6 
 Nhuane 26,239 0.6 29,442 0.5 
 Iewmien (Yao) Hmong-Mien 22,665 0.5 27,449 0.5 
 Phong Mon-Khmer 21,395 0.5 26,314 0.5 
 Brao (Larvae) Mon-Khmer 17,544 0.4 22,772 0.4 
 Katu Mon-Khmer 17,024 0.4 22,759 0.4 
 Oey Mon-Khmer 14,947 0.3 22,458 0.4 
 Pray Mon-Khmer 15,000 0.3 21,922 0.4 
 Lamed Mon-Khmer 16,740 0.3 19,827 0.4 
 Lahu (Musir) Tibeto-Burman 8,702 0.2 15,238 0.3 
 Thaneua Tai-Kadai 14,799 0.3 
 Kriang (Ngae) Mon-Khmer 12,189 0.3 12,879 0.2 
 Hor 8,900 0.2 10,437 0.2 
 Xingmoon (Puoc) Mon-Khmer 5,834 0.1 8,565 0.2 
 Jeng Mon-Khmer 6,511 0.1 7,559 0.1 
 Nhahem 5,152 0.1 6,785 0.1 
 Kmer 3,902 0.1 5,825 0.1 
 Toum (Hung) Mon-Khmer 2,510 0.05 4,458 0.08 
 Xaek Tai-Kadai 2,745 0.06 3.733 0.07 
 Samtao Mon-Khmer 2,213 0.05 3,533 0.06 
 Sila (Sida) Tibeto-Burman 1,772 0.04 2,939 0.05 
 Tri 20,906 0.5 2.668 0.05 
 Harak 2,128 0.04 
 Bid Mon-Khmer 1,509 0.03 1,691 0.03 
 Lolo Tibeto-Burman 1,407 0.03 1,691 0.03 
 Pako Mon-Khmer 13,224 0.3 1,675 0.03 
 Lavy Mon-Khmer 538 0.01 1,193 0.02 
 Yae Mon-Khmer 8,013 0.2 1,057 0.02 
 Sadang Mon-Khmer 786 0.02 938 0.02 
 Hanyi Tibeto-Burman 1,122 0.02 848 0.02 
 Nguane 1,344 0.03 722 0.01 
 Oedou Mon-Khmer 649 0.01 
 Yang 4,630 0.1 616 0.01 
 Moy 534 0.01 
 Thin (Mal) Mon-Khmer 23,193 0.51 514 0.01 
 Kree 739 0.02 495 0.01 
 Laven Mon-Khmer 40,519 0.9 
 Phounoy Tibeto-Burman 35,635 0.8 
 Talieng Mon-Khmer 23,091 0.5 
 Alack Mon-Khmer 16,594 0.4 
 Kui Mon-Khmer 6,268 0.1 
 Khir 1,639 0.04 
 Mone 217 0.00 
 Others & not stated 19,285 0.4 216,780 3.9 
 Total 4,574,848 5,621,982 

== CIA World Factbook demographic statistics ==

The following demographic statistics are from the CIA World Factbook, unless otherwise indicated.

Sex ratio:
at birth: 1.05 male(s)/female
under 15 years: 1.01 male(s)/female
15-64 years: 0.98 male(s)/female
65 years and over: 0.76 male(s)/female
total population: 0.98 male(s)/female (2009 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
total population: 62.39 years (2011 est.)
male: 60.50 years (2011 est.) 
female: 64.36 years (2011 est.)

Nationality:
noun: Lao(s) or Laotian(s)
adjective: Lao or Laotian

Religions:
Buddhist 67%, Christian 1.5%, other and unspecified 31.5% (see Religion in Laos)

Languages:
Lao (official), French, English, Vietnamese, and various ethnic languages

Literacy:
definition: age 15 and over can read and write
total population: 73%
male: 83%
female: 63% (2005 est.)

== See also ==
* List of ethnic groups in Laos

== References ==

== Sources ==
* CIA World Factbook
* Lao Statistics Bureau



[[Politics of Laos]]

The politics of Laos takes place in the framework of a single-party socialist republic. The only legal political party is the Lao People's Revolutionary Party (LPRP). The head of state is President Choummaly Sayasone, who also is LPRP general secretary. The head of government is Prime Minister Thongsing Thammavong. Government policies are determined by the party through the all-powerful nine-member Politburo of the Lao People's Revolutionary Party and the 49-member Central Committee. Important government decisions are vetted by the Council of Ministers.

Laos' first, French-written and monarchical constitution was promulgated on May 11, 1947 and declared it to be an independent state within the French Union. The revised constitution of May 11, 1957, omitted reference to the French Union, though close educational, health and technical ties with the former colonial power persisted. The 1957 document was abrogated on December 3, 1975, when a communist People's Republic was proclaimed. A new constitution was adopted in 1991 and enshrined a "leading role" for the LPRP. The following year, elections were held for a new 85-seat National Assembly with members elected by secret ballot to five-year terms. This National Assembly, which essentially acts as a rubber stamp for the LPRP, approves all new laws, although the executive branch retains authority to issue binding decrees. The most recent elections took place in April 2006. The assembly was expanded to 99 members in 1997 and in 2006 elections had 115.

The FY 2000 central government budget plan called for revenue of $180 million and expenditures of $289 million, including capital expenditures of $202 million.

In the early 2000s, bomb attacks against the government have occurred, coupled with small exchanges of fire, across Laos. http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/asia-pacific/859457.stm A variety of different groups have claimed responsibility including the Committee for Independence and Democracy in Laos and Lao Citizens Movement for Democracy.

==Executive branch==
The presidential palace in Vientiane

|President
|Choummaly Sayasone
|Lao People's Revolutionary Party
|8 June 2006
|-
|Prime Minister
|Thongsing Thammavong
|Lao People's Revolutionary Party
|23 December 2010

The president is elected by the National Assembly for a five-year term. The prime minister and the Council of Ministers are appointed by the president with the approval of the National Assembly for a five-year term.

There are also four deputy prime ministers. As of a cabinet reshuffle on June 8, 2006, they are Maj. Gen. Douangchay Phichit (also defense minister), Thongloun Sisoulith (also foreign minister), Somsavat Lengsavad and Maj. Gen. Asang Laoly.

The 28-member cabinet also includes Onechanh Thammavong as labour minister, Chaleuan Yapaoher as justice minister, Nam Vignaket as industry and commerce minister, Sitaheng Latsaphone as agriculture minister and Sommath Pholsena as transport minister.

==Legislative branch==
The National Assembly (Sapha Heng Xat) has 115 members, elected for a five-year term.

==Political parties and elections==

==Judicial branch==
The President of the People's Supreme Court is elected by the National Assembly on the recommendation of the National Assembly Standing Committee. The Vice President of the People's Supreme Court and the judges are appointed by the National Assembly Standing Committee.

==State leaders==
*President: Lt. Gen. Choummaly Sayasone
*Vice President: Bounnhang Vorachith
*Prime Minister: Thongsing Thammavong
*Deputy Prime Minister and President of State Control Authority: Maj. Gen. Asang Laoly
*Deputy Prime Minister and Minister of Foreign Affairs: Dr Thongloun Sisoulith
*Deputy Prime Minister and Standing Member of Government: Dr Somsavat Lengsavad

==Government==
*Thongbane Sengaphone, Minister of National Security
*Onchanh Thammavong, Minister of Labour and Social Welfare
*Somdy Douangdy, Minister of Planning and Investment
*Pr.Dr Bosengkham Vongdara, Minister of Information, Culture and Tourism (update 2013)
*Prof. Dr. Eksavang VONGVICHIT, Minister of Public Health
*Dr Phankham Viphavan, Minister of Education
*Dr Nam Viyaket, Minister of Industry and Commerce
*Soulivong Daravong, Minister of Energy and Mining
*Sommath Pholsena, Minister of Public Works and Transport
*Phouphet Khamphounvong, Minister of Finance
*Hiem Phommachanh, Minister of Post and Telecommunication
*Vilayvan Phomkhe, Minister of Agriculture and Forestry

== PM Office ==
*Sinlavong Khoutphaytoon, Minister to the Prime Ministers Office, Head of the government Secretariat committee
*Bounpheng Mounphosay, Minister to Prime Ministers Office, Head the Public Administration and Civil Service Authority (PACSA)
*Soubanh Sritthirath, Minister to the Prime Minister's Office.
*Cheuang Sombounkhanh, Minister to the Prime Ministers office, Head of the government Secretariat committee.
*Onneua Phommachanh, Minister to Prime Ministers Office
*Kham-ouan Boupha, Minister to Prime Ministers Office
*Dr Bounteim Phitsamai, Minister, Head of the Science, Technology and Environment Organisation
*Saisengly Tengbriaju, Minister to Prime Ministers Office
*Somphong Mongkhonvilay, Minister to the Prime Ministers Office, Head of the National Tourism Authority
*Bouasi Lorvansay, Minister to Prime Ministers Office
*Khamluad Sitlakon, Minister to the Prime Ministers Office, President of post &Communication

== Presidential Palace Office ==
*Phongsavath Boupha, Minister to Presidential Palaces Office

Somphao Faysith, Governor of Lao PDR Central Bank
*Dr Chaleun Yiapaoheu, Minister of Justice 
*President of the National Assembly: Pany Yathotou:
*Vice-President of the National Assembly: Dr Xaysomphone Phomvihane , Somphan Phengkhammy
*President of Supreme Court: Khamphanh Sithidampha
*Supreme Peoples Prosecutor: Khamsane Souvong

Politburo of the Lao People's Revolutionary Party:
#Lt. Gen. Choummaly Sayasone, General Secretary of the Lao People's Revolutionary Party
#Thongsing Thammavong, Prime Minister (since 23 December 2010)
#Colonel Bounnhang Vorachith, Vice President of Lao People's Democratic Republic, Standing Member of the Secretariat
#Pany Yathotou, Chairwoman of the National Assembly (since 23 December 2010)
#Dr Thongloun Sisoulith, Deputy Prime Minister, Minister of Foreign Affairs, Head of the Party's National External Relations Committee
#Maj. Gen. Asang Laoly, Deputy Prime Minister, Head of the Party's Central Inspection Committee.
#Maj. Gen. Douangchay Phichith, Deputy Prime Minister, Minister of National Defence
#Somsavat Lengsavad, Standing Deputy Prime Minister
#Dr. Bounpone Bouttanavong, chief of the party Central Committee office.
#Dr. Bounthong Chitmany, chief of the party organization.
#Dr. Phankham Viphavanh, education minister.

Secretariat of the Party Central Committee:
#Lt. Gen. Choummaly Sayasone
#Bounnhang Vorachit (PCC Standing Secretariat)
#Dr Bounthong Chitmany
#Dr Bounpone Bouttanavong
#Dr Thongban Seng-aphone
#Chansy Phosikham
#Soukan Mahalath
#Maj. Gen. Sengnuan Xayalath
#Cheuang Sombounkhanh

Inspection Committee of the Party Central Committee
#Bounthong Chitmany (President)
#Thongsy Ouanlasy
#Sinay Mienglavanh
#Khamsuan Chanthavong
#Thongsouk Bounyavong
#Singphet Bounsavatthiphan
#Bounpone Sangsomsak

Party Central Committee Advisor: Khamtai Siphandon

==Administrative divisions==

Laos is divided into 17 provinces (khoueng, singular and plural), 1 municipality* ( nakhon luang vientiane, singular and plural):
Attapu, Bokeo, Borikhamxay, Champassack, Houaphan, Khammouane, Louang Namtha, Luangphabang, Oudomxay, Phongsaly, Saravane, Savannakhet, Saysomboune, Sekong, Vientiane*, Vientiane, Sayaboury, Xieng Khouang.

 



[[Economy of Laos]]

The economy of the Lao Peoples' Democratic Republic is rapidly growing, as the government began to decentralise control and encourage private enterprise in 1986. https://www.cia.gov/library/publications/the-world-factbook/geos/la.html Currently, the economy grows at 8% a year, and the government is pursuing poverty reduction and education for all children as key goals. The country opened a stock exchange, the Lao Securities Exchange in 2011, and has become a rising regional player in its role as a hydroelectric power supplier to neighbors such as China, Vietnam and Thailand. 

Laos remains one of the poorest countries in Southeast Asia. http://www.marketwatch.com/story/laos-marks-first-day-trade-in-new-exchange-2011-01-11 A landlocked country, it has inadequate infrastructure and a largely unskilled work force. The country's per capita income in 2009 was estimated to be $2,700 on a purchasing power parity-basis.

==Economic history==

The communist government imposed a dogmatic Soviet-style command economy system, replacing the private sector with state enterprises and cooperatives; centralizing investment, production, trade, and pricing; and creating barriers to internal and foreign trade.

Within a few years, the PDR Lao government realized these types of economic policies were preventing, rather than stimulating, growth and development. No substantive reform was introduced, however, until 1986 when the government announced its "new economic mechanism" (NEM). Initially timid, the NEM was expanded to include a range of reforms designed to create conditions conducive to private sector activity. Prices set by market forces replaced government-determined prices. Farmers were permitted to own land and sell crops on the open market. State firms were granted increased decision making authority and lost most of their subsidies and pricing advantages. The government set the exchange rate close to real market levels, lifted trade barriers, replaced import barriers with tariffs, and gave private sector firms direct access to imports and credit.

In 1989, the PDR Lao government reached agreement with the World Bank and the International Monetary Fund on additional reforms. The government agreed to expa

In an attempt to stimulate further international commerce, the PDR Lao government accepted Australian aid to build a bridge across the Mekong River to Thailand. The "Thai-Lao Friendship Bridge", between Vientiane Prefecture and Nong Khai Province, Thailand, was inaugurated in April 1994. Although the bridge has created additional commerce, the Lao government does not yet permit a completely free flow of traffic across the span.

These reforms led to economic growth and an increased availability of goods. However, the 1997 Asian Financial Crisis, coupled with the Lao government's own mismanagement of the economy, resulted in spiraling inflation and a steep depreciation of the kip, which lost 87% of its value from June 1997 to June 1999. Tighter monetary policies brought about greater macroeconomic stability in FY 2000, and monthly inflation, which had averaged about 10% during the first half of FY 1999, dropped to an average 1% over the same period in FY 2000.

The economy continues to be dominated by an unproductive agricultural sector operating largely outside the money economy and in which the public sector continues to play a dominant role. Still, a number of private enterprises have been founded and some are quite successful in industries such as handicrafts, beer, coffee and tourism. With United Nations, Japanese, and German support, a formerly state-controlled chamber of commerce aims to promote private business: the Lao National Chamber of Commerce and Industry and its provincial subdivisions. 8km.de, LNCCI 

==Agriculture==

Agriculture, mostly subsistence rice farming, dominates the economy, employing an estimated 85% of the population and producing 51% of GDP. Domestic savings are low, forcing Laos to rely heavily on foreign assistance and concessional loans as investment sources for economic development. Agricultural products include sweet potatoes, vegetables, corn, coffee, sugarcane, tobacco, cotton, tea, peanuts, rice; water buffalo, pigs, cattle, poultry. In FY 1999, for example, foreign grants and loans accounted for more than 20% of GDP and more than 75% of public investment.

In mid-2012, the Laos government issued a four-year moratorium for new mining projects. The reasons cited were environmental and social concerns relating to the use of agricultural land. 

==Tourism==

Tourism is the fastest growing industry in the economy and plays a vital role in the Lao economy. The government opened Laos to the world in the 1990s, and continues to be a popular destination amongst tourists. 

==Other Statistics==

GDP: purchasing power parity - $14.2 billion (2009 est.)
Exchange rate - kips (LAK) per US dollar - 8,556.56 (2009), 8,760.69 (2008), 9,658 (2007), 10,235 (2006), 10,820 (2005)

*Oil - production:
:0 bbl/d (2009 est.)
*Oil - consumption:
:3000 oilbbl/d (2009 est.)
*Oil - exports:
:0 bbl/d (2007 est.)
*Oil - imports:
:3080 oilbbl/d (2007 est.)

Of the total foreign investment in Laos in 2012, the mining industry got 27% followed by electricity generation which has 25% share. 
 
 

==External links==

*Rice research in Lao PDR http://www.nafri.org.la/05_news/news/IRRI/15_years_of_Research.htm
*Rice Biodiversity in Lao PDR http://www.sdc.org.vn/index.php?navID=21483&langID=1, 

==References==

 

[[Telecommunications in Laos]]

Telecommunications in Laos are based on a network of telephone lines and radiotelephone communications in remote areas, as well as mobile phone infrastructure. The system is not well-developed.

==Infrastructure and statistics==
In 1997 there were 25,000 telephone lines in use, and in 2007 there were 850,000 mobile cellular subscribers. Laos is served by an Intersputnik satellite that covers the Indian Ocean region.

In 1998 there were 12 AM stations and one FM station. In 1997 there were an estimated 730,000 radios in the country. In 2011 Laos had three television channels. In 2000 there was one Internet service provider, by 2002 serving about 10,000 users. The top-level domain for Laos is .la.

==See also==
* Telephone numbers in Laos
* Internet in Laos

== References ==

*

[[Transport in Laos]]

This article concerns systems of transportation in Laos. Laos is a country in Asia, which possesses a number of modern transportation systems, including several highways and a number of airports. As a landlocked country, Laos possesses no ports or harbours on the sea, and the difficulty of navigation on the Mekong means that this is also not a significant transport route.

== Geography and transport limits ==

A topographic map of Laos.
Because of its mountainous topography and lack of development, Laos has few reliable transportation routes. This inaccessibility has historically limited the ability of any government to maintain a presence in areas distant from the national or provincial capitals and has limited interchange and communication among villages and ethnic groups. 

The Mekong and Nam Ou are the only natural channels suitable for large-draft boat transportation, and from December through May low water limits the size of the draft that may be used over many routes. Laotians in lowland villages located on the banks of smaller rivers have traditionally traveled in pirogues for fishing, trading, and visiting up and down the river for limited distances. 

Otherwise, travel is by ox-cart over level terrain or by foot. The steep mountains and lack of roads have caused upland ethnic groups to rely entirely on pack baskets and horse packing for transportation.

The road system is not extensive. A rudimentary network begun under French colonial rule and continued from the 1950s has provided an important means of increased intervillage communication, movement of market goods, and a focus for new settlements. In mid-1994, travel in most areas was difficult and expensive, and most Laotians traveled only limited distances, if at all. As a result of ongoing improvements in the road system started during the early 1990s, it is expected that in the future villagers will more easily be able to seek medical care, send children to schools at district centers, and work outside the village.

== Railways ==

Rail transport does not play a significant part in Laos's transport sector, since the country largely lacks the required infrastructure. A short portage railway, the Don Det  Don Khon narrow gauge railway, was built by the French while Laos was a part of French Indochina. The railway crossed over the islands of Don Det and Don Khon, enabling vessels, freight and passengers to travel along the Mekong River. The railway was abandoned and fell into disrepair, although some of the infrastructure is still in place. The only railway (ever) in Laos The International Steam Pages 

In the late 1920s, work began on the Thakhek  Tan Ap railway, that would have run between Thakhek, Khammouane Province and Tn p Railway Station, Qung Bnh Province, Vietnam through the M Gi Pass. However, the scheme was eventually aborted in the 1930s.

===Link to Thailand===
In January 2007 work began on a 3.5 km extension of the metre-gauge State Railway of Thailand network across the ThaiLao Friendship Bridge to Thanaleng Railway Station, a new passenger and freight terminal in Dongphosy village, 20 km east of Vientiane. Test trains began running on July 4, 2008, and Princess Maha Chakri Sirindhorn of Thailand formally inaugurated the line on March 5, 2009. As of November 2010, Lao officials plan to convert the station into a rail cargo terminal for freight trains, allowing cargo to be transported from Bangkok into Laos at a lower cost than would be possible with road transport. 

===Link to Vietnam===
In 2007, the Laotian Ministry of Transportation entered into discussion with Vietnam to discuss the possibility of opening a new railway line from Thakhek in Laos through the M Gi Pass to Tn p Railway Station in Vietnam's Qung Bnh Province, on the NorthSouth Railway. The proposed line would continue to the coast at Vung Ang, a port in H Tnh Province, which would provide landlocked Laos with access to the South China Sea. According to plans established by ASEAN, the line may also be extended via Thakhek all the way to the Laotian capital Vientiane. Both Laos and Thailand have expressed interest in the project as a shorter export gateway to the Pacific Ocean. 

By 2012, the Thakhek project was not in the news anymore; but a project for another, somewhat more southern, line to Vietnam, now from Savannakhet, was announced instead. An agreement for the construction of this 220-kilometre-long, $5 billion line, was signed on Nov 5, 2012 with the Malaysian company called Giant Consolidated Limited. The work is supposed to begin in 2013 and be completed in 4 years. Laos to build railway to Vietnam\, 2012-11-14 

===Link to China===
Laos has a long history of negotiating with China regarding the possibility of a join railway project. Laos Says China to Finance Rail Link, The Wall Street Journal, 2012-10-24 

In October 2010, plans were announced for a 530 km standard gauge Laos-China railways ready to roll, 2012-11-16 railway linking Vientiane to Xishuangbanna, in Yunnan province in China. Construction was expected to begin in 2011, for completion in 2014. There were plans to extend this railway south from Vientiane to Bangkok. However, in April 2011 it was reported that construction of the railway has been postponed indefinitely, while the Chinese minister of Transport and Railways has been arrested on corruption charges. 

In October 2012, it was announced again that an agreement with China about the construction of a railway from Vientiane to the Chinese border is to be signed "within days". The project cost is quoted at $7 bln, and the construction will be done by Chinese companies. The ground-breaking ceremony was planned for November 2012, and the completion of the project was expected by 2017. In November 2012, the Laotian press was reporting that the money for the construction of the railway would be borrowed from the EXEM Bank of China; the construction would be started in 2013, and complete in 2018. 

The rail link will go through Yunnan province, linking together Kunming, China with Vientiane, Laos via Bangkok, Thailand to Dawei, Myanmar. On February 23, 2013, part of the new railway line started operations. Spans from Yuxi, south of Kunming, capital of Chinas southern Yunnan province, to Mengzi on the route to the Vietnamese border, and is mainly intended for freight transport with a maximum speed of 120 km/h. The new line replaces the 100-year-old, 854 kilometer Kunming-Haiphone line, which had a speed of just 30 km/h. 
 
 

==Highways==
In Laos, there are 21,716 km of highway, of which 9,673.5 km are paved, leaving 12,042.5 km unpaved. Driving in Laos is on the right.

Laos has constructed a new highway connecting Savannakhet to the Vietnamese border at Lao Bao, with funding coming from the Japanese government . This has greatly facilitated travelling across Laos. This highway can now be traversed in a few hours, while in 2002 the trip took over 9 hours along a very bumpy (and scenic) route.

Laos is connected across the Mekong to Thailand by First and Second Thai-Lao Friendship Bridges. Vientiane is linked to Udon Thani using the First Friendship Bridge. The Third Thai-Lao Friendship Bridge began construction in March 2009 linking Nakhon Phanom province in northeastern Thailand and Khammouan province in Laos. It was completed on November 11, 2011.

Laos opened a highway connection to Kunming in April 2008. The Fourth Thai-Lao Friendship Bridge is under construction and is hoped to be completed by December 2012 linking Kunming to Bokeo, Laos and Chiang Rai. It will reduce the travel time to 5 hours. This is a cooperation between Thailand, China and Laos.

==Water transport==
About 4,587 km of navigable water routes exist in Laos, primarily the Mekong and its tributaries. There is an additional 2,897 km, which is sectionally navigable by craft drawing less than 0.5 m.

In terms of sea travel, Laos has a merchant marine consisting of 1 cargo ship of .

==Pipelines==
Laos has 136 km of pipeline for transport of petroleum products.

==Airports==
The interior of Wattay Airport in Vientiane.
Laos possesses 52 airports, of which 9 have paved runways, and 43 do not. Of the airports with paved runways, only Wattay International Airport has runway length over 2,438m which is necessary to accommodate jumbo jets. Of the remainder, four have runways 1,524 to 2,437 m length, and a further four of lengths between 914 and 1,523 m. 

Of the airports without paved runways, 1 has runways of length above 1,524m, 17 have runway lengths between 914 and 1,523 m, leaving 25 with length below 914m.

==See also==
*Laos
*Lao Airlines
*Vientiane

== External links ==
* UN Map of Laos
* News site regarding rail in Laos
* Map of railways in Laos, Cambodia, and Vietnam  does not show Thailand or China

==References==
 

 

[[Lao People's Army]]

The Lao People's Army is the name of the armed forces of Laos, who are charged with protecting the country. Until 1975, the Royal Laos Army were the armed forces of the Kingdom of Laos, along with the Lao People's Liberation Army Air Force and the Lao People's Navy.

==History==

Serving one of the world's least developed communist countries, the Lao People's Armed Forces (LPAF) is small, poorly funded, and ineffectively resourced; its mission focus is border and internal security, primarily in internal suppression of Laotian dissident and opposition groups, including the brutal crushing of the peaceful 1999 Lao Students Movement of Democracy demonstrations in Vientiane, and in countering ethnic Hmong insurgent groups and other groups of Laotian and Hmong people opposed the one-party Marxist Pathet Lao government and the support it receives from the Socialist Republic of Vietnam. Together with the Lao People's Revolutionary Party and the government, the Lao People's Army (LPA) is the third pillar of state machinery, and as such is expected to suppress political and civil unrest and similar national emergencies faced by the authoritarian, communist government in Vientiane. The LPA also has reportedly upgraded skills to respond to avian influenza outbreaks. At present, there is no major perceived external threat to the state and the LPA maintains very strong ties with the neighboring Vietnamese military (2008). CIA Factbook: Laos 

According to numerous independent journalists and non-governmental organizations (NGOs), including Amnesty International, Human Rights Watch, The Centre for Public Policy Analysis, and humanitarian and human rights organizations, the Lao People's Army has repeatedly engaged in egregious human rights violations and the practice of corruption in Laos, including kidnapping, rape, torture, extrajudicial killing, military attacks against civilians, mass starvation against the ethnic minority, Hmong people, illegal logging in cooperation with the Vietnam People's Army-owned front companies and other violations of international law, the Geneva conventions, and acceptable norms of behavior. According to a report by Amnesty International in 2007: "Thousands of ethnic Hmong women, men and children live in scattered groups in the Lao jungles, hiding from the authorities, particularly the military. Amnesty International is calling for an immediate end to armed attacks on these people." Amnesty International, (23 March 2007), "Lao People's Democratic Republic: Hiding in the jungle - Hmong under threat" http://www.amnesty.org/en/library/info/ASA26/003/2007 The Centre for Public Policy Analysis, CPPA, Washington, D.C. (1 August 2013), http://wwww.centerforpublicpolicyanalysis.org In 2013, attacks by the Lao People's Army against the Hmong people and others intensified, with soldiers killing four unarmed Hmong school teachers in addition to engaging in other human rights abuses according the Lao Human Rights Council, the Centre for Public Policy Analysis and others. Businesswire, businesswire.com (4 March 2013) "Laos: Attacks Intensify Against Lao, Hmong People" http://www.businesswire.com/news/home/20130304006755/en/Laos-Attacks-Intensify-Lao-Hmong-People The LPAF and its military intelligence play a major role in the arrest, imprisonment and torture of foreign prisoners in Vientiane's notorious Phonthong Prison and the communist Lao gulag system where Australians Kerry and Kay Danes were imprisoned and where civic activist Sombath Somphone may be imprisoned following his arrest in December 2012. Scoop Independent News,Auckland, New Zealand, (19 March 2013) "Laos Officials Criticized for Obstructing Investigation" http://www.scoop.co.nz/stories/WO1303/S00169/laos-officials-criticized-for-obstructing-investigation.htm 

The army of 130,000 was equipped with 30 main battle tanks. The army marine section, equipped with 16 patrol crafts, had 600 personnel. The air force, with 3,500 personnel, was equipped with anti-aircraft missiles and 24 combat aircraft. Militia self-defense forces numbered approximately 100,000 organized for local defense. The small arms utilized mostly by the Laotian Army is the Soviet AKM Assault rifle, PKM Machine gun, Makarov PM pistol, and RPD light machine gun.

Laotian and Hmong veterans who fought against North Vietnam, Vietnam People's Army (VPA), communist Pathet Lao forces, and LPAF to defend the Kingdom of Laos and U.S., Laos and the Kingdom of Thailand's national security interests during the Vietnam war and its aftermath, including the Lao Veterans of America, established the Laos Memorial in Arlington National Cemetery in 1997.

The United League for Democracy in Laos, Amnesty International, the Centre for Public Policy Analysis, the Lao Veterans of America and other NGOs continue to raise concerns about the LPAF's serious human rights violations, internal suppression of the population, systemic corruption, brutal attacks against unarmed Laotian and Hmong political and religious dissident and opposition groups, one-party authoritarian rule in Laos as well as the LPAF's very close relationship with the VPA and VPA military-owned companies engaged in illegal logging in Laos. Lao Veterans of America,Inc. (LVA), (29 August 2013), http://www.laoveteransofamerica.org 

==Tank and armoured vehicle==

 photo Name Type Origin Quantity Notes 
 120px PT-76 light tank USSR 25 www.army-guide.com/eng/countrys.php?countryID=125 
 120px T-54/55 Main Battle Tank USSR 30 www.army-guide.com/eng/countrys.php?countryID=125 
 120px BTR-60P Armored Personnel Carrier USSR 130 www.army-guide.com/eng/countrys.php?countryID=125 
 120px BTR-152 Armored personnel carrier USSR 30 www.army-guide.com/eng/countrys.php?countryID=125 
 120px M8 Greyhound Armored Car USA 25 www.army-guide.com/eng/countrys.php?countryID=125 
 120px ZSU-23-4 Light Armored anti-aircraft USSR 10 ZSU-23-4#Operators 

==Artillery==

 photo Name Type Origin Quantity Notes 
 120px M-30 122 mm howitzer field howitzer USSR 40 www.army-guide.com/eng/countrys.php?countryID=125 
 120px 130 mm towed field gun M1954 (M-46) www.globalsecurity.org/military/world/laos/army-equipment.htm field gun USSR 16 
 120px 122 mm howitzer 2A18 (D-30) www.army-guide.com/eng/countrys.php?countryID=125 Howitzer USSR 48 
 120px M114 155 mm howitzer http://www.globalsecurity.org/military/world/laos/army-equipment.htm howitzer USA 10 
 120px M101 howitzer 105mm (towed): M-101 http://www.globalsecurity.org/military/world/laos/army-equipment.htm USA 25 
 120px M116 howitzer http://www.globalsecurity.org/military/world/laos/army-equipment.htm 75mm (towed): M-116 pack USA 10 
 
 http://www.globalsecurity.org/military/world/index.html http://www.asiapacificdefencereporter.com/order-of-battle/laos 

==Air defense==

 photo Name Type Origin Quantity Notes 
 120px Strela 2 Surface to air missile USSR 120 
 120px 57 mm AZP S-60 Automatic anti-aircraft gun USSR 18 
 120px 37 mm automatic air defense gun M1939 (61-K) Air defense gun USSR 18 
 120px ZU-23-2 anti-aircraft gun USSR 48 
 120px ZPU auto anti-aircraft gun USSR 100+ 
 
 http://www.asiapacificdefencereporter.com/order-of-battle/laos 

==Mortars==

*81mm http://lcweb2.loc.gov/frd/cs/laos/la_appen.html 
*82mm http://lcweb2.loc.gov/frd/cs/laos/la_appen.html 
* M1938 mortar http://lcweb2.loc.gov/frd/cs/laos/la_appen.html 
*Mortar M1943|120mm: M-43] http://lcweb2.loc.gov/frd/cs/laos/la_appen.html 
*M2 4.2 inch mortar

==See also==
*Lao People's Liberation Army Air Force
*Amnesty International
*The Centre for Public Policy Analysis The Centre for Public Policy Analysis, Washington, D.C.
*Laos Memorial, Memorial to Lao and Hmong Veterans who fought against Lao People's Army and Pathet Lao during Vietnam, Arlington National Cemetery, USA, 
*Lao Veterans of America, Inc., Lao and Hmong Veterans who fought against Lao People's Army, Pathet Lao and North Vietnam during the Vietnam War.

==References==

*http://www.asianmilitaryreview.com/upload/201102172337151.pdf
*Army Guide
 

 



[[Foreign relations of Laos]]

The foreign relations of Laos, after the takeover by the Pathet Lao in December 1975, were characterized by a hostile posture toward the West, with the government of the Lao People's Democratic Republic aligning itself with the Soviet bloc, maintaining close ties with the Soviet Union and depending heavily on the Soviets for most of its foreign assistance. Laos also maintained a "special relationship" with Vietnam and formalized a 1977 treaty of friendship and cooperation that created tensions with China.

With the collapse of the Soviet Union and with Vietnam's decreased ability to provide assistance, Laos has sought to improve relations with its regional neighbors.

Laos' emergence from international isolation has been marked through improved and expanded relations with other nations such as Australia, France, Japan, Sweden, and India. Trade relations with the United States were normalized in 2004.

Laos was admitted into the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) in July 1997 and applied to join the World Trade Organization in 1998. In 2005 it attended the inaugural East Asia Summit.

Laos is a member of the following international organizations: Agency for Cultural and Technical Cooperation (ACCT), Association of Southeast Asian NationsASEAN, ASEAN Free Trade Area (AFTA), ASEAN Regional Forum, Asian Development Bank, Colombo Plan, Economic and Social Commission for Asia and Pacific (ESCAP), Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO), Group of 77G-77, International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (World Bank), International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO), International Development Association (IDA), International Fund for Agricultural Development (IFAD), International Finance Corporation (IFC), International Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies, International Labour Organization (ILO), International Monetary Fund (IMF), Intelsat (nonsignatory user), Interpol, International Olympic Commission (IOC), International Telecommunication UnionITU, Mekong Group, Non-Aligned Movement (NAM), Permanent Court of Arbitration (PCA), United Nations, United Nations Convention on Trade and Development (UNCTAD), United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO), United Nations Industrial Development Organization (UNIDO), Universal Postal Union (UPU), World Federation of Trade Unions, World Health Organization (WHO), World Intellectual Property Organization (WIPO), World Meteorological Organization (WMO), World Tourism Organization, World Trade Organization (observer).

==Bilateral relations==

===Brunei===
Brunei

Brunei has an embassy in Vientiane, and Laos has an embassy in Bandar Seri Begawan. 

===Cambodia===
Cambodia

===People's Republic of China===
China

Relations with the People's Republic of China have improved over the years. Although the two were allies during the Vietnam War, the Sino-Vietnamese War in 1979 led to a sharp deterioration in Sino-Lao relations. These relations began to improve in the late 1980s. In 1989 Sino-Lao relations were normalized.

===France===
France

Following its occupation of Vietnam, France absorbed Laos into French Indochina via treaties with Siam in 1893 and 1904. During World War II, the Japanese occupied French Indochina. When Japan surrendered, Lao nationalists declared Laos independent, but by early 1946, French troops had reoccupied the country and conferred limited autonomy on Laos. During the First Indochina War, the Indochinese Communist Party formed the Pathet Lao resistance organization committed to Lao independence. Laos gained full independence following the French defeat by the Vietnamese communists and the subsequent Geneva peace conference in 1954.

Today, Laos maintains an embassy in Paris. France maintains an embassy in Vientiane. 

=== Indonesia ===
Indonesia
Since established diplomatic relations on 1957, both nations enjoys cordial relations. Indonesia have an embassy in Vientiane, while Laos have an embassy in Jakarta. Indonesia supported and welcomed Laos membership to the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) in 1997. Laos and Indonesia agreed to enhance relations to focus on exploring the potential of both nations to cooperate on trade and investment. The two nations expressed a desire to reach further agreements relating to security, tourism, sport, air transport and education. Indonesia through bilateral cooperation assist Laos on capacity building and development in various sectors, trough scholarships and trainings for Laos students. 

===Malaysia===
Malaysia
During the collapse of the Communist Bloc, the Soviet Union could no longer afford aid for the development of Laos. This made Laos seek aid from other countries to help develop their country and has led the country to adopt a neutral foreign policy. When this policy of neutrality was adopted, relations with Malaysia were established. 

===Pakistan===
Pakistan
* Legend has it that the origin name of Laos is named after Pakistani city of Lahore.

===Russia===
Russia

* Laos has an embassy in Moscow. Embassy of Laos in Moscow 
* Russia has an embassy in Vientiane. Embassy of The Russian Federation in Vientiane 

===South Korea===
South Korea

* Kolaoholdings is South Korean company in Laos which is currently the largest private enterprise. KOLAO Holdings 

===Thailand===
Thailand

Thai-Lao relations were strained somewhat in 2006 ahead of the release of the sports comedy Lucky Loser, which Lao diplomats warned might offend Lao people and spark disturbances similar to the 2003 Phnom Penh riots. The film's release was cancelled.

Thailand is Laos' principal means of access to the sea and its primary trading partner. Despite strong economic and cultural ties with Thailand, parts of the border shared by the two countries are indefinite. Within a year of serious border clashes in 1987, Lao and Thai leaders signed a communiqu, signaling their intention to improve relations. Since then, they have made slow but steady progress, notably the construction and opening of the Friendship Bridge between the two countries.

===United States===
United States

Laos-United States relations officially began when the United States opened a legation in Laos in 1950, when Laos was a semi-autonomous state within French Indochina. These relations were maintained after Laotian independence in 1954.

The U.S. government provided more than $13.4 million in foreign assistance to Laos in FY 2006, in areas including unexploded ordnance clearance and removal, health and avian influenza, education, economic development, and governance.

In December 2004, George W. Bush signed into law a bill extending normal trade relations to Laos. In February 2005, a bilateral trade agreement (BTA) between the two countries entered into force. There has been a consequent rise in Lao exports to the United States, although the volume of trade remains small in absolute terms. Bilateral trade reached $15.7 million in 2006, compared with $8.9 million in 2003. The Lao Government is working to implement the provisions of the BTA and in 2 February 2013 joined the World Trade Organization.

===Vietnam===
Vietnam

Although Vietnam's historical record of leadership over the Pathet Lao during the civil war and its military power and proximity will not cease to exist, Laos struck out ahead of Vietnam with its New Economic Mechanism to introduce market mechanisms into its economy. In so doing, Laos has opened the door to rapprochement with Thailand and China at some expense to its special dependence on Vietnam. Laos might have reached the same point of normalization in following Vietnam's economic and diplomatic change, but by moving ahead resolutely and responding to Thai and Chinese gestures, Laos has broadened its range of donors, trading partners, and investors independent of Vietnam's attempts to accomplish the same goal. Thus, Vietnam remains in the shadows as a mentor and emergency ally, and the tutelage of Laos has shifted dramatically to development banks and international entrepreneurs. Brown, MacAlister and Joseph J. Zasloff. "Relations with Vietnam". Laos: a country study (Andrea Matles Savada, editor). Library of Congress Federal Research Division (July 1994). This article incorporates text from this source, which is in the public domain. 

===Overview===
Foreign relation of Laos

Laos has established relations with 134 countries (including the Sahrawi Republic and the State of Palestine) and the European Union. List of STATES WHICH THE LAO PDR HAS ESTABLISHED DIPLOMATIC RELATIONS SINCE 1950 

Laos has not yet established diplomatic relations with:
*Guatemala, El Salvador, Honduras, Costa Rica, Bolivia, Uruguay
*Belize, Bahamas, Haiti, Antigua and Barbuda, St. Kitts and Nevis, St. Lucia, St. Vincent and the Grenadines, Barbados, Guyana, Suriname, Dominica, Trinidad and Tobago
*Monaco, San Marino, Vatican City
*Jordan, Bhutan
*Botswana, Namibia, Swaziland, Lesotho, Comoros, Malawi, DRCongo, Congo, Burundi, Uganda, South Sudan, Eritrea, Djibouti, Central African Republic, Chad, Cameroon, Eq.Guinea, Gabon, So Tom and Prncipe, Togo, Ghana, Burkina Faso, Liberia, Sierra Leone, Guinea-Bissau, Senegal, Gambia, Mauritania, Cape Verde
*Palau, Micronesia, Nauru, Cook Islands, Tuvalu, Kiribati, Marshall Islands, Niue, Solomon Islands, Tonga, Samoa
*the Sovereign Military Order of Malta
*the rest of states with limited recognition.

==See also==
*List of diplomatic missions in Laos
*List of diplomatic missions of Laos
*Laos
*Kingdom of Laos
*Politics of Laos
*History of Laos

==References==

 

[[History of Latvia]]

The History of Latvia began when the area that is today Latvia was settled following the end of the last glacial period, around 9000 BC. Ancient Baltic peoples appeared during the second millennium BC, and four distinct tribal realms in Latvia's territories were identifiable towards the end of the first millennium AD. Latvia's principal river, the Daugava River, was at the head of an important mainland route from the Baltic region through Russia into southern Europe and the Middle East, used by the Vikings and later Nordic and German traders.

In the early medieval period, the region's peoples resisted Christianisation and became subject to attack in the Northern Crusades. Today's capital, Riga, founded in 1201 by Teutonic colonists at the mouth of the Daugava, became a strategic base in a papally-sanctioned conquest of the area by the Livonian Brothers of the Sword. It was to be the first major city of the southern Baltic and, after 1282, a principal trading centre in the Hanseatic League. By the 16th century, Germanic dominance in the region was increasingly challenged by other powers.

Due to Latvia's strategic location and prosperous city, its territories were a frequent focal point for conflict and conquest between at least four major powers, the State of the Teutonic Order (later Germany), the PolishLithuanian Commonwealth, Sweden and Russia. The longest period of external hegemony in the modern period began in 1710 when control over Riga switched from Sweden to Russia during the Great Northern War. Under Russian control, Latvia was in the vanguard of industrialisation and the abolition of serfdom, so that by the end of the 19th century, it had become one of the most developed parts of the Russian Empire. The increasing social problems and rising discontent that this brought meant that Riga also played a leading role in the 1905 Russian Revolution.

A rising sense of Latvian nationalism from the 1850s onward bore fruit after World War I when, after two years of struggle in the Russian Civil War, Latvia finally won sovereign independence, recognised by Russia in 1920 and by the international community in 1921. Latvia's independent status was interrupted at the outset of World War II in 1940 when the country was forcibly incorporated into the Soviet Union, invaded and occupied by Nazi Germany in 1941, then retaken by the Soviets in 194445.

From the mid-1940s, the country was subject to Soviet economic control and saw considerable Russification of its peoples. However, Latvian culture and infrastructures survived and, during the period of Soviet liberalisation under Mikhail Gorbachev, Latvia once again took a path towards independence, eventually succeeding in August 1991 and being recognised by Russia the following month. Since then, under restored independence, Latvia has become a member of the United Nations, entered NATO and joined the European Union.

== Prehistory ==
Baltic Tribes, about 1200 CE.

The proto-Baltic forefathers of the Latvian people have lived on the eastern coast of the Baltic Sea since the third millennium BCE. Data: 3000 BC to 1500 BC - The Ethnohistory Project 

Necklace (BM).JPG|left|thumb|Baltic bronze necklace from the village of Aizkraukle, Latvia dating to 12th century AD now in the British Museum. [http://www.britishmuseum.org/research/collection_online/collection_object_details.aspx?objectId=63381&partId=1&place=28497&plaA=28497-3-1&page=2 British Museum Collection ]]
At the beginning of this era, the territory known today as Latvia became famous as a trading crossroads. The famous "route from the Vikings to the Greeks" mentioned in ancient chronicles stretched from Scandinavia through Latvian territory via the Daugava River to the ancient Rus and Byzantine Empire.

The ancient Balts of this time actively participated in the trading network. Across the European continent, Latvia's coast was known as a place for obtaining amber. Up to and into the Middle Ages, amber was more valuable than gold in many places. Latvian amber was known in places as far away as Ancient Greece and the Roman Empire, and the Amber Road was intensively used for the transfer of amber to the south of Europe. In the 10th century, the ancient Balts started to form specific tribal realms. Gradually, five individual Baltic tribal cultures developed: Curonians, Livonians, Latgalians, Selonians, Semigallians (). The largest of them was the Latgallian tribe, which was the most advanced in its socio-political development. The main Latgallian principality was Jersika, ruled by the Greek Orthodox princes from Latgallian-Polotsk branch of Rurik dynasty. The last ruler of Jersika, mentioned in the Chronicle of Henry of Livonia was prince Visvaldis (Vissewalde, rex de Gercike). During dividing of his realm in 1211 part of the country was called "Latvia" (terra, quae Lettia dicitur), probably the first time this name is mentioned in written sources. In contrast, the Couronians maintained a lifestyle of intensive invasions that included looting and pillaging. On the west coast of the Baltic Sea, they became known as the "Baltic Vikings". But Selonians and Semgallians, closely related to Auktaitians and Samogitians, were known as peace-loving and prosperous farmers. Livonians lived along the shores of the Gulf of Riga and were fishers and traders.

==German period (12071561)==

Medieval Livonia in 1260.
Because of its strategic geographic location, Latvian territory has always been invaded by other larger nations, and this situation has defined the fate of Latvia and its people.

At the end of the 12th century, Latvia was more often visited by traders from Western Europe who set out on trading journeys along Latvia's longest river, the Daugava, to Russia. At the very end of the 12th century, German traders arrived and with them came preachers of the Christian faith who attempted to convert the pagan Baltic and Finno-Ugric tribes to the Christian faith. The Livs did not willingly convert to the new and different beliefs and practices, and particularly opposed the ritual of baptism. News of this reached the Pope in Rome and it was decided that Crusaders would be sent into Latvia to influence the situation.

The Germans founded Riga in 1201, and gradually it became the largest city in the Southern part of the Baltic Sea. Order of the Sword Brothers was founded in 1202 to subjugate the local people. The Livs were conquered by 1207 and most of the Latgalians by 1214. But the Sword Brothers were defeated in Battle of Saule (1236) and its remnants accepted incorporation into the Teutonic Order. By the end of 13th century also the Curonians and Semigallians were subjugated and the development of separate tribal realms of the ancient Latvians came to an end.

In the 13th century, an ecclesiastical state Terra Mariana or Livonia was established under the Germanic authorities consisting of Latvia and Estonia. In 1282, Riga and later Csis, Limbai, Koknese and Valmiera were included in the Northern German Trading Organisation, or the Hanseatic League (Hansa). From this time, Riga became an important point in west-east trading. Riga, being the centre of the Eastern Baltic region, formed close cultural contacts with Western Europe.

The reformation reached Livonia in 1521. It was supported in particular in the cities and by the middle of the 16th century the majority of the population had already converted to Lutheranism.

In the 1516th century the hereditary landed class gradually evolved from vassals of the Order and the bishops. In time their descendants came to own vast estates over which they exercised absolute rights. At the end of the Middle Ages, this Baltic German minority had established themselves as the governing elite, partly as an urban trading population in the cities, and partly as rural landowners, via a vast manorial network of estates. The titled landowners wielded immense economic power and for all that they had a duty to care for the peasants dependent of them, however in practice the latter sank into serfdom.

==Lithuanian-Polish and Swedish period (15611795)==

=== Livonian War 15581583 ===

Europe, 1550
In September 1557 the Livonian Confederation and the PolishLithuanian union signed the Treaty of Pozvol, which created a mutual defensive and offensive alliance. The tsar of Russia Ivan the Terrible regarded this as casus belli and in January 1558 reacted with the invasion of Livonia. On 2 August 1560 the forces of Ivan the Terrible defeated the united forces of the Livonian Order and the Archibishop of Riga at the Battle of reme.

The same year, the prince-bishop of sel-Wiek and Courland Johannes V von Mnchhausen sold his lands to king Frederick II of Denmark for 30,000 thalers. To avoid hereditary partition of his lands, King Frederick II gave that territory to his younger brother Magnus on condition that he renounced his rights to succession in the duchies of Schleswig and Holstein. The chances for success of Magnus and his supporters looked particularly good in 1560 (and 1570). In the former case he had been recognised as their sovereign by The Bishopric of sel-Wiek and The Bishopric of Courland, and as their prospective ruler by the authorities of The Bishopric of Dorpat; The Bishopric of Reval with the Harrien-Wierland gentry were on his side; Livonian Order conditionally recognised his right of ownership of Principality of Estonia. Then along with Archbishop Wilhelm von Brandenburg of The Archbishopric of Riga and his Coadjutor Christoph von Mecklenburg, Kettler gave to Magnus the portions of The Kingdom of Livonia, which he had taken possession of, but they refused to give him any more land. Once Eric XIV of Sweden became king he took quick actions to get involved in the war. He negotiated a continued peace with Russia and spoke to the burghers of Reval city. He offered them goods to submit to him as well as threatening them. By June 6, 1561 they submitted to him contrary to the persuasions of Kettler to the burghers. The King's brother Johan married the Polish princess Catherine Jagiellon. Wanting to obtain his own land in Livonia, he loaned Poland money and then claimed the castles they had pawned as his own instead of using them to pressure Poland. After Johan returned to Finland, Erik XIV forbade him to deal with any foreign countries without his consent. Shortly after that Erik XIV started acting quickly lost any allies he was about to obtain, either from Magnus or the Archbishop of Riga. Magnus was upset he had been tricked out of his inheritance of Holstein. After Sweden occupied Reval, Frederick II of Denmark made a treaty with Erik XIV of Sweden in August 1561. The brothers were in great disagreement and Frederick II negotiated a treaty with Ivan IV on August 7, 1562 in order to help his brother obtain more land and stall further Swedish advance. Erik XIV did not like this and The Northern Seven Years' War between The Free City of Lbeck, Denmark, Poland, and Sweden broke out.

In 1561 the weakened Livonian Order was dissolved by the Treaty of Vilnius. Its lands were secularised as the Duchy of Livonia and assigned to the Grand Duchy of Lithuania as a part of it and the Duchy of Courland and Semigallia as a vassal state. The last Master of the order Gotthard Kettler became the first Duke of Courland, in doing so converting to Lutheranism.

While only losing land and trade, Frederick II and Magnus were not faring well. But in 1568 Erik XIV became insane and his brother Johan III took his place. Johan III ascended to the throne of Sweden and due to his friendship with Poland he began a policy against Russia. He would try to obtain more land in Livonia and exercise strength over Denmark. After all parties had been financially drained, Frederick II let his ally, King Sigismund II Augustus of PolishLithuanian Commonwealth, know that he was ready for peace. On December 15, 1570, the Treaty of Stettin was concluded. It is, however, more difficult to estimate the scope and magnitude of the support Magnus received in Livonian cities. Compared to the Harrien-Wierland gentry, the Reval city council, and hence probably the majority of citizens, demonstrated a much more reserved attitude towards Denmark and King Magnus of Livonia. Nevertheless, there is no reason to speak about any strong pro-Swedish sentiments among the residents of Reval. The citizens who had fled to The Bishopric of Dorpat or had been deported to Muscovy hailed Magnus as their saviour until 1571. The analysis indicates that during the Livonian War a pro-independence wing emerged among the Livonian gentry and townspeople, forming the so-called "Peace Party". Dismissing hostilities, these forces perceived an agreement with Muscovy as a chance to escape the atrocities of war and avoid the division of Livonia. That is why Magnus, who represented Denmark and later struck a deal with Ivan the Terrible, proved a suitable figurehead for this faction.

The Peace Party, however, had its own armed forces  scattered bands of household troops (Hofleute) under diverse command, which only united in action in 1565 (Battle of Prnu, 1565 and Siege of Reval, 1565), in 15701571 (Siege of Reval, 1570-1571; 30 weeks), and in 15741576 (first on Swedens side, then came the sale of Wiek to the Danish Crown, and the loss of the territory to the Tsardom of Russia. In 1575 after Russians attacked Danish claims in Livonia, Frederick II dropped out of the competition along with the Holy Roman Emperor. After this Johan III held off on his pursuit for more land due to Russia obtaining lands that Sweden controlled. He used the next two years of truce to get in a better position. In 1578, he resumed the fight for not only Livonia, but also everywhere due to an understanding he made with Rzeczpospolita. In 1578 Magnus retired to Rzeczpospolita and his brother all but gave up the land in Livonia.

=== Kingdom of Livonia 15701578 ===

On June 10, 1570 the Danish Duke Magnus of Holstein arrived in Moscow where he was crowned King of Livonia. Magnus took the oath of allegiance to Ivan the Terrible as his overlord and received from the corresponding charter for the vassal kingdom of Livonia in what Ivan termed his patrimony. The armies of Ivan the Terrible were initially successful, taking Polotsk (1563) and Parnawa (1575) and overrunning much of Grand Duchy of Lithuania up to Vilnius. Eventually, Grand Duchy of Lithuania and Kingdom of Poland formed PolishLithuanian Commonwealth in 1569 under the Union of Lublin. Eric XIV of Sweden did not like this and The Northern Seven Years' War between Free City of Lbeck, Denmark, Poland, and Sweden broke out. While only losing land and trade, Frederick II of Denmark and Magnus von Lyffland of sel-Wiek were not faring well. But in 1569 Erik XIV became insane and his brother John III of Sweden took his place. After all parties had been financially drained, Frederick II let his ally, King Zygmunt II August, know that he was ready for peace. On December 15, 1570, the Treaty of Stettin was concluded.

Livonia, as shown in the map of 1573 of Joann Portantius.
In the next phase of the conflict, in 1577 Ivan IV took opportunity of the Commonwealth internal strife (called the war against Gdask in Polish historiography), and during the reign of Stefan Batory in Poland invaded Livonia, quickly taking almost the entire territory, with the exception of Riga and Rewel. In 1578 Magnus of Livonia recognized the sovereignty of PolishLithuanian Commonwealth (not ratified by the Sejm of Poland-Lithuania, or recognized by Denmark). The Kingdom of Livonia was beaten back by Muscovy on all fronts. In 1578 Magnus of Livonia retired to The Bishopric of Courland and his brother all but gave up the land in Livonia.

=== Duchy of Livonia 15611621 ===

In 1561 during the Livonian War, The Livonian Confederation subjected itself to the Grand Duchy of Lithuania with vassal dependency of it and became secularized under the Union of Wilno. Eight years later, in 1569, when the Grand Duchy of Lithuania and Kingdom of Poland formed the PolishLithuanian Commonwealth, Livonia became a joint domain administered directly by the king and grand duke. 
Having rejected peace proposals from its enemies, Ivan the Terrible found himself in a difficult position by 1579, when Crimean Khanate devastated Muscovian territories and burnt down Moscow (see Russo-Crimean Wars), the drought and epidemics have fatally affected the economy, Oprichnina had thoroughly disrupted the government, while The Grand Principality of Lithuania had united with The Kingdom of Poland (13851569) and acquired an energetic leader, Stefan Batory, supported by Ottoman Empire (1576). Stefan Batory replied with a series of three offensives against Russia, trying to cut The Kingdom of Livonia from Russian territories. During his first offensive in 1579 with 22,000 men he retook Polotsk, during the second, in 1580, with 29,000-strong army he took Velikiye Luki, and in 1581 with a 100,000-strong army he started the Siege of Pskov. Frederick II of Denmark and Norway had trouble continuing the fight against Muscovy unlike Sweden and Poland. He came to an agreement with John III in 1580 giving him the titles in Livonia. That war would last from 1577 to 1582. Muscovy recognized PolishLithuanian control of Ducatus Ultradunensis only in 1582. After Magnus von Lyffland died in 1583, Poland invaded his territories in The Duchy of Courland and Semigallia and Frederick II decided to sell his rights of inheritance. Except for the island of sel, Denmark was out of the Baltic by 1585. As of 1598 Polish Livonia was divided onto:
* Wenden Voivodeship (wojewdztwo wendeskie, Kie)
* Dorpat Voivodeship (wojewdztwo dorpackie, Dorpat)
* Parnawa Voivodeship (wojewdztwo parnawskie, Parnawa)

===Duchy of Courland and Semigallia 15621795===

In the 17th century, the Duchy of Courland and Semigallia, once a part of Livonia, experienced a notable economic boom. During the reign of the duke Jacob Kettler new copper and iron foundries, gunpowder mills and shipyards were opened. In Ventspils alone 120 ships were built, of which over 40 were warships. The duchy owned large fleet and established two colonies  St. Andrews Island in the estuary of Gambia River (in Africa) and Tobago Island (in the Caribbean Sea). Names from this period still survive today in these places.

===Swedish Livonia 16291721===

During the PolishSwedish War (16001629) Riga and the largest part of Duchy of Livonia came under Swedish rule in 1621. During the Swedish rule Vidzeme was known as the "Swedish Bread Basket" because it supplied the larger part of the Swedish Kingdom with wheat. The rest of Latvia stayed Polish until the second partition of Poland in 1793, when it became Russian.

In 1632 the Swedish king Gustavus Adolphus founded Dorpat University which became the intellectual focus for population of Livonia. The translation of the whole Bible into Latvian in 1685 by Johann Ernst Glck was subsidized by the Swedish government. Also the schools for Latvian speaking peasantry were set up in the country parishes.

Riga was the second largest city in the Swedish Empire at the time. Together with other Baltic Sea dominions, Livonia served to secure the Swedish Dominium maris baltici. In contrast to Swedish Estonia, which had submitted to Swedish rule voluntarily in 1561 and where traditional local laws remained largely untouched, the uniformity policy was applied in Swedish Livonia under Karl XI of Sweden: serfdom was abolished in the estates owned by the Swedish crown, peasants were offered education and military, administrative or ecclesiastical careers, and nobles had to transfer domains to the king in the Great Reduction. These reforms were subsequently reversed by Peter I of Russia when he conquered Livonia.

===Inflanty Voivodeship 16291772===

After the PolishSwedish War (16001629) only the Southeastern part of the Duchy of Livonia ramained under Polish-Lithuanian rule. The Catholicism became the dominant religion in this territory known as Inflanty or Latgale as a result of Counter-Reformation.

==Russian period (17211918)==

In 1700, the Great Northern War broke out. The course of this war was directly linked with today's Latvian territory and the territorial claims of the Russian Empire. One of its goals was to secure the famous and rich town of Riga. In 1710, the Russian Tsar, Peter I, managed to secure Vidzeme. Through Vidzeme to Riga, Russia obtained a clear passage to Europe. Following the Third Partition of Poland, all of Latvia's territory was under Russian rule when Kurzeme was obtained by Russia in 1795.

In 1812 Napoleon's troops invaded Russia and the Prussian units under the leadership of the field marshal Yorck occupied Courland and approached Riga. The governor-general of Riga Ivan Essen set the wooden houses of the Riga suburbs on fire to deflect the invaders and thousands of city residents were left homeless. However York did not attack Riga and in December the Napoleon's army retreated.

Serfdom was abolished in Courland Governorate in 1818 and Governorate of Livonia in 1819. However all the land stayed in the hands of the German nobility. Only in 1849, a law granted a legal basis for the creation of peasant-owned farms. Reforms were slower in Latgale which was part of Vitebsk Governorate, where serfdom was only abolished in 1861 after emancipation reform. In the middle of 19th century industry developed quickly and the number of the inhabitants grew. Courland and Vidzeme became one of Russia's most developed provinces.

===Religion===
Latvia was predominantly Lutheran, but in the first half of the eighteenth century Moravian missionaries made significant headway, despite the opposition of the German landlords who controlled the Lutheran clergy. The Imperial government proscribed the Moravians 17431764. Latvian nationalism was strongly supported by a revival of the language, including the translation of many foreign works. The Imperial government sponsored the Russian Orthodox Church, as part of its program of russification, but Lutheranism remained the dominant religion, except Latgale where Catholicism was dominant. Other Protestant missions had some success including the Baptists, Methodists and Seventh Day Adventists. Kenneth Scott Latourette, Christianity in a Revolutionary Age (1959) 2:199 

===Latvian National Awakening===
In the 19th century, the first Latvian National Awakening began among ethnic Latvian intellectuals, a movement that partly reflected similar nationalist trends elsewhere in Europe. This revival was led by the "Young Latvians" (in Latvian: jaunlatviei) from the 1850s to the 1880s. Primarily a literary and cultural movement with significant political implications, the Young Latvians soon came into severe conflict with the Baltic Germans.

In the 1880s and 1890s the russification policy began by Alexander III was aimed at reducing the autonomy of Baltic provinces and the introduction of the Russian language in administration, court and education replacing German or Latvian (in regard to schools).

With increasing pauperization in rural areas and growing urbanization, a loose but broad leftist movement called the "New Current" arose in the late 1880s. Led by Rainis and Pteris Stuka, editors of the newspaper Dienas Lapa, this movement was soon influenced by Marxism and led to the creation of the Latvian Social Democratic Labour Party.

Latvia in the 20th century saw an explosion of popular discontent in the 1905 Revolution.

=== 1905 Revolution ===

Following the shooting of demonstrators in St. Petersburg on January 9 a wide-scale general strike began in Riga. On January 13 Russian army troops opened fire on demonstrators in Riga killing 73 and injuring 200 people. During the summer of 1905 the main revolutionary events moved to the countryside. 470 new parish administrative bodies were elected in 94% of the parishes in Latvia. The Congress of Parish Representatives was held in Riga in November. Mass meetings and demonstrations took place including violent attacks against Baltic German nobles, burning estate buildings and seizure of estate property including weapons. In the autumn of 1905 armed conflict between the German nobility and the Latvian peasants began in the rural areas of Vidzeme and Courland. In Courland, the peasants seized or surrounded several towns. In Livland the fighters controlled the Rjiena-Prnu railway line. Altogether, a thousand armed clashes were registered in Latvia in 1905. Martial law was declared in Courland in August 1905 and in Livland in late November. Special punitive expeditions were dispatched in mid-December to suppress the movement. They executed 1170 people without trial or investigation and burned 300 peasant homes. Thousands were exiled to Siberia. In 1906 the revolutionary movement gradually subsided.

=== German occupation World War I ===

On August 1, 1914 Germany declared war on Russia and by 1915, the conflict reached Latvia. On May 7 the Germans captured Liepja and on May 18, Talsi, Tukums and Ventspils. On June 29 the Russian Supreme Command ordered the whole population of Kurzeme evacuated, and around 400,000 refugees fled to the east. Some of them settled in Vidzeme but most continued their way to Russia. On July 19 the Russian War Minister ordered the factories of Riga evacuated together with their workers. In the summer of 1915, 30,000 railway wagons loaded with machines and equipment from factories were taken away. In August the formation of Latvian battalions known as Latvian Riflemen started. From 1915 to 1917, the Riflemen fought in the Russian army against the Germans in positions along Daugava River. In December 1916 and January 1917, they suffered heavy casualties in month-long Christmas Battles. In February 1917 Revolution broke out in Russia and in the summer the Russian army collapsed. The German offensive was successful and on 3 September 1917 they entered Riga. In November 1917, the Communist Bolsheviks took power in Russia. The Bolshevik government tried to end the war and in March 1918, the Treaty of Brest-Litovsk was signed which gave Kurzeme and Vidzeme to the Germans. By February the Germans had occupied all of Latvia. However after the German Revolution, on 11 November the armistice treaty between the Allies and Germany was signed thus ending World War I. Mangulis, Visvaldis. Latvia in the Wars of the 20th Century Princeton Junction: Cognition Books, 1983, xxi, 207p. ISBN 0-912881-00-3 Great Britain declared its de facto recognition of Latvia in writing on that day as well, confirming a prior verbal communication of 23 October to Meierowitz by the British Minister for Foreign Affairs, A. J. Balfour. Laserson, Max. The Recognition of Latvia, The American Journal of International Law, Vol. 37, No. 2 (April , 1943), pp. 233-247 

== Independence ==

Flag of the Republic of Latvia.
The idea of an independent Latvia became a reality at the beginning of the 20th century. The course of World War I activated the idea of independence. World War I directly involved Latvians and Latvian territory. Latvian riflemen (latvieu strlnieki) fought on the Russian side during this war, and earned recognition for their bravery far into Europe. During the Russian Civil War (19171922), Latvians fought on both sides with a significant group (known as Latvian red riflemen) supporting the Bolsheviks. In the autumn of 1919 the red Latvian division participated in a major battle against the "white" anti-bolshevik army headed by the Russian general Anton Denikin.

Latvia was ostensibly included within the proposed Baltic German-led United Baltic Duchy, The Story of the Estonian Republic  19181940 Estonica.org but this attempt collapsed after the defeat of the German Empire in November 1918. The post-war confusion was a suitable opportunity for the development of an independent nation. Latvia proclaimed independence shortly after the end of World War I  on November 18, 1918 which is now the Independence Day in Latvia.

A series of conflicts within the territory of Latvia during 19181920 is commonly known as the Latvian War of Independence. In December 1918 Soviet Russia invaded the new republic and rapidly conquered almost all the territory of Latvia, Riga itself was captured by the Soviet Army on 4 April 1919, with the exception of a small territory near Liepja. The Latvian Socialist Soviet Republic was proclaimed on 17 December 1918 with the political, economic, and military backing of the Bolshevik government of Soviet Russia. On March 3, 1919 German and Latvian forces commenced a counterattack against the forces of Soviet Latvia. On 22 May 1919 Riga was recaptured. In June 1919 collisions started between the Baltische Landeswehr on one side and the Estonian 3rd division on the other. The 3rd division defeated the German forces in the Battle of Wenden on June 23. An armistice was signed at Strazdumuia, under the terms of which the Germans had to leave Latvia. However the German forces instead of leaving, were incorporated into the West Russian Volunteer Army. On October 5 it commenced an offensive on Riga taking the west bank of the Daugava River but on November 11 was defeated by Latvian forces and by the end of the month, driven from Latvia. On January 3, 1920 the united Latvian and Polish forces launched an attack on the Soviet army in Latgalia and took Daugavpils. By the end of January they reached the etnographic border of Latvia. On August 11, 1920 according to the LatvianSoviet Peace Treaty ("Treaty of Riga") Soviet Russia relinquished authority over the Latvian nation and claims to Latvian territory "once and for all times".

The international community (United Kingdom, France, Belgium, Italy and Japan) recognized Latvia's independence on January 26, 1921, and the recognition from many other countries followed soon. In this year Latvia also became a member of the League of Nations (September 22, 1921).

In April 1920 elections to the Constituent assembly were held. In May 1922 the Constitution of Latvia and in June the new Law on Elections were passed, opening the way to electing the parliament- Saeima. At Constituent Assembly, the law on the land reform was passed, which expropriated the manor lands. Landowners were left with 50 hectares each and their land was distributed to the landless peasants without cost. In 1897, 61.2% of the rural population had been landless; by 1936, that percentage had been reduced to 18%. The extent of cultivated land surpassed the pre-war level already in 1923. 

Because of the world economic crisis there was a growing dissatisfaction among the population at the beginning of the 1930s. In Riga on May 15, 1934, Prime Minister Krlis Ulmanis, one of the fathers of Latvian independence, took power by a bloodless coup d'tat: the activities of the parliament (the Saeima) and all the political parties were suspended.

Rapid economic growth took place in the second half of the 1930s, due to which Latvia reached one of the highest living standards in Europe. Because of improving living standards in Latvian society, there was no serious opposition to the authoritarian rule of the Prime Minister Krlis Ulmanis and no possibility of it arising.

== World War II ==

=== Soviet Occupation ===

The Soviet Union guaranteed its interests in the Baltics with the signing of the MolotovRibbentrop Pact between the Soviet Union and Nazi Germany on August 23, 1939. Under threat of invasion, Latvia (along with Estonia and Lithuania) signed a mutual assistance pact with Soviet Union, providing for the stationing of up to 25,000 Soviet troops on Latvian soil. Following the initiative from Nazi Germany, Latvia on October 30, 1939 concluded an agreement to repatriate ethnic Germans in the wake of the impeding Soviet takeover.

Seven months later, the Soviet foreign minister Vyacheslav Molotov accused the Baltic states of conspiracy against the Soviet Union. On June 16, 1940, threatening an invasion, Soviet Union issued an ultimatum demanding that the government be replaced and that an unlimited number of Soviet troops be admitted. see text of ultimatum; text in Latvian: Knowing that the Red Army had entered Lithuania a day before, that its troops were massed along the eastern border and mindful of the Soviet military bases in Western Latvia, the government acceded to the demands, and Soviet troops occupied the country on June 17. Staged elections were held July 1415, 1940, whose results were announced in Moscow 12 hours before the polls closed; Soviet documents show the election results were forged. The newly elected "People's Assembly" declared Latvia a Socialist Soviet Republic and applied for admission into the Soviet Union on July 21. Latvia was incorporated into the Soviet Union on August 5, 1940. The overthrown Latvian government continued to function in exile while the republic was under the Soviet control.

In the spring of 1941, the Soviet central government began planning the mass deportation of anti-Soviet elements from the occupied Baltic states. In preparation, General Ivan Serov, Deputy People's Commissar of Public Security of the Soviet Union, signed the Serov Instructions, "Regarding the Procedure for Carrying out the Deportation of Anti-Soviet Elements from Lithuania, Latvia, and Estonia." During the night of 1314 June 1941, 15,424 inhabitants of Latvia  including 1,771 Jews and 742 ethnic Russians  were deported to camps and special settlements, mostly in Siberia. 35,000 people were deported in the first year of Soviet occupation (131,500 across the Baltics).

=== Occupation of Latvia by Nazi Germany ===

Hinrich Lohse in the Riga Central Railway Station.

The Nazi invasion, launched a week later, cut short immediate plans to deport several hundred thousand more from the Baltics. Nazi troops occupied Riga on July 1, 1941. Immediately after the installment of German authority, a process of eliminating the Jewish and Gypsy population began, with many killings taking place in Rumbula. The killings were committed by the Einsatzgruppe A, the Wehrmacht and Marines (in Liepja), as well as by Latvian collaborators, including the 500-1,500 members of the infamous Arajs Commando (which alone killed around 26,000 Jews) and the 2,000 or more Latvian members of the SD. Ezergailis, A. The Holocaust in Latvia, 1996 Simon Wiesenthal Center Multimedia Learning Center Online By the end of 1941 almost the entire Jewish population was killed or placed in the concentration camps. In addition, some 25,000 Jews were brought from Germany, Austria and the present-day Czech Republic, of whom around 20,000 were killed. The Holocaust claimed approximately 85,000 lives in Latvia, the vast majority of whom were Jews.

A large number of Latvians resisted the German occupation. The resistance movement was divided between the pro-independence units under the Latvian Central Council and the pro-Soviet units under the Latvian Partisan Movement Headquarters (   ) in Moscow. Their Latvian commander was Arturs Sprois. The Nazis planned to Germanise the Baltics after the war. In 1943 and 1944 two divisions of Waffen-SS were formed from Latvian conscripts and volunteers to help Germany against the Red Army.

==Soviet era==

In 1944, when the Soviet military advances reached the area heavy fighting took place in Latvia between German and Soviet troops, which ended with another German defeat. Riga was re-captured by the Soviet Red Army on 13 October 1944. During the course of the war, both occupying forces conscripted Latvians into their armies, in this way increasing the loss of the nation's "live resources". In 1944, part of the Latvian territory once more came under Soviet control and Latvian national partisans began their fight against another occupier  the Soviet Union. 160,000 Latvian inhabitants took refuge from the Soviet army by fleeing to Germany and Sweden. The first post-war years were marked by particularly dismal and sombre events in the fate of the Latvian nation. On March 25, 1949, 43,000 rural residents ("kulaks") and Latvian patriots ("nationalists") were deported to Siberia in a sweeping repressive Operation Priboi in all three Baltic States, which was carefully planned and approved in Moscow already on January 29, 1949. All together 120,000 Latvian inhabitants were imprisoned or deported to Soviet concentration camps (the Gulag). Some managed to escape arrest and joined the partisans.
Flag of the Latvian SSR.
In the post-war period, Latvia was forced to adopt Soviet farming methods and the economic infrastructure developed in the 1920s and 1930s was eradicated. Rural areas were forced into collectivisation. The massive influx of labourers, administrators, military personnel and their dependents from Russia and other Soviet republics started. By 1959 about 400,000 persons arrived from other Soviet republics and the ethnic Latvian population had fallen to 62%. An extensive programme to impose bilingualism was initiated in Latvia, limiting the use of Latvian language in favor of Russian. All of the minority schools (Jewish, Polish, Belarusian, Estonian, Lithuanian) were closed down leaving only two languages of instructions in the schools- Latvian and Russian. The Russian language were taught notably, as well as Russian literature, music and history of Soviet Union (actually- history of Russia).

On 5 March 1953 Joseph Stalin died and his successor became Nikita Khrushchev. The period known as the Khrushchev Thaw began but attempts by the national communists led by Eduards Berklavs to gain a degree of autonomy for the republic and protect the rapidly deteriorating position of the Latvian language were not successful. In 1959 after Krushchev's visit in Latvia national communists were stripped of their posts and Berklavs was deported to Russia.

Because Latvia had still maintained a well-developed infrastructure and educated specialists it was decided in Moscow that some of the Soviet Union's most advanced manufacturing factories were to be based in Latvia. New industry was created in Latvia, including a major machinery factory RAF in Jelgava, electrotechnical factories in Riga, chemical factories in Daugavpils, Valmiera and Olaine, as well as food and oil processing plants. However, there were not enough people to operate the newly built factories. In order to expand industrial production, more immigrants from other Soviet republics were transferred into the country, noticeably decreasing the proportion of ethnic Latvians.

By 1989, the ethnic Latvians comprised about 52% of the population (1,387,757), compared to a pre-war proportion of 77% (1,467,035). In 2005 there were 1,357,099 ethnic Latvians, showing a real decrease in the titular population. Proportionately, however, the titular nation already comprises approximately 60% of the total population of Latvia (2,375,000).

== Restoration of independence ==

Barricade in Riga to prevent the Soviet Army from reaching the Latvian Parliament, July 1991.
Liberalization in the communist regime began in the mid-1980s in the USSR with the perestroika and glasnost instituted by Mikhail Gorbachev. In Latvia, several mass political organizations were constituted that made use of this opportunity  Popular Front of Latvia (Tautas Fronte), Latvian National Independence Movement (Latvijas Nacionls Neatkarbas Kustba) and Citizens' Congress (Pilsou kongress). These groups began to agitate for the restoration of national independence.

On the 50th anniversary of the Molotov-Ribbentrop pact (August 23, 1989) to the fate of the Baltic nations, Latvians, Lithuanians and Estonians joined hands in a human chain, the Baltic Way, that stretched 600 kilometers from Tallinn, to Riga, to Vilnius. It symbolically represented the united wish of the Baltic States for independence.

Subsequent steps towards full independence were taken on May 4, 1990. The Latvian SSR Supreme Council, elected in the first democratic elections since the 1930s, adopted a declaration restoring independence that included a transition period between autonomy within the Soviet Union and full independence. In January 1991, however, pro-communist political forces attempted to restore Soviet power with the use of force. Latvian demonstrators managed to stop the Soviet troops from re-occupying strategic positions (January 1991 events in Latvia). On August 21, after unsuccessful attempt at a coup d'tat in Moscow, parliament voted for an end to the transition period, thus restoring Latvia's pre-war independence. On September 6, 1991 Latvian independence was once again recognized by the Soviet Union.

==Modern history==
George W. Bush, Vaira Ve-Freiberga, Arnold Rtel, and Valdas Adamkus in Riga, May 7, 2005.
Soon after reinstating independence, Latvia, which had been a member of the League of Nations prior to World War II, became a member of the United Nations. In 1992, Latvia became eligible for the International Monetary Fund and in 1994 took part in the NATO Partnership for Peace program in addition to signing the free trade agreement with the European Union. Latvia became a member of the European Council as well as a candidate for the membership in the European Union and NATO. Latvia was the first of the three Baltic nations to be accepted into the World Trade Organization.

At the end of 1999 in Helsinki, the heads of the European Union governments invited Latvia to begin negotiations regarding accession to the European Union. In 2004, Latvia's most important foreign policy goals, membership of the European Union and NATO, were fulfilled. On April 2, Latvia became a member of NATO and on May 1, Latvia, along with the other two Baltic States, became a member of the European Union. Around 67% had voted in favor of EU membership in a September 2003 referendum with turnout at 72.5 percent.

==See also==
* Dissolution of the Soviet Union
* History of Estonia
* History of Europe
* History of the European Union
* History of Lithuania
* History of Germany
* History of Russia
* History of Sweden
* Latvian independence movement (19401991)
* Latvian diplomatic service (19401991)
* List of Presidents of Latvia
* Prime Minister of Latvia
* Livonia
* Politics of Latvia

== Notes ==

== References ==

==Further reading==
* Bilmanis, Alfreds. A History of Latvia (1970)
* Eglitis, Daina Stukuls. Imagining the Nation: History, Modernity, and Revolution in Latvia (Post-Communist Cultural Studies) (2005)
* Lumans; Valdis O. Latvia in World War II (Fordham University Press, 2006) online edition
* Plakans, Andrejs. Historical Dictionary of Latvia (2008)
* Plakans, Andrejs. The Latvians: A Short History (1995) excerpt and text search

==External links==
* History of Latvia The Route from the Vikings to the Greeks

==External links==
* History of Latvia; A Brief Survey (en)
* History of Latvia
* Issues of the History of Latvia: 1939-1991
* Castle ruins in Latvia
* Myths of Latvian History (en)
* Occupation of Latvia (PDF file 2.85MB)
* Latvia: Year of horror (1940)
* The Story of Latvia, by Arveds Svabe
* Historical maps of Latvia in the 16th, 17th and 18th century
* Medieval Castles of Latvia

*



[[Geography of Latvia]]

Geographic coordinates:

Detailed map of Latvia
Satellite image of Latvia in March 2003

Latvia lies on the eastern shores of the Baltic Sea on the level northwestern part of the rising East European platform, between Estonia and Lithuania. About 98% of the country lies under 200 m elevation. With the exception of the coastal plains, the ice age divided Latvia into three main regions: the morainic Western and Eastern uplands and the Middle lowlands. Latvia holds over 12,000 rivers, only 17 of which are longer than 60 mi, and over 3,000 small lakes, most of which are eutrophic. The major rivers include the Daugava, the Lielupe, the Gauja, the Venta and the Salaca. Woodlands, more than half of which are pine woods, cover around 41% of the country. Other than peat, dolomite, and limestone, natural resources are scarce. Latvia has 531 km of sandy coastline, and the ports of Liepja and Ventspils provide important warm-water harbors for the Baltic coast.

Latvia is slightly larger than Croatia, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Slovakia, or Estonia. Its strategic location has instigated many wars between rival powers on its territory. As recently as 1944, the USSR granted Russia the Abrene region on the Livonian frontier, which Latvia contested after the dissolution of the Soviet Union.

==Physical environment==
Latvia is traditionally seen as a small country. In terms of its population of about 2.3 million, it deserves this designation. Geographically, however, Latvia encompasses 64,589 square kilometers, a size surpassing that of better-known European states such as Belgium, the Netherlands, Switzerland, and Denmark. Seen from the air, Latvia is an extension of the East European Plain. Its flat terrain differs little from that of its surrounding neighbors. Latvia's only distinct border is the Baltic Sea coast, which extends for 531 kilometers. Its neighbors include Estonia on the north (267 kilometers of common border), Lithuania on the south (453 kilometers), Belarus on the southeast (141 kilometers), and Russia on the east (217 kilometers). Prior to World War II, Latvia bordered eastern Poland, but as a result of boundary changes by the Soviet Union, this territory was attached to Belarus. Also, in 1944 Russia annexed the northeastern border district of Latvia, known as Abrene, including the town of Pytalovo.

==Geographic features==
The physiography of Latvia and its neighboring areas was formed, to a large degree, during the Quaternary period and the Pleistocene ice age, when soil and debris were pushed by glaciers into mounds and hills. Undulating plains cover 75% of Latvia's territory and provide the main areas for farming; 25% of the territory lies in uplands of moderate-sized hills. About 27% of the total territory is cultivable, with the central Zemgale Plain south of Riga being the most fertile and profitable. The three main upland areas, in the provinces of Kurzeme (western Latvia), Vidzeme (central Latvia, Vidzeme Upland and Aluksne Upland), and Latgale (eastern Latvia), provide a picturesque pattern of fields interspersed with forests and numerous lakes and rivers. In this area, the extensive glacial moraines, eskers, and drumlins have limited the profitability of agriculture by fragmenting fields and presenting serious erosion problems.

About 10% of Latvian territory consists of peat bogs, swamps, and marshes, some of which are covered by stunted forest growth. Forests are the outstanding feature of Latvia, claiming 42% of the territory. Timber and wood products are among the country's most important exports. Two-thirds of the forests consist of Scots Pine or Norway Spruce. Latvian forests differ from those of North America primarily because of their relatively brush-free understory. The forest floor, however, is far from a biological desert, as is often the case in tree plantations. Indeed, one of the most widespread pastimes of the population is picking Bilberries, Cranberries, mushrooms, and other bounties of the natural environment.

Few of the forests are fully mature because of previous overcutting and also because of several violent storms during the 1960s, which snapped or uprooted millions of trees. As a consequence, most of the wood today is derived from thinning and improvement cuts, forming 50% of the annual total growth increment of 8 million cubic meters of wood.

For a long time, wood has been a basic source of energy. The utilization of wood as fuel has increased dramatically in the 1990s, even in cities, because of the numbing price hikes on other forms of energy. Local wood is also an important resource for the pulp and paper industry and for specialized plywood and furniture manufacturers. A great concern today is the unregulated cutting of timber for the foreign market. Prices paid by European wood buyers are phenomenally high by local standards, and there is much pressure to utilize this opportunity for cash accumulation, even without legal permits. By 1992 the problem had become so serious that Latvian forestry officials were given the right to carry firearms.

Not all forests are productive. Many areas, especially abandoned, formerly private farms, have become overgrown with low-value alders and other scrub trees. With the return of private farming, these areas are once again being reclaimed for agriculture. In the process, however, there is a danger that these areas, which are ideal for wildlife, will become threatened. The decades-long neglect of extensive areas of marginal farmland was a boon for the establishment of unique ecological conditions favorable for the survival of animal species rarely found in other parts of Europe. According to a World Wildlife Fund study in 1992, Latvia has unusual populations of Black Storks, Lesser Spotted Eagles, Otters, Beaver, Lynx, and Wolves. There are also great concentrations of deer (86,000; Red Deer and Roe Deer), Wild Boar (32,000), Elk (25,000), and Red Fox (13,000). Many Latvians today are planning to exploit this resource by catering to foreign hunters.

The variegated and rapidly changing physiography of glacial moraines and lowlands has also allowed temperate flora, such as oaks, to grow within a few hundred meters of northern flora, such as bog cotton and cloudberries. This variety and the rapid change in natural ecosystems are among the unique features of the republic.

The Soviet system left behind another windfall for naturalists. The Latvian western seacoast was a carefully guarded border region. Almost all houses near the sea were razed or evacuated. As a result, about 300 kilometers of undeveloped seashore are graced only by forests of pine and spruce and ecologically unique sand dunes. The temptation for fast profit, however, may foster violation of laws that clearly forbid any construction within one kilometer of the sea. This could lead to one of the last remaining wild shorelines in Europe becoming non-existent.

The seashore adjoining the population centers around Riga was a major focus of tourism during the Soviet era. Jrmala, with its many sanatoriums and tourist accommodations, its tall pines, sandy beaches, and antique architecture, is now experiencing a wrenching readjustment. East European tourists can no longer afford to come here, and Western tourists have not yet discovered the area and its relatively low prices. West Europeans may be loath to come, however, because excessive pollution has closed Jrmala beaches to swimming since 1988. Moreover, facilities and accommodations adequate for Soviet tastes fall far short of minimal standards expected in the West.

Latvia has an abundant network of rivers, contributing to the visual beauty and the economy of the country. The largest river is the Daugava, which has been an important route for several thousand years. It has been used by local tribes as well as by Vikings, Russians, and other Europeans for trade, war, and conquest. With a total length of 1,020 kilometers, the Daugava (or Zapadnaya Dvina in its upper reaches) originates in the Valday Hills in Russia's Tver' Oblast, meanders through northern Belarus, and then winds through Latvia for 370 kilometers before emptying into the Gulf of Riga. It is about 200 meters wide when it enters Latvia, increasing to between 650 and 750 meters at Riga and to 1.5 kilometers at its mouth.

The river carries an average annual flow of 21 cubic kilometers. Its total descent within Latvia of ninety-eight meters has made it an attractive source of hydroelectric power production. The first hydroelectric stationegums Hydro Power Plantwas built during Latvia's independence period. The second damPavias Hydro Power Plantaroused an unusual wave of protest in 1958. Most Latvians opposed the flooding of historical sites and a particularly scenic gorge with rare plants and natural features, such as the Staburags, a cliff comparable in cultural significance to the Lorelei in Germany. The construction of the dam was endorsed in 1959, however, after the purge of relatively liberal and nationally oriented leaders under Eduards Berklavs and their replacement by Moscow-oriented, ideologically conservative cadres led by Arvds Pele. The third damRiga Hydroelectric Power Plantjust above Riga, did not provoke much protest because of the seeming hopelessness of the cause. The proposed fourth dam, at the town of Daugavpils on the Daugava River, became the rallying point for protest in 1986-87 by hundreds of thousands of Latvians. This dam was not constructed, in spite of the vast expenditures already poured into the project.

The Lielupe flows into the Baltic Sea in the Gulf of Riga, while the Buupe branch flows towards the Daugava River to the west.

Smaller rivers include the Lielupe, in central Latvia, with an average annual flow of 3.6 cubic kilometers; the Venta, in the west, with 2.9 cubic kilometers; the Gauja, in the northeast, with 2.5 cubic kilometers; and the Aiviekste, in the east, with 2.1 cubic kilometers. Very little hydroelectric power is generated by their waters, although planners are now thinking of reactivating some of the abandoned older dams and turbines. The Gauja is one of Latvia's most attractive, relatively clean rivers and has an adjoining large Gauja National Park along both of its banks as one of its notable features. Its cold waters attract trout and salmon, and its sandstone cliff and forest setting are increasingly a magnet for tourists interested in the environment.

More than 60% of the annual water volume of Latvia's six largest rivers comes from neighboring countries, mainly from Belarus and Lithuania. These adjoining resources create obvious needs for cooperation, especially in pollution control. The dangers from a lack of cooperation were brought home to Latvians in November 1990, when a polymer complex in Navapolatsk, Belarus, accidentally spilled 128 tons of cyanide derivatives into the Daugava River with no warning to downstream users in Latvia. Only the presence of numerous dead fish alerted Latvian inhabitants to the danger.

==Climate==
In the summer, daylight hours are long and in the winter short. In December it is still pitch dark at 9:00 A.M., and daylight disappears before 4:00 P.M. The climate is tempered by the Gulf Stream flowing across the Atlantic Ocean from Mexico. Average temperatures in winter are reasonably mild, ranging in January from -2.8 C in Liepja, on the western coast, to -6.6 C in the southeastern town of Daugavpils. July temperatures range from 16.7 C in Liepja to 17.6 C in Daugavpils. Latvia's proximity to the sea brings high levels of humidity and precipitation, with average annual precipitation of 633 mm in Riga. There, an average of 180 days per year have precipitation, forty-four days have fog, and only seventy-two days are sunny. Continuous snow cover lasts eighty-two days, and the frost-free period lasts 177 days.

This precipitation has helped provide the abundant water for Latvia's many rivers and lakes, but it has created many problems as well. A large part of agricultural land requires drainage. Much money has been spent for land amelioration projects involving the installation of drainage pipes, the straightening and deepening of natural streams, the digging of drainage ditches, and the construction of polder dams. During the 1960s and 1970s, drainage work absorbed about one-third of all agricultural investments in Latvia. Although accounting for only one-third of 1% of the territory, Latvia was responsible for 11% of all artificially drained land in the former Soviet Union.

An additional problem associated with precipitation is the difficulty of early mechanized sowing and harvesting because of waterlogged fields. Heavy precipitation occurs, especially during harvest time in August and September, requiring heavy investment outlays in grain-drying structures and ventilation systems. In 1992 Latvia experienced the driest summer in recorded weather history, but unusually heavy rains in the preceding spring kept crop damage below the extent expected. The moist climate has been a major factor orienting Latvian agriculture toward animal husbandry and dairying. Even most of the field crops, such as barley, oats, and potatoes, are grown for animal feed.

==Natural resources==
Latvia cannot claim valuable natural resources. Nevertheless, the abundant presence of such materials as limestone for cement (6 billion cubic meters or 8 billion cubic yards), gypsum (165 million cubic meters or 216 million cubic yards), high-quality clay (375 million cubic meters or 490 million cubic yards), dolomite (615 million cubic meters or 804 million cubic yards), peat (480 million tonnes, 530 million short tons or 470 million long tons), and construction materials, including gravel and sand, satisfy local needs. Fish from the Baltic Sea is another potential export resource. Amber, million-year-old chunks of petrified pine pitch, is often found on the beaches of the Baltic Sea and is in high demand for jewelry. It has also had a symbolic impact on the country, which is often called Dzintarzeme, or Amberland. The future may hold potentially more valuable resources if oil fields are discovered in Latvian territorial waters, as some geologists have predicted.

==Area and boundaries==
Area:
total:
64589 km2
land:
62249 km2
water:
2340 km2

Area - comparative:
slightly larger than West Virginia 
slightly smaller than New Brunswick

Land boundaries:
total:
1382 km
border countries:
Belarus 171 km, Estonia 343 km, Lithuania 576 km, Russia 292 km

Coastline:
498 km

Maritime claims:
territorial sea:
12 nmi
exclusive economic zone:
200 nmi
continental shelf:
200 m depth or to the depth of exploitation

Elevation extremes:
lowest point:
Baltic Sea 0 m
highest point:
Gaizinkalns 312 m

Latitude and longitude

* North : ()
* South : ()
* West : ()
* East : ()

==Resources and land use==
Natural resources:
peat, limestone, dolomite, amber, hydropower, timber, arable land

Land use:
arable land:
17.96%
permanent crops:
0.11%
other:
81.93% (2011)

Irrigated land:
8.3 km2 
note: land in Latvia is often too wet and in need of drainage not irrigation; approximately 16000 km2 or 85% of agricultural land has been approved by drainage (2007)

Total renewable water resources:
35.45 km3 (2011)

==Environmental concerns==
Natural hazards:
none

Environment - current issues:
Latvia's environment has benefited from a shift to service industries after the country regained independence; the main environmental priorities are improvement of drinking water quality and sewage system, household, and hazardous waste management, as well as reduction of air pollution; in 2001, Latvia closed the EU accession negotiation chapter on environment committing to full enforcement of EU environmental directives by 2010

Environment - international agreements:
party to:
Air Pollution, Air Pollution-Persistent Organic Pollutants, Biodiversity, Climate Change, Climate Change-Kyoto Protocol, Endangered Species, Hazardous Wastes, Law of the Sea, Ozone Layer Protection, Ship Pollution, Wetlands
signed, but not ratified:
none of the selected agreements

==See also==
* Cultural regions of Latvia
* Dobele crater

==References==
*
*

 

[[Demographics of Latvia]]

Population of Latvia (in millions) from 19502012
This article is about the demographic features of the population of the historical territory of Latvia, including population density, ethnic background, education level, health of the populace, economic status, religious affiliations and other aspects of the population.

==Background==

Latvia was settled by the Baltic tribes some three millennia ago. The territories along the eastern Baltic first came under foreign domination at the beginning of the 13th century, with the formal establishment of Riga in 1201 under the German Teutonic Knights.

Latvia, in whole or in parts, remained under foreign rule for the next eight centuries, finding itself at the cross-roads of all the regional superpowers of their day, including Denmark (the Danes held on lands around the Gulf of Riga), Sweden, and Russia, with southern (Courland) Latvia being at one time a vassal to Poland-Lithuania as well as Latgale falling directly under Poland-Lithuania rule. Through all this time, Latvia remained largely under Baltic German hegemony, with Baltic Germans comprising the largest land-owners, a situation which did not change until Latvia's independence.

Historically, Latvia has had significant German, Russian, Jewish and Polish minorities. The majority (roughly two thirds) of Latvians, under Swedish influences, adopted Lutheranism, while the minority (the remaining third) of Latvians under Poland-Lithuania, Latgale in particular, retained their Catholicism. Aglona, in Latgale, has been the site of annual Catholic pilgrimage for centuries, even through to today.

Recently introduced immigration law in Latvia provides framework for immigration through investment in various financial areas or real estate. In 2012, solely 2,435 http://www.immigration-residency.eu/faq/latvia-real-estate-statistics-residence-permit-requests-history/ Statistics - residence permit requests applications for residence permit by investment in real estate were received by Office of Citizenship and Migration Affairs. Main immigrant countries are Russia, Belarus, Ukraine and Lithuania (Lithuania is in the European Union, thus no investment is needed). Moreover Latvia receives residence permit applications from people of nationalities such as Afghans, Chinese, Libyans and people from various other distant countries.

==Historical shifts==

Latvia's indigenous population has been ravaged numerous times throughout history. The earliest such event occurred during the conquest of Latvia by Peter the Great in the Great Northern War with Sweden.

In 1897, the first official census in this area indicated that Latvians formed 68.3% of the total population of 1.93 million; Russians accounted for 12%, Jews for 7.4%, Germans for 6.2%, and Poles for 3.4%. The remainder were Lithuanians, Estonians, Gypsies, and various other nationalities.

The demographics shifted greatly in the 20th century due to the world wars, the repatriation of the Baltic Germans, the Holocaust, and occupation by the Soviet Union. Today, only the Russian minority, which has tripled in numbers since 1935, remains important. The share of ethnic Latvians grew from 77% (1,467,035) in 1935 to 80% (1,508,800), after human loss in World War II and human deportation and other repressive measures, fell strongly to 52% (1,387,757) in 1989.

In 2005, there were even fewer Latvians than in 1989, though their share of the population was larger - 1,357,099 (58.8% of the inhabitants). People who arrived in Latvia during the Soviet era, and their descendants born before 21 August 1991, have to pass a naturalisation process to receive Latvian citizenship. Children born to residents after the restoration of independence in 1991 automatically receive citizenship. However, if both parents are non-citizens then the parents must take the extra step of choosing Latvian citizenship for their childwho is automatically entitled, but for whom citizenship is not automatic (neither granted nor imposed).

Over 130,000 persons have been naturalized as Latvian citizens since 1995, but 290,660 persons, as of March 2011, live in Latvia with non-citizen's passports. Large numbers of Russians, as well as some Ukrainians and Belarussians remained in Latvia after the fall of the Soviet Union.

According to the provisional results of the Population and Housing Census 2011, the total population of Latvia on March 1, 2011 was 2,067,887. Since the previous census in 2000 the country's population decreased by 309 thousand or 13%. The proportion of ethnic Latvians increased to 62.1% of the population. Population Census 2011Key Indicators Livonians are the other indigenous ethnic group, with about 100 of them remaining. Latgalians are a distinctive subgroup of Latvians inhabiting or coming from Eastern Latvia.

According to rankings provided by the United States Census BureauInternational Data Base (IDB)Country Rankings, Latvia is estimated to have a population of 1,544,000 in the year 2050.

== Immigration ==
Immigration in Latvia has traditionally been from neighboring countries such as Russia but now migrants also come from other areas such as Latin America and Africa. The Latvian government have sought to work with Russia to stem the problem.
 The Latvian government has been criticized for its treatment of illegals 

For immigrant not to be illegal a residence permit is required if a foreign national or a stateless person wishes to reside in the Republic of Latvia for more than 90 days within a 6-month period, thus if the person does not acquire himself a residence permit, he is considered illegal immigrant.

==Population==

===Age structure===
Approximate demographic evolution in Latvia, 19202011. NB. the amount of time between each year in the diagramme is not the same which gives a somewhat garbled image of the evolution.

+ Population at census according to age groups 1897-1959. uzrdtas vecuma grupas ldz 20 gadiem, 20-65 g. un virs 65 g. (1959. - virs 70 g.), skat.: Jnis Rutkis. Latvijas eogrfija. Apgds Zemgale. Stokholma. 1960. 421. lpp. 1970-2006. uzrdtas vecuma grupas atbilstoi attiecgo gadu likumdoan noteiktajam darbspjas un pensijas vecumam, skat.: Demogrfija 2006. LR CSP. Rga. 2006. ISBN 9984-06-287-2. 2122 lpp. Census year Children Working age Pensioners 
 1897 41.0 52.8 6.2 
 1920 38.3 52.9 8.6 
 1935 30.4 60.3 9.2 
 1943 29.1 60.6 10.3 
 1959 30.0 63.2 6.8 
 1970 23.1 56.2 20.7 
 1979 21.8 58.3 19.9 
 1989 22.7 56.6 20.7 
 2000 18.0 58.9 23.1 
 2011 14.1 64.1 21.8 
 

On 1 January 2011 the average age was 41.6 years6 months more than the average age published earlier.

==Vital statistics==

:Source: Latvijas Statistika and UN Demographic Yearbooks

 
 Average population (&times; 1000) Live births Deaths Natural change Crude birth rate (per 1000) Crude death rate (per 1000) Natural change (per 1000) Total fertility rate Infant mortality rate (per 1000 births) 
 1920 1 727 29 434 33 891 4 457 17.0 19.6 2.6 
 1921 1 850 36 420 25 331 11 089 19.7 13.7 6.0 
 1922 1 883 41 146 27 553 13 593 21.9 14.6 7.2 
 1923 1 909 41 796 26 080 15 716 21.9 13.7 8.2 
 1924 1 845 41 172 28 399 12 773 22.3 15.4 6.9 
 1925 1 857 41 314 27 683 13 631 22.3 14.9 7.3 
 1926 1 871 41 073 27 557 13 516 22.0 14.7 7.2 
 1927 1 883 41 610 28 941 12 669 22.1 15.4 6.7 
 1928 1 895 39 126 27 299 11 827 20.7 14.4 6.2 
 1929 1 900 35 673 28 512 7 161 18.8 15.0 3.8 
 1930 1 910 37 835 27 110 10 725 19.8 14.2 5.6 
 1931 1 920 36 972 26 891 10 081 19.3 14.0 5.3 
 1932 1 931 37 366 26 342 11 024 19.4 13.6 5.7 
 1933 1 939 34 576 26 319 8 257 17.8 13.6 4.3 
 1934 1 947 33 383 27 065 6 318 17.2 13.9 3.2 
 1935 1 953 34 419 27 660 6 759 17.6 14.2 3.5 
 1936 1 961 35 468 27 646 7 822 18.1 14.1 4.0 
 1937 1 968 34 863 28 083 6 780 17.7 14.3 3.4 
 1938 1 978 36 386 26 703 9 683 18.4 13.5 4.9 
 1939 (e) 1 970 36 400 27 400 9 000 18.5 13.9 4.6 
 1940 (e) 1 900 36 700 29 800 6 900 19.3 15.7 3.6 
 1941 1 790 37 125 30 989 6 136 20.7 17.3 3.4 
 1942 37 219 30 568 6 651 
 1946 1 636 30 544 32 266 1 722 18.7 19.7 1.1 
 1947 1 787 34 832 32 435 2 397 19.5 18.2 1.3 
 1948 1 872 35 402 26 500 8 902 18.9 14.2 4.8 
 1949 1 886 35 671 25 640 10 031 18.9 13.6 5.3 
 1950 1 887 33 137 24 250 8 887 17.6 12.9 4.7 
 1951 1 895 32 764 23 898 8 866 17.3 12.6 4.7 
 1952 1 906 32 278 22 680 9 598 16.9 11.9 5.0 
 1953 1 926 30 986 22 761 8 225 16.1 11.8 4.3 
 1954 1 953 33 202 22 500 10 702 17.0 11.5 5.5 
 1955 1 981 32 968 21 330 11 638 16.6 10.8 5.9 
 1956 2 018 32 590 20 339 12 251 16.1 10.1 6.1 
 1957 2 054 33 714 21 087 12 627 16.4 10.3 6.1 
 1958 2 073 35 068 20 910 14 158 16.9 10.1 6.8 
 1959 2 092 35 028 22 601 12 427 16.7 10.8 5.9 1.94 
 1960 2 121 35 468 21 314 14 154 16.7 10.0 6.7 1.99 
 1961 2 153 35 993 21 759 14 234 16.7 10.1 6.6 2.01 
 1962 2 182 35 061 23 592 11 469 16.1 10.8 5.3 1.91 
 1963 2 211 33 843 22 703 11 140 15.3 10.3 5.0 1.85 
 1964 2 241 33 053 21 165 11 888 14.7 9.4 5.3 1.79 
 1965 2 266 31 212 22 780 8 432 13.8 10.1 3.7 1.74 
 1966 2 283 31 974 23 350 8 624 14.0 10.2 3.8 1.76 
 1967 2 301 32 232 24 362 7 870 14.0 10.6 3.4 1.80 
 1968 2 324 32 693 25 104 7 589 14.1 10.8 3.3 1.83 
 1969 2 343 32 915 26 229 6 686 14.0 11.2 2.9 1.88 
 1970 2 359 34 333 26 546 7 787 14.6 11.3 3.3 2.01 
 1971 2 376 35 239 26 275 8 964 14.8 11.1 3.8 2.04 
 1972 2 396 35 007 27 296 7 711 14.6 11.4 3.2 2.03 
 1973 2 416 34 008 28 139 5 869 14.1 11.6 2.4 1.96 
 1974 2 437 34 920 28 143 6 777 14.3 11.5 2.8 2.00 
 1975 2 456 34 810 30 042 4 768 14.2 12.2 1.9 1.96 
 1976 2 470 34 644 30 373 4 271 14.0 12.3 1.7 1.93 
 1977 2 485 34 240 30 869 3 371 13.8 12.4 1.4 1.88 
 1978 2 498 34 258 31 261 2 997 13.7 12.5 1.2 1.85 
 1979 2 506 34 683 32 162 2 521 13.8 12.8 1.0 1.87 
 1980 2 512 35 534 32 100 3 434 14.1 12.8 1.4 1.90 15.3 
 1981 2 519 35 732 32 090 3 642 14.2 12.7 1.4 1.90 
 1982 2 531 37 477 31 234 6 243 14.8 12.3 2.5 1.98 
 1983 2 546 40 572 32 330 8 242 15.9 12.7 3.2 2.13 
 1984 2 562 40 847 33 406 7 441 15.9 13.0 2.9 2.15 
 1985 2 579 39 571 34 166 5 405 15.3 13.2 2.1 2.09 13.0 
 1986 2 600 41 960 31 328 10 632 16.1 12.0 4.1 2.22 
 1987 2 627 42 135 32 150 9 985 16.0 12.2 3.8 2.21 
 1988 2 653 41 275 32 421 8 854 15.6 12.2 3.3 2.16 
 1989 2 667 38 922 32 584 6 338 14.6 12.2 2.4 2.04 
 1990 2 663 37 918 34 812 3 106 14.2 13.1 1.2 2.00 13.7 
 1991 2 651 34 633 34 749 116 13.1 13.1 0.0 1.85 15.7 
 1992 2 614 31 569 35 420 3 851 12.1 13.6 1.5 1.74 17.6 
 1993 2 563 26 759 39 197 12 438 10.4 15.3 4.9 1.52 16.2 
 1994 2 521 24 256 41 757 17 501 9.6 16.6 6.9 1.41 15.7 
 1995 2 485 21 595 38 931 17 336 8.7 15.7 7.0 1.27 18.8 
 1996 2 457 19 782 34 320 14 538 8.1 14.0 5.9 1.18 15.9 
 1997 2 433 18 830 33 533 14 703 7.7 13.8 6.0 1.13 15.3 
 1998 2 410 18 410 34 200 15 790 7.6 14.2 6.6 1.11 15.0 
 1999 2 390 19 396 32 844 13 448 8.1 13.7 5.6 1.18 11.3 
 2000 2 373 20 248 32 205 11 957 8.5 13.6 5.0 1.24 10.4 
 2001 2 355 19 664 32 991 13 327 8.3 14.0 5.7 1.21 11.0 
 2002 2 320 20 044 32 498 12 454 8.7 14.1 5.3 1.25 9.8 
 2003 2 299 21 006 32 437 11 431 9.2 14.2 4.9 1.32 9.4 
 2004 2 277 20 334 32 024 11 690 9.1 14.2 5.1 1.29 9.4 
 2005 2 250 21 497 32 777 11 280 9.8 14.6 4.9 1.39 7.8 
 2006 2 228 22 264 33 098 10 834 10.3 14.9 4.7 1.46 7.6 
 2007 2 209 23 273 33 042 9 769 10.9 15.0 4.3 1.54 8.7 
 2008 2 192 23 948 31 006 7 058 11.2 14.2 3.1 1.59 6.7 
 2009 2 163 21 677 29 897 8 220 10.3 14.0 3.6 1.47 7.8 
 2010 2 121 19 219 30 040 10 821 9.4 14.3 4.8 1.36 5.7 
 2011 2 075 18 825 28 540 9 715 9.1 13.9 4.8 1,34 6.7 
 2012 2 041 19 897 29 025 9 128 9.8 14.2 4.4 1,44 
 2013 2 005 20 340 28 815 8 475 10.1 14.4 4.3 

e=estimate, p=provisional

===Current vital statistics===

-Number of births from January to April 2013 = 6,530

-Number of births from January to April 2014 = 6,813

-Number of death from January to April 2013 = 10,970

-Number of death from January to April 2014 = 9,784

-Natural increase from January to April 2013 = 4,440

-Natural increase from January to April 2014 = 2,971

==Ethnic groups==
Ethnic Latvians and Russians
Smaller ethnic minorities

Latvians have always been the largest ethnic group in Latvia during the past century, but minority peoples have always been numerous. Before WW II the proportion of non-Latvians was approximately 25%, the Russians being the largest minority (app. 10%), followed by Jews (approx. 5%), Germans and Poles (23%). After World War 2 only small numbers of Jews and Germans remained and following a massive immigration of Russians, Ukrainians and Belarusians, Latvians almost became a minority. In 1989, the proportion of Latvians had decreased to only 52% (75.5% in 1935). Despite the decreasing number of Latvians due to low fertility rates, the proportion of Latvians has considerably increased during the past two decades and reached 62.1% in 2011 (slightly higher than the 62.0% in 1959). This is due to large scale emigration of Russians, Ukrainians and Belarusians. The number of these peoples almost halved between 1989 and 2011.

+ Population of Latvia according to ethnic group 19252013 
 Ethnicgroup census 1925 census 1935 census 1959 census 1970 census 1979 census 1989 census 2000 census 2011 statistics 2014 
 Number % Number % Number % Number % Number % Number % Number % Number % Number % 
 Latvians 1,354,126 73.4 1,472,612 75.5 1,297,881 62.0 1,341,805 56.8 1,344,105 53.7 1,387,757 52.0 1,370,703 57.7 1,285,136 62.1 1,299,368 
 Russians 193,648 10.5 206,499 10.6 556,448 26.6 704,599 29.8 821,464 32.8 905,515 34.0 703,243 29.6 557,119 26.9 586,052 
 Belarusians 38,010 2.1 26,867 1.4 61,587 2.9 94,898 4.0 111,505 4.5 119,702 4.5 97,150 4.1 68,202 3.3 74,205 
 Ukrainians 512 0.0 1,844 0.1 29,440 1.4 53,461 2.3 66,703 2.7 92,101 3.5 63,644 2.7 45,798 2.2 52,554 
 Poles 51,143 2.8 48,949 2.5 59,774 2.9 63,045 2.7 62,690 2.5 60,416 2.3 59,505 2.5 44,772 2.2 48,485 
 Lithuanians 23,192 1.3 22,913 1.2 32,383 1.6 40,589 1.7 37,818 1.5 34,630 1.3 33,430 1.4 24,479 1.2 27,997 
 Jews 95,675 5.2 93,479 4.8 36,592 1.8 36,680 1.6 28,331 1.1 22,897 0.9 10,385 0.4 6,437 0.3 9,040 
 Roma 2,870 0.2 3,839 0.2 4,301 0.2 5,427 0.2 6,134 0.3 7,044 0.3 8,205 0.3 6,489 0.3 8,194 
 Germans 70,964 3.8 62,144 3.2 1,609 0.1 5,413 0.2 3,299 0.1 3,783 0.1 3,465 0.1 3,042 0.1 4,975 
 Estonians 7,893 0.4 7,014 0.4 4,610 0.2 4,334 0.2 3,681 0.2 3,312 0.1 2,652 0.1 2,007 0.1 2,270 
 Livonians 1,268 0.1 944 0.0 185 0.0 48 0.0 107 0.0 135 0.0 180 0.0 250 0.1 171 
 Others 5,504 0.3 3,398 0.2 8,648 0.4 13,828 0.6 16,979 0.7 29,275 1.1 24,824 1.1 26,640 1.3 67,594 3.1% 
 Total 1,844,805 1,950,502 2,093,458 2,364,127 2,502,816 2,666,567 2,377,383 2,070,371 2,180,442 
 

==Languages==

 

* official: Latvian
* considered indigenous in some legislation: Livonian, Latgalian
* other languages registered as mother tongue by at least 500 speakers in 2011 census (in declining order): Russian, Belarusian, Ukrainian, Lithuanian, Polish, Romani, Tatar, Yiddish and Hebrew, Estonian, German
* other languages widely spoken: English
* Latvian Sign Language and Russian Sign Language

In the 2011 census, 1,164,894 persons in Latvia reported Latvian as their mother tongue; 698,757 respondents listed Russian as their mother tongue, representing 37.2% of the total population, whereas Latvian was recorded as the mother tongue for 62.1%.  choose "Results of Population Census Year 2011, in short" and "Iedzvotju dzimt valoda un citu valodu prasme" Latvian was spoken as a second language by 20.8% of the population, and 43.7% spoke Russian as a second language. LR CSP preses izlaidums: 2000. Gada Tautas Skaitana Latvij; 07.11.2000. In total, 71% of ethnic Latvians said they could speak Russian, and 52% of Russians could speak Latvian in census 2000. Dadu tautu valodu prasme 

==Religion==

In a 2005 survey, 24.1% described themselves as Russian Orthodox, 20.7% Catholics, 20.0% Lutherans, 4.4% Old Believers, 10.6% non-denominational believers and 15.8% non-believers. Samazins to Latvijas iedzvotju patsvars, kuri sevi uzskata par luteriem Lutheranism was the majority religion before World War II, but has now fallen to third place behind Russian Orthodoxy and Catholicism.

== CIA World Factbook demographic statistics ==

The following data are estimates as of September 2009, obtained from the CIA World Factbook.

===Sex ratio===
at birth: 1.054 male(s)/female
under 15 years: 1.05 male(s)/female
1564 years: 0.95 male(s)/female
65 years and over: 0.48 male(s)/female
total population: 0.86 male(s)/female (2011 est.)

===Life expectancy at birth===
total population: 72.68 years
male: 67.56 years
female: 78.07 years (2011 est.)

===Nationality===
noun: Latvian(s) (archaic: Lett(s))
adjective: Latvian (archaic: Lettish)

===Literacy===
definition: age 15 and over can read and write
total population: 99.7%
male: 99.8%
female: 99.7% (2000 census)

==See also==

* Aging of Europe
* List of cities in the Baltic states by population

==References==

== External links ==
* Naturalization Board of the Republic of Latvia: Figures and facts
* Office of Citizenship and Migration Affairs: Statistics

Latvia


[[Politics of Latvia]]

The politics of Latvia takes place in a framework of a parliamentary representative democratic republic, whereby the Prime Minister is the head of government, and of a multi-party system. The President holds a primarily ceremonial role as Head of State. Executive power is exercised by the government. Legislative power is vested in both the government and parliament, the Saeima. 
The Judiciary is independent of the executive and the legislature.

==Political developments since independence==
On March 19, 1991 the Supreme Council passed a law explicitly guaranteeing "equal rights to all nationalities and ethnic groups" and "guarantees to all permanent residents in the Republic regardless of their nationality, equal rights to work and wages." The law also prohibits "any activity directed toward nationality discrimination or the promotion of national superiority or hatred."

In autumn 1992 Latvia reimplemented significant portions of its 1922 constitution and in spring 1993 the government took a census to determine eligibility for citizenship. After almost three years of deliberations, Latvia finalized a citizenship and naturalization law in summer 1994.

In the 56 June 1993 elections, with a turnout of over 90%, eight of Latvia's 23 registered political parties passed the four percent threshold to enter parliament. The Popular Front, which spearheaded the drive for independence two years previously with a 75% majority in the last parliamentary elections in 1990, did not qualify for representation. The centrist Latvian Way party received a 33% plurality of votes and joined with the Farmer's Union to head a center-right coalition government.

Led by the opposition National Conservative Party, right-wing nationalists won a majority of the seats nationwide and also captured the Riga mayoralty in the 29 May 1994 municipal elections. OSCE and COE observers pronounced the elections free and fair, and turnout averaged about 60%. In February 1995, the Council of Europe granted Latvia membership.

With President Bill Clinton's assistance, on 30 April 1994 Latvia and Russia signed a troop withdrawal agreement. Russia withdrew its troops by 31 August 1994, but maintained several hundred technical specialists to staff an OSCE-monitored phased-array ABM radar station at Skrunda until 31 August 1998.

The 30 September-1 October 1995 elections produced a deeply fragmented parliament with nine parties represented and the largest party - the newly founded centrist Democratic Party "Saimnieks" - commanding only 18 of 100 seats. Attempts to form right-of-center and left-wing governments failed; 7 weeks after the election, a broad but fractious coalition government of six of the nine parties was voted into office under Prime Minister Andris le, a nonpartisan businessman. The also-popular president, Guntis Ulmanis, had limited constitutional powers but played a key role in leading the various political forces to agree finally to this broad coalition. In June 1996, the Saeima re-elected Ulmanis to another 3-year term. In the summer of 1997, the daily newspaper Diena revealed that half the cabinet ministers and two-thirds of parliamentarians appeared to violate the 1996 anti-corruption law, which bars senior officials from holding positions in private business. Under pressure from le, several ministers subsequently resigned or were fired. However, after months of increasing hostility between le and leading coalition politicians, the coalition parties demanded and received the prime minister's resignation on 28 July. The new government was formed by the recent Minister of Economy Guntars Krasts. It included the same parties and mostly the same ministers as le's government. It pursued the same course of reform, albeit not as vigorously.

In the 1998 elections, the Latvian party structure began to consolidate with only six parties winning seats in the Saeima. Andris le's newly formed People's Party garnered a plurality with 24 seats. Though the election represented a victory for the center-right, personality conflicts and scandals within the two largest right of center parties&ndash;Latvian Way and the People's Party&ndash;prevented stable coalitions from forming. Two shaky governments under Vilis Kritopans and Andris le quickly collapsed in less than a year. In May 2000, a compromise candidate was found in the form of Andris Brzi, the Latvian Way mayor of Rga. His four-party coalition government lasted till the next elections in 2002.

In 1999, the Saeima elected Vaira Ve-Freiberga, a compromise candidate with no party affiliation, to the presidency. Though born in Rga in 1937, she settled in Canada during the years of the Soviet occupation, becoming a well-respected academic in the subject of Latvian culture. Since her election, she has become one of the most popular political figures in Latvia.

Local elections in 2001 represented a victory for the left-of-center parties in several municipalities, including Rga. A leftist coalition in the Rga City Council elected Gundars Bojrs, a Social Democrat, to the office of mayor.

Between local elections in 2001 and Saeima elections in 2002, two new parties formed: the conservative New Era Party led by Einars Repe and Christian Democratic Latvia's First Party. Both of them promised to fight corruption and made that the most important issue in 2002 elections. Six parties were elected to Saiema in 2002 elections. New Era Party with 26 seats out of 100 became the largest party in the parliament. Several previously successful parties such as Latvian Way and the Social Democrats did not reach the 5% threshold of the popular vote needed to be in the parliament. This was mostly due to voters perceiving these parties as corrupt. After elections, Einars Repe formed a government consisting of his New Era Party and three other parties.

In 2003, Vaira Ve-Freiberga was reelected to the presidency for the second term, until 2007. On 20 September 2003, Latvia voted to join the European Union in a referendum. Virtually all of major political parties and major Latvian-language media supported the 'YES' vote. Latvian government also spent significant amount of money for the 'YES' campagain. The 'NO' campaign lacked both funding and media access. Out of voters who participated in the referendum, 66.9% of cast votes in favor of EU. The vote was largerly along the ethnic lines. It is estimated that 84% of ethnic Latvians voted 'YES', while 91% of ethnic Russians voted 'NO' .

After the referendum, Repe's government started to fall apart and he eventually resigned in January 2004. A new government, led by Indulis Emsis, head of the conservative "Union of Greens and Farmers" (ZZS) was approved by the parliament in March 2004. The government was a coalition of ZZS, TP (People's party), and LPP (First Party); the coalition has only 46 out of 100 seats in Latvia's parliament, but was also supported by TSP, the leftist party of national harmony. After the Saeima did not accept the budget for 2005 proposed by the government of Indulis Emsis, the government resigned. On 2 December 2004, Aigars Kalvtis became the new Prime Minister and thus head of the government.

Kalvtis was the first prime minister in the history of post-soviet independent Latvia whose government was reelected by an election in 2006. New Era Party, however, weakened, so a coalition reshuffle took place, and a 4-party centre-right coalition emerged. The government lasted only until 5 December 2007, when Kalvitis resigned due to his continuous and unsuccessful attempts to dismiss Aleksejs Loskutovs, the head of KNAB, the State Anti-Corruption Agency, after Loskutov's had investigated shadowy matters of the PM's party.

After negotiations, a "crisis-handling" government was formed, with the participation of the same parties, led by former PM Ivars Godmanis, a respectable public figure, and member of Latvian Way. The government tried to impose austerity measures, with moderate success. This was accompanied, though, with a widespread public opposition, which resulted in two referenda, one on pensions, the other on constitutional amendments, which would have allowed the electorate to initiate the dissolution of the parliament.

Both of the referenda failed, http://www.cvk.lv/cvkserv/TN_2008_1/rez/rezultati.htm http://www.tn2008.cvk.lv/report-results.html but the country entered into the worst political crisis since the independence from the Soviet Union, together with the economic situation severely deteriorating, due to the world financial crisis. The popularity of the governing parties melted and was below the parliamentary threshold. By the end of 2008, parties had a hard time agreeing on further budget cuts, (mainly in the social sphere) the planned reorganization of the government, and layoffs.

On 13 January 2009, there were severe riots in Riga, with protesters attacking the building of the parliament. The President Valdis Zatlers gave an ultimatum to parties, saying that should they not agree on constitutional amendments about the dissolution of the Saeima, he would dissolve the parliament by the end of March. http://www.baltictimes.com/news/articles/22150/ After background talks and a failed vote of no confidence, PM Ivars Godmanis chose to resign in late February. http://www.transworldnews.com/NewsStory.aspx?id=77221&cat=11 On the 26 February, Zatlers nominated the candidate of New Era Party, MEP Valdis Dombrovskis to the post of prime minister. http://www.baltic-course.com/eng/legislation/?doc=10343 After talks, on 4 March 2009 five parties confirmed their participation in the coalition: New Era, People's Party, Union of Greens and Peasants, For Fatherland and Freedom/LNNK, and Civic Union.

==Citizenship and language issues==

The current edition of the citizenship law was adopted in 1998 after much debate and pressure from Russia and European Union, amending a more restrictive law, initially passed in 1994. In accordance with law, Latvian citizens are those who had Latvian citizenship prior to June 17, 1940, and their descendants. Those who settled in Latvia during Soviet occupation, with exception of those who did so subsequent to retirement from Soviet Army, or were employees, informers, agents or safehouse keepers of the KGB, or of the security services, intelligence services or other special services of some other foreign state, see Section 11., 5) and 6) can obtain Latvian citizenship via naturalization. Other categories of persons not eligible for naturalization include convicted criminals, state officials and servicemen of armed forces of a foreign state, members of Communist Party as well as members of certain affiliate organizations, who, after 13 January 1991, have acted against the Latvian State. Naturalization criteria include a conversational knowledge of Latvian, an oath of loyalty, renunciation of former citizenship, a 5-year residency requirement, and a knowledge of the Latvian constitution. As of November 2005, about 109,000 persons have applied for naturalization and about 103,000 of them have been granted Latvian citizenship.

In 2006 approximately 18 per cent of the total population (420,000 inhabitants of Latvia, slightly less than half of ethnically non-Latvian population) had no Latvian citizenship. Most of them have Latvian non-Citizen Passports, which give them a status similar to permanent residency in other countries. They can reside in Latvia indefinitely and obtain most of public services (e.g., education and healthcare) according to the same conditions as the citizens of Latvia. Non-citizens of Latvia cannot vote during municipal and state elections and are not allowed to work in government, the police and civil services. Several foreign nations also treat citizens and non-citizens of Latvia differently, admitting citizens of Latvia without visa but requiring visas from non-citizens. Russia used to have an opposite practice, requiring visas from both citizens and non-citizens of Latvia, but allowing non-citizens to travel to Russia with a cheaper visa.

As a transitional clause, the Latvian law allows dual citizenship for those who were forced to leave Latvia during the Soviet or Nazi occupation and adopted another citizenship while away from Latvia. In order to be eligible for dual citizenship, they had to claim it by July 1, 1995. After that date the other citizenship must be renounced upon the acceptance of the Latvian citizenship.

Latvian is the sole state language in Latvia; while the threatened Livonian language also has official status. All other languages are considered foreign by the law on state languages. The Latgalian written language is also protected as a historic variant of the Latvian language. Official Language Law Two parliamentary parties, Harmony Centre and ForHRUL, have requested that Russian (37.5% of inhabitants, according to the 2000 census, are Russians) be given official status.

Since 1999, the education laws have forbidden the public universities to instruct students in languages other than Latvian (there are exclusions made for linguistics, some international projects and non-budget groups). The law included a provision allowing for instruction in Latvian only in public high schools since 2004. Following large-scale protests in 20032004, the law was amended, requiring instruction in Latvian within at least 60% of the curriculum.

==President==

|President
|Andris Brzi
|Union of Greens and Farmers
|8 July 2011


The president is elected by Parliament for a maximum of two terms of four-years, by secret ballot and by an absolute majority of the vote (Constitution of Latvia, Articles 35, 36 and 39).

The President is a largely ceremonial Head of State, and in common with other presidents in parliamentary republics, the President of Latvia has influence and authority rather than power.

Although the President is formally the Commander-in-Chief of the Armed Forces, signs treaties, represents Latvia abroad, and officially appoints ambassadors and other key officials, these powers are constitutionally exercised on the binding advice of the Prime Minister, who is politically responsible for them (Constitution of Latvia, Article 53). The President does, however, have personal discretion over the proposal of legislation to the Parliament, vetoing legislation, calling referendums on legislation, and nominating the Prime Minister. The President also has the right, in extremis, to call a referendum on the premature dissolution of Parliament: if the referendum is passed, Parliament is dissolved; but if the referendum fails, the President must resign.

==Executive Branch==

|Prime Minister
|Laimdota Straujuma
|Unity
|22 January 2014


The Prime Minister is appointed by the President. The Prime Minister then chooses the Council of Ministers (Cabinet) which has to be accepted by the Parliament. The Parliament can remove the Prime Minister and Cabinet by means of a vote of no-confidence (Constitution of Latvia, Article 59).

==Legislative branch==
The unicameral Parliament (Saeima) has 100 members, elected for a four-year term by proportional representation with a 5% threshold. The parliamentary elections are held on the first Saturday of October. Locally, Latvia elects municipal councils, consisting of 7 to 60 members, depending on the size of the municipality, also by proportional representation for a four-year term.

==Political parties and elections==

==Judicial branch==
Judges' appointments are confirmed by Parliament and are irrevocable, except on the decision of the Judicial Disciplinary Board or on the judgment of a criminal court. There is a special Constitutional Court, with the authority to rule on the constitutionality of laws, whose members must be confirmed by an absolute majority vote of Parliament, by secret ballot.

==International organization participation==
BIS, CBSS, CE, EAPC, EBRD, ECE, EU, FAO, IAEA, IBRD, ICAO, ICC, ICRM, IDA, IFC, IFRCS, ILO, IMF, IMO, ITUC, Intelsat (nonsignatory user), Interpol, IOC, IOM (observer), ISO (correspondent), ITU, NATO, NSG, OAS (observer), OPCW, OSCE, United Nations, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNIDO, UPU, WCO, WEU (associate partner), WHO, WIPO, WMO, WTO, WTrO (applicant)

== References ==



[[Economy of Latvia]]

The economy of Latvia is an open economy in Northern Europe and is part of the European Union's (EU) single market. Latvia is a member of the World Trade Organization (WTO) since 1999, a member of the European Union since 2004, and of the Eurozone since 2014. 
Latvia is ranked the 21st in the world by the Ease of Doing Business Index prepared by the World Bank Group, According to the Human Development Report 2011, Latvia belongs to the group of very high human development countries. Human Development Index and its components Retrieved 2012-09-06 Due to its geographical location, transit services are highly developed, along with timber and wood-processing, agriculture and food products, and manufacturing of machinery and electronic devices.

Latvia's economy experienced GDP growth of more than 10% per year during 200607, but entered a severe recession in 2008 as a result of an unsustainable current account deficit and large debt exposure amid the softening world economy. Triggered by the collapse of the second largest bank, GDP plunged by almost 18% in 2009, The CIA World Factbook Latvia  CIA  The World Factbook Retrieved 2012-09-06 and the European Union, the International Monetary Fund, and other international donors provided substantial financial assistance to Latvia as part of an agreement to defend the currency's peg to the euro in exchange for the government's commitment to stringent austerity measures.
In 2011 Latvian GDP grew again by 5.5% and thus Latvia was among the fastest growing economies in the European Union. The IMF/EU program successfully concluded in December 2011. Latvia and the Balticsa Story of Recovery by Christine Lagarde managing director, International Monetary Fund Riga, 5 June 2012 

Privatization is mostly complete, except for some of the large state-owned utilities. Export growth contributed to the economic recovery, however the bulk of the country's economic activity is in the services sector.
In May 2013, the OECD decided to open accession negotiations with Latvia. 

==Economic history==
Real GDP growth in Latvia 19962006.

For centuries under Hanseatic and German influence and then during its inter-war independence, Latvia used its geographic location as an important East-West commercial and trading center. Industry served local markets, while timber, paper and agricultural products were Latvia's main exports. Conversely, years in the Russian Empire and the Soviet Union tended to integrate Latvia's economy with their markets and also serve those countries' large internal industrial needs.

After reestablishing its independence, Latvia proceeded with market-oriented reforms, albeit at a measured pace. Its freely traded currency, the lat, was introduced in 1993 and held steady, or appreciated, against major world currencies. Inflation was reduced from 958.6% in 1992 to 25% by 1995 and 1.4% by 2002.

After contracting substantially between 199193, the economy steadied in late 1994, led by recovery in light industry and a boom in commerce and finance. This recovery was interrupted twice, first by a banking crisis and the bankruptcy of Banka Baltija, Latvia's largest bank, in 1995 and second by a severe crisis in the financial system of neighbouring Russia in 1998. After 2000, Latvian GDP grew by 68% a year for 4 consecutive years. Latvia's state budget was balanced in 1997 but the 1998 Russian financial crisis resulted in large deficits, which were reduced from 4% of GDP in 1999 to 1.8% in 2003. These deficits were smaller than in most of the other countries joining the European Union in 2004.

Until the middle of 2008, Latvia had the fastest developing economy in Europe. In 2003, GDP growth was 7.5% and inflation was 2.9%. The centrally planned system of the Soviet period was replaced with a structure based on free-market principles. Two-thirds of employment and 60% of GDP was in the private sector. Recovery in light industry and Riga's emergence as a regional financial and commercial center offset shrinkage of the state-owned industrial sector and agriculture. The official unemployment figure was held steady in the 7%10% range.

===Economic contraction in 20082010===

The Financial Crisis of 2008 severely disrupted the Latvian economy, primarily as a result of the easy credit bubble that began building up during 2004. The bubble burst lead to a rapidly weakening economy, resulting in a budget, wage and unemployment crisis. Latvia had the worst economic performance in 2009, with annual growth rate averaging 18%.

The Latvian economy entered a phase of fiscal contraction during the second half of 2008 after an extended period of credit-based speculation and unrealistic inflation of real estate values. The national account deficit for 2007, for example, represented more than 22% of the GDP for the year while inflation was running at 10%. 
By 2009 unemployment rose to 23% and was the highest in the EU. 

Paul Krugman, the Nobel Laureate in economics for 2008, wrote in his New York Times Op-Ed column for 15 December 2008:

"The most acute problems are on Europe's periphery, where many smaller economies are experiencing crises strongly reminiscent of past crises in Latin America and Asia: Latvia is the new Argentina " 

By August 2009, Latvia's GDP had fallen by 20% year on year, with S&P predicting a further 16% contraction to come. The International Monetary Fund suggested a devaluation of Latvia's currency, but the European Union objected to this, on the grounds that the majority of Latvia's debt was denominated in foreign currencies. Financial economist Michael Hudson has advocated for redenominating foreign currency liabilities in Latvian lats before devaluing.

However, by 2010 there were indications that Latvia's policy of internal devaluation was successful. Baltic Business News, 8 February 2010 

===Economic recovery 20102012===

The economic situation has since 2010 improved, Moody's: Latvian economy is stabilizing Baltic Business News, Retrieved on 3 September 2012 and by 2012 Latvia was described as a success by IMF managing director Christine Lagarde Those who change will endure  IMF managing director LETA Retrieved on 5 June 2012 showing strong growth forecasts. The Latvian economy grew by 5.5% in 2011 Danske Bank: we expect Latvian GDP to grow by 2.0% y/y in 2012 Retrieved on 3 September 2012 and by 5.6% in 2012 reaching the highest rate of growth in Europe. GDP growth in Latvia, at 5.6%, the fastest in Europe; growth to moderate this year Unemployment, however, remains high, and GDP remains below the pre-crisis level. http://www.multpl.com/latvia-real-gdp 

==Privatisation==
Privatisation in Latvia is almost complete. Virtually all of the previously state-owned small and medium companies have been privatized, leaving only a small number of politically sensitive large state companies. In particular, the country's main energy company, Latvenergo remains state-owned and there are no plans to privatize it. The government also holds minority shares in Ventspils Nafta oil transit company and the country's main telecom company Lattelecom but it plans to sell those.

Foreign investment in Latvia is still modest compared with the levels in north-central Europe. A law expanding the scope for selling land, including land sales to foreigners, was passed in 1997. Representing 10.2% of Latvia's total foreign direct investment, American companies invested $127 million in 1999. In the same year, the United States exported $58.2 million of goods and services to Latvia and imported $87.9 million. Eager to join Western economic institutions like the World Trade Organization, OECD, and the European Union, Latvia signed a Europe Agreement with the EU in 1995 with a 4-year transition period. Latvia and the United States have signed treaties on investment, trade, and intellectual property protection and avoidance of double taxation.

==Energy==
With Lithuania, Poland, and Estonia, Latvia is considering participating in the Visaginas Nuclear Power Plant in Lithuania to replace the Ignalina Nuclear Power Plant. 
 
 

==Statistics==
Household income or consumption by percentage share:
lowest 10%:
2.9%
highest 10%:
25.9% (1998)

Industries:
synthetic fibers, agricultural machinery, fertilizers, radios, electronics, pharmaceuticals, processed foods, textiles, timber; note  dependent on imports for energy and raw materials

Industrial production growth rate:
8.5% (2004 est.)

Electricity  production:
4,547 GWh (2002)

Electricity  production by source:
fossil fuel:
29.1%
hydro:
70.9%
nuclear:
0%
other:
0% (2001)

Electricity  consumption:
5,829 GWh (2002)

Electricity  exports:
1,100 GWh (2002)

Electricity  imports:
2,700 GWh (2002)

Agriculture  products:
grain, potatoes, vegetables; beef, milk, eggs; fish

Foreign direct investments in Latvia:
Lursoft statistics on remaining amount of investments at the end of each year. 

Exchange rates:
lati per US dollar  0.56 (2012), 0.44 (2008), 0.5402 (2004), 0.57 (2003), 0.62 (2002), 0.63 (2001), 0.61 (2000), 0.59 (1999), 0.590 (1998), 0.581 (1997), 0.551 (1996), 0.528 (1995)

Packet of 20 cigarettes: 1.20  2.45 LVL. Most Western brands (Marlboro, etc.) are about 2.00 LVL.

==See also==
*Baltic Tiger
*Baltic states housing bubble
*Economy of Europe
*Invest in Latvia

==References==

==External links==
*Latvia's Tiger Economy Loses Its Bite by Kristina Rizga, The Nation, 28 October 2009
* Latvia's Internal Devaluation: A Success Story?, from the Center for Economic and Policy Research, December 2011
* European Commission's DG ECFIN's country page on Latvia.
* World Bank Summary Trade Statistics 2012

 
Latvia

[[Telecommunications in Latvia]]

Telecommunications in Latvia include radio, television, fixed and mobile telephones, and the Internet. 

== Radio and television ==

Radio stations:
* publicly owned broadcaster operates 4 radio networks with dozens of stations throughout the country; dozens of private broadcasters also operate radio stations (2007); "Communications: Latvia", World Factbook, U.S. Central Intelligence Agency, 31 January 2014. Retrieved 20 February 2014. 
* AM 8, FM 56, shortwave 1 (1998).

Radios:
1.76 million (1997).

Television stations:
* several national and regional commercial TV stations are foreign-owned, 2 national TV stations are publicly owned; system supplemented by privately owned regional and local TV stations; cable and satellite multi-channel TV services with domestic and foreign broadcasts available (2007); 
* 44 plus 31 repeaters (1995).

Televisions:
1.22 million (1997).

The state public television broadcaster is Latvijas Televzija.

== Telephones ==

Calling code: +371 

International call prefix: 00

Main lines:
* ~501,000 lines in use, 97th in the world (2012); 
* ~644,000 lines in use (2007). 

Mobile cellular:
* ~2.3 million lines (2012); 
* ~2.2 million lines (2007). 

Telephone system: recent efforts have focused on bringing competition to the telecommunications sector; the number of fixed lines is decreasing as mobile-cellular telephone service expands; the number of telecommunications operators has grown rapidly since the fixed-line market opened to competition in 2003; combined fixed-line and mobile-cellular subscribership is roughly 150 per 100 persons; the Latvian network is now connected via fiber optic cable to Estonia, Finland, and Sweden (2008). 

Until 2003 Lattelecom had a monopoly in the fixed telecommunications market. This led to overwhelming use of cellular phones for private customers, fixed lines being requested mostly by companies. In Latvia exist more than 2 million mobile phones but only 644,000 fixed phone connections.

Since the fixed-line voice communication monopoly ended on January 1, 2003, several companies entered the market for fixed voice communication services: Aeronavigcijas serviss, Baltkom TV, Beta Telecom, Latvenergo Tehniskais Centrs, OPTRON, Rigatta, Telecentrs, Telenets, Telekom Baltija and CSC Telecom. These voice telephony providers provide services for cheaper foreign calls, as well as local calls. The telecom regulator SPRK tries to provide a competitive environment so that new operators can compete with Lattelecom which owns most of the last-mile connections.

== Internet ==

Top-level domain: .lv 

Internet users:
* 1.5 million users, 81st in the world (2009); 
* 1.1 million users (2007). 

Internet hosts:
* 359,604 hosts, 58th in the world (2012). 

Internet Service Providers:
150+ ISPs (2007).

The Internet in Latvia began to experience significant growth in 1999, as the consolidation of regional Internet providers began to drive down prices for dial-up access. By 2000, there were 75,000 Internet users and about a dozen e-commerce shops in Latvia. The average salary for a web programmer was 500Ls/month. High-speed access costs remained prohibitive; for example, an ADSL service planned to be introduced in July 2000 and planned to charge a monthly fee of 50,00Ls. . By 2003, however, still only 5.4% of Latvians used the Internet at home, and 60% did not use it at all; those who did instead accessed it in public areas or through their place of work, as high subscription prices for home usage remained a barrier. . By 2008, access prices had fallen to 11,90Ls (17) per month for the Lattelecom ADSL line.

===Internet censorship and surveillance===

There is no OpenNet Initiative (ONI) country profile, but Latvia is shown as no evidence of Internet filtering in all areas for which ONI tests (political, social, conflict/security, and Internet tools) on the ONI global Internet filtering maps. "Global Internet Filtering Maps", OpenNet Initiative, Retrieved 28 September 2011. 

The constitution and law provide for freedom of speech and of the press. There are no government restrictions on access to the Internet or reports that the government monitors e-mail or Internet chat rooms. Individuals and groups engage in the peaceful expression of views via the Internet, including by e-mail. "2010 Country Reports on Human Rights Practices: Latvia", Bureau of Democracy, Human Rights, and Labor, U.S. Department of State, 8 April 2011. 

In September 2010 the government's Corruption Prevention and Combating Bureau (KNAB), which enforces campaign laws, removed a satirical film, The Last Bear Slayer, from the on-demand playlist of the partially state-owned cable provider, Lattelecom. The KNAB stated that the film might have constituted election advertising. Reporters Without Borders charged that the prohibition constituted improper censorship, but noted it was ineffective because the film was widely available on the Internet. 

==See also==

* Latvian Internet Exchange
* Latvia

==References==

* 
* 

== External links ==

*Public Utilities Commission
*Latvian State Department of Communications
*Telecommunications and IT blog, news on telecoms in Latvia.
*NIC.lv, .lv domain registrar.
*CERT.lv, the Information Technology Security Incident Response Institution of the Republic of Latvia.

;Telecommunications operators in Latvia
*AdForte (VOIP)
*Bite Latvia (GSM)
*CSC Telecom
*Lattelecom
*Latvia Mobile Telephone (GSM)
*Optron (VoIP)
*Tele2 (GSM)
*TELEFANT
*Telepele, prefix code 1030 in Lattelecom network.
*Triatel (CDMA)

Latvia
 
Latvia
Latvia

[[Transport in Latvia]]

This article provides an overview of the transport infrastructure of Latvia.

== Road system ==
280px
280px
280px
It is mandatory to keep headlights on while driving, even in daylight; most cars commercially sold in Latvia are equipped to make this automatic.

=== Highways ===

 Number E-road Route Length (km) 
 35px A1 Rga - Ainai (EE border) 101 
 35px A2 Rga - Sigulda - Veclaicene (EE border) 196 
 35px A3 Inukalns - Valmiera - Valka (EE border) 101 
 35px A4 Rga ring road (Baltezers - Saulkalne) 20 
 35px A5 Rga ring road (Salaspils - Babte) 40 
 35px A6 Rga - Daugavpils - Krslava - Pternieki (BY border) 307 
 35px A7 Rga - Bauska - Grenctle (LT border) 85 
 35px A8 Rga - Jelgava - Meitene (LT border) 76 
 35px A9 Rga - Skulte - Liepja 199 
 35px A10 Rga - Ventspils 190 
 35px A11 Liepja - Rucava (LT border) 57 
 35px A12 Jkabpils - Rzekne - Ludza - Terehova (RU border) 166 
 35px A13 Grebeva (RU border) - Rzekne - Daugavpils - Medumi (LT border) 163 
 35px A14 Daugavpils ring road (Tilti - Kalkne) 15 
 35px A15 Rzekne ring road 7 

=== Length of the road system ===

 Roads Paved, km Unpaved, km Total, km 
 
 State-owned roads 
 Highways (A) 1651.1 - 1651.1 
 Regional roads (P) 4189.9 1127.5 5317.4 
 Local roads (V) 2616.7 10533.4 13150.1 
 
 Municipality-owned roads 
 Roads 1055.6 29593.5 30649.1 
 Streets 4588.2 3446.4 8034.6 
 
 Other roads 
 Forest roads - 10142 10142 
 Private house roads 500 3000 3500 
 
 
 Total 14601.5 57842.8 72444.3 

== Railways ==

Jelgava railway station 
One of RVR ER2T trainsets operated by Pasaieru Vilciens 
 
Latvian Railways is the main state-owned railyway company in Latvia. Its daughter companies both carry out passengers services as well as carry a large quantity of freight cargo, and freight trains operate over the whole current passenger network, and a number of lines currently closed to passenger services.

There is also a narrow gauge railway between Gulbene and Aluksne, operated by the Industrial Heritage Trust, using Russian and Polish built heritage rolling stock. Three narrow gauge trains a day operate on the 33 km route between the two towns.

total:
2,347 km 
Russian gauge:
2,314 km gauge (270 km electrified) 
narrow gauge:
33 km gauge (2002)

=== Passenger Train ===

Passenger Train is a daughter company of Latvian Railways and the only passenger-carrying company in Latvia.

Domestic passenger lines with current service are:
* Torakalns  Tukums II Railway
* Riga  Jelgava Railway
* Jelgava  Liepja Railway
* Riga  Daugavpils Railway
* Krustpils  Rzekne  Zilupe (border of Russia)
* Rga  Sigulda  Csis  Valmiera  Valga (border of Estonia)
* Zemitni  Skulte Railway
* Pavias  Gulbene

=== Rail links with adjacent countries ===

* Russia - yes
* Lithuania - yes
* Belarus - yes
* Estonia - yes

== Airports ==

airBaltic Boeing 757200WL take-off at Riga International Airport 
Riga International Airport is the only major airport in Latvia, carrying around 5 million passengers annually. It is the largest airport in the Baltic states and has direct flights to over 80 destinations in 30 countries including a nonstop transatlantic flight to New York-JFK operated by Uzbekistan Airlines year-round. It is also the main hub of airBaltic.

In the recent years airBaltic operated also in Liepja International Airport as well as Ventspils International Airport but operations in both of these airports were soon ceased.

Currently there are plans for further development in several regional airports, including Jrmala Airport, Liepja, Ventspils as well as Daugavpils International Airport.

=== Airfields ===
As of 2003, there were a total of 51 airfields in Latvia, with 27 of them having paved runways.

Airports - with paved runways
total:
27 
2,438 to 3,047 m:
7
1,524 to 2,437 m:
2
914 to 1,523 m:
2
under 914 m:
16 (2003)

Airports - with unpaved runways
total:
24
2,438 to 3,047 m:
1
1,523 to 2,438 m:
2
914 to 1,523 m:
1
under 914 m:
20 (2003)

== Ports and harbors ==
Port of Ventspils is the busiest port in the Baltic states
Riga Passenger Terminal 
Key ports are located in Riga (Freeport of Riga and Riga Passenger Terminal), Ventspils (Free port of Ventspils), and Liepja (Port of Liepja). Most transit traffic uses these and half the cargo is crude oil and oil products. Latvia, World Bank 

== Waterways ==
300 km (perennially navigable)

== Pipelines ==
crude oil 412 km; refined products 421 km; natural gas 1,097 km (2003)

== Merchant marine ==
total:
11 ships (with a volume of or over) totaling / 
note:
includes some foreign-owned ships registered here as a flag of convenience: Germany 1, Greece 1, Ukraine 1 (2002 est.)
ships by type:
cargo ship 6, petroleum tanker 1, refrigerated cargo 2, roll-on/roll-off ship 1, short-sea/passenger 1

==References==

== External links ==
* History of railroad construction in Latvia
* Ministry of Transport of Republic of Latvia
* Transport in Latvia

*

[[Military of Latvia]]

The Latvian National Armed Forces () are the unified armed forces of the Republic of Latvia. Latvia's defense concept is based upon a rapid response force composed of a mobilization base and a small group of career professionals. The National Armed Forces consists of Land Forces, Naval Forces, Air Force, National Guard and others. Latvia has switched to a professional army, the last draft was in 2005. From January 1, 2007, the Latvian army is fully contract-based.

==Mission==
The mission of the National Armed Forces (NAF) is to defend the sovereignty and territorial integrity of the nation and to defend its population against aggression. In order to implement these tasks, the NAF provide for the defense of the nation, its air space and national territorial waters, participate in large scale crisis response operations, perform emergency rescue operations, and participate in international peacekeeping operations.

The main mission of the National Armed Forces is to:

*Provide for the inviolability of all national territory, its waters and air space;
*Participate in international operations;
*Participate in national threat elimination;
*Provide for the training of personnel and military reserves.
*Ensure modernization and enhancement of professional combat training;

==History==
The Latvian armed forces were first formed after the new state was created after World War I. At the end of the Latvian War of Independence (1918-1920), the Latvian Army consisted of 69,232 men.

After the occupation of Latvia in June 1940 the annihilation of the Latvian army began. The army was renamed the Peoples Army and in SeptemberNovember 1940- the Red Armys 24th Territorial Rifle Corps. The corps comprised the 181st and 183rd Rifle Divisions. In September the corps contained 24,416 men but in autumn more than 800 officers and about 10,000 instructors and soldiers were discharged. The arresting of soldiers continued in the following months. In June 1940, the entire Territorial Corps was sent to Litene camp. Before leaving the camp, Latvians drafted in 1939 were demobilised, and replaced by about 4000 Russian soldiers from area around Moscow. On June 10, the corps senior officers were sent to Russia where they were arrested and most of them- shot. On June 14 at least 430 officers were arrested and sent to Gulag camps. After the German attack to Soviet Union, from June 29 to July 1 more 2080 Latvian soldiers were demobilsed, fearing that they might turn their weapons against the Russian commissars and officers. Simultaneously, many soldiers and officers deserted and when the corps crossed the Latvian border only about 3000 Latvian soldiers remained. 

== Structure ==
Structure of the Latvian Armed Forces 2010
A Latvian soldier during a training exercise
National Armed Forces consist of:

*NAF Joint Headquarters
*NAF Commanders Personal Staff
*30px Land Forces
*30px Naval Forces
*30px Air Force
*30px National Guard
*30px Special Tasks Unit
*30px Military Police
*30px NAF Staff Battalion
*30px Training and Doctrine Command
*30px Logistics Command

The Security Service of Parliament and State President was a part of the National Armed Forces until its merger with the Military Police in 2009.

==Personnel==
There are 4,763 active duty personnel in the NAF. There are 971 soldiers in the Latvian Land Forces, 552 in the Latvian Naval Forces, 251 in the Latvian Air Force with the balance in the other commands. There are 10,642 voluntary national guardsmen with 1,284 officers and 1,945 non-commissioned officers in the Latvian National Guard. There are 1,288 civil employees serving in the NAF. 

==Cooperation==
Along with providing for national defense, the NAF will also react immediately to threats to other allies and to international crises.

Latvia cooperates with Estonia and Lithuania in the joint infantry battalion BALTBAT and naval squadron BALTRON which are available for peacekeeping operations.

Currently, NATO is involved in the patrolling and protection of the Latvian air space as the Latvian military does not have the means to do so. For this goal a rotating force of four NATO fighters, which comes from different nations and switches at two or three month intervals, is based in Lithuania to cover all three Baltic states (see Baltic Air Policing).

==Modernization==
Latvian guard in Iraq
After joining the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO), Latvia has undertaken obligations to strengthen common defense within the scope of its capabilities. For this purpose, every NATO member state delegates its military formations  fast response, well-armed and well-equipped units capable to operate beyond the NATOs borders.

After joining NATO, the foundation of the Latvian defense system has shifted from total territorial defense to collective defense. Latvia has acquired small but highly professional troops that have been fully integrated into NATO structures. NAF soldiers have participated in international operations since 1996. Specialized units (e.g. units of military medics, military police, unexploded ordenance neutralizers, military divers and special forces) have been established in order to facilitate and enhance NAF participation in international operations. Special attention has been paid to establishing a unit to deal with the identification and clearance of nuclear pollution. The successful participation of Latvian soldiers in international exercises, operations and missions demonstrates that their professional skills already comply with the performance requirements set by the Alliance.

==References==

* Ministry of Defence of the Republic of Latvia
* Mission of Latvia to NATO
* kamouflage.net > Europe > Latvia (Republic of Latvia) > index
* www.sargs.lv
* Stefan Marx, "The Latvian Defence System", Jane's Intelligence Review, December 1993, p. 557559

 

[[Foreign relations of Latvia]]

Today's Republic of Latvia regards itself as a continuation of the 19181940 republic.
After the declaration on the restoration of its full independence on August 21, 1991, Latvia became a member of the United Nations on September 17, 1991, and is a signatory to a number of UN organizations and other international agreements, including Council of Europe, CERCO, International Council for the Exploration of the Sea, International Civil Aviation Organization, International Atomic Energy Agency, UNESCO, UNICEF, International Criminal Court, the World Bank, International Monetary Fund, and the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development. It also is a member of the Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe (OSCE) and of the North Atlantic Coordinating Council. On 20 September 2003, in a nationwide referendum, the Latvians voted to join the European Union and Latvia's EU membership took effect on 1 May 2004. Latvia became a member state of NATO on March 29, 2004. Latvia welcomes further cooperation and integration with NATO, European Union, and other Western organizations. It also seeks more active participation in UN peacekeeping efforts worldwide.

Through its Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Latvia maintains embassies in Argentina, Austria, Belarus, Belgium, Canada, the People's Republic of China, the Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Israel, Italy, Lithuania, Netherlands, Nicaragua, Norway, Poland, Portugal, Russia, South Africa, Sweden, Ukraine, the United Kingdom, the United States, and Uzbekistan.
Ministry of Foreign Affairs in Riga

It also operates missions to the United Nations in New York City and Geneva, to the European Union, the Chemical Weapons Nonproliferation Organization, the OSCE, NATO, World Trade Organization, and the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations.

Latvia has a Consulate General in Russia; Consulates in Belarus and Russia; Honorary Consulates General in Australia, Cyprus, India, Israel, and Norway; and Honorary Consulates in Argentina, Australia, Austria, Belarus, Brazil, Canada, Chile, Cyprus, Denmark, Egypt, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany, Greece, Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Lebanon, Luxembourg, Mexico, Moldova, Netherlands, Norway, Pakistan, Philippines, Poland, Singapore, South Africa, South Korea, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Thailand, Turkey, and Venezuela.

Russia expresses concern for how Latvia's language and naturalization laws effect Latvia's Russian-speaking population. Russians comprised 27.6% of the population in 2010. In turn, Latvia is interested in the welfare of ethnic Latvians still residing in Russia. The latest Russian census shows about 40,000 still living in Russia, but sources indicate that given the probability of an undercount, Latvians in Russia probably number about 50,000-60,000. 

Disputes - international:
Treaty delimiting the boundary with Russia has been signed and ratified in 2007, under the treaty the Abrene district passes to Russia; ongoing talks over maritime boundary dispute with Lithuania (primary concern is oil exploration rights)

Illicit drugs:
transshipment point for opiates and cannabis from Central and Southwest Asia to Western Europe and Scandinavia and Latin American cocaine and some synthetics from Western Europe to CIS; limited production of illicit amphetamines, ephedrine, and ecstasy for export.

==Relations by country==

 Country Formal Relations Began Notes 
 Armenia 1992-08-22 * Armenia is represented in Latvia through its embassy in Warsaw (Poland). * Latvia is represented in Armenia through a non-resident ambassador based in Riga (at the Ministry of Foreign Affairs) and through an honorary consulate in Yerevan. Latvian Ministry of Foreign Affairs: direction if the Latvian representation in Armenia * Latvian Ministry of Foreign Affairs about relations with Armenia 
 Austria See Foreign relations of Austria 
 Azerbaijan See Foreign relations of Azerbaijan 
 Belarus See Foreign relations of Belarus 
 Bulgaria See BulgariaLatvia relations Bulgaria is represented in Latvia through its embassy in Warsaw (Poland) and through an honorary consulate in Riga. Latvia is represented in Bulgaria through its embassy in Warsaw (Poland) and through an honorary consulate in Sofia. Both countries are full members of NATO and of the European Union. 
 Canada 1991-08-26 See CanadaLatvia relations * Both countries re-established diplomatic relations on September 3, 1991. * Canada has an embassy in Riga. * Latvia has an embassy in Ottawa and 2 honorary consulates in Quebec and Toronto. * Both countries are full members of the Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe and of NATO. 
 Colombia 1995 *Colombia counts with an honorary consulate in Riga. http://www.cancilleria.gov.co/ubicacion *Latvia counts with an honorary consulate in Bogot and is represented by the German embassy in Colombia for consular services only. http://eeas.europa.eu/delegations/colombia/travel_eu/embassies/index_es.htm#hungria *Colombia recognized Latvia as an independent country after the dissolution of the Soviet Union in 1991. http://www.cancilleria.gov.co/international/regions/europe/union/member/latvia 
 Croatia See Foreign relations of Croatia 
 Czech Republic See Foreign relations of the Czech Republic 
 Denmark See Denmark-Latvia relations 
 Estonia See EstoniaLatvia relations * Both states share a long common history: before 1918, they were both part of the Russian Empire. Estonian Ministry of Foreign Affairs about relations with Latvia * They were both re-occupied by the USSR between 1945 and 1991. Both countries established diplomatic relations on January 3, 1992. * Estonia has an embassy in Riga. Latvia has an embassy in Tallinn. * The two states share 343 km of common borders. 
 Finland See Foreign relations of Finland 
 France See Foreign relations of France 
 Georgia See Foreign relations of Georgia 
 Germany See Foreign relations of Germany 
 Greece See Foreign relations of Greece 
 Hungary See Foreign relations of Hungary 
 Iceland See IcelandLatvia relations Iceland was the first country to recognise the independence of Latvia in August 1991. Both countries re-established diplomatic relations on August 22, 1991. Iceland is represented in Latvia through its embassy in Helsinki (Finland). Latvia is represented in Iceland through its embassy in Oslo (Norway) and an honorary consulate in Reykjavik. Both countries are full members of the Council of the Baltic Sea States, of NATO, and of the Council of Europe. 
 Iraq 2004-10-15 * Iraq recognized the independence of Latvia on 1 January 1992. * In 2005, a project entitled Latvian Government's Assistance to Iraq in the Documentation of Architectural and Archaeological Objects with Photogrammetric Methods was implemented. * Latvia's participation in the Iraq war commenced in May 2003. At their peak the number of Latvian soldiers in Iraq was 126. They were withdrawn on November 8, 2008. http://www.mnf-iraq.com/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=23564&Itemid=21 * Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Latvia: Iraq 
 Ireland See Foreign relations of the Republic of Ireland 
 Israel 1992-01-06 See IsraelLatvia relations * Israel recognized Latvias independence on September 4, 1991. * Israel has an embassy in Riga. Israeli embassy in Riga * Latvia has an embassy in Tel Aviv and 2 honorary consulates (in Ashdod and Eilat). Latvian Ministry of Foreign Affairs: directions of Latvian representations in Israel * There are 9,000 Jews living in Latvia (see History of the Jews in Latvia). * Both countries are full members of the Union for the Mediterranean. 
 Italy See Foreign relations of Italy 
 Kazakhstan 1992-12-30 * Kazakhstan recognised Latvia's independence on December 23, 1991. * Latvia recognised the independence of Kazakhstan on January 8, 1992. * Kazakhstan is represented in Latvia through its embassy in Vilnius (Lithuania) and though an honorary consulate in Riga. Kazakh embassy in Vilnius (also accredited to Latvia) * Latvia has an embassy in Astana and an honorary consulate in Almaty. * Latvian Ministry of Foreign Affairs about the relation with Kazakhstan 
 Kosovo See KosovanLatvian relations Latvia recognized it on 20 February 2008. Latvian and Kosovan governments established diplomatic relations on 10 June 2008. \"Kosovo & Latvia Open Diplomatic Ties\" balkaninsight.com 10 June 2008 Link accessed 10/06/08 However, Latvia's involvement in Kosovo date back to 2000 when it first sent peacekeeping troops. 
 Lithuania 1991-10-05 See also Foreign relations of Lithuania * Latvia has an embassy in Vilnius. Embassy of the Republic of Latvia in the Republic of Lithuania * Lithuania has an embassy in Riga. Embassy of the Republic of Lithuania in the Republic of Latvia * The two states share 588 km of common border. Both countries are full members of the European Union. 
 Luxembourg *Luxembourg did not recognise the annexation of the Baltic States by the USSR in 1940-1991 either de iure or de facto. *Diplomatic relations between the two countries were restored on April 21, 1992. *Latvia is represented in Luxembourg through its embassy in Brussel (Belgium) and through an honorary consulate in Luxembourg City. Luxembourg is represented in Latvia through its embassy in Warsaw (Poland) and through an honorary consulate in Riga. *Both countries are full members of NATO and of the European Union. 
 Malaysia See LatviaMalaysia relations Latvia doesn't have any embassy in Malaysia. while Malaysian embassy in Helsinki is accredited to Latvia. 
 Pakistan 
 
 Poland 1991-08-30 See LatviaPoland relations * Poland recognised Latvia's independence on January 27, 1921. * Latvia has an embassy in Warsaw and 3 honorary consulates (in Katowice, Gdansk and Lodz). Latvian embassy in Warsaw (in Latvian and Polish only) * Poland has an embassy in Riga. Polish embassy in Riga * There are around 57,000 Poles living in Latvia. * Both countries are full members of the Council of the Baltic Sea States, of NATO and of the European Union. * Latvian Ministry of Foreign Affairs about relations with Poland 
 Romania 1922-01-03 * Romania recognized Latvia on August 26, 1991. * Both countries re-established diplomatic relations on September 13, 1991. * Latvia is represented in Romania through its embassy in Warsaw (Poland). * Romania is represented in Latvia through its embassy in Vilnius (Lithuania) and an honorary consulate in Riga. Romanian embassy in Vilnius, also accredited to Latvia (new version) * Both countries are full members of NATO, the European Union, and the Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe. * Latvian Ministry of Foreign Affairs about relations with Romania 
 Russia 1920-10-04 and again 1991-10-04 * Until 1917, Latvia had been part of the Russian empire. Following the Latvian declaration of independence, war broke out between Latvia and the Russian SFSR. * Diplomatic relations between the two countries were first established in 1920, following the conclusion of a Soviet-Latvian peace treaty on August 11, 1920. Text in League of Nations Treaty Series, vol. 2, pp. 196-231 The treaty was ratified by the Latvian Constituent Assembly on September 2, and by the Latvian government on September 25. On the Russian side, it was ratified by the Pan Russian Central Executive Committee on September 9. Ratification letters were exchanged between the two governments in Moscow on October 4, the date on which in entered into effect. These relations lasted until the Soviet take over of Latvia in 1940. * Following the collapse of the Soviet Union, the Russian government recognized the independence of Latvia on August 24, 1991. 
 Serbia 2001-01-19 * Latvia has a non resident ambassador in Riga (in the Foreign Ministry). * Serbia is represented in Latvia through its embassy in Stockholm (Sweden). * Latvian Foreign Ministry about relations with Serbia * Serbian Ministry of Foreign Affairs about relations with Latvia 
 Slovakia *Both countries established direct diplomatic relations on January 1, 1993. Latvia is represented in Slovakia through its embassy in Vienna (Austria). Slovakia has an embassy in Riga. Both countries are full members of NATO and of the European Union. Latvian Foreign Minister Indulis Berzins and his Slovak counterpart Eduard Kukan met in Riga in 2000. 
 Ukraine 1992-02-12 * Latvia has an embassy in Kiev and 2 honorary consulates (in Lviv and Odessa). Latvian embassy in Kiev * Ukraine has an embassy in Riga and an honorary consulate in Ventspils. Ukrainian embassy in Riga * There are around 92,000 Ethnic Ukrainians living in Latvia. * Latvian Ministry of Foreign Affairs about relations with Ukraine 
 United Kingdom 1991-09 * Britain had strong links with Latvia before the Soviet occupation and annexation in 1940, which the UK never recognised de jure. * The UK recognised the restoration of Latvian independence on August 27, 1991. * The United Kingdom has an embassy in Riga. UK embassy in Riga * Latvia has an embassy in London and 3 honorary consulates (in Manchester, Scotland and Wales). Latvian embassy in London * There were 26,000 Latvian people registered as living in the United Kingdom in 2010. Office of National Statistics, Population survey 2010 accessed 18 September 2010 * Both countries are full members of NATO and of the European Union. * British Foreign and Commonwealth Office about relations with Latvia * Latvian Ministry of Foreign Affairs about relations with the United Kingdom 
 United States 1922-07-28 See Latvia  United States relations * The U.S. Legation in Riga was officially established on November 13, 1922 and served as the headquarters for U.S. representation in the Baltics during the interwar era. The Soviet invasion forced the closure of the legation on September 5, 1940, but Latvian representation in the United States has continued uninterrupted for 85 years. * The U.S. Embassy in Latvia is located in Riga. * 

==See also==
* Ministry of Foreign Affairs (Latvia)
* List of diplomatic missions in Latvia
* List of diplomatic missions of Latvia

==References==

 

[[Lebanon]]

Lebanon ( or ; or ; Lebanese Arabic: ; Aramaic: ), spoken languages ( Arabic, French and English). officially the Lebanese Republic Republic of Lebanon is the most common phrase used by Lebanese government agencies. The phrase Lebanese Republic is a literal translation of the official Arabic and French names that is not used in today's world. Lebanese Arabic is the most common language spoken among the citizens of Lebanon. ( ; Lebanese Arabic: ), is a country in Western Asia. It is bordered by Syria to the north and east and Israel to the south. Lebanon's location at the crossroads of the Mediterranean Basin and the Arabian hinterland has dictated its rich history and shaped a cultural identity of religious and ethnic diversity. 

The earliest evidence of civilization in Lebanon dates back more than seven thousand years, predating recorded history. Lebanon was the home of the Phoenicians, a maritime culture that flourished for over a thousand years (c.1550539BC). In 64BC, the region came under the rule of the Roman Empire, and eventually became one of the Empire's leading centers of Christianity. In the Mount Lebanon range a monastic tradition known as the Maronite Church was established. As the Arab Muslims conquered the region, the Maronites held onto their religion and identity. However, a new religious group, the Druze, established themselves in Mount Lebanon as well, a religious divide that would last for centuries. During the Crusades, the Maronites re-established contact with the Roman Catholic Church and asserted their communion with Rome. The ties they established with the Latins have influenced the region into the modern era.

The region eventually came under the rule of the Ottoman Empire, a political empire that came to power from 1299-1923. Following the collapse of the Empire after World War I, the five provinces that constitute modern Lebanon were mandated to France. The French expanded the borders of Mount Lebanon, which was mostly populated by Maronites and Druze, to include more Muslims. Lebanon gained independence in 1943, establishing a unique political system"confessionalism"that is a power-sharing mechanism based on religious communities. Bechara El Khoury (independent Lebanon's first president), Riad El-Solh (Lebanon's first prime minister) and Emir Majid Arslan (Lebanon's first minister of defence) are considered the founders of the modern Republic of Lebanon and are national heroes for having led the country's independence. French troops withdrew from Lebanon in 1946. 

Before the Lebanese Civil War (19751990), the country experienced a period of relative calm and renowned prosperity, driven by tourism, agriculture, commerce, and banking. Because of its financial power and diversity, Lebanon was known in its heyday as "theSwitzerland of the East". It attracted so many tourists that the capital, Beirut, was referred to as "theParis of the Middle East". At the end of the war, there were extensive efforts to revive the economy and rebuild national infrastructure. 

== Etymology ==

The name Lebanon originates from the Semitic root LBN (), meaning "white", likely a reference to the snow-capped Mount Lebanon. 

Occurrences of the name have been found in different texts from the library of Ebla, which date to the third millennium BC, nearly 70 times in the Hebrew Bible, and three of the twelve tablets of the Epic of Gilgamesh (perhaps as early as 2100 BC). 

The name is recorded in Ancient Egyptian as Rmnn, where R stood for Canaanite L. 

==History==

===Ancient Lebanon===

Map of Phoenicia and trade routes
Evidence of an early settlement in Lebanon was found in Byblos, which is considered to be one of the oldest continuously inhabited cities in the world,. The evidence dates back to earlier than 5000 BC. Archaeologists discovered remnants of prehistoric huts with crushed limestone floors, primitive weapons, and burial jars left by the Neolithic and Chalcolithic fishing communities who lived on the shore of the Mediterranean Sea over 7,000 years ago. 

Lebanon was a part of northern Canaan, and consequently became the homeland of Canaanite descendants  the Phoenicians, a seafaring people that spread across the Mediterranean before the rise of Cyrus the Great. Their most famous colonies were Carthage in todays Tunisia and Cdiz in todays Spain. The Phoenicians are best known as the inventors of the alphabet, among many other things. After two centuries of Persian rule, Macedonian ruler Alexander the Great attacked and burned Tyre, the most prominent Phoenician city. Throughout the subsequent centuries leading up to recent times, the country became part of numerous succeeding empires, among them Egyptian Empire, Persian, Assyrian, Hellenistic, Roman, Armenian, Eastern Roman, Arab (Umayyad, Abbasid, Fatimid), Seljuk, Mamluk, the Crusader's state of County of Tripoli founded by Raymond IV of Toulouse that encompassed most of present day Lebanon, and the Ottoman Empire.

===Maronites, Druze, and the Crusades===
The Fall of Tripoli to the Egyptian Mamluks and destruction of the Crusader state, the County of Tripoli, 1289
The region that is now Lebanon, as with the rest of Syria and much of Anatolia, became a major center of Christianity in the Roman Empire during the early spread of the religion. During the late 4th and early 5th century, a hermit named Maron established a monastic tradition, focused on the importance of monotheism and asceticism, near the Syrian mountain range known as Mount Lebanon. The monks who followed Maron spread his teachings among the Syrians in the region. These Christians came to be known as Maronites and moved into mountains to avoid religious persecution by Roman authorities. 

During the 7th century the Muslim Arabs conquered Syria establishing a new regime to replace the Byzantines. Though Islam and the Arabic language were officially dominant under this new regime, the general populace still took time to convert from Christianity and the Syriac language. The Maronite community in particular clung stubbornly to its faith and managed to maintain a large degree of autonomy despite the succession of rulers over Syria.

During the 11th century the Druze faith emerged from a branch of Shia Islam. The new faith gained followers in the southern portion of Mount Lebanon. The Northern portion of Mount Lebanon was ruled by Druze feudal families to the early 14th century which was then brought to an end by the Mamluk invasion. The Maronite population increased gradually in Northern Mount Lebanon and the Druze have remained in Southern Mount Lebanon until the modern era. The South of current Lebanon (Jabal Amel), Baalbek and The Beqaa Valley was ruled by The Shia feudal families under the Mamluks and the Ottoman Empire. The major cities on the coast, Acre, Beirut, and others, were directly administered by the Muslim Caliphs and the people became more fully absorbed by the Arab culture.

Following the fall of Roman Anatolia to the Muslim Turks, the Byzantines put out a call to the Pope in Rome for assistance in the 11th century. The result was a series of wars known as the Crusades launched by the Franks in Western Europe to reclaim the former Byzantine Christian territories in the Eastern Mediterranean, especially Syria and Palestine (the Levant). The First Crusade succeeded in temporarily establishing the Kingdom of Jerusalem and the County of Tripoli as Roman Catholic Christian states along the coast. These crusader states made a lasting impact on the region, though their control was limited, and the region returned to full Muslim control after two centuries following the conquest by the Mamluks.

One of the most lasting effects of the Crusades in this region was the contact between the Franks (i.e. the French) and the Maronites. Unlike most other Christian communities in the eastern Mediterranean, who swore allegiance to Constantinople or other local patriarchs, the Maronites proclaimed allegiance to the Pope in Rome. As such the Franks saw them as Roman Catholic brethren. These initial contacts led to centuries of support for the Maronites from France and Italy, even after the fall of the Crusader states in the region.

===Ottoman Lebanon and French Mandate===

Fakhreddine II Palace, 17th century
1862 map drawn by the French expedition of Beaufort d'Hautpoul, later used as a template for the 1920 borders of Greater Lebanon. 

During this period current Lebanon was divided into several provinces. The Northern and Southern Mount Lebanon, Tripoli, Baalbek and Beqaa Valley and Jabal Amel. 
In the Southern Mount Lebanon in 1590, Fakhr-al-Din II became successor to Korkmaz. He soon established his authority as paramount prince of the Druze in the Shouf area of Mount Lebanon. Eventually, Fakhr-al-Din II was appointed Sanjakbey (Governor) of several Ottoman sub-provinces, with responsibility for tax-gathering. He extended his control over a substantial part of Mount Lebanon and its coastal area, even building a fort as far inland as Palmyra. This over-reaching eventually became too much for Ottoman Sultan Murad IV, who sent a punitive expedition to capture him in 1633. He was taken to Istanbul, kept in prison for two years and then executed along with one of his sons in April 1635. Surviving members of Fakhr al-Din's family ruled a reduced area under closer Ottoman control until the end of the seventeenth century.

On the death of the last Maan emir, various members of the Shihab clan ruled Mount Lebanon until 1830. Approximately 10,000 Christians were killed by the Druzes during inter-communal violence in 1860. Shortly afterwards, the Emirate of Mount Lebanon that lasted about 400 years was replaced by the Mount Lebanon Mutasarrifate, as a result of a European-Ottoman treaty called the Rglement Organique.
The Baalbek and Beqaa Valley and Jabal Amel was ruled intermittently by various Shia feudal families, especially the Al Ali Alsagheer in Jabal Amel that remained in power until 1865 when Ottomans took direct ruling of the region.

In 1920, following WWI, the area of the Mutasarrifate, plus some surrounding areas which were predominantly Shia and Sunni, became a part of the state of Greater Lebanon under the French Mandate of Syria and Lebanon. In the first half of 1920, Lebanese territory was claimed as part of the Arab Kingdom of Syria, but shortly the Franco-Syrian War resulted in Arab defeat and capitulation of the Hashemites. By the end of the war, famine had killed an estimated 100,000 people in Beirut and Mount Lebanon, about 30% of the total population. 
Roman baths park on the Serail hill, Beirut.
On 1 September 1920, France reestablished Greater Lebanon after the Moutasarrifiya rule removed several regions belonging to the Principality of Lebanon and gave them to Syria. Lebanon was a largely Christian country (mainly Maronite territory with some Greek Orthodox enclaves) but it also included areas containing many Muslims (including Druze). On 1 September 1926, France formed the Lebanese Republic. A constitution was adopted on 25 May 1926 establishing a democratic republic with a parliamentary system of government.

===Independence===
Martyrs' Square in Beirut during celebrations marking the release by the French of Lebanon's government from Rashayya prison on November 22, 1943
Lebanon gained independence in 1943, while France was occupied by Germany. 
General Henri Dentz, the Vichy High Commissioner for Syria and Lebanon, played a major role in the independence of the nation. The Vichy authorities in 1941 allowed Germany to move aircraft and supplies through Syria to Iraq where they were used against British forces. The United Kingdom, fearing that Nazi Germany would gain full control of Lebanon and Syria by pressure on the weak Vichy government, sent its army into Syria and Lebanon.Needed.

After the fighting ended in Lebanon, General Charles de Gaulle visited the area. Under political pressure from both inside and outside Lebanon, de Gaulle recognized the independence of Lebanon. On 26 November 1941 General Georges Catroux announced that Lebanon would become independent under the authority of the Free French government. Elections were held in 1943 and on 8 November 1943 the new Lebanese government unilaterally abolished the mandate. The French reacted by imprisoning the new government. In the face of international pressure, the French released the government officials on 22 November 1943 and recognized the independence of Lebanon.

The allies kept the region under control until the end of World War II. The last French troops withdrew in 1946. Lebanon's unwritten National Pact of 1943 required that its president be Maronite Christian, its speaker of the parliament to be a Shiite Muslim, its prime minister be Sunni Muslim, and the Deputy Speaker of Parliament and the Deputy Prime Minister be Greek Orthodox. 

Lebanon's history since independence has been marked by alternating periods of political stability and turmoil interspersed with prosperity built on Beirut's position as a regional center for finance and trade. 

In May 1948, Lebanon supported neighbouring Arab countries in a war against Israel. While some irregular forces crossed the border and carried out minor skirmishes against Israel, it was without the support of the Lebanese government, and Lebanese troops did not officially invade. Lebanon agreed to support the forces with covering artillery fire, armored cars, volunteers and logistical support. On 56 June 1948, the Lebanese army  led by the then Minister of National Defence, Emir Majid Arslan  captured Al-Malkiyya. This was Lebanon's only success in the war.

100,000 Palestinians fled to Lebanon because of the war. Israel did not permit their return after the cease-fire. Today, more than 400,000 refugees remain in limbo, about half in camps. 

In 1958, during the last months of President Camille Chamoun's term, an insurrection broke out, instigated by Lebanese Muslims who wanted to make Lebanon a member of the United Arab Republic. Chamoun requested assistance, and 5,000 United States Marines were briefly dispatched to Beirut on July 15. After the crisis, a new government was formed, led by the popular former general Fuad Chehab.

With the defeat of the PLO in Jordan, many Palestinian militants relocated to Lebanon, increasing their armed campaign against Israel. The relocation of Palestinian bases also led to increasing sectarian tensions between Palestinians versus the Maronites and other Lebanese factions.

===Civil war and occupation===

The Green Line that separated west and east Beirut, 1982
In 1975, following increasing sectarian tensions, a full-scale civil war broke out in Lebanon. The Lebanese Civil War pitted a coalition of Christian groups against the joint forces of the PLO, left-wing Druze and Muslim militias. In June 1976 Syria sent in its own troops, ostensibly to restore peace. In October 1976 the Arab League agreed to establish a predominantly Syrian Arab Deterrent Force, which was charged with restoring calm. 

In 1982, the PLO attacks from Lebanon on Israel led to an Israeli invasion. A multinational force of American, French and Italian contingents (joined in 1983 by a British contingent) were deployed in Beirut after the Israeli siege of the city, to supervise the evacuation of the PLO. It returned in September 1982 after the assassination of Bashir Gemayel and subsequent fighting, during which a number of massacres were committed, such as in Damour, Noam Chomsky, Edward W. Said (1999): Fateful Triangle: The United States, Israel, and the Palestinians, South End Press, 1999, pp. 184185 in Sabra and Shatila, and in several refugee camps. The War of the Camps, Journal of Palestine Studies, Vol. 16, No. 1 (Autumn, 1986), pp. 191194 The multinational force was withdrawn in the spring of 1984, following a devastating bombing attack during the previous year.

According to a videotape released by Osama Bin Laden in 2004, images of the bombing of Lebanon were what made him conceive the attack on the United States on the 11th of September 2001, in order to deter further attacks resulting in the deaths of women and children. http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/world/middle_east/3966817.stm 

In September 1988, the Parliament failed to elect a successor to President Gemayel as a result of differences between the Christians, Muslims, and Syrians. The Arab League Summit of May 1989 led to the formation of a Saudi-Moroccan-Algerian committee to solve the crisis. On 16 September 1989 the committee issued a peace plan which was accepted by all. A ceasefire was established, the ports and airports were re-opened and refugees began to return. 

In the same month, the Lebanese Parliament agreed to the Taif Agreement, which included an outline timetable for Syrian withdrawal from Lebanon and a formula for the de-confessionalisation of the Lebanese political system. The war ended at the end of 1990 after sixteen years, resulting in massive loss of human life and property, while devastating the country's economy. It is estimated that 150,000 people were killed and another 200,000 wounded. Some 900,000 people, representing one-fifth of the pre-war population, were displaced from their homes. Parts of Lebanon were left in ruins. The Taif Agreement has still not been implemented in full and Lebanon's political system continues to be divided along sectarian lines.

===Withdrawal and aftermath===
Demonstrators calling for the withdrawal of Syrian forces.
The internal political situation in Lebanon significantly changed in early 2000s. After the Israeli withdrawal from southern Lebanon and the death of Hafez Al-Assad in 2000, the Syrian military presence faced criticism and resistance from the Lebanese population. 

On 14 February 2005, former Prime Minister Rafik Hariri was assassinated in a car bomb explosion. Leaders of the March 14 Alliance accused Syria of the attack, while the March 8 Alliance and Syrian officials claimed that the Mossad was behind the assassination. The Hariri assassination marked the beginning of a series of assassinations that resulted in the death of many prominent Lebanese figures. 2005: Bassel Fleihan, Lebanese legislator and Minister of Economy and Commerce; Samir Kassir, Columnist and Democratic Left Movement leader; George Hawi, former head of Lebanese Communist Party; Gibran Tueni, Editor in Chief of "An Nahar" newspaper. 2006: Pierre Gemayel, Minister of Industry. 2007: Walid Eido, MP; Antoine Ghanim, MP. 

The assassination triggered the Cedar Revolution, a series of demonstrations which demanded the withdrawal of Syrian troops from Lebanon and the establishment of an international commission to investigate the assassination. Under pressure from the West, Syria began withdrawing, and by 26 April 2005 all Syrian soldiers had returned to Syria. 

The UNSC Resolution 1595 called for an investigation into the assassination. The UN International Independent Investigation Commission published its preliminary findings on 20 October 2005 in the Mehlis report, which cited indications that the assassination was organized by Syrian and Lebanese intelligence services. 

On 12 July 2006, Hezbollah launched a series of rocket attacks and raids into Israeli territory, where they killed three Israeli soldiers and captured a further two. Israel responded with airstrikes and artillery fire on targets in Lebanon, and a ground invasion of southern Lebanon, resulting in the 2006 Lebanon War. The conflict was officially ended by the UNSC Resolution 1701 on 14 August 2006, which ordered a ceasefire. Some 1,191 Lebanese and 160 Israelis were killed in the conflict. Beirut's southern suburb was heavily damaged by Israeli airstrikes where Hezbollah military infrastructure was deeply embedded among the civilian population. 

In 2007, the Nahr al-Bared refugee camp became the center of the 2007 Lebanon conflict between the Lebanese Army and Fatah al-Islam. At least 169 soldiers, 287 insurgents and 47 civilians were killed in the battle. Funds for the reconstruction of the area have been slow to materialize. 

Syrian refugees in Lebanon.
Between 2006 and 2008, a series of protests led by groups opposed to the pro-Western Prime Minister Fouad Siniora demanded the creation of a national unity government, over which the mostly Shia opposition groups would have veto power. When mile Lahoud's presidential term ended in October 2007, the opposition refused to vote for a successor unless a power-sharing deal was reached, leaving Lebanon without a president.

On 9 May 2008, Hezbollah and Amal forces, sparked by a government declaration that Hezbollah's communications network was illegal, seized western Beirut, leading to the 2008 conflict in Lebanon. The Lebanese government denounced the violence as a coup attempt. At least 62 people died in the resulting clashes between pro-government and opposition militias. On 21 May 2008, the signing of the Doha Agreement ended the fighting. As part of the accord, which ended 18 months of political paralysis, Michel Suleiman became president and a national unity government was established, granting a veto to the opposition. The agreement was a victory for opposition forces, as the government caved in to all their main demands. 

In early January 2011, the national unity government collapsed due to growing tensions stemming from the Special Tribunal for Lebanon, which was expected to indict Hezbollah members for the Hariri assassination. The parliament elected Najib Mikati, the candidate for the Hezbollah-led March 8 Alliance, Prime Minister of Lebanon, making him responsible for forming a new government. Hezbollah leader Hassan Nasrallah insists that Israel was responsible for the assassination of Hariri. A report leaked by the Al-Akhbar newspaper in November 2010 stated that Hezbollah has drafted plans for a takeover of the country in the event that the Special Tribunal for Lebanon issues an indictment against its members. 
Saint Nicholas stairs, Achrafieh
In 2012, the Syrian civil war threatened to spill over in Lebanon, causing more incidents of sectarian violence and armed clashes between Sunnis and Alawites in Tripoli. As of 6 August 2013, more than 677,702 Syrian refugees are in Lebanon. As the number of Syrian refugees increases, the Lebanese Forces Party, the Kataeb Party, and the Free Patriotic Movement fear the countrys sectarian based political system is being undermined. 

On 27 December 2013, former Minister of Finance Mohamad Chatah, a senior aide to former Prime Minister of Lebanon Saad Hariri, was killed along with seven others in a car bomb explosion in Downtown Beirut Friday, a security source said. 
The 62-year-old was on his way to a March 14 coalition meeting at Hariris residence. 

==Geography==

Kadisha Valley
Lebanon from space. Snow cover can be seen on the western and eastern mountain ranges
Lebanon is located in Western Asia between latitudes 33 and 35 N and longitudes 35 and 37 E.

The country's surface area is 10452 sqkm of which 10230 sqkm is land. Lebanon has a coastline and border of 225 km on the Mediterranean sea to the west, a 375 km border shared with Syria to the north and east and a 79 km long border with Israel to the south. The border with the Israeli-occupied Golan Heights is disputed by Lebanon in a small area called Shebaa Farms. 

Lebanon is divided into four distinct physiographic regions: the coastal plain, the Lebanon mountain range, the Beqaa valley and the Anti-Lebanon mountains.

The narrow and discontinuous coastal plain stretches from the Syrian border in the north where it widens to form the Akkar plain to Ras al-Naqoura at the border with Israel in the south. The fertile coastal plain is formed of marine sediments and river deposited alluvium alternating with sandy bays and rocky beaches.
The Lebanon mountains rise steeply parallel to the Mediterranean coast and form a ridge of limestone and sandstone that runs for most of the country's length. The mountain range varies in width between 10 km and 56 km; it is carved by narrow and deep gorges. The Lebanon mountains peak at 3088 m above sea level in Qurnat as Sawda' in North Lebanon and gradually slope to the south before rising again to a height of 2695 m in Mount Sannine.
The Beqaa valley sits between the Lebanon mountains in the west and the Anti-Lebanon range in the east; it's a part of the Great Rift Valley system. The valley is 180 km long and 10 to wide, its fertile soil is formed by alluvial deposits.
The Anti-Lebanon range runs parallel to the Lebanon mountains, its highest peak is in Mount Hermon at 2814 m. 

The mountains of Lebanon are drained by seasonal torrents and rivers foremost of which is the 145 km long Leontes that rises in the Beqaa Valley to the west of Baalbek and empties into the Mediterranean Sea north of Tyre. Lebanon has 16 rivers all of which are non navigable; 13 rivers originate on the western face of the Lebanon range and run through the steep gorges and into the Mediterranean Sea, the other three arise in the Beqaa Valley. 

===Climate===

Lebanon has a moderate Mediterranean climate. In coastal areas, winters are generally cool and rainy whilst summers are hot and humid. In more elevated areas, temperatures usually drop below freezing during the winter with heavy snow cover that remains until early summer on the higher mountaintops. (Bonechi et al.) (2004) Golden Book Lebanon, p. 3, Florence, Italy: Casa Editrice Bonechi. ISBN 88-476-1489-9 Although most of Lebanon receives a relatively large amount of rainfall, when measured annually in comparison to its arid surroundings, certain areas in north-eastern Lebanon receive little because of rain shadow created by the high peaks of the western mountain range. 

===Environment===
The Lebanon cedar is the national emblem of Lebanon.
In ancient times, Lebanon was covered by large forests of cedar trees, the national emblem of the country. The forests cover 13.4% of the Lebanese land area; they are under constant threat from wildfires caused by the long dry summer season. 

As a result of longstanding exploitation, few old Cedar trees remain in pockets of forests in Lebanon, but there is an active program to conserve and regenerate the forests. The Lebanese approach has emphasized natural regeneration over planting by creating the right conditions for germination and growth. The Lebanese state has created several nature reserves that contain cedars, including the Shouf Biosphere Reserve, the Jaj Cedar Reserve, the Tannourine Reserve, the Ammouaa and Karm Shbat Reserves in the Akkar district, and the Forest of the Cedars of God near Bsharri. Talhouk, S. N. & Zurayk, S. 2003. Conifer conservation in Lebanon. Acta Hort. 615: 411414. Semaan, M. & Haber, R. 2003. In situ conservation on Cedrus libani in Lebanon. Acta Hort. 615: 415417. 

In 2010, the Environment Ministry set a 10-year plan to increase the national forest coverage by 20% that is equivalent to the planting of two million new trees each year. The plan, which was funded by the United States Agency for International Development (USAID), and implemented by the United States U.S. Forest Service (USFS), through the Lebanon Reforestation Initiative (LRI), was inaugurated in 2011 by planting cedar, pine, wild almond, juniper, fir and oak and other seedlings in ten regions around Lebanon. 

==Government and politics==

The Lebanese parliament building at the Place de l'toile.
One of the many protests in Beirut
Lebanon is a parliamentary democracy, which implements a special system known as confessionalism. This system is intended to deter sectarian conflict and attempts to fairly represent the demographic distribution of the 18 recognized religious groups in government. Lijphart, Arend. Multiethnic democracy, in S. Lipset (ed.), "The Encyclopedia of Democracy". London, Routledge, 1995, Volume III, pp. 853865 ISBN 0871878887. High-ranking offices are reserved for members of specific religious groups. The President, for example, has to be a Maronite Christian, the Prime Minister a Sunni Muslim, the Speaker of the Parliament a Shia Muslim, the Deputy Prime Minister and the Deputy Speaker of Parliament Eastern Orthodox. 

Until 1975, Freedom House considered Lebanon to be one of only two (together with Israel) politically free countries in the Middle East and North Africa region. The country lost this status with the outbreak of the Civil War, and never regained it again. Lebanon was rated as "Partly Free" in 2013. 

Until 2005, Palestinians were forbidden to work in over 70 jobs because they do not have Lebanese citizenship, but this was later reduced to around 20 as of 2007 after liberalization laws. In 2010, Palestinians were granted the same rights to work as other foreigners in the country. 

Lebanon's national legislature is the unicameral Parliament of Lebanon. Its 128 seats are divided equally between Christians and Muslims, proportionately between the 18 different denominations and proportionately between its 26 regions. Prior to 1990, the ratio stood at 6:5 in favor of Christians; however, the Taif Agreement, which put an end to the 19751990 civil war, adjusted the ratio to grant equal representation to followers of the two religions. The Parliament is elected for a four-year term by popular vote on the basis of sectarian proportional representation. 

The executive branch consists of the President, the head of state, and the Prime Minister, the head of government. The parliament elects the president for a non-renewable six-year term by a two-third majority. The president appoints the Prime Minister, following consultations with the parliament. The President and the Prime Minister form the Cabinet, which must also adhere to the sectarian distribution set out by confessionalism.

The next nation-wide elections are scheduled for November 2014. 

===Law===
There are 17 official religions in Lebanon, each with its own family law and religious courts. Law of 16 July 1962 concurring in the project of organization of the Sharia, with Sunni and Ja'afari Shii jurisdictions. 

The Lebanese legal system is based on the French system, and is a civil law country, with the exception for matters related to personal status (heritage, marriage, divorce, etc.), which are governed by a separate set of laws designed for each sectarian community. For instance, the Islamic personal status laws are inspired by the Sharia law. For Muslims, these tribunals deal with questions of marriage, divorce, custody, and inheritance and wills. For non-Muslims. personal status jurisdiction is split: the law of inheritance and wills falls under national civil jurisdiction, while Christian and Jewish religious courts are competent for marriage, divorce, and custody. Catholics can additionally appeal before the Vatican Rota court. 

The most notable set of codified laws is the Code des Obligations et des Contrats promulgated in 1932 and equivalent to the French Civil Code. Capital punishment is still used to sanction certain crimes. 

The Lebanese court system consists of three levels: courts of first instance, courts of appeal, and the court of cassation. The Constitutional Council rules on constitutionality of laws and electoral frauds. There also is a system of religious courts having jurisdiction over personal status matters within their own communities, with rules on matters such as marriage and inheritance. 

===Foreign relations===

Lebanon concluded negotiations on an association agreement with the European Union in late 2001, and both sides initialed the accord in January 2002. It is included in the European Union's European Neighbourhood Policy (ENP), which aims at bringing the EU and its neighbours closer.

Lebanon also has bilateral trade agreements with several Arab states and is working toward accession to the World Trade Organization.

Lebanon enjoys good relations with virtually all of the other Arab countries (despite historic tensions with Libya, the Palestinians, Syria and Iraq), and hosted an Arab League Summit in March 2002 for the first time in more than 35 years. Lebanon is a member of the Francophone countries and hosted the Francophone Summit in October 2002 as well as the Jeux de la Francophonie in 2009.

===Military===

Soldiers of the Lebanese army, 2009
The Lebanese Armed Forces (LAF) has 72,000 active personnel, including 1,100 in the air force, and 1,000 in the navy. 

The Lebanese Armed Forces' primary missions include defending Lebanon and its citizens against external aggression, maintaining internal stability and security, confronting threats against the country's vital interests, engaging in social development activities, and undertaking relief operations in coordination with public and humanitarian institutions. 

Lebanon is a major recipient of foreign military aid. With $400 million since 2005, it is the second largest per capita recipient of American military aid behind Israel. 

===Governorates and districts===

Lebanon is divided into six governorates (mohaafazaat, ;singular mohafazah, ) which are further subdivided into twenty-five districts (aqdyasingular: qadaa). The districts themselves are also divided into several municipalities, each enclosing a group of cities or villages. The governorates and their respective districts are listed below:

* Beirut Governorate
** The Beirut Governorate is not divided into districts and is limited to the city of Beirut
* Nabatieh Governorate (Jabal Amel)
** Bint Jbeil
** Hasbaya
** Marjeyoun
** Nabatieh
* Beqaa Governorate
** Baalbek
** Hermel
** Rashaya
** Western Beqaa (al-Beqaa al-Gharbi)
** Zahle
* North Governorate (al-Shamal)
** Akkar
** Batroun
** Bsharri
** Koura
** Miniyeh-Danniyeh
** Tripoli
** Zgharta
* Mount Lebanon Governorate (Jabal Lubnan)
** Aley
**Kamil DistrictIAley
** Baabda
** Jbeil
** Chouf
** Keserwan
** Matn
* South Governorate (al-Janoub)
** Jezzine
** Sidon (Saida)
** Tyre (Sur)

==Economy==

Graphical depiction of Lebanon 's product exports in 28 color-coded categories.
Lebanons economy follows a laissez-faire model. Most of the economy is dollarized, and the country has no restrictions on the movement of capital across its borders. The Lebanese governments intervention in foreign trade is minimal. 

The Lebanese economy grew 8.5% in 2008 and a revised 9% in 2009 despite a global recession. Real GDP growth is estimated to have slowed from 7.5% in 2010 to 1.5% in 2011, according to IMF preliminary estimates, with nominal GDP estimated at $41.5 billion in 2011. The Banque du Liban projects real GDP growth could reach 4% in 2012, with 6% inflation (versus 4% in 2011). The political and security instability in the Arab world, especially in Syria, is expected to have a negative impact on the domestic business and economic environment. 

Lebanon has a very high level of public debt and large external financing needs. The 2010 public debt exceeded 150.7% of GDP, ranking fourth highest in the world as a percentage of GDP, though down from 154.8% in 2009. Finance minister Mohamad Chatah stated that the debt reached $87 billion in 2008 and would increase to $949 billion if privatization of two telecoms companies did not occur. The Daily Star wrote that exorbitant debt levels have "slowed down the economy and reduced the government's spending on essential development projects." 

The urban population in Lebanon is noted for its commercial enterprise. Emigration has yielded Lebanese "commercial networks" throughout the world. Remittances from Lebanese abroad total $8.2 billion and account for one fifth of the country's economy. Lebanon has the largest proportion of skilled labor among Arab States. United Nations Population Fund. 

The Investment Development Authority of Lebanon was established with the aim of promoting investment in Lebanon. In 2001, Investment Law No.360 was enacted to reinforce the organisation's mission.

The agricultural sector employs 12% of the total workforce. Jean Hayek et al, 1999. The Structure, Properties, and Main Foundations of the Lebanese Economy. In The Scientific Series in Geography, Grade 11, 110114. Beirut: Dar Habib. Agriculture contributed to 5.9% of the country's GDP in 2011. Lebanon's proportion of cultivable land is the highest in the Arab world, Major produce includes apples, peaches, oranges, and lemons. 

The commodities market in Lebanon includes substantial gold coin production, however according to International Air Transport Association (IATA) standards, they must be declared upon exportation to any foreign country. http://www.iatatravelcentre.com/LB-Lebanon-customs-currency-airport-tax-regulations-details.htm 

Oil has recently been discovered inland and in the seabed between Lebanon, Cyprus, Israel and Egypt and talks are underway between Cyprus and Egypt to reach an agreement regarding the exploration of these resources. The seabed separating Lebanon and Cyprus is believed to hold significant quantities of crude oil and natural gas. 

Industry in Lebanon is mainly limited to small businesses that reassemble and package imported parts. In 2004, industry ranked second in workforce, with 26% of the Lebanese working population, and second in GDP contribution, with 21% of Lebanon's GDP. 

Nearly 65% of the Lebanese workforce attain employment in the services sector. The GDP contribution, accordingly, amounts to roughly 67.3% of the annual Lebanese GDP. However, dependence on the tourism and banking sectors leaves the economy vulnerable to political instability. 

Lebanese banks are high on liquidity and reputed for their security. Lebanon was one of the only seven countries in the world in which the value of the stock markets increased in 2008. 

On May 10, 2013 the Lebanese minister of energy and water clarified that seismic images of the Lebanese's sea bed are undergoing detailed explanation of their contents and that up till now, approximately 10% have been covered. Preliminary inspection of the results showed, with more than 50% probability, that 10% of Lebanon's exclusive economic zone contained up to 660 million barrels of oil and up to 301012 cu ft of gas. 

===History===
Lebanese real GDP growth
The 19751990 civil war heavily damaged Lebanon's economic infrastructure, cut national output by half, and all but ended Lebanon's position as a West Asian entrept and banking hub. The subsequent period of relative peace enabled the central government to restore control in Beirut, begin collecting taxes, and regain access to key port and government facilities. Economic recovery has been helped by a financially sound banking system and resilient small- and medium-scale manufacturers, with family remittances, banking services, manufactured and farm exports, and international aid as the main sources of foreign exchange. 

Until July 2006, Lebanon enjoyed considerable stability, Beirut's reconstruction was almost complete, and increasing numbers of tourists poured into the nation's resorts. The economy witnessed growth, with bank assets reaching over 75 billion US dollars, Market capitalization was also at an all time high, estimated at $10.9 billion at the end of the second quarter of 2006. The month-long 2006 war severely damaged Lebanon's fragile economy, especially the tourism sector. According to a preliminary report published by the Lebanese Ministry of Finance on 30 August 2006, a major economic decline was expected as a result of the fighting. 

Over the course of 2008 Lebanon rebuilt its infrastructure mainly in the real estate and tourism sectors, resulting in a comparatively robust post war economy. Major contributors to the reconstruction of Lebanon include Saudi Arabia (with US$ 1.5 billion pledged), the European Union (with about $1 billion) and a few other Persian Gulf countries with contributions of up to $800 million. 

====Tourism====

Baalbek, temple of Jupiter
The tourism industry accounts for about 10% of GDP. Lebanon managed to attract around 1,333,000 tourists in 2008, thus placing it as rank 79 out of 191 countries. In 2009, the New York Times ranked Beirut the No. 1 travel destination worldwide due to its Unique Nightlife and Hospitality. In January 2010, the Ministry of Tourism announced that 1,851,081 tourists had visited Lebanon in 2009, a 39% increase from 2008. In 2009, Lebanon hosted the largest number of tourists to date, eclipsing the previous record set before the Lebanese Civil War. Tourist arrivals reached 2 million in 2010, but fell by 37% for the first 10 months of 2012, a decline caused by the war in neighbouring Syria. 

Saudi Arabia, Jordan, and Japan are the three most popular origin countries of foreign tourists to Lebanon. The recent influx of Japanese tourists is probably the reason for the recent rise in popularity of Japanese Cuisine in Lebanon. 

==Demographics==

Artisan in Tripoli, Lebanon
The population of Lebanon was estimated to be 4,125,247 in July 2010, however no official census has been conducted since 1932 due to the sensitive confessional political balance between Lebanon's various religious groups. Identifying all Lebanese as ethnically Arab is a widely employed example of panethnicity since in reality, the Lebanese are descended from many different peoples who have occupied, invaded, or settled this corner of the world, making Lebanon, a mosaic of closely interrelated cultures. While at first glance, this ethnic, linguistic, religious and denominational diversity might seem to cause civil and political unrest, for much of Lebanons history this multitudinous diversity of religious communities has coexisted with little conflict. 

The fertility rate fell from 5.00 in 1971 to 1.75 in 2004. Fertility rates vary considerably among the different religious groups: in 2004 it was 2.10 for Shiites, 1.76 Sunnis and 1.61 for Maronites. 

Lebanon has witnessed a series of migration waves: over 1,500,000 people emigrated from the country in the 19752011 period. Millions of people of Lebanese descent are spread throughout the world, mostly Christians, especially in Latin America. Brazil has the largest expatriate population. (See Lebanese Brazilians). Large numbers of Lebanese migrated to West Africa, particularly to the Ivory Coast (home to over 100,000 Lebanese) and Senegal (roughly 30,000 Lebanese). Australia is home to over 270,000 Lebanese (1999 est.). In Canada, there is also a large Lebanese diaspora of approximately 250,000-500,000 people having Lebanese descent. (see Lebanese Canadians).

As of 2012, Lebanon was host to over 460,000 refugees and asylum seekers: 405,425 Palestinians, 50,00060,000 from Iraq, over 80,000 from Syria, and 4,500 from Sudan. Their primary sources of income are UNRWA aid and menial labor sought in competition with about 300,000 Syrian guest workers. The latest estimates by the United Nations put the number of Syrian refugees at more than 850,000. 

In the last three decades, lengthy and destructive armed conflicts have ravaged the country. The majority of Lebanese have been affected by armed conflict; those with direct personal experience include 75% of the population, and most others report suffering a range of hardships. In total, almost the entire population (96%) has been affected in
some way  either personally or because of the wider consequences of armed conflict. 

===Religion===

Distribution of main religious groups of Lebanon according to last municipal election data. 
Lebanon is the most religiously diverse country in the Middle East. The CIA World Factbook estimates that the population is 59.7% Muslim and 39% Christian, with other religions and non-believers accounting for the remaining 1.3%. A study conducted by the Lebanese Information Center and based on voter registration numbers shows that by 2011 the Christian population was stable compared to that of previous years, making up 34.35% of the population; Muslims, the Druze included, were 65.47% of the population. 

It is believed that there has been a decline in the ratio of Christians to Muslims over the past 60 years, due to higher emigration rates of Christians, and a higher birth rate in the Muslim population. When the last census was held in 1932, Christians made up 53% of Lebanon's population. In 1956 it was estimated that the population was 54% Christian and 44% Muslim. 

A demographic study conducted by the research firm Statistics Lebanon found that approximately 27% of the population was Sunni, 27% Shi'a, 21% Maronite, 8% Greek Orthodox, 5% Druze, and 5% Greek Catholic, with the remaining 7% mostly belonging to smaller Christian denominations. 

Other sources like Euronews El santo padre sigue de visita en el Lbano Euronews . or the Spanish diary La Razn El Papa viaja maana al Lbano en medio de la tensin que vive la zona La Razn. Consultado el 15 de septiembre de 2012. estimate the percentage of Christians to be around 53%.

Because the relative size of confessional groups remains a sensitive issue, a national census has not been conducted since 1932. There are 18 state-recognized religious sects  4 Muslim, 12 Christian, 1 Druze, and 1 Jewish. 

The Shi'a residents primarily live in Southern Beirut, the Beqaa Valley, and Southern Lebanon. 

The Sunni residents primarily live in Tripoli, Western Beirut, the Southern coast of Lebanon, and Northern Lebanon. 

The Maronite residents primarily live in Eastern Beirut and the mountains of Lebanon. They are the largest Christian community in Lebanon. 

The Greek Orthodox, the second largest Christian community in Lebanon, primarily live in Koura, Beirut, Zahleh, Rachaya, Matn, Aley, Akkar, Tripoli, Hasbaya and Marjeyoun.

===Language===
Article 11 of Lebanon's Constitution states that "Arabic is the official national language. A law determines the cases in which the French language is to be used". The majority of Lebanese people speak Lebanese Arabic, while Modern Standard Arabic is mostly used in magazines, newspapers, and formal broadcast media. Lebanese Sign Language is the language of the deaf community. Almost 40% of Lebanese are considered francophone, and another 15% "partial francophone," and 70% of Lebanon's secondary schools use French as a second language of instruction. By comparison, English is used as a secondary language in 30% of Lebanon's secondary schools. The use of French is a legacy of France's historic ties to the region, including its League of Nations mandate over Lebanon following World War I; as of 2004, some 20% of the population used French on a daily basis. The use of Arabic by Lebanon's educated youth is declining, as they prefer to speak in French and English. 

English is increasingly used in science and business interactions. As of 2007 the presence of English in Lebanon has increased. Lebanese citizens of Armenian, Greek, or Kurdish descent often speak Armenian, Greek, or Kurdish with varying degrees of fluency. There are currently around 150,000 Armenians in Lebanon, or around 5% of the population. 

==Culture==

Temple of Bacchus is considered one of the best preserved Roman temples in the world, c. 150 AD
The culture of Lebanon is the cross culture of various civilizations over thousands of years. Originally home to the Phoenicians, and then subsequently conquered and occupied by the Assyrians, the Persians, the Greeks, the Romans, the Arabs, the Fatimids, the Crusaders, the Ottoman Turks and most recently the French, Lebanese culture has over the millennia evolved by borrowing from all of these groups. Lebanon's diverse population, composed of different ethnic and religious groups, has further contributed to the country's festivals, musical styles and literature as well as cuisine.

Despite the ethnic, linguistic, religious and denominational diversity of the Lebanese, they share an almost common culture. Stokes, Jamie. Encyclopedia of the Peoples of Africa and the Middle East, Facts On File, 2009, p. 406 ISBN 0816071586 Lebanese Arabic is universally spoken while food, music, and literature are deep-rooted in wider Mediterranean and Levantine norms. 

===Arts===
In literature, Khalil Gibran is particularly known for his book The Prophet (1923), which has been translated into more than twenty different languages. Several contemporary Lebanese writers have also achieved international success; including Elias Khoury, Amin Maalouf, Hanan al-Shaykh, and Georges Schehad.

In visual arts, Moustafa Farroukh was one of Lebanon's most prominent painters of the 20th century. Formally trained in Rome and Paris, he exhibited in venues from Paris to New York to Beirut over his career. Many more contemporary artists are currently active, such as Walid Raad, a contemporary media artist currently residing in New York. 

In the field of photography, the Arab Image Foundation has a collection of +400,000 photographs from Lebanon and the Middle East. The photographs can be viewed in a research center and various events and publications have been produced in Lebanon and worldwide to promote the collection.

===Popular culture===
Votive marble statue of a royal child, inscribed in Phoenician from the Eshmun sanctuary, c. 400s BC
The Music of Lebanon is pervasive in Lebanese society. While traditional folk music remains popular in Lebanon, modern music reconciling Western and traditional Arabic styles, pop, and fusion are rapidly advancing in popularity. Radio stations feature a variety of music, including traditional Lebanese, classical Arabic, Armenian McKenzie, Robert. Comparing Media from Around the World, Pearson/Allyn and Bacon, 2006, p. 372 ISBN 0-205-40242-9 and modern French, English, American, and Latin tunes. 

Cinema of Lebanon, according to film critic and historian, Roy Armes, was the only other cinema in the Arabic-speaking region, beside Egypt's, that could amount to a national cinema. Cinema in Lebanon has been in existence since the 1920s, and the country has produced over 500 films, 

The Media of Lebanon is not only a regional center of production but also the most liberal and free in the Arab world. According to Press freedom's Reporters Without Borders, "the media have more freedom in Lebanon than in any other Arab country". Despite its small population and geographic size, Lebanon plays an influential role in the production of information in the Arab world and is "at the core of a regional media network with global implications". 
Our Lady of Lebanon, a marian shrine and a pilgrimage site in Harissa.

===Holidays and festivals===

Beiteddine Palace, venue of the Beiteddine Festival
Lebanon celebrates national and both Christian and Muslim holidays. Christian holidays are celebrated following both the Gregorian Calendar and Julian Calendar. Greek Orthodox (with the exception of Easter), Catholics, Protestant, and Melkite Christians follow the Gregorian Calendar and thus celebrate Christmas on 25 December. Armenian Orthodox Christians celebrate Christmas on 6 January, as they follow the Julian Calendar. Muslim holidays are followed based on the Islamic lunar calendar. Muslim holidays that are celebrated include Eid al-Fitr (the three-day feast at the end of the Ramadan month), Eid al-Adha (The Feast of the Sacrifice) which is celebrated during the annual pilgrimage to Mecca and also celebrates Abrahams willingness to sacrifice his son to God,the Birth of the Prophet Muhammad, and Ashura (the Shiite Day of Mourning). Lebanon's National Holidays include Workers Day, Independence day, and Martyrs Day.

Music festivals, often hosted at historical sites, are a customary element of Lebanese culture. Among the most famous are Baalbeck International Festival, Byblos International Festival, Beiteddine International Festival, Jounieh International Festival, Broumana Festival, Batroun International Festival, Ehmej Festival, Dhour Chwer Festival and Tyr Festival. These festivals are promoted by Lebanon's Ministry of Tourism. Lebanon hosts about 15 concerts from international performers each year, ranking 1st for nightlife in the Middle East, and 6th worldwide. 

===Sports===

Lebanon has six ski resorts. Because of Lebanon's unique geography, it is possible to go skiing in the morning and swimming in the Mediterranean Sea in the afternoon. At the competitive level, basketball and football are among Lebanons most popular sports. Canoeing, cycling, rafting, climbing, swimming, sailing and caving are among the other common leisure sports in Lebanon. The Beirut Marathon is held every fall, drawing top runners from Lebanon and abroad. 

Rugby league is a relatively new but growing sport in Lebanon. The Lebanon national rugby league team participated in the 2000 Rugby League World Cup, and narrowly missed qualification for the 2008 and 2013 tournaments. Lebanon also took part in the 2009 European Cup where, after narrowly failing to qualify for the final, the team defeated Ireland to finish 3rd in the tournament. 

Lebanon participates in Basketball. The Lebanese National Team qualified for the FIBA World Championship 3 times in a row. Dominant Basketball teams in Lebanon are Sporting Al Riyadi Beirut, who are the current Arab and Asian champions, Club Sagesse who were able to earn the Asian and Arab championships before. Fadi El Khatib is the most decorated player in the Lebanese National Basketball League.

Football is also one of the more popular sports in the country with the Lebanese Premier League, whose most successful clubs are the Al-Ansar Club and the Nejmeh SC, with notable players being Roda Antar and Youssef Mohamad, the first Arab to captain a European premier league team.

In recent years, Lebanon has hosted the AFC Asian Cup and the Pan Arab Games. Lebanon hosted the 2009 Jeux de la Francophonie from 27 September to 6 October, and have participated in every Olympic Games since its independence, winning a total of four medals. 

Prominent Lebanese bodybuilders include Samir Bannout, Mohammad Bannout and Ahmad Haidar.

==Education==

155x155px

Listed by the World Economic Forums 2013 Global Information Technology Report, Lebanon has been ranked globally as the fourth best country for math and science education, and as the tenth best overall for quality of education. In quality of management schools, the country was ranked 13th worldwide. 

The United Nations assigned Lebanon an education index of 0.871 in 2008. The index, which is determined by the adult literacy rate and the combined primary, secondary, and tertiary gross enrollment ratio, ranked the country 88th out of the 177 countries participating. 

All Lebanese schools are required to follow a prescribed curriculum designed by the Ministry of Education. Some of the 1400 private schools offer IB programs, and may also add more courses to their curriculum with approval from the Ministry of Education. The first eight years of education are, by law, compulsory. 

Lebanon has forty-one nationally accredited universities, several of which are internationally recognized. The American University of Beirut (AUB) and the Universit Saint-Joseph (USJ) were the first Anglophone and the first Francophone universities to open in Lebanon, respectively. "Country Report: Lebanon". Retrieved 14 December 2006. eIFL.net Regional Workshop (2005) Universities in 
AUST campus in Beirut.
Lebanon, both public and private, largely operate in French or English. 

According to the Webometrics Ranking of World Universities's Excellence Rank, the top-ranking universities in the country are the American University of Beirut (951st worldwide), Universit Saint Joseph de Beyrouth (2332nd), American University of Science and Technology (5080th), and the Lebanese American University (2630th). 

==Health==
In 2010, spending on healthcare accounted for 7.03% of the country's GDP. In 2009, there were 31.29 physicians and 19.71 nurses per 10,000 inhabitants. The life expectancy at birth was 72.59 years in 2011, or 70.48 years for males and 74.80 years for females. 

By the end of the civil war, only one third of the countrys public hospitals were operational, each with an average of only 20 beds. By 2009 the country had 28
public hospitals, with a total of 2,550 beds. At public hospitals, hospitalized uninsured patients pay 5% of the bill, in comparison with 15% in private hospitals, with the Ministry of Public Health reimbursing the remainder. The Ministry of Public Health contracts with 138 private hospitals and 25 public hospitals. 

In 2011, there were 236,643 subsidized admissions to hospitals; 164,244 in private hospitals, and 72,399 in public hospitals. More patients visit private hospitals than public hospitals, because the private beds supply is higher. 

==See also==

* Index of Lebanon-related articles
* List of Lebanese people (diaspora)
* Outline of Lebanon

==Notes==

==References==

==Bibliography==
*

==Further reading==

*Arkadiusz, Plonka. Lide de langue libanaise daprs Sad Aql, Paris, Geuthner, 2004 (French) ISBN 2-7053-3739-3
* Firzli, Nicola Y. Al-Baath wa-Lubnn only ("The Baath and Lebanon"). Beirut: Dar-al-Tali'a Books, 1973
* Fisk, Robert. Pity the Nation: The Abduction of Lebanon. New York: Nation Books, 2002.
*Glass, Charles, "Tribes with Flags: A Dangerous Passage Through the Chaos of the Middle East", Atlantic Monthly Press (New York) and Picador (London), 1990 ISBN 0-436-18130-4
* Gorton, TJ and Feghali Gorton, AG. Lebanon: through Writers' Eyes. London: Eland Books, 2009.
* Hitti Philip K. History of Syria Including Lebanon and Palestine, Vol. 2 (2002) (ISBN 1-931956-61-8)
* Holst, Sanford. Phoenicians: Lebanon's Epic Heritage. Los Angeles: Cambridge and Boston Press, 2005.
* Norton, Augustus R. Amal and the Shi'a: Struggle for the Soul of Lebanon. Austin and London: University of Texas Press, 1987.
* Sobelman, Daniel. New Rules of the Game: Israel and Hizbollah After the Withdrawal From Lebanon, Jaffee Center for Strategic Studies, Tel-Aviv University, 2004.
* Riley-Smith, Jonathan. The Oxford Illustrated History of the Crusades. New York: Oxford University Press, 2001.
* Salibi, Kamal. A House of Many Mansions: The History of Lebanon Reconsidered. Berkeley: University of California Press, 1990.
* Schlicht, Alfred. The role of Foreign Powers in the History of Syria and Lebanon 17991861 in: Journal of Asian History 14 (1982)

==External links==

*Lebanon official government portal
*Lebanon Lebanon  Country Profile
*
*
*
*
*

 



[[History of Lebanon]]

The history of Lebanon covers the history of the modern Republic of Lebanon and the earlier emergence of Greater Lebanon under the French Mandate for Syria and Lebanon, as well as the previous history of the region, covered by the modern state.

==Prehistory==
Ksar Akil 10 km northeast of Beirut is a large rock shelter below a steep limestone cliff where excavations have shown occupational deposits reaching down to a depth of 23.6 m with one of the longest sequences of Paleolithic flint industries ever found in the Middle East. The first level of 8 m contained Upper Levalloiso-Mousterian remains with long and triangular Lithic flakes. The level above this showed industries accounting for all six stages of the Upper Paleolithic. An Emireh point was found at the first stage of this level (XXIV), at around 15.2 m below datum with a complete skeleton of an eight-year-old Homo Sapiens (called Egbert, now in the National Museum of Beirut after being studied in America) was discovered at 11.6 m, cemented into breccia. A fragment of a Neanderthal maxilla was also discovered in material from level XXVI or XXV, at around 15 m. Studies by Hooijer showed Capra and Dama were dominant in the fauna along with Stephanorhinus in later Levalloiso-Mousterian levels. 

It is believed to be one of the earliest known sites containing Upper Paleolithic technologies including Aurignacian. Artifacts recovered from the site include Ksar Akil flakes, the main type of tool found at the site, along with shells with holes and chipped edge modifications that are suggested to have been used as pendants or beads. These indicate that the inhabitants were among the first in Western Eurasia to use personal ornaments. Results from radiocarbon dating indicate that the early humans may have lived at the site approximately 45,000 years ago or earlier. The presence of personal ornaments at Ksar Akil is suggestive of modern human behavior. The findings of ornaments at the site are contemporaneous with ornaments found at Late Stone Age sites such as Enkapune ya muto. Douka, K. 2011. An Upper Palaeolithic shell scraper from Ksar Akil (Lebanon). Journal of Archaeological Science 38 (2):429-437 Kuhn, Steven L., Stiner, Mary C., Reese, David S., Gle, Erksin., Ornaments of the earliest Upper Paleolithic: New insights from the Levant, Edited by Henry C. Harpending, PNAS, June 5th 2001 

==Ancient antiquity==

===Canaanite period===
The earliest prehistoric cultures of Lebanon, such as the Qaraoun culture gave rise to the civilization of the Canaanite period, when the region was populated by ancient peoples, cultivating land and living in sophisticated societies during the 2nd millennium BC. Northern Canaanites are mentioned in the Bible as well as in other Semitic records from that period. Northern Canaanites are commonly thought to develop into Phoenicians by the 8th century BC - a claim which has recently been verified by genetic comparison analysis of ancient Canaanite and Phoenician burial sites in modern Lebanon. 

Canaanites were the creators of the oldest known 24-letter alphabet, a shortening of earlier 30-letter alphabets such as Proto-Sinaitic and Ugaritic. The Canaanite alphabet
later developed into the Phoenician one (with sister alphabets of Hebrew, Aramaic and Moabite), influencing the entire Mediterranean region.

===Phoenicia===

Map of Phoenicia.
The coastal plain of Lebanon is the historic home of a string of coastal trading cities of Semitic culture, which the Greeks termed Phoenicia, whose maritime culture flourished there for more than 1000 years. Ancient ruins in Byblos, Berytus (Beirut), Sidon, Sarepta (Sarafand), and Tyre show a civilized nation, with urban centres and sophisticated arts. Phoenicia was a cosmopolitan centre for many nations and cultures.

Its people roamed the Mediterranean seas, skilled in trade and in art, and founded trading colonies. The ancient Phoenicians set sail and colonized overseas. Their most famous colonies were Cadiz in todays Spain and Carthage in todays Tunisia.

Phoenicia maintained an uneasy tributary relationship with the neo-Assyrian and neo-Babylonian empires.

==Antiquity==
After gradual decline of its strength, Phoenician city-states on the Lebanese coast were conquered outright by the Achaemenid dynasty of Persia, which organized it as a satrapy, though many of Phoenician colonies continued their independent existence - most notably Carthage. The region of northern Canaan was subsequently merged into the empire of Alexander the Great, who notably conquered Tyre (332 BC) by extending a still-extant causeway from the mainland in a seven-month effort. After Alexander's death the region was absorbed into the Seleucid Empire.

With the rise of the Roman Empire and the decline of the Seleucids, the area was conquered by the Roman Empire in 63 BC. During the Herodian dynasty rule, the area has become part of Judaea. It was ruled by Herodian descendants also when Judea itself became a Roman Province in 6 CE, up until the death of Agrippa II in the year 92. Agrippa II was a Roman ally during the Great Judean Revolt of 6673 CE, supporting Roman armies with Iturean troops. Following Agrippa II's death, his kingdom was divided between Roman Syria and Roman Judea. In the final consequences of the Jewish-Roman Wars, the region of modern Lebanon became part of Syria Palaestina since 135.

Christianity was introduced to coastal plane of Mount Lebanon from neighboring Galilee, already in the 1st century. The region, as with the rest of Syria and much of Anatolia, became a major center of Christianity. In the 4th century it was incorporated into Christian Byzantine Empire. Mount Lebanon and its coastal plane became part of the Diocese of the East, divided to provinces of Phoenice Paralia and Phoenice Libanensis (which also extended over large parts of modern Syria).

During the late 4th and early 5th century, a hermit named Maron established a monastic tradition, focused on the importance of monotheism and asceticism, near the Syrian mountain range known as Mount Lebanon. The monks who followed Maron spread his teachings among the Syrians in the region. These Christians came to be known as Maronites and moved into mountains to avoid religious persecution by Roman authorities. Dalyrmple (1997), pg. 305. 

==Middle Ages==

===Arab rule===

During the 7th century the Muslim Arabs conquered Syria soon after the death of Prophet Muhammad establishing a new regime to replace the Romans (or Byzantines as the Eastern Romans are sometimes called). Though Islam and the Arabic language were officially dominant under this new regime, the general populous still took time to convert from Christianity and the Syriac language. The Maronite community in particular clung stubbornly to its faith and managed to maintain a large degree of autonomy despite the succession of rulers over Syria. Muslim influence increased greatly in the seventh century when the Umayyad capital was established at nearby Damascus.

During the 11th century the Druze faith emerged from a branch of Islam. The new faith gained followers in the southern portion of Mount Lebanon. The Maronites and the Druze divided Mount Lebanon until the modern era. The major cities on the coast, Acre, Beirut, and others, were directly administered by the Muslim Caliphs and the people became more fully absorbed by Arab culture.

===Crusader kingdoms===
Following the fall of Roman/Christian Anatolia to the Muslim Turks, the Romans put out a call to the Pope in Rome for assistance in the 11th century. The result was a series of wars known as the Crusades launched by Latin Christians (of mainly French origin) in Western Europe to reclaim the former Roman territories in the Eastern Mediterranean, especially Syria and Palestine (the Levant). Lebanon was in the main path of the First Crusade's advance on Jerusalem. Frankish nobles occupied these present-day Lebanon as part of the southeastern Crusader States. The southern half of present-day Lebanon formed the northern march of the Kingdom of Jerusalem; the northern half was the heartland of the County of Tripoli. Although Saladin eliminated Christian control of the Holy Land around 1190, the Crusader states in Lebanon and Syria were better defended.

One of the most lasting effects of the Crusades in this region was the contact between the crusaders (mainly French) and the Maronites. Unlike most other Christian communities in the region, who swore allegiance to Constantinople or other local patriarchs, the Maronites proclaimed allegiance to the Pope in Rome. As such the Franks saw them as Roman Catholic brethren. These initial contacts led to centuries of support for the Maronites from France and Italy, even after the later fall of the Crusader states in the region.

===Mamluk rule===
Muslim control of Lebanon was reestablished in the late 13th century under the Mamluk sultans of Egypt. Lebanon was later contested between Muslim rulers until the Ottoman Empire solidified authority over the eastern Mediterranean.

Ottoman control was uncontested during the early modern period, but the Lebanese coast became important for its contacts and trades with Venice and other Italian city-states.

The mountainous territory of Mount Lebanon has long been a shelter for minority and persecuted groups, including its historic Maronite Christian majority along with Druze, and local Shi'a Muslims. It was an autonomous Druze region of the Ottoman empire.

==Ottoman rule==
The Ottoman Turks formed an empire starting from the 14th century which came to encompass the Balkans, Middle East and North Africa. The Ottoman sultan, Selim I (151620), after defeating the Persians, conquered the Mamluks. His troops, invading Syria, destroyed Mamluk resistance in 1516 at Marj Dabaq, north of Aleppo. Text used in this cited section originally came from: Lebanon Country Study (1987) from the Library of Congress Country Studies project. 

During the conflict between the Mamluks and the Ottomans, the amirs of Lebanon linked their fate to that of Ghazali, governor (pasha) of Damascus. He won the confidence of the Ottomans by fighting on their side at Marj Dabaq and, apparently pleased with the behavior of the Lebanese amirs, introduced them to Salim I when he entered Damascus. Salim I, whose treasury was depleted by the wars, decided to grant the Lebanese amirs a semiautonomous status in exchange for their acting as "tax-farmers". The Ottomans, through two great Druze feudal families, the Maans and the Shihabs, ruled Lebanon until the middle of the nineteenth century. During Ottoman rule the term Syria was used to designate the approximate area included in present-day Lebanon, Syria, Jordan, and Israel/Palestine. 

===The Maans, 1120-1697===
The Maans came to Lebanon in from Iraq sometime in the 11th or 12th centuries. They settled on the southwestern slopes of the Lebanon Mountains and soon adopted the Druze religion. Their authority began to rise with Fakhr ad-Din I, who was permitted by Ottoman authorities to organize his own army, and reached its peak with Fakhr ad-Din II (15701635). The existence of "Fakhr ad-Din I" has been questioned by some scholars. Salibi, Kemal: The Secret of the House of Man, International Journal of Middle East Studies, Vol. 4 (1973), pp 272-287 

Although Fakhr ad-Din II's aspirations toward complete independence for Lebanon ended tragically, he greatly enhanced Lebanon's military and economic development. Noted for religious tolerance, Fakhr ad-Din attempted to merge the country's different religious groups into one Lebanese community. In an effort to attain complete independence for Lebanon, he concluded a secret agreement with Ferdinand I, grand duke of Tuscany.
Following his return from Tuscany, Fakhr ad-Din II, realizing the need for a strong and disciplined armed force, channeled his financial resources into building a regular army. This army proved itself in 1623, when Mustafa Pasha, the new governor of Damascus, underestimating the capabilities of the Lebanese army, engaged it in battle and was decisively defeated at Anjar in the Biqa Valley. 

In addition to building up the army, Fakhr ad-Din II, who became acquainted with Italian culture during his stay in Tuscany, initiated measures to modernize the country. After forming close ties and establishing diplomatic relations with Tuscany, he brought in architects, irrigation engineers, and agricultural experts from Italy in an effort to promote prosperity in the country. He also strengthened Lebanon's strategic position by expanding its territory, building forts as far away as Palmyra in Syria, and gaining control of Palestine. Finally, the Ottoman sultan Murad IV of Istanbul, wanting to thwart Lebanon's progress toward complete independence, ordered Kutshuk, then governor of Damascus, to attack the Lebanese ruler. This time Fakhr ad-Din was defeated, and he was executed in Istanbul in 1635. No significant Maan rulers succeeded Fakhr ad-Din II. 

===The Shihabs, 1697-1842===
The Shihabs succeeded the Maans in 1697. They originally lived in the Hawran region of southwestern Syria and settled in Wadi al-Taym in southern Lebanon. The most prominent among them was Bashir Shihab II, who was much like his predecessor, Fakhr ad Din II. His ability as a statesman was first tested in 1799, when Napoleon besieged Acre, a well-fortified coastal city in Palestine, about forty kilometers south of Tyre. Both Napoleon and Al Jazzar, the governor of Acre, requested assistance from the Shihab leader; Bashir, however, remained neutral, declining to assist either combatant. Unable to conquer Acre, Napoleon returned to Egypt, and the death of Al Jazzar in 1804 removed Bashir's principal opponent in the area. The Shihabs were originally a Sunni Muslim family, but had converted to Christianity. 

===The rise and fall of Emir Bashir II===
In 1788 Bashir Shihab II (sometimes spelled Bachir in French sources) would rise to become the Emir. Born into poverty, he was elected emir upon the abdication of his predecessor, and would rule under Ottoman suzerainty, being appointed wali or governor of Mt Lebanon, the Biqa valley and Jabal Amil. Together this is about two thirds of modern day Lebanon. He would reform taxes and attempt to break the feudal system, in order to undercut rivals, the most important of which was also named Bashir: Bashir Jumblatt, whose wealth and feudal backers equaled or exceeded Bashir II  and who had increasing support in the Druze community. In 1822 the Ottoman wali of Damascus went to war with Acre, which was allied with Muhammad Ali, the pasha of Egypt. As part of this conflict one of the most remembered massacres of Maronite Christians by Druze forces occurred, forces that were aligned with the wali of Damascus. Jumblatt represented the increasingly disaffected Druze, who were both shut out from official power and angered at the growing ties with the Maronites by Bashir II, who was himself a Maronite Christian.

Bashir II was overthrown as wali when he backed Acre, and fled to Egypt, later to return and organize an army. Jumblatt gathered the Druze factions together, and the war became sectarian in character: the Maronites backing Bashir II, the Druze backing Bashir Jumblatt. Jumblatt declared a rebellion, and between 1821 and 1825 there were massacres and battles, with the Maronites attempting to gain control of the Mt. Lebanon district, and the Druze gaining control over the Biqa valley. In 1825 Bashir II defeated his rival and killed him after the battle of al Simqaniya. Bashir II was not a forgiving man and repressed the Druze, particularly in and around Beirut.

Bashir II, who had come to power through local politics and nearly fallen from power because of his increasing detachment from them, reached out for allies, allies who looked on the entire area as the Orient and who could provide trade, weapons and money, without requiring fealty and without, it seemed, being drawn into endless internal squabbles. He disarmed the Druze and allied with France, governing in the name of the Egyptian Pasha Muhammad Ali, who entered Lebanon and formally took overlordship in 1832. For the remaining 8 years, the sectarian and feudal rifts of the 18211825 conflict were heightened by the increasing economic isolation of the Druze, and the increasing wealth of the Maronites.

During the nineteenth century the town of Beirut became the most important port of the region, supplanting Acre further to the south. This was mostly because Mount Lebanon became a centre of silk production for export to Europe. This industry made the region wealthy, but also dependent on links to Europe. Since most of the silk went to Marseille, the French began to have a great impact in the region.

===Sectarian conflict: European Powers begin to intervene===

The discontent grew to open rebellion, fed by both Ottoman and British money and support: Bashir II fled, the Ottoman empire reasserted control and Mehmed Hsrev Pasha, whose sole term as Grand Vizier ran from 1839 to 1841, appointed another member of the Shihab family, who styled himself Bashir III. Bashir III, coming on the heels of a man who by guile, force and diplomacy had dominated Mt Lebanon and the Biqa for 52 years, did not last long. In 1841 conflicts between the impoverished Druze and the Maronite Christians exploded: There was a massacre of Christians by the Druze at Deir al Qamar, and the fleeing survivors were slaughtered by Ottoman regulars. The Ottomans attempted to create peace by dividing Mt Lebanon into a Christian district and a Druze district, but this would merely create geographic powerbases for the warring parties, and it plunged the region back into civil conflict which included not only the sectarian warfare but a Maronite revolt against the Feudal class, which ended in 1858 with the overthrow of the old feudal system of taxes and levies. The situation was unstable: the Maronites lived in the large towns, but these were often surrounded by Druze villages living as perioikoi.
Christian refugees during the 1860 strife between Druze and Maronites in Lebanon
In 1860, this would boil back into full scale sectarian war, when the Maronites began openly opposing the power of the Ottoman Empire. Another destabilizing factor was France's support for the Maronite Christians against the Druze which in turn led the British to back the Druze, exacerbating religious and economic tensions between the two communities. The Druze took advantage of this and began burning Maronite villages. The Druze had grown increasingly resentful of the favoring of the Maronites by Bashir II, and were backed by the Ottoman Empire and the wali of Damascus in an attempt to gain greater control over Lebanon; the Maronites were backed by the French, out of both economic and political expediency. The Druze began a military campaign that included the burning of villages and massacres, while Maronite irregulars retaliated with attacks of their own. However, the Maronites were gradually pushed into a few strongholds and were on the verge of military defeat when the Concert of Europe intervened White (1899) and established a commission to determine the outcome. Shehadi (1992) The French forces deployed there were then used to enforce the final decision. The French accepted the Druze as having established control and the Maronites were reduced to a semi-autonomous region around Mt Lebanon, without even direct control over Beirut itself. The Province of Lebanon that would be controlled by the Maronites, but the entire area was placed under direct rule of the governor of Damascus, and carefully watched by the Ottoman Empire.

The long siege of Deir al Qamar found a Maronite garrison holding out against Druze forces backed by Ottoman soldiers; the area in every direction was despoiled by the besiegers. In July 1860, with European intervention threatening, the Turkish government tried to quiet the strife, but Napoleon III of France sent 7,000 troops to Beirut and helped impose a partition: The Druze control of the territory was recognized as the fact on the ground, and the Maronites were forced into an enclave, arrangements ratified by the Concert of Europe in 1861. They were confined to a mountainous district, cut off from both the Biqa and Beirut, and faced with the prospect of ever-growing poverty. Resentments and fears would brood, ones which would resurface in the coming decades.

It is estimated that more than 4,000 Christians were killed in the conflict, with another 4,000 dying of destitution. Furthermore, more than 100,000 were made homeless. Salibi (1977) 

Lebanese soldiers, 1861-1914

===Rising prosperity and peace===
Lebanese dress from the late 19th century.
The remainder of the 19th century saw a relative period of stability, as Muslim, Druze and Maronite groups focused on economic and cultural development which saw the founding of the American University of Beirut and a flowering of literary and political activity associated with the attempts to liberalize the Ottoman Empire. Late in the century there was a short Druze uprising over the extremely harsh government and high taxation rates, but there was far less of the violence that had scalded the area earlier in the century.

In the approach to World War I, Beirut became a center of various reforming movements, and would send delegates to the Arab Syrian conference and Franco-Syrian conference held in Paris. There was a complex array of solutions, from pan-Arab nationalism, to separatism for Beirut, and several status quo movements that sought stability and reform within the context of Ottoman government. The Young Turk revolution brought these movements to the front, hoping that the reform of Ottoman Empire would lead to broader reforms. The outbreak of hostilities changed this, as Lebanon was to feel the weight of the conflict in the Middle East more heavily than most other areas occupied by the Syrians.

==League of Nations Mandate==

Greater Lebanon (green) in the Mandate of Syria

Following the collapse of the Ottoman Empire after World War I, the League of Nations mandated the five provinces that make up present-day Lebanon to the direct control of France. Initially the division of the Arabic-speaking areas of the Ottoman Empire were to be divided by the Sykes-Picot Agreement; however, the final disposition was at the San Remo conference of 1920, whose determinations on the mandates, their boundaries, purposes and organization was ratified by the League in 1921 and put into effect in 1922.

According to the agreements reached at San Remo, France had its control over what was termed Syria recognised, the French having taken Damascus in 1920. Like all formerly Ottoman areas, Syria was a Class A Mandate, deemed to "... have reached a stage of development where their existence as independent nations can be provisionally recognized subject to the rendering of administrative advice and assistance by a Mandatory until such time as they are able to stand alone. The wishes of these communities must be a principal consideration in the selection of the Mandatory." The entire French mandate area was termed "Syria" at the time, including the administrative districts along the Mediterranean coast. Wanting to maximize the area under its direct control, contain an Arab Syria centered on Damascus, and insure a defensible border, France moved the Lebanon-Syrian border to the Anti-Lebanon mountains, east of the Beqaa Valley, territory which had historically belonged to the province of Damascus for hundreds of years, and was far more attached to Damascus than Beirut by culture and influence. This doubled the territory under the control of Beirut, at the expense of what would become the state of Syria.

As a consequence of this also, the demographics of Lebanon were profoundly altered, as the added territory contained people who were predominantly Muslim or Druze: Lebanese Christians, of which the Maronites were the largest subgrouping, now constituted barely more than 50% of the population, while Sunni Muslims in Lebanon saw their numbers increase eightfold, and the Shi'ite Muslims fourfold. The Modern Lebanon's constitution, drawn up in 1926, specified a balance of power between the various religious groups, but France designed it to guarantee the political dominance of its Christian allies. The president was required to be a Christian (in practice, a Maronite), the prime minister a Sunni Muslim. On the basis of the 1932 census, parliament seats were divided according to a six-to-five Christian/Muslim ratio. The constitution gave the president veto power over any legislation approved by parliament, virtually ensuring that the 6:5 ratio would not be revised in the event that the population distribution changed. By 1960, Muslims were thought to constitute a majority of the population, which contributed to Muslim unrest regarding the political system.

==Republic of Lebanon==

===Independence and following years===

Lebanon gained independence in 1943, while France was occupied by Germany. General Henri Dentz, the Vichy High Commissioner for Syria and Lebanon, played a major role in the independence of both nations. The Vichy authorities in 1941 allowed Germany to move aircraft and supplies through Syria to Iraq where they were used against British forces. Britain, fearing that Nazi Germany would gain full control of Lebanon and Syria by pressure on the weak Vichy government, sent its army into Syria and Lebanon.

After the fighting ended in Lebanon, General Charles de Gaulle visited the area. Under various political pressures from both inside and outside Lebanon, de Gaulle decided to recognize the independence of Lebanon. On November 26, 1941, General Georges Catroux announced that Lebanon would become independent under the authority of the Free French government. Elections were held in 1943 and on November 8, 1943 the new Lebanese government unilaterally abolished the mandate. The French reacted by throwing the new government into prison. In the face of international pressure, the French released the government officials on November 22, 1943 and accepted the independence of Lebanon. The allies kept the region under control until the end of World War II. The last French troops withdrew in 1946.

Lebanon's history from independence has been marked by alternating periods of political stability and turmoil interspersed with prosperity built on Beirut's position as a freely trading regional center for finance and trade. Beirut became a prime location for institutions of international commerce and finance, as well as wealthy tourists, and enjoyed a reputation as the "Paris of the Middle East" until the outbreak of the Lebanese Civil War.

In the aftermath of the 1948 Arab-Israeli War, Lebanon became home to more than 110,000 Palestinian refugees.

===Economic prosperity and growing tensions===
In 1958, during the last months of President Camille Chamoun's term, an insurrection broke out, and 5,000 United States Marines were briefly dispatched to Beirut on July 15 in response to an appeal by the government. After the crisis, a new government was formed, led by the popular former general Fuad Chehab.

During the 1960s, Lebanon enjoyed a period of relative calm, with Beirut-focused tourism and banking sector-driven prosperity. Lebanon reached the peak of its economic success in the mid-1960s  the country was seen as a bastion of economic strength by the oil-rich Persian Gulf Arab states, whose funds made Lebanon one of the worlds fastest growing economies. This period of economic stability and prosperity was brought to an abrupt halt with the collapse of Yousef Beidas' Intra Bank, the country's largest bank and financial backbone, in 1966.

Additional Palestinian refugees arrived after the 1967 Arab-Israeli War. Following their defeat in the Jordanian civil war, thousands of Palestinian militiamen regrouped in Lebanon, led by Yasser Arafat's Palestine Liberation Organization, with the intention of replicating the modus operandi of attacking Israel from a politically and militarily weak neighbour. Starting in 1968, Palestinian militants of various affiliations began to use southern Lebanon as a launching pad for attacks on Israel. Two of these attacks led to a watershed event in Lebanon's inchoate civil war. In July 1968, a faction of George Habash's Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine (PFLP) hijacked an Israeli El Al civilian plane en route to Algiers; in December, two PFLP gunmen shot at an El Al plane in Athens, resulting in the death of an Israeli.

As a result, two days later, an Israeli commando flew into Beirut's international airport and destroyed more than a dozen civilian airliners belonging to various Arab carriers. Israel defended its actions by informing the Lebanese government that it was responsible for encouraging the PFLP. The retaliation, which was intended to encourage a Lebanese government crackdown on Palestinian militants, instead polarized Lebanese society on the Palestinian question, deepening the divide between pro- and anti-Palestinian factions, with the Muslims leading the former grouping and Maronites primarily constituting the latter. This dispute reflected increasing tensions between Christian and Muslim communities over the distribution of political power, and would ultimately foment the outbreak of civil war in 1975.

In the interim, while armed Lebanese forces under the Maronite-controlled government sparred with Palestinian fighters, Egyptian leader Gamal Abd al-Nasser helped to negotiate the 1969 "Cairo Agreement" between Arafat and the Lebanese government, which granted the PLO autonomy over Palestinian refugee camps and access routes to northern Israel in return for PLO recognition of Lebanese sovereignty. The agreement incited Maronite frustration over what were perceived as excessive concessions to the Palestinians, and pro-Maronite paramilitary groups were subsequently formed to fill the vacuum left by government forces, which were now required to leave the Palestinians alone. Notably, the Phalange, a Maronite militia, rose to prominence around this time, led by members of the Gemayel family. Smith (2006) pp. 310, 353. 

In September 1970 Suleiman Franjieh, who had left the country briefly for Latakia in the 1950s after being accused of killing hundreds of people including other Maronites, was elected president by a very narrow vote in parliament. In November, his personal friend Hafiz al-Asad, who had received him during his exile, seized power in Syria. Later, in 1976, Franjieh would invite the Syrians into Lebanon. . Reprint (possibly with different page numbers). 

For its part, the PLO used its new privileges to establish an effective "mini-state" in southern Lebanon, and to ramp up its attacks on settlements in northern Israel. Compounding matters, Lebanon received an influx of armed Palestinian militants, including Arafat and his Fatah movement, fleeing the 1970 Jordanian crackdown. The PLO's "vicious terrorist attacks in Israel" Chomsky (1999), p. 184 dating from this period were countered by Israeli bombing raids in southern Lebanon, where "150 or more towns and villages...have been repeatedly savaged by the Israeli armed forces since 1968," of which the village of Khiyam is probably the best-known example. Chomsky (1999), p. 191, quoting Guardian correspondent Irene Beeson Palestinian terror claimed 106 lives in northern Israel from 1967, according to official IDF statistics, while the Lebanese army had recorded "1.4 Israeli violations of Lebanese territory per day from 196874" Chomsky (1999), p. 74, citing Ha'aretz, June 22, 1982, and p. 191, citing The New York Times, October 2, 1977. Where Lebanon had no conflict with Israel during the period 19491968, after 1968 Lebanon's southern border began to experience an escalating cycle of attack and retaliation, leading to the chaos of the civil war, foreign invasions and international intervention. The consequences of the PLO's arrival in Lebanon continue to this day.

===The Lebanese Civil War: 19751990===

The Lebanese Civil War had its origin in the conflicts and political compromises of Lebanon's colonial period and was exacerbated by the nation's changing demographic trends, inter-religious strife, and proximity to Syria, the Palestine Liberation Organization, and Israel. By 1975, Lebanon was a religiously and ethnically diverse country with most dominant groups of Maronite Chrtistians, Orthodox Christians, Sunni Muslims and Shia Muslims; with significant minorities of Druze, Kurds, Armenians, and Palestinian refugees and their descendants.

Events and political movements that contributed to Lebanon's violent implosion include, among others, the departure of European colonial powers, the emergence of Arab Nationalism, Arab Socialism in the context of the Cold War, the Arab-Israeli Conflict, Ba'athism, the Iranian Revolution, Palestinian militants, Black September in Jordan, Islamic fundamentalism, and the IranIraq War.

In all, it is estimated that more than 100,000 were killed, and another 100,000 handicapped by injuries, during Lebanon's 16-year war. Up to one-fifth of the pre-war resident population, or about 900,000 people, were displaced from their homes, of whom perhaps a quarter of a million emigrated permanently. Thousands of people lost limbs during many stages of planting of land-mines.

The War can be divided broadly into several periods: The initial outbreak in the mid-1970s, the Syrian and then Israeli intervention of the late 1970s, escalation of the PLO-Israeli conflict in the early 1980s, the 1982 Israeli invasion, a brief period of multinational involvement, and finally resolution which took the form of Syrian occupation.

Constitutionally guaranteed Christian control of the government had come under increasing fire from Muslims and leftists, leading them to join forces as the National Movement in 1969, which called for the taking of a new census and the subsequent drafting of a new governmental structure that would reflect the census results. Political tension became military conflict, with full-scale civil war in April 1975. The leadership called for Syrian intervention in 1976, leading to the presence of Syrian troops in Lebanon, and an Arab summit in 1976 was called to stop the crisis.

In the south, military exchanges between Israel and the PLO led Israel to support Saad Haddad's South Lebanon Army (SLA) in an effort to establish a security belt along Israel's northern border, an effort which intensified in 1977 with the election of new Israeli prime minister Menachem Begin. Israel invaded Lebanon in response to Fatah attacks in Israel in March 1978, occupying most of the area south of the Litani River, and resulting in the evacuation of at least 100,000 Lebanese, Smith (2006), p. 356 as well as approximately 2,000 deaths. Newsweek, March 27, 1978; Time, April 3, 1978; cited in Chomsky, Towards a New Cold War, p. 485 n115) 

The UN Security Council passed Resolution 425 calling for an immediate Israeli withdrawal and creating the UN Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL), charged with maintaining peace. Israeli forces withdrew later in 1978, leaving an SLA-controlled border strip as a protective buffer against PLO cross-border attacks.

In addition to the fighting between religious groups, there was rivalry between Maronite groups. In June 1978 one of Suleiman Franjieh's sons, Tony, was killed along with his wife and infant daughter in a nighttime attack on their town, reportedly by Bashir Gemayel, Samir Geagea, and their Phalangist forces. Dalrymple, op. cit. 

Concurrently, tension between Syria and Phalange increased Israeli support for the Maronite group and led to direct Israeli-Syrian exchanges in April 1981, leading to American diplomatic intervention. Philip Habib was dispatched to the region to head off further escalation, which he successfully did via an agreement concluded in May.

Intra-Palestinian fighting and PLO-Israeli conflict continued, and July 24, 1981, Habib brokered a cease-fire agreement with the PLO and Israel: the two sides agreed to cease hostilities in Lebanon proper and along the Israeli border with Lebanon.

After continued PLO-Israeli exchanges, Israel invaded Lebanon on June 6 in Operation Peace for Galilee. By June 15, Israeli units were entrenched outside Beirut and Yassir Arafat attempted through negotiations to evacuate the PLO. It is estimated that during the entire campaign, approximately 20,000 were killed on all sides, including many civilians. A multinational force composed of U.S. Marines and French and Italian units arrived to ensure the departure of the PLO and protect civilians. Nearly 15,000 Palestinian militants were evacuated by September 1.

Although Bashir Gemayel did not cooperate with the Israelis publicly, his long history of tactical collaboration with Israel counted against him in the eyes of many Lebanese, especially Muslims. Although the only announced candidate for the presidency of the republic, the National Assembly elected him by the second narrowest margin in Lebanese history (57 votes out of 92) on August 23, 1982; most Muslim members of the Assembly boycotted the vote. Nine days before he was due to take office, Gemayel was assassinated along with twenty-five others in an explosion at the Kataeb party headquarters in Beirut's Christian neighborhood of Achrafieh on September 14, 1982.Bachir Gemayel with Philipe Habib

Phalangists entered Palestinian camps on September 16 at 6:00 PM and remained until the morning of September 19, massacring 700800 Palestinians, according to official Israeli statistics, "none apparently members of any PLO unit". Smith (2006), p. 380-1 These are known as the Sabra and Shatila massacre. It is believed that the Phalangists considered it retaliation for Gemayel's assassination and for the Damour massacre which PLO fighters had committed earlier in a Christian town. Friedman, Thomas. (1998) From Beirut To Jerusalem. 2nd Edition. London: HarperCollins, p. 161 

Bachir Gemayel was succeeded as president by his older brother Amine Gemayel, who served from 1982 to 1988. Rather different in temperament, Amine Gemayel was widely regarded as lacking the charisma and decisiveness of his brother, and many of the latter's followers were dissatisfied.

Amine Gemayel focused on securing the withdrawal of Israeli and Syrian forces. A May 17, 1983, agreement among Lebanon, Israel, and the United States arranged an Israeli withdrawal conditional on the departure of Syrian troops. Syria opposed the agreement and declined to discuss the withdrawal of its troops, effectively stalemating further progress.

In 1983 the IDF withdrew southward, and would remain only in the "security zone" until the year 2000.

Explosion at the Marine barracks seen from afar
Intense attacks against U.S. and Western interests, including two truck bombings of the US Embassy in 1983 and 1984 and the landmark attacks on the U.S. Marine and French parachute regiment barracks on October 23, 1983, led to an American withdrawal, while the virtual collapse of the Lebanese Army in February 1984 was a major blow to the government. On March 5 the Lebanese Government canceled the May 17 agreement and the Marines departed a few weeks later.

Between 1985 and 1989, heavy fighting took place in the "War of the Camps". The Shi'a Muslim Amal militia sought to rout the Palestinians from Lebanese strongholds.

Combat returned to Beirut in 1987, with Palestinians, leftists, and Druze fighters allied against Amal, eventually drawing further Syrian intervention. Violent confrontation flared up again in Beirut in 1988 between Amal and Hezbollah.

Meanwhile, on the political front, Prime Minister Rashid Karami, head of a government of national unity set up after the failed peace efforts of 1984, was assassinated on June 1, 1987. President Gemayel's term of office expired in September 1988. Before stepping down, he appointed another Maronite Christian, Lebanese Armed Forces Commanding General Michel Aoun, as acting Prime Minister, as was his right under the Lebanese constitution of 1943. This action was highly controversial.

Muslim groups rejected the move and pledged support to Selim al-Hoss, a Sunni who had succeeded Karami. Lebanon was thus divided between a Christian government in East Beirut and a Muslim government in West Beirut, with no President.

In February 1989, General Aoun launched the "War of liberation", a war against the Syrian Armed Forces in Lebanon. His campaign was partially supported by a few foreign nations but the method and approach was disputed within the Christian community. This led to the Lebanese forces to abstain from the Syrian attack against Aoun. In October 1990, the Syrian air force, backed by the US and pro-Syrian Lebanese groups (including Hariri, Joumblatt, Berri, Geagea and Lahoud) attacked the Presidential Palace at B'abda and forced Aoun to take refuge in the French embassy in Beirut and later go into exile in Paris. October 13, 1990 is regarded as the date the civil war ended, and Syria is widely recognized as playing a critical role in its end. 

The Taif Agreement of 1989 marked the beginning of the end of the war, and was ratified on November 4. President Rene Mouawad was elected the following day, but was assassinated in a car bombing in Beirut on November 22 as his motorcade returned from Lebanese independence day ceremonies. He was succeeded by Elias Hrawi, who remained in office until 1998.

In August 1990, the parliament and the new president agreed on constitutional amendments embodying some of the political reforms envisioned at Taif. The National Assembly expanded to 128 seats and was divided equally between Christians and Muslims. In March 1991, parliament passed an amnesty law that pardoned most political crimes prior to its enactment, excepting crimes perpetrated against foreign diplomats or certain crimes referred by the cabinet to the Higher Judicial Council.

In May 1991, the militias (with the important exception of Hizballah) were dissolved, and the Lebanese Armed Forces began to slowly rebuild themselves as Lebanon's only major non-sectarian institution.

Some violence still occurred. In late December 1991 a car bomb (estimated to carry 100 kg (220 pounds) of TNT) exploded in the Muslim neighborhood of Basta. At least thirty people were killed, and 120 wounded, including former Prime Minister Shafik Wazzan, who was riding in a bulletproof car. It was the deadliest car bombing in Lebanon since June 18, 1985, when an explosion in the northern Lebanese port of Tripoli killed sixty people and wounded 110.

The last of the Westerners kidnapped by Hezbollah during the mid-1980s were released in May 1992.

==Occupation: 1992 to February 2005==
Since the end of the war, the Lebanese have conducted several elections, most of the militias have been weakened or disbanded, and the Lebanese Armed Forces (LAF) have extended central government authority over about two-thirds of the country. Only Hezbollah retained its weapons, and was supported by the Lebanese parliament in doing so, as they had defended Lebanon against the Israeli occupation. Syria on the other hand kept its military presence in most of Lebanon, also holding various government institutions in the country, strengthening its occupation. The Israeli forces finally withdrew from south of Lebanon in May 2000, though the Syrian occupation of most Lebanon still continued.

By early November 1992, a new parliament had been elected, and Prime Minister Rafiq Hariri had formed a cabinet, retaining for himself the finance portfolio. The formation of a government headed by a successful billionaire businessman was widely seen as a sign that Lebanon would make a priority of rebuilding the country and reviving the economy. Solidere, a private real estate company set up to rebuild downtown Beirut, was a symbol of Hariri's strategy to link economic recovery to private sector investment. After the election of then-commander of the Lebanese Armed Forces mile Lahoud as President in 1998 following Hrawi's extended term as President, Salim al-Hoss again served as Prime Minister. Hariri returned to office as Prime Minister in November 2000. Although problems with basic infrastructure and government services persist, and Lebanon is now highly indebted, much of the civil war damage has been repaired throughout the country, and many foreign investors and tourists have returned.

Postwar social and political instability, fueled by economic uncertainty and the collapse of the Lebanese currency, led to the resignation of Prime Minister Omar Karami, also in May 1992, after less than 2 years in office. He was replaced by former Prime Minister Rashid al Sulh, who was widely viewed as a caretaker to oversee Lebanon's first parliamentary elections in 20 years.

If Lebanon has in part recovered over the past decade from the catastrophic damage to infrastructure of its long civil war, the social and political divisions that gave rise to and sustained that conflict remain largely unresolved. Parliamentary and more recently municipal elections have been held with fewer irregularities and more popular participation than in the immediate aftermath of the conflict, and Lebanese civil society generally enjoys significantly more freedoms than elsewhere in the Arab world. However, there are continuing sectarian tensions and unease about Syrian and other external influences.

In the late 1990s, the government took action against Sunni Muslim extremists in the north who had attacked its soldiers, and it continues to move against groups such as Asbat al-Ansar, which has been accused of being partnered with Osama bin Laden's al-Qaida network. On January 24, 2002, Elie Hobeika, another former Lebanese Forces figure associated with the Sabra and Shatilla massacres who later served in three cabinets and the parliament, was assassinated in a car bombing in Beirut.

During Lebanon's civil war, Syria's troop deployment in Lebanon was legitimized by the Lebanese Parliament in the Taif Agreement, supported by the Arab League, and is given a major share of the credit for finally bringing the civil war to an end in October 1990. In the ensuing fifteen years, Damascus and Beirut justified Syria's continued military presence in Lebanon by citing the continued weakness of a Lebanese armed forces faced with both internal and external security threats, and the agreement with the Lebanese Government to implement all of the constitutional reforms in the Taif Agreement. Under Taif, the Hezbollah militia was eventually to be dismantled, and the LAF allowed to deploy along the border with Israel. Lebanon was called on to deploy along its southern border by UN Security Council Resolution 1391, urged to do so by UN Resolution UN Security Council Resolution 1496, and deployment was demanded by UN Security Council Resolution 1559. The Syrian military and intelligence presence in Lebanon was criticised by some on Lebanon's right-wing inside and outside of the country, others believed it helped to prevent renewed civil war and discourage Israeli aggression, and others believed its presence and influence was helpful for Lebanese stability and peace but should be scaled back. Major powers United States and France rejected Syrian reasoning that they were in Lebanon by the consent of the Lebanese government. They insist that the latter had been co-opted and that in fact Lebanon's Government was a Syrian puppet. 

Up to 2005, 14-15,000 Syrian troops (down from 35,000) remained in position in many areas of Lebanon, although the Taif called for an agreement between the Syrian and Lebanese Governments by September 1992 on their redeployment to Lebanon's Bekaa Valley. Syria's refusal to exit Lebanon following Israel's 2000 withdrawal from south Lebanon first raised criticism among the Lebanese Maronite Christians and Druze, who were later joined by many of Lebanon's Sunni Muslims. ) Lebanon's Shiites, on the other hand, have long supported the Syrian presence, as has the Hezbollah militia group and political party.
The U.S. began applying pressure on Syria to end its occupation and cease interfering with internal Lebanese matters. In 2004, many believe Syria pressured Lebanese MPs to back a constitutional amendment to revise term limitations and allow Lebanon's two term pro-Syrian president mile Lahoud to run for a third time. France, Germany and the United Kingdom, along with many Lebanese politicians joined the U.S. in denouncing alleged Syria's interference. 
On September 2, 2004, the UN Security Council adopted UN Security Council Resolution 1559, authored by France and the U.S. in an uncommon show of cooperation. The resolution called "upon all remaining foreign forces to withdraw from Lebanon" and "for the disbanding and disarmament of all Lebanese and non-Lebanese militias".

On May 25, 2000, Israel completed its withdrawal from the south of Lebanon in accordance with UN Security Council Resolution 425. [http://domino.un.org/UNISPAL.NSF/d744b47860e5c97e85256c40005d01d6/e25dae8e3ce54fb5852560e50079c708!OpenDocument ] A 50 square kilometer piece of mountain terrain, commonly referred to as the Shebaa Farms, remains under the control of Israel. The UN has certified Israel's pullout, and regards the Shebaa Farms as occupied Syrian territory, while Lebanon and Syria have stated they regard the area as Lebanese territory. The January 20, 2005, UN Secretary-General's report on Lebanon stated: "The continually asserted position of the Government of Lebanon that the Blue Line is not valid in the Shab'a farms area is not compatible with Security Council resolutions. The Council has recognized the Blue Line as valid for purposes of confirming Israel's withdrawal pursuant to resolution 425 (1978). The Government of Lebanon should heed the Council's repeated calls for the parties to respect the Blue Line in its entirety." 

In Resolution 425, the UN had set a goal of assisting the Lebanese government in a "return of its effective authority in the area", which would require an official Lebanese army presence there. Further, UN Security Council Resolution 1559 requires the dismantling of the Hezbollah militia. Yet, Hezbollah remains deployed along the Blue Line. Both Hezbollah and Israel have violated the Blue Line more than once, according to the UN. [http://domino.un.org/UNISPAL.NSF/22f431edb91c6f548525678a0051be1d/bb095796d02d589785256b910058cc00!OpenDocument ] The most common pattern of violence have been border incursions by the Hezbollah into the Shebaa Farms area, and then Israeli air strikes into southern Lebanon. The UN Secretary-General has urged "all governments that have influence on Hezbollah to deter it from any further actions which could increase the tension in the area". Staffan de Misura, Personal Representative of the Secretary-General for Southern Lebanon stated that he was "deeply concerned that air violations by Israel across the Blue Line during altercations with Hezbollah are continuing to take place", calling "upon the Israeli authorities to cease such violations and to fully respect the Blue Line". In 2001 de Misura similarly expressed his concern to Lebanon's prime minister for allowing Hezbollah to violate the Blue Line, saying it was a "clear infringement" of UN Resolution 425, under which the UN certified Israel's withdrawal from south Lebanon as complete. On January 28, 2005, UN Security Council Resolution 1583 called upon the Government of Lebanon to fully extend and exercise its sole and effective authority throughout the south, including through the deployment of sufficient numbers of Lebanese armed and security forces, to ensure a calm environment throughout the area, including along the Blue Line, and to exert control over the use of force on its territory and from it. 
On January 23, 2006 The UN Security Council called on the Government of Lebanon to make more progress in controlling its territory and disbanding militias, while also calling on Syria to cooperate with those efforts. In a statement read out by its January President, Augustine Mahiga of Tanzania, the Council also called on Syria to take measures to stop movements of arms and personnel into Lebanon. 

On September 3, 2004, the National Assembly voted 9629 to amend the constitution to allow the pro-Syrian president, mile Lahoud, three more years in office by extending a statute of limitations to nine years. Many regarded this as a second time Syria had pressured Lebanon's Parliament to amend the constitution in a way that favored Lahoud (the first allowing for his election in 1998 immediately after he had resigned as commander-in-chief of the LAF.) a study from Carnegie Endowment Three cabinet ministers were absent from the vote and later resigned. The USA charged that Syria exercised pressure against the National Assembly to amend the constitution, and many of the Lebanese rejected it, saying that it was considered as contradictive to the constitution and its principles. http://weekly.ahram.org.eg/2004/707/re1.htm The limits of loyalty from Al-Aharam weekly.com, retrieved at April 2, 2007. Including these is the Maronite Patriarch Mar Nasrallah Boutros Sfeir  the most eminent religious figure for Maronites  and the Druze leader Walid Jumblatt.

To the surprise of many, Prime Minister Rafiq Hariri, who had vehemently opposed this amendment, appeared to have finally accepted it, and so did most of his party. However, he ended up resigning in protest against the amendment. He was assassinated soon afterwards (see below), triggering the Cedar Revolution. This amendment comes in discordance with the UN Security Council Resolution 1559, which called for a new presidential election in Lebanon.

On October 1, 2004, one of the main dissenting voices to mile Lahoud's term extension, the newly resigned Druze ex-minister Marwan Hamadeh was the target of a car bomb attack as his vehicle slowed to enter his Beirut home. Mr. Hamadeh and his bodyguard were wounded and his driver killed in the attack. Druze leader Walid Jumblatt appealed for calm, but said the car bomb was a clear message for the opposition. The quote is: "The police state ... has proven its efficiency in targeting one of the symbols of the nation... ", see http://weekly.ahram.org.eg/2004/711/re4.htm Lebanon at the crossroads, Al-Aharam Weekly, retrieved at April 2, 2007 UN Secretary General Kofi Annan expressed his serious concern over the attack. 

On October 7, 2004, UN Secretary General Kofi Annan reported to the Security Council that Syria had failed to withdraw its forces from Lebanon. Mr. Annan concluded his report saying that "It is time, 14 years after the end of hostilities and four years after the Israeli withdrawal from Lebanon, for all parties concerned to set aside the remaining vestiges of the past. The withdrawal of foreign forces and the disbandment and disarmament of militias would, with finality, end that sad chapter of Lebanese history.". On October 19, 2004, following the UN Secretary General's report, the UN Security Council voted unanimously (meaning that it received the backing of Algeria, the only Arab member of the Security Council) to put out a statement calling on Syria to pull its troops out of Lebanon, in accordance with Resolution 1559. 

On October 20, 2004, Prime Minister Rafiq Hariri resigned; the next day former Prime Minister and loyal supporter of Syria Omar Karami was appointed Prime Minister. On February 14, 2005, former Prime Minister Hariri was assassinated in a car-bomb attack which killed 21 and wounded 100. On February 21, 2005, tens of thousand Lebanese protestors held a rally at the site of the assassination calling for the withdrawal of Syria's peacekeeping forces and blaming Syria and the pro-Syrian president Lahoud for the murder. 

Hariri's murder triggered increased international pressure on Syria. In a joint statement U.S. President Bush and French president Chirac condemned the killing and called for full implementation of UNSCR 1559. UN Secretary-General Kofi Annan announced that he was sending a team led by Ireland's deputy police commissioner, Peter FitzGerald, to investigate the assassination. And while Arab League head Amr Moussa declared that Syrian president Assad promised him a phased withdrawal over a two-year period, the Syrian Information Minister Mahdi Dakhlallah said Mr Moussa had misunderstood the Syrian leader. Mr Dakhlallah said that Syria will merely move its troops to eastern Lebanon. Russia, Germany, and Saudi Arabia all called for Syrian troops to leave.

Local Lebanese pressure mounted as well. As daily protests against the Syrian occupation grew to 25,000, a series of dramatic events occurred. Massive protests such as these had been quite uncommon in the Arab world, and while in the 90s most anti-Syrian demonstrators were predominantly Christian, the new demonstrations were Christian and Sunni. On February 28 the government of pro-Syrian Prime Minister Omar Karami resigned, calling for a new election to take place. Mr Karami said in his announcement: "I am keen the government will not be a hurdle in front of those who want the good for this country." The tens of thousands gathered at Beirut's Martyrs' Square cheered the announcement, then chanted "Karami has fallen, your turn will come, Lahoud, and yours, Bashar". Opposition MPs were also not satisfied with Karami's resignation, and kept pressing for full Syrian withdrawal. Former minister and MP Marwan Hamadeh, who survived a similar car bomb attack on October 1, 2004, said "I accuse this government of incitement, negligence and shortcomings at the least, and of covering up its planning at the most... if not executing". Two days later Syrian leader Bashar Assad announced that his troops will leave Lebanon completely "in the next few months". Responding to the announcement, opposition leader Walid Jumblatt said that he wanted to hear more specifics from Damascus about any withdrawal: "It's a nice gesture but 'next few months' is quite vague  we need a clear-cut timetable". 

On March 5 Syrian leader Assad declared in a televised speech that Syria would withdraw its forces to the Bekaa Valley in eastern Lebanon, and then to the border between Syria and Lebanon. Assad did not provide a timetable for a complete withdrawal of Syrian forces from Lebanon  14,000 soldiers and intelligence agents. Meanwhile, Hezbollah leader Nasrallah called for a "massive popular gathering" on Tuesday against UN Resolution 1559 saying "The resistance will not give up its arms ... because Lebanon needs the resistance to defend it", and added "all the articles of UN resolution give free services to the Israeli enemy who should have been made accountable for his crimes and now finds that he is being rewarded for his crimes and achieves all its demands". 
In opposition to Nasrallah's call, Monday, March 7 saw at least 70,000 people  with some estimates putting the number at twice as high  gathered at central Martyrs' Square to demand that Syria leave completely. 

The following day a pro-Syrian demonstration set a new record when Hezbollah amassed 400500 thousand protestors at Riad Solh square in Beirut, most of them bussed in from the heavily Shi'ite south Lebanon and eastern Beka'a valley. The show of power demonstrated Hezbollah's influence, wealth and organization as the sole Lebanese party allowed to hold a militia by Syria. In his speech Nasrallah blasted UN Security-Council Resolution 1559, which calls for Hezbollah's militia to be disbanded, as foreign intervention. Nasrallah also reiterated his earlier calls for the destruction of Israel saying "To this enemy we say again: There is no place for you here and there is no life for you among us. Death to Israel!". Though Hezbollah organized a very successful rally, opposition leaders were quick to point out that Hezbollah had active support from Lebanon's government and Syria. While the pro-democracy rallies had to deal with road blocks forcing protestors to either turn back or march long distances to Martyr's Square, Hezbollah was able to bus people directly to Riad Solh square. Dory Chamoun, an opposition leader, pointed out that "the difference is that in our demonstrations, people arrive voluntarily and on foot, not in buses". Another opposition member said the pro-Syrian government pressured people to turn out and some reports said Syria had bused in people from across the border. But on a mountain road leading to Beirut, only one bus with a Syrian license plate was spotted in a convoy of pro-Syrian supporters heading to the capital and Hezbollah officials denied the charges. 
Opposition MP Akram Chehayeb said "That is where the difference between us and them lies: They asked these people to come and they brought them here, whereas the opposition's supporters come here on their own. Our protests are spontaneous. We have a cause. What is theirs?". 

One month after Hariri's murder, an enormous anti-Syrian rally gathered at Martyr's Square in Beirut. Multiple news agencies estimated the crowd at between 800,000 and 1 million  a show of force for the Sunni Muslim, Christian and Druze communities. The rally was double the size of the mostly Shi'ite pro-Syrian one organized by Hezbollah the previous week. When Hariri's sister took a pro-Syrian line saying that Lebanon should "stand by Syria until its land is liberated and it regains its sovereignty on the Israeli- occupied Golan Heights" the crowd jeered her. This sentiment was prevalent among the rally participants who opposed Hezbollah's refusal to disarm based on the claim that Lebanese and Syrian interests are linked. 

==Cedar Revolution and 2006 War (2005-present)==

Jamil Al Sayyed, a Syrian ally in the Lebanese security forces, resigned on 25 April, just a day before the final Syrian troops pulled out of Lebanon.

On 26 April 2005, the last 250 Syrian troops left Lebanon. During the departure ceremonies, Ali Habib, Syria's chief of staff, said that Syria's president had decided to recall his troops after the Lebanese army had been "rebuilt on sound national foundations and became capable of protecting the state."

UN forces led by Senegalese Mouhamadou Kandji and guided by Lebanese Imad Anka were sent to Lebanon to verify the military withdrawal which was mandated by Security Council resolution 1559.

Following the Syrian withdrawal a series of assassinations of Lebanese politicians and journalists with the anti-Syrian camp had begun. Many bombings have occurred to date and have triggered condemnations from the UN Security Council and UN Secretary General. 

Eight months after Syria withdrew from Lebanon under intense domestic and international outrage over the assassination of Lebanese prime minister Rafiq Hariri the UN investigation has yet to be completed. While UN investigator Detlev Mehlis has pointed the finger at Syria's intelligence apparatus in Lebanon he has yet to be allowed full access to Syrian officials who are suspected by the UN International Independent Investigation Commission (UNIIIC) as being behind the assassination. In its latest report UNIIIC said it had "credible information" that Syrian officials had arrested and threatened close relatives of a witness who recanted testimony he had previously given the Commission, and that two Syrian suspects it questioned indicated that all Syrian intelligence documents on Lebanon had been burned. 
A campaign of bomb attacks against politicians, journalists and even civilian neighborhoods associated with the anti-Syrian camp has provoked much negative attention for Syria in the UN and elsewhere.

On December 15, 2005 the UN Security Council extended the mandate of the UNIIIC.

On December 30, 2005 Syria's former Vice-President, Abdul Halim Khaddam, said that "Hariri received many threats" from Syria's President Bashar Al-Assad. Prior to Syria's withdrawal from Lebanon Mr Khaddam was in charge of Syria's Lebanon policy and mainly responsible for Syria's abuse of Lebanon's resources. Many believe that Khaddam seized the opportunity to clear his history of corruption and blackmail.

Parliament voted for the release of the former Lebanese Forces warlord Samir Geagea in the first session since election were held in the spring of 2005. Geagea was the only leader during the civil war to be charged with crimes related to that conflict. With the return of Michel Aoun, the climate was right to try to heal wounds to help unite the country after former Prime Minister Rafik Hariri was assassinated on 14 February 2005. Geagea was released on 26 July 2005 and left immediately for an undisclosed European nation to undergo medical examinations and convalesce.

During the Cedar Revolution Hezbollah organized a series of pro-Syrian rallies. Hezbollah became a part of the Lebanese government following the 2005 elections but is at a crossroads regarding UNSCR 1559's call for its militia to be dismantled. On 21 November 2005, Hezbollah launched an attack along the entire border with Israel, the heaviest in the five and a half years since Israel's withdrawal. The barrage was supposed to provide tactical cover for an attempt by a squad of Hezbollah special forces to abduct Israeli troops in the Israeli side of the village of Al-Ghajar. The attack failed when an ambush by the IDF Paratroopers killed 4 Hezbollah members and scattered the rest. The UN Security Council accused Hezbollah of initiating the hostilities. 

On 27 December 2005, Katyusha rockets fired from Hezbollah territory smashed into houses in the Israeli village of Kiryat Shmona wounding three people. [http://news.yahoo.com/s/nm/20051228/wl_nm/mideast_attack_dc_6 ] UN Secretary General Kofi Annan called on the Lebanese Government "to extend its control over all its territory, to exert its monopoly on the use of force, and to put an end to all such attacks". Lebanese Prime Minister Fuad Saniora denounced the attack as "aimed at destabilizing security and diverting attention from efforts exerted to solve the internal issues prevailing in the country". http://www.haaretz.com/hasen/spages/663101.html On December 30, 2005 the Lebanese army dismantled two other Katyusha rockets found in the border town of Naqoura, an action suggesting increased vigilance following PM Saniora's angry remarks. In a new statement Saniora also rejected claims by Al-Qaeda that it was responsible for the attack and insisted again that it was a domestic action challenging his government's authority. 

The 2006 Lebanon War was a 34-day military conflict in Lebanon and northern Israel. The principal parties were Hezbollah paramilitary forces and the Israeli military. The conflict started on 12 July 2006, and continued until a United Nations-brokered ceasefire went into effect in the morning on 14 August 2006, though it formally ended on 8 September 2006 when Israel lifted its naval blockade of Lebanon, leaving more than 1500 dead civilians and still the Israeli army couldn't penetrate the Lebanese land borders and was driven back by Hezbollah suffering heavy casualties and defeated.

==See also==

* Timeline of Lebanese history
*History of Asia
*History of the Middle East
*History of Israel
*History of Syria
*Lebanon
*List of Presidents of Lebanon
*List of Prime Ministers of Lebanon
*Politics of Lebanon
*Lebanese Civil War

==References==

==Bibliography==
*
*
*
*
*

==Further reading==
*

*Abu-Husayn, Abdul-Rahim. Provincial Leaderships in Syria, 1575-1650, Beirut: American University of Beirut, 1985.
*Abu-Husayn, A. The View from Istanbul. Ottoman Lebanon and the Druze Emirate, London: I.B. Tauris in association with the Centre for Lebanese Studies, 2002.
* Abou Issa,Chady. " Rouassa el- joumhoriya al-libnaniya ",Beirut,All-Prints,2008.
*Akarli, Engin Deniz. The Long Peace. Ottoman Lebanon, 1861-1920, Berkeley: University of California Press, 1993. 
*Azar, Fabiola. Construction idntitaire et appartenance confessionelle au Liban, Paris: L'Harmattan, 1999.
*Beydoun, Ahmad. Le Liban, une histoire dispute: identit et temps dans l'histoire libanaise contemporaine, Beyrouth: Publications de l'Universit Libanaise, 1984.
*Chevallier, Dominique. La socit du Mont-Liban  l'poque de la rvolution industrielle en Europe, Beyrouth: IFAPO, 1971.
*Corm, Georges. Liban: les guerres de l'Europe et de l'Orient 1840-1922, Paris: Gallimard, 1992.
*Farah, Caesar E. The Politics of Interventionism in Ottoman Lebanon 1830-1861, London: The Centre for Lebanese Studies in association with I.B. Tauris, 2000.
*Fawaz Tarazi, Leila. An Occasion for War: Civil Conflict in Lebanon and Damascus in 1860. London: I.B. Tauris, 1994.
*Fawaz Tarazi, L. Merchants and Migrants in Nineteenth-Century Beirut. Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1983.
*Firro, Kais. Inventing Lebanon. Nationalism and the State Under the Mandate, London: I.B. Tauris, 2002.
*Gilsenan, Michael. Lords of the Lebanese Marches: Violence and Narrative in an Arab Society, London: I.B. Tauris, 1996.
*Gorton, T.J. Renaissance Emir: a Druze Warlord at the Court of the Medici (London, Quartet Books, 2013); see http://tjgorton.wordpress.com/prince-of-lebanon-a-druze-emir-at-the-court-of-the-medici/ for this new biography of Fakhr ad-Din Ma'n.
* Harris, William. Lebanon: A History, 600-2011 by (Oxford University Press; 2012) 360 pages; on the evolution of the Maronite Christian, Druze, and Twelver Shia communities centered on Mount Lebanon through Frankish, Mamluk, and Ottoman rule, and considers the problems of social cohesion in modern Lebanon, founded in 1920.
*Johnson, Michael. All Honourable Men. The Social Origins of War in Lebanon, London: I.B. Tauris, 2001.
*Khalaf, Samir. Persistence and Change in 19th Century Lebanon: A Sociological Essay, Beirut: American University of Beirut, 1979.
*Khalidi, Tarif. Land Tenure and Social Transformation in the Middle East, Beirut: American University of Beirut, 1984.
*Makdisi, Ussama. The Culture of Sectarianism: Community, History, and Violence in Nineteenth-Century Ottoman Lebanon, Berkeley: University of California Press, 2000.
*Ma'oz Moshe. Ottoman Reforms in Syria and Palestine 1840-1861: The Impact of Tanzimat on Politics and Society, Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1968.
*Picard, Elizabeth. Lebanon: A Shattered Country. Myths and Realities of the Wars in Lebanon, New York City: Holmes&Meier, 1996.
*Salibi, Kamal. A House of Many Mansions: The History of Lebanon Reconsidered, London: I.B. Tauris, 1988. ISBN 0-520-06517-4
*Salibi, K. Maronite Historians of Medieval Lebanon, Beirut: American University of Beirut, 1959.
*Shehadi, Nadim & Mills Haffar, Dana (eds.), Lebanon: A History of Conflict and Consensus, The Centre for Lebanese Studies in association with I.B. Tauris, 1988.
*Spagnolo, John P. France and Ottoman Lebanon, 1861-1914, London: Ithaca Press, 1977.
*Zamir, Meir. The Formation of Modern Lebanon, Ithaca: Cornell University Press, 1985.
*Lebanon's struggle for Independence (The Political History of Lebanon, 19201950) ; v. 3-4, 1980. ISBN 0-89712-021-3
*Thackston Wheeler, Murder, Mayhem, Pillage and Plunder: The History of the Lebanon in the 18th and 19th Centuries, 1988. ISBN 0-88706-714-X
*Thomas L. Friedman, From Beirut to Jerusalem: One Man's Middle Eastern Odyssey, second edition, Harpers Collins, 1998. ISBN 0-00-653070-2
*Alfred Schlicht, The role of foreign powers in the history of Lebanon and Syria from 1799 to 1861 In: Journal of Asian History 14 (1980) pp. 97126

==External links==

* The Center for Democracy in Lebanon
* Lebanon, the Cedars' Land The historic and touristic cities of Lebanon
* The Modern History of Lebanon with Fawwaz Traboulsi - Complete video series, The Real News
* Al-Ghajar Village Flashpoint Defense Update, December 5, 2005
* Who's who in Lebanon BBC, March 14, 2005
* A Look at Mass Rallies Held in Lebanon AP, March 14, 2005
* Lebanon finds unity in street rallies BBC, March 3, 2005
* Q&amp;A: Syria's involvement in Lebanon BBC, March 1, 2005
* Opposition accuses Syria of assassination Daily Star, February 15, 2005
*Timeline: Lebanon A chronology of key events-BBC News February 14, 2005
* Explosion kills former Lebanon PM BBC, February 14, 2005
* UN urges Syria to leave Lebanon BBC, October 19, 2004
* Ex-minister hurt in Beirut blast BBC, October 1, 2004
* Hizballah and Syria's "Lebanese Card" Nicholas Blanford, Middle East Online Report, September 14, 2004
* Thirteen-Year Itch - The Demise of Lebanon's Taif Agreement? Middle East Report, August 13, 2002
* Syria: The power in Lebanon BBC, 16 April 2001
*Center for Lebanese Study-Oxford University
*Country Profile: Lebanon-BBC News
*War is Peace Noam Chomsky, excerpts from "The Fateful Triangle" on The Israeli invasion of Lebanon, 1983
*Israel, Lebanon, and the "Peace Process" Noam Chomsky, April 23, 1996
*"Limited War" in Lebanon Noam Chomsky September, 1993

 



[[Geography of Lebanon]]

 
Detailed map of Lebanon, 2002
Mount Sannine
Lebanon is part of the Middle East, and it is located at approximately 35N, 35W, stretching along the eastern shore of the Mediterranean Sea, its length almost three times its width. As it stretches from north to south, the width of its terrain becomes narrower. Lebanon's mountainous terrain, economic, and religious movements that either originated in the region or crossed through to leave an imprint upon Lebanese society give form to that history.

The country's role in the region, as indeed in the world at large, was shaped by trade. Lebanon is named "the pearl of the middle east." It serves as a link between the Mediterranean world and India and East Asia. The merchants of the region exported oil, grain, textiles, metal work, and pottery through the port cities to Western markets.

==Land==
Topography of Lebanon
The area of Lebanon is approximately 10452 km2. The country is roughly rectangular in shape, becoming narrower toward the south and the farthest north. Its widest point is 88 km, and its narrowest is 32 km; the average width is about 56 km.

The physical geography of Lebanon is influenced by natural systems that extend outside the country. Thus, the Beqaa Valley is part of the Great Rift system, which stretches from southern Turkey to Mozambique in Africa. Like any mountainous country, Lebanon's physical geography is complex. Land forms, climate, soils, and vegetation differ markedly within short distances. There are also sharp changes in other elements of the environment, from good to poor soils, as one moves through the Lebanese mountains.

A major feature of Lebanese topography is the alternation of lowland and highland that runs generally parallel with a north-to-south orientation. There are four such longitudinal strips between the Mediterranean Sea and Syria: the coastal strip (or the maritime plain), western Lebanon, the central plateau, and eastern Lebanon (see fig. 3, Physical Features).

The extremely narrow coastal strip stretches along the shore of the eastern Mediterranean. Hemmed in between sea and mountain, the sahil, as it is called in Lebanon, is widest in the north near Tripoli, where it is only 6.5 km wide. A few kilometers south at Juniyah the approximately 1.5-kilometer-wide plain is succeeded by foothills that rise steeply to 750 m within 6.5 km from the sea. For the most part, the coast is abrupt and rocky. The shoreline is regular with no deep estuary, gulf, or natural harbor. The maritime plain is especially productive of fruits and vegetables.

The western range, the second major region, is the Lebanon Mountains, sometimes called Mount Lebanon, or Lebanon proper before 1920. Since Roman days the term Mount Lebanon has encompassed this area. Antilibanos (Anti-Lebanon) was used to designate the eastern range. Geologists believe that the twin mountains once formed one range. The Lebanon Mountains are the highest, most rugged, and most imposing of the whole maritime range of mountains and plateaus that start with the Amanus or Nur Mountains in northern Syria and end with the towering massif of Sinai. The mountain structure forms the first barrier to communication between the Mediterranean and Lebanon's eastern hinterland. The mountain range is a clearly defined unit having natural boundaries on all four sides. On the north it is separated from the Nusayriyah Mountains of Syria by An Nahr al Kabir ("the great river"); on the south it is bounded by Al Qasimiyah River, giving it a length of 169 kilometers. Its width varies from about 56.5 km near Tripoli to 9.5 km on the southern end. It rises to alpine heights southeast of Tripoli, where Al Qurnat as Sawda ("the black nook") reaches 3088 m. Of the other peaks that rise east of Beirut, Jabal Sannin (2695 m) is the highest. Ahl al Jabal ("people of the mountain"), or simply jabaliyyun, has referred traditionally to the inhabitants of western Lebanon. Near its southern end, the Lebanon Mountains branch off to the west to form the Shuf Mountains.

The third geographical region is the Biqa Valley. This central highland between the Lebanon Mountains and the Anti-Lebanon Mountains is about 177 km in length and 9.6 to 16 kilometers wide and has an average elevation of 762 m. Its middle section spreads out more than its two extremities. Geologically, the Biqa is the medial part of a depression that extends north to the western bend of the Orontes River in Syria and south to Jordan through Al Arabah to Al Aqabah, the eastern arm of the Red Sea. The Biqa is the country's chief agricultural area and served as a granary of Roman Syria. Biqa is the Arabic plural of buqaah, meaning a place with stagnant water.

Emerging from a base south of Homs in Syria, the eastern mountain range, or Anti-Lebanon (Lubnan ash Sharqi), is almost equal in length and height to the Lebanon Mountains. This fourth geographical region falls swiftly from Mount Hermon to the Hawran Plateau, whence it continues through Jordan south to the Dead Sea. The Barada Gorge divides Anti-Lebanon. In the northern section, few villages are on the western slopes, but in the southern section, featuring Mount Hermon (2860 meters), the western slopes have many villages. Anti-Lebanon is more arid, especially in its northern parts, than Mount Lebanon and is consequently less productive and more thinly populated.

===Terrain===
Bathymetric map of Lebanon
Lebanon is divided into five ribbonlike topographical areas stretching mainly in a north-south direction:
*the 210 km long shoreline, rocky in the north and sandy in the south, including several bays and islands
*the narrow coastal plain, approximately 3 km wide
*the western Mount Lebanon range
*the Beqaa Valley
*the eastern Anti-Lebanon mountains

==Climate==
Mount Lebanon
Lebanese Coastline
Lebanon has a Mediterranean climate characterized by a long, hot, and dry summer, and cool, rainy winter. Fall is a transitional season with a gradual lowering of temperature and little rain; spring occurs when the winter rains cause the vegetation to revive. Topographical variation creates local modifications of the basic climatic pattern. Along the coast, summers are hot and humid, with little or no rain. Heavy dews form, which are beneficial to agriculture. The daily range of temperature is not wide. A west wind provides relief during the afternoon and evening; at night the wind direction is reversed, blowing from the land out to sea.

Winter is the rainy season, with major precipitation falling after December. Rainfall is generous but is concentrated during only a few days of the rainy season, falling in heavy cloudbursts. The amount of rainfall varies greatly from one year to another. Occasionally, there are frosts during the winter, and about once every fifteen years a light powdering of snow falls as far south as Beirut. A hot wind blowing from the Egyptian desert called the khamsin (Arabic for "fifty"), may provide a warming trend during the fall, but more often occurs during the spring. Bitterly cold winds may have come from Europe. Along the coast the proximity to the sea provides a moderating influence on the climate, making the range of temperatures narrower than it is inland, but the temperatures are cooler in the northern parts of the coast where there is also more rain.

In the Lebanon Mountains the gradual increase in altitude produces colder winters with more precipitation and snow. The summers have a wider daily range of temperatures and less humidity. In the winter, frosts are frequent and snows heavy; in fact, snow covers the highest peaks for much of the year. In the summer, temperatures may rise as high during the daytime as they do along the coast, but they fall far lower at night. Inhabitants of the coastal cities, as well as visitors, seek refuge from the oppressive humidity of the coast by spending much of the summer in the mountains, where numerous summer resorts are located. Both the khamsin and the north winter wind are felt in the Lebanon Mountains. The influence of the Mediterranean Sea is abated by the altitude and, although the precipitation is even higher than it is along the coast, the range of temperatures is wider and the winters are more severe.

The Biqa Valley and the Anti-Lebanon Mountains are shielded from the influence of the sea by the Lebanon Mountains. The result is considerably less precipitation and humidity and a wider variation in daily and yearly temperatures. The khamsin does not occur in the Biqa Valley, but the north winter wind is so severe that the inhabitants say it can "break nails." Despite the relatively low altitude of the Biqa Valley (the highest point of which, near Baalbek, is only 1100 m) more snow falls there than at comparable altitudes west of the Lebanon Mountains.

Because of their altitudes, the Anti-Lebanon Mountains receive more precipitation than the Biqa Valley, despite their remoteness from maritime influences. Much of this precipitation appears as snow, and the peaks of the Anti-Lebanon, like those of the Lebanon Mountains, are snow-covered for much of the year. Temperatures are cooler than in the Biqa Valley.

The Biqa Valley is watered by two rivers that rise in the watershed near Baalbek: the Orontes flowing north (in Arabic it is called Nahr al Asi, "the Rebel River", because this direction is unusual), and the Litani flowing south into the hill region of the southern Biqa Valley, where it makes an abrupt turn to the west in southern Lebanon and is thereafter called the Al Qasmiyah River. The Orontes continues to flow north into Syria and eventually reaches the Mediterranean in Turkey. Its waters, for much of its course, flow through a channel considerably lower than the surface of the ground. The Nahr Barada, which waters Damascus, has as its source a spring in the Anti-Lebanon Mountains.

Smaller springs and streams serve as tributaries to the principal rivers. Because the rivers and streams have such steep gradients and are so fast moving, they are erosive instead of depository in nature. This process is aided by the soft character of the limestone that composes much of the mountains, the steep slopes of the mountains, and the heavy rainstorms. The only permanent lake is Buhayrat al Qirawn, about ten kilometers east of Jezzine. There is one seasonal lake, fed by springs, on the eastern slopes of the Lebanon Mountains near Yammunah, about 40 km southeast of Tripoli.

Image:Danniyeh.jpg|Snow covered karstic formations in the Danniyeh mountains.
Image:Satellite image of Lebanon in March 2002.jpg|Lebanon from space. Snow cover can be seen on the western and eastern mountain ranges.
Image:March 2011 Snow in Lebanon.jpg|Snow in Lebanons two mountain ranges, Jebel Liban and Jabal ash Sharqi in March 2011.

==Area and boundaries==
Map of Lebanon

total: 10400 km2
land: 10230 km2
water: 170 km2

Land boundaries:
total: 454 km
border countries: Israel 79 km, Syria 375 km

Coastline: 225 km

Maritime claims:
territorial sea: 12 nmi 

Elevation extremes:
lowest point: Mediterranean Sea 0 m (sea level)
highest point: Qurnat as Sawda' 3088 m

==Resources and land use==
Limestone, iron ore, salt, water-surplus state in a water-deficit region, arable land

Land use:
arable land: 10.72%
permanent crops: 12.06%
other: 77.22% (2011)

Irrigated land: 1040 km (2011)

Total renewable water resources: 4.5 km3 (2011)

==Environmental concerns==
Natural hazards include dust storms.

Current environmental degradation concerns include deforestation, soil erosion, desertification, air pollution in Beirut from vehicular traffic and the burning of industrial wastes, and pollution of coastal waters from raw sewage and oil spills.

Lebanon's rugged terrain historically helped isolate, protect, and develop numerous factional groups based on religion, clan, and ethnicity.

==References==

* 

 
Lebanon



[[Demographics of Lebanon]]

 Demographics of Lebanon 30px 
 Indicator Rank Measure 
 Economy 
 GDP (PPP) per capita 51st $16,000 
 Unemployment rate  21st 20.89%* 
 CO2 emissions 78th 3.05t 
 Electricity consumption 77th 49.72GWh 
 Economic Freedom 95th 2.98 
 Politics 
 Human Development Index 72nd 0.745 
 Political freedom Unknown 4 
 Corruption (A higher score means less (perceived) corruption.)  134th 2.5 
 Press freedom 45th 74.00 
 Society 
 Literacy Rate 43rd 96.7% 
 Number of Internet users 59th 2,604,000 users 
 E-readiness 14th 7.16 
 Ease of Doing Business 24th Unknown 
 Health 
 Life Expectancy 59th 77.0 
 Birth rate 113th 15.6 
 Fertility rate 157th 1.77 
 Infant mortality 127th 14.39 
 Death rate 157th 7.5 
 HIV/AIDS rate 127th 0.10% 
 Notes 
 * including several non-sovereign entities  indicates rank is in reverse order (e.g. 1st is lowest) per capita  score out of 10 per 1000 people per woman per 1000 live births 

This article is about the demographic features of the population of Lebanon, including population density, ethnicity, education level, health of the populace, economic status, religious affiliations and other aspects of the population.

Identifying all Lebanese as ethnically Phoenician is a widely employed example of panethnicity since in reality, the Lebanese are descended from many different peoples who have occupied, invaded, or settled this corner of the world, making Lebanon, a mosaic of closely interrelated cultures. Stokes, Jamie. Encyclopedia of the Peoples of Africa and the Middle East, page 406 While at first glance, this ethnic, linguistic, religious and denominational diversity might seem to cause civil and political unrest, for much of Lebanons history this multitudinous diversity of religious communities has coexisted with little conflict. About 99% of the population of Lebanon includes numerous Muslim sects and Christian denominations. Because the matter of religious balance is a sensitive political issue, a national census has not been conducted since 1932, before the founding of the modern Lebanese state. Consequently there is an absence of accurate data on the relative percentages of the population of the major religions and groups. There are about 15 million Lebanese and descendants of Lebanese worldwide and not in Lebanon; about 80% of them are Christians

==Ethnic groups==
===Lebanese===

Ethnic background is an important factor in Lebanon. The country encompasses a great mix of cultural, religious, and ethnic groups which have been building up for more than 6,000 years. The Arabs invaded and occupied Phoenicia in the 7th century AD from Arabia. The predominant cultural backgrounds and ancestry of the Lebanese vary from Aramaean (Ancient Syria) to Canaanite (Phoenician), and Greek (Byzantine). Lebanese are overall genetically similar to the people of Cyprus and Malta and to the other modern Levantine populations, such as the Syrians and Palestinians. The question of ethnic identity has come to revolve more around aspects of cultural self-identification more than descent. Religious affiliation has also become a substitute in some respects for ethnic affiliation. 
Generally it can be said that all religious sects and denominations comprise many different ethnic backgrounds, and that clear ethnic boundaries are difficult to define due to common conversions and inter-faith marriages.

==Religious groups==
Three Lebanese women in 1873.
The Phoenicians are some of the oldest Christians in world, preceded only by the Coptic Christians of Kush (ancient Ethiopia) and Kemet (ancient Egypt). The Maronite Christians, belong to the West Syriac Rite. Their Liturgical language is the Syriac-Aramaic language. The Melkite Greek Catholics and the Greek Orthodox, tend to focus more on the Greek heritage of the region from the days of the Byzantine Empire, and the fact that Greek was maintained as a liturgical language until very recently. Some Lebanese even claim partial descent from Crusader knights who ruled Lebanon for a couple of centuries during the Middle Ages, also backed by recent genetic studies which confirmed this among Lebanese people, especially in the north of the country that was under the Crusader County of Tripoli. This identification with non-Arab civilizations also exists in other religious communities, albeit not to the same extent.

===The sectarian system===
Lebanon's religious divisions are extremely complicated, and the country is made up by a multitude of religious groupings. The ecclesiastical and demographic patterns of the sects and denominations are complex. Divisions and rivalries between groups date back as far as 15 centuries, and still are a factor today. The pattern of settlement has changed little since the 7th century, but instances of civil strife and ethnic cleansing, most recently during the Lebanese Civil War, has brought some important changes to the religious map of the country. (See also History of Lebanon.)

Lebanon has by far the largest proportion of Christians of any Middle Eastern country, but both Christians and Muslims are sub-divided into many splinter sects and denominations. All population statistics are by necessity controversial, and all denomination and sects have a vested interest in inflating their own numbers. Sunnis, Shia, Maronites and Greek Orthodox (the four largest denominations) all often claim that their particular religious affiliation holds a majority in the country, adding up to over 150% of the total population, even before counting the other denominations. One of the rare things that most Lebanese religious leaders will agree on is to avoid a new general census, for fear that it could trigger a new round of denominational conflict. The last official census was performed in 1932.

Religion has traditionally been of overriding importance in defining the Lebanese population. Dividing state power between the religious denominations and sects, and granting religious authorities judicial power, dates back to Ottoman times (the millet system). The practice was reinforced during French mandate, when Christian groups were granted privileges. This system of government, while partly intended as a compromise between sectarian demands, has caused tensions that still dominate Lebanese politics to this day.

The Christian population majority is believed to have ended in the early 1960s, but government leaders would agree to no change in the political power balance. This led to Muslim demands of increased representation, and the constant sectarian tension slid into violent conflict in 1958 (prompting U.S. intervention) and again in the grueling Lebanese Civil War, in 197590.
Natural Growth Rate in Lebanon throughout years
The balance of power has been slightly adjusted in the 1943 National Pact, an informal agreement struck at independence, in which positions of power were divided according to the 1932 census. The Sunni elite was then accorded more power, but Maronites continued to dominate the system. The sectarian balance was again adjusted towards the Muslim side but simultaneously further reinforced and legitimized. Shia Muslims (by now the largest sect) then gained additional representation in the state apparatus, and the obligatory Christian-Muslim representation in Parliament was downgraded from a 6:5 to a 1:1 ratio. Christians of various denominations were then generally thought to constitute about 40% of the population, although often Muslim leaders would cite lower numbers, and some Christians would claim that they still held a majority of the population.

====18 recognized religious groups====
An estimate of the area distribution of Lebanon's main religious groups
Distribution of Lebanon's religious groups according to 2009 municipal election data
The present Lebanese Constitution officially acknowledges 18 religious groups (see below). These have the right to handle family law according to their own courts and traditions, and they are the basic players in Lebanon's complex sectarian politics. 

* Alawite
* Armenian Catholic
* Armenian Orthodox
* Assyrian Church of the East
* Chaldean Catholic
* Copts
* Druze
* Greek Catholic
* Greek Orthodox
* Isma'ili
* Jewish
* Latin Catholic
* Maronite
* Protestant
* Sunni
* Shia
* Syriac Catholic
* Syriac Orthodox

===Religious population statistics===

Note: stateless Palestinians and Syrians are not included in the statistics below since they do not hold Lebanese citizenship. The numbers only include the present population of Lebanon, and not the Lebanese diaspora.

The 1932 census stated that Christians made up 54% of the population. Maronites, largest among the Christian denomination and then largely in control of the state apparatus, accounted for 29% of the total resident population. But since the 19th century, Muslim birth rates have been continually higher than Christian birth rates. Also, far larger numbers of Christians emigrated from Lebanon than Muslims. 

A study conducted by Statistics Lebanon, a Beirut-based research firm, cited by the United States Department of State found that of Lebanon's population of approximately 4.3 million is estimated to be: 

* 40.5% Christian (21% Maronite, 8% Greek Orthodox, 5% Melkite Catholic, 7% other Christian denominations like Armenian Orthodox, Syriac Catholic, Armenian Catholic, Syriac Orthodox, Roman Catholic, Chaldean, Assyrian, Copt, Protestant)
* 54% Islam (Sunni and Shia, 27% each)
* 5.6% Druze (who do not consider themselves to be Muslims)

There are also very small numbers of other religions such as Judaism, Bah' Faith, Buddhism, Hindusim and Mormons. 

The CIA World Factbook specifies that of those residing in Lebanon, 59.7% are Muslims (Sunni, Shia, Druze, Sufi and Alawites) and 39% are Christians (mostly Maronites, Greek Orthodox, Melkite Greek Catholics, Protestant, Armenian Apostolic, Assyrian Church of the East, Syriac Orthodox, Chaldean Catholic, Syrian Catholics) and 1.3% "Other". 

====Christians====
Lebanese President Michel Suleiman. In Lebanon the President has to be a Christian Maronite
It is estimated that the Christian population in Lebanon makes up about 41.5% and worldwide of the 18 millions Lebanese about 80% of the total population.

* The Maronites are the largest of the Christian groups about 21% in Lebanon and worldwide over 60% of the population. They have had a long and continuous association with the Roman Catholic Church, but have their own patriarch, liturgy, and customs. Traditionally they had good relations with the Western world, especially France French mandate and the Vatican. Fr. Samir: Benedict XVIs courage carries the Churches of the Middle East and the Arab Spring They traditionally dominated the Lebanese government, and Maronites are the only sect eligible for the post of President of Lebanon. Their influence in later years has diminished, because of their relative decrease in numbers but also due to the Syrian occupation of Lebanon, which generally benefited Muslim communities, and was resisted by most Maronites. Today the Maronites are believed to compose about 21% of the population, scattered around the Lebanese countryside but with heavy concentrations on Mount Lebanon and in Beirut.
* The second largest Christian group is the Greek Orthodox at least 10% of the population. The church exists in many parts of the Arab world and Greek Orthodox Christians have often been noted for pan-Arab or pan-Syrian leanings; it has had less dealings with Western countries than the Maronites. The Greek Orthodox Lebanese Christians have a long and continuous association with Greek Orthodox European countries like Greece, Cyprus, Russia, Ukraine, Bulgaria and Serbia. They are believed to constitute about 10% of the total population. The Deputy Speaker of Parliament and the deputy Prime Minister are reserved for Greek Orthodox Christians.
* The Greek Catholics or Melkites are thought to constitute about 5% of the population.
* The remaining Christian churches are thought to constitute another 7% of the population (Armenian Apostolic, Armenian Catholic, Syriac Orthodox, Syriac Catholic, Assyrians, Protestants, Roman Catholics).

====Muslims====
Today, there is consensus that Muslims constitute a solid part of the population. According to the CIA World Factbook The Muslim population is estimated at around 61% within the Lebanese territories, but at a smaller percentage worldwide. (Shia, Sunni, Druze, Isma'ilite, Alawite or Nusayri). Sectarian Breakdown:

* The Shia Muslims are around 27% - 29% of the total population. The Speaker of Parliament is always a Shi'a Muslim, as it is the only high post that Shi'as are eligible for. The Shiites are largely concentrated in northern and western Beqaa, Southern Lebanon and in the southern suburbs of Beirut. 
* The Sunni Muslims constitute also about 27% - 29% of the total population. Sunni notables traditionally held power in the Lebanese state together, and they are still the only sect eligible for the post of Prime Minister Sunnis are mostly concentrated in west Beirut, Tripoli, Sidon, Central and Western Beqaa, and Akkar in the north. 
* The Druze constitute 5% of the population and can be found primarily in Mount Lebanon and the Shouf District.
* Other Muslim sects have a small presence, with the Isma'ilis and Alawites combined comprising less than 1% of the population and usually included among Lebanese Shia Muslims.

====Other religions====
Other religions account for only an estimated 0.3% of the population mainly foreign temporary workers, according to the CIA Factbook. There remains a very small Jewish population, traditionally centered in Beirut. It has been larger: most Jews left the country after the Lebanese Civil War (19751990) as thousands of Lebanese did at that time.

==Diaspora==

Apart from the three and a half million citizens of Lebanon proper, there is a sizeable Lebanese diaspora. No accurate numbers are available, so estimates on the total size of the diaspora vary wildly, from conservative estimates of 45 million to a maximum, and probably inflated, figure of 15 million. Most Lebanese emigrants and their descendants are Christian; however, there are some who are Muslim. Lebanese Christian families are economically and politically prominent in several Latin American countries (in 2007 Mexican Carlos Slim Hel, son of Lebanese immigrants, was determined to be the wealthiest man in the World by Fortune Magazine), and make up a substantial portion of the Lebanese American community in the United States. The largest Lebanese diaspora is located in Brazil, where about 67 million people have Lebanese descent (see Lebanese Brazilian). In Argentina, there is also a large Lebanese diaspora of approximately 1.5 million people having Lebanese descent. (see Lebanese Argentine). In Canada, there is also a large Lebanese diaspora of approximately 250,000-500,000 people having Lebanese descent. (see Lebanese Canadians).

The large size of Lebanon's diaspora may be partly explained by the historical and cultural tradition of seafaring and traveling, which stretches back to Lebanon's ancient Phoenician origins and its role as a "gateway" of relations between Europe and the Middle East. It has been commonplace for Lebanese citizens to emigrate in search of economic prosperity. Furthermore, on several occasions in the last two centuries the Lebanese population has endured periods of ethnic cleansing and displacement (for example, 184060 and 197590). These factors have contributed to the geographical mobility of the Lebanese people.

While under Syrian occupation, Beirut passed legislation which prevented second-generation Lebanese of the diaspora from automatically obtaining Lebanese citizenship. This has reinforced the migr status of many diaspora Lebanese. There is currently a campaign by those Lebanese of the diaspora who already have Lebanese citizenship to attain the vote from abroad, which has been successfully passed in the Lebanese parliament and will be effective as of 2013 which is the next parliamentary elections. If suffrage was to be extended to these 1.2 million Lebanese migr citizens, it would have a significant political effect, since as many as 80% of them are believed to be Christian.

===Lebanese Civil War refugees and displaced persons===

With no official figures available, it is estimated that 600,000900,000 persons fled the country during the Lebanese Civil War (197590). Although some have since returned, this permanently disturbed Lebanese population growth and greatly complicated demographic statistics.

Another result of the war was a large number of internally displaced persons. This especially affected the southern Shia community, as Israeli invasion of southern Lebanon in 1978, 1982 and 1996 prompted waves of mass emigration, in addition to the continual strain of occupation and fighting between Israel and Hizbullah (mainly 1982 to 2000).

Many Shias from Southern Lebanon resettled in the suburbs south of Beirut. After the war, the pace of Christian emigration accelerated, as many Christians felt discriminated against in a Lebanon under increasingly oppressive Syrian occupation.

According to a UNDP study, as much as 10% of the Lebanese had a disability in 1990. LEBANON: Disabled remain marginalized, study finds, IRIN. Accessed August 6, 2009. Other studies have pointed to the fact that this portion of society is highly marginalized due to the lack of educational and governmental support of their advancement. 

==Languages==

Commonly spoken languages in Lebanon include Lebanese Arabic, French and English. The minority languages mainly spoken between their respective populations are Armenian, Kurdish, Greek and many others.

==CIA World Factbook demographic statistics==
US Census Statistics
The following demographic statistics are from the CIA World Factbook, unless otherwise indicated.
* Population:
:Total population: 4,143,101 (July 2011 est.)
* Age structure: 
* 014 years: 21.5% (male 487,930/female 464,678)
* 1564 years: 68% (male 1,370,628/female 1,466,173)
* 65 years and over: 10.5% (male 173,073/female 200,619) (2010 est.)

* Median age:
:Total: 29.34 years

:Male: 27.28 years

:Female: 31.43 years (2011 est.)
* Population growth rate:
:1.04% (2005 est.)
:0.96% (2011 est.) according to CIA Factbook
* Net migration rate:
:-4.43 migrant(s)/1,000 population (2011 est.)
* Sex ratio: 
:at birth: 1.05 male(s)/female

:under 15 years: 1.04 male(s)/female

:15-64 years: 0.92 male(s)/female

:65 years and over: 0.83 male(s)/female

:total population: 0.94 male(s)/female (2005 est.)
* Life expectancy at birth:
:total population: 79.82 years
:male: 77.28 years
:female: 80.36 years (2010 est.)

==Vital statistics==
===UN estimates World Population Prospects: The 2010 Revision ===

 Period Live births per year Deaths per year Natural change per year CBR1 CDR1 NC1 TFR1 IMR1 
 1950-1955 61 000 24 000 38 000 39.9 15.4 24.4 5.74 90.0 
 1955-1960 70 000 23 000 47 000 39.3 12.7 26.6 5.72 72.8 
 1960-1965 77 000 22 000 55 000 37.6 10.7 26.9 5.69 61.1 
 1965-1970 81 000 21 000 59 000 34.5 9.2 25.3 5.34 53.4 
 1970-1975 83 000 21 000 62 000 31.9 8.1 23.8 4.78 47.0 
 1975-1980 85 000 22 000 63 000 30.5 7.8 22.7 4.31 44.2 
 1980-1985 84 000 21 000 62 000 29.5 7.6 21.9 3.90 40.6 
 1985-1990 78 000 21 000 57 000 26.7 7.3 19.4 3.31 36.8 
 1990-1995 80 000 23 000 57 000 24.8 7.1 17.8 3.00 31.4 
 1995-2000 81 000 26 000 56 000 22.6 7.1 15.5 2.70 28.1 
 2000-2005 69 000 27 000 42 000 17.7 6.9 10.8 2.09 25.6 
 2005-2010 66 000 28 000 38 000 15.9 6.9 9.1 1.86 22.7 
 2010-2015 63 000 29 000 34 000 14.8 7.1 7.7 1.81 18.7 
 1 CBR = crude birth rate (per 1000); CDR = crude death rate (per 1000); NC = natural change (per 1000); TFR = total fertility rate (number of children per woman); IMR = infant mortality rate per 1000 births 

===Registered births and deaths Demographic Yearbook ===

 Average population Live births Deaths Natural change Crude birth rate (per 1000) Crude death rate (per 1000) Natural change (per 1000) Total fertility rate (TFR) 
 2007 80 896 21 092 59 804 21.5 5.6 15.9 
 2008 84 823 21 048 63 775 
 2009 90 388 22 260 68 128 
 2010 95 218 25 500 69 718 

===Population estimates===

 Year Population 
 January 1, 2010 4,073,000  
 January 1, 2011 4,081,000 +0.19% 
 January 1, 2012 4,088,000 +0.17% 
 January 1, 2013 (est) 4,093,000 +0.12% 
 January 1, 2014 (est) 4,097,000 +0.09% 

Source: 

==Immigrants and ethnic groups==
There are substantial numbers of immigrants from other Arab countries (mainly Palestine, Syria, Iraq and Egypt) and non-Arab-speaking Muslim countries. Also, recent years have seen an influx of people from Ethiopia and South East Asian countries such as Indonesia, the Philippines, Malaysia, Sri Lanka, as well as smaller numbers of other immigrant minorities, Colombians and Brazilians (of Lebanese descent themselves). Most of these are employed as guest workers in the same fashion as Syrians and Palestinians, and entered the country to search for employment in the post-war reconstruction of Lebanon. Apart from the Palestinians, there are approximately 180,000 stateless persons in Lebanon.

===Armenians, Jews, Iranians===
Armenian Church in North Beirut
Lebanese Armenians, Jews, Iranians form more distinct ethnic minorities, all of them in possession of a separate languages (Armenian, Hebrew, Farsi) and a national home area (Armenia, Israel, Iran) outside of Lebanon. However, they total 5% of the population.

===French and Italians===
During the French Mandate of Lebanon, there was a fairly large French minority and a tiny Italian minority. Most of the French and Italian settlers left after Lebanese independence in 1943 and only 22,000 French Lebanese and 4,300 Italian Lebanese continue to live in Lebanon. The most important legacy of the French Mandate is the frequent use and knowledge of the French language by most of the educated Lebanese people.

===Palestinians===
402,582 descendants of Palestinian refugees were registered in Lebanon with the United Nations Relief and Works Agency (UNRWA) in March 2005, almost all refugees or descendants of refugees from the 1948 Arab-Israeli War. Some of these may have emigrated during the civil war, but there are no reliable figures available. There are also a number of Palestinians who are not registered as UNRWA refugees, because they left earlier than 1948 or were not in need of material assistance. The exact number of Palestinians remain a subject of great dispute and the Lebanese government will not provide an estimate. A figure of 400,000 Palestinian refugees would mean that Palestinians constitute more than 10% of the resident population of Lebanon.

Palestinians living in Lebanon are considered foreigners and are under the same restrictions on employment applied to other foreigners. Prior to 2010 they were under even more restrictive employment rules which permitted, other than work for the U.N., only the most menial employment. They are not allowed to attend public schools, own property, or make an enforceable will. "Lebanon Gives Palestinians New Work Rights" article by Nada Bakri in The New York Times August 17, 2010, accessed August 17, 2010 

Palestinian refugees, who constitute nearly a tenth of the countrys population, have long been denied basic rights in Lebanon. They are not allowed to attend public schools, own property or pass on inheritances, measures Lebanon says it has adopted to preserve their right to return to their property in what constitutes Israel now.

Their presence is controversial, and resisted by large segments of the Christian population, who argue that the primarily Sunni Muslim Palestinians dilute Christian numbers. Many Shia Muslims also look unfavorably upon the Palestinian presence since the camps have tended to be concentrated in their home areas. The Lebanese Sunnis, however, would be happy to see these Palestinians given the Lebanese nationality, thus increasing the Lebanese Sunni population by well over 10% and tipping the fragile electoral balance much in favor of the Sunnis. Late Prime Minister Rafiq Haririhimself a Sunnihad hinted on more than one occasion on the inevitability of granting these refugees Lebanese citizenship. Thus far the refugees are denied Lebanese citizenship as well as many rights enjoyed by the rest of the population, and are confined to severely overcrowded refugee camps, in which construction rights are severely constricted.

Palestinians may not work in a large number of professions, such as lawyers and doctors. However, after negotiations between Lebanese authorities and ministers from the Palestinian National Authority some professions for Palestinians were allowed (such as taxi driver and construction worker). The material situation of the Palestinian refugees in Lebanon is difficult, and they are believed to constitute the poorest community in Lebanon, as well as the poorest Palestinian community with the possible exception of Gaza refugees. Their primary sources of income are UNRWA aid and menial labor sought in competition with Syrian guest workers.

The Palestinians are almost totally Sunni Muslim, though at some point Christians counted as high as 40% with Muslims at 60%. The numbers of Palestinian Christians has diminished in later years, as many have managed to leave Lebanon. During the Lebanese Civil War, Palestinian Christians sided with the rest of the Palestinian community, instead of allying with Lebanese Greek Orthodox or other Christian communities.

60,000 Palestinians have received Lebanese citizenship, including most Christian Palestinians. 

===Syrians===

In 1976, Syrian President Hafez al-Assad sent troops into Lebanon to fight PLO forces on behalf of Christian militias. This led to escalated fighting until a cease-fire agreement later that year that allowed for the stationing of Syrian troops within Lebanon. The Syrian presence in Lebanon quickly changed sides; soon after they entered Lebanon they had flip-flopped and began to fight the Christian nationalists in Lebanon they allegedly entered the country to protect. The Kateab Party and The Lebanese Forces under Bachir Gemayel strongly resisted the Syrians in Lebanon. In 1989, 40,000 Syrian troops remained in central and eastern Lebanon under the supervision of the Syrian government. Although, the Taif Accord, established in the same year, called for the removal of Syrian troops and transfer of arms to the Lebanese army, the Syrian Army remained in Lebanon until the Lebanese Cedar Revolution in 2005 to relaease the Syrian Occupation. However, in 1994, the Lebanese Government under the pressure of the Syrian regime has given the Lebanese passport to almost 250,000 Syrian citizens, in order to have voting power in later parliamentary elections.

There are 816,432 registered Syrian refugees in Lebanon. Syria Regional Refugee Response - Lebanon, UNHCR 

===Assyrians===
There are an estimated 40,000 to 80,000 Iraqi Assyrian refugees in Lebanon. The vast majority of them are undocumented, with a large number having been deported or put in prison. They belong to various denominations, including the Assyrian Church of the East, Chaldean Catholic Church, and Syriac Catholic Church.

===Iraqis===
Due to the US-led invasion of Iraq, Lebanon has received a mass influx of Iraqi refugees numbering at around 100,000. The vast majority of them are undocumented, with a large number having been deported or put in prison. 

===Kurds===
There are about 200,000 Mardalli in Lebanon, i.e. people originating from the Mardin province in Turkey, most of them live in Beirut. The Mardallis are often referred to as Kurds by the Lebanese people due to their close culture and similar vocabulary with the Kurdish peoples of Mardin. But the Mardallis are a mix population, as is the population in Mardin itself.

==References==

 

[[Politics of Lebanon]]

Lebanon is a parliamentary democratic republic within the overall framework of confessionalism, a form of consociationalism in which the highest offices are proportionately reserved for representatives from certain religious communities. The constitution grants the people the right to change their government. However, from the mid-1970s until the parliamentary elections in 1992, civil war precluded the exercise of political rights. According to the constitution, direct elections must be held for the parliament every 4 years. The last parliamentary election was in 2009. Pro-Western coalition declares victory in Lebanon - The Globe and Mail The Parliament, in turn, elects a President every 6 years to a single term. The President is not eligible for re-election. The last presidential election was in 2008. The president and parliament choose the Prime Minister. Political parties may be formed; most are based on sectarian interests. Syria was charged by Arab League with disentangling the combatants and restoring calm from the time of the second Lebanese civil war (which began in 1975) until 2005 when the Lebanese revolted against the Syrian presence and caused the withdrawal of Syrian troops with the support of the International community. Israel occupied parts of Lebanon in 1978 then withdrew from all Lebanese territories in 2000 although they still occupy Shebaa Farms, an area disputed between Syria, Israel and Lebanon. 2008 saw a new twist to Lebanese politics when the Doha Agreement set a new trend where the opposition is allowed a veto power in the Lebanese Council of Ministers and confirmed religious Confessionalism in the distribution of political power.

==Political developments since 1943==

Since the emergence of the post-1943 state and after the destruction of the Ottoman Caliphate, national policy has been determined largely by a relatively restricted group of traditional regional and sectarian leaders. The 1943 National Pact, an unwritten agreement that established the political foundations of modern Lebanon, allocated political power on an essentially confessional system based on the 1932 census. Seats in parliament were divided on a 6-to-5 ratio of Christians to Muslims, until 1990 when the ratio changed to half and half. Positions in the government bureaucracy are allocated on a similar basis. The pact also by custom allocated public offices along religious lines, with the top three positions in the ruling "troika" distributed as follows:
* The President, a Maronite Christian;
* The Speaker of the Parliament, a Shi'a Muslim, and
* The Prime Minister, a Sunni Muslim.

Efforts to alter or abolish the confessional system of allocating power have been at the centre of Lebanese politics for decades. Those religious groups most favoured by the 1943 formula sought to preserve it, while those who saw themselves at a disadvantage sought either to revise it after updating key demographic data or to abolish it entirely. Nonetheless, many of the provisions of the national pact were codified in the 1989 Ta'if Agreement, perpetuating sectarianism as a key element of Lebanese political life.

Although moderated somewhat under Ta'if, the Constitution gives the President a strong and influential position. The President has the authority to promulgate laws passed by the Parliament, to issue supplementary regulations to ensure the execution of laws, and to negotiate and ratify treaties.

The Parliament is elected by adult suffrage (majority age for election is 21) Lebanese Constitution English Official Translation, Lebanese Presidency Website. based on a system of majority or "winner-take-all" for the various confessional groups. There has been a recent effort to switch to proportional representation which many argue will provide a more accurate assessment of the size of political groups and allow minorities to be heard. Most deputies do not represent political parties as they are known in the West, and rarely form Western-style groups in the assembly. Political blocs are usually based on confessional and local interests or on personal/family allegiance rather than on political affinities.

The parliament traditionally has played a significant role in financial affairs, since it has the responsibility for levying taxes and passing the budget. It also exercises political control over the cabinet through formal questioning of ministers on policy issues and by requesting a confidence debate.

Lebanon's judicial system is based on the Napoleonic Code. Juries are not used in trials. The Lebanese court system has three levelscourts of first instance, courts of appeal, and the court of cassation. There also is a system of religious courts having jurisdiction over personal status matters within their own communities, e.g., rules on such matters as marriage, divorce, and inheritance.

Lebanese political institutions often play a secondary role to highly confessionalized personality-based politics. Powerful families also still play an independent role in mobilizing votes for both local and parliamentary elections. Nonetheless, a lively panoply of domestic political parties, some even predating independence, exists. The largest are all confessional based. The Free Patriotic Movement, The Kataeb Party, also known as the Phalange Party, the National Bloc, National Liberal Party, Lebanese Forces and the Guardians of the Cedars (now outlawed) each have their own base among Christians. Amal and Hezbollah are the main rivals for the organized Shi'a vote, and the PSP (Progressive Socialist Party) is the leading Druze party. While Shi'a and Druze parties command fierce loyalty to their leaderships, there is more factional infighting among many of the Christian parties. Sunni parties have not been the standard vehicle for launching political candidates, and tend to focus across Lebanon's borders on issues that are important to the community at large. Lebanon's Sunni parties include Hizb ut-Tahrir, Future Movement, Independent Nasserist Organization (INO), the Al-Tawhid, and Ahbash. In addition to domestic parties, there are branches of pan-Arab secular parties (Ba'ath parties, socialist and communist parties) that were active in the 1960s and throughout the period of civil war.

There are differences both between and among Muslim and Christian parties regarding the role of religion in state affairs. There is a very high degree of political activism among religious leaders across the sectarian spectrum. The interplay for position and power among the religious, political, and party leaders and groups produces a political tapestry of extraordinary complexity.

In the past, the system worked to produce a viable democracy. Events over the last decade and long-term demographic trends, however, have upset the delicate Muslim-Christian-Druze balance and resulted in greater segregation across the social spectrum. Whether in political parties, places of residence, schools, media outlets, even workplaces, there is a lack of regular interaction across sectarian lines to facilitate the exchange of views and promote understanding. All factions have called for a reform of the political system.

Some Christians favor political and administrative decentralization of the government, with separate Muslim and Christian sectors operating within the framework of a confederation. Muslims, for the most part, prefer a unified, central government with an enhanced share of power commensurate with their larger share of the population. The reforms of the Ta'if agreement moved in this direction but have not been fully realized.

Palestinian refugees, predominantly Sunni Muslims, whose numbers are estimated at between 160,000-225,000, are not active on the domestic political scene.

On September 3, 2004, the Lebanese Parliament voted 96-29 to amend the constitution to extend President mile Lahoud's six-year term (which was about to expire) by another three years. The move was supported by Syria, which maintained a large military presence in Lebanon.

Following the withdrawal of Syrian troops in April 2005, Lebanon held parliamentary elections in four rounds, from 29 May to 19 June. The elections, the first for 33 years without the presence of Syrian military forces, were won by the Quadripartite alliance, which was part the Rafik Hariri Martyr List, a coalition of several parties and organizations newly opposed to Syrian domination of Lebanese politics.

==Executive branch==

|
|
|
|
|-
|Prime Minister
|Tammam Salam
|Independent
|15 February 2014

The President is elected by the Parliament for a six-year term and cannot be reelected again until six years have passed from the end of the first term. The Prime Minister and Deputy Prime Minister are appointed by the President in consultation with the Parliament; the president is required to be a Maronite, the prime minister a Sunni, and the Speaker of the Parliament a Shi'a. (See list of the ministers and their political affiliation for a list of ministers.)

This confessional system is based on 1932 census data which showed the Maronite Christians as having a substantial majority of the population. The Government of Lebanon continues to refuse to undertake a new census.

==Legislative branch==

Lebanese parliament building at Place d'toile in Beirut
Lebanon's national legislature is called the Assembly of Representatives (Majlis al-Nuwab in Arabic). Since the elections of 1992 (the first since the reforms of the Taif Agreement of 1989 removed the built-in majority previously enjoyed by Christians and distributed the seats equally between Christians and Muslims), the Parliament has had 128 seats. The term was four years, but has recently been extended to five.

Seats in the Parliament are confessionally distributed but elected by universal suffrage. Each religious community has an allotted number of seats in the Parliament. They do not represent only their co-religionists, however; all candidates in a particular constituency, regardless of religious affiliation, must receive a plurality of the total vote, which includes followers of all confessions. The system was designed to minimize inter-sectarian competition and maximize cross-confessional cooperation: candidates are opposed only by co-religionists, but must seek support from outside of their own faith in order to be elected.

The opposition Qornet Shehwan Gathering, a group opposed to the former pro-Syrian regime, has claimed that constituency boundaries have been drawn so as to allow many Shi'a Muslims to be elected from Shi'a-majority constituencies (where the Hezbollah Party is strong), while allocating many Christian members to Muslim-majority constituencies, forcing Christian politicians to represent Muslim interests. (Similar charges, but in reverse, were made against the Chamoun administration in the 1950s).

The following table sets out the confessional allocation of seats in the Parliament before and after the Taif Agreement.

==Political parties and elections==

Lebanon has numerous political parties, but they play a much less significant role in Lebanese politics than they do in most parliamentary democracies. Many of the "parties" are simply lists of candidates endorsed by a prominent national or local figure. Loose coalitions, usually organized locally, are formed for electoral purposes by negotiation among clan leaders and candidates representing various religious communities; such coalitions usually exist only for the election, and rarely form a cohesive block in the Parliament after the election. No single party has ever won more than 12.5 percent of the seats in the Parliament, and no coalition of parties has won more than 35 percent.

Especially outside of the major cities, elections tend to focus more on local than national issues, and it is not unusual for a party to join an electoral ticket in one constituency while aligned with a rival party - even an ideologically opposite party - in another constituency.

==Judicial branch==
The judicial branch is of:
* Four Courts of Cassation (three courts for civil and commercial cases and one court for criminal cases)
* The Constitutional Council (called for in the Ta'if Accord) rules on constitutionality of laws
* The Supreme Council hears charges against the president and prime minister as needed.
* A system of military courts that also has jurisdiction over civilians for the crimes of espionage, treason, and other crimes that are considered to be security-related. http://www.state.gov/g/drl/rls/hrrpt/2005/61693.htm 

==Administrative divisions==
Lebanon is divided in 6 governorates (muhafazat, singular - muhafazah); Beirut, Mount Lebanon, North, Beqaa, South, Nabatiye.

==Lebanon in the news==
*1999 Conflict: Farid Abboud discusses rebuilding after Israeli attacks. Farid Abboud at LAWAC 
*June 1999 Lebanon Will Fight Corruption by "Authority of Law" Ambassador of Lebanon Dr. Farid Abboud at Al-Hewar Center 
*2002 Fighting along the disputed Lebanese/Israeli border Interview With Lebanese Ambassador Farid Abboud & Wesley Clark 
*2002 Lebanese Post-reconstruction Efforts Ambassador Abboud discusses reconstruction success 
*2005 Assassination of former Prime Minister Rafiq Hariri WAMU and Farid Abboud discuss Hariri's assassination 

==International organization participation==
ABEDA, ACCT, AFESD, AL, AMF, ESCWA, FAO, G24, G-77, IAEA, IBRD, ICAO, ICC, ICRM, IDA, IDB, IFAD, IFC, IFRCS, ILO, IMF, IMO, Inmarsat, ITUC, Intelsat, Interpol, IOC, ISO (correspondent), ITU, NAM, OAS (observer), OIC, PCA, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNHCR, UNIDO, UNRWA, UPU, WCO, WFTU, WHO, WIPO, WMO, WTO.

== Notes ==

==External links==
*Lebanon official government portal
*

*



[[Economy of Lebanon]]

The economy of Lebanon is a developing economy, with a private sector that contributes to 75% of aggregate demand and a large banking sector that supports this demand. The IMF forecast a growth of 7% for Lebanon's real GDP in 2010 and 2011 following 9% growth in 2009 and 8.5% in 2008 it has 54th richest GDP per capita in the world it is forecasted that Lebanon per capita will be 19,100 by 2015 which makes it one of the strongest in the region. 

The major industrial sectors include metal products, banking, agriculture, chemicals, and transport equipment. Lebanon has a competitive and free market regime and a strong laissez-faire commercial tradition. The Lebanese economy is service-oriented; main growth sectors include banking and tourism. There are no restrictions on foreign exchange or capital movement.

==Macro-economic trend==
This is a chart of trend of gross domestic product of Lebanon at market prices estimated by the International Monetary Fund with figures in millions of Lebanese Pounds. 

 Year Gross Domestic Product US Dollar Exchange Inflation Index (2000=100) 
 1980 14,000 3.43 Lebanese Pounds 0.071 
 1985 59,329 16.41 Lebanese Pounds 0.21 
 1990 1,973,000 695.20 Lebanese Pounds 18 
 1995 18,027,607,000 1,621.33 Lebanese Pounds 81 
 2000 25,143,000,000 1,507.46 Lebanese Pounds 100 
 2005 33,243,000,000 1,507.48 Lebanese Pounds 105 
 2007 37,243,000,000 1,507.48 Lebanese Pounds 103 
 2009 39,243,000,000 1,507.48 Lebanese Pounds 101 
 2011 43,243,000,000 1,507.48 Lebanese Pounds 99 

For purchasing power parity comparisons, the US Dollar is exchanged at 1,403.29 Lebanese Pounds only. Mean wages were $8.95 per manhour in 2009.
:

 GDP 
 
 Year 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 
 GDP (USD Billions) 14.7 14.2 15.1 16.5 17.7 19.2 22.3 27.8 31.7 39.1 42.0 45.4 49.5 55.5 
 GDP growth rate 0.0% 2.6% 3.9% 4.4% 6.3% 1.0% -8.2% 9.9% 9.5% 7.0% 8.8% 1.5% 2.0% -.- 
 GDP Per Capita (USD) 6321 6766 7023 7444 7731 8002 8708 9062 9213 10351 11902 13013 15130 16346 
 Source: IMF IMF 

== History ==

+GDP per capita in international dollars, 19802012 Year Lebanon MENA avg 
 1980 5,322 3,346 
 1981 5,897 3,581 
 1982 3,970 3,681 
 1983 5,064 3,781 
 1984 7,592 3,903 
 1985 9,613 3,980 
 1986 9,025 3,873 
 1987 10,722 3,869 
 1988 7,875 3,826 
 1989 4,674 4,001 
 1990 4,158 4,191 
 1991 5,649 4,472 
 1992 5,925 4,570 
 1993 6,352 4,658 
 1994 6,868 4,764 
 1995 7,320 4,860 
 1996 7,606 5,138 
 1997 7,892 5,352 
 1998 8,031 5,512 
 1999 7,928 5,585 
 2000 8,077 5,876 
 2001 8,478 6,063 
 2002 8,792 6,261 
 2003 9,144 6,711 
 2004 9,959 7,175 
 2005 10,367 7,360 
 2006 10,751 7,882 
 2007 11,893 8,354 
 2008 13,116 8,735 
 2009 14,197 8,862 
 2010 15,168 9,220 
 2011 15,523 9,896 
 2012 15,985 10,188 

A typical street in the city of Beirut.
The 1975-90 Lebanese civil war seriously damaged Lebanon's economic infrastructure, cut national output by half, and had major consequences for Lebanon's position as a Middle Eastern entrepot and banking hub. After the war, the central government regained its ability to collect taxes and control over key port and government facilities. As a result, GDP per capita expanded 353% in the 1990s. 
Economic recovery has been helped by a financially sound banking system and resilient small- and medium-scale manufacturers, with family remittances, banking services, manufactured and farm exports, and international aid as the main sources of foreign exchange. Lebanon's economy has made impressive gains since the launch of "Horizon 2000," the government's $20 billion reconstruction program in 1993. Real GDP grew 8% in 1994 and 7% in 1995 before Israel's Operation Grapes of Wrath in April 1996 stunted economic activity. Real GDP grew at an average annual rate of less than 3% per year for 1997 and 1998 and only 1% in 1999. During 1992-98, annual inflation fell from more than 100% to 5%, and foreign exchange reserves jumped to more than $6 billion from $1.4 billion. Burgeoning capital inflows have generated foreign payments surpluses, and the Lebanese pound has remained relatively stable. Progress also has been made in rebuilding Lebanon's war-torn physical and financial infrastructure. Solidere, a $2-billion firm, is managing the reconstruction of Beirut's central business district; the stock market reopened in January 1996, and international banks and insurance companies are returning. The government nonetheless faces serious challenges in the economic arena. It has had to fund reconstruction by tapping foreign exchange reserves and boosting borrowing. Reducing the government budget deficit is a major goal of the current government. The gap between rich and poor grew in the 1990s, resulting in popular dissatisfaction over the skewed distribution of the reconstruction's benefits and leading the government to shift its focus from rebuilding infrastructure to improving living conditions.

After the end of the civil war, Lebanon enjoyed considerable stability, Beirut's reconstruction was almost complete, and increasing numbers of tourists poured into the nation's resorts. The economy witnessed growth, with bank assets reaching over 75 billion US dollars, Market capitalization was also at an all time high, estimated at $10.9 billion at the end of the second quarter of 2006. The month-long 2006 war severely damaged Lebanon's economy, especially the tourism sector. 
Over the course of 2008 Lebanon rebuilt its infrastructure mainly in the real estate and tourism sectors, resulting in a comparatively robust post war economy. Major contributors to the reconstruction of Lebanon include Saudi Arabia (with US$ 1.5 billion pledged), the European Union (with about $1 billion) and a few other Persian Gulf countries with contributions of up to $800 million. 

Given the frequent security turmoil it has faced, the Lebanese banking system has adopted a conservative approach, with strict regulations imposed by the central bank to protect the economy from political instability. These regulations have generally left Lebanese banks unscathed by the Financial crisis of 20072010. Lebanese banks remain, under the current circumstances, high on liquidity and reputed for their security. In late 2008, Moody's shifted Lebanon's sovereign rankings from stable to positive, acknowledging its financial security. Moreover, with an increase of 51% in the Beirut stock market, the index provider MSCI ranked Lebanon the world's best performer in 2008. Lebanon is one of the only seven countries in the world in which the value of the stock market increased in 2008. The Lebanese economy experienced continued resilience, growing 8.5 percent in 2008, 7 percent in 2009 and 8.8% in 2010. 

==External trade==
Lebanese exports in 2006
Lebanon has a competitive and free market regime and a strong laissez-faire commercial tradition. The Lebanese economy is service-oriented; main growth sectors include banking and tourism. There are no restrictions on foreign exchange or capital movement, and bank secrecy is strictly enforced. Lebanon has recently adopted a law to combat money laundering. There are practically no restrictions on foreign investment. There are no country-specific U.S. trade sanctions against Lebanon.

===Remittances===
Lebanon benefits from its large, cohesive, and entrepreneurial diaspora. Global Investment House.Lebanon Economic and Strategic Outlook (Nov 2008) Retrieved 28 June 2009. Over the course of time, emigration has yielded Lebanese "commercial networks" throughout the world. Background Note: Lebanon "www.washingtoninstitute.org". Retrieved 3 December 2006. As a result, remittances from Lebanese abroad to family members within the country total $8.2 billion International Organization for Migration."Lebanon - Facts and Figures" Retrieved 13 June 2009. and account for one fifth of the country's economy. Reuters."FACTBOX: Facts on Lebanon's economy" Retrieved 13 June 2009. Nassib Ghobril, the head of research and analysis for Byblos Bank, calculates that Lebanese abroad supply Lebanon with about $1,400 per capita every year. http://www.nytimes.com/2007/12/24/world/middleeast/24lebanon.html Retrieved June 18, 2009 

==Investment==
The stock market capitalisation of listed companies in Lebanon was valued at $10.858 billion in 2007 by the World Bank. 

Lebanon was unable to attract significant foreign aid to help it rebuild from both the long civil war (197589) and the Israeli occupation of the south (19782000). In addition, the delicate social balance and the near- dissolution of central government institutions during the civil war handicapped the state as it sought to capture revenues to fund the recovery effort. Thus it accumulated significant debt, which by 2001 had reached $28 billion, or nearly 150% of GDP. Unfortunately, economic performance was sluggish in 2000 and 2001 (zero growth in 2000, and estimates between 1.0-1.4% in 2001, largely attributed to slight increases in tourism, banking, industry, and construction). Unemployment is estimated at 14% for 2000 and 29% among the 15-24 year age group, with preliminary estimates of further increases in 2001. However, fortunately, many Lebanese expatriates have been able to return to the country due to the negative financial situations they are facing abroad, due to the global economic crisis. Also, more job opportunities are attracting more Lebanese youths for a chance to return and work in Lebanon, and also a benefit for the Lebanese living in the country, graduating from universities.

==Reforms==

Lebanon's current program of reforms focuses on three main pillars:
190x190px
* Economic revival and sustainable growth, with the private sector as the engine of growth;
* Fiscal consolidation and structural improvement in public sector finances; and
* Monetary, financial, and price stability.

The government also has maintained a firm commitment to the Lebanese pound, which has been pegged to the dollar since September 1999. In late 2000, the government substantially reduced customs duties, adopted export promotion schemes for agriculture, decreased social security fees and restrictions on investment in real estate by foreigners, and adopted an open-skies policy,with positive effects on trade in 1991. Nonetheless, the relative appreciation of the Lebanese currency has undermined competitiveness, with merchandise exports falling from 23% of GDP in 1989 to 4% in 2000.

In 2001, the government turned its focus to fiscal measures, Increasing gasoline taxes, reducing expenditures, and approving a value-added-tax that became effective in February 2002. Slow money growth and dollarization of deposits have hampered the ability of commercial banks to finance the government, leaving more of the burden to the central bank. This monetization of the fiscal deficit has put enormous pressure on central bank reserves, mitigated only slightly with the issuance of new Eurobonds over the past 2 years. The central bank has maintained a stable currency by intervening directly in the market, as well as low inflation, and succeeded in maintaining investors' confidence in debt. It has done so at a cost, however, as international reserves declined by $2.4 billion in 2000 and by $1.6 billion in the first half of 2001.

For 2002, the government has put primary emphasis on privatization, initially in the telecom sector and electricity, with continued planning for sales of the state airline, Beirut port, and water utilities. The government has pledged to apply the proceeds of sales to reducing the public debt and the budget deficit. In addition, it projects that privatization will bring new savings as government payrolls are pared, interest rates decline, and private sector growth and foreign investment are stimulated. The government also is tackling the daunting task of administrative reform, aiming to bring in qualified technocrats to address ambitious economic programs, and reviewing further savings that can be realized through reforms of the income tax system. The Lebanese Government faces major challenges in order to meet the requirements of a fiscal adjustment program focusing on tax reforms and modernization, expenditure rationalization, privatization, and improved debt management.
Faraya in North Lebanon. The Lebanese economy depends on its tourism sector throughout all seasons of the year. Tourists from Europe, GCC and Arab countries visit Lebanon for various reasons.

The U.S. enjoys a strong exporter position with Lebanon, generally ranking as Lebanon's fourth-largest source of imported goods. More than 160 offices representing U.S. businesses currently operate in Lebanon. Since the lifting of the passport restriction in 1997 (see below), a number of large U.S. companies have opened branches or regional offices, including Microsoft, American Airlines, Coca-Cola, FedEx, UPS, General Electric, Parsons Brinckerhoff, Cisco Systems, Eli Lilly, Computer Associates and Pepsi Cola. Mexico has also many enterprises run by ethnic Lebanese, such as Carlos Slim's Telmex.

Solidere shares are the most actively traded in the Beirut Stock Exchange. Its share price in the Beirut Stock Exchange has risen sharply in the last year from around US$5.00 in early 2004 to close at US$ 17.50 on Friday, 23 December 2005.

==Salaries of Lebanon==
Marina Towers, Beirut
On 15 October 2011, after various unions, including the teachers union, the general workers union, and others threatened to strike, the minimum wage was raised by 40% (200,000 LBP - $133) to 700,000 LBP ($466). Most unions went ahead with the strike except the general workers union. 
*Wages between minimal wage and 1,200,000 LBP ($800) were increased by 200,000 ($133) to become 700,000 LBP (minimal wage) and 1,400,000 LBP ($933) respectively.
*Wages more than 1,200,000 LBP up to 1,700,000 LBP ($1133) were increased by 300,000L.P ($200) to become 1,500,000 LBP ($1000) and 2,000,000 LBP ($1333).
*Wages above 1,800,000 LBP ($1200) were not increased.
The increase in wages was welcomed by most Lebanese but it also sparked criticism by many some workers unions, saying that the increases were not up to expectations especially that employees earning more that $1200 were not entitled to raises. Others criticized the raises altogether citing that it would burden small business that might end up closing altogether, those critics were mainly opposition politicians. 

As of 2011 World Bank analysis of Quality Life Index, it was estimated that: 
* 28% of the Lebanese people lives below poverty line ($2,500) http://www.nationmaster.com/graph/eco_pop_bel_pov_lin-economy-population-below-poverty-line 
* 54% of the Lebanese people lives in the moderate middle class ($9,000) annually. 12% from 1998
* 22% of the Lebanese people lives in the upper middle class ($15,000 - $27,000) annually. 19% from 1998
* 4% of the Lebanese people lives in the highest upper class rich ($30,000 and above) annually 1% from 1998

==See also==

* Beirut Stock Exchange
* Solidere

==References==

==External links==
*BSE trade sky high despite tensions - The Daily Star
*Embassy of Lebanon, Washington D.C. - Country Profile, The Economy
* Lebanese Economy extracted from the CIA factbook public data
*

 



[[Telecommunications in Lebanon]]

This article concerns the systems of communication in Lebanon. Lebanon possesses a number of systems of telecommunication, some of which are currently being reconstructed following damage during the civil war that ended in 1991. The country code and top-level domain for Lebanon is ".lb".

==Telephone==
There are 1,150,000 landlines and 2,916,000 mobile telephones in use in Lebanon. CIA World Factbook, 2009. The telephone system was severely damaged during the civil war but was completely rebuilt and revamped. The systems that provide the infrastructure for the telephone network are, domestically, microwave radio relay stations and cables, and internationally, two Intelsat satellite-earth stations, a microwave radio relay station to Syria and three international undersea fiber optic cables: I-ME-WE, CADMOS (to Cyprus), and BERYTAR (to Syria).

==Free radio and television broadcasting==
Lebanon possesses one AM radio broadcast station, and 32 FM radio broadcast stations. In 2005, there were 28 privately owned FM radio stations. One FM station, which shifts between French, English, and Armenian, and the sole AM radio station, which broadcasts solely in Arabic, are owned by the state-owned Radio Lebanon, which is under the jurisdiction of the Ministry of Information. Radio Lebanon also relays Radio France International at 13:00 (UTC) daily. Among private broadcasters are Mix FM, PAX Radio, the Lebanese Broadcasting Corporation(LBCI), National Broadcasting Network, Radio One, and the Voice of Tomorrow. World Radio Television Handbook (WRTH), 2005. There are 2.85 million radios is Lebanon. Furthermore, Lebanon has two digital cable television companies, Cable Vision and echonet.

There are 28 television broadcast stations in Lebanon, although the application of the audiovisual law has caused the closure of a number of TV stations. The PAL television standard is used in Lebanon. Other than the state-owned Tl Liban, most broadcasters are privately owned and earn revenues from advertising. Some of the most important television networks are the LBC, Murr TV, Al Jadeed, Future TV, Orange TV (OTV), Al-Manar, NBN, Tl Lumire, and TL (controlled by the government). There are 1.18 million television sets in Lebanon.

==Paid radio and television==
There are five cable TV companies in Lebanon: Cable Vision , Eco Net , City TV, Digiteck and UCL.

==Internet services==
The development and growth of internet infrastructure has been particularly slow in Lebanon due to corruption and allegations of a sector monopoly. http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/business-15273510 

Internet services are administered in Lebanon by the Ministry of Telecommunication. Lebanon provides three types of services: dialup services, wireless Internet service and ADSL. Lebanon ranks 80th on the netindex.com (as of January 12, 2014).

=== 56 K dialup ===
Dialup services cost around $7 a month but users have to pay for the cost of phone communication.

=== ADSL services ===
ADSL was offered for the first time in April 2007 and there were, as of July 2011, 1,284,361 subscribers. The ADSL network has been undergoing large upgrades throughout the country. The addition of the new IMEWE underwater cable during the summer of 2011 has dramatically increased Lebanon's international bandwidth capacity, allowing for increased speeds and larger data caps. The prices for ADSL varies slightly depending on the DSP but typically cost from $16/month (1 Mbit/s) to $50/month (6-8 Mbit/s) on unlimited data plans.

To fix the problem, former Minister of Telecommunications Charbel Nahas signed an 18-month contract with Consolidated Engineering & Trading and French/American Company Alcatel-Lucent to install a Fiber Optics grid. According to Nahhas, by the end of 2011 all the areas of Lebanon will have fast internet ranging from 10-15 Mbit/s download, and 20 Mbit/s and more will be available the year after, allowing Lebanon to finally catch up with the rest of the world.

=== Wireless Internet ===
Wireless Internet services were offered for the first time in 2005 to palliate for the absence of ADSL infrastructure at the time. It's fees across ISPs revolves around $45/month. Wireless internet is portable: users can connect nearly anywhere through a receiver (connected to the client via USB or Ethernet) and it provides download rates between 2 Mbit/s and 9 Mbit/s depending on the chosen plan. Coverage weakens in densely built areas or remote locations.

Point-to-point leased line fees include:
* A one time connection fee based on Bit Rate- calculated per Leased Line- (and depending on the Leased Line Bit Rate).
* A recurring monthly fee with a fixed component which is based on Bit Rate, and a variable component based on Bit Rate and distance. http://www.mpt.gov.lb/nleased.htm, Fees and Tariffs (Local link)
Point-to-Point Analog and Digital Leased Lines (valid from 15 July 2006). Retrieved on 2008-06-26. 

fiber to the home service (FTTH): came in 2014

4G connection service : came in 2013 
There are 17 licensed ISPs (Internet Services Providers) and 9 licensed DSPs (Data Service Providers) operating in Lebanon.

ISPs:
Broadband Plus, ComNet, Farah Net, Fiberlink Networks (NewCom), IDM, Keblon, Lebanon OnLine, Masco Group, Moscanet (Wise), Onet Plus, Pro Services, Sodetel, Solidere, Terranet, Transmog (Cyberia), Tri Network Consultants, Virtual ISP (VISP).

DSPs:Cable One, Cedarcom, GlobalCom Data Services, Pesco, Sodetel, Solidere, LCNC S.A.L., TRISAT S.A.R.L., Waves S.A.L.

For more information about the licensed ISPs/DSPs, you can visit TRA website.

In 2009 Lebanon had 2,000,000 internet users (48% of the population).

In mid-2011 Lebanon had 2,500,820, 59% penetration rate Internet World Stats, 2011. 

As of December 31, 2011, Lebanon had 3,367,220 Internet users (87% penetration rate). Internet World Stats, 2012. 

As of June 30, 2012, Lebanon had 3,722,950 Internet users (92% penetration rate). Internet World Stats, 2012. 

==Broadband Decree passed==
The cabinet of ministers passed a decree on August 23, 2011, to increase the current speeds of Internet connection setting the minimum speed to 1 Mbit/s in addition to lowering the prices. The decree was presented by telecommunication minister Nicolas Sahnaoui.

==References==

Much of the information in this article is adapted from the CIA World Factbook.

==External links==
* 
* VPN for Lebanon

Lebanon
 

[[Transport in Lebanon]]

Transportation in Lebanon varies greatly in quality from the ultra modern Beirut International Airport to poor road conditions in many parts of the country. The Lebanese civil war between 1975 and 1990 and the 2006 Lebanon War with Israel severely damaged the country's infrastructure.

==Buses==

Beirut has frequent bus connections to other cities in Lebanon and major cities in Syria. The Lebanese Commuting Company, or LCC in short, is just one of a handful brands of public transportations all over Lebanon. http://www.lccworld.com/profile.asp Company Profile], LCC On the other hand, the publicly owned buses are managed by le Office des Chemins de Fer et des Transports en Commun (OCFTC), or the "Railway and Public Transportation Authority" in English. OCFTC Buses for northern destinations and Syria leave from Charles Helou Station. Beirut Transport, Lonely Planet 

Buses are popular and inexpensive and can be stopped anywhere along the way simply by hailing. Never take a bus without verifying the destination with the driver. The fair is for LBP1500 ($1). There are Public Buses (are not regular) and Private Buses (are in general better organized than Public buses).

==Ferries==

Apart from the international airport, the Port of Beirut is another port of entry. As a final destination, anyone can also reach Lebanon by ferry from Cyprus or by road from Damascus. Transportation & Communication, Ikama The Port of Tripoli (Lebanon) is also a port of entry.

==Taxis and services==

Apart from buses, the latter are served by either service or taxis. 'Service' is a lot cheaper than taxis however, to avoid misunderstanding, agreement over the pricing needs to be made before setting off. 

Note: Meters are NOT used in Lebanon. Prices for Taxis must be negotiated before entering the vehicle.

Service-taxis are probably the most popular means of transportation in Lebanon and recognizable by their red plate. You can take a service or taxi just by hailing in the street. Watch out, if there are no passengers, specify if you would like it as a taxi (private cab) or as a service (shared cab).

===Types of taxis in Lebanon===

*Service-taxis

One has to specify one's destination and enter the taxi only if one's destination corresponds to the itinerary of the Service-taxi. The driver stops to pick up additional passengers anywhere on the streets and drop them off generally in main squares and main streets. It remains advantageous with very low fares. 

Service-Taxi Taxi 
*Local
**LBP 2000 ($1.32) per person or LBP 4000 ($2.64) per person depending on how close/far the destination is. All prices within Beirut should not exceed LBP 4000 per person (Maximum of LBP 5000 for Beirut outskirts). (Note: If the driver says 'Servicene', he means double the 'Service' price, i.e. LBP 4000 per person).
*Long Distance
**LBP 5.000 ($3.50) LP 30.000 ($20) 

*Traditional Taxis
The driver must not pick up additional passengers. Most of these taxis are not equipped with meters, so negotiate the fare before embarking. The estimation of the fare is therefore often an approximate. 

*On-call taxis
Pick up people who have pre-booked by phone. They dont respond to hails in the street. They dont have a meter so passengers should ask the operator the price when they are booking the taxi, and double check with the driver at the end of the journey.

===Trains===

The Lebanese rail system is not currently in use, with services having ceased due to the country's political difficulties.

==Port infrastructure==

===Airport===
The Beirut Rafic Hariri International Airport, Beirut
The main national airport is the Beirut Rafic Hariri International Airport and is located in the southern suburbs. History Beirut Rafic Hariri International Airport }

== Other ==

An aerial tramway (Tlphrique) operates in the Jounieh area and the Beirut Tramway was decommissioned in 1968.

==See also==
http://www.beirutairport.gov.lb/home.html

==References==
 



[[Lebanese Armed Forces]]

The Lebanese Armed Forces (LAF) (Arabic:    | Al-Quwwt al-Musallaa al-Lubnniyya) or Forces Armes Libanaises (FAL) in French, also known as the Lebanese Army according to its official Website http://www.lebarmy.gov.lb/?ln=en (Arabic:   or "Arme libanaise" in French), is the military of the Republic of Lebanon. It consists of three branches, the army, the air force and the navy. The motto of the Lebanese Armed Forces is "Honor, Sacrifice, Loyalty" (Arabic: "    " - Sharaf.Tadhia.Wafa). The Lebanese Armed Forces logo consists of a Lebanon Cedar tree surrounded by two laurel leaves, positioned above the symbols of the three branches: the ground forces represented by the two bayonets, the navy represented by an anchor, and the air force represented by two wings.

==General overview==
The Lebanese Armed Forces primary missions include defending Lebanon and its citizens against external aggression, maintaining internal stability and security, confronting threats against the country's vital interests, engaging in social development activities and undertaking relief operations in coordination with public and humanitarian institutions. 

The LAF consists of 72,000 active personnel with the Land forces consisting of approximately 54,000 troops, the air & air defense forces consisting of about 1,000 personnel and another 1,000 in the naval forces. All three branches are operated and coordinated by LAF Command, which is located in Yarzeh, east of Lebanon's capital, Beirut. Currently the LAF is ranked 6th in the world in terms of growth, with the number of military personnel doubling over the period between 1985 to 2000. The country has six military colleges and schools. The Lebanese officers are sent to other countries such as Russia or other parts of Europe to receive additional training.

The equipment of the LAF is outdated due to lack of funds, political bickering and until recently the presence of foreign forces. After the conclusion of the Lebanese Civil War, the LAF decided to repair as much of its equipment as it could, while being aided by modest donations from other nations. About 85% of the LAF's equipment is American-made with the remaining being British, French, and Soviet-made. 

==History==
Lebanese soldiers during the mutasarrif period
The Lebanese Army first formed under Prince Fakher el-Din II the Great in the early 17th-century during the Principality of Lebanon (1516-1842). The first major victory came on October 31, 1622 against the Ottoman Empire Army under the lead of the Pasha of Damascus in the Battle of Majdel Anjar. Outnumbered (5,000 Lebanese soldiers against 12,000 Syrians), Fakher el-Din was nevertheless victorious and was able to capture the Pasha of Damascus himself. 

During the period of the semi-autonomous province (Mutasarrifia) period of Mount Lebanon between 1861 and 1914, no Turkish troops were allowed to station within its boundary. Lebanon established its own army made up of volunteer militias; "the free independent bearing of these mountaineers was in striking contrast to that of the underpaid, underfed and poorly clothed conscripts of the regular army". 

The beginnings of the modern army arose during 1916, when the French government established the "Legion of the Orient", which included Lebanese soldiers. After a post World War I League of Nations mandate was established over Lebanon in April 1920, France formed the Army of the Levant, which was later reorganized into the "Troupes Spciales du Levant" (Special Troops of the Levant). These troops were composed of Lebanese and Syrian enlisted personnel, but were commanded predominantly by French officers; however, the percentage of Lebanese and Syrian officers in the force gradually increased in size to approximately 90% of the total number by 1945. 

Later in 1926, the Lebanese First Sharp Shooters Unit was created out of the Special Troops of the Levant; it is considered to be a direct precursor to the Lebanese Armed Forces (LAF). 

During World War II, Lebanese troops fought in Lebanon with the Vichy French forces against Free French and British forces. After the Vichy forces in the Middle East surrendered in July 1941, volunteers from the Troupes Spciales du Levant enlisted in the Free French forces and participated in combat in Italy, North Africa, and southern France. In 1943, prior to the declaration of Lebanese independence, all the military units were combined in one brigade, the Fifth Brigade, under the command of General Fouad Chehab. On the day Lebanon declared independence, the Lebanese Third Sharp Shooters Regiment was placed at the disposal of the Lebanese government in order to maintain security. In June of the same year, the French reconstituted units of the Troupes Spciales du Levant, which were then attached to the British forces in the Middle East. The majority of the Lebanese Armed Forces remained a part of the French Army in Lebanon. 

After gaining independence in 1943, the Lebanese government formed an official delegation in 1944 to negotiate with the French the terms related to handing over the LAF. After nearly three weeks of talks, the joint French-British Command decreed that responsibility for armed units under French control were to be handed over to the Independent Government of Lebanon. These units were part of the Troupes Spciales du Levant and totaled about 3,000 men. On August 1, 1945 at 00:00 hours, the LAF was placed under full authority of the Lebanese National Government; this day is commemorated annually as Lebanese Army Day. 

The Lebanese Army first flag under the Independent Lebanon

After establishing authority over the LAF in 1945, the Lebanese government intentionally kept its armed forces small and weak due to the country's unique internal politics. Christian politicians feared that Muslims might use the armed forces as a vehicle for seizing power in a military coup. They also appeared unwilling to incur the cost of maintaining a large well equipped army. Throughout the 1950s and 1960s, Lebanon never spent more than 4% of its GNP on the military budget. Many Christian Lebanese also feared that a large army would inevitably force Lebanon into the ArabIsraeli conflict. However, Muslim politicians were also worried that a strong army could be used against Muslim interests because it would be commanded by Christians. At the same time they tended to feel that the military should be strong enough to play a part in the Arab-Israeli struggle. In addition to the two major conflicting views, prominent Lebanese politicians of the myriad religious denominations in Lebanon have also tended to be feudal warlords commanding their own private militias and feared that a strong army would endanger their personal power. 

In 1948, the Lebanese Third Sharp Shooters Regiment fought Israeli Forces occupying the Lebanese village of Malkieh in the northern Galilee and captured it, and that by the orders of Lebanese defense minister then, Emir Majid Arslan II. Khalidi, Walid. (1992). All That Remains. Institute of Palestine Studies, p.471. This was the first major combat operation for the Lebanese Armed Forces under the Independent Lebanese Government.

==Branches==

===Armed Forces Command===
The LAF Command is headquartered at Yarzeh. The organizational structure of the LAF Command includes:
* The Commander-in-Chief
* The Chief of staff
* Deputy Chiefs of Staff
* Various Directorates

===Lebanese Ground Forces===
The Lebanese Armed Forces' strength lies in their ground forces which is by far the largest of the three branches of the military.

The Fourth Brigade was previously active but was disbanded in 1984.

The Lebanese Army Ground Forces consist of:
* 5 Regional Commands
** Beirut Region
** Bekaa Region
** Mount Lebanon Region
** North Region
** South Region
* 11 Brigades
** 5 Heavy (Mechanized) Brigades
*** First Brigade
*** Second Brigade
*** Third Brigade
*** Fifth Brigade
*** Sixth Brigade
** 6 Light Brigades
*** Seventh Brigade
*** Eighth Brigade
*** Ninth Brigade
*** Tenth Brigade
*** Eleventh Brigade
*** Twelfth Brigade
* First Artillery Regiment
* Second Artillery Regiment

* Commando Regiment
** Includes the Mountains Combat Company.
* Airborne Regiment

* Navy SEALs Regiment
* Counter-Sabotage Regiment (Moukafaha)
* First Intervention Force Regiment
* Second Intervention Force Regiment
* Third Intervention Force Regiment
* Fourth Intervention Force Regiment
* Fifth Intervention Force Regiment
* Republican Guard Brigade

* Medical Brigade
* Support Brigade

* Logistics Brigade
* Military Police
* Independent Construction Regiment

* First Armored Regiment

* First Land Border Regiment

====Lebanese Ground Forces Equipment====

The Lebanese Army still uses equipment mostly received through donations or friendly prices. Its work horse is the M113 which is commonly used by every regiment and brigade. A collection of Western and Soviet made arms and equipment exists ranging from rifles to tanks. However, the Lebanese army is trying to rearm and modernize itself through new aids and purchases from different countries such as the United States, Belgium, Russia, and The Netherlands. A list of awaiting-for-delivery equipment is constantly growing and includes Leopard 1/A5 tanks, more M60 Patton tanks, M198 Howitzers, etc. A recent Russian promise to supply Lebanon with T-90 tanks has been in discussion since the Lebanese Defense Minister's last visit to Russia on December 16, 2008. 

Throughout history the Lebanese Army employed different arms and equipment which, at the time, were considered state of the art. Most of these arms have either been phased out of service or sold to other countries. Among the major equipment that is not currently active are AMX-13, Saladin, Panhard M3, and Staghound.

====Lebanese special forces====

The Lebanese Special Forces are the elite of the Lebanese army, those who enroll are subjected to rigorous training regimes and must be in peak physical and mental condition prior to their ascension to such a highly desired position. Each branch of the Armed Forces consist of their own form of Special Forces or Commandos. These include:
* Navy Commando Regiment (Navy SEALs)
* Commando Regiment (Also known as the Maghaweer)
* Airborne Regiment (Moujawkal)
* Counter-Sabotage (Moukafaha) Branch 
* Strike Force (Kouwa el-Dareba) Anti-Terrorism Branch

To ensure the effectiveness of such an elite force, many Commandos are sent overseas to nations such as the US, UK and France to receive extra training in specialized areas that the Lebanese Armed Forces are unable to provide, due to a lack of resources. While training in Lebanon, each Commando is instructed in the art of urban and guerrilla warfare. So rigorous is their domestic training regime that each commando is subjected to a training timetable consisting of 20 hours per day for 3 months, which is divided into different stages. Each stage consists of a specialized form of warfare and its associated tactics. Such tactics include: sabotage, sniping, extraction and covert operations. The Lebanese Special Forces are also well known for killing and eating snakes with their bare hands at graduation ceremonies. http://www.lebarmy.gov.lb/English/popup.htm?/images/album/13/21.jpg http://www.lebarmy.gov.lb/English/popup.htm?/images/album/13/22.jpg 

In 2008, the Lebanese Army started establishing the Special Operations command in order to group the Army's elite units. These Special Operations forces will include the Airborne Regiment, the Commandos Regiment,the Navy Commandos Regiment, and the Counter-Sabotage Regiment of the Military Intelligence. The initial size of the force will be less than two brigades, around 5,000 troops, but the plan is to enlarge it up to three brigades. 
 

===Lebanese Navy===

The Lebanese Navy is responsible for protecting Lebanon's territorial waters, ports, and fighting illegal smuggling of goods. The structure of the navy is centralized around the Navy Command, then it branches off into the quarter-general of the Navy, the Department of Naval Equipment Stores, the Naval School, Beirut Naval Base and the Jounieh Naval Base.

The navy, which currently lacks the suitable amount of equipment, has a number of approximately 50 vessels of various sizes and roles; however, the navy is trying to modernize itself, and increase its size.

===Lebanese Air Force===

The Lebanese Air Force is the air force branch of the Lebanese Armed Forces. It currently has a number of helicopters including the UH-1H Bell Huey, Gazelle, and various others. The air force is currently in the process of restoring its jet capabilities and considering the purchase of a small number of fighters or jet trainers.

===Colleges and schools===
The Lebanese Armed Forces has six official military colleges and schools that serve a wide variety of functions from officer training to overseeing national youth conscription programs. The recent emphasis on the First Flag Service Center is designed to help overcome the diverse nature of the population. The schools and colleges are:
* Fouad Shehab Command and Staff College
* High Center for Military Sport
* Military Academy
* Skiing and Mountain Fighting School
* Teaching Institute
* Air Force Aviation School
* Naval Academy
* Special Forces School

The Staff and Command College, Military Academy, and Mountain Skiing Fighting School are training centers for Lebanese soldiers designed to upgrade the quality of their skills while the High Center for Military Sport is designed to keep them in peak physical shape (it also organizes sports groups and teams for international competition as well). The Training Institute is designed to help soldiers specialize in certain aspects of the military, such as artillery and defense. 

==Military ranks http://www.lebarmy.gov.lb/en/ranks_orders/?100#.U3a9YvldVsw ==

===Generals===

 Insignia Shoulder pad of a General in the Lebanese Army Lebanese Army's Insignia of Major General Shoulder pad of a Brigadier General in the Lebanese Army 
 Title General Major General Brigadier General 
 Imd Liw Ameed 
    

===Senior officers===

 Insignia Shoulder pad of a Colonel in the Lebanese Army Shoulder pad of a Lieutenant Colonel in the Lebanese Army Shoulder pad of a Major in the Lebanese Army 
 Title Colonel Lieutenant Colonel Major 
 Aqeed Muqaddam R'id 
    

===Junior officers===

 Insignia Shoulder pad of a Captain in the Lebanese Army Shoulder pad of a First Lieutenant in the Lebanese Army Shoulder pad of a Second Lieutenant in the Lebanese Army 
 Title Captain First Lieutenant Second Lieutenant 
 Naqeeb Mulzim 'Awwal Mulzim 
     

===Non-commissioned officer ranks===

 Insignia Shoulder pad of a Chief Warrant Officer in the Lebanese Army Shoulder pad of a Warrant Officer in the Lebanese Army Shoulder pad of a First Adjutant in the Lebanese Army Shoulder pad of an Adjutant in the Lebanese Army Shoulder pad of a Sergeant First Class in the Lebanese Army Shoulder pad of a Sergeant in the Lebanese Army 
 Title Chief Warrant Officer Warrant Officer First Adjutant Adjutant Sergeant First Class Sergeant 
 Mu'ahhal 'Awwal Mu'ahhal Muawin 'Awwal Muawin Raqeeb 'Awwal Raqeeb 
          

===Enlisted men===

 Insignia Shoulder pad of a Corporal First class in the Lebanese Army Shoulder pad of a Corporal in the Lebanese Army Shoulder pad of a Soldier First Class in the Lebanese Army Shoulder pad of a Third Year Cadet in the Lebanese Army Shoulder pad of a Second Year Cadet in the Lebanese Army Shoulder pad of a First Year Cadet in the Lebanese Army 
 Title Corporal First Class Corporal Soldier First Class Third year Cadet Second year Cadet First year Cadet 
 Areef 'Awwal Areef Jundi 'Awwal Telmeez abit Telmeez abit Telmeez abit 
 Sana Thlitha Sana Thniya Sana 'Oula 
                  

==Camouflage patterns==

 Image 90px 110px 100px 100px 100px 100px 100px 
 Name US Woodland ARPAT 3-tones brown ARPAT MARPAT Woodland Tigerstripe Camouflage Lizard Camouflage Black Camouflage 
 Users All units Navy SEALs Regiment Airborne Regiment Commando Regiment Commando Regiment Moukafaha Navy SEALs Regiment 

==Combat history==

===Lebanese Civil War===

Lebanese Army personnel, Beirut, Lebanon 1982
As the civil war escalated, Lebanese militias grew stronger and soon surpassed the regular army. This rapidly undermined the authority of the central government. The government's ability to maintain order was also handicapped by the nature of the Lebanese Army. One of the smallest in the Middle East, it was composed based on a fixed ratio of religions. As members defected to sectarian militias, the army would eventually prove unable to contain the militant groups, rein in the PLO or monitor foreign infiltration. Since the government was Christian-dominated, especially the officers' ranks, trust among Muslims for central institutions, including the army, was low. The disintegration of the Lebanese Army was eventually initiated by Muslim deserters declaring that they would no longer take orders from the Maronite generals.

===Dinnieh fighting===

During December 1999-January 2000 an Islamic group launched a failed uprising against the Lebanese authorities in the Dinnieh district. In a period of 8 days of fighting in the snow-blanketed mountains east of the northern port of Tripoli, 14 soldiers and 25 rebels were killed. 

===2006 Lebanon War===

Lebanese Soldiers overlook the border, and prepare to confront Israeli soldiers.
In the 2006 Lebanon War the LAF did not engage in a direct conflict with the Israeli Army, despite its threat of retaliation if the IDF pushed too far northward into Lebanon. However, the latter did bomb several Lebanese military bases. While providing aid to civilians, Lebanese troops helped to uphold order in city streets, directed refugees to safer areas, and assisted with overlooking damage done by Israeli attacks. On several occasions, Lebanese troops fired anti-air weapons at Israeli aircraft, but no damage was documented. Overall, 49 Lebanese soldiers were killed. 

After the July war the LAF deployed south of the Litani River for the first time since 1968 to enforce Security Council Resolution 1701. The LAF says it will not, and cannot, disarm Hezbollah by force. On August 3, 2010, the Lebanese army fired at Israeli soldiers whom crane lifted a soldier across the border, to remove a tree off the fence; Israeli troops returned fire. 3 LAF soldiers, one Israeli officer and 1 Lebanese journalist were killed in the incident (After indiscriminate Israeli Artillery & aircraft bombing). According to UN reports, the border fence in the area is actually inside Israel's international border. http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/world-middle-east-10851692 The UNIFIL force stationed in the south described the shootout as a "serious incident".

===2007 North Lebanon conflict===

The 2007 Lebanon conflict began when fighting broke out between Fatah al-Islam, a militant organization, and the Lebanese Armed Forces on May 20, 2007 in Nahr al-Bared, a Palestinian refugee camp near Tripoli. It has been the most severe internal fighting since Lebanon's 197590 civil war. The conflict evolved mostly around the Siege of Nahr el-Bared. There was heavy use of the Lebanese artillery in that area to eliminate snipers posted around the cities. The conflict finally ended on September 2, 2007 with the Lebanese Army taking control of the camp after more than three months of heavy fights and a death toll of 155 Commandos and Infantrymen. The LAF Engineering Corps achieved what was seen as a feat of ingenuity during the conflict where they converted a number of UH-1 helicopters into bombers, arming them with 250 kg and 400 kg conventional bombs from old Hunter and Mirage III fighter jets. Some helicopters were also fitted with French Matra rocket pods. This was, according to observers, a decisive step that considerably shortened the conflict. 
 
A Lebanese M113 APC in Beirut, during the unrest of May 9, 2008.

===2008 fighting in Lebanon===

During the week-long clashes that occurred at the beginning of May 2008 in Beirut and other regions of the country, the army was unable to prevent rival Lebanese groups from fighting each other. This was because the army, along with the government, had thought it would have been better if rival groups would eventually end the violence and sort out the dispute between them, alone, other than involving the national army which may have led to great divisions between the soldiers, just like in the civil war. It would have also caused an out cry to the soldiers that could have died, leading to even greater divisions and blame to the political forces. However, whenever ceasefire was brought into action in a specific area or district in Beirut or else where in the country, the LAF would straight away enforce peace. On May 13, the national army had announced that if the clashes would not end as soon as possible, it would have to intervene and use force if necessary to stop them. 

===Syrian Civil War spillover in Lebanon===

Since the outbreak of conflict in Syria, the Lebanese Army has been deployed to prevent Sunni-Shiite clashes from taking place in the city as Tripoli, as well as in other hotzones such as Arsal and downtown Beirut.

On June 23, 2013, intense clashes in Sidon took place between followers of Salafist Sunni preacher Ahmad Al-Assir and Lebanese troops. Following these clashes, the Lebanese Army was sent in to capture Sheikh Assirs headquarters at Abra and apprehend him. Lebanese Army units fought against pro-Assir militants for two days in a battle that led to the deaths of at least 16 Lebanese soldiers, and the wounding of at least 50 men. Although the LAF managed to secure his complex, Assir was able to escape and the search for him and his holdouts is currently ongoing. Lebanon army seizes radical sunni clericss HQ 

==Conscription==
Lebanon previously had mandatory military service of one year for men. On May 4, 2005, a new conscription system was adopted, making for a six-month service, and pledging to end conscription within two years. As of February 10, 2007 mandatory military service no longer exists in Lebanon thus making it a conscription-free all-volunteer force. , Lebanese Army (official website) 

==Training==
Soldiers of the Lebanese army, 2009
Training of new conscripts takes place in the First Flag Service Center (FFSC). After a week of enlisting, they submit to two training courses, the common military training basic course and the specific course. All these courses are organized in details according to a program determining hours of training taking into consideration the conscript rank. The first course consists of 240 hours equivalent to 9 weeks and the training program is composed of:
* Military rules and regulations
* Technical and tactical education
* Weapons
* Physical fitness
* Orientation and moral preparation

The second course consists of 84 hours equivalent to three weeks. The infantry course is composed of:
* Physical fitness
* Drill
* Infantry weapons, which are available in the Lebanese army and its tactics.

==See also==

* Tomb of the Unknown Soldier
* Internal Security Forces
* General Security Directorate (Lebanon)
* United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon

==References==

http://www.lorientlejour.com/article/821338/les-appels-a-une-enquete-sur-la-bataille-de-saida-deviennent-detailles.html

==External links==
* Lebanese Armed Forces (LAF) Official Website
* Lebanon Military Guide from GlobalSecurity.org
* CIA - The World Factbook - Lebanon
* Army Recognition Index of Lebanese Military Equipment
* Global Fire Power - Lebanon Military Strength
* Lebanon army trying to rearm and modernize itself
* Lebanese Military Wish List 2008/2009 - New York Times
* MilitaryPhotos.Net, Lebanese Army - Photos Thread
* MilitaryPhotos.Net, Lebanese Army - Discussions Thread
* 



[[Foreign relations of Lebanon]]

The foreign policy of Lebanon reflects its geographic location, the composition of its population, and its reliance on commerce and trade. Until 2005, Lebanon's foreign policy had been heavily influenced by Syria. The framework for relations was first codified in May 1991, when Lebanon and Syria signed a treaty of mutual cooperation. This treaty came out of the Taif Agreement, which stipulated that "Lebanon is linked to Syria by distinctive ties deriving strength from kinship, history, and common interests." The Lebanese-Syria treaty calls for "coordination and cooperation between the two countries" that would serve the "interests of the two countries within the framework of sovereignty and independence of each." Numerous agreements on political, economic, security, and judicial affairs have followed over the years.

After Syria's military withdrawal in 2005, Lebanon's foreign policy charted a more independent course. Although its current government's policy can be considered Western-leaning if not pro-Western, the political opposition led by Hezbollah and the Free Patriotic Movement advocate a foreign policy more in line with that of Iran and Syria.

==Middle East==
Lebanon also has bilateral trade agreements with several Arab states and is in the process of accession to the World Trade Organization. Lebanon traditionally enjoys warm relations with other pro-Western Arab states. At various times, however, it has seen tension with Egypt, Syria, Iraq, the Palestinians, and Libya. In March 2002, in honor of the expulsion of Israeli troops from the South of the country, the Arab League met in Lebanon for the first time since 1967. Lebanon also is a member of the Organisation of Islamic Cooperation. Hezbollah maintains a close relationship with Iran, largely centered on Shi'a Muslim links and animosity towards Israel.

===Armenia===
Lebanon is host to the eighth largest Armenian population in the world. During the 2006 Lebanon War, Armenia announced that it would send humanitarian aid to Lebanon. According to the Armenian government, an unspecified amount of medicines, tents and fire-fighting equipment was allocated to Lebanese authorities on July 27, 2006. Armenia To Provide Relief To Lebanon, Armenialiberty.org Armenia Sent Humanitarian Assistance To Lebanon, PanArmenian.Net On May 11, 2000, the Lebanese parliament voted to recognize the Armenian genocide. International Affirmation of the Armenian Genocide, Armenia Foreign Ministry Lebanon is the only Arab country and one of the few countries of the world to have done so.

===Cyprus===
See Foreign relations of Cyprus

===Iran===
See IranLebanon relations

===Iraq===

Despite similarities in language and religion, and mutual support for each other in conflicts, Lebanon's relations with Iraq have at most times been cold. Issues include the Lebanese Government's strong material and political assistance of Hezbollah and ongoing clashes in Baghdad between the Sunnis and Shias. Despite this tension, the two nations have embassies in each of their capital cities.

===Israel===

Israeli troops in southern Lebanon between June 1982 and May 2000; Syrian troops in northern, central, and eastern Lebanon since October 1976 not at Lebanese government request. Syrian troops left in April 2005. Lebanon claims Israeli controlled Shebaa Farms in southern Syria.

According to the current prime minister Lebanese officials, Lebanon will be the last Arab country to sign a peace treaty with Israel as the two states are officially in a state of war. The already strained relations between the two countries have deteriorated to an abysmal point in the 2006 war, a move which many believe to have strained US-Lebanese relations.

===Syria===

The relationship between these two neighboring countries in Western Asia is complex: Syria has had troops stationed in Lebanon and has exerted political influence in the nation for many years. Q&A: Syria and Lebanon - BBC News However, Syria has only officially recognised Lebanon's sovereignty recently. Ten steps to Syria-Lebanon ties BBC News 

===Saudi Arabia===

The relationship between these two Arab countries are very strong.

In 2008, the Saudi Foreign Minister, prince Saud Al Faisal secretly proposed setting up an Arab military force to fight Hezbollah in Lebanon with the help of the United States, UN and NATO. According to leaked diplomatic memos, Faisal has accused the UN troops in Lebanon of "sitting doing nothing", and voiced concerns that Iran will use Hezbollah to take over Lebanon. Saudi plan for anti-Hezbollah force revealed, AFP and Ynet, 12 August 2010 

==Europe==
Lebanon concluded negotiations on an association agreement with the European Union in late 2001, and both sides initialed the accord in January 2002, the accord becoming known as the EU-Lebanon Association Agreement. The EU-Lebanon Action Plan from 19 January 2007 gave a new impetus to bilateral relations in the framework of the European Neighborhood Policy.

Lebanon is one of the main Mediterranean beneficiaries of community assistance and the EU through its various instruments is Lebanons leading donor. Starting from 2007 financial support is channeled through the European Neighborhood Policy Instrument. A Lebanon Country Strategy Paper 2007-2013 and a National Indicative Program 2007-2010 have been adopted by the EU. The assistance provided was refocused after the Second Lebanon War in order to engage in real help for the government and the society in reconstruction and reform of the country. Republic of Lebanon. European Commission: External Relations 

 Country Formal Relations Began Notes 
 1992-03-04 * Armenia has embassy in Beirut. * Lebanon has an embassy in Yerevan.. 
 1966-09-19 * Since May 1967, Bulgaria has embassy in Beirut. Bulgarian embassy in Beirut * Since 1983, Lebanon has an embassy in Sofia. Bulgarian Ministry of Foreign Affairs: direction of the Lebanese embassy in Sofia * Both countries are full members of the Francophonie and of the Union for the Mediterranean. 
 Denmark * Denmark has an embassy in Beirut, Lebanon. Libanon Danske kontaktoplysninger * Lebanon is represented in Denmark through its embassy in Stockholm, Sweden. http://www.lebanonembassy.se/ 
 See FranceLebanon relations In 2007, French President Nicolas Sarkozy ordered ties with Syria to be suspended until proof Damascus was not interfering in the Lebanese political crisis was established. A week after Sarkozy's statement in Cairo, Syrian Foreign Minister Walid al Muallem announced Syria was ceasing their ties with France. \"Syria has decided to cease cooperation with France on the Lebanese crisis\" said Mouallem. In July 2008, France and Syria decied to open embassies in each other's countries. In April 2009, French and Lebanese officials approved the framework of a security agreement that besides improving bilateral relations include drugs and arms trafficking, illegal immigration and cyber-crime. 
 See GreekLebanese relations The relation between both people dates back to early antiquity, with the early trading activities between the ancient Greeks and the Phoenicians. In modern times, Greek-Lebanese bilateral relations are very good at all levels. Greece has an embassy in Beirut and Lebanon has an embassy in Athens. Both countries are members of the Union for the Mediterranean and the Francophonie. 
 1947 See Holy See  Lebanon relations The Holy See has a nunciature in Harissa. Lebanon has an embassy in Rome. The Holy See has played a major role in the peace negotiations of Lebanon. It has sought to unify Christian factions that were separated after the Lebanese civil war. At the same time, it sought to reduce Christian-Muslim tensions and to preserve Christian communities that have been declining in many parts of Lebanon and elsewhere in the Middle East. 
 See ItalyLebanon relations Lebanon opened an legation in 1946, which was transformed into an embassy in 1955. Both countries signed a Treaty of Friendship, Cooperation and Navigation in 1949. Rome supported the reconstruction of Lebanon after the Taef Agreement. Also, Italian companies, from almost all sectors, operate in Lebanon. 
 See LebanonRomania relations * Lebanon has an embassy in Bucharest and an honorary consulate in Constanta. Romanian Ministry of Foreign Affairs: direction of the Lebanese embassy in Bucharest * Romania has an embassy in Beirut. Romanian Ministry of Foreign Affairs: direction of the Romanian embassy in Beirut * Both countries are full members of the Union for the Mediterranean and of the Francophonie 
 See LebanonRussia relations * Lebanon has an embassy in Moscow. * Russia has an embassy in Beirut. * Russia will donate 10 Mi 24 attack helicopters to the Lebanese Army 

==Rest of the World==

 Country Formal Relations Began Notes 
 See CanadaLebanon relations Canada established diplomatic relations with Lebanon in 1954, when Canada deployed \"Envoy Extraordinaire\" to Beirut. In 1958, Canada sent its first Ambassador. The Embassy was closed in 1985 and reopened in January 1995. Lebanon opened a consulate in Canada in 1946. A Consulate-General replaced the Consulate in 1949, and an Embassy opened in 1958. 
 See LebanonMalaysia relations * Lebanon has an embassy in Kuala Lumpur, and Malaysia has an embassy in Beirut. 
 See Foreign relations of Mexico * Mexico was among the first nations to recognize Lebanon's independence in 1943. * Lebanon has an embassy in Mexico City, and Mexico has an embassy in Beirut. * Mexico was a popular destination during the Lebanese diaspora. There is a significant population of Lebanese descent in Mexico, nearing half a million people, many of which travel to and support business with Lebanon. * The Centro Libans and \"Club Deportivo Libans\" in Mexico City are important symbols representing the historically cultural and social ties between both countries. 
 See LebanonPakistan relations * Lebanon and Pakistan have cordial, deep and brotherly relations. The relations between Lebanon and Pakistan have been warm as Pakistan does not recognize Lebanon's arch enemy, Israel as a legitimate country. Messages to Lebanon Pakistan MOFA * Lebanon has an embassy in Islamabad * Pakistan has an embassy in Beirut 
 See Lebanon  United States relations The United States' interaction with Lebanon extends back to events such as the 1958 Lebanon crisis, which it sent in troops to fortify the government's position. Lebanon's southern neighbor, Israel, has also sent troops on several occasions, and attacked into Lebanon in response to Hezbollah kidnapping two Israeli soldiers. A possible source of friction between the U.S. and Lebanon is that most of Israel's weaponry is American-made, arguing possible American complicity in Israel's attacks. 
 1945-10-25 See LebanonUruguay relations * Uruguay recognized Lebanon's independence on November 22, 1943. * Lebanon has an embassy in Montevideo. * Uruguay has an embassy in Beirut. Uruguayan embassy in Beirut * There are 55,000 people of Lebanese descent living in Uruguay. 

==See also==
*List of diplomatic missions in Lebanon
*List of diplomatic missions of Lebanon
*Visa requirements for Lebanese citizens

==References and footnotes==

*
*
*

==External links==
*1983 Israel-Lebanon agreement
*Embassy of Lebanon in Washington DC
*Amb. Farid Abboud profile The Washington Diplomat serves the diplomatic community with columns focusing on international news and events.
* EU Neighbourhood Info Centre: Country profile of Jordan
Representations of foreign nations in Lebanon 
*Delegation of the European Commission in Lebanon
*United States Embassy in Beirut, Lebanon
*Farid Abboud: Lebanese Ambassador to Tunisia

 

[[Lesotho]]

Lesotho ( ), officially the Kingdom of Lesotho, is a landlocked country completely surrounded by South Africa. It is just over 30000 km in size and has a population slightly over two million. Its capital and largest city is Maseru. Lesotho is a member of the Commonwealth of Nations. The name Lesotho translates roughly into the land of the people who speak Sotho. About 40% of the population lives below the international poverty line of US $1.25 a day. Human Development Indices, Table 3: Human and income poverty, p. 35. Retrieved on 1 June 2009 

==History==

The earliest known inhabitants of the area were Khoisan hunter-gatherers. They were largely replaced by Wasja-speaking tribes during the Bantu migrations. The SothoTswana peoples colonized the general region of South Africa between the third and 11th centuries.

King Moshoeshoe I with his Ministers.
The present Lesotho, then called Basutoland, emerged as a single polity under King Moshoeshoe I in 1822. Moshoeshoe, a son of Mokhachane, a minor chief of the Bakoteli lineage, formed his own clan and became a chief around 1804. Between 1821 and 1823, he and his followers settled at the Butha-Buthe Mountain, joining with former adversaries in resistance against the Lifaqane associated with the reign of Shaka Zulu from 1818 to 1828.

Subsequent evolution of the state hinged on conflicts between British and Dutch colonists leaving the Cape Colony following its seizure from the French-allied Dutch by the British in 1795, and subsequently associated with the Orange River Sovereignty and subsequent Orange Free State. Missionaries invited by Moshoeshoe I, , and from the Paris Evangelical Missionary Society, placed at Morija, developed orthography and printed works in the Sotho language between 1837 and 1855. Casalis, acting as translator and providing advice on foreign affairs, helped to set up diplomatic channels and acquire guns for use against the encroaching Europeans and the Griqua people.

Trekboers from the Cape Colony showed up on the western borders of Basutoland and claimed land rights, beginning with Jan de Winnaar, who settled in the Matlakeng area in MayJune 1838. As more Boers were moving into the area they tried to colonise the land between the two rivers, even north of the Caledon, claiming that it had been abandoned by the Sotho people. Moshoeshoe subsequently signed a treaty with the British Governor of the Cape Colony, Sir George Thomas Napier that annexed the Orange River Sovereignty that many Boers had settled. These outraged Boers were suppressed in a brief skirmish in 1848. In 1851 a British force was defeated by the Sotho army at Kolonyama, touching off an embarrassing war for the British. After repulsing another British attack in 1852, Moshoeshoe sent an appeal to the British commander that settled the dispute diplomatically, then defeated the Tlokoa in 1853.

In 1854 the British pulled out of the region, and in 1858 Moshoeshoe fought a series of wars with the Boers in the Free StateBasotho War, losing a great portion of the western lowlands. The last war in 1867 ended when Moshoeshoe appealed to Queen Victoria, who agreed to make Basutoland a British protectorate in 1868. In 1869, the British signed a treaty at Aliwal North with the Boers that defined the boundaries of Basutoland, and later Lesotho, which by ceding the western territories effectively reduced Moshoeshoe's Kingdom to half its previous size.

Following the cession in 1869, the British initially transferred functions from Moshoeshoe's capital in Thaba Bosiu to a police camp on the northwest border, Maseru, until administration of Basutoland was transferred to the Cape Colony in 1871. Moshoeshoe died on 11 March 1870, marking the end of the traditional era and the beginning of the colonial era, and was buried at Thaba Bosiu. During their rule between 1871 and 1884, Basutoland was treated similarly to territories that had been forcefully annexed, much to the chagrin of the Basotho. This led to the Gun War in 1881. In 1884, Basutoland was restored its status as a protectorate, with Maseru again its capital, but remained under direct rule by a governor, though effective internal power was wielded by traditional chiefs.

1959 stamps for the Basutoland National Council.
Basutoland gained its independence from Britain and became the Kingdom of Lesotho in 1966. 

In January 1970, the ruling Basotho National Party (BNP) lost the first post-independence general elections, with 23 seats to the Basutoland Congress Party's 36. Prime Minister Leabua Jonathan refused to cede power to the Basotho Congress Party (BCP), declared himself Tona Kholo (Sesotho translation of prime minister), and imprisoned the BCP leadership.

BCP began a rebellion and then received training in Libya for its Lesotho Liberation Army (LLA) under the pretense of being Azanian People's Liberation Army (APLA) soldiers of the Pan Africanist Congress (PAC). Deprived of arms and supplies by the Sibeko faction of the PAC in 1978, the 178-strong LLA was rescued from their Tanzanian base by the financial assistance of a Maoist PAC officer, but they launched the guerrilla war with only a handful of old weapons. The main force was defeated in northern Lesotho, and later guerrillas launched sporadic but usually ineffectual attacks. The campaign was severely compromised when BCP's leader, Ntsu Mokhehle, went to Pretoria. In the early 1980s, several Basotho who sympathized with the exiled BCP were threatened with death and attacked by the government of Leabua Jonathan. In September 1981, the family of Benjamin Masilo was attacked. A few days later, Edgar Mahlomola Motuba was taken from his home and murdered.

The BNP ruled from 1966 till January 1970. What later ensued was a de facto government led by Dr Leabua Jonathan until 1986 when a military coup forced it out of office. The Transitional Military Council that came to power granted executive powers to King Moshoeshoe II, who was until then a ceremonial monarch. But in 1987 the King was forced into exile after coming up with a six-page memorandum on how he wanted the Lesotho's constitution to be, which would have given him more executive powers had the military government agreed. His son was installed as King Letsie III.

The chairman of the military junta, Major General Justin Metsing Lekhanya, was ousted in 1991 and replaced by Major General Elias Phisoana Ramaema, who handed over power to a democratically elected government of the BCP in 1993. Moshoeshoe II returned from exile in 1992 as an ordinary citizen. After the return to democratic government, King Letsie III tried unsuccessfully to persuade the BCP government to reinstate his father (Moshoeshoe II) as head of state.

Makhaleng River Gorges in the Highlands of Lesotho, 2003.

In August 1994, Letsie III staged a military-backed coup that deposed the BCP government, after the BCP government refused to reinstate his father, Moshoeshoe II, according to Lesotho's constitution. The new government did not receive full international recognition. Member states of the Southern African Development Community (SADC) engaged in negotiations to reinstate the BCP government. One of the conditions Letsie III put forward for this was that his father should be re-installed as head of state. After protracted negotiations, the BCP government was reinstated and Letsie III abdicated in favor of his father in 1995, but he ascended the throne again when Moshoeshoe II died at the age of fifty-seven in a supposed road accident, when his car plunged off a mountain road during the early hours of 15 January 1996. According to a government statement, Moshoeshoe had set out at 1 am to visit his cattle at Matsieng and was returning to Maseru through the Maluti Mountains when his car left the road. King of Tiny Land Circled by South Africa Dies in Car Plunge, by Donald G. McNeil Jr in The New York Times, 16 January 1996. Retrieved 3 November 2007. 

In 1997, the ruling BCP split over leadership disputes. Prime Minister Ntsu Mokhehle formed a new party, the Lesotho Congress for Democracy (LCD), and was followed by a majority of members of parliament, which enabled him to form a new government. Pakalitha Mosisili succeeded Mokhehle as party leader and the LCD won the general elections in 1998. Although the elections were pronounced free and fair by local and international observers and a subsequent special commission appointed by SADC, the opposition political parties rejected the results.

Opposition protests in the country intensified, culminating in a peaceful demonstration outside the royal palace in August 1998. Exact details of what followed are greatly disputed, both in Lesotho and South Africa. While the Botswana Defence Force troops were welcomed, tensions with South African National Defence Force troops were high, resulting in fighting. Incidences of sporadic rioting intensified when South African troops hoisted a South African flag over the Royal Palace. By the time the SADC forces withdrew in May 1999, much of the capital of Maseru lay in ruins, and the southern provincial capital towns of Mafeteng and Mohale's Hoek had seen the loss of over a third of their commercial real estate. A number of South Africans and Basotho also died in the fighting.

An Interim Political Authority (IPA), charged with reviewing the electoral structure in the country, was created in December 1998. The IPA devised a proportional electoral system to ensure that the opposition would be represented in the National Assembly. The new system retained the existing 80 elected Assembly seats, but added 40 seats to be filled on a proportional basis. Elections were held under this new system in May 2002, and the LCD won again, gaining 54% of the vote. But for the first time, opposition political parties won significant numbers of seats, and despite some irregularities and threats of violence from Major General Lekhanya, Lesotho experienced its first peaceful election. Nine opposition parties now hold all 40 of the proportional seats, with the BNP having the largest share (21). The LCD has 79 of the 80 constituency-based seats. Although its elected members participate in the National Assembly, the BNP has launched several legal challenges to the elections, including a recount; none has been successful.

==Politics==

The Lesotho Government is a parliamentary or constitutional monarchy. The Prime Minister, Tom Motsoahae Thabane, is head of government and has executive authority. The King serves a largely ceremonial function; he no longer possesses any executive authority and is prohibited from actively participating in political initiatives.

The All Basotho Convention (ABC) leads a coalition government in the National Assembly, the lower house of parliament.

The upper house of parliament, called the Senate, is composed of twenty-two principal chiefs whose membership is hereditary, and eleven appointees of the king, acting on the advice of the prime minister.

The constitution provides for an independent judicial system, made up of the High Court, the Court of Appeal, Magistrate's Courts, and traditional courts that exist predominantly in rural areas. All but one of the Justices on the Court of Appeal are South African jurists. There is no trial by jury; rather, judges make rulings alone, or, in the case of criminal trials, with two other judges as observers.

The constitution also protects basic civil liberties, including freedom of speech, freedom of association, freedom of the press, freedom of peaceful assembly and freedom of religion. Lesotho was ranked 12th out of 48 sub-Saharan African countries in the 2008 Ibrahim Index of African Governance. Moibrahimfoundation.org 

However there is a growing movement, the People's Charter Movement, calling for the practical annexation of the country by South Africa due to the AIDS epidemic which infects a third of the population. The country faces high unemployment, economic collapse, a weak currency and poor travel documents restricting their movement. An African Union report called for economic integration of Lesotho with South Africa but stopped short of suggesting annexation. In May 2010 the Charter Movement delivered a petition to the South African High Commission requesting integration. South Africa's home affairs spokesman Ronnie Mamoepa rejected the idea that Lesotho should be treated as a special case. "It is a sovereign country like South Africa. We sent envoys to our neighbours  Botswana, Zimbabwe, Swaziland and Lesotho  before we enforced the passport rule. When you travel from Britain to South Africa, don't you expect to use a passport?" 

===Foreign relations===
The flag used by Lesotho until October 2006.

Lesotho's geographic location makes it extremely vulnerable to political and economic developments in South Africa. It is a member of many regional economic organizations, including the Southern African Development Community (SADC), Lesotho Country profile on the Southern African Development Community website and the Southern African Customs Union (SACU). It is also active in the United Nations (UN), the African Union, the Non-Aligned Movement, the Commonwealth, and many other international organizations.

Prince Seeiso Hirohr Seeiso is the present High Commissioner of the Kingdom of Lesotho to the Court of St. James's. The UN is represented by a resident mission as well, including UNDP, UNICEF, WHO, FAO, WFP, and UNAIDS.

Lesotho also has maintained ties with the United Kingdom (Wales in particular), Germany, the United States and other Western states. Although in 1990 it broke relations with the People's Republic of China (PRC) and re-established relations with the Republic of China (Taiwan), it later restored ties with the PRC.

Lesotho also recognizes the State of Palestine. 

Lesotho recognizes the Republic of Kosovo. http://www.mfa-ks.net/?page=1,4,2242 

In the past, it was a strong public opponent of apartheid in South Africa and granted a number of South African refugees political asylum during the apartheid era. 

===Law===
Lesotho does not have a single code containing its laws; it draws them from a variety of sources including: Constitution, Legislation, Common Law, Judicial precedent, Customary Law, and Authoritative texts. 

The Constitution of Lesotho came into force after the publication of the Commencement Order. Constitutionally, legislation refers to laws that have been passed by both houses of parliament and have been assented to by the king (section 78(1)). Subordinate legislation refers to laws passed by other bodies to which parliament has by virtue of section 70(2) of the Constitution validly delegated such legislative powers. These include government gazettes, ministerial orders, ministerial regulations and municipal by-laws.

Although Lesotho shares with South Africa, Botswana, Swaziland, Namibia and Zimbabwe a mixed general legal system which resulted from the interaction between the Roman-Dutch Civilian law and the English Common Law, its general law operates independently. Lesotho also applies the common law, which refers to unwritten law or law from non-statutory sources, but excludes customary law. Decisions from South African courts are only persuasive, and courts refer to them in formulating their decisions. Decisions from similar jurisdictions can also be cited for their persuasive value. Magistrates courts decisions do not become precedent since these are lower courts. They are however bound by decisions of the High Court and the Court of Appeal. At the apex of the Lesotho justice system is the Court of Appeal, which is the final appellate forum on all matters. It has a supervisory and review jurisdiction over all the courts of Lesotho.

Lesotho has a dual legal system consisting of customary and general laws operating side by side. Customary law is made up of the customs of the Basotho, written and codified in the Laws of Lerotholi whereas general law consists of Roman Dutch Law imported from the Cape and the Lesotho statutes. The codification of customary law came about after a council was appointed in 1903 to advise the British Resident Commissioner on what was best for the Basotho in terms of laws that would govern them. Until this time, the Basotho customs and laws were passed down from generation to generation through oral tradition. The council was then given the task of codifying them, came up with the Laws of Lerotholi which are applied by customary courts today (local courts). Written works of eminent authors have persuasive value in the courts of Lesotho. These include writings of the old authorities as well as contemporary writers from similar jurisdictions.

===Districts===
Districts and Cities of Lesotho

For administrative purposes, Lesotho is divided into ten districts, each headed by a district administrator. Each district has a capital known as a camptown.

The districts are further subdivided into 80 constituencies, which consist of 129 local community councils.

==Geography==

Landscape of Lesotho

Lesotho covers 30355 km2. It is the only independent state in the world that lies entirely above 1000 m in elevation. Its lowest point of 1400 m is thus the highest in the world. Over 80% of the country lies above 1800 m. Lesotho is also the southernmost landlocked country in the world and is entirely surrounded by South Africa. It lies between latitudes 28 and 31S, and longitudes 27 and 30E.

===Climate===

Because of its altitude, Lesotho remains cooler throughout the year than other regions at the same latitude. Most of the rain falls as summer thunderstorms. Maseru and surrounding lowlands often reach 30 C in summer. Winters can be cold with the lowlands getting down to -7 C and the highlands to -18 C at times. Snow is common in the highlands between May and September; the higher peaks can experience snowfalls year-round.

==Economy==

Lesotho is geographically surrounded by South Africa and economically integrated with it as well. The economy of Lesotho is based on agriculture, livestock, manufacturing and mining, and depends heavily on inflows of workers remittances and receipts from the Southern African Customs Union (SACU). The majority of households subsist on farming. The formal sector employment consist of mainly the female workers in the apparel sector, the male migrant labor, primarily miners in South Africa for 3 to 9 months and employment in the Government of Lesotho (GOL). The western lowlands form the main agricultural zone. Almost 50% of the population earn income through informal crop cultivation or animal husbandry with nearly two-thirds of the country's income coming from the agricultural sector. The percentage of the population living below USD Purchasing Power Parity (PPP) US$1.25/day fell from 48 percent to 44 percent between 1995 and 2003. The country is still among the "Low Human Development" countries (rank 160 of 187 on the Human Development Index) as classified by the UNDP, with 48.2 years of life expectancy at birth. However, adult literacy is very high  82% and children under weight aged under 5 is only 20%. Human Development Report 2009. The United Nations. Retrieved 7 March 2012. 

The Afriski resort in the Maloti Mountains of Lesotho.
Lesotho has taken advantage of the African Growth and Opportunity Act (AGOA) to become the largest exporter of garments to the US from sub-Saharan Africa. US brands and retailers sourcing from Lesotho include: Foot Locker, Gap, Gloria Vanderbilt, JCPenny, Levi Strauss, Saks, Sears, Timberland and Wal-Mart. In mid-2004 its employment reached over 50,000 mainly female workers, marking the first time that manufacturing sector workers outnumbered government employees. In 2008 it exported goods worth 487 million dollars mainly to the U.S.A. Since 2004 employment in the sector was somehow reduced to about 45,000, in mid-2011, due to intense international competition in the garment sector. It was the largest formal sector employer in Lesotho in 2011. In 2007, the average earnings of an employee in the textile sector were $103 per month, and the official minimum wage for a general textile worker was $93 per month. The average gross national income per capita in 2008 was $83 per month. The sector initiated a major program to fight HIV/AIDS called Apparel Lesotho Alliance to Fight AIDS (ALAFA). It is an industry-wide program providing prevention and treatment for the workers. (see below HIV) 

Water and diamonds are Lesotho's significant natural resources. Water is utilized through the 21-year, multi-billion-dollar Lesotho Highlands Water Project (LHWP), under the authority of the Lesotho Highlands Development Authority. The project commenced in 1986. The LHWP is designed to capture, store, and transfer water from the Orange River system to South Africa's Free State and greater Johannesburg area, which features a large concentration of South African industry, population, and agriculture. Completion of the first phase of the project has made Lesotho almost completely self-sufficient in the production of electricity and generated approximately $70 million in 2010 from the sale of electricity and water to South Africa. The World Bank, African Development Bank, European Investment Bank, and many other bilateral donors financed the project.

Diamonds are produced at the Letseng, Mothae, Liqhobong and Kao mines, which combined are estimated to produce 240,000 carats of diamonds in 2014, worth $300 million. The Letseng mine is estimated to produce diamonds with an average value of $2172/carat, making it the worlds richest mine on an average price per-carat basis. The sector suffered a set back in 2008 as the result of the world recession but rebounded in 2010 and 2011. Export of diamonds reached $230 million in 2010/11. In 1957, a South African adventurer, colonel Jack Scott, accompanied by a young man named Keith Whitelock, set out prospecting for diamonds. They found their diamond mine at 3,100 m altitude, on top of the Maluti Mountains in northeastern Lesotho, some 70 km from Mokhotlong at Letseng. In 1967, a 601 carat diamond (Lesotho Brown) was discovered in the mountains by a Mosotho woman. In August 2006, a 603 carat white diamond (Lesotho Promise) was discovered at the Letseng-la-Terae mine. Another 478 carat diamond was discovered at the same location in 2008. 

Lesotho has progressed in moving from a predominantly subsistence-oriented economy to a lower middle income economy exporting natural resources and manufacturing goods. The exporting sectors have brought higher and more secure incomes to a significant portion of the population. 

The global economic crisis hit the Lesotho economy hard through: the loss of textile exports and jobs in the sector due largely to the economic slowdown in the United States which is a major export destination; reduced diamond mining and exports, including weak prices for diamonds; drop in SACU revenues due to the economic slowdown in the South African economy; and reduction in worker remittances due to weakening of the South African economy and contraction of the mining sector and related job losses in South Africa. In 2009, GDP growth slowed to 0.9 percent. 

The official currency is the loti (plural: maloti), but can be used interchangeably with the South African rand. Lesotho, Swaziland, Namibia, and South Africa also form a common currency and exchange control area known as the Common Monetary Area (CMA). The loti is at par with the rand. One hundred lisente equal one loti.

Lesotho is a member of the Southern African Customs Union (SACU), in which tariffs have been eliminated on the trade of goods between other member countries Botswana, Namibia, South Africa, and Swaziland.

Lesotho has received economic aid from a variety of sources, including the United States, the World Bank, Republic of Ireland, the United Kingdom, the European Union, and Germany.

==Demographics==

Mosotho horseman.
Women walking

===Population===
Lesotho has a population of approximately 2,067,000. The population distribution of Lesotho is 25% urban and 75% rural. However, it is estimated that annual increase of urban population is 3.5%. 
Population density is lower in the highlands than in the western lowlands. Although the majority of the population60.2%is between 15 and 64 years of age, Lesotho has a substantial youth population numbering around 34.8%. 

===Ethnic groups and languages===
Lesotho's ethno-linguistic structure consists almost entirely of the Basotho, a Bantu-speaking people: an estimate of 99.7% of the people identify as Basotho. Basotho subgroups include the Bakuena (Kuena), Batloung (the Tlou), Baphuthi (the Phuti), Bafokeng, Bataung (the Tau), Batoeneng (the Toene), Matebele, etc.

The main language, Sesotho (or Sotho), is also the first official and administrative language, and it is what Basotho speak on an ordinary basis. English is the other official and administrative language.

===Religion===

The population of Lesotho is estimated to be around 90% Christian. Protestants represent 45% of the population (Evangelicals 26%, and Anglican and other Protestant groups an additional 19%), and Roman Catholics represent 45 percent of the population. Members of other religions (Muslims, Hindus, Buddhists, Bah', and members of traditional indigenous religions) comprise the remaining 10% of the population. 

===Education and literacy===
Children in class at Ha Nqabeni primary school

An estimated 85% of the population 15 and over is literate, according to recent estimates. As such, Lesotho holds one of the highest literacy rates in Africa, in part because Lesotho invests over 12% of its GDP in education. Contrary to most countries, in Lesotho female literacy (94.5%) is higher than male literacy. According to a study by the Southern and Eastern Africa Consortium for Monitoring Educational Quality in 2000, 37% of grade 6 pupils in Lesotho (average age 14 years) are at or above reading level 4, "Reading for Meaning." A pupil at this level of literacy can read ahead or backwards through various parts of text to link and interpret information. Although education is not compulsory, the Government of Lesotho is incrementally implementing a program for free primary education. 

Despite having a highly literate population, Lesotho's residents struggle for access to vital services, such as healthcare, travel, and educational resources, as according to the International Telecommunication Union, only 3.4% of the population use the Internet. A service from Econet Telecom Lesotho expanded the country's access to email through entry level, low-end mobile phones and consequently improved access to educational information. The African Library Project works to establish school and village libraries in partnership with US Peace Corps Lesotho and the Butha Buthe District of Education.

==Health==
Infant mortality is at about 8.3%. There are 5 physicians per 100,000 persons. 

===HIV/AIDS===

Lesotho is severely afflicted by HIV/AIDS. According to 2009 estimates, the prevalence is about 23.6%, one of the highest in the world. CIA world factbook: HIV/AIDS  adult prevalence rate In urban areas, about 50% of women under 40 have HIV. The UNDP stated that in 2006 life expectancy in Lesotho was estimated at 42 years for men and women. 

The country regards HIV as one of its most important development issues, and the Government is addressing the pandemic through its HIV/AIDS National Strategic Plan. Coverage of some key HIV/AIDS interventions has improved, including prevention of mother to child transmission and antiretroviral therapy. Prevention of mother to child transmission coverage increased from about 5 percent in 2005, to 31 percent in 2007. The roll-out of antiretroviral therapy has made good progress, with 38,586 people receiving treatment by 2008. 

The "Know Your Status" campaign boosted the number of people being tested for HIV to 229,092 by the end of 2007, 12 percent of the population and three times the number tested in 2005. The program is funded by the Clinton Foundation and started in June 2006. Bill Clinton and Microsoft chairman Bill Gates visited Lesotho in July 2006 to assess its fight against AIDS. As a result, the annual rate at which adults in the population who are HIV-negative become HIV-positive declined from 2.9 percent in 2005 to 2.3 percent in 2007, lowering the estimated annual number of new infections from 26,000 to 21,560. These are the first signs of a decline in the HIV epidemic. 

The Apparel Lesotho Alliance to Fight AIDS (ALAFA) is an industry-wide program providing prevention and treatment, including ARVs when these are necessary, for the 46,000 mainly women workers in the Lesotho apparel industry. It was launched in May 2006. The program is helping to combat two of the key drivers of the HIV/AIDS epidemic: poverty and gender inequality. Surveys within the industry by ALAFA show that 43% of the employees have HIV. 

==Culture==
Retsilisitsoe Nthunya wrapped in a Basotho blanket. 

Traditional musical instruments include lekolulo, a kind of flute used by herding boys, setolo-tolo, played by men using their mouth, and the woman's stringed thomo.

The national anthem of Lesotho is "Lesotho Fate La Bo-ntata Rona", which literally translates into "Lesotho, Land of Our Fore-Fathers".

The traditional style of housing in Lesotho is called a mokhoro. Many older houses, especially in smaller towns and villages, are of this type, with walls usually constructed from large stones cemented together. Baked mud bricks and especially concrete blocks are also used nowadays, with thatched roofs still common, although often replaced by corrugated roofing sheets.

Traditional attire revolves around the Basotho blanket, a thick covering made primarily of wool. The blankets are ubiquitous throughout the country during all seasons, and worn differently for men and women.

The Morija Arts & Cultural Festival is a prominent Sesotho arts and music festival. It is held annually in the historical town of Morija, where the first missionaries arrived in 1833.

==Cuisine of Lesotho==
The cuisine of Lesotho includes African traditions and British influences. http://foodspring.com/content/lesotho/ 

==Social issues==
Significant levels of child labor exist in Lesotho, and the country is in the process of formulating an Action Program on the Elimination of Child Labor (APEC). According to the UN, Lesotho has the highest rape rate of any country (91.6 per 100,000 people rate for reported rape in 2008). Rape rate (most recent) by country 

Treatment of people with disabilities is another major issue facing the country. According to the Lesotho Census 2006 around 4% of the population is thought to have some sort of disability. However, there are concerns regarding the reliability of the methodologies used and the real figure is thought to be closer to the global estimate of 15%. According to a survey conducted by the Lesotho National Federation of Organisations of the Disabled in conjunction with SINTEF, (2011) Living Conditions of People with Disability in Lesotho people with disability in Lesotho face significant social and cultural barriers which prevent them from accessing education, healthcare, and employment on an equal basis with others.

On 2 December 2008 Lesotho became the 42nd country in the world to sign the UN Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities. However, to date the treaty has yet to be domesticated. Despite lobbying efforts from disabled persons organisations, there have been no moves to develop disability specific legislation to protect the rights of people with disability. Although the National Disability and Rehabilitation Policy was developed in 2011, as yet there has been no budget allocated for its implementation.

However, the disability people's organizations such as IDAL, LNAPD, LNLVIP LNLVIP, as well as NADL are leaving no stone unturned in their efforts to put pressure on ministry of social development to accelerate implementation of the NDR policy.

However, LNFOD and its Disabled People's Organizations are working very hard in ensuring the domestication of the Conversion. The Ministry of Social Development also support disability movement in this aspect.

Sexual violence in Lesotho is a serious problem. International data from UNODC found the incidence of rapes recorded in 2008 by the police to be the highest in Lesotho. "Rape at the National Level, number of police recorded offenses". United Nations. 

One study in Lesotho found that 61% of women reported having experienced sexual violence at some point in their lives, of which 22% reported being physically forced to have sexual intercourse. apha.confex.com In the 2009 DHS survey 15.7% of men said that a husband is justified in hitting or beating his wife if she refuses to have sex with him, while 16% said a husband is justified to use force to have sex. http://www.measuredhs.com/pubs/pdf/FR241/FR241%5BNEW_completeHHQst_3March2012%5D.pdf In another study, researches have concluded that "Given the high prevalence of HIV in Lesotho, programs should address women's right to control their sexuality." http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/17209284 

The Married Persons Equality Act 2006 gives equal rights to wives in regard to their husbands, abolishing the husband's marital power. http://www.nyulawglobal.org/globalex/lesotho.htm 

The World Economic Forum's 2013 Gender Gap Report www3.weforum.org ranks Lesotho 15th in the world for gender parity, 8 places higher than the USA.

==Notable residents==

Folklorist and author Z. D. Mangoaela was raised in Lesotho. 

==See also==

*Outline of Lesotho
*Index of Lesotho-related articles
*Communications in Lesotho
*List of Basotho companies
*List of people from Lesotho
*Military of Lesotho
*National University of Lesotho
*National University of Lesotho International School
*Transportation in Lesotho

==References==

==External links==

* Government of Lesotho
* Published Judicial Opinions
* Judgments of the Lesotho High Court
* Chief of State and Cabinet Members
* 
* Lesotho from UCB Libraries GovPubs
* 
* Lesotho profile from the BBC News
* 
* Key Development Forecasts for Lesotho from International Futures

 



[[History of Lesotho]]

Flag oflol

The area now known as Lesotho goes back as many as 40,000 years. The present Lesotho (then called Basutoland) emerged as a single polity under paramount chief Moshoeshoe I in 1822. Under Mashoeshoe I, Basutoland joined other tribes in their struggle against the Lifaqane associated with the reign of Shaka Zulu from 1818 to 1828.

Subsequent evolution of the state was shaped by contact with the British and Dutch colonists from Cape Colony. Missionaries invited by Moshoeshoe I developed orthography and printed works in the Sotho language between 1837 and 1855. The country set up diplomatic channels and acquired guns for use against the encroaching Europeans and the Korana people. Territorial conflicts with both British and Boer settlers arose periodically, including Moshoeshoe's notable victory over the Boers in the Free StateBasotho War, but the final war in 1867 with an appeal to Queen Victoria, who agreed to make Basutoland a British protectorate. In 1869, the British signed a treaty at Aliwal with the Boers that defined the boundaries of Basutoland and later Lesotho, which by ceding the western territories effectively reduced Moshoeshoe's kingdom to half its previous size.

The extent to which the British exerted direct control over Basutoland waxed and waned until Basutoland's independence in 1966, when it became the Kingdom of Lesotho. However, when the ruling Basotho National Party (BNP) lost the first post-independence general elections to the Basotho Congress Party (BCP), Leabua Jonathan refused to cede and declared himself Tona Kholo (Sesotho translation of prime minister). The BCP began an insurrection that culminated in a January 1986 military coup forced the BNP out of office. Power was transferred to King Moshoeshoe II, until then a ceremonial monarch, but forced into exile when he lost favour with the military the following year. His son was installed as King Letsie III. Conditions remained tumultuous, including an August 1994 coup by Letsie III, until 1998 when the Lesotho Congress for Democracy (LCD) came to power in elections which were deemed fair by international observers. Despite protests from opposition parties, the country has remained relatively stable since.

==Ancient history==
At some stage during their migration south from a tertiary dispersal area Bantu speaking peoples came to settle the lands that now make up Lesotho as well as a more extensive territory of fertile lands that surround modern day Lesotho. These people spoke a unique "South Sotho" dialect seSotho and called themselves the Basotho. There were several severe disruptions to the Basotho peoples in the early 19th century. Firstly marauding Zulu clans, displaced from Zululand as part of the Lifaqane (or Mfecane), wrought havoc on the Basotho peoples they encountered as they moved first west and then north. Secondly no sooner than the Zulu has passed to the north than the first Voortrekkers arrived, some of whom obtained hospitality during their difficult trek north. Early Voortrekker accounts describe how the lands surrounding the mountain retreat of the Basotho had been burnt and destroyed, in effect leaving a vacuum that subsequent Voortrekkers began to occupy.

However, this interpretation of history for the entire southern region of Africa has been refuted by Norman Etherington in The Great Treks: The Transformation of Southern Africa, 1815-1854 (Longman, 2001). Etherington argues that no such thing as the Mfecane occurred, the Zulu were no more marauding than any other group in the region, and the land the Voortrekkers saw as empty was not settled by either Zulu or Basotho because those people did not value open lowland plains as pasture.This state has been colonization of many many European states.

==Basutoland==

South Africa, Lesotho and Swazuiland in 1885.

In 1818, Moshoeshoe I consolidated various Basotho groupings and became their King. During Moshoeshoe's reign (1823-1870), a series of wars (185668) were fought with the Boers who had settled in traditional Basotho lands. These wars resulted in the extensive loss of land, now known as the "Lost Territory".

A treaty had been signed with the Boer of Griqualand in 1843 and an agreement made with the British in 1853 following a minor war. However, the disputes with the Boer over land were revived in 1858 and more seriously in 1865. The Boer had a number of military successes, killing possibly 1,500 Basotho soldiers, and annexed an expanse of arable land which they were able to retain following a treaty at Thaba Bosiu. In order to protect his people, Moshoeshoe appealed to the British for assistance, and in March 1868 the land was placed under British protection and the Boer were ordered to leave. A treaty was signed at Aliwal in 1869 between the British and the Boer defining the boundaries of the protectorate, the arable land west of the Caledon River remained in Boer hands and is referred to as the Lost or Conquered Territory. Moshoeshoe died in 1870.

In 1871 the protectorate was annexed to Cape Colony. The Basotho resisted the British and in 1879 a southern chief, Moorosi, rose in revolt. The rising was crushed and Moorosi was killed in the fighting. The Basotho then began to fight amongst themselves over the division of Moorosi's lands. The British extended the Cape Peace Preservation Act of 1878 to cover Basutoland and attempted to disarm the natives. Much of the colony rose in revolt in the Gun War (1880-1881), inflicting significant casualties upon the colonial British forces sent to subdue it. An 1881 peace treaty failed to quell sporadic fighting. 

Cape Town's inability to control the territory led to its return to crown control in 1884 as the Territory of Basutoland. The colony was bound by the Orange River Colony, Natal Colony, and Cape Colony it was divided into seven administrative districts - Berea, Leribe, Maseru, Mohales Hock, Mafeteng, Qacha's Nek and Quthing. The colony was ruled by the British Resident Commissioner, who worked through the pitso (national assembly) of hereditary native chiefs under one paramount chief. Each chief ruled a ward within the territory. The first paramount chief was Lerothodi, the son of Moshoeshoe. During the Second Boer War the colony was neutral. The population was around 125,000 (1875), 310,000 (1901) and 349,000 (1904).

When the Union of South Africa was founded in 1910 the colony was still controlled by the British and moves were made to transfer it to the Union. However the people of Basutoland opposed this and when the South African Nationalist party put its apartheid policies into place the possibility of annexation was halted. In 1959, a new constitution gave Basutoland its first elected legislature. This was followed in April 1965 with general legislative elections.

The differing fates of the seSotho-speaking peoples in the Protectorate of Basotholand and in the lands that became the Orange Free State are worth noting. The Orange Free State became a Boer-ruled territory. However at the end of the Boer War it was colonised by the British, and this colony was subsequently incorporated by Britain into the Union of South Africa as one of four provinces. It is still part of the modern day Republic of South Africa, now known as the Free State. In contrast Basotholand, along with the two other British Protectorates in the sub-Saharan region (Bechuanaland and Swaziland), was precluded from incorporation into the Union of South Africa. These protectorates were individually brought to independence by Britain in the 1960s in line with the trend towards self-government and independence that swept the British Empire following the close of the Second World War, a trend that reached its peak in Africa in the late 1950s and early 1960s. By becoming a protectorate Basotholand and its inhabitants were not subjected to Afrikaner rule, which saved them from experiencing Apartheid, and so generally prospered under more benevolent British rule. Basotho resident in Basotholand had access to better health services and to education, and came to experience greater political emancipation through independence. These lands protected by the British, however, had a much smaller capacity to generate income and wealth than the "lost territory" had, which had been granted to the Boers.

After a 1955 request by the Basutoland Council to legislate its internal affairs, in 1959 a new constitution gave Basutoland its first elected legislature. This was followed in April 1965 with general legislative elections with universal adult suffrage in which the Basotho National Party (BNP) won 31 and the Basutoland Congress Party (BCP) won 25 of the 65 seats contested.

==Kingdom of Lesotho==
On October 4, 1966, the Kingdom of Lesotho attained full independence, governed by a constitutional monarchy with a bicameral Parliament consisting of a Senate and an elected National Assembly. Early results of the first post-independence elections in January 1970 indicated that the BNP might lose control. Under the leadership of Prime Minister Chief Leabua Jonathan, the ruling Basotho National Party (BNP) refused to cede power to the rival Basotholand Congress Party (BCP), although the BCP was widely believed to have won the elections. Citing election irregularities, Prime Minister Leabua Jonathan nullified the elections, declared a national state of emergency, suspended the constitution, and dissolved the Parliament. In 1973, an appointed Interim National Assembly was established. With an overwhelming progovernment majority, it was largely the instrument of the BNP, led by Prime Minister Jonathan. In addition to the Jonathan regime's alienation of Basotho powerbrokers and the local population, South Africa had virtually closed the country's land borders because of Lesotho support of cross-border operations of the African National Congress (ANC). Moreover, South Africa publicly threatened to pursue more direct action against Lesotho if the Jonathan government did not root out the ANC presence in the country. This internal and external opposition to the government combined to produce violence and internal disorder in Lesotho that eventually led to a military takeover in 1986.

Under a January 1986 Military Council decree, state executive and legislative powers were transferred to the King who was to act on the advice of the Military Council, a self-appointed group of leaders of the Royal Lesotho Defense Force (RLDF). A military government chaired by Justin Lekhanya ruled Lesotho in coordination with King Moshoeshoe II and a civilian cabinet appointed by the King.

In February 1990, King Moshoeshoe II was stripped of his executive and legislative powers and exiled by Lekhanya, and the Council of Ministers was purged. Lekhanya accused those involved of undermining discipline within the armed forces, subverting existing authority, and causing an impasse on foreign policy that had been damaging to Lesotho's image abroad. Lekhanya announced the establishment of the National Constituent Assembly to formulate a new constitution for Lesotho with the aim of returning the country to democratic, civilian rule by June 1992. Before this transition, however, Lekhanya was ousted in 1991 by a mutiny of junior army officers that left Phisoane Ramaema as Chairman of the Military Council.

Because Moshoeshoe II initially refused to return to Lesotho under the new rules of the government in which the King was endowed only with ceremonial powers, Moshoeshoe's son was installed as King Letsie III. In 1992, Moshoeshoe II returned to Lesotho as a regular citizen until 1995 when King Letsie abdicated the throne in favor of his father. After Moshoeshoe II died in a car accident in 1996, King Letsie III ascended to the throne again.

In 1993, a new constitution was implemented leaving the King without any executive authority and proscribing him from engaging in political affairs. Multiparty elections were then held in which the BCP ascended to power with a landslide victory. Prime Minister Ntsu Mokhehle headed the new BCP government that had gained every seat in the 65-member National Assembly. In early 1994, political instability increased as first the army, followed by the police and prisons services, engaged in mutinies. In August 1994, King Letsie III, in collaboration with some members of the military, staged a coup, suspended Parliament, and appointed a ruling council. As a result of domestic and international pressures, however, the constitutionally elected government was restored within a month.

In 1995, there were isolated incidents of unrest, including a police strike in May to demand higher wages. For the most part, however, there were no serious challenges to Lesotho's constitutional order in the 1995-96 period. In January 1997, armed soldiers put down a violent police mutiny and arrested the mutineers.

In 1997, tension within the BCP leadership caused a split in which Dr. Mokhehle abandoned the BCP and established the Lesotho Congress for Democracy (LCD) followed by two-thirds of the parliament. This move allowed Mokhehle to remain as Prime Minister and leader of a new ruling party, while relegating the BCP to opposition status. The remaining members of the BCP refused to accept their new status as the opposition party and ceased attending sessions. Multiparty elections were again held in May 1998.

Although Mokhehle completed his term as Prime Minister, due to his failing health, he did not vie for a second term in office. The elections saw a landslide victory for the LCD, gaining 79 of the 80 seats contested in the newly expanded Parliament. As a result of the elections, Mokhehle's Deputy Prime Minister, Pakalitha Mosisili, became the new Prime Minister. The landslide electoral victory caused opposition parties to claim that there were substantial irregularities in the handling of the ballots and that the results were fraudulent. The conclusion of the Langa Commission, a commission appointed by Southern African Development Community (SADC) to investigate the electoral process, however, was consistent with the view of international observers and local courts that the outcome of the elections was not affected by these incidents. Despite the fact that the election results were found to reflect the will of the people, opposition protests in the country intensified. The protests culminated in a violent demonstration outside the royal palace in early August 1998 and in an unprecedented level of violence, looting, casualties, and destruction of property. In early September, junior members of the armed services mutinied. The Government of Lesotho requested that a SADC task force intervene to prevent a military coup and restore stability to the country. To this end, Operation Boleas, consisting of South African and (later) Botswana troops, entered Lesotho on September 22, 1998 to put down the mutiny and restore the democratically elected government. The army mutineers were brought before a court-martial.

After stability returned to Lesotho, the SADC task force withdrew from the country in May 1999, leaving only a small task force (joined by Zimbabwean troops) to provide training to the LDF. In the meantime, an Interim Political Authority (IPA), charged with reviewing the electoral structure in the country, was created in December 1998 and devised a proportional electoral system to ensure that there be opposition in the National Assembly. The new system retained the existing 80 elected Assembly seats, but added 40 seats to be filled on a proportional basis. Elections were held under this new system in May 2002, and the LCD won again, gaining 54% of the vote. For the first time, however, opposition political parties won significant numbers of seats, and despite some irregularities and threats of violence from Major General Lekhanya, Lesotho experienced its first peaceful election. Nine opposition parties now hold all 40 of the proportional seats, with the BNP having the largest share (21). The LCD has 79 of the 80 constituency-based seats.

==See also==
*History of Africa
*History of South Africa
*History of Southern Africa
*History of Swaziland
*List of heads of government of Lesotho
*List of Kings of Lesotho
*Politics of Lesotho

==References==
*

==External links==
*Background Note: Lesotho

 


[[Geography of Lesotho]]

Lesotho is a mountainous, landlocked country located in Southern Africa. It is an enclave, surrounded by South Africa. The total length of the country's borders is 909 km. Lesotho covers an area of around 30355 km2, of which a negligible percentage is covered with water.

The most notable geographic fact about Lesotho, apart from its status as an enclave, is that it is the only independent state in the world that lies entirely above 1000 m in elevation. Its lowest point is at 1400 m, the highest lowest point of any country. Because of its elevation, the country's climate is cooler than in most other regions at the same latitude. Its climate zone can be classified as continental.

==Location==
Lesotho is a country in Southern Africa, located at around 2930' south latitude and 2830' east longitude. It is the 141st largest country in the world, with a total land area of 30355 km2, of which a negligible percentage is covered with water. Lesotho is completely surrounded by South Africa, making it one of only four countries in the world that are enclaves within another country; the other three are San Marino and Vatican City, both located within Italy, and Principality of Monaco, located in France. The total length of the South African border is 909 km. Lesotho's status as an enclave also means that it is landlocked and largely dependent on South Africa. The nearest major shipping port is Durban. Uprety 2005, p. 9 

==Physical geography==
Malealea village in the highlands of Lesotho
Lesotho can be roughly divided into three geographic regions: the lowlands, following the southern banks of the Caledon River, and in the Senqu river valley; the highlands formed by the Drakensberg and Maloti mountain ranges in the east and central parts of the country; and the foothills that form a divide between the lowlands and the highlands. The lowest elevation in the country is at the junction of the Makhaleng and Orange (Senqu) rivers (at the South African border), which at 1400 m is the highest lowest point of any country. Lesotho is the only independent state in the world that lies entirely above 1000 m in elevation. The highest point is the peak of the Thabana Ntlenyana mountain, which reaches an elevation of 3482 m. Over 80% of Lesotho lies above 1800 m. 

Even though very little of Lesotho is covered in water, the rivers that run across the country are an important part of Lesotho's economy. Much of the country's export income comes from water, and much of its power comes from hydroelectricity. The Orange River rises in the Drakensberg mountains in northeastern Lesotho and flows across the entire length of the country before exiting to South Africa at the Mohale's Hoek District in the southwest. The Caledon River marks the northwestern part of the border with South Africa. Other rivers include the Malibamatso, Matsoku and Senqunyane.

The bedrock of Lesotho belongs to the Karoo Supergroup, consisting mostly of shale and sandstone. Peatlands can be found in the highlands of Lesotho, most extensively in the mountainous escarpment near the country's eastern border. The summit of Thabana Ntlenyana is partially encircled by bogs. Adams, Goudie, Orme, p. 245 

==Political geography==
Districts and Cities of Lesotho

Lesotho is divided into 10 administrative districts, each with its own capital, called a camptown. The districts are further subdivided into 80 constituencies, which consist of 129 local community councils. 

Districts (in alphabetical order):
#Berea
#Butha-Buthe
#Leribe
#Mafeteng
#Maseru
#Mohale's Hoek
#Mokhotlong
#Qacha's Nek
#Quthing
#Thaba-Tseka

==Climate==
Snow on the Lesotho Moteng pass
Because of its altitude, the country remains cooler throughout the year than most other regions at the same latitude. Lesotho has a continental climate, with hot summers and cold winters. Maseru and its surrounding lowlands often reach 30 C in the summer. Winters can be cold with the lowlands getting down to -7 C and the highlands to -20 C at times. 

The yearly precipitation varies from around 600 mm in the lowland valleys to around 1200 mm in areas of the northern and eastern escarpment bordering South Africa. Most of the rain falls as summer thunderstorms: 85% of the annual precipitation falls between the months of April and October. The wintersbetween May and September are usually very dry. Snow is common in the deserts and low valleys between May and September; the higher peaks can experience occasionally significant snowfall year-round. Annual variance in rainfall is quite erratic, which leads to periodic droughts in the dry season (May to September) and flooding, which can be severe in the rainy season (October-April).

==Natural resources==
Map of Lesotho 
Lesotho is poor in natural resources. Economically the most important resource is water. The Lesotho Highlands Water Project allows exporting water from the Malibamatso, Matsoku, Senqu and Senqunyane rivers to South Africa, while also generating hydroelectric power for Lesotho's needs. As of April 2008, the first phase of the project has been completed. The project already accounts for an estimated five percent of Lesotho's GDP, and when fully completed, it could account for as much as 20 percent. 

The main mineral resource is diamonds from the Letseng diamond mine in the Maluti mountain range. The mine produces very few stones, but has the highest dollar ratio per carat of any diamond mine in the world. Other mineral resources include coal, galena, quartz, agate and uranium deposits, but their exploitation is not considered commercially viable. Clay deposits can be found in the country, and are used for producing tiles, bricks and other ceramics. 

Much of the population engages in subsistence farming, even though only 10.71% of the country's surface is classified as arable land and 0.13% has permanent crops. Much of the land has been ruined by soil erosion. The most fertile farmlands are in the northern and central lowlands, and in the foothills between the lowlands and the mountains. Large tracts of the fertile farmland to the north of the countryin the Free State region of South Africawere lost to European colonists in wars during the 19th century.

==Extreme points==
This is a list of the extreme points of Lesotho, the points that are farther north, south, east or west than any other location.

* Northernmost point - unnamed location on the border with Golden Gate National Park in South Africa immediately north-west of the village of Monontsa,In Butha-Buthe District
* Easternmost point - unnamed location on the border with South Africa immediately west of the South African mountain Giant's Castle, Mokhotlong District
* Southernmost point - Gairntoul mountain, Quthing District
* Westernmost point - unnamed location in the Caledon River on the border with South Africa, Mafeteng District

==References==

 



[[Demographics of Lesotho]]

This article is about the demographic features of the population of Lesotho, including population density, ethnicity, education level, health of the populace, economic status, religious affiliations and other aspects of the population.

The Demographics of Lesotho describe the condition and overview of Lesotho's peoples. Demographic topics include basic education, health, and population statistics as well as identified racial and religious affiliations.

==Population==
Historical population of Lesotho (Food and Agriculture Organization data), year 2005; Number of inhabitants in thousands.
According to the 2006 census, Lesotho has a total population of 1,872,721. Of the population, 23.74 percent lived in urban and 76.26 percent in rural areas. The country's capital, Maseru, accounts for around half of the total urban population. The sex distribution is 911,848 male and 960,873 female, or around 95 males for each 100 females. 

The average population density in the country is around 61,7 people per square kilometer. The density is lower in the highlands than in the western lowlands. Although the majority of the population59.8 percentis between 15 and 64 years of age, Lesotho has a substantial youth population numbering around 35.3 percent. The annual population growth rate is estimated at 0.13% 

According to the 2010 revison of the World Population Prospects the total population was 2 171 000 in 2010, compared to only 734 000 in 1950. The proportion of children below the age of 15 in 2010 was 37.4%, 58.3% was between 15 and 65 years of age, while 4.3% was 65 years or older
. Population Division of the Department of Economic and Social Affairs of the United Nations Secretariat, World Population Prospects: The 2010 Revision 

 Total population (x 1000) Population aged 014 (%) Population aged 1564 (%) Population aged 65+ (%) 
 1950 734 40.7 54.9 4.5 
 1955 788 41.9 53.7 4.4 
 1960 852 43.1 52.7 4.3 
 1965 934 43.6 52.2 4.2 
 1970 1 033 44.1 51.8 4.2 
 1975 1 150 44.5 51.3 4.2 
 1980 1 310 44.3 51.6 4.1 
 1985 1 487 44.3 51.6 4.1 
 1990 1 639 44.1 51.7 4.2 
 1995 1 795 43.1 52.5 4.4 
 2000 1 964 41.2 54.3 4.5 
 2005 2 066 39.6 56.0 4.4 
 2010 2 171 37.4 58.3 4.3 

==Vital statistics==
Registration of vital events is in Lesotho not complete. The Population Departement of the United Nations prepared the following estimates.
 

 Period Live births per year Deaths per year Natural change per year CBR* CDR* NC* TFR* IMR* 
 1950-1955 32 000 17 000 15 000 42.1 22.7 19.4 5.84 169 
 1955-1960 35 000 17 000 18 000 42.2 20.3 21.9 5.86 150 
 1960-1965 38 000 16 000 21 000 42.3 18.3 24.0 5.81 134 
 1965-1970 42 000 17 000 24 000 42.5 17.8 24.8 5.80 130 
 1970-1975 47 000 18 000 28 000 42.8 16.9 26.0 5.80 123 
 1975-1980 52 000 19 000 33 000 42.0 15.1 27.0 5.69 110 
 1980-1985 56 000 18 000 38 000 40.4 13.0 27.4 5.46 94 
 1985-1990 59 000 18 000 41 000 37.6 11.6 26.0 5.14 84 
 1990-1995 60 000 17 000 42 000 34.7 10.0 24.7 4.70 70 
 1995-2000 63 000 25 000 38 000 33.7 13.5 20.2 4.37 81 
 2000-2005 62 000 36 000 26 000 30.7 17.9 12.8 3.79 86 
 2005-2010 60 000 35 000 25 000 28.5 16.7 11.9 3.37 77 
 * CBR = crude birth rate (per 1000); CDR = crude death rate (per 1000); NC = natural change (per 1000); IMR = infant mortality rate per 1000 births; TFR = total fertility rate (number of children per woman) 

==Ethnic groups and languages==
Due to Lesotho's long history as a unified nation, that continued even through British colonial rule, the ethnic makeup of the country is very homogenous. Lesotho's ethno-linguistic structure consists almost entirely of the Basotho (singular Mosotho), a Bantu-speaking people: an estimate of 99.7 percent of the people identify as Basotho. The Kwena (Bakoena) are the largest subgroup of the Sotho; other Basotho subgroups include the Natal (North) Nguni, Batloung (the Tlou), Baphuthi (the Phuti), Bafokeng, Bataung (the Tau), Bats'oeneng (the tso'ene) and the Cape (South) Nguni (Thembu). Other ethnic groups include Europeans, numbering in the thousands, and several hundred Asians. 

Sesotho (Southern Sotho) and English languages are both official. Afrikaans, Zulu, Xhosa and French are also spoken.

==Religion==

The population of Lesotho is estimated to be around 90 percent Christian. Roman Catholics, the largest religious group, make up around 45 percent of the population. Evangelicals comprise 26 percent of the population, and Anglican and other Christian groups an additional 19 percent. Muslims, Hindus, Buddhists, Baha'i, and members of traditional indigenous religions comprise the remaining 10 percent of the population. 

==Education and literacy==
According to recent estimates, 85 percent of the population 15 and over was literate. Among women the literacy rate was around 95 percent, and among men around 75 percent. As such, Lesotho boasts one of the higher literacy rates in Africa. Although education is not compulsory, the Government of Lesotho is incrementally implementing a programme for free primary education. It was expected that the program would be fully in place by 2006. The National University of Lesotho located in Roma is the only university in the country. In addition, the country has almost 20 other public and 15 private institutes giving tertiary education. 

==References==

Lesotho


[[Politics of Lesotho]]

Politics of Lesotho takes place in a framework of a parliamentary representative democratic constitutional monarchy, whereby the Prime Minister of Lesotho is the head of government, and of a multi-party system. Executive power is exercised by the government. Legislative power is vested in both the government and the two chambers of Parliament, the Senate and the National Assembly. The Judiciary is independent of the executive and the legislature.

==Executive branch==

|King
|Letsie III
|
|7 February 1996
|-
|Prime Minister
|Tom Thabane
|All Basotho Convention
|June 2012

The Lesotho Government is a constitutional monarchy. The Prime Minister, Tom Thabane, is head of government and has executive authority. The King serves a largely ceremonial function; he no longer possesses any executive authority and is proscribed from actively participating in political initiatives. According to the constitution, the leader of the majority party in the assembly automatically becomes prime minister; the monarch is hereditary, but, under the terms of the constitution which came into effect after the March 1993 election, the monarch is a "living symbol of national unity" with no executive or legislative powers; under traditional law the college of chiefs has the power to determine who is next in the line of succession, who shall serve as regent in the event that the successor is not of mature age, and may even depose the monarch.

==Legislative branch==
Parliament has two chambers. The National Assembly has 120 members, elected for a five-year term, 80 in single-seat constituencies and 40 by proportional representation. The Senate has 33 nominated members.

==Political parties and elections==

The Lesotho Congress for Democracy (LCD) won the majority in parliament in the 23 May 1998 general elections, leaving the once-dominant Basotho National Party (BNP) and Basotholand Congress Party (BCP) far behind in total votes. Although international observers as well as a regional commission declared the elections to have reflected the will of the people, many members of the opposition have accused the LCD of electoral fraud. The 1998 elections were the third multiparty elections in Lesotho's history. The LCD, BNP, and BCP remain the principal rival political organizations in Lesotho. Distinctions and differences in political orientation between the major parties have blurred in recent years.

Nevertheless, after political riots following the disputed 1998, an all-party forum called the Interim Political Authority was formed to level ground for the next poll. It proposed the restructuring of the Independent Electoral Commission, which happened and the change of the model from pure First-Past-the-Post System to Mixed Member Proportional Representation. 

In the 25 May 2002 general elections, the ruling Lesotho Congress for Democracy was re-elected by majority, winning all but one of the 80 constituency-based seats. 40 compensatory seats under the Proportional Representation were shared among nine opposition parties.

==Judicial branch==
The constitution provides for an independent judicial system. The judiciary is made up of the High Court of Lesotho, the Court of Appeal, magistrate's courts, and traditional courts that exist predominantly in rural areas. There is no trial by jury; rather, judges make rulings alone, or, in the case of criminal trials, with two other judges as observers. The constitution also protects basic civil liberties, including freedom of speech, association, and the press; freedom of peaceful assembly; and freedom of religion.

==Administrative divisions==
For administrative purposes, Lesotho is divided into 10 districts, each headed by a district secretary and a district military officer appointed by the central government and the RLDF, respectively.
The districts are: Berea, Butha-Buthe, Leribe, Mafeteng, Maseru, Mohales Hoek, Mokhotlong, Qacha's Nek, Quthing, Thaba-Tseka

==International organization participation==
Lesotho is member of ACP, AfDB, C, CCC, ECA, FAO, G-77, IBRD, ICAO, ICC, ICRM, IDA, IFAD, IFC, IFRCS, ILO, IMF, Intelsat (nonsignatory user), Interpol, IOC, ITU, NAM, OAU, OPCW, SACU, SADC, United Nations, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNHCR, UNIDO, UPU, WCL, WFTU, WHO, WIPO, WMO, WToO, WTrO

==Notes and references==
 

==Literature==
*K. Matlosa Electoral System Design and Conflict Mitigation: the Case of Lesotho // Democracy, Conflict and Human Security

 

[[Economy of Lesotho]]

Lesotho is geographically surrounded by South Africa and economically integrated with it as well. The economy of Lesotho is based on agriculture, livestock, manufacturing, mining, and depends heavily on inflows of workers remittances and receipts from the Southern African Customs Union (SACU). and The majority of households subsist on farming. The formal sector employment consist of mainly the female workers in the apparel sector, the male migrant labor, primarily miners in South Africa for 3 to 9 months and employment in the Government of Lesotho (GOL) . The western lowlands form the main agricultural zone. Almost 50% of the population earn income through informal crop cultivation or animal husbandry with nearly two-thirds of the country's income coming from the agricultural sector.

Water and diamonds are Lesotho's only significant natural resources. Water is being exploited through the 30-year, multi-billion dollar Lesotho Highlands Water Project (LHWP), which was initiated in 1986. The LHWP is designed to capture, store, and transfer water from the Orange River system and send it to South Africa's Free State and greater Johannesburg area, which features a large concentration of South African industry, population and agriculture. At the completion of the project, Lesotho should be almost completely self-sufficient in the production of electricity and also gain income from the sale of electricity to South Africa. The World Bank, African Development Bank, European Investment Bank, and many other bilateral donors are financing the project. Diamonds are produced in Leteng, Mothae, Liqhobong and Kao mines. The sector suffered a set back in 2008 as the result of the world recession but rebounded in 2010 and 2011. It is a major contributor to the exports of Lesotho. 

Lesotho has taken advantage of the African Growth and Opportunity Act (AGOA) to become the largest exporter of garments to the US from sub-Saharan Africa. American Brands and retailers sourcing from Lesotho include: Foot Locker, Gap, Gloria Vanderbilt, JCPenny, Levi Strauss, Saks, Sears, Timberland and Wal-Mart. In mid-2004 its employment reached over 50,000 mainly female workers, marking the first time that manufacturing sector workers outnumbered government employees. In 2008 it exported 487 million dollars mainly to the U.S.A. Since 2004 employment in the sector was somehow reduced to about 45,000, in mid-2011, due to intense international competition in the garment sector. It was the largest formal sector employer in Lesotho in 2011. The sector initiated a major program to fight HIV/AIDS called Apparel Lesotho Alliance to Fight AIDS (ALAFA). It is an industry-wide program providing prevention and treatment for the workers. 

Until the political insecurity in September 1998, Lesotho's economy had grown steadily since 1992. The riots, however, destroyed nearly 80% of commercial infrastructure in Maseru and two other major towns in the country, having a disastrous effect on the country's economy. Nonetheless, the country has completed several IMF Structural Adjustment Programs, and inflation declined substantially over the course of the 1990s. Lesotho's trade deficit, however, is quite large, with exports representing only a small fraction of imports.

Lesothos progress in moving from a predominantly subsistence-oriented economy to a lower middle income, diversified economy exporting natural resources and manufacturing goods has brought higher, more secure incomes to a significant portion of the population. The percentage of the population living below USD PPP US$1.25/day fell from 48 percent to 44 percent between 1995 and 2003. The country is still among the "Low Human Development" countries (rank 155 of 192) as classified by the UNDP, with 42.3 years of life expectancy at birth. However, adult literacy is very high - 82% and children under weight aged under 5 is only 20%. Human Development Report 2009. The United Nations. Retrieved 07 March 2012. 

The global economic crisis hit the Lesotho economy hard through loss of textile exports and jobs in the sector due largely to the economic slowdown in the United States which is a major export destination, reduced diamond mining and exports, including weak prices for diamonds; drop in SACU revenues due to the economic slowdown in the South African economy, and reduction in worker remittances due to weakening of the South African economy and contraction of the mining sector and related job losses in South Africa. In 2009, GDP growth slowed to 0.9 percent. 

Lesotho has received economic aid from a variety of sources, including the United States, the World Bank, the United Kingdom, the European Union, and Germany.

Lesotho has nearly 6,000 kilometers of unpaved and modern all-weather roads. There is a short rail line (freight) linking Lesotho with South Africa that is totally owned and operated by South Africa. 

Lesotho, is a member of the Southern African Customs Union (SACU) in which tariffs have been eliminated on the trade of goods between other member countries, which also include Botswana, Namibia, South Africa, and Swaziland. Lesotho, Swaziland, Namibia, and South Africa also form a common currency and exchange control area known as the Rand Monetary Area that uses the South African rand as the common currency. In 1980, Lesotho introduced its own currency, the loti (plural: maloti). One hundred lisente equal one loti. The Loti is at par with the rand.

==Other statistics==

Household income or consumption by percentage share:
lowest 10%:
0.9%
highest 10%:
43.4% (198687)

Industrial production growth rate:
3% (2010)

Electricity - consumption:
626 GWh (2010/11)

Agriculture - products:
maize, wheat, pulses, sorghum, barley; livestock

Currency:
1 loti (L) = 100 lisente; note - maloti (M) is the plural form of loti

Exchange rates:
maloti (M) per US$1  7.32 (2010), 6.10948 (1999), 3.62709 (1995); note - the Basotho loti is at par with the South African rand

==See also==
* Economy of Africa
* Lesotho
* List of Basotho companies
* List of South African companies

==References==

==External links==
*
* MBendi Lesotho overview
*Lesotho latest trade data on ITC Trade Map

 
Lesotho
Lesotho

[[Telecommunications in Lesotho]]

Telecommunications in Lesotho include radio, television, print and online newspapers, fixed and mobile telephones, and the Internet.

==Radio==

* Radio stations: 2 state-owned radio stations; government controls most private broadcast media; transmissions of multiple international broadcasters are available (2008). "Communications: Lesotho", World Factbook, U.S. Central Intelligence Agency, 7 January 2014. Retrieved 19 January 2014. 
* Radio stations in Lesotho:
** Radio Lesotho 1050AM.
** Ultimate 950AM.
** Radio Lesotho 93.3FM, Maseru only.
** People's Choice (PCFM) 95.6FM, Maseru only.
** Radio France International (RFI) 95.4FM, Maseru only.
** Thaha-Khube 97.1FM, Maseru only.
** Harvest 98.8FM, Maseru only.
** Moafrica 99.3FM, Maseru only.
** Ultimate 99.8FM, Maseru only.
** Kereke Evangel, 102FM.
** Catholic radio 103.3FM.
** Jeso KE Karabo 105.2FM, Maseru only.
** Joy 106.9FM, Maseru only.

==Television==

* Television stations: 1 state-owned TV station; government controls most private broadcast media; satellite TV subscription service available; transmissions of multiple international broadcasters are available (2008). 
* TV stations in Lesotho:
** Lesotho Television (LTV 151 on DStv).
** Trinity Broadcasting Network (TBN).

==Newspapers==

* Main newspapers in Lesotho:
** Public Eye newspaper, Public Eye website.
** Lesotho Times, Lesotho Times website.
** Informative News, Informative News website.

==Telephones==

* Calling code +266 
* International call prefix: 00 Dialing Procedures (International Prefix, National (Trunk) Prefix and National (Significant) Number) (in Accordance with ITY-T Recommendation E.164 (11/2010)), Annex to ITU Operational Bulletin No. 994-15.XII.2011, International Telecommunication Union (ITU, Geneva), 15 December 2011. Retrieved 2 January 2014. 
* Main lines: 43,100 lines in use, 168th in the world (2012). 
* Mobile cellular: 1.3 million lines, 153rd in the world (2012). 
* Telephone system: Rudimentary system consisting of a modest number of landlines, a small microwave radio relay system, and a small radiotelephone communication system; privatized in 2001, Telecom Lesotho was tasked with providing an additional 50,000 fixed-line connections within five years, a target not met; mobile-cellular service dominates the market and is expanding with a subscribership of roughly 65 per 100 persons in 2011; rural services are scant (2011). 
* Satellite earth station: 1 Intelsat (Atlantic Ocean) (2011). 

===Telecommunications providers===

Vodacom Lesotho started operating in 1996 with the Government of Lesotho as a shareholder through its stake in Lesotho Telecommunications Corporation. When the Government of Lesotho began its privatisation process in 1999, it invited bids for this share in Vodacom Lesotho. In July 2000, Sekha-Metsi Consortium, a group of local business people and public figures, was announced as the successful bidder. Sekha-Metsi now holds a 12% share in Vodacom Lesotho with the remaining share held by Vodacom Group. In 2008 Vodacom Lesotho introduced its new partnership with Vodafone.

Econet Telecom Lesotho is part of the Econet Wireless group and operates as a stand-alone entity with full local board and management control. It is the first African mobile service operator to use ForgetMeNot Africa's eTXT service to enable their customer base to send and receive email via any mobile capable of a simple SMS. "Econet Telecom launches ForgetMeNots email-by-SMS service for Lesotho", Ewan MacLeod, Mobile Industry Review, 2 October 2009. Retrieved 19 January 2014. "Econet Telecom and ForgetMeNot Africa bring mobile email to Lesotho", James Barton, Developing Telecoms, 23 October 2009. Retrieved 7 February 2014. 

==Internet==

* Top-level domain: .ls 
* Internet users: 88,602 users, 170th in the world; 4.6% of the population, 189th in the world (2012). Calculated using penetration rate and population data from "Countries and Areas Ranked by Population: 2012", Population data, International Programs, U.S. Census Bureau, retrieved 26 June 2013 "Percentage of Individuals using the Internet 2000-2012", International Telecommunications Union (Geneva), June 2013, retrieved 22 June 2013 
* Fixed broadband: 2,529 subscriptions, 169th in the world; 0.1% of the population, 163rd in the world (2012). "Fixed (wired)-broadband subscriptions per 100 inhabitants 2012", Dynamic Report, ITU ITC EYE, International Telecommunication Union. Retrieved on 29 June 2013. 
* Wireless broadband: Unknown (2012). "Active mobile-broadband subscriptions per 100 inhabitants 2012", Dynamic Report, ITU ITC EYE, International Telecommunication Union. Retrieved on 29 June 2013. 
* Internet hosts: 11,030 hosts, 131st in the world (2012). 
* IPv4: 40,448 addresses allocated, less than 0.05% of the world total, 21.0 addresses per 1000 people (2012). Select Formats, Country IP Blocks. Accessed on 2 April 2012. Note: Site is said to be updated daily. Population, The World Factbook, United States Central Intelligence Agency. Accessed on 2 April 2012. Note: Data are mostly for 1 July 2012. 
* Internet Service Providers: 2 ISPs (2013).

===Internet censorship and surveillance===

There are no government restrictions on access to the Internet or credible reports that the government monitors e-mail or Internet chat rooms without judicial oversight. The Internet is not widely available and almost nonexistent in rural areas due to the lack of communications infrastructure and high cost of access. "Lesotho", Country Reports on Human Rights Practices for 2012, Bureau of Democracy, Human Rights and Labor, U.S. Department of State, 21 March 2013. Retrieved 19 January 2014. 

The constitution and law provide for freedom of speech, so long as they do not interfere with "defense, public safety, public order, public morality, or public health". The government generally respects this right. An independent press, effective judiciary, and functioning democratic political system combine generally to promote freedom of the press; however, harassment of journalists and self-censorship persist. The law prohibits expressions of hatred or contempt for any person because of the persons race, ethnic affiliation, gender, disability, or color. 

==See also==

* Lesotho Amateur Radio Society

==References==

* 
* 

==External links==

* LEO domain name registrar, website.
* Lesotho Amateur Radio Society, website.
* Lesotho Communications Authority, website.

 
Lesotho
Lesotho]

[[Transport in Lesotho]]

This article concerns systems of transport in Lesotho. As a landlocked country, Lesotho has no seaports or harbours, but does possess road, air, and limited rail infrastructure.

==Roads==
Prior to Lesotho's independence in 1966, the only paved road in the country was the Kingsway in the capital, Maseru, between the Mejametalana Airport and the Royal Palace. Since the early 1970s, the road infrastructure has been substantially developed. In 1999, Lesotho had a road network measuring at 5940 km in length, of which 1087 km were paved. The most weight has been given to connecting the district centres, but the roads within central Lesotho have also been improved, as part of the construction needs of the Lesotho Highlands Water Project. 

== Railways ==

The only railway line in Lesotho is the Maseru branch line, which connects the capital city Maseru to the Bloemfontein&ndash;Bethlehem line in the railway network of South Africa. The final 1.6 km of this line, which opened on 18 December 1905, lies within the borders of Lesotho, running from the border bridge on the Mohokare River through the northern industrial district of Maseru to that city's station, the only railway station in the country. 

As of 2008, there have been talks of building new railways to connect Lesotho to Durban and Port Elizabeth. 

==Air transport==
There are a total of 28 airports in Lesotho, of which 3 have paved runways. The only international airport is the Moshoeshoe I International Airport in Mazenod, a short distance southeast from Maseru. The main runway of the Moshoeshoe Airport is the only one with a runway longer than 1,523 meters; it measures at 3,200 meters.

Of the other airports, one has a paved runway between 914 and 1,523 meters in length and one a paved runway with a length of under 914 meters. Four of the airports have unpaved runways of between 914 and 1,523 meters in length, and the others have unpaved runways of less than 914 meters. All of the classifications are made by the length of the longest runway on an airport.

==Water transport==
Lesotho is landlocked and completely dependent on South Africa for sea transport. The nearest major port and the transshipping point for the country is Durban. Recently due to delays out of Durban more companies have been using the Port Elizabeth facilities that are 2 hours farther south.

Inland water transport is limited to small ferry boats at river crossings, and the Government of Lesotho operates boats at major crossings.

==Intermediate means of transport==
The main intermediate means of transport (IMTs) in use are wheelbarrows and work animals. Wheelbarrows are widespread in the urban and rural areas and are commonly used by women and men to transport food aid, grains for milling, water containers, and building materials. The importance of wheelbarrows for water collection is gradually being reduced by the provision of water taps. Also common in both highland and lowland areas are two-wheeled scotch carts' with pneumatic tyres. They used to be pulled mainly by oxen, but in recent years there has been an increasing tendency to use cows (females), as farmers often do not own oxen. The carts vary in design, some being made with old pickup bodies, some made using old axles, and many being purpose-made to standard designs by small workshops in Lesotho or South Africa. Most are painted red. Discussion with workshops producing carts suggest the main problem is obtaining suitable wheels and axles, as well as other raw materials, that can be afforded by their clients.

Horses are very important in the highlands for riding. Horses are sometimes used as pack animals to carry goods, but this is relatively uncommon. Donkeys, on the other hand are widely used as pack animals in all parts of the county. Donkeys are quite commonly ridden, mainly by young men and usually without a saddle. It is quite common for women to ride horses, but relatively few women ride donkeys. A few people, notably older men, ride donkeys fitted with saddles. Mules are relatively uncommon, and may be used for riding or pack transport.The use of horses, mules and donkeys to pull carts is very low. Very few two-wheeled donkey carts or horse carts, although such carts are very common in other countries in southern, eastern, western and northern Africa. In at least two urban areas (Maputsoe and Mafeteng) a small number of transport entrepreneurs use carts or wagons with pneumatic tyres pulled mainly by single horses (and occasionally by two donkeys or a mule). In Mafeteng, the transporters use two-wheel carts, while in Maputsoe, the transporters use four-wheel wagons.

The numbers of bicycles and motorcycles in use is very low. The per-capita ownership of motorcycles in Lesotho, and also bicycles, may be among the lowest in the world. The small number of people who do use bicycles tend to be children and young men, primarily for recreation although some use them for inter-village travel. A few people use bicycles for sport, and some South Africans and other tourists travel through the highlands on bicycles. A small number of transport entrepreneurs use bicycles to gain a livelihood.

== References ==

 

[[Military of Lesotho]]

The security forces are composed of the Lesotho Defence Force (LDF) and the Lesotho Mounted Police Service. The LDF consists of an army, an air wing, and a newly formed paramilitary wing. The LDF is answerable to the Prime Minister through the Ministry of Defence, while the Lesotho Mounted Police report to the Prime Minister through the ministry of Defense, Police and National Security Service. There also is a National Security Service, Intelligence, which is directly accountable to the Prime Minister. Relations between the police and the army have been tense, and in 1997 the army was called upon to put down a serious police mutiny.
Lesotho Defense Force in 2009

==Army units==
*7 x Infantry Companies
*1 x Support Company (81mm mortars)
*1 x Armoured Recon. Company (AML-90\RAM-2V\RBY MK-II\Shorland)
*1 x Artillery Battery (L-118 Light-gun 105mm towed howitzer)
*1 x Logistic Support Group

==Equipment==
*Berreta AR-70\90 5.56mm AR 
*IMI Galil 5.56mm AR 
*Colt M16 5.56mm AR 
*FN MAG 7.62mm LMG 
*SMG 
*7.62mm MMG 
*Bren Mk-III LMG 
*Panhard AML-90 4x4,90mm ARV (x 10) 
*Ramta RAM-2-V 4x4 APC (x 6) 
*Ramta RBY Mk-II 4x4 APC (x 10) 
*Shorland S-52 4x4 APC (x 8) 
*M40 105mm RCL (x 6) 
*RPG-7 Light ATRL \
*L-118 105mm Light-Gun Towed Howitzer (x 2) 
*L-16 81mm Medium-Mortar (x 10) 
Military branches:
Lesotho Defence Force (LDF; includes Army and Air Wing), Lesotho Mounted Police Service (LMPS)

Military manpower - availability:
males age 15-49:
526,332 (2002 est.)

Military manpower - fit for military service:
males age 15-49:
283,203 (2002 est.)

Military expenditures - dollar figure:
$34 million (1999)

Military expenditures - percent of GDP:
NA%

Military - note:
The Lesotho Government in 1999 began an open debate on the future structure, size, and role of the armed forces, especially considering the Lesotho Defence Force's (LDF) history of intervening in political affairs.



[[Foreign relations of Lesotho]]

Lesotho's geographic location makes it extremely vulnerable to political and economic developments in South Africa.It's capital is the small city of Maseru. It is a member of many regional economic organizations including the Southern African Development Community (SADC) and the Southern African Customs Union (SACU). Lesotho also is active in the United Nations, the Organisation of African Unity, now the African Union, the Non-Aligned Movement, and many other international organizations. In addition to the United States, South Africa, Ireland, People's Republic of China, Libya, and the European Union all currently retain resident diplomatic missions in Lesotho. Foreign relations of Lesotho are administered by the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and International Relations.

Lesotho has historically maintained generally close ties with Ireland (Lesotho's largest bi-lateral aid donor), the United States, the United Kingdom, Germany, and other Western states. Although Lesotho decided in 1990 to break relations with the People's Republic of China (P.R.C.) and re-establish relations with the Republic of China (commonly known by its main island as Taiwan), it has since restored ties with the P.R.C. 
Passport of Lesotho

==Bilateral Relations==
===Bangladesh===

===China===

===Ireland===

Lesotho has significant relations with the Republic of Ireland. In 13 November 1997, it's president Mr Prabhav DavidisLiz O'Donnell (Irish Minister for State) spoke about the relationship between the two nations and Ireland's future commitment towards Lesotho. The Irish Prime Minister, Bertie Ahern visited Lesotho in 2000. http://www.rte.ie/news/2000/0110/taoiseach.html This relationship was further strengthened by a visit from the then President of Ireland Mary McAleese between 14 and 16 June 2006 on her speech about the long standing relationship with Lesotho and shared history between both nations. http://www.president.ie/index.php?section=5&speech=249&lang=eng 

The Irish Government has donated aid to Lesotho since 1975. Donations to Lesotho is Ireland's longest running aid programme. http://www.irishaid.gov.ie/lesotho.asp On 14 February 2005, Lesotho announced that Ireland is the largest bilateral donor with financial support in excess of M70 million in each of the past three years. http://www.lesotho.gov.ls/articles/2005/PM_Visits_Ireland.htm Ireland also supports Lesotho's Flying Doctor Service, education, sanitation, water and various health such as the Fight against AIDS with the Clinton Foundation. http://www.lesotho.gov.ls/about/health.php Ireland also showed support to Lesotho in 1975, when Lesotho took a stand against South Africa's apartheid regime. 

===South Africa===
Lesotho-South Africa border

LesothoSouth Africa relations

===Swaziland===

Lesotho and Swaziland both have borders with South Africa.

===United Kingdom===

Lesotho was previously the British protectorate of Basutoland prior to gaining independence in 1966. Since then Lesotho has been a member of the Commonwealth of Nations and maintained strong relations with the United Kingdom, exchanging High Commissioners between respective governments. The United Kingdom has maintained its status as one of Lesotho's major defence equipment suppliers as well as significant investment coming from the United Kingdom to help in the prevention and management of AIDS/HIV as well as other infrastructure projects.

===United States===

The United States was one of the first four countries to establish an embassy in Maseru after Lesotho gained its independence from Great Britain in 1966. Since this time, Lesotho and the United States have consistently maintained warm bilateral relations. In 1996, the United States closed its bilateral aid program in Lesotho. The Southern African regional office of the U.S. Agency for International Development (USAID) in Gaborone, Botswana now administers most of the U.S. assistance to Lesotho, which totalled approximately $2 million in FY 2004. Total U.S. aid to Lesotho is over $10 million, including humanitarian food assistance. The Peace Corps has operated in Lesotho since 1966. About 100 Peace Corps volunteers concentrate in the sectors of health, agriculture, education, rural community development, and the environment. The Government of Lesotho encourages greater American participation in commercial life and welcomes interest from potential U.S. investors and suppliers. In 2007, the Government of Lesotho signed a compact with the Millennium Challenge Corporation to provide $362.5 million in support to develop Lesotho's water sector, healthcare infrastructure, and private sector.

==Lesotho and the Commonwealth of Nations==

Lesotho, along with Brunei, Malaysia, Swaziland, and Tonga, is a Commonwealth member state with its own monarchy.

==References==

==See also==

*List of diplomatic missions in Lesotho
*List of diplomatic missions of Lesotho
*Further Reading from Irish Department of Foreign Affairs

 


[[Liberia]]

Liberia , officially the Republic of Liberia, is a country in West Africa bordered by Sierra Leone to its west, Guinea to its north and Ivory Coast to its east. It covers an area of 111369 km2 and is home to about 4 million people. English is the official language and over thirty indigenous languages are also spoken within the country. Its coastline is composed mostly of mangroves, while its more sparsely populated inland consists of forests opening onto a plateau of drier grasslands. The climate is hot and equatorial, with significant rainfall during the MayOctober rainy season and harsh harmattan winds the remainder of the year. The country possesses about forty percent of the remaining Upper Guinean rainforest.

Liberia is the only country in Africa founded by United States colonization while occupied by native Africans. Beginning in 1820, the region was colonized by African Americans, most of whom were freed slaves. The colonizers (who later become known as Americo-Liberians) established a new country with the help of the American Colonization Society, a private organization whose leaders thought former slaves would have greater opportunity in Africa. African captives freed from slave ships by the British and Americans were sent there instead of being repatriated to their countries of origin. In 1847, this new country became the Republic of Liberia, establishing a government modeled on that of the United States and naming its capital city Monrovia after James Monroe, the fifth president of the United States and a prominent supporter of the colonization. The colonists and their descendants, known as Americo-Liberians, led the political, social, cultural and economic sectors of the country and ruled the nation for over 130 years as a dominant minority.

The country began to modernize in the 1940s following investment by the United States during World War II and economic liberalization under President William Tubman. Liberia was a founding member of the United Nations and the Organisation of African Unity. In 1980 a military coup overthrew the Americo-Liberian leadership, marking the beginning of political and economic instability and two successive civil wars. These resulted in the deaths of between 250,000 and 520,000 people and devastated the country's economy. A peace agreement in 2003 led to democratic elections in 2005. Today, Liberia is recovering from the lingering effects of the civil wars and their consequent economic upheaval, but about 85% of the population continue to live below the international poverty line.

==History==

European map of the Pepper Coast, 1736.
The Pepper Coast has been inhabited at least as far back as the 12th century and perhaps earlier. Mende-speaking people expanded westward from the Sudan, forcing many smaller ethnic groups southward towards the Atlantic ocean. The Dei, Bassa, Kru, Gola and Kissi were some of the earliest recorded arrivals. Runn-Marcos, K. T. Kolleholon, B. Ngovo, p. 5 This influx was compounded by the decline of the Western Sudanic Mali Empire in 1375 and later in 1591 with the Songhai Empire. Additionally, inland regions underwent desertification, and inhabitants were pressured to move to the wetter coast. These new inhabitants brought skills such as cotton spinning, cloth weaving, iron smelting, rice and sorghum cultivation, and social and political institutions from the Mali and Songhai Empires. Runn-Marcos, K. T. Kolleholon, B. Ngovo, p. 6 Shortly after the Manes conquered the region, the Vai people of the former Mali Empire immigrated into the Grand Cape Mount region. The ethnic Kru opposed the influx of Vai, forming an alliance with the Manes to stop further influx of Vai. citation needed 

People along the coast built canoes and traded with other West Africans from Cap-Vert to the Gold Coast. Between 1461 and late 17th century, Portuguese, Dutch and British traders had contacts and trading posts in the region. The Portuguese named the area Costa da Pimenta ("Pepper Coast") but it later came to be known as the Grain Coast, due to the abundance of grains of melegueta pepper. European traders would barter various commodities and goods with local people. When the Kru began trading with Europeans, they initially traded in commodities, but later they actively participated in the African slave trade.

In 1820, the American Colonization Society (ACS) began sending African American volunteers to the Pepper Coast to establish a colony for freed African Americans. The American Colonisation Society is now widely regarded as being a failure in this effort - only an estimated 528 free African Americans were convinced to move to Liberia. These free African Americans came to identify themselves as Americo-Liberian, developing a cultural tradition infused with American notions of racial supremacy, and political republicanism. The ACS, a private organization supported by prominent American politicians such as Abraham Lincoln, Henry Clay, and James Monroe, believed repatriation was preferable to emancipation of slaves. Maggie Montesinos Sale (1997). The slumbering volcano: American slave ship revolts and the production of rebellious masculinity, p.264. Duke University Press, 1997. ISBN 0-8223-1992-6 Similar organizations established colonies in Mississippi-in-Africa and the Republic of Maryland, which were later annexed by Liberia. On July 26, 1847, the settlers issued a Declaration of Independence and promulgated a constitution, which, based on the political principles denoted in the United States Constitution, created the independent Republic of Liberia. Adekeye Adebajo (2002) Liberia's Civil War: Nigeria, ECOMOG, and Regional Security in West Africa, International Peace Academy, p. 21, ISBN 1588260526. 

Presidents Edwin Barclay (right) and Franklin D. Roosevelt during World War II, 1943.
The leadership of the new nation consisted largely of the Americo-Liberians. The 1865 Ports of Entry Act prohibited foreign commerce with the inland tribes. In 1877, the Americo-Liberian True Whig Party was the most powerful political power in the country. Competition for office was usually contained within the party, whose nomination virtually ensured election. Pressure from the United Kingdom and France led to a loss of Liberia's claims to extensive territories, which were annexed by adjoining countries. Economic development was hindered by the decline of markets for Liberian goods in the late 19th century and by indebtedness on a series of international loans. In Liberia's early years, the Americo-Liberian settlers periodically encountered stiff and sometimes violent opposition from indigenous Africans who were excluded from citizenship until 1904. "Liberia". U.S. State Department. 

In the mid-20th century, Liberia gradually began to modernize with American assistance. Both the Freeport of Monrovia and Roberts International Airport were built by U.S. personnel through the Lend-Lease program during World War II. President William Tubman encouraged foreign investment in the country, resulting in the second-highest rate of economic growth in the world during the 1950s. Liberia also began to take a more active role in international affairs. It was a founding member of the United Nations in 1945 and became a vocal critic of the South African apartheid regime. Liberia also served as a proponent both of African independence from the European colonial powers and of Pan-Africanism, helping to found the Organisation of African Unity. 

Samuel Doe with Caspar Weinberger during a visit to the United States, 1982.
On April 12, 1980, a military coup led by Master Sergeant Samuel Doe of the Krahn ethnic group overthrew and killed President William R. Tolbert, Jr.. Doe and the other plotters later executed a majority of Tolbert's cabinet and other Americo-Liberian government officials and True Whig Party members. The coup leaders formed the People's Redemption Council (PRC) to govern the country. A strategic Cold War ally, Doe received significant financial backing from the United States while critics condemned the PRC for corruption and political repression. After the country adopted a new constitution in 1985, Doe was elected president in subsequent elections that were internationally condemned as fraudulent. On November 12, 1985, a failed counter-coup was launched by Thomas Quiwonkpa, whose soldiers briefly occupied the national radio station. Government repression intensified in response, as Doe's troops executed members of the Gio and Mano ethnic groups in Nimba County. 

The National Patriotic Front of Liberia, a rebel group led by Charles Taylor, launched an insurrection in December 1989 against Doe's government with the backing of neighboring countries such as Burkina Faso and Cte d'Ivoire, triggering the First Liberian Civil War. By September 1990, Doe's forces controlled only a small area just outside the capital, and Doe was captured and executed that month by rebel forces. The rebels soon split into various factions fighting one another, and the Economic Community Monitoring Group under the Economic Community of West African States organized a military task force to intervene in the crisis. From 1989 to 1996 one of Africa's bloodiest civil wars ensued, claiming the lives of more than 200,000 Liberians and displacing a million others into refugee camps in neighboring countries. A peace deal between warring parties was reached in 1995 leading to Taylor's election as president in 1997. 

Under Taylor's leadership, Liberia became internationally known as a pariah state due to the use of blood diamonds and illegal timber exports to fund the Revolutionary United Front in the Sierra Leone Civil War. The Second Liberian Civil War began in 1999 when Liberians United for Reconciliation and Democracy, a rebel group based in the northwest of the country, launched an armed insurrection against Taylor. In March 2003, a second rebel group, Movement for Democracy in Liberia, began launching attacks against Taylor from the southeast. Peace talks between the factions began in Accra in June of that year, and Taylor was indicted by the Special Court for Sierra Leone for crimes against humanity that same month. By July 2003, the rebels had launched an assault on Monrovia. Under heavy pressure from the international community and the domestic Women of Liberia Mass Action for Peace movement, Taylor resigned in August and went into exile in Nigeria, and a peace deal was signed later that month. The United Nations Mission in Liberia began arriving in September 2003 to provide security and monitor the peace accord, and an interim government took power the following October. 

The subsequent 2005 elections were internationally regarded as the most free and fair in Liberian history. Ellen Johnson Sirleaf, a Harvard-trained economist and former Minister of Finance, was elected as the first female president in Africa. Upon her inauguration, Sirleaf requested the extradition of Taylor from Nigeria and immediately handed him over to the SCSL for trial in The Hague. In 2006, the government established a Truth and Reconciliation Commission to address the causes and crimes of the civil war. 

==Geography==

Map of Liberia.
Liberia is situated in West Africa, bordering the North Atlantic Ocean to the country's southwest. It lies between latitudes 4 and 9N, and longitudes 7 and 12W.

The landscape is characterized by mostly flat to rolling coastal plains that contain mangroves and swamps, which rise to a rolling plateau and low mountains in the northeast. Tropical rainforests cover the hills, while elephant grass and semi-deciduous forests make up the dominant vegetation in the northern sections. The equatorial climate is hot year-round with heavy rainfall from May to October with a short interlude in mid-July to August. During the winter months of November to March, dry dust-laden harmattan winds blow inland, causing many problems for residents. 

Liberia's watershed tends to move in a southwestern pattern towards the sea as new rains move down the forested plateau off the inland mountain range of Guine Forestire, in Guinea. Cape Mount near the border with Sierra Leone receives the most precipitation in the nation. The country's main northwestern boundary is traversed by the Mano River while its southeast limits are bounded by the Cavalla River. Liberia's three largest rivers are St. Paul exiting near Monrovia, the river St. John at Buchanan and the Cestos River, all of which flow into the Atlantic. The Cavalla is the longest river in the nation at 515 km. 

The highest point wholly within Liberia is Mount Wuteve at 1440 m above sea level in the northwestern Liberia range of the West Africa Mountains and the Guinea Highlands. However, Mount Nimba near Yekepa, is higher at 1752 m above sea level but is not wholly within Liberia as Nimba shares a border with Guinea and Cte d'Ivoire (Ivory Coast) and is their tallest mountain as well. Financial Time's World Desk Reference (2004) Dorling Kindersley Publishing. p 368 

===Counties and districts===

View of a lake in Bomi County.
Liberia is divided into fifteen counties, which, in turn, are subdivided into districts and further subdivided into clans. The oldest counties are Grand Bassa and Montserrado, both founded in 1839 prior to Liberian independence. Gbarpolu is the newest county, created in 2001. Nimba is the largest of the counties in size at 11551 km2, while Montserrado is the smallest at 1909 km2. Montserrado is also the most populous county with 1,144,806 residents as of the 2008 census. 

The fifteen counties are administered by superintendents appointed by the president. The Constitution calls for the election of various chiefs at the county and local level, but these elections have not taken place since 1985 due to war and financial constraints. 

 map# County Capital Population (2008) Area Created 
 1 Bomi Tubmanburg 82,036 1942 km2 1984 
 2 Bong Gbarnga 328,919 8772 km2 1964 
 3 Gbarpolu Bopulu 83,758 9689 km2 2001 
 4 Grand Bassa Buchanan 224,839 7936 km2 1839 
 5 Grand Cape Mount Robertsport 129,055 5162 km2 1844 
 6 Grand Gedeh Zwedru 126,146 10484 km2 1964 
 7 Grand Kru Barclayville 57,106 3895 km2 1984 
 8 Lofa Voinjama 270,114 9982 km2 1964 
 9 Margibi Kakata 199,689 2616 km2 1985 
 10 Maryland Harper 136,404 2297 km2 1857 
 11 Montserrado Bensonville 1,144,806 1909 km2 1839 
 12 Nimba Sanniquellie 468,088 11551 km2 1964 
 13 Rivercess Rivercess 65,862 5594 km2 1985 
 14 River Gee Fish Town 67,318 5113 km2 2000 
 15 Sinoe Greenville 104,932 10137 km2 1843 

==Politics==

President Ellen Johnson Sirleaf.
The government of Liberia, modeled on the government of the United States, is a unitary constitutional republic and representative democracy as established by the Constitution. The government has three co-equal branches of government: the executive, headed by the president; the legislative, consisting of the bicameral Legislature of Liberia; and the judicial, consisting of the Supreme Court and several lower courts.

The president serves as head of government, head of state and the commander-in-chief of the Armed Forces of Liberia. Among the other duties of the president are to sign or veto legislative bills, grant pardons, and appoint Cabinet members, judges and other public officials. Together with the vice president, the president is elected to a six-year term by majority vote in a two-round system and can serve up to two terms in office. 

The Legislature is composed of the Senate and the House of Representatives. The House, led by a speaker, has 73 members apportioned among the 15 counties on the basis of the national census, with each county receiving a minimum of two members. Each House member represents an electoral district within a county as drawn by the National Elections Commission and is elected by a plurality of the popular vote of their district into a six-year term. The Senate is made up of two senators from each county for a total of 30 senators. Senators serve nine-year terms and are elected at-large by a plurality of the popular vote. The vice president serves as the President of the Senate, with a President pro tempore serving in his absence.

Liberia's highest judicial authority is the Supreme Court, made up of five members and headed by the Chief Justice of Liberia. Members are nominated to the court by the president and are confirmed by the Senate, serving until the age of 70. The judiciary is further divided into circuit and speciality courts, magistrate courts and justices of the peace. The judicial system is a blend of common law, based on Anglo-American law, and customary law. An informal system of traditional courts still exists within the rural areas of the country, with trial by ordeal remaining common despite being officially outlawed. 

Between 1877 and 1980, the government was dominated by the True Whig Party. Today, over 20 political parties are registered in the country, based largely around personalities and ethnic groups. Most parties suffer from poor organizational capacity. The 2005 elections marked the first time that the president's party did not gain a majority of seats in the Legislature. 

Liberia scored a 3.3 on a scale from 10 (highly clean) to 0 (highly corrupt) on the 2010 Corruption Perceptions Index. This gave it a ranking 87th of 178 countries worldwide and 11th of 47 in Sub-Saharan Africa. This score represented a significant improvement since 2007, when the country scored 2.1 and ranked 150th of 180 countries. When seeking attention of a selection of service providers, 89% of Liberians had to pay a bribe, the highest national percentage in the world according to the organization's 2010 Global Corruption Barometer. 

===Military===

The Armed Forces of Liberia (AFL) are the armed forces of the Republic of Liberia. Founded as the Liberian Frontier Force in 1908, the military was retitled in 1956. For virtually all of its history, the AFL has received considerable materiel and training assistance from the United States. For most of the 194189 period, training was largely provided by U.S. advisers, though this assistance has not prevented the same generally low levels of effectiveness common to most of the armed forces in the developing world.

===Foreign relations with United Kingdom===
The foreign relations of Liberia are handled by various governmental ministries. The UK was amongst the first to recognise the new republic. After the visit to the UK in 1848 of President Roberts, Queen Victoria put the Royal Navy ship HMS Amazon at the disposal of him and his family, for his return journey to Liberia. The Times. Monday, Dec 25, 1848; pg. 8; Issue 20055 

In 1961, Queen Elizabeth II made a state visit to Liberia, arriving at Monrovia on the HMY Britannia. The Times Oct 06, 1961; pg. 14, Nov 21, 1961; pg. 8; Issue 55244. Nov 23, 1961; pg. 10; Issue 55246. President Tubman made a gift of two Pygmy hippopotamus, which arrived by cargo ship in 1962 and were sent to Whipsnade Zoo. The Times. Jun 04, 1962; pg. 5; Issue 55408. 

In 1962, President Tubman and his wife visited the UK. The Times. Mar 28, 1962; pg. 5; Issue 55351. Jul 10, 1962; pg. 11; Issue 55439 

==Economy and infrastructure==

Boy grinding sugar cane.
The Central Bank of Liberia is responsible for printing and maintaining the Liberian dollar, which is the primary form of currency in Liberia.
Liberia is one of the world's poorest countries, with a formal employment rate of only 15%. GDP per capita peaked in 1980 at US$496, when it was comparable to Egypt's (at the time). In 2011, the country's nominal GDP was US$1.154 billion, while nominal GDP per capita stood at US$297, the third-lowest in the world. Historically, the Liberian economy has depended heavily on foreign aid, foreign direct investment and exports of natural resources such as iron ore, rubber and timber. 

Following a peak in growth in 1979, the Liberian economy began a steady decline due to economic mismanagement following the 1980 coup. This decline was accelerated by the outbreak of civil war in 1989; GDP was reduced by an estimated 90% between 1989 and 1995, one of the fastest declines in history. Upon the end of the war in 2003, GDP growth began to accelerate, reaching 9.4% in 2007. The global financial crisis slowed GDP growth to 4.6% in 2009, though a strengthening agricultural sector led by rubber and timber exports increased growth to 5.1% in 2010 and an expected 7.3% in 2011, making the economy one of the 20 fastest growing in the world. Current impediments to growth include a small domestic market, lack of adequate infrastructure, high transportation costs, poor trade links with neighboring countries and the high dollarization of the economy. Liberia used the United States dollar as its currency from 1943 until 1982 and continues to use the U.S. dollar alongside the Liberian dollar. Following a decrease in inflation beginning in 2003, inflation spiked in 2008 as a result of worldwide food and energy crises, reaching 17.5% before declining to 7.4% in 2009. Liberia's external debt was estimated in 2006 at approximately $4.5 billion, 800% of GDP. As a result of bilateral, multilateral and commercial debt relief from 20072010, the country's external debt fell to $222.9 million by 2011. 

Liberia, Trends in the Human Development Index 1970-2010
While official commodity exports declined during the 1990s as many investors fled the civil war, Liberia's wartime economy featured the exploitation of the region's diamond wealth. The country acted as a major trader in Sierra Leonian blood diamonds, exporting over US$300 million in diamonds in 1999. This led to a United Nations ban on Liberian diamond exports in 2001, which was lifted in 2007 following Liberia's accession to the Kimberley Process Certification Scheme. In 2003, additional UN sanctions were placed on Liberian timber exports, which had risen from US$5 million in 1997 to over US$100 million in 2002 and were believed to be funding rebels in Sierra Leone. These sanctions were lifted in 2006. Due in large part to foreign aid and investment inflow following the end of the war, Liberia maintains a large account deficit, which peaked at nearly 60% in 2008. Liberia gained observer status with the World Trade Organization in 2010 and is in the process of acquiring full member status. 

Liberia has the highest ratio of foreign direct investment to GDP in the world, with US$16 billion in investment since 2006. Following the inauguration of the Sirleaf administration in 2006, the country signed several multi-billion dollar concession agreements in the iron ore and palm oil industries with numerous multinational corporations, including BHP Billiton, ArcelorMittal, and Sime Darby. Especially palm oil companies like Sime Darby (Malaysia) and Golden Veroleum (USA) are being accused by critics of the destruction of livelihoods and the displacement of local communities, enabled through government concessions. The Firestone Tire and Rubber Company has operated the world's largest rubber plantation in Liberia since 1926. 

Due to its status as a flag of convenience, the country has the second-largest maritime registry in the world behind Panama, with 3,500 vessels registered under its flag accounting for 11% of ships worldwide. 

===Telecommunications===

There are six major newspapers in Liberia, and 45% of the population has a mobile phone service.
Much of Liberia's communications infrastructure was destroyed or plundered during the two civil wars (1989-1996 and 1999-2003). With low rates of adult literacy and high poverty rates, television and newspaper use is limited, leaving radio as the predominant means of communicating with the public. "Introduction to Communication and Development in Liberia", AudienceScapes. Retrieved 8 February 2014. 

===Transportation===

===Energy===
Formal electricity services are solely provided by the state-owned Liberia Electricity Corporation, which operates a small grid almost exclusively in the Greater Monrovia District. The vast majority of electric energy services is provided by small privately-owned generators. At $0.54 per kWh, the electricity tariff in Liberia is among the highest in the world. Total installed capacity in 2013 was 20 MW, a sharp decline from a peak of 191 MW in 1989. Completion of the repair and expansion of the Mount Coffee Hydropower Plant, with a maximum capacity of 80 MW, is scheduled to be completed by 2018, while construction of three new heavy fuel oil power plants is expected to boost electrical capacity by 38 MW. In 2013, Liberia began importing power from neighboring Cte d'Ivoire and Guinea through the West African Power Pool. 

Liberia has begun exploration for offshore oil; unproven oil reserves may be in excess of one billion barrels. The government divided its offshore waters into 17 blocks and began auctioning off exploration licenses for the blocks in 2004, with further auctions in 2007 and 2009. An additional 13 ultra-deep offshore blocks were demarcated in 2011 and planned for auction. Among the companies to have won licenses are Repsol, Chevron, Anadarko and Woodside Petroleum. 

===Education===

Students studying by candlelight in Bong County.
In 2010, the literacy rate of Liberia was estimated at 60.8% (64.8% for males and 56.8% for females). In some areas primary and secondary education is free and compulsory from the ages of 6 to 16, though enforcement of attendance is lax. In other areas children are required to pay a tuition fee to attend school. On average, children attain 10 years of education (11 for boys and 8 for girls). The country's education sector is hampered by inadequate schools and supplies, as well as a lack of qualified teachers. 

Higher education is provided by a number of public and private universities. The University of Liberia is the country's largest and oldest university. Located in Monrovia, the university opened in 1862 and today has six colleges, including a medical school and the nation's only law school, Louis Arthur Grimes School of Law. Jallah, David A. B. Notes, Presented by Professor and Dean of the Louis Arthur Grimes School of Law, University of Liberia, David A. B. Jallah to the International Association of Law Schools Conference Learning From Each Other: Enriching the Law School Curriculum in an Interrelated World Held at Soochow University Kenneth Wang School of Law, Suzhou, China, October 17-19, 2007. International Association of Law Schools. Retrieved on September 1, 2008. In 2009, Tubman University in Harper, Maryland County became the second public university in Liberia. Cuttington University, established by the Episcopal Church of the USA in 1889 in Suakoko, Bong County, is the nation's oldest private university. Since 2006, the government has also opened community colleges in Buchanan, Sanniquellie, and Voinjama. 

===Health===
The Hospitals in Liberia includes the John F. Kennedy Medical Center in Monrovia and several others.
Life expectancy in Liberia is estimated to be 57.4 years in 2012. With a fertility rate of 5.9 births per woman, the maternal mortality rate stood at 990 per 100,000 births in 2010. A number of highly communicable diseases are widespread, including tuberculosis, diarrheal diseases and malaria. In 2007, HIV infection rates stood at 2% of the population aged 1549 whereas the incidence of tuberculosis was 420 per 100,000 people in 2008. Liberia imports 90% of its rice, a staple food, and is extremely vulnerable to food shortages. In 2007, 20.4% of children under the age of 5 were malnourished. In 2008, only 17% of the population had access to adequate sanitation facilities. 

Civil war strife ended in 2003 after destroying approximately 95% of the country's healthcare facilities. In 2009, government expenditure on health care per capita was US$22, accounting for 10.6% of total GDP. In 2008, Liberia had only 1 doctor and 27 nurses per 100,000 people. 

In 2014 there was an outbreak of Ebola virus in Liberia, which had originated in neighboring Guinea. 

===Crime and law enforcement===

==Demographics==

The streets of downtown Monrovia in March 2009.
School children in Liberia
As of the 2008 national census, Liberia was home to 3,476,608 people. Of those, 1,118,241 lived in Montserrado County, the most populous county in the country and home to the capital of Monrovia, with the Greater Monrovia District home to 970,824 people. Nimba County is the next most populous county with 462,026 residents. As revealed in the 2008 census, Monrovia is more than four times more populous than all the county capitals combined. Prior to the 2008 census, the last census had been held in 1984 and listed the country's population as 2,101,628. The population of Liberia was 1,016,443 in 1962 and increased to 1,503,368 in 1974. As of 2006, Liberia has the highest population growth rate in the world (4.50% per annum). Similar to its neighbors, it has a large youth population, with half of the population under the age of 18.

The population includes sixteen indigenous ethnic groups and various foreign minorities. Indigenous peoples comprise about 95% of the population. The 16 officially recognized ethnic groups include the Kpelle, Bassa, Mano, Gio or Dan, Kru, Grebo, Krahn, Vai, Gola, Mandingo or Mandinka, Mende, Loma, Fante, Dei or Dewoin, Belleh, and Americo-Liberians or Congo people. The largest of which are the Kpelle in central and western Liberia. Americo-Liberians, who are descendants of African American and West Indian, mostly Barbadian or Bajan settlers, make up 2.5%, and Congo people, descendants of repatriated Congo and Afro-Caribbean slaves who arrived in 1825, make up an estimated 2.5%. There is also a large number of Lebanese, Indians, and other West African nationals who make up a significant part of Liberia's business community. There is a high percentage of interracial marriage between ethnic Liberians and the Lebanese. Thus creating a large mulatto population especially in and around Monrovia. A small minority of Liberians of European descent reside in the country. The Liberian constitution restricts citizenship to only people of black African descent. 

Thirty-one indigenous languages are spoken within Liberia, none of which are a first language to more than a small percentage of the population. English is the official language and serves as the lingua franca of the country. Liberians speak a variety of dialects collectively known as Liberian English. 

===Largest cities===

===Religion===

According to the 2008 National Census, 85.5% of the population practices Christianity. Muslims comprise 12.2% of the population, largely coming from the Mandingo and Vai ethnic groups. Traditional indigenous religions are practiced by 0.5% of the population, while 1.5% subscribe to no religion. A small number of people are Bah', Hindu, Sikh, or Buddhist. Concurrent participation in indigenous religious secret societies such as Poro and Sande is common, with some Sande societies practicing female genital mutilation. Liberian Muslims are divided into Sunnis, Shias, Ahmadiyyas, Sufis, and non-denominational Muslims Pew Forum on Religious & Public life. 9 August 2012. Retrieved 29 October 2013 

The Constitution provides for freedom of religion, and the government generally respects this right. While separation of church and state is also mandated by the Constitution, Liberia is considered a Christian state in practice. Public schools offer biblical studies, though parents may opt out their children. Commerce is prohibited by law on Sundays and major Christian holidays. The government does not require businesses or schools to excuse Muslims for Friday prayers. 

==Culture==

The former Executive Mansion, an example of American South architectural influence.
The religious practices, social customs and cultural standards of the Americo-Liberians had their roots in the antebellum American South. The settlers wore top hat and tails and modeled their homes on those of Southern slaveowners. Most Americo-Liberian men were members of the Masonic Order of Liberia, which became heavily involved in the nation's politics. 

Liberia has a long, rich history in textile arts and quilting, as the settlers brought with them their sewing and quilting skills. Liberia hosted National Fairs in 1857 and 1858 in which prizes were awarded for various needle arts. One of the most well-known Liberian quilters was Martha Ann Ricks, who presented a quilt featuring the famed Liberian coffee tree to Queen Victoria in 1892. When President Ellen Johnson Sirleaf moved into the Executive Mansion, she reportedly had a Liberian-made quilt installed in her presidential office. 

A rich literary tradition has existed in Liberia for over a century. Edward Wilmot Blyden, Bai T. Moore, Roland T. Dempster and Wilton G. S. Sankawulo are among Liberia's more prominent authors. Moore's novella Murder in the Cassava Patch is considered Liberia's most celebrated novel. 

===Cuisine===
Main article see Liberian cuisine

A beachside barbeque at Sinkor, Monrovia, Liberia
Liberian cuisine heavily incorporates rice, the country's staple food. Other ingredients include cassava, fish, bananas, citrus fruit, plantains, coconut, okra and sweet potatoes. Heavy stews spiced with habanero and scotch bonnet chillies are popular and eaten with fufu. Liberia also has a tradition of baking imported from the United States that is unique in West Africa. 

===Sports===
Liberian footballer George Weah holding the Ballon d'Or in 1995
The most popular sport in Liberia is association football, with George Weah (the only African to be named FIFA World Player of the Year) the nation's most famous athlete. "Iconic Weah a true great". FIFA.com. Retrieved 17 November 2013 The Liberia national football team has reached the Africa Cup of Nations twice, in 1996 and 2002.

In Liberia, the Samuel Kanyon Doe Sports Complex serves as a multi-purpose stadium and hosts sporting events.

===Measurement system===
Liberia is one of only three countries that has not officially adopted the International System of Units. The Liberian government has begun transitioning away from use of imperial units to the metric system. However, this change has been gradual, with government reports concurrently using both imperial and metric units. A 2008 report from the University of Tennessee stated that the changeover from imperial to metric measures was confusing to coffee and cocoa farmers. 

==See also==
* Gender inequality in Liberia

==Footnotes==

==Bibliography==
*

==Further reading==

* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* Great Tales of Liberia by Wilton Sankawulo. Dr. Sankawulo is the compiler of these tales from Liberia and about Liberian culture. Published by Editura Universitatii "Lucian Blaga"; din Sibiu, Romania, 2004. ISBN 973-651-838-8.
* Sundown at Dawn: A Liberian Odyssey by Wilton Sankawulo. Recommended by the Cultural Resource Center, Center for Applied Linguistics for its content concerning Liberian culture. ISBN 0-9763565-0-3
* To Liberia: Destiny's Timing, by Victoria Lang (Publish America, Baltimore, 2004, ISBN 1-4137-1829-9). A fast-paced gripping novel of the journey of a young Black couple fleeing America to settle in the African motherland of Liberia.
* Godfrey Mwakikagile, Military Coups in West Africa Since The Sixties, Chapter Eight: Liberia: 'The Love of Liberty Brought Us Here,' pp. 85  110, Nova Science Publishers, Inc., Huntington, New York, 2001; Godfrey Mwakikagile, The Modern African State: Quest for Transformation, Chapter One: The Collapse of A Modern African State: Death and Rebirth of Liberia, pp. 1  18, Nova Science Publishers, Inc., 2001.
* Redemption Road: The Quest for Peace and Justice in Liberia (A Novel) by Elma Shaw, with a Foreword by President Ellen Johnson Sirleaf. (Cotton Tree Press, 2008, ISBN 978-0-9800774-0-7)
* House at Sugar Beach: In Search of a Lost African Childhood by Helene Cooper (Simon & Schuster, 2008, ISBN 0-7432-6624-2)

==External links==

*Chief of State and Cabinet Members
*
*Liberia from UCB Libraries GovPubs.
*
*Liberia profile from the BBC News.
*"Liberia Maps", Perry-Castaeda Library, University of Texas at Austin.
*

 



[[History of Liberia]]

Liberia was established by citizens of the United States as a colony for former African American slaves and their free black descendants. It is one of only two sovereign states in the world that were started by citizens of a political power as a colony for former slaves of the same political power: Sierra Leone was begun as a colony for resettlement of Black Loyalists and poor blacks from England for the same purpose by Britain.

==Early times (pre1821)==
Map of Liberia circa 1830
Historians believe that many of the indigenous peoples of Liberia migrated there from the north and east between the 12th and 16th centuries AD. Portuguese explorers established contacts with people of the land later known as "Liberia" as early as 1461. They named the area Costa da Pimenta (Pepper Coast) because of the abundance of melegueta pepper. In 1602 the Dutch established a trading post at Grand Cape Mount but destroyed it a year later. In 1663, the British installed trading posts on the Pepper Coast. No further known settlements by non-African colonists occurred along the Grain Coast (an alternative name) until the arrival in 1821 of free blacks from the United States.

==Colonization (18211847)==

From around 1800, in the United States, people opposed to slavery were planning ways to alleviate the problem. Some abolitionists and slaveholders discussed the idea of setting up a colony in Africa for freed African-American slaves. The first ship, Mayflower of Liberia (formerly Elizabeth), departed New York on February 6, 1820, for West Africa, with 86 settlers. Between 1821 and 1838, the American Colonization Society developed the first settlement, which would be known as Liberia. On July 26, 1847, it declared its independence. 

===First ideas of colonization===
As early as the period of the American Revolution, many white members of American society thought that African Americans could not succeed in living in their society as free people. Some considered blacks physically and mentally inferior to whites, and others believed that the racism and societal polarization resulting from slavery were insurmountable obstacles for integration of the races. Thomas Jefferson was among those who proposed colonization in Africa: relocating free blacks outside the new nation. 

===Growing numbers of free blacks===
After 1783 the ranks of free blacks expanded markedly, due both to manumission of the enslaved in the South during the first two decades after the Revolutionary War, attributable both to slaveholders inspired by its ideals and to others inspired to manumission by Quaker, Methodist and Baptist preachers active in those years. The Northeast states abolished slavery following the war, generally on a graduated basis where it was still economically viable, as in the mid-Atlantic states.

In 1800 and 1802, slave rebellions occurred (see Gabriels rebellion) in Virginia, and were brutally suppressed by slaveholders. Some planters feared that free blacks would encourage slaves to run away or revolt. From 17821810, the percentage of free blacks in the Upper South increased from less than one percent to 13.5%. In the nation as a whole, the number of free people of color also increased. In 1790, there were 59,467 free blacks, out of a total U.S. population of almost four million and a total black U.S. population of 800,000. By 1800, there were 108,378 free blacks in a population of 7.2 million. These factors significantly influenced the popularity of the concept of colonization as a solution to the "problem " of free blacks.

===Sierra Leone===
Paul Cuffee in 1812.
In 1787, Britain had started to resettle the Black Poor of London in the colony of Freetown in modern-day Sierra Leone, many of whom were Black Loyalists who had been freed in exchange for their services during the American Revolution. The Crown also offered resettlement to former slaves from Nova Scotia. The wealthy African-American shipowner Paul Cuffee thought this was a worthwhile exercise, and with support from certain members of Congress and British officials conveyed 38 American Blacks to Freetown in 1816 at his own expense. Despite such voyages ceasing with his death in 1817, his private initiative served to arouse public interest.

===Cape Mesurado===
In this same period, on the initiative of the Virginian politician Charles F. Mercer and the Presbyterian minister Robert Finley from New Jersey, in 1817 the American Colonization Society (ACS) was founded. The society aimed to help freed blacks colonize outside of the United States, and supporting them to relocate to Africa. 

From January 1820, the ACS sent ships from New York to West Africa. The first had eighty-eight free black emigrants and three white ACS agents on board, who intended to seek an appropriate area to ground a settlement. After several attempts and hardships, ACS representatives in the Colonization Society#Second ship:the Nautilus|Nautilus] in December 1821 succeeded, perhaps with some threat of force, to buy Cape Mesurado, a 36-mile long strip of land near present-day Monrovia, from the indigenous ruler King Peter.

From the beginning, the colonists were attacked by indigenous peoples, such as the Malink tribes. In addition, they suffered from diseases, the harsh climate, lack of food and medicine, and poor housing conditions. 

===Expansion===
Up until 1835, five more colonies were started by American Societies other than the ACS, and one by the U.S. government, all on the same West African coast. The first colony on Cape Mesurado was extended, along the coast as well as inland, sometimes by use of force. In 1838 these colonies came together to create the Commonwealth of Liberia. Monrovia would be named the capital. By 1842, four of the other American colonies were incorporated into Liberia, and one was destroyed by indigenous people. The colonists of African-American descent became known as Americo-Liberians. Not only were many racially mixed and of European descent, but their education, religion and culture made them distinct from the indigenous peoples, with whom they did not identify.

===Handing over command to Americo-Liberians===
The maturing colony was gradually given more self-governance. In 1839, it was renamed the Commonwealth of Liberia; 1841 saw the Commonwealth's first black Governor, J.J. Roberts. By the 1840s, the ACS was effectively bankrupt; Liberia had become a financial burden for it. In 1846, the ACS directed the Americo-Liberians to proclaim their independence. In 1847, Roberts proclaimed the colony the free and independent republic of Liberia. It then counted some 3000 settlers. A Constitution was drawn up along the lines of that of the United States.

==Americo-Liberian rule (18471980)==
Between 1847 and 1980, the state of Liberia was dominated by the small minority of black colonists and their offspring, known collectively as Americo-Liberians. The Americo-Liberian minority, many of whom were mulattos or Afro-Americans, were generally richer than the indigenous people of Liberia and exercised overwhelming political power.

===Politics===
Map of Liberia c. 1856
Politically, Liberia was dominated by two political parties. The franchise was deliberately limited to prevent indigenous Liberians from voting in elections. The Liberian Party (later the Republican Party), was supported primarily by mulattos from poorer backgrounds, while the True Whig Party received much of its following from richer blacks. From the first presidential election in 1847, the Liberian Party held political dominance and used its position of power to attempt to cripple its opposition. In 1869, however, the Whigs won the presidential election under Edward James Roye. Although Roye was deposed after just two years and the Republicans returned to government, the Whigs regained power in 1878 and held power constantly afterwards.

A series of rebellions among the indigenous Liberian population took place between the 1850s and 1920s. In 1854, a newly independent African-American state in the region, the Republic of Maryland, was forced by an insurgency of the Grebo and the Kru people to join Liberia. Liberia's expansion brought the colony into border disputes with French and British colonists in French Guinea and Sierra Leone, however the presence and protection of the United States Navy in West Africa, until 1916, prevented any military threat to Liberian territory or independence.

===Society===

====1847-1940====
The social order in Liberia was dominated by a class of Americo-Liberians. Although of African origin, Americo-Liberians held American-style cultural and social values. Like many Americans and Europeans of the period, the Americo-Liberian held beliefs in the religious superiority of Protestant Christianity and the cultural superiority of European civilization over indigenous animism and culture.

The Americo-Liberian created communities and social infrastructure closely based on American society, maintaining their English-speaking, Americanized way of life, and building churches and houses resembling those of the southern United States. Although they never constituted more than five percent of the population of Liberia, they controlled key resources that allowed them to dominate the local native peoples: access to the ocean, modern technical skills, literacy and higher levels of education, and valuable relationships with many American institutions, including the American government.

Based on the system of racial segregation in America, the Americo-Liberians recreated a cultural and racial caste system with themselves at the top and indigenous Liberans at the bottom. The did believe, on the other hand, in a form of racial equality which meant that all had the potential of to become "civilized" through conversion to Christianity and education.

====1940-1980====
President Tubman and Vice President Tolbert on a commemorative wrap celebrating the sixth term. 1968
During World War II thousands of indigenous Liberians came from the nation's interior to the coastal regions in search of jobs. The Liberian Government had long opposed this kind of migration, but was no longer able to restrain it. In the decades after 1945, the Liberian government received hundreds of millions of dollars of unrestricted foreign investment, which destabilized the Liberian economy. Government revenue rose enormously, but was being grossly embezzled by government officials. Growing economic disparities caused increased hostility between indigenous groups and Americo-Liberians.

The social tensions led President Tubman to enfranchise the indigenous Liberians either in 1951 or 1963 (accounts differ). Regardless of the date, this was enfranchisement in name only, since Tubman continued to repress political opposition, and to rig elections.

===Economics===
The suppression of the slave trade in West Africa by American and British navies, and constant economic competition from European colonies in Africa, created a long term economic problem in Liberia. The economy of Liberia was always based on the production of agricultural produce for export, however it faced increasing competition from other states. In particular, Liberia's important coffee industry was destroyed in the 1870s by the emergence of production in Brazil. New technology available in Europe increasingly drove Liberian shipping companies out of business. Although Roye's government attempted to procure funding for a railway in 1871, the plan never materialized and the first railway in the country was only built after 1945. The national currency, the Liberian dollar, collapsed in 1907 and the country was later forced to adopt the United States Dollar. The Liberian government was constantly dependent on foreign loans at high rates of exchange, which endangered the country's independence.

In 1926, Firestone, an American rubber company, started the worlds largest rubber plantation in Liberia. This industry created 25,000 jobs, and rubber quickly became the backbone of the Liberian economy; in the 1950s, rubber accounted for 40 percent of the national budget.

In the 1930s, Liberia signed concession agreements with Dutch, Danish, German and Polish investors. 

Between 1946 and 1960, exports of iron, timber and rubber rose strongly. In 1971, Liberia had the worlds largest rubber industry, and was the third largest exporter of iron ore. From 1948 Ship registrations became another large new source of state revenue. From 1962 until 1980, the U.S. donated $280 million in aid to Liberia, in exchange for which Liberia offered its land free of rent for U.S. government facilities. Throughout the 1970s the price of rubber in the world commodities market was depressed, putting pressure on Liberian state finances.

===International relations===
After 1927, the League of Nations investigated accusations that the Liberian government forcibly recruited and sold indigenous people as contract labor or slaves. In its 1930 report the League admonished the Liberian government for "systematically and for years fostering and encouraging a policy of gross intimidation and suppression", " the native, prevent him from realizing his powers and limitations and prevent him from asserting himself in any way whatever, for the benefit of the dominant and colonizing race, although originally the same African stock as themselves" (see also Presidency Charles King 19201930). President King hastily resigned.

Liberian rulers also built up ties with the Soviet bloc and other powers, striving for an independent position in world politics, as far as their strong bonds with the Western world allowed them to.

====Relations with the United States====
President Edwin Barclay (right) and U.S. President Franklin D. Roosevelt during World War II, January 1943
The United States had a long history of intervening in Liberia's internal affairs, occasionally sending naval vessels to help suppress insurrections by indigenous tribes (in 1821, 1843, 1876, 1910, and 1915). The United States had lost interest in Liberia after 1876, and the country became closely tied to British capital. Starting again in 1909, the U.S. become heavily involved. By 1909, Liberia faced serious external threats to its sovereignty from the British over unpaid foreign loans and annexation of its borderlands.

In 1912 the U.S. arranged a 40-year international loan of $1.7 million, against which Liberia had to agree to four Western powers (America, Britain, France and Germany) controlling Liberian Government revenues until 1926. American administration of the border police also stabilized the frontier with Sierra Leone (part of the British Empire) and checked French ambitions to annex more Liberian territory. The American navy also established a coaling station in Liberia. When World War I started, Liberia declared war on Germany and expelled its resident German merchants, who constituted the country's largest investors and trading partners  Liberia suffered economically as a result. http://www.globalsecurity.org/military/ops/grebo2.htm 

In 1926, the Liberian government gave a concession to the American rubber company Firestone to start the worlds largest rubber plantation at Harbel, Liberia. At the same time, Firestone arranged a $5 million private loan to Liberia. In the 1930s Liberia was again virtually bankrupt, and, after some American pressure, agreed to an assistance plan from the League of Nations. As part of this plan, two key officials of the League were placed in positions to advise the Liberian government.

===World War I and II===
In 1942, Liberia signed a Defense Pact with the United States. It assured the Americans and their allies of all the supply of natural rubber. Rubber was a strategically important commodity, and Liberia assured the U.S. and its allies of all the natural rubber they needed. Also, Liberia allowed the U.S. to use its territory as a bridgehead for transports of soldiers and war supplies, to construct military bases, airports, the Freeport of Monrovia, roads to the interior, etc. The American military presence boosted the Liberian economy; thousands of laborers descended from the interior to the coastal region. The countrys huge iron ore deposits were made accessible to commerce.

The Defense Areas Agreement between the U.S. and Liberia entailed the US-financed construction of Roberts Field airport, the Freeport of Monrovia, and roads into the interior of Liberia. By the end of World War II, approximately 5,000 American troops had been stationed in Liberia. Akingbade, Harrison. U.S Liberian Relations During World War II. Phylon Vol. 46 (1). 1985. Pp 25-36. Arguments substantiating this notion are that World War II infrastructure developments did not positively affect social and political struggles in Liberia and that, decades after the development from World War II, Americo-Liberians disproportionately controlled and benefited from Liberias growing economy and increase in foreign investment. Dalton, George. History, Politics, and Economic Development in Liberia. The Journal of Economic History. Vol 25(4). 1965. pp 569-591 

===Cold War===
President Tolbert and U.S. President Jimmy Carter (in car, left) in Monrovia, 1978 
After World War II, the U.S. pressured Liberia to resist the expansion of Soviet influence in Africa during the Cold War. Liberian president Tubman was agreeable to this policy. Between 1946 and 1960 Liberia received some $500 million in unrestricted foreign investment, mainly from the U.S. From 1962 to 1980, the U.S. donated $280 million in aid to Liberia. In the 1970s under president Tolbert, Liberia strove for a more non-aligned and independent posture, and established diplomatic relations with the Soviet Union, China, Cuba and Eastern bloc countries. It also severed ties with Israel during the Yom Kippur War in 1973, but announced it supported American involvement in the Vietnam War.

===End of Americo-Liberian rule===
President William R. Tolbert, Jr. pursued a policy of suppressing opposition. Dissatisfaction over governmental plans to raise the price of rice in 1979 led to protest demonstrations in the streets of Monrovia. Tolbert ordered his troops to fire on the demonstrators, and seventy people were killed. Rioting ensued throughout Liberia, finally leading to a military coup d'tat in April 1980.

==Samuel Doe and the Peoples Redemption Council (19801989)==

After a bloody overthrow of the Americo-Liberian rgime by indigenous Liberians in 1980, a Redemption Council took control of Liberia. Internal unrest, opposition to the new military regime, and governmental repression steadily grew, until in 1989 Liberia sank into outright tribal and civil war.

===Coup dtat; relations with U.S.===
Samuel Kanyon Doe (19511990) was a member of the small ethnic group the Krahn, a master sergeant in the Liberian army, and trained by U.S. Army Special Forces. On April 12, 1980, Doe led a bloody coup d'tat against president Tolbert, in which Tolbert and twenty-six of his supporters were murdered; ten days later thirteen of Tolberts Cabinet members were publicly executed. Thus ended 133 years of Americo-Liberian political domination over Liberia. Doe established a military regime called the People's Redemption Council (PRC). 
Many people welcomed Doe's takeover as a shift favouring the majority of the population that had been excluded from power. Immediately following the coup, the PRC tolerated a relatively free press.

Doe quickly established good relations with the United States, especially after U.S. President Ronald Reagan took office in 1981. Reagan increased financial aid for Liberia, from the $20 million it had been in 1979, to $75 million, and later $95 million per year. Liberia became again an important Cold War ally of the U.S.. Liberia served to protect important U.S. facilities and investments in Africa, and to counter the perceived spread of Soviet influence on the continent. Doe closed the Libyan mission in Monrovia and even severed diplomatic relations with the Soviet Union. He agreed to a modification of the mutual defense pact with the U.S., which granted staging rights on 24-hour's notice at Liberia's sea- and airports for the U.S. Rapid Deployment Forces. 
Under Doe, Liberian ports were opened to American, Canadian, and European ships, which brought in considerable foreign investment from shipping firms and earned Liberia a reputation as a tax haven.

===Fear of counter-coup; repression===
Doe overcame seven coup attempts between 1981 and 1985. In August 1981 he had Thomas Weh Syen and four other PRC members arrested and executed for allegedly conspiring against him. Then Does government declared an amnesty for all political prisoners and exiles, and released sixty political prisoners. 
Soon there were more internal rifts in the PRC. Doe became paranoid about the possibility of a counter-coup, and his government grew increasingly corrupt and repressive, banning political opposition, shutting down newspapers and jailing reporters. He began to systematically eliminate PRC members who challenged his authority, and to place people of his own ethnic Krahn background in key positions, which intensified popular anger. 
Meanwhile, the economy deteriorated precipitously. Popular support for Doe's government evaporated.

===1985 presidential election===
A draft constitution providing for a multiparty republic had been issued in 1983 and was approved by referendum in 1984. After the referendum, Doe staged a presidential election on October 15, 1985. Nine political parties sought to challenge Doe's National Democratic Party of Liberia (NDPL), but only three were allowed to take part. Prior to the election, more than fifty of Doe's opponents were murdered. Doe was elected with 51% of the vote, but the election was heavily rigged. Foreign observers declared the elections fraudulent, and most of the elected opposition candidates refused to take their seats. 
U.S. Assistant Secretary of State for Africa Chester Crocker testified before Congress that the election was imperfect but that at least it was a step toward democracy. He further justified his support for the election results with the claim that, in any case, all African elections were known to be rigged at that time.

===Outbreak of Civil War===

In November 1985 Thomas Quiwonkpa, Doe's former second-in-command, with an estimated 500 to 600 people, failed in an attempt to seize power; all were killed. Doe was sworn in as President on January 6, 1986. Doe then initiated crackdowns against certain tribes, such as the Gio (or Dan) and Mano, in the north, where most of the coup plotters came from. This government's mistreatment of certain ethnic groups resulted in divisions and violence among indigenous peoples, who until then had coexisted relatively peacefully. 
In the late 1980s, as fiscal austerity took hold in the United States and the perceived threat of Communism declined with the waning of the Cold War, the U.S. became disenchanted with Doe's government and began cutting off critical foreign aid to Liberia. This, together with the popular opposition, made Does position precarious.

Nonetheless, the Krahn tribe of president Doe attacked tribes in Nimba County in the north; some northerners fled to bordering Cte dIvoire (Ivory Coast). In the late 1980s, Charles Taylor assembled rebels from Gio and Mano tribes in Ivory Coast into a militia and invaded Nimba County in 1989. By 1990 a full-blown inter-tribal war was taking place.

==First Liberian Civil War (19891996)==

In the late 1980s opposition from abroad to Does regime led to economic collapse. Doe had already been repressing and crushing internal opposition for some time, when in November 1985 another coup attempt against him failed. Doe retaliated against tribes such as the Gio (or Dan) and Mano in the north, where most of the coup plotters had come from. Perhaps as a sequel to these governmental retaliations, perhaps as another circumscription of these same events: Does Krahn tribe began attacking other tribes, particularly in Nimba County in the northeast of Liberia, bordering on Cte dIvoire (Ivory Coast) and on Guinea. Some Liberian northerners fled brutal treatment from the Liberian army into the Ivory Coast.

===Charles Taylor and the NPFL, 198089===
Charles Taylor, born 1948, is son to a Gola mother and either an Americo-Liberian or an Afro-Trinidadian father. Taylor was a student at Bentley College in Waltham, Massachusetts, U.S.A., from 1972 to 1977, earning a degree in economics. After the 1980 coup dtat he served some time in Does government until he was sacked in 1983 on accusation of embezzling government funds. He fled Liberia, was arrested in 1984 in Massachusetts on a Liberian warrant for extradition, and jailed in Massachusetts; escaped from jail in 1985, and probably fled to Libya. 
Some time later, while in the Ivory Coast, Taylor assembled a group of rebels into the National Patriotic Front of Liberia (NPFL), mostly from the Gio and Mano tribes.

===War===
December 1989, NPFL invaded Nimba County in Liberia. Thousands of Gio and Mano joined them, Liberians of other ethnic background as well. The Liberian army (AFL) counterattacked, and retaliated against the whole population of the region. Mid 1990, a war was raging between Krahn on one side, and Gio and Mano on the other. On both sides, thousands of civilians were massacred.

By the middle of 1990, Taylor controlled much of the country, and by June laid siege to Monrovia. In July, Yormie Johnson split off from NPFL and formed the Independent National Patriotic Front of Liberia (INPFL), based on the Gio tribe. Both NPFL and INPFL continued siege on Monrovia. Bloodshed was all over.

In August 1990, the Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS), an organisation of West African states, created a military intervention force called Economic Community of West African States Monitoring Group (ECOMOG) of 4,000 troops, to restore order. President Doe and Yormie Johnson (INPFL) agreed to this intervention, Taylor didnt. 
On September 9, President Doe paid a visit to the barely established headquarters of ECOMOG in the Free Port of Monrovia, was at the ECOMOG headquarters attacked by INPFL, taken to the INPFLs Caldwell base, tortured and killed.

November 1990, ECOWAS agreed with some principal Liberian players but without Charles Taylor, on an Interim Government of National Unity (IGNU) under President Dr. Amos Sawyer. Sawyer established his authority over most of Monrovia, with the help of a paramilitary police force, the 'Black Berets', under Brownie Samukai, while the rest of the country was in the hands of the various warring factions.

June 1991, former Liberian army fighters formed rebel group United Liberation Movement of Liberia for Democracy (ULIMO), entered western Liberia in September 91, and gained territories from the NPFL.

American troops secure Freeport of Monrovia, 2003
In 1993, ECOWAS brokered a peace agreement in Cotonou, Benin. On 22 September 1993, the United Nations established the United Nations Observer Mission in Liberia (UNOMIL) to support ECOMOG in implementing the Cotonou agreement. March 1994, the Interim Government of Amos Sawyer was succeeded by a Council of State of six members headed by David D. Kpormakpor. Renewed armed hostilities broke out in 1994 and held on. During the course of the year, ULIMO split into two militias: ULIMO-J, a Krahn faction led by Roosevelt Johnson, and ULIMO-K, a Mandigo-based faction under Alhaji G.V. Kromah. Faction leaders agreed to the Akosombo peace agreement in Ghana but with little consequence. October 1994, the UN reduced its number of UNOMIL observers to about 90 because of the lack of will of combatants to honour peace agreements. December 1994, factions and parties signed the Accra agreement, but fighting continued. August 1995, factions signed an agreement largely brokered by Jerry Rawlings, Ghanaian President; Charles Taylor agreed. September 1995, Kpormakpors Council of State is succeeded by one under civilian Wilton G. S. Sankawulo and with the factional heads Charles Taylor, Alhaji Kromah and George Boley in it. April 1996, followers of Taylor and Kromah assaulted the headquarters of Roosevelt Johnson in Monrovia, and the peace accord collapsed. In August 1996, a new ceasefire is reached in Abuja, Nigeria. September 3, 1996, Ruth Perry followed Sankawulo as chairwoman of the Council of State, with the same three militia leaders in it.

==Second Liberian Civil War (19972003)==
(See also: First Liberian Civil War, Charles Taylor and Second Liberian Civil War) 

===Elections 1997===
Charles Taylor won the 1997 presidential elections with 75.33 percent of the vote, while the runner-up, Unity Party leader Ellen Johnson Sirleaf, received a mere 9.58 percent of the vote. Accordingly, Taylor's National Patriotic Party gained 21 of a possible 26 seats in the Senate, and 49 of a possible 64 seats in the House of Representatives. The election was judged free and fair by some observers although it was charged that Taylor had employed widespread intimidation to achieve victory at the polls.

===19971999===
Bloodshed in Liberia did slow considerably, but it did not end. Violence kept flaring up. During his entire reign, Taylor had to fight insurgencies against his government. Suspicions were, Taylor continued to assist rebel forces in neighbouring countries, like Sierra Leone, trading weapons for diamonds.

===19992003===
Some ULIMO forces reformed themselves as the Liberians United for Reconciliation and Democracy (LURD), backed by the government of neighbouring Guinea. In 1999, they emerged in northern Liberia, in April 2000 they started fighting in Lofa County in northernmost Liberia. By the spring of 2001 they were posing a major threat to the Taylor government. Liberia was now engaged in a complex three-way conflict with Sierra Leone and the Guinea Republic.

Meanwhile, the United Nations Security Council in March 2001 (Resolution 1343) concluded that Liberia and Charles Taylor played roles in the civil war in Sierra Leone, and therefore: 
* banned all arms sales to, and diamonds sales from Liberia; and
* banned high Liberian Government members to travel to UN-states.

By the beginning of 2002, Sierra Leone and Guinea were supporting the LURD, while Taylor was supporting opposition factions in both countries. By supporting Sierra Leonean rebels, Taylor also drew the enmity of the British and Americans.

Other elements of the former ULIMO-factions formed another new rebel group, the Movement for Democracy in Liberia (MODEL). Early 2003, MODEL emerged in the south of Liberia.

===Women of Liberia===

Women of Liberia Mass Action for Peace
In 2002, the women in Liberia were tired of seeing their country torn apart. Organized by social worker Leymah Gbowee, women started gathering and praying in a fish market to protest the violence. They organized the Women in Peacebuilding Network (WIPNET), and issued a statement of intent: "In the past we were silent, but after being killed, raped, dehumanized, and infected with diseases, and watching our children and families destroyed, war has taught us that the future lies in saying NO to violence and YES to peace! We will not relent until peace prevails." 

Joined by Liberian Muslim Women's Organization, Christian and Muslim women joined forces to create Women of Liberia Mass Action for Peace. They wore white, to symbolize peace. They staged silent nonviolence protests and forced a meeting with President Charles Taylor and extracted a promise from him to attend peace talks in Ghana. 

In 2003, a delegation of Liberian women went to Ghana to continue to apply pressure on the warring factions during the peace process. They staged a sit in outside of the Presidential Palace, blocking all the doors and windows and preventing anyone from leaving the peace talks without a resolution. Women of Liberia Mass Action for Peace became a political force against violence and against their government. Their actions brought about an agreement during the stalled peace talks. As a result, the women were able to achieve peace in Liberia after a 14-year civil war and later helped bring to power the country's first female head of state, Ellen Johnson Sirleaf.

===Another UN embargo, and arrest warrant against Taylor===
The Buduburam refugee camp west of Accra, Ghana, home in 2005 to more than 40,000 refugees from Liberia
On March 7, 2003, the war tribunal Special Court for Sierra Leone (SCSL) decided to summon Charles Taylor and charge him with war crimes and crimes against humanity, but they kept this decision and this charge secret until June that year. 

May 6, 2003, the UN Security Council (Resolution 1478) decided to an embargo also on Liberian round logs and timber products. 

By mid-2003, LURD controlled the northern third of the country and was threatening the capital, MODEL was active in the south, and Taylor's government controlled only a third of the country: Monrovia and central Liberia.

On June 4, 2003, ECOWAS organized peace talks in Accra, Ghana, among the Government of Liberia, civil society, and the rebel groups LURD and MODEL. On the opening ceremony, in Taylors presence, the SCSL revealed their charge against Taylor which they had kept secret since March, and also issued an international arrest warrant for Taylor. The SCSL indicted Taylor for bearing the greatest responsibility for atrocities in Sierra Leone since November 1996. The Ghanaian authorities did not attempt to arrest Taylor, declaring they could not round up a president they themselves had invited as a guest for peace talks. The same day, Taylor returned to Liberia.

===Pressure of rebels, Presidents, and UN: Taylor resigns===
June 2003, LURD began a siege of Monrovia. July 9, the Nigerian President offered Taylor safe exile in his country, if Taylor stayed out of Liberian politics. Also in July, American President Bush stated twice that Taylor must leave Liberia. Taylor insisted that he would resign only if American peacekeeping troops were deployed to Liberia. 
August 1, 2003, the Security Council, (Resolution 1497) decided on a multinational force in Liberia, to be followed-on by a United Nations stabilization force. 
ECOWAS sent troops under the banner of 'ECOMIL' to Liberia. These troops started to arrive in Liberia probably as of August 15. The U.S. provided logistical support. President Taylor resigned, and flew into exile in Nigeria. Vice-President Moses Blah replaced Taylor as interim-President. 
A ECOWAS-ECOMIL force of 1000 Nigerian troops was airlifted into Liberia on August 15, to halt the occupation of Monrovia by rebel forces. Meanwhile, U.S. stationed a Marine Expeditionary Unit with 2300 Marines offshore Liberia.

==Peace agreement and transitional government (20032005)==
Gyude Bryant 
On August 18, 2003, the Liberian Government, the rebels, political parties, and leaders from civil society signed the Accra Comprehensive Peace Agreement that laid the framework for a two-year National Transitional Government of Liberia. August 21, they selected businessman Charles Gyude Bryant as Chair of the National Transitional Government of Liberia (NTGL), effective on October 14. These changes paved the way for the ECOWAS peacekeeping mission to expand into a 3,600-strong force, constituted by Benin, Gambia, Ghana, Guinea-Bissau, Mali, Nigeria, Senegal and Togo.

On October 1, 2003, UNMIL took over the peacekeeping duties from ECOWAS. Some 3,500 West African troops were provisionally re-hatted as United Nations peacekeepers. The UN Secretary-General commended the African Governments who have contributed to UNMIL, as well as the United States for its support to the regional force. October 14, 2003, Blah handed power to Gyude Bryant.

Fighting initially continued in parts of the country, and tensions between the factions did not immediately vanish. 
But fighters were being disarmed; in June 2004, a program to reintegrate the fighters into society began; the economy recovered somewhat in 2004; by year's end, the funds for the re-integration program proved inadequate; also by the end of 2004, more than 100,000 Liberian fighters had been disarmed, and the disarmament program was ended. In light of the progress made, President Bryant requested an end to the UN embargo on Liberian diamonds (since March 2001) and timber (since May 2003), but the Security Council postponed such a move until the peace was more secure. Because of a supposed fundamentally broken system of governance that contributed to 23 years of conflict in Liberia, and failures of the Transitional Government in curbing corruption, the Liberian government and the International Contact Group on Liberia signed onto the anti-corruption program GEMAP, starting September 2005.

==Ellen Johnson Sirleaf elected president (2005)==
 
Ellen Johnson Sirleaf 
The transitional government prepared for fair and peaceful democratic elections on October 11, 2005, with UNMIL troops safeguarding the peace. Twenty three candidates stood for the presidential election, with George Weah, internationally famous footballer, UNICEF Goodwill Ambassador and member of the Kru ethnic group, and Ellen Johnson Sirleaf, a former World Bank economist and finance minister, Harvard-trained economist and of mixed Americo-Liberian and indigenous descent. 
In the first round, no candidate took the required majority, Weah won this round with 28% of the vote. A run-off between the top two vote getters, Weah and Ellen Johnson Sirleaf, was necessary.

The second round of elections took place on November 8, 2005. Ellen Johnson Sirleaf won this runoff decisively. Both the general election and runoff were marked by peace and order, with thousands of Liberians waiting patiently in the Liberian heat to cast their ballots. 
Sirleaf claimed victory of this round, winning 59 per cent of the vote. However, Weah alleged electoral fraud, despite international observers declaring the election to be free and fair. Although Weah was still threatening to take his claims to the Supreme Court if no evidence of fraud was found, Johnson-Sirleaf was declared winner on November 23, 2005, and took office on January 16, 2006.

==Recent events (2006present)==

===Allegations of labor rights abuses by Firestone===
In November 2005, the International Labor Rights Fund filed an Alien Tort Claims Act (ATCA) case against Bridgestone, the parent company of Firestone, alleging forced labor, the modern equivalent of slavery, on the Firestone Plantation in Harbel. In May 2006, the United Nations Mission in Liberia (UNMIL) released a report: Human Rights in Liberias Rubber Plantations: Tapping into the Future which detailed the results of its investigation into the conditions on the Firestone plantation in Liberia. A redacted copy of the UN report Human Rights in Liberias Rubber Plantations: Tapping into the Future can be seen at the Office of Child Labor, Forced Labor, and Human Trafficking website, part of the US Bureau of Labour. 

===Extradition and trial of Charles Taylor, arrest of Bryant===
Under international pressure, President Sirleaf requested in March 2006 that Nigeria extradite Charles Taylor, who was then brought before an international tribunal in Sierra Leone to face charges of crimes against humanity, arising from events during the Sierra Leone civil war (his trial was later transferred to The Hague for security purposes). In June 2006, the United Nations ended its embargo on Liberian timber (effective since May 2003), but continued its diamond embargo (effective since March 2001) until an effective certificate of origin program was established, a decision that was reaffirmed in October 2006.

In March 2007, former Interim President Bryant was arrested and charged with having embezzled government funds while in office. In August 2007, the Supreme Court of Liberia allowed the criminal prosecution for this to proceed in the lower courts. The court ruled that Bryant was not entitled to immunity as the head of state under the Constitution as he was not elected to the position and he was not acting in accordance with law when he allegedly stole USD $1.3 million in property from the government. 

==See also==
*History of Africa
*History of West Africa
*President of Liberia
*Politics of Liberia
*Lott Carey, of Richmond, Virginia, the first American missionary to Liberia
*Pray the Devil Back to Hell

==References==

==Further reading==
* Akpan, Monday B. "Black imperialism: Americo-Liberian rule over the African peoples of Liberia, 1841-1964." Canadian Journal of African Studies (1973): 217-236. in JSTOR
* Allen, William E. "Liberia and the Atlantic World in the Nineteenth Century: Convergence and Effects." History in Africa (2010) 37#1 pp : 7-49.
*
*
*
*
*
* Gershoni, Yekutiel. Black Colonialism: The Americo-Liberian Scramble for the Hinterland (London: Westview Press, 1985)
*
*
* Lyon, Judson M. "Informal Imperialism: The United States in Liberia, 18971912." Diplomatic History (1981) 5#3 pp 221243.
*
* Rosenberg, Emily S. "The Invisible Protectorate: The United States, Liberia, and the Evolution of Neocolonialism, 190940." Diplomatic History (1985) 9#3 pp 191214.
*
*
*

==External links==
* The Struggle for the Recognition of Haiti and Liberia as Independent Republics  From Haitian history Wiki
*The Liberian Post  Extensive background information with links and photos.
*U.S. Library of Congress exhibition, based on materials deposited by the ACS.
*CIA World Factbook : Liberia
*BBC Country Profile : Liberia
*Art and Life in Africa : Liberia
*Timeline Liberia
*History of Liberia: a Timeline, from Library of Congress
*Political Resources on the Net: Liberia
* by Martin Delany

 


[[Geography of Liberia]]

Map of Liberia.
 

Liberia is a large Sub-Saharan nation in West Africa located at 6 N, 9 W. The country is shaped like a rectangle, with a shape similar to El Salvador. It borders the north Atlantic Ocean to the southwest (360 mi of coastline) and three other African nations on the other three sides. The total length of Liberia's land borders is 986 mi: 190 mi with Sierra Leone on the northwest, 350 mi with Guinea to the north, and 445 mi with Cte d'Ivoire. In total, Liberia comprises 43000 mi2 of which 37190 mi2 is land and 5810 mi2 is water, making the country slightly smaller than the U.S. state of Ohio but larger than Virginia.

==Maritime Claims==
Liberia currently claims a territorial sea of 200 nmi.

==Terrain==
Liberia has a mostly hilly terrain, from rolling plains along the coast to a rolling plateau and low mountains in the northeast.

===Elevation extremes===
The lowest point on Liberia is at sea level on the Atlantic Ocean. The highest point on Liberia is 1380m above sea level at Mount Wuteve.

==Natural resources==
Natural resources that are found in Liberia include iron ore, timber, diamonds, gold and hydropower.

==Land use and agriculture==

Topographic map of Liberia
arable land:
4.04%
permanent crops:
1.62%
other:
94.34% (2011)

===Irrigated land===
21 square kilometres of Liberia's land was irrigated as of 2003.

===Natural hazards===
The natural hazard that occurs in Liberia is a dust-laden harmattan wind that blows from the Sahara (December to March).

==Environmental issues==

===Current environmental issues===
Current environmental issues include the fact that the tropical rainforest is subject to deforestation; soil erosion; loss of biodiversity and the pollution of coastal waters from oil residue and raw sewage.

===Environment - international agreements===
party to:
Biodiversity, Climate Change, Climate Change-Kyoto Protocol, Desertification, Endangered Species, Hazardous Wastes, Law of the Sea, Ozone Layer Protection, Ship Pollution, Tropical Timber 83, Tropical Timber 94, Wetlands
signed, but not ratified:
Environmental Modification, Marine Life Conservation

== Extreme points ==

This is a list of the extreme points of Liberia, the points that are farther north, south, east or west than any other location.

* Northernmost point  unnamed location on the border with Guinea in the Sodia river immediately north of the town of Vonamai, Lofa County
* Easternmost point  unnamed headland at the confluence of the Cavally river and the Hana river, River Gee County
* Southernmost point  Kablak headland, Maryland Country
* Westernmost point - unnamed headland immediately west of the town of Sewulu at the mouth of the Mano River, Grand Cape Mount County

== External links ==
* 

 

[[Demographics of Liberia]]

This article is about the demographic features of the population of Liberia, including population density, ethnicity, education level, health of the populace, economic status, religious affiliations and other aspects of the population.

The demographics of Liberia Liberia's history as a place set up in 1821 as a colony for free slaves from the United States. The noun for a person from Liberia is Liberian(s). The adjective is Liberian. Despite the recent war's divisions along ethnic lines, Liberia remains a multiethnic and multicultural country. Diversity has always been celebrated in Liberian culture, cuisine, music, fashion, language and people themselves. This diversity has often been overlooked in post war years.

==Population==
The increase in population in Liberia from 1961-2003 Data of FAO, year 2005 
According to the 2010 revison of the World Population Prospects the total population was 3 994 000 in 2010, compared to only 911 000 in 1950. The proportion of children below the age of 15 in 2010 was 43.5%, 53.7% was between 15 and 65 years of age, while 2.8% was 65 years or older
. Population Division of the Department of Economic and Social Affairs of the United Nations Secretariat, World Population Prospects: The 2010 Revision 

 Total population (x 1000) Population aged 014 (%) Population aged 1564 (%) Population aged 65+ (%) 
 1950 911 41.0 55.9 3.0 
 1955 997 41.1 56.1 2.8 
 1960 1 116 41.4 55.9 2.7 
 1965 1 262 43.0 54.3 2.6 
 1970 1 440 44.1 53.3 2.6 
 1975 1 658 44.8 52.6 2.6 
 1980 1 923 45.5 51.9 2.6 
 1985 2 212 45.9 51.5 2.6 
 1990 2 127 45.6 52.8 2.6 
 1995 2 095 44.5 52.8 2.6 
 2000 2 847 43.6 53.8 2.6 
 2005 3 183 43.3 54.0 2.7 
 2010 3 994 43.5 53.7 2.8 

==Vital statistics==
Registration of vital events is in Liberia not complete. The Population Departement of the United Nations prepared the following estimates.
 

 Period Live births per year Deaths per year Natural change per year CBR* CDR* NC* TFR* IMR* 
 1950-1955 45 000 27 000 17 000 46.7 28.8 18.0 6.27 224 
 1955-1960 51 000 29 000 22 000 48.1 27.1 21.0 6.35 208 
 1960-1965 58 000 30 000 28 000 48.6 25.4 23.2 6.47 194 
 1965-1970 65 000 32 000 33 000 48.4 23.6 24.7 6.59 181 
 1970-1975 76 000 34 000 41 000 48.9 22.1 26.8 6.80 169 
 1975-1980 88 000 37 000 51 000 49.0 20.8 28.2 6.93 158 
 1980-1985 101 000 43 000 58 000 48.8 20.8 28.0 6.96 159 
 1985-1990 102 000 46 000 57 000 47.2 21.1 26.1 6.72 164 
 1990-1995 95 000 45 000 50 000 45.0 21.2 23.8 6.30 168 
 1995-2000 109 000 49 000 60 000 44.0 19.8 24.2 6.01 155 
 2000-2005 128 000 46 000 82 000 42.4 15.4 27.1 5.69 116 
 2005-2010 145 000 43 000 102 000 40.5 12.0 28.5 5.42 89 
 * CBR = crude birth rate (per 1000); CDR = crude death rate (per 1000); NC = natural change (per 1000); IMR = infant mortality rate per 1000 births; TFR = total fertility rate (number of children per woman) 

== Ethnic communities of Liberia ==
===Indigenous===
The indigenous ethnic groups of Liberia can be linguistically divided into three groups who speak;

* The isolate Gola language and the
* Mel languages (particularly Kissi) in the east and
* Kru languages (particularly Bassa) in the west

to which must be added the immigrant communities;

* Mande-Fu (Kpelle, Gio, Mano, Loma)
* Mande-Tan (Vai, Mende, Mandingo)
* Repatriated (Americo-Liberians, Congo, Caribbean)

The Gola ethnic group originated somewhere in central Africa. During the Empire of Ancient Ghana they were involved in the land-surveying and jurisprudence of the empire. 

The other ethnic groups that fall under the Mande-Tan, Mande-Fu were also members of Ancient Ghana. Because of the their influence in the judicial aspects of the Ghana, the Gola's social structure dominated through the Poro. 

With the influx of Islam many groups adopted it while others resisted. The Golas fought three wars with pro-Islamic elements in a changing Ghana. These wars were known as the Kumba Wars. The Golas lost the third of these wars and were forced to retreat toward Sierra Leone. They were pursued by the Mende, Gbandi and Loma. Their battles with the Mende in Sierra Leone forced them to retreat yet again and settle finally in Liberia where they encountered the Dei.

===Immigrants from Mali===
The Kpelle, Gio, Mano, Mandingo and Vai groups migrated from the Empire of Mali for various reasons, some escaping political intrigue, others looking for a better life. The Vais, settled in Grand Cape Mount county in the west of Liberia, were the first to invent a form of writing in 1833 or 1834. The reported inventor was Dwalu Bukele of Bandakor along the Robertsport(provincial capital) highway. 

===Immigrants from Cte d'Ivoire===
In the 16th century; Kru (Tajuasohn), Bassa, Dei, Mamba, Grebo.

===19th century===
*Americo-Liberians: Freed slaves and descendants of freed slaves from the U.S. and the Caribbean
*Congo people from the Congo River Basin who were captured for the slave trade but sent to Liberia when slavery was abolished without ever being exposed to non-African cultures. The word Congo is also used to refer to anyone from the countryside or rural Liberia regardless of their ancestors came from Congo River Basin.

==Immigrants from Lebanon==
In the late 19th century to early 20th century Lebanese merchants, families and businessmen began arriving in Liberia. Lebanese currently own many major businesses such as supermarkets, restaurants, textiles, construction works, factories and other production based companies across the country. Despite living in the country, Lebanese are denied citizenship rights due to Liberia's nationality law and are seen in a political view as foreigners.

==Religion==

== CIA World Factbook demographic statistics ==

The following demographic statistics are from the CIA World Factbook, unless otherwise indicated.

===Population===
As of 2008, Liberia has the 3rd highest population growth rate in the world (3.66%). The current population is 3,042,004. July 2006 estimate from 2006 CIA World Factbook 

===Sex ratio===
at birth:
1.03 male(s)/female
under 15 years:
1.01 male(s)/female
1564 years:
0.98 male(s)/female
65 years and over:
1.03 male(s)/female
total population:1 male(s)/female (2011 est.)

===Life expectancy at birth===
total population:
57 years
male:
55.44 years
female:
58.6 years (2011 est.)

===Ethnic groups===
There are officially 16 ethnic groups that make up Liberia's indigenous African population, making up maybe 95% of the total: Kpelle, the largest group; Bassa, Gio, Kru, often fishermen; Grebo, Mandingo, often in trade and transport; Mano, Krahn, Gola, Gbandi, Loma, Kissi, Vai, and Bella).

There are also more or less nomadic tribes like the Fula, who engage mostly in trade, and the Fanti, who are often fishermen or traders of fish, usually from Ghana, living seasonally and more and more often permanently in Liberia.

Then there are Americo-Liberians, who are descendants of free-born and formerly enslaved African Americans who arrived in Liberia from 1822 onward and Congo People (descendants of immigrants from the Caribbean), making up an estimated 5% of the population. They used to dominate political life in Liberia and still have a lot of influence.

There are about 5,000 people of European descent, many of them having settled down as miners, missionaries, business people, and so on. There also is a sizeable number of Lebanese, Indians, and other people with Asian roots who make up a significant part of Liberia's business community. Because of the civil war and its accompanying problem of insecurity, the number of non-Africans in Liberia is low and confined largely to Monrovia and its immediate surroundings. The Liberian constitution restricts citizenship to people of African descent.

===Languages===

English 20% (official), some 20 ethnic group languages, of which a few can be written and are used in correspondence.

===Literacy===
Literacy in Liberia, as defined as age 15 and over and can read and write, is:
total population:
38.3%
male:
53.9%
female:
22.4% 1995 estimate 
note:
these figures are increasing because of the improving school system

==See also==
*Liberia
*List of countries by population growth rate

==References==

==External links==
* Liberia: Nation & People without identity
* The Indigenous & Americo Liberians' Palva

* Liberia, "America's step child" searches for own identity
* Words Matter: Terms of Global Conflicts debated, NPR
* Contemporary Africa & Legacy of late colonialism
* How the word tribe stereotypes Africa

Liberia


[[Politics of Liberia]]

Politics of Liberia takes place in a framework of a presidential representative democratic republic modeled on the government of the United States, whereby the President is the head of state and head of government; unlike the United States, however, Liberia is a unitary state as opposed to a federation and has a pluriform multi-party system rather than the two-party system that characterizes US politics. Executive power is exercised by the government. Legislative power is vested in both the government and the two chambers of the legislature. 

Liberia is still in transition from dictatorship and civil war to democracy. Liberia's government is based on the American model of a republic with three equal branches of government, though in reality the President of Liberia has usually been the dominant force in Liberian politics. Following the dissolution of the Republican Party in 1876, the True Whig Party dominated the Liberian government until the 1980 coup, eventually creating what was effectively a one-party state. 

Currently, no party has majority control of the legislature. The longest serving president in Liberian history was William Tubman, serving from 1944 until his death in 1971. The shortest term was held by James Skivring Smith, who was interim president for all of two months. However, the political process from Liberia's founding in 1847, despite widespread corruption, was very stable until the end of the First Republic in 1980. 

==Political developments since 1980==
Between 1980 and 2006, Liberia was governed by a series of military and transitional governments. The president of the last of these, Charles Taylor, was forced to step down in 2003, and the United Nations installed a transitional government. Elections to select a government to replace the transitional government took place in October and November 2005. (see Liberian elections, 2005).

In the 1980s, Samuel K. Doe's government increasingly adopted an ethnic outlook as members of his Krahn ethnic group soon dominated political and military life in Liberia. This caused a heightened level of ethnic tension leading to frequent hostilities between the politically and militarily dominant Krahns and other ethnic groups in the country.

Political parties remained banned until 1984. Elections were held on 15 October 1985 in which Doe's National Democratic Party of Liberia (NDPL) was declared winner. The elections were characterized by widespread fraud and rigging. The period after the elections saw increased human rights abuses, corruption, and ethnic tensions. The standard of living, which had been rising in the 1970s, declined drastically. On 12 November 1985, former Army Commanding General Thomas Quiwonkpa invaded Liberia by way of neighboring Sierra Leone and almost succeeded in toppling the government of Samuel Doe. Members of the Krahn-dominated Armed Forces of Liberia repelled Quiwonkpa's attack and executed him in Monrovia.
The Executive Mansion has been the home of Liberian Presidents since the 1960s, but has not been used since a fire in 1996.
On 24 December 1989, a small band of rebels led by Doe's former procurement chief, Charles Taylor invaded Liberia from Cte d'Ivoire. Taylor and his National Patriotic Front rebels rapidly gained the support of Liberians because of the repressive nature of Samuel Doe and his government. Barely six months after the rebels first attacked, they had reached the outskirts of Monrovia.

The First and Second Liberian Civil War, which was one of Africa's bloodiest, claimed the lives of more than 200,000 Liberians and further displaced a million others into refugee camps in neighboring countries.

The Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS) intervened and succeeded in preventing Charles Taylor from capturing Monrovia. Prince Johnson who had been a member of Taylor's National Patriotic Front of Liberia (NPFL) but broke away because of policy differences, formed the Independent National Patriotic Front of Liberia (INPFL). Johnson's forces captured and killed Doe on 9 September 1990. 

An Interim Government of National Unity (IGNU) was formed in Gambia under the auspices of ECOWAS in October 1990 and Dr. Amos Sawyer became President. Taylor refused to work with the interim government and continued war.

By 1992, several warring factions had emerged in the Liberian civil war, all of which were absorbed in the new transitional government. After several peace accords and declining military power, Taylor finally agreed to the formation of a five-man transitional government.

After considerable progress in negotiations conducted by the United States, United Nations, Organization of African Unity, and the Economic Community of West African States, disarmament and demobilization of warring factions were hastily carried out and special elections were held on 19 July 1997 with Charles Taylor and his National Patriotic Party emerging victorious. Taylor won the election by a large majority, primarily because Liberians feared a return to war had Taylor lost. However, unrest continued, and by 2003, two rebel groups were challenging Taylor's control of the country. In August 2003, Taylor resigned and fled the country and vice-president Moses Blah became acting president. On August 18, 2003 the warring parties signed the Accra Comprehensive Peace Agreement which marked the political end of the conflict. 

The international community again intervened and helped set up a transitional government (National Transitional Government of Liberia) which was led by Gyude Bryant until the Liberian general election of 2005.

For more than a year, over 9,000 census-takers combed the densely forested nation mapping every structure. For three days starting 21 March 2008, they revisited each dwelling and counted the inhabitants.

==Executive branch==

|President
|Ellen Johnson Sirleaf
|Unity Party
|16 January 2006
|-
|Vice President
|Joseph Boakai
|Unity Party
|16 January 2006

The president is elected by popular vote for a six-year term (renewable). The cabinet is appointed by the president and confirmed by the Senate.

==Legislative branch==

Legislature of Liberia.
Liberia has a bicameral Legislature that consists of the Senate (30 seats; members elected by popular vote to serve nine-year terms) and the House of Representatives (64 seats; members elected by popular vote to serve six-year terms)

==Political parties and elections==

:More info: Liberia elections, 2005

===2011 presidential election===

In January 2010, Sirleaf announced that she would run for a second term in office in the 2011 presidential election while speaking to a joint session of the Legislature. Opposition leaders noted that in doing so, she had broken a promise made during her 2005 campaign to only serve one term if elected. 

Sirleaf garnered 43.9% of the vote in the first round, more than any other candidate but short of the 50% needed to avoid a run-off. Tubman came in second with 32.7%, pitting him against Sirleaf in the second round. Tubman called for a boycott of the run-off, claiming that the results of the first round had been fraudulent. Sirleaf denied the allegations, and international observers reported that the first round election had been free, fair and transparent. As a result of the boycott, Sirleaf won the second round with 90.7% of the vote, though voter turnout significantly declined from the first round. 

==Judicial branch==
There is a Supreme Court, criminal courts, and appeals court and magistrate courts in the counties. There also are traditional courts and lay courts in the counties. Trial by ordeal is practiced in various parts of Liberia.

==Administrative divisions==
The basic unit of local government is the town chief. There are clan chiefs, paramount chiefs, and district commissioners. The counties are governed by superintendents appointed by the President. There are fifteen counties in Liberia.

==International organization participation==
ACP, 
AfDB, 
CCC, 
ECA, 
ECOWAS, 
FAO, 
G-77, 
IAEA, 
IBRD, 
ICAO, 
ICFTU, 
ICRM, 
IDA, 
IFAD, 
IFC, 
IFRCS, 
ILO, 
IMF, 
IMO, 
Inmarsat, 
Intelsat (nonsignatory user), 
Interpol, 
IOC, 
IOM, 
ITU, 
NAM, 
OAU, 
OPCW, 
UN, 
UNCTAD, 
UNESCO, 
UNIDO, 
UPU, 
WCL, 
WFTU, 
WHO, 
WIPO, 
WMO

==References==

==Further reading==
*International Crisis Group, Liberia reports
*Martin Lowenkopf, Politics in Liberia: The Conservative Road to Development, 1976.
*William Reno, Reinvention of an African Patrimonial State: Charles Taylor's Liberia, Third World Quarterly, Vol. 16, No. 1 (Mar., 1995), pp. 109-120 Published by Taylor & Francis, Ltd.

==External links==
*
*http://www.traveldocs.com/lr/history.htm

 

[[Economy of Liberia]]

The First Liberian Civil War in 1989-96 destroyed much of Liberia's economy, especially the infrastructure in and around Monrovia. Many businessmen fled the country, taking capital and expertise with them. Some returned during 1997, but many have not. Richly endowed with water, mineral resources, forests, and a climate favorable to agriculture, Liberia had been a producer and exporter of basic products, while local manufacturing, mainly foreign owned, had been small in scope. The democratically elected government, installed in August 1997, inherited massive international debts and currently relies on revenues from its maritime registry to provide the bulk of its foreign exchange earnings. The restoration of the infrastructure and the raising of incomes in this ravaged economy depend on the implementation of sound macro- and micro-economic policies of the new government, including the encouragement of foreign investment.

==Summary==
Civil war and government mismanagement destroyed much of Liberia's economy, especially the infrastructure in and around the capital

==In greater depth==
The Liberian economy had relied heavily on the mining of iron ore prior to the civil war. Liberia was a major exporter of iron ore on the world market. In the 1970s and 1980s, iron mining accounted for more than half of Liberia's export earnings. Since the coup d'tat of 1980, the country's economic growth rate has slowed down because of a decline in the demand for iron ore on the world market and political upheavals in Liberia. Liberia's foreign debt amounts to more than $3 billion. However, in recent years (2005 - 2012), foreign investment from Mittal Steel, BHP Biliton, and China Union is aiding the revitalization of the iron mining sector; meanwhile, Liberia's debt has been reduced significantly from assistance from the World Bank, the United States, EU, AND the IMF to as low as under $500,000 USD.

Timber and rubber are Liberia's main export items since the end of the war. Liberia earns more than $100 million and more than $70 million annually from timber and rubber exports, respectively. Alluvial diamond and gold mining activities also account for some economic activity.

Being the second-largest maritime licenser in the world with more than 1,700 vessels registered under its flag, including 35% of the world's tanker fleet, Liberia earned more than $18 million from its maritime program in 2000. The Liberian Government has declared in recent months that it has discovered sizable amounts of crude oil along its Atlantic coast.

Boy grinding sugar cane 1968
Liberia's business sector is largely controlled by foreigners mainly of Lebanese and Indian descent. There also are limited numbers of Chinese engaged in agriculture. The largest timber concession, Oriental Timber Corporation (OTC), is Indonesian owned. There also are significant numbers of West Africans engaged in cross-border trade. Legal monopolies are possible; for example, Cemenco holds a monopoly on cement production.

Liberia is a member of the Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS). With Guinea and Sierra Leone, it formed the Mano River Union (MRU) for development and the promotion of regional economic integration. The MRU became all but defunct because of the Liberian civil war which spilled over into neighboring Sierra Leone and Guinea.

Liberia has relied heavily on vast amounts of foreign assistance, particularly from the United States, Japan, Britain, France, Italy, Germany, the People's Republic of China, and Romania. But because of the Liberian Government's perceived disregard for human rights, foreign assistance to Liberia has declined drastically. The Republic of China (Taiwan) and Libya are currently the largest donors of direct financial aid to the Liberian Government. However, significant amounts of aid continue to come in from Western countries through international aid agencies and non-governmental organizations, avoiding direct aid to the government.

The United Nations imposed sanctions on Liberia in May 2001 for its support to the rebels of the Revolutionary United Front (RUF) in neighboring Sierra Leone. These sanctions have been lifted following elections in 2005.

Unlike almost all other countries in the world, Liberia has not adopted the metric system as its primary system of measurement.

In March 2010, Bob Johnson, founder of BET, funded the first hotel constructed in Liberia in 20 years. The 13 acre luxury resort was built in the Paynesville section of Monrovia. 

==References==

==External links==
*68% of Liberians live in poverty census reveals
*
*Mineral resources of Liberia
*Liberia latest trade data on ITC Trade Map
*Liberia profile - World Bank

 
Liberia

[[Communications in Liberia]]

Cellcom Liberia antenna in Monrovia (2009)

Communications in Liberia include the press, radio, television, fixed and mobile telephones, and the Internet.

Much of Liberia's communications infrastructure was destroyed or plundered during the two civil wars (1989-1996 and 1999-2003). With low rates of adult literacy and high poverty rates, television and newspaper use is limited, leaving radio as the predominant means of communicating with the public. "Introduction to Communication and Development in Liberia", AudienceScapes. Retrieved 8 February 2014. However, even as it struggles with economic and political constraints, Liberias media environment is expanding. The number of registered newspapers and radio stations (many of them community stations) is on the rise despite limited market potential. And politically critical content and investigative pieces do get published or broadcast. "Media Environment and Regulation in Liberia", AudienceScapes. Retrieved 8 February 2014. 

==Press==

The main newspapers are: "Liberia Newspapers and News on the Internet", Africa South of the Sahara, Stanford University Libraries. Retrieved 8 February 2014. 
* The Analyst "Liberia: LMC Extols Media Institutions", The NEWS, 16 September 2008, AllAfrica. 
* Daily Observer, private. 
* The Daily Talk 
* FrontPage Africa, private. 
* The Inquirer, private daily. "Liberia profile", BBC News, 14 March 2012. 
* National Chronicle "Media regulator recommends support for local media coverage of truth commission", BBC Monitoring Africa, 27 June 2008. 
* The New Dawn, private daily. 
* New Democrat 
* The New Republic "Liberia: Ties With China Can't Be Understated", The NEWS, 16 September 2008, AllAfrica. 

==Radio and television==

* Radios: 790,000 radio receivers (1997).
* Radio stations: 1 state-owned radio station, but no national public service broadcaster; "Most Used Media Outlets in Liberia", AudienceScapes. Retrieved 8 February 2014. about 15 independent radio stations broadcasting in Monrovia, with another 25 local stations operating in other areas; transmissions of 2 international broadcasters are available (2007). "Communications: Liberia", World Factbook, U.S. Central Intelligence Agency, 28 January 2014. Retrieved 7 February 2014. 
** BBC World Service 103 FM. 
** ELBC FM, public. "Liberia: Radio Station Websites", Radio Station World. Retrieved 8 February 2014. 
** ELWA FM and SW, private, religious-Christian. 
** LUX 106.6 FM, University of Liberia.
** Radio Liberia FM, operated by the state-run Liberian Broadcasting System (LBS). 
** Radio Veritas FM and SW, religious-Catholic. 
** RFI English FM, the English service of Radio France Internationale. 
** Sky FM 
** STAR Radio FM and SW, operated in partnership with Swiss-based Hirondelle Foundation. "Liberia: Press Union names Star Radio as radio station of year", BBC Monitoring Africa, 30 July 2008. 
** Truth FM 
** UNMIL Radio FM, operated by the United Nations mission. 
** Voice of Firestone Liberia 89.5 FM 

* Television sets: 70,000 sets (1997).
* Television stations: 4 private TV stations, none with national reach; satellite TV service available (2007). 
** Clar TV, private. 
** DC TV, private. 
** Power TV, private. 
** Real TV, private. 

==Telephones==
Comium building (2006)

* Calling code: +231 "How to call Liberia", International Calling Information. Retrieved 7 February 2014. 
* International call prefix: 00 Dialing Procedures (International Prefix, National (Trunk) Prefix and National (Significant) Number) (in Accordance with ITY-T Recommendation E.164 (11/2010)), Annex to ITU Operational Bulletin No. 994-15.XII.2011, International Telecommunication Union (ITU, Geneva), 15 December 2011. Retrieved 2 January 2014. 
* Main lines: 3,200 lines in use, 213th in the world (2011). 
* Mobile cellular: 2.4 million lines, 138th in the world (2012). 
* Telephone system: the limited services available are found almost exclusively in the capital Monrovia; fixed-line service stagnant and extremely limited; telephone coverage extended to a number of other towns and rural areas by four mobile-cellular network operators; mobile-cellular subscription base growing and teledensity reached 50 per 100 persons (2011). 
* Satellite earth stations: 1 Intelsat (Atlantic Ocean) (2010). 
* Communications cables: Africa Coast to Europe (ACE) cable system, links countries along the west coast of Africa to each other and on to Portugal and France. "ACE: Africa Coast to Europe", Orange SA. Retrieved 8 February 2014. 

The fixed line infrastructure of Liberia was nearly completely destroyed during the civil wars (1989-1996 and 1999-2003). 

Prior to the passage of the Telecommunications Act of 2007, the state-owned Liberia Telecommunications Corporation (LIBTELCO) held a legal monopoly for all fixed line services in Liberia, and remains the sole licensed fixed line telephone service provider in the country. "About Us", Liberia Telecommunications Corporation. Retrieved 7 February 2014. 

Four licensed GSM cellular mobile service providers operate in the country: Lonestar Cell, CellCom, LiberCell, and Comium. Approximately 45% of the population has cell phone service. 

==Internet==

* Top-level domain: .lr 
* Internet users: 
** 147,510 users, 162nd in the world; 3.8% of the population, 193rd in the world (2012). Calculated using penetration rate and population data from "Countries and Areas Ranked by Population: 2012", Population data, International Programs, U.S. Census Bureau. Retrieved 26 June 2013. "Percentage of Individuals using the Internet 2000-2012", International Telecommunications Union (Geneva), June 2013. Retrieved 22 June 2013. 
** 20,000 users, 194th in the world (2009). 
* Fixed broadband: 78 subscriptions, 193rd in the world; less than 0.05% of the population, 192nd in the world (2012). "Fixed (wired)-broadband subscriptions per 100 inhabitants 2012", Dynamic Report, ITU ITC EYE, International Telecommunication Union. Retrieved on 29 June 2013. 
* Wireless broadband: Unknown (2012). "Active mobile-broadband subscriptions per 100 inhabitants 2012", Dynamic Report, ITU ITC EYE, International Telecommunication Union. Retrieved on 29 June 2013. 
* Internet hosts: 7 hosts, 228th in the world (2012). 
* IPv4: 13,312 addresses allocated, less than 0.05% of the world total, 3.4 addresses per 1000 people (2012). Select Formats, Country IP Blocks. Accessed on 2 April 2012. Note: Site is said to be updated daily. Population, The World Factbook, United States Central Intelligence Agency. Accessed on 2 April 2012. Note: Data are mostly for 1 July 2012. 

===Internet censorship and surveillance===

There are no government restrictions on access to the Internet or reports that the government monitors e-mail or Internet chat rooms. "Liberia", Country Reports on Human Rights Practices for 2012, Bureau of Democracy, Human Rights and Labor, U.S. Department of State, 25 March 2013. Retrieved 7 February 2014. 

The constitution provides for freedom of speech and press, and the government generally respects these rights in practice. Libel and national security laws place some limits on freedom of speech. Individuals can generally criticize the government publicly or privately without reprisal. Some journalists practice self-censorship.
The constitution prohibits arbitrary interference with privacy, family, home, or correspondence, and the government generally respects these prohibitions in practice. 

President Sirleaf endorsed and signed the World Association of Newspapers and News Publishers' Declaration of Table Mountain in Monrovia on 21 July 2012, committing to the core principles of a free press and calling for the repeal of the criminal defamation and insult laws regularly used against journalists. 

==See also==

* Liberia Telecommunications Corporation, the sole provider of fixed line telephone services in Liberia.
* Cable Consortium of Liberia, a public-private partnership formed in 2010 to own and operate Liberia's cable landing point for the ACE cable system.
* The Liberian Journal, a US-based Liberian online and print news organization covering issues of interest to Liberians in the Diaspora.

==References==

* 
* 

==External links==
* Liberia Domain Registration (.lr)

 
Liberia
Liberia
Liberia

[[Transport in Liberia]]

Transport in Liberia consist of railways, highways, seaports and airports.

== Railways ==

Historically, three railways were built in Liberia to export ore from mines; they were damaged during civil war, and as of August 2010 only one had been brought back into service.

There are no rail connections with other countries, although there has been a proposal to extend the Bong mine railway to serve a mine across the border in Guinea.

== Highways ==
total:
10,600 km (6,586 mi) (there is major deterioration on all highways due to heavy rains and lack of maintenance)
paved:
657 km (408 mi)
unpaved:
9,943 km (6,178 mi) (1996 est.)

When construction and reconstruction of roads in Liberia is complete, the TransWest African Coastal Highway will cross the country, connecting it to Freetown (Sierra Leone), Abidjan (Cte d'Ivoire), and eventually to 11 other nations of the Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS).

== Ports and harbors ==
* Buchanan - railhead of for civil war affected iron mine at Nimba 
* Greenville
* Harper
* Monrovia

== Merchant marine ==
total:
1,513 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 51,912,244 GRT/ 
ships by type:
barge carrier 3, bulk 313, cargo 89, chemical tanker 167, combination bulk 16, combination ore/oil 32, container 318, liquefied gas 99, multi-functional large-load carrier 4, passenger 23, petroleum tanker 302, refrigerated cargo 69, roll on/roll off 20, short-sea passenger 3, specialized tanker 13, vehicle carrier 42
note:
includes some foreign-owned ships registered here as a flag of convenience: Argentina 9, Australia 2, Austria 15, Belgium 9, Brazil 5, Canada 4, Cayman Islands 1, Chile 7, China 39, Croatia 11, Denmark 4, Ecuador 1, Estonia 1, Germany 437, Greece 154, Hong Kong 69, India 5, Indonesia 1, Israel 1, Italy 5, Japan 90, Latvia 20, Man, Isle of 5, Monaco 56, Netherlands 12, New Zealand 1, Nigeria 1, Norway 103, Pakistan 1, Portugal 5, Russia 66, Saudi Arabia 21, Singapore 20, Slovenia 1, South Africa 1, South Korea 10, Spain 2, Sweden 9, Switzerland 17, Taiwan 29, Turkey 3, Ukraine 4, United Arab Emirates 12, United Kingdom 39, United States 113, Uruguay 3, Vietnam 1 (2002 est.)

== Airports ==
70 (1999 est.)

=== Airports - with paved runways ===
Total:
2
Over 3,047 m (10,000 ft):
1
1,524 to 2,437 m (5,000 to 8,000 ft):
1 (2002)

=== Airports - with unpaved runways ===
Total:
45
1,524 to 2,437 m (5,000 to 8,000 ft):
4
914 to 1,523 m (3,000 to 4,999 ft):
7
Under 914 m (3,000 ft):
34 (2002)

== See also ==
* Railways of Liberia
* Liberia

== References ==

== External links ==
* 

 

[[Armed Forces of Liberia]]

The Armed Forces of Liberia (AFL) are the armed forces of the Republic of Liberia. Founded as the Liberian Frontier Force in 1908, the military was retitled in 1956. For virtually all of its history, the AFL has received considerable materiel and training assistance from the United States. For most of the 194189 period, training was largely provided by U.S. advisers, though this assistance has not prevented the same generally low levels of effectiveness common to most of the armed forces in the developing world.

For most of the Cold War, the AFL saw little action, apart from a reinforced company group which was sent to ONUC in the Democratic Republic of the Congo in the 1960s. This changed with the advent of the First Liberian Civil War in 1989. The AFL became entangled in the conflict, which lasted from 1989 to 199697, and then the Second Liberian Civil War, which lasted from 1999 to 2003.

The AFL is in the process of being reformed and retrained after being completely demobilized following the second civil war. The AFL currently consists of two infantry battalions, and a small Liberian National Coast Guard, which is being reformed. The Liberian Government has requested that a Nigerian Army officer serve as head of the military during the transitional period.

==Legal standing==
The New National Defense Act of 2008 was approved on August 21, 2008. It repeals the National Defense Act of 1956, the Coast Guard Act of 1959, and the Liberian Navy Act of 1986. The duties and functions of the AFL are officially stated as follows: Liberian Congress, New National Defense Act of 2008, approved August 21, 2008. Published by authority Ministry of Foreign Affairs Monrovia, Liberia, September 3, 2008 
*Section 2.3(a): The primary mission of the AFL shall be to defend the national sovereignty and territorial integrity of Liberia, including land, air and maritime territory, against external aggressions, insurgency, terrorism and encroachment. In addition thereto the AFL shall respond to natural disasters and engage in other civic works as may be required or directed.
*Section 2.3(b): The AFL shall also participate in international peacekeeping peace enforcement and other by the UN, the AU, ECOWAS, MRU, and/or all international institutions of which Liberia may be a member. All such activities shall be undertaken only upon authorization of the President of Liberia with the consent of the Legislature.
*Section 2.3(c): The AFL shall provide command, communications, logistical, medical, transportation, and humanitarian support to the civil authority in the event of a natural or man-made disaster, outbreak of disease, or epidemic. Such assistance shall be authorized by the President of Liberia.
*Section 2.3(d): The AFL shall assist civil authorities in search, rescue, and saving of life on land, sea, or air; such assistance shall be authorized by the President for immediate response by specialized search and rescue units in conjunction with other Government Ministries and Agencies.
*Section 2.3(e): The duties of the AFL in peacetime shall include support to the national law enforcement agencies when such support is requested and approved by the President. Such support shall include exchange of information, personnel training, and mobilization and deployment of security contingents. At no time during peacetime however, shall the AFL engage in law enforcement within Liberia, such function being the prerogative of the Liberia National Police and other law enforcement agencies. Notwithstanding, the Military Police of the AFL may, on request of the Ministry of Justice made to the Ministry of National Defense, and approved by the President of Liberia, provide assistance to these law enforcement agencies as determined by prevailing situations. The AFL shall intervene only as a last resort, when the threat exceeds the capability of the law enforcement agencies to respond.

*Section 2.5: Standards of Conduct for the Armed Forces of Liberia: Members of the AFL shall perform their duties at all times in accordance with democratic values and human rights. They shall perform their duties in a non-partisan manner, obey all lawful orders and commands from their superior officers in ways that command citizen respect and confidence and contribute towards the maintenance and promotion of the respect for the rule of law.

==History==
Chief of the Liberian Frontier Force, Captain Alford Russ (seated far right) sits alongside members of President Barclay's party during the Liberian President's visit to Washington DC in 1943
The modern Armed Forces of Liberia grew out of a militia that was formed by the first black colonists from the United States. The militia was first formed when in August 1822 an attack was feared on Cape Mesurado (where Monrovia now is) and the agent of the settlements directed the mobilization of all "able-bodied males into a militia and declared martial law." Sawyer was an interim president of Liberia in the mid-1990s. By 1846, the size of the militia had grown to two regiments. In 1900, Liberian men between the ages of sixteen and fifty were considered liable for military service. The navy consisted only of two small gunboats. Keltie, J.S., ed. The Statesman's Year Book: Statistical and Historical Annual of the States of the World for the Year 1900. New York: MacMillan, 1900. p 794. (Retrieved via Google Books March 3, 2011.) 

On February 6, 1908, the militia was established on a permanent basis as the 500-strong Liberian Frontier Force (LFF). The LFF's original mission was "to patrol the border in the Hinterland British and French territorial ambitions and to prevent disorders." The LFF was initially placed under the command of a British officer, who was quickly replaced after he complained the Force was not being properly paid. See http://newliberian.com/?p=137 for the Cadwell affair. In 1912, the United States established military ties with Liberia by sending some five black American officers to help reorganize the force. Harrison Akingbade, "U.S. Liberian relations during World War II," Phylon, Vol. XLVI, No.1, 1985, p.25 The LFF in its early years was frequently recruited by inducing men from the interior forcibly. When dispatched to the interior to quell tribal unrest, units often lived off the areas that they were pacifying, as a form of communal punishment. The Force's officers were drawn from either the coastal aristocracy or tribal elites. 

===World Wars===
Liberia joined the Allies in both World War I and World War II, but the only troops dispatched overseas were a few individuals to France during World War I, and Liberian volunteers under the command of the United States during World War II. United States military assistance for the LFF began during World War II, when funding provided by the United States allowed an increase in the Force's strength to around 1,500. John Keegan, "World Armies" page 435, ISBN 0-333-17236-1. See also Harrison Akingbade's article in Phylon. The armed forces came to rely almost exclusively on American assistance in terms of training, with non-US training "tend to be brief and uninspired little accomplished other than some desultory close-order drill." Roberts, 1964, pp.3923 U.S. forces also established an officer candidate school during the later part of the war, using instructors selected from the American troops in the country. The school conducted two courses and graduated nearly 300 new officers. Just under twenty years later in 1964, the group still made up over 50% of the officer corps of the AFL. 

===19451980===
From 1945 to 1964, the officers appointed were nearly all college graduates. T.D. Roberts et al, US Army Area Handbook 1964, pp.38990 From 1951, there was a US military mission based in Liberia to assist in training the AFL. A Reserve Officers' Training Corps was established in 1956 with units at the University of Liberia in Monrovia and the Booker Washington Institute in Kakata. By 1978 the program had been redesignated the Army Student Training Program (ASTP) and had a total of 46 students at the University of Liberia, the Booker Washington Institute, and three smaller institutions. 1978 Annual Report, p.7 However it was not until the late 1960s that the Tubman Military Academy was established in Todee, upper Montserrado County, as an officer training facility. 

The LFF was renamed as the Armed Forces of Liberia under the Amended National Defense Law of 1956, Brownie J. Samukai, Armed Forces Of Liberia: Reality Check For A New Military With A Redefined Constitutional Mission, February 17, 2004. Retrieved August 2010 though other sources say 1962, which appears to have been the date the land force became the Liberian National Guard. says the LFF was redesignated the LNG in February 1962. From this period, Liberia's armed forces consisted of the Liberian National Guard, the Liberian Militia, whose ostensible structure is depicted below, and the Liberian Coast Guard. Until 1980, by law every able-bodied male between the ages of 16 and 45 years was to serve in the militia, though this stipulation was not enforced. Accessed via GlobalSecurity.org 

In 1957, Armed Forces Day was designated. Speaking in 2012, the Jonathan B. B. Hart, the Bishop of the Espicopal Church of Liberia recalled that on Jan 26, 1957, the Liberian Legislature set aside Armed Forces Day as Feb 11, 1957, "the day we remembered the mutiny that was started in 1909." The bishop said that in 1909, "the army was put together under the name Frontier Force and one year after, it was established that it should be called the Liberian Frontier Force but with a foreign commander. He recalled how the Sierra Leoneans were sent to Liberia to take over the army by the British government because it had given Liberia a loan." .. "The Sierra Leonean commanders took orders from the British government and not the President of Liberia, then Arthur Barclay. When they began to misbehave, the army was turned over to a Liberian who refused. It was during that time that some soldiers took to the streets in demand of salary arrears, so soldiers getting in the streets.. in demand of salary is not new." C. Winnie Saywah, Espicopal Bishop Urges AFL Soldiers, Tuesday, February 7, 2012. This mutiny is also known as the 'Caddell affair.' 

The National Guard was not a high status force: "It was a skeleton brigade of soldiers who were predominantly from the lower economic and social stratum of society. They were poorly paid, and had less than decent facilities for accommodation and care." Despite this, a Liberian company, designated the Reinforced Security Company, was contributed to the United Nations Operation in the Congo in the early 1960s. Six rotations were made. The 1964 US Army Area Handbook described the company's actions as "...After a poor start, the performance of the contingent improved steadily; the last company, which returned home in May 1963, had performed creditably and, by its conduct and appearance, gave the impression of being a well-trained and disciplined military organization." Roberts et al 1964, p.394 In 1964 the US Army Area Handbook described the National Guard as 3,000 strong with a headquarters company, the Executive Mansion Guard Battalion in Monrovia, three infantry battalions and one engineer battalion (which was newly formed at Camp Naama in 1962 and only had one company organized). Roberts et al 1964, p.394. See also International Institute for Strategic Studies, The Armed Forces of African States, 1967 and 1970, Adelphi Papers 27 and 67, pages 11 and 22 respectively. The three infantry battalions were the 1st Infantry Battalion, at Camp Schiefflin, situated on the airport road between Monrovia and Roberts International Airport, the 2nd Infantry Battalion, HQ at Barclay Training Center (BTC), Monrovia, and the 3rd Infantry Battalion, HQ at Baworobo, Maryland County. Baworobo appears to be in Barrobo District, Maryland County. 

By 1978, the LNG Brigade had been established and the Brigade was described as comprising a Headquarters and Headquarters Company at the Barclay Training Center, Monrovia, the Executive Mansion Guard Battalion on Capitol Hill, Monrovia, the Engineer Battalion and the First Field Artillery Battalion (both at Camp Jackson, Naama) two tactical combat battalions (the First Infantry Battalion, at Schiefflin and the Second Infantry Battalion which in the intervening period had moved from the BTC to Camp Tolbert, Todee) and three non-tactical battalions, tasked with providing guard services to government officials, tax collection, and 'other non-military duties'. , Accessed at New York Public Library, October 2007 The Third Infantry Battalion covered Montserrado, Grand Cape Mount, and Grand Bassa counties from BTC; the Fourth Infantry Battalion covered Grand Gedeh, Sinoe County and Maryland counties from Camp Whisnant, Zwedru; and the Fifth Infantry Battalion at Gbarnga. Other field units of the brigade were the Armoured Unit, at Camp Ram Rod, Paynesward City (possibly Paynesville), Monrovia), and the Bella Yella Special Detachment, Camp Bella Yella, Lofa. The Service Support Battalion was located at BTC, and comprised the Medical Company, the Brigade Band, the Brigade Special Unit (a parade unit) and the Military Police Unit. Also at BTC was the Logistical Command, consisting of a depot, arsenal (whose location had been declared unsafe), the AFL Quartermaster Corps, and the AFL Transportation Company. Strength was reported to be 4,822 in 1978. 

While militia service was compulsory by law for all eligible males, the law was only enforced in a lax manner. From the mid-1960s, and in its later years, members of the militia met only quarterly for sparsely attended drill practice. Estimates of men enrolled over the years vary. The 1964 US Army Area Handbook said that "some 20,000 men are estimated to be enrolled." T.D. Roberts et al, 1964, p.395 The IISS estimated militia numbers at 5,000 in 1967 and 6,000 in 1970. IISS, Adelphi Papers 27 and 67, op. cit. By the early 1970s the militia reported a strength of only some 4,000 poorly trained and ill-equipped men. The 1978 Annual Report of the Liberian Ministry of National Defense said that "The various militia regiments, in accordance with the law, held quarterly parades. ...Furthermore, the entire Regiments were out in full strength during burial occasions." By the time it was disbanded in 1980, the militia was considered to be completely ineffective as a military force. 

The armed forces' third arm, the Liberian National Coast Guard, was established in 1959. Accessed via GlobalSecurity.org The Coast Guard, throughout the Tubman period, was little more than a few sometimes unserviceable patrol craft manned by ill-trained personnel, though its training improved in the 1980s to the point where it was considered the best trained of the armed services. 

From 1952 onwards, Chiefs of Staff of the AFL included Major General Alexander Harper (195254), Lieutenant General Abraham Jackson (195460), Albert T. White (196465), Lieutenant General George T. Washington (late 1960s), Lieutenant General Henry Johnson (197074), Lieutenant General Franklin Smith, and Lieutenant General Henry Dubar (19801990). Ministry of National Defense (Liberia), Armed Forces Today, Vol. 2, No.1, February 11, 2008, p.63 

When William Tolbert replaced the long-serving William Tubman as President in 1971, he retired more than 400 aging soldiers. Amos Sawyer, The Emergence of Autocracy in Liberia: Tragedy and Challenge, Institute for Contemporary Studies, San Francisco, California, 1992, p.287, drawing on Martin Lowenkopf, Politics in Liberia: The Conservative Road to Development, 1976. Sawyer comments that "retired soldiers were replaced by young recruits from urban areas, many of whom were then poorly trained at the Tubman Military Academy. This development dramatically changed the character of the military in Liberia." (Samuel Doe was among this group.) Amos Sawyer also comments that "recruitment of such individuals for the military was part of Tolbert's efforts to replace aging, illiterate soldiers with younger, literate men who were capable of absorbing technical and professional training." Amos Sawyer, 1992, footnote 74 at p.375 

===Doe era===
President Samuel Doe with United States Secretary of Defense Caspar Weinberger during a visit to Washington DC in 1982
The AFL became involved in politics when seventeen soldiers launched a coup on April 12, 1980. The group was made up of Master Sergeant Samuel Doe, two staff sergeants, four sergeants, eight corporals, and two privates. Adebayo, 2002, p. 24 They found President Tolbert sleeping in his office in the Executive Mansion and there they killed him. While then-Sergeant Thomas Quiwonkpa led the plotters, it was the group led by Samuel Doe that found Tolbert in his office, and it was Doe, as a master sergeant the highest ranking of the group, who went on the radio the next day to announce the overthrow of the long-entrenched True Whig Party government. Doe became Head of State and co-chair of the new People's Redemption Council government. Quiwonkpa became commander of the army and the other co-chair of the PRC. (In the aftermath of the coup, the title of LNG Brigade commanding general was confusingly changed to commanding general of the AFL, reporting to the chief of staff, and it was this position that Quiwonkpa inherited.) Henry Dubar (who had helped recruit Doe personally years before) was promoted in one leap from captain to lieutenant general as Chief of Staff. From 1980 onward, Doe's systematic promotion of Krahn to sensitive posts in the government and military, began to drive deepening divisions within the AFL, among others with Quiwonkpa's Gio, and to hamper morale. 

"... Military discipline was an early casualty of the coup. The revolt had been an enlisted men's affair, and one of the first instructions broadcast over the radio had ordered soldiers not to obey their officers. Over four years later, according to observers, the reluctance of most officers to impose discipline had combined with the unwillingness of more than a few enlisted men to accept it." 

The launch of Doe's coup meant that Major William Jarbo, another soldier with political ambitions who was said to have excellent connections to U.S. security officials, had had his takeover plans forestalled. He tried to escape abroad but was hunted down and killed by the new government. The junta started to split in 1983, with Doe telling Quiwonkpa that he was planning to move Quiwonkpa from command of the army to a position as secretary-general of the People's Redemption Council. Unhappy with this proposed change, Quiwonkpa fled into exile in late 1983, along with his aide-de-camp Prince Johnson. 

In 1984 the AFL included the Liberian National Guard (LNG) Brigade and related units (6,300 men), and the Liberian National Coast Guard (about 450 men). The brigade, formed between 1964 and 1978, was based at the Barclay Training Center (BTC) in Monrovia, and was composed of six infantry battalions, a military engineer battalion (which circa 1974 under the command of Colonel Robert M. Blamo completed an airstrip at Belefania Town), 'Looking at the LNG Brigade,' Armed Forces Day Brochure, 197374, Ministry of National Defense (Liberia), via University of Liberia Library a field artillery battalion (the First Field Artillery Battalion, reportedly at Camp Naama in Bong County) and a support battalion. Three of the infantry unitsthe First Infantry Battalion, stationed at Camp Schieffelin, the Second Infantry Battalion at Camp Todee in northern Montserrado County, and the Sixth Infantry Battalion at Bomi Hillswere tactical elements designed to operate against hostile forces. The other battalions, the Third Infantry Battalion based at the Barclay Training Centre in Monrovia, the Fourth Infantry Battalion at Zwedru in Grand Gedeh County, and the Fifth Infantry Battalion at Gbarnga in Bong County served mostly as providers of personnel for non-military duties. Soldiers in these units were used extensively as policemen, customs and immigration officials, and as tax collectors. 

In the aftermath of the rigged elections of 1985, which Doe manipulated to solidify his power, Quiwonkpa returned from his U.S. exile to enter Liberia from Sierra Leone. On November 12, 1985 he entered Monrovia with a group of dissident soldiers, took over the national Liberia Broadcasting System radio station and announced that the 'National Patriotic Forces of Liberia' had seized power. Adekeye says that Quiwonkpa erred in 'fail to establish control over the country's communications system and resisted a frontal attack on the Executive Mansion.' Adebayo, 2002, p. 29 These mistakes allowed Doe the time to rally the Krahn-dominated Executive Mansion Guard and 1st Infantry Battalion from Camp Schiefflin to reestablished control. Quiwonkpa was captured, killed, and mutilated, his body being dismembered and parts eaten. In the aftermath of the attempted coup, purges took place in Monrovia and in Nimba County, Quiwonkpa's home, against those who had rejoiced after the coup announcement. As many as 1,500 people may have been killed. The AFL was purged of Gio soldiers.

Under Samuel Doe the Coast Guard was retitled the Liberian Navy in 1986 through the passage of The Liberian Navy Act of 1986. "Ellen Signs Anti-Corruption Act, Commissions Several Officials", The Inquirer (Monrovia), August 22, 2008 The Aviation Unit was founded in 1970 with the delivery of three Cessna U-17C light aircraft. An Aviation Unit aircraft crashed at Spriggs-Payne in 1984. Liberian Observer, Eviction Hangs Over 2,000 Wroto Town Dwellers, September 11, 2010 In 1985 it operated three fixed-wing aircraft from Spriggs Payne Airport in Monrovia, including Cessna 172s. Andrade, John (1982). Militair 1982. London: Aviation Press Limited. ISBN 0-907898-01-7, p.147 Their duties included reconnaissance and transport of light cargo and VIPs. The Aviation Unit was expanded in the 1980s with the delivery of more Cessna aircraft: three 172s, a 206, 207 and two single engined turboprop 208s.

The Liberian Air Force was established from the Aviation Unit by an Act of Legislature on August 12, 1987. Its statutory responsibilities were to: protect and defend the air space of the Republic of Liberia; protect lives and properties; provide air mobility for military and civil personnel; assist in search and rescue operations; undertake emergency operations; conduct reconnaissance patrols; participate in joint military operations and perform other duties as may be designated by the Ministry of Defense. The LAF was to be headed by a colonel in his capacity as Assistant Chief of Defense Staff for the Air Force and was mandated to do the following: to train personnel and develop doctrine; advise the Chief of Staff of the AFL on matters relating to the Air Force. 
In 1989 two refurbished DHC-4 Caribou, a single Piper Aztec light twin and three IAI Arava STOL twins were delivered.

===First Liberian Civil War===
Charles Taylor invaded the country at Butuo in Nimba County on Christmas Eve 1989 with a force of around 150 men, initiating the First Liberian Civil War. Doe responded by sending two AFL battalions to Nimba in December 1989  January 1990, Charles Hartung, 'Peacekeeping in Liberia: ECOMOG and the Struggle for Order,' Liberian Studies Journal, Volume XXX, No.2, 2005 under then-Colonel Hezekiah Bowen. Then Lieutenant General Hezekiah Bowen was later mentioned in the Abuja Accords of 1996. The Liberian government forces assumed that most of the Mano and Gio peoples in the Nimba region were supporting the rebels. They thus acted in a very brutal and scorched-earth fashion which quickly alienated the local people. Taylor's support rose rapidly, as the Mano and Gio flocked to his National Patriotic Front of Liberia seeking revenge. Many government soldiers deserted, some to join the NPFL. The inability of the AFL to make any headway was one of the reasons why Doe changed his field commander in the area five times in the first six months of the war. Field commanders apparently included Brigadier General Edward Smith. By May 1990 the AFL had been forced back to Gbarnga, still under the control of Bowen's troops, but they lost the town to a NPFL assault by the end of May 1990, at which time the NPFL also captured Buchanan on the coast. Adebajo, 2002, p.58. See also Hubard, pp.118125. The NPFL had now gathered an estimated 10,000 fighters while the AFL, splintering, could only summon 2,000. Adebajo, 2002, p.58 

The revolt reached Monrovia by July 1990, and General Dubar left the country for exile in the United States. In place of Dubar, Brigadier General Charles Julu, former commander of the Executive Mansion Guard Battalion, was appointed Chief of Staff. Two Liberian Coast Guard vessels were sunk in the battles for the city. The NPFL had been distributing weapons to Gio civilians after it arrived in Nimba, where many were very interested in taking their revenge on the government after Doe had punished Nimba country for its support of Quiwonkpa in 1983 and 1985. By July 1990 the government began to distribute weapons to civilians in turn, to Krahn and Mandingo who wished to protect themselves. These hastily enlisted civilians became known as '1990 soldiers.' A '1990 soldier' which the President had personally picked, Tailey Yonbu, led a massacre of refugees, mostly Gio and Mandingo civilians, on the night of July 29/30, 1990 at St. Peter's Lutheran Church in Sinkor, Monrovia. Some 600 were killed. Stephen Ellis, Mask of Anarchy, 2001, p.80 Because of the previous ethnic purges carried out by Doe's forces, the conflict took on characteristics of an ethnic pogrom. 

In August 1990 the Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS) despatched a peacekeeping force, ECOMOG, to Liberia. The force arrived at the Freeport of Monrovia on August 24, 1990, landing from Nigerian and Ghanaian vessels. By the time ECOMOG arrived, Prince Johnson's INPFL and Taylor's NPFL were fighting on the outside bounds of the port. Adebajo, 2002, p.75 A series of peacemaking conferences in regional capitals followed. There were meetings in Bamako in November 1990, Lome in January 1991, and Yamoussoukro in JuneOctober 1991. But the first seven peace conferences, including the Yamoussoukro I-IV processes and the Carter Center negotiation leading to the Cotonou Accords, failed due to lack of agreement between the warring factions. The NPFL launched an assault on Monrovia in 1992, which they named 'Operation Octopus.' The civil war lasted until the Abuja Accords of August 1996.

The AFL was confined to an enclave around the capital during the conflict, and did not play a significant part in the fighting. Elections in July 1997 finally brought Taylor to power. Under the accords, which led to a break in fighting in 1996 and the Liberian general election, 1997, ECOMOG was to retrain a new national army based on fair ethnic and geographical representation. See also IRIN, LIBERIA: Soldiers refuse to quit camp needed for new army, January 4, 2006, mirrored at GlobalSecurity.org Yet Taylor denied ECOMOG any role in the restructuring of the AFL, and the force eventually left Liberia by the end of 1998. Adebayo, 2002, pp. 233235 

During the 199099 period, Chiefs of Staff included Lieutenant Colonel Davis S. Brapoh, Lieutenant General Hezekiah Bowen (later Minister of Defense), Lieutenant General A.M.V. Doumuyah, and Lieutenant General Kalilu Abe Kromah, appointed during the interim rule of the Council of State in 1996, Kromah was a former police officer, and promoted again, like Dubar, in one leap to lieutenant general. He now appears to be in the United States. (http://www.felmausa.org/felmausa178.htm). who was chief of staff from May 1996 to April 1997. Following Kromah, Lieutenant General Prince C. Johnson was appointed, who died in October 1999 following a car accident. 

===Taylor regime===
Shortly after the induction of Taylor as elected president of Liberia in August 1997, the Ministry of National Defense determined that the strength of the AFL had risen during the war from 6,500 to 14,981 service members. To begin demobilization, the AFL Chief of Staff published Special Orders No. 1 on January 1, 1998, demobilizing and retiring 2,250 personnel. The demobilization process was delayed and badly managed, and only on April 22, 1998 did payments began to be issued to the demobilizing personnel, without prior explanation of what exactly the payments represented. Demonstrations and protests by the demobilized personnel eventually led to a riot in which three died on May 5, 1998. As a result, Taylor authorised the formation of a commission to submit recommendations on how the AFL should be reorganized. The commission, led by Blamoh Nelson, Director of the Cabinet, submitted its report on December 17, 1998, recommending a 6,000-strong armed forces (5,160 Army, 600 Navy, and 240 Air Force) but the proposal was never implemented. 

Instead Taylor ran down the Armed Forces, letting go 2,4002,600 former personnel, many of whom were Krahn brought in by former President Doe, in December 1997  January 1998, and building up instead the Anti-Terrorist Unit (ATU), the Special Operations Division of the Liberian National Police, and the Special Security Service. On November 19, 1999, Taylor named General Kpenkpah Konah as the new Chief of Staff of the AFL (where he would stay until 2006) and John Tarnue as head of the army. Tarnue was later implicated in a land dispute in 1999, while acting as AFL commander. The International Crisis Group writes that the AFL was reduced practically to the point of non-existence by Fall 2001, by which time a total of 4,000 personnel had been retired. The Second Liberian Civil War, originated in clashes in April 1999 but was not a major threat to Taylor until 200001. However on the government side the AFL played only a minor role; irregular ex National Patriotic Front of Liberia militias backed by more privileged Taylor partisans such as the Anti-Terrorist Unit saw most of the fighting. 

As a result of the Civil War, all aircraft, equipment, materiel, and facilities belonging to the Liberian Air Force were badly damaged, rendering the force inoperable. During the Civil War the Taylor government made a variety of different air support arrangements; a seemingly inoperable Mil Mi-2 and Mil Mi-8, one in Anti-Terrorist Unit markings, could be seen at Spriggs Payne Airport in central Monrovia in mid-2005, apparently a hangover from the war. Meanwhile during the Taylor era, the Navy consisted of a couple of small patrol craft. However, on shore, both late 1990s and 2005 sources indicate the Navy included the 2nd Naval District, Buchanan, the 3rd Naval District, Greenville, and the 4th Naval District, Harper. 

===Rebuilding the AFL===
President Ellen Johnson Sirleaf inspecting AFL soldiers on board USS Fort McHenry in 2008
Part 4 (Articles VI and VII) of the August 2003 Accra Comprehensive Peace Agreement (CPA) which ended the Second Liberian Civil War addressed security sector reform. Link to Accra Comprehensive Peace Agreement, August 18, 2003, reproduced by the United States Institute of Peace It declared that future recruits for the new AFL would be screened for their fitness for service as well as prior human rights violations, that the new force would be ethnically balanced and without political bias, and that the new force's mission would be to defend national sovereignty and "in extremis" respond to natural disasters. 

By March 1, 2005, over a year after the war ended, the United Nations Mission in Liberia (UNMIL) had disarmed and demobilized 103,018 people National Commission on Disarmament, Demobilization, Rehabilitation and Reintegration, DDRR Consolidated Report Phase (Status of Disarmament and Demobilization Activities as at January 16, 2005). 1,2 & 3, cited in Ebo, 2005. The UN Secretary-General's 6th Report on UNMIL, S/2005/177, dated March 17, 2005, paragraph 22, gives 101,495. who claimed to have fought for former president Charles Taylor or the two rebel groups, Liberians United for Reconciliation and Democracy (LURD) or the Movement for Democracy in Liberia (MODEL). That year most former AFL elements were concentrated at Camp Schiefflin. The previous AFL personnel, including those of the Navy and Air Force, were slowly retired with pensions obtained by the MND and international partners from a number of international donors. 

In 2005, the United States provided funding for DynCorp International and Pacific Architects & Engineers, private military contractors, to train a new 4,000-man Liberian military. See funding for 20072009 at http://www.state.gov/t/pm/64675.htm DynCorp was made responsible for individual training and PA&E unit training. In JuneJuly 2005 the projected force strength was reduced to 2000 men. DynCorp and the U.S. Embassy scrutinized the personnel for the new armed forces thoroughly. Recruits had to pass a literacy test, an aptitude test, a drug test and an HIV test, and their names and faces were put on posters which are distributed to try to make sure none have a history of war crimes or other human rights violations. A new batch of 500 screened personnel started to arrive at the Camp Ware base at VOA Careysburg, inland from Monrovia, for initial training in early November 2007, D. Webster Cassell, Liberia: New AFL Recruits Go Into Training, allAfrica.com, November 8, 2007 joining 608 others who had graduated earlier. The Analyst Newspaper, Liberia : AFL Regaining Shape, September 2007 (Nonfunctioning link removed). 

The Minister of Defense that President Ellen Johnson Sirleaf appointed in early 2006, Brownie Samukai, had a good public reputation. IRIN, LIBERIA: Sirleaf unveils first members of new peacetime government, January 17, 2006 
A U.S. Marine Corps officer speaks to AFL troops during a 2009 training exercise
There appears to be some lack of coordination, at least according to the Wall Street Journal, between the Ministry of National Defense and DynCorp, who is training the new army. The newspaper said in an August 2007 report:
Mr. Samukai also complains that he feels sidelined from the formation of an army that, as defense minister, he is supposed to oversee. Neither the State Department nor DynCorp will let him see the company's contract, for instance. And the U.S. insists that instead of talking directly to DynCorp managers, he go through Major Wyatt of the Office of Defense Cooperation at the U.S. Embassy in Monrovia on all matters related to the training. Michael M. Phillips, An Army unsuilled by past Wall Street Journal, August 14, 2007 

Whether well regarded or not, Samukai has been accused of misusing his power; there have been allegations that he has ordered soldiers to manhandle other senior Liberian government officialsthe Comptroller General of the Ministry of Finance in August 2008. The Inquirer (Monrovia), Liberia: Prince Johnson wants investigation, August 22, 2008 

On January 11, 2008 a total 485 soldiers graduated from Initial Entry Training class 08-01. The addition of this third class of soldiers, consisting of 468 men and 17 women, raised the total strength of the AFL from 639 to 1,124. International Crisis Group, Liberia: Uneven Progress in Security Sector Reform, Africa Report No. 148, January 13, 2009, p.13, and Lieutenant Colonel William C. Wyatt's blog, Monrovia Daily Monitor As the new Liberian force developed, UNMIL started winding down its initially 15,000 strong peacekeeping mission; by 2008 the force had been reduced to 11,000. Liberia: Govt pleads for UNMIL's full presence, February 22, 2008 

In the interim buildup period, President Johnson-Sirleaf decided that a Nigerian officer would act as the Command Officer-In-Charge of the new armed forces. Major General Suraj Alao Abdurrahman succeeded the previous incumbent, Lieutenant General Luka Yusuf, in early June 2007; Lieutenant General Yusuf had been posted home to Nigeria to become Chief of Army Staff. Charles B. Yates, Liberia: Army Gets New Commander, The Inquirer (Monrovia), June 11, 2007 See also AfriqueJet.com, Liberia gets new Nigerian Chief of Staff, 2009 Luka had succeeded the previous Liberian Chief of Staff, Kpenkpa Y. Konah, in 2006. In mid-July 2008, five reinstated AFL officers returned from the Nigerian Armed Forces Command and Staff College after training there. These officers include Lt Cols. Sekou S. Sheriff, Boakai B. Kamara, Aaron T. Johnson, Daniel K. Moore and Major Andrew J. Wleh. New Liberian, Five Reinstated AFL Officers Complete Senior Leadership Training in Nigeria, July 16, 2008 Subsequently Aaron T. Johnson was promoted to colonel and confirmed by the Liberian Senate as Deputy Chief of Staff of the AFL, immediately subordinate to General Abdurrahman. Ministry of National Defense (Liberia), 'Profile of AFL Deputy Chief of Staff (DCOS),' Armed Forces Today, Vol. 3, No. 1, February 11, 2009 A number of the current senior AFL officers have been drawn from the ranks of the previous 199394 Interim Government of National Unity paramilitary police force, the 'Black Berets.' Thomas Kai Toteh, Progressive Deception to create Black Berets and their trail of violence. Retrieved August 18, 2010 

Facility reconstruction has not been limited to VOA/Camp Ware and Schiefflin/EBK. The Chinese Government offered in 2006 to rebuild Camp Tubman in Gbarnga, AllAfrica, Liberia: Chinese to Build Camp Tubman, link verified April 2009, and AllAfrica, Liberia: GOL breaks ground for military barracks, July 2007 and the new facility was opened in April 2009. There is also a plan to rebuild Camp Todee in Todee District, upper Montserrado. 'Citizens of Todee Celebrate Road Rehabilitation and Development Initiatives Gifts from American People,' Monrovia Daily Observer, Wednesday, May 27, 2009, p.6b The Barclay Training Center (BTC) was handed back to the Government of Liberia on July 31, 2009 at a ceremony attended by the Minister for National Defense and the United States Ambassador after four years of management by DynCorp. The Informer (Monrovia), Barclay Training Center to be handed over to Defense Ministry, July 31, 2009 

In October 2009 a State Partnership Program relationship was begun between the AFL and the U.S. state of Michigan's Michigan National Guard. TSgt Dan Heaton (127th Wing), Multi-State Efforts Support West African Partner, Air Force Print News Today, April 12, 2010, and The Inquirer, Defense Minister hosts Michigan National Guard's Adjutant General, JuneJuly 2011 Of the other large number of security agencies, plans exist as of mid-2008 at least to dissolve the Ministry of National Security, the National Bureau of Investigation and the Drug Enforcement Agency. The 20092010 budget appears to indicate however that this consolidation has not taken place.

In 2013, the AFL deployed a platoon as part of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali, marking the first time that the AFL had operated abroad since the United Nations Operation in the Congo in the early 1960s. http://allafrica.com/stories/201306210920.html Initially under Nigerian command, the AFL platoon came under Togo Contingent Command when Nigeria withdrew from the mission. Despite some initial logistical problems the platoon performed admirably, performing patrols and VIP escort duties. The platoon is scheduled to be withdrawn to Liberia by the end of 2013.

==Organization==
Major Andrew Wleh, commander, AFL Armed Forces Training Command (left), discusses marksmanship training with a U.S. soldier (right) whilst on a visit to the United States.
The Liberian ground forces currently consist of two infantry battalions and supporting units. The 1st Battalion, 23rd Infantry Brigade, was formed on August 29, 2008, at the Barclay Training Center in Monrovia, Petty Officer 1st Class Daniel P. Lapierre, Liberia's President Johnson-Sirleaf, U.S. General Ward Attend Historic Activation of Liberian Military Unit, United States Africa Command. Retrieved August 3, 2010 and the 2nd Battalion, 23rd Infantry Brigade in December that year. Both battalions are currently based at the former Camp Schiefflin, which has now been renamed the Edward Binyah Kesselly Barracks, often known simply as 'EBK Barracks.' Colin Robinson, Military or hybrid solutions for border patrolling in Liberia, Comments on Africa No. 13, Conflict, Security, and Development Group, King's College London, March 2012. As a result of the concentration of troops at EBK, the camp is overcrowded, and disturbances among the soldiers have occurred. Rebecca Murray, New Army Faces Greatest Challenge, Inter Press Service, December 26, 2009 As of mid-2009, the Ministry of Defense is attempting to alleviate the problem by relocating some personnel to Camp Tubman in Gbarnga. Jefferson Massah, Liberia: UNMIL Provides training for 60 AFL Military Engineers, The Informer, September 16, 2009 

The two battalions and supporting units went through training and preparation for an assessment exercise, a modified US Army Readiness Training Evaluation Program (ARTEP), United States Marine Corps, Diggin' In, March 2009 which was held in late 2009. When declared operational, the 23rd Infantry Brigade was planned to be commanded by a colonel with a headquarters of 113 personnel. Supporting units were to include a band platoon (40 members), engineer company (220 strong), Brigade Training Unit (162 strong, now retitled the Armed Forces Training Command, located at Camp Ware under Major Wleh), (The Bayonet) and a military police company (105 strong). , pages 3637 
The force operates according to slightly modified United States Army practices, and uses U.S. doctrine. 

"..The first battalion started the United States Army Training and Evaluation Programme, which it will complete in September , while the second battalion will complete the programme in December . At that time, the United States contractors currently training and equipping the force will hand over to the Ministry of National Defense, which will assume responsibility for training and standing up the new army. The United States has indicated that it plans to assign as many as 60 United States serving military personnel to continue mentoring the Armed Forces of Liberia, beginning in January 2010." UN Secretary-General's Report on UNMIL, released 10 August 2009 
Major General Suraj Abdurrahman, Command Officer-in-Charge of the AFL, hands over a new Guidon to the reactivated Coast Guard.
As of December 2010, a Logistics Command is being established within the AFL, taking the same name as a pre-Civil War AFL formation. Photo 2 of 9 covering senior officials visit: United States Marine Brig. Gen. Paul W. Brier, commander, U.S. Marine Forces Africa, and Michelle Stefanick, foreign policy advisor, U.S. Marine Forces Africa, learn about the progress of Operation ONWARD LIBERTY. http://www.dvidshub.net/image/319273/marine-forces-africa-commander-visits-liberia-gauges-progress-onward-liberty-mentorship. Retrieved December 2, 2010. 

The Coast Guard was reactivated on the 53rd Armed Forces Day on February 11, 2010, with an initial strength of 40 personnel who had been trained in the United States. Ellen Johnson Sirleaf, President's Annual Message, January 25, 2010 A United States Coast Guard officer is now serving at the U.S. Embassy in Monrovia supporting efforts to reestablish the Liberian Coast Guard. Chief Petty Officer Jason Morris, APS, Seabees Bolster Liberia's Coast Guard, Africa Partnership Station Public Affairs, October 20, 2009 

A detachment from SeaBee Naval Mobile Construction Battalion 7, based at Naval Station Rota, Spain, constructed a United States Africa Command-funded boat ramp and concrete perimeter wall for the Coast Guard, which was handed over in December 2010. NMCB 7 Liberia Detachment Receives Commendation, May 30, 2010. Retrieved June 2010, and Liberian Coast Guard Ready for 24/7 Ops, December 29, 2010. Retrieved February 21, 2011 In February 2011, the United States turned over two donated USCG Defender class boats to the Coast Guard. http://www.liberianobserver.com/node/10592 US Equip AFL with 2 Boats 

The Liberian Air Force (LAF) was formally dissolved in 2005 as part of the armed forces demobilization programme, though it had effectively ceased to exist during the civil war. Currently, only the United Nations Mission in Liberia (UNMIL) operates military aircraft in Liberia, 2006/2007 Budget, Republic of Liberia. Retrieved December 2008  January 2009. (The link, which now does not work, was at http://www.mofliberia.org/budget0607.xls.) Mi-8s and Mi-24s based at Roberts International Airport. 

==References==

==Bibliography==
*Aboagye, Festus B, and Rupiya, Dr Martin R, (2005). Enhancing post-Conflict Democratic Governance through effective Security Sector Reform in Liberia, Institute for Security Studies, Pretoria, RSA, (Chapter 11 of larger book)
*
*
*Ebo, Adedeji, (2005). The Challenges And Opportunities Of Security Sector Reform in post-conflict Liberia, Geneva Center for the Democratic Control of Armed Forces,
*Ellis, Stephen (2001). The Mask of Anarchy. London: Hurst and Company. ISBN 1-85065-417-4.
*International Crisis Group, Liberia: Uneven Progress in Security Sector Reform, Africa Report No. 148, January 13, 2009
*International Crisis Group, Liberia: Staying Focused, Africa Report No. 36, January 13, 2006
*
*International Institute for Strategic Studies, Adelphi Papers 27 (1967) and 67 (1970), The Armed Forces of African States
*Nelson, Harold D., ed., (September 1984). Liberia: A Country Study, Area Handbook Series, U.S. Government Printing Office, Washington, D.C.
*Roberts T.D., et al., (1964). US Army Area Handbook Liberia, Foreign Area Studies Division, American University, Department of the Army Pamphlet 550-38
*Colin Robinson, Military or hybrid solutions for border patrolling in Liberia, Comments on Africa No. 13, Conflict, Security, and Development Group, King's College London, March 2012
*Samukai, Brownie J., (February 17, 2004). Armed Forces Of Liberia: Reality Check For A New Military With A Redefined Constitutional Mission,
*
*United Nations Mission in Liberia, United Nations Secretary-General's Report on UNMIL, released August 10, 2009

==Further reading==

*Bekoe, Dorina, and Parajon, Christina, Security Sector Reform in Liberia: Domestic Considerations and the Way Forward, United States Institute of Peace, April 2007
*Global Witness, Taylor-made: The Pivotal Role of Liberia's Forests and Flag of Convenience in Regional Conflict, September 2001
*McFate, Sean, Military Review, JulyAugust 2007.



[[Foreign relations of Liberia]]

Liberian foreign relations were traditionally stable and cordial throughout much of the 19th and 20th centuries. During the 1990s, Charles Taylor's presidency and the First and Second Liberian Civil Wars underscored Liberian relations with the Western world, the People's Republic of China, and its neighboring countries in Western Africa. Stabilization in the 21st century brought a return to cordial relations with neighboring countries and much of the Western world. Liberia holds diplomatic relations with many western nations, as well as Libya, Cuba, and the People's Republic of China.

==Liberian-African Relations==
The First Liberian Civil War, instigated by Charles Taylor and the National Patriotic Front of Liberia (NPFL) on December 24, 1989, eventually spread to neighboring Sierra Leone in 1991 when dissidents of the Revolutionary United Front (RUF), led by Foday Sankoh, began using Liberia as a staging ground for NPFL backed military assaults on border towns in Sierra Leone. Guinea: Refugees Still at Risk, Human Rights Watch, Vol. 13, No. 5 (A) Yekutiel Gershoni. War without End and End to a War: The Prolonged Wars in Liberia and Sierra Leone, African Studies Review, Vol. 40, No. 3 (December, 1997), pp. 55-57 Blood diamonds: Timeline of conflict, CNN, January 18, 2001 

By 1992, 120,000 people had fled from Sierra Leone to Guinea due to the RUF's practice of targeting civilians. In 2001, Liberian forces along with the RUF began attacking and burning refugee camps and Guinean villages along the border. In an inflammatory speech the Guinean president Lansana Cont, blamed the refugees for the border destabilization and alleged that the vast majority of refugees were rebels. He called for the Guinean population to defend its nation.
This call precipitated attacks, beatings, rapes, and abductions of refugees by Guinean police and military forces. This reversal of Guinea's previously open policy towards refugees, further escalated the refugee crisis as refugees attempted to cross back through RUF territory. By 2002, the United Nations estimated that three million people, or one in five people of the Mano River Union countries, were displaced. United Nations Consolidated Inter-Agency Appeal for West Africa, 2001, U.N. Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA), March 23, 2001, section 2 

Neighboring Guinea and Sierra Leone have accused Liberia of backing rebels who have devastated their countries. 

==United States==

U.S. relations with Liberia date back to 1819 when the US Congress appropriated $100,000 for the establishment of Liberia. State Department Profile of Liberia After official US recognition of Liberia in 1862, the two nations shared very close ties until strains in the 1970s due to Liberia's establishment of diplomatic relations with the Soviet Union and other Eastern Bloc countries. http://www.pbs.org/wgbh/globalconnections/liberia/timeline/time4.html 

During the 1980s, the United States forged especially close ties with Liberia as part of a Cold War effort to suppress socialist and Marxist movements in Africa. Liberia received between $500 million and $1.3 billion during the 1980s from the United States government. Monrovia - US Embassy, http://globalsecurity.org, Retrieved October 2, 2006 

The rise of Charles Taylor's government, the Liberian Civil War, regional instability and human rights abuses interrupted the previously close relations between Liberia and the United States. The United States cut direct financial and military aid to the Liberian government, withdrew Peace Corps operations, imposed a travel ban on senior Liberian Government officials, and frequently criticized Charles Taylor's government. U.S. offers U.N. resolution on Liberia, CNN, Friday, August 1, 2003 Due to intense pressure from the international community and the United States, Charles Taylor resigned his office on August 11, 2003. 

The resignation and exile of Charles Taylor in 2003 brought changes in diplomatic ties between the United States and Liberia. The United States proposed a United Nations Security Council draft resolution to authorize the deployment of a multi-national stabilization force, Liberia's Historic Ties to America, Zachary K. Johnson, May 2005 Taylor sets date to step down, CNN, August 2, 2003 and 200 marines as well as warships were sent to Monrovia's airport to support the peace-keeping effort. Welcome for US Liberia deployment, BBC News, 26 July 2003 The United States committed $1.16 billion to Liberia between 2004 and 2006. Liberian president invites rebels into government, CNN, August 12, 2003 In 2009, A 17.5 million dollar contract to support elections was offered to Liberia with International Foundation for Electoral Systems as the conduit. This money is meant to support the Presidential election of 2011 and the General Election of 2014. 

==People's Republic of China==
 
Relations between the People's Republic of China (PRC) and Liberia have been broken and reestablished several times since February 17, 1977, when diplomatic relations between the PRC and Liberia were first formed. Taiwan as an Emerging Foreign Aid Donor: Developments, Problems, and Prospects, Gerald Chan; Pacific Affairs, Vol. 70, 1997 The PRC broke off relations with Liberia on October 10, 1989 in response to Liberia's recognition of the Republic of China (Taiwan). Taiwan Edges Out China for Liberia's Diplomatic Recognition, Global News No. GL970-25, February 21, 1997 Taiwan had offered $200 million in aid to Liberia for education and infrastructure in exchange for this recognition. The PRC reestablished relations with Liberia on August 10, 1993 and opened an embassy in Monrovia, making Liberia one of the few nations with established diplomatic ties to both the PRC and ROC. Cross-Strait Scramble for Africa, A Hidden Agenda in China-Africa Cooperation Forum, Harvard Asia Quarterly, Volume V, No. 2. Spring 2001 In 1997, Charles Taylor's government proclaimed to recognize "two Chinas" and the PRC subsequently severed diplomatic relations. ' China and Liberia, Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the People's Republic of China, August 8, 2003 

Liberia dropped diplomatic relations with the ROC on October 12, 2003 and reestablished ties with the People's Republic of China. http://www.china-un.org/eng/xw/t29261.htm This move was seen largely as a result of the PRC's lobbying in the UN and plans to deploy a peacekeeping force in Liberia. Taiwan plays down Liberia blow, BBC News13 October 2003 

==India==

Indian-Liberian relations have traditionally been strong and cordial with Liberia's full-fledged support for Indias stand on Kashmir and Indias aspiration for permanent membership on the United Nations Security Council. In recent years, both nations have developed close and extensive cooperation in trade, military and strategic fields.

Amidst India's growing role in Liberia, the Liberian Minister of Mines and Energy, Dr. Eugene Shannon visited India in October 2005 to participate in the Confederation of Indian Industry-Africa Conclave. In 2008, the President of Liberia Ellen Johnson Sirleaf was invited to visit India. Major items of Indian exports include engineering goods, pharmaceuticals, two wheelers, transportation equipment, steel and plastic products. Major items of imports are gold, diamonds, timber and metal scrap. Following lifting of United Nations sanctions, timber concessions have been awarded to Indian firms. Overall, Indian investments in Liberia have been increased from US$450 million in 2005 to an estimated $2 billion in 2009.

==Namibia==
LiberiaNamibia relations refers to the current and historical relationship between Liberia and Namibia.

In 1960, Liberia and Ethiopia brought litigation against apartheid South Africa in the International Court of Justice to end its illegal occupation of Namibia. Liberia, Namibia Sign Agreement aimed at Strengthening Bilateral Relations NewLiberian.com, 15 July 2008 As part of Liberia's support for Namibia's liberation struggle, many Namibian students received Liberian passports which helped them study abroad.

As of July 2008, a total of 5,900 Namibia Defence Force troops had been rotated through Liberia as part of the United Nations Mission in Liberia. Liberia and Namibia to trade more The Namibian, 15 July 2008 Namibia maintained a battalion of about 800 personnel in Grand Cape Mount county for several years, for most of the period part of UNMIL Sector 2, headquartered at Tubmanburg. In May 2005, Namibian troops were accused of sexual exploitation of young girls and women; three Namibian soldiers were sent home from the force after a United Nations investigation found them guilty of "engaging in sexual activity with civilians", which is against United Nations rules for peacekeepers. NDF to probe Liberia sex scandal The Namibian, 26 May 2005 

==Russia==
Liberia and Russia resumed bilateral relations in March 2010 and cited a recent exploration of mine by a Russian company as a sign of future trade relations. Russia And Italy Renew Ties With Liberia Government of Liberia, 17 March 2010 

==Diplomatic Agreements==
Liberia is a founding member of the United Nations (see Permanent Representative of Liberia to the United Nations) and its specialized agencies and is a member of the Organization of African Unity (OAU), Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS), African Development Bank (ADB), Mano River Union (MRU) and the Non-Aligned Movement. Liberia is also a member of the International Criminal Court with a Bilateral Immunity Agreement of protection for the US-military (as covered under Article 98). CIA Factbook, Retrieved October 2, 2006 

==See also==
*List of diplomatic missions in Liberia
*List of diplomatic missions of Liberia

==References==

 

[[Geography of Libya]]

Map of Libya with major cities and settlements
 
Topography of Libya

Libya is fourth in size among the countries of Africa and seventeenth among the countries of the world. Its coastline lies between Egypt and Tunisia. Although the oil discoveries of the 1960s have brought it immense petroleum wealth, at the time of its independence it was an extremely poor desert state whose only important physical asset appeared to be its strategic location at the midpoint of Africa's northern rim. It lay within easy reach of the major European nations and linked the Arab countries of North Africa with those of the Middle East, facts that throughout history had made its urban centres bustling crossroads rather than isolated backwaters without external social influences. Consequently, an immense social gap developed between the cities, cosmopolitan and peopled largely by foreigners, and the desert hinterland, where tribal chieftains ruled in isolation and where social change was minimal.

==Geographical summary==
The Mediterranean coast and the Sahara Desert are the country's most prominent natural features. There are several highlands but no true mountain ranges except in the largely empty southern desert near the Chadian border, where the Tibesti Massif rises to over 2,200 metres. A relatively narrow coastal strip and highland steppes immediately south of it are the most productive agricultural regions. Still farther south a pastoral zone of sparse grassland gives way to the vast Sahara Desert, a barren wasteland of rocky plateaus and sand. It supports minimal human habitation, and agriculture is possible only in a few scattered oases.

Between the productive lowland agricultural zones lies the Gulf of Sidra, where along the coast a stretch of 500 km of wasteland desert extends northward to the sea. This barren zone, known as the Sirtica, has great historical significance. To its west, the area known as Tripolitania has characteristics and a history similar to those of nearby Tunisia, Algeria, and Morocco. It is considered with these states to constitute a supranational region called the Maghrib. To the east, the area known historically as Cyrenaica has been closely associated with the Arab states of the Middle East. In this sense, the Sirtica marks the dividing point between the Maghrib and the Mashriq.

Along the shore of Tripolitania for more than 300 km, coastal oases alternate with sandy areas and lagoons. Inland from these lies the Jifarah Plain, a triangular area of some 15,000 square km. About 120 km inland the plain terminates in an escarpment that rises to form the Nafusa Mountains, with elevations of up to 1,000 metres, which is the northern edge of the Tripolitanian Plateau. Barich, B. E.; Garcea, E. A.A. and Giraudi, C. (2006) "Between the Mediterranean and the Sahara: Geoarchaeological reconnaissance in the Jebel Gharbi, Libya" Antiquity 80(309): pp. 567582 

In Cyrenaica there are fewer coastal oases, and the Marj Plain  the lowland area corresponding to the Jifarah Plain of Tripolitania  covers a much smaller area. The lowlands form a crescent about 210 km long between Benghazi and Derna and extend inland a maximum of 50 km. Elsewhere along the Cyrenaican coast, the precipice of an arid plateau reaches to the sea. Behind the Marj Plain, the terrain rises abruptly to form Jabal al Akhdar (Green Mountain), so called because of its leafy cover of pine, juniper, cypress, and wild olive. It is a limestone plateau with maximum altitudes of about 900 metres. From Jabal al Akhdar, Cyrenaica extends southward across a barren grazing belt that gives way to the Sahara Desert, which extends still farther southwest across the Chadian frontier. Unlike Cyrenaica, Tripolitania does not extend southward into the desert. The southwestern desert, known as Fezzan, was administered separately during both the Italian regime and the federal period of the Libyan monarchy. In 1969 the revolutionary government officially changed the regional designation of Tripolitania to Western Libya, of Cyrenaica to Eastern Libya, and of Fezzan to Southern Libya; however, the old names were intimately associated with the history of the area, and during the 1970s they continued to be used frequently. Cyrenaica comprises 51%, Fezzan 33%, and Tripolitania 16% of the country's area.

Before Libya achieved independence, its name was seldom used other than as a somewhat imprecise geographical expression. The people preferred to be referred to as natives of one of the three constituent regions. The separateness of the regions is much more than simply geographical and political, for they have evolved largely as different socioeconomic entities  each with a culture, social structure, and values different from the others. Cyrenaica became Arabized at a somewhat earlier date than Tripolitania, and Beduin tribes dominated it. The residual strain of the indigenous Berber inhabitants, however, still remains in Tripolitania. Fezzan has remained a kind of North African outback, its oases peopled largely by minority ethnic groups.

The border between Tripolitania and Tunisia is subject to countless crossings by legal and illegal migrants. No natural frontier marks the border, and the ethnic composition, language, value systems, and traditions of the two peoples are nearly identical. The Cyrenaica region is contiguous with Egypt, and here, too, the border is not naturally defined; illegal as well as legal crossings are frequent. In contrast, Fezzan's borders with Algeria, Niger, and Chad are seldom crossed because of the almost total emptiness of the desert countryside.

Other factors, too, such as the traditional forms of land tenure, have varied in the different regions. In the 1980s their degrees of separateness were still sufficiently pronounced to represent a significant obstacle to efforts toward achieving a fully unified Libya.

==Area and boundaries==
Dust storm over the Tripolitania region of Libya. Over 90% of the country is desert.
Area:
total:
1 759 540 km
land:
1 759 540 km
water:
0 km

Area - comparative:
Libya is the fourth largest country in Africa, seven times the size of the United Kingdom, and slightly larger than Alaska. Slightly smaller than Nunavut, Canada

Land boundaries:
total:
4 348 km
border countries:
Algeria 982 km, Chad 1 055 km, Egypt 1 115 km, Niger 354 km, Sudan 383 km, Tunisia 459 km

Coastline:
1 770 km

Maritime claims:
territorial sea:
12 nmi
note:
Gulf of Sidra closing line  32 degrees, 30 minutes north.
exclusive fishing zone:
62 nmi

==Climate and hydrology==
Wan Caza sand dunes in the Sahara desert region of Fezzan
Al Akdhar.jpg|thumb|The Jabal Al Akdhar area. Annual rainfall averages at between 400 and. Federal Research Division of the Library of Congress, (1987), [http://lcweb2.loc.gov/cgi-bin/query/r?frd/cstdy:@field(DOCID+ly0046) "Climate & Hydrology of Libya", U.S. Library of Congress. Retrieved July 15, 2006. ]]
Snow in Bayda, Libya's third largest city
Coastline of Benghazi in the Cyrenaica, Libya's east. Libya has the longest Mediterranean coastline among African nations with mostly unspoilt beaches.
Within Libya as many as five different climatic zones have been recognized, but the dominant climatic influences are Mediterranean and Saharan. In most of the coastal lowland, the climate is Mediterranean, with warm summers and mild winters. Rainfall is scanty. The weather is cooler in the highlands, and frosts occur at maximum elevations. In the desert interior the climate has very hot summers and extreme diurnal temperature ranges. The highest official temperature ever recorded was on 13 September 1922 at 'Aziziya, Libya, NASA but that reading is queried.

Less than 2% of the national territory receives enough rainfall for settled agriculture, the heaviest precipitation occurring in the Jabal al Akhdar zone of Cyrenaica, where annual rainfall of 400 to is recorded. All other areas of the country receive less than 400 mm, and in the Sahara 50 mm or less occurs. Rainfall is often erratic, and a pronounced drought may extend over two seasons. For example, epic floods in 1945 left Tripoli underwater for several days, but two years later an unprecedentedly severe drought caused the loss of thousands of head of cattle.

Deficiency in rainfall is reflected in an absence of permanent rivers or streams, and the approximately twenty perennial lakes are brackish or salty. In 1987 these circumstances severely limited the country's agricultural potential as a basis for the sound and varied economy Gaddafi sought to establish. The allocation of limited water is considered of sufficient importance to warrant the existence of the Secretariat of Dams and Water Resources, and damaging a source of water can be punished by a heavy fine or imprisonment.

The government has constructed a network of dams in wadis, dry watercourses that become torrents after heavy rains. These dams are used both as water reservoirs and for flood and erosion control. The wadis are heavily settled because soil in their bottoms is often suitable for agriculture, and the high water table in their vicinity makes them logical locations for digging wells. In many wadis, however, the water table is declining at an alarming rate, particularly in areas of intensive agriculture and near urban centers. The government has expressed concern over this problem and because of it has diverted water development projects, particularly around Tripoli, to localities where the demand on underground water resources is less intense. It has also undertaken extensive reforestation projects.

There are also numerous springs, those best suited for future development occurring along the scarp faces of the Jabal Nafusah and the Jabal al Akhdar. The most talked-about of the water resources, however, are the great subterranean aquifers of the desert. The best known of these lies beneath Kufra Oasis in southeastern Cyrenaica, but an aquifer with even greater reputed capacity is located near the oasis community of Sabha in the southwestern desert. In the late 1970s, wells were drilled at Kufra and at Sabha as part of a major agricultural development effort. An even larger undertaking is the so-called Great Manmade River, initiated in 1984. It is intended to tap the tremendous aquifers of the Kufra, Sarir, and Sabha oases and to carry the resulting water to the Mediterranean coast for use in irrigation and industrial projects.

==Terrain and land use==
Terrain:
mostly barren, flat to undulating plains, plateaus, depressions

Elevation extremes:
lowest point:
Sabkhat Ghuzayyil -47 m
highest point:
Bikku Bitti 2 267 m

Natural resources:
petroleum, natural gas, gypsum

Land use:
arable land:
0.99%
permanent crops:
0.19%
other:
98.82% (2011)

Irrigated land:
4 700 km (2003)

Total renewable water resources:
0.7 0.7 km3 (2011)

==Environmental concerns==
Natural hazards:
hot, dry, dust-laden ghibli is a southern wind lasting one to four days in spring and fall; dust storms, sandstorms

Environment - current issues:
desertification; very limited natural fresh water resources; the Great Manmade River Project, the largest water development scheme in the world, is being built to bring water from large aquifers under the Sahara to coastal cities

Environment - international agreements:
party to:
Biodiversity, Climate Change, Climate Change-Kyoto Protocol Desertification, Endangered Species, Hazardous Wastes, Marine Dumping, Ozone Layer Protection, Ship Pollution, Wetlands
signed, but not ratified:
Law of the Sea

== Extreme points ==
This is a list of the extreme points of Libya, the points that are farther north, south, east or west than any other location.

* Northernmost point  Ras Ajdir at the point where the border with Tunisia enters the Mediterranean Sea, Nuqat al Khams District
* Easternmost point  Marsa er Ramla at the point where the border with Egypt enters the Mediterranean Sea, Butnan District
* Southernmost point - the tripoint with Chad and Sudan, Kufra District
* Westernmost point - unnamed point on the border with Algeria immediately east of Ghadames, Nalut District

==See also==
*Cyrenaica
*Fezzan
*List of cities in Libya
*Tripolitania
*Transliteration of Libyan placenames

==Notes==
 

==References==
*

==External links==
*About Libya | Libya Connected

 

[[Demographics of Libya]]

Demographics of Libya include population density, ethnicity, education level, health of the populace, economic status, religious affiliations and other aspects of the Libyan population.

No complete population or vital statistics registration exists in Libya. The estimates in this article are from the 2010 Revision of the World Population Prospects which was prepared by the Population Division of the Department of Economic and Social Affairs of the United Nations Secretariat, unless otherwise indicated. World Population Prospects: The 2010 Revision 
Demographics of Libya, Data of FAO, year 2006; Number of inhabitants in thousands. to see the latest information, please visit this official site: http://www.gait.gov.ly/info/info2.htm

==Population==
Population pyramid for Libya in 2011.
Libyan young men in Bayda. In 2010, about 30 % of the population was under the age of 15.1.
Libya has a small population residing in a large land area. Population density is about 50 persons per km (130/sq. mi.) in the two northern regions of Tripolitania and Cyrenaica, but falls to less than one person per km (2.7/sq. mi.) elsewhere. Ninety percent of the people live in less than 10% of the area, primarily along the coast. About 88% of the population is urban, mostly concentrated in the four largest cities, Tripoli, Benghazi, Misrata and Bayda. Thirty percent of the population is estimated to be under the age of 15, but this proportion has decreased considerably during the past decades.

 Total population (x 1000) Population aged 014 (%) Population aged 1564 (%) Population aged 65+ (%) 
 1950 6 029 41.9 53.4 4.7 
 1955 6 126 43.0 52.7 4.3 
 1960 6 349 43.3 52.7 4.0 
 1965 6 623 43.4 53.0 3.6 
 1970 6 994 45.2 52.1 2.7 
 1975 7 066 46.5 51.3 2.2 
 1980 7 193 47.0 50.7 2.2 
 1985 7 750 47.3 50.5 2.3 
 1990 7 834 43.5 53.9 2.6 
 1995 7 975 38.3 58.8 2.9 
 2000 8 231 32.4 64.2 3.4 
 2005 8 970 30.6 65.6 3.8 
 2010 9 655 30.4 65.3 4.3 

===Population census===
Eight population censuses have been carried out in Libya, the first in 1931 and the most recent one in 2006. B.R. Mitchell. International historical statistics: Africa, Asia & Oceania 1750-2000. United nations. Demographic Yearbooks 1948-2008 The population sixfolded between 1931 and 2006.

Year Males (thousands) Females (thousands) Total population (thousands) Average annual growth rate (%) 
 1931 704 
 1936 463 386 849 3.8 
 1954 564 524 1,089 1.4 
 1964 (July 31) 813 751 1,564 3.7 
 1973 (July 31) 1,192 1,057 2,249 4.1 
 1984 (July 31) 1,954 1,689 3,643 4.5 
 1995 (August 11) 2,237 2,168 4,405 1.7 
 2006 (April 15) 2,934 2,723 5,658 2.3 

==Vital statistics==
During the past 60 years the demographic situation of Libya changed considerably. Since the 1950s, life expectancy increased steadily and the infant mortality rates decreased. As the fertility rates remained high until the 1980s (the number of births tripled between 195055 and 198085), population growth was very high for three decades. However, after 1985 a fast decrease in fertility was observed from over 7 children per woman in the beginning of the 1980s to less than 3 in 2005-2010. Because of this decrease in fertility the population growth slowed down and also the proportion of Libyans under the age of 15 decreased from 47% in 1985 to 30% in 2010.

===Births and Deaths===

 Period Births Deaths Difference CBR* CDR* NC* IMR* TFR* 
 19501955 52.000 24.000 28.000 48,0 22,5 25,5 185 6,87 
 19551960 60.000 25.000 35.000 48,5 19,9 28,6 170 6,97 
 19601965 73.000 27.000 46.000 49,0 18,3 30,7 150 7,18 
 19651970 90.000 30.000 60.000 49,5 16,8 32,7 125 7,48 
 19701975 109.000 33.000 76.000 49,0 14,8 34,2 105 7,59 
 19751980 131.000 35.000 96.000 47,3 12,7 34,6 68 7,38 
 19801985 158.000 38.000 120.000 45,6 10,9 34,7 50 7,18 
 19851990 123.000 22.000 101.000 29,9 5,3 24,6 38,0 5,65 
 19901995 113.000 20.000 93.000 24,7 4,5 20,2 28,3 4,10 
 19952000 115.000 20.000 95.000 23,0 4,0 19,0 20,5 3,25 
 20002005 134.000 22.000 112.000 24,3 4,0 20,3 17,7 3,00 
 20052010 145.000 24.000 121.000 24,0 4,0 20,0 15,0 2,72 
 

===Life expectancy at birth===
* 1950-1955: 42.85 years
* 1955-1960: 45.4 years
* 1960-1965: 48.1 years
* 1965-1970: 50.5 years 
* 1970-1975: 52.8 years
* 1975-1980: 56.45 years
* 1980-1985: 60.2 years
* 1985-1990: 63.5 years
* 1990-1995: 65.85 years
* 1995-2000: 67.2 years 
* 2000-2005: 68.8 years 
* 2005-2010: 69.9 years

== CIA World Factbook demographic statistics ==
The following demographic statistics are from the CIA World Factbook, unless otherwise indicated. CIA - The World Factbook -- Libya 

===Vital Statistics===

Population
:5,613,380 (July 2012 est.)

Age structure
:0-14 years: 27.7% (male 795,748/ female 759,806)
:15-64 years: 68.4% (male 2,006,059/ female 1,834,119)
:65 years and over: 3.9% (male 111,144/ female 106,504) (2012 est.)

Median age
:total: 24.8 years
:male: 24.8 years
:female: 24.7 years (2011 est.)

Population growth rate
:2.007% (2012 est.)

Birth rate
:17.5 births/1,000 population (2012 est.)

Death rate
:4.9 deaths/1,000 population (July 2012 est.)

Net migration rate
:0 migrant(s)/1,000 population (2012 est.)

Total fertility rate
:3.71 children born/woman (2000 est.)
:3.01 children born/woman (2010 est.)
:2.12 children born/woman (2012 est.)

Urbanization
:urban population: 78% of total population (2010)
:rate of urbanization: 2.1% annual rate of change (2010-15 est.)

Sex ratio
:at birth: 1.05 male(s)/female
:under 15 years: 1.04 male(s)/female
:15-64 years: 1.06 male(s)/female
:65 years and over: 0.96 male(s)/female
:total population: 1.05 male(s)/female (2012 est.)

Infant mortality rate
:total: 12.7 deaths/1,000 live births
:male: 13.7 deaths/1,000 live births
:female: 11.6 deaths/1,000 live births (2012 est.)

Life expectancy at birth
:total population: 77.83 years
:male: 75.5 years
:female: 80.27 years (2012 data)

==Ethnic and tribal groups==
Ethnic composition of the Libyan population in 1974 (CIA map)

===Ethnic groups===
The native population of Libya is primarily Berber or a mixture of Arab-Berber ethnicities, with a small minority of Berber-speaking tribal groups concentrated in northwest part of Tripolitania, Tuareg and Toubou tribes can be found in southern Libya, which are nomadic or semi-nomadic. Most of the Libyans claim descent from the Bedouin Arab tribes of the Banu Hilal and the Banu Sulaym, who invaded the Maghreb in the 11th century. There is also some Punic admixture, and a curious traditional element from the Romanized Punics such as the Roman toga can be seen in Tripoli's people and was used by Muammar Gaddafi himself.

In the west of the country, there are some Tuareg nomads, mobile across the Libyan-Algerian border. Tuaregs are also scattered over Algeria, Mali, Niger and Burkina Faso.

In the southeast, there are small populations of the Nilo-Saharan Toubou (Tibbu), although they occupy between a quarter and a third of the country and who also inhabit Niger and Chad.

Among foreign residents, the largest groups are from other African nations, including citizens of other North African nations (primarily Egyptians) as well as sub-Saharan Africans.

===Tribal groups===
Libyan society is to a large extent structured along triballines, with more than 20 major tribal groups. The major tribal groups of Libya are: Jon Hemming, Tribal ties key to Gaddafi rule, Reuters (2011) 
*Tripolitania: Al-Awager - ALUAGER Warfalla, Tarhona, Wershifana, Al-Fwatir, Awlad Busayf, Al-Zintan, Al-Rijban, Zuwarah.
*Cyrenaica: Al-Awagir, Al-Abaydat, Drasa, Al-Barasa, Al-Fawakhir, Al-Zuwayya, Al-Majabra, Al-Msmare.
*Sirte: Al-Qaddadfa, Al-Magarha, Al-Magharba, Al-Riyyah, Al-Haraba, Al-Zuwaid, Al-Guwaid.
*Fezzan: Al-Hutman, Al-Hassawna; Toubou, Tuareg.
*Kufra: Al-Zuwayya; Toubou.

===Foreign population===
Foreign population is estimated at 3%, mostly migrant workers in the oil industry from Tunisia and Egypt, but also including small numbers Greeks, Maltese, Italians, Pakistanis, Palestinians, Turks, Indians and people from former Yugoslavia. Due to the Libyan civil war, most of these migrant workers have returned to their homelands or simply left the country for a different one.

==Genetics==
Listed here are the human Y-chromosome DNA haplogroups in Libya. Karima Fadhlaoui-Zid et al. (2013) Genome-Wide and Paternal Diversity Reveal a Recent Origin of Human Populations in North Africa. PLoS One. 2013; 8(11): e80293. See Table S2 

Hg Libya (n=215) 
 E-M81 35.88% 
 J-M267 30.53% 
 E-M78 11.07% 
 E-M2 8.78% 
 G-M201 4.20% 
 J-M172 3.44% 
 R* 3.43% 
 E-M123 1.53% 
 E* 0.76% 
 R-M17 0.38% 
 

==Languages==

The official language of Libya is Standard Arabic.
The prevalent spoken language is Libyan Arabic, spoken by about 6 million Libyans, besides other Arabic dialects (partly spoken by immigrant workers, partly by native populations), viz. Egyptian Arabic, Moroccan Arabic, Sudanese Arabic, Tunisian Arabic, Ta'izzi-Adeni Arabic, South Levantine Arabic and Hassaniyya Arabic, amounting to a total number of first-language Arabic speakers of about 95% of total population.

SIL Ethnologueestimates for indigenous minority languages in Libya: Ethnologue report for Libya, Languages of Libya 
*Berber languages: ca. 305,000 speakers, mainly concentrated in Tripolitania.
**Nafusi and Zuwara Berber: 184,000 (2006) constitutes a majority.
**Tamahaq: 47,000 (2006)
**Ghadams: 30,000 (2006)
**Sawknah: 5,600 (2006)
**Awjilah: 3,000 (2000)
*Domari: ca. 33,000 speakers (2006)
*Tedaga: 2,000

Non-Arabic languages spoken by temporary foreign workers include (with more than 10,000 speakers each): Punjabi, Urdu, Mandarin, Cantonese, Korean, Sinhala, Bengali, Tamil, Tagalog, French, Italian, Ukrainian, Serbian, English.

==Religions==
Almost all Libyans are Sunni Muslim.

Foreigners contribute very little Christian presence, but there are some churches. A small Jewish community historically lived in Libya since antiquity (see History of the Jews in Libya), but the entire Jewish community in Libya eventually fled the country for Italy, Israel, or the United States, particularly after anti-Jewish riots in the wake of the 1967 Six-Day War between Arab countries and Israel.

==See also==
* Health in Libya
* List of Ashraf tribes in Libya

==References==

*CIA World Factbook 2008
*Looklex Encyclopedia

 


[[Politics of Libya]]

Libya has been governed under a temporary Constitutional Declaration since the defeat of the previous government in the 2011 civil war. Under the Declaration, Libya is a parliamentary republic governed by the General National Congress (GNC), which was elected in July 2012. The executive branch is appointed by the GNC and led by the Prime Minister, while the President of the GNC is the de facto head of state, though not explicitly described as such in the Declaration. 
 
The main responsibility of the GNC is to form a constituent assembly which will write Libya's permanent constitution, for approval by a referendum. The law of Libya is based on sharia. http://www.aljazeera.com/news/africa/2013/12/libya-assembly-votes-sharia-law-2013124153217603439.html 

==Recent Changes==
Political parties were banned in Libya from 1972 until the collapse of the Gaddafi government, and all elections were nonpartisan under law. However during the revolution, the National Transitional Council (NTC), a body formed on 27 February 2011 by anti-Gaddafi forces to act as the "political face of the revolution", made the introduction of multiparty democracy a cornerstone of its agenda. In June 2011, Saif al-Islam Gaddafi said his father would agree to internationally monitored general elections, and would step down if he lost them, but his offer was refused by the rebels and ignored by the UN Security Council. 

On 8 March, the NTC issued a statement in which it declared itself to be the "sole representative all over Libya". 
The council formed an interim governing body on 23 March. As of 20 October 100 countries declared full support to the council by severing all relations with Gaddafi's rule and recognizing the National Transitional Council as the rightful representative of Libya.

On 3 August 2011, the NTC issued a Constitutional Declaration which declared the statehood of Libya as a democracy with Islam as its state religion, in which the state guarantees the rule of law and an independent judiciary as well as civic and human basic rights (including freedom of religion and women's rights), and which contains provisions for a phase of transition to a presidential republic with an elected national assembly and a democratically legitimized constitution by 2013. Vice Chairman Abdul Hafiz Ghoga declared Libya to be "liberated" on 23 October 2011, announcing an official end to the war. Chairman Mustafa Abdul Jalil said Libya would become an Islamic democracy in the wake of Gaddafi's death, though the extent of Islamic law's influence would be determined by elected lawmakers. Ghoga later confirmed that Libya will continue to adhere to all international agreements to which it was signatory prior to the uprising. 

On 7 July 2012 an election was held for the General National Congress (GNC) to replace the NTC. There were 2,501 candidates for the 200 seats - 136 for political parties and 64 for independent candidates. About 300 candidates' views were considered unacceptable and removed from candidates list, suspected of sympathizing with the defeated forces of the Jamahiriya. Accreditation centers have also been organized in European cities with larger Libyan communities like Berlin and Paris, in order to allow Libyan nationals there to cast their vote. High National Election Commission: Press Release 16. June 2012 On 8 August 2012 the NTC officially dissolved and transferred power to the General National Congress.

==General National Congress==

The General National Congress is the legislative authority of Libya. It was elected by popular vote on 7 July 2012, and from 8 August replaced the National Transitional Council that had governed the country since the end of the Libyan civil war. The General National Congress is composed of 200 members of which 80 were elected through a party list system of proportional representation, and 120 were elected as independents in multiple-member districts. On 9 August 2012, Congress members elected Mohamed Yousef el-Magariaf, leader of the National Front Party, as chairman for the GNC. Its term has been extended to the end of 2014.

==Political parties and elections==
On 7 July 2012, the Legislative body - the General National Congress - was elected.

=== List of parties with seats in the General National Congress ===
* National Forces Alliance
* Justice & Construction
* National Front
* Wadi al-Hiya Alliance
* Union for Homeland
* National Centrist Party
* Libyan National Democratic Party
* The Message
* The Foundation
* National Party for Development & Welfare
* Nation & Prosperity
* Authenticity & Renewal
* Authenticity & Progress
* Moderate Umma Assembly
* Libik Watani
* National Gathering of Wadi al-Shati
* Moderate Youth Party
* Libyan List for Freedom & Development
* National Coalition of Parties
* Libya the Hope
* Wisdom Party 

=== List of parties without seats in the General National Congress ===
* Libyan Popular National Movement
* Democratic Party
* Homeland Party 
* Party of Reform and Development 
* Libyan Constitutional Union
* Libyan Amazigh Congress
* Alhaq and Democracy Party of Benghazi
* Libyan National Congress Party
* New Libya Party
* National Unity of Libya Party
* Freedom and Development Party of Libya
* The Patriotic Reform Party
* National Solidarity Party
* The Libyan National Party
* Umma Party
* Justice and Democracy Party of Libya
* Libya Future Party
* Libyan Center Party
* National Democratic Assembly for Justice and Progress
* Libya Development Party
* Libyan Universal Party
* National Democratic Alliance
* New National Congress Party
* Tawasul Party
* Libyan National Democratic Party for Justice and Development
* Libya Our Home and Tribe Party
* Libyan Liberation Party
* Libya for All Party
* Unity Movement
* Democratic Youth Party
* National Democratic Assembly
* Wefaq Party
* Libyan National Democratic Assemblage
* Ansar Al Horria
* Libyan Unionist Party 

==International organization participation==

The National Transitional Council has pledged to honour Libya's international commitments until the 2012 elections.

Libya is a member of ABEDA, AfDB, AFESD, AL, AMF, AMU, AU, CAEU, ECA, FAO, G-77, IAEA, IBRD, ICAO, IDA, IDB, IFAD, IFC, IFRCS, ILO, IMF, IMO, Inmarsat, Intelsat, Interpol, IOC, ISO, ITU, MONUC, NAM, OAPEC, OIC, OPEC, PCA, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNHRC (suspended), UNIDO, UPU, WCO, WFTU, WHO, WIPO, WMO, UNWTO and UNHABITAT.

==Libyan politics under Muammar Gadaffi==

After originally rising to power through a military coup d'etat in 1969, Colonel Muammar Gaddafi's governance of Libya became increasingly centric on the teachings of his Green Book, which he published in the mid-1970s chapter by chapter as a foundation for a new form of government. This jamahiriya, as he called it, was supposedly a form of direct democracy in which power was balanced between a General People's Congress, consisting of 2,700 representatives of Basic People's Congresses, and an executive General People's Committee, headed by a General Secretary, who reported to the Prime Minister and the President. However, Gaddafi retained virtually all power, continuing to operate and control vestiges of the military junta put in place in 1969.

===Wanted figures===
Interpol on 4 March 2011 issued a security alert concerning the "possible movement of dangerous individuals and assets" based on United Nations Security Council Resolution 1970, which imposed a travel ban and asset freeze. The warning lists Gaddafi himself and 15 key members of his government: Interpol File No.: 2011/108/OS/CCC, 4 March 2011. 
# Muammar Gaddafi: Responsibility for ordering repression of demonstrations, human rights abuses. *Killed October 20, 2011 in Sirte*
# Dr. Baghdadi Mahmudi: Head of the Liaison Office of the Revolutionary Committees. Revolutionary Committees involved in violence against demonstrators.
# Abuzed Omar Dorda: Director, External Security Organisation. Government loyalist. Head of external intelligence agency.
# Major General Abu-Bakr Yunis Jabr: Defense Minister. Overall responsibility for actions of armed forces.
# Ayesha Gaddafi: Daughter of Muammar Gaddafi. Closeness of association with government.
# Hannibal Muammar Gaddafi: Son of Muammar Gaddafi. Closeness of association with government.
# Mutassim Gaddafi: National Security Adviser. Son of Muammar Gaddafi. Closeness of association with government
# Al-Saadi Gaddafi: Commander Special Forces. Son of Muammar Gaddafi. Closeness of association with government. Command of military units involved in repression of demonstrations.
# Saif al-Islam Gaddafi: Director, Gaddafi Foundation. Son of Muammar Gaddafi. Closeness of association with government. Inflammatory public statements encouraging violence against demonstrators.
# Abdulqader Yusef Dibri: Head of Muammar Gaddafi's personal security. Responsibility for government security. History of directing violence against dissidents.
# Matuq Mohammed Matuq: Secretary for Utilities. Senior member of government. Involvement with Revolutionary Committees. Past history of involvement in suppression of dissent and violence.
# Sayyid Mohammed Qadhaf Al-dam: Cousin of Muammar Gaddafi. In the 1980s, Sayyid was involved in the dissident assassination campaign and allegedly responsible for several deaths in Europe. He is also thought to have been involved in arms procurement.
# Khamis Gaddafi: Son of Muammar Gaddafi. Closeness of association with government. Command of military units involved in repression of demonstrations.
# Muhammad Gaddafi: Son of Muammar Gaddafi. Closeness of association with government.
# Saif al-Arab Gaddafi: Son of Muammar Gaddafi. Closeness of association with government.
# Colonel Abdullah Senussi: Director Military Intelligence. Military Intelligence involvement in suppression of demonstrations. Past history includes suspicion of involvement in Abu Selim prison massacre. Convicted in absentia for bombing of UTA flight. Brother-in-law of Muammar Gaddafi.

The NTC has been in negotiations with Algeria and Niger, neighboring countries to which members of the government and defecting military commanders have fled, attempting to secure the arrest and extradition of Al-Saadi Gaddafi and others. 

Of these officials, Baghdadi Mahmudi and Abuzed Omar Dorda were arrested, while Saif al-Arab Gaddafi was killed by a NATO airstrike during the war, Khamis Gaddafi was killed in action after the fall of Tripoli, and Muammar and Mutassim Gaddafi, as well as Abu-Bakr Yunis Jabr, were killed during the fall of Sirte. 

==See also==
*Green Resistance
*General People's Committee of Libya
*List of diplomatic missions of Libya

==References==

==External links==
*Gaddafi Plays Quietly, But He's Still in the Game," The New York Times, 17 March 1991
*Chief of state and cabinet members, CIA Factbook, as of 17 March 2010
*

 


[[Economy of Libya]]

The Economy of Libya depends primarily upon revenues from the petroleum sector, which contributes practically all export earnings and over half of GDP. These oil revenues and a small population have given Libya the highest nominal per capita GDP in Africa. USD 12,062 as of 2010 (IMF estimate); rank 48 worldwide, followed by Equatorial Guineawith USD 11,081 on rank 51. 
After 2000, Libya recorded favourable growth rates with an estimated 10.6% growth of GDP in 2010. This development was interrupted by the Libyan civil war, which resulted in contraction of the economy by 62.1% in 2011. After the war the economy rebounded by 104.5% in 2012, but it has yet to achieve its pre-war level.

==Macro-economic trend==
Libya had seen fantastic growth rate, however these proved unsustainable in the face of global oil recession and international sanctions. Consequently the GDP per capita shrank by 40% in the 1980s. Successful diversification and integration into the international community helped current GDP per capita to cut further deterioration to just 3.2% in the 1990s.

Libyan GDP per capita was about $40 in the early 1920s and it rose to $1,018 by 1967. In 1947 alone, per capita GDP rose by 42 percent.

Below is a chart of trend of gross domestic product of Libya at market prices estimated by the International Monetary Fund with figures in millions of Libyan dinars (LYD).

 Year GDP USD to LYD Inflation Index(2000 = 100) Per Capita Income (as % of USA) 
 1980 10,882 0.29 LYD 25 104.37 
 1985 8,227 0.29 LYD 45 46.13 
 1990 8,185 0.28 LYD 57 30.42 
 1995 10,679 0.34 LYD 89 24.45 
 2000 17,668 0.51 LYD 100 20.70 
 2005 50,693 1.22 LYD 80 18.49 

Notes:
1. For purchasing power parity comparisons, the US Dollar is exchanged at 0.77 Libyan Dinars only.

Mean wages were $9.51 per manhour in 2009 (amounts to a compensation of $1598 for 21 working days of 8 hours).

==Oil sector==

Libya is an OPEC member and holds the largest proven oil reserves in Africa (followed by Nigeria and Algeria), 41.5 Goilbbl as of January 2007, up from 39.1 Goilbbl in 2006. About 80% of Libyas proven oil reserves are located in the Sirte Basin, which is responsible for 90% of the countrys oil output. Oil and Gas Journal, 2007 The state-owned National Oil Corporation (NOC) dominates Libya's oil industry, along with smaller subsidiaries, which combined account for around 50% of the country's oil output. Among NOC's subsidiaries, the largest oil producer is the Waha Oil Company (WOC), followed by the Agoco, Zueitina Oil Company (ZOC), and Sirte Oil Company (SOC). Oil resources, which account for approximately 95% of export earnings, 75% of government receipts, and over 50% of GDP. Oil revenues constitute the principal foreign exchange source. Reflecting the heritage of the command economy, three quarters of employment is in the public sector, and private investment remains small at around 2% of GDP. World Bank 2006 

Falling world oil prices in the early 1980s and economic sanctions caused a serious decline in economic activity, eventually leading to a slow private sector rehabilitation. At 2.6% per year on average, real GDP growth was modest and volatile during the 1990s. Libya's GDP grew in 2001 due to high oil prices, the end of a long cyclical drought, and increased foreign direct investment following the suspension of UN sanctions in 1999. Real GDP growth has been boosted by high oil revenues, reaching 4.6% in 2004 and 3.5% in 2005. Despite efforts to diversify the economy and encourage private sector participation, extensive controls of prices, credit, trade, and foreign exchange constrain growth.

Although UN sanctions were suspended in 1999, foreign investment in the Libyan gas and oil sectors were severely curtailed due to the U.S. Iran and Libya Sanctions Act (ILSA), which caps the amount foreign companies can invest in Libya yearly at $20 million (lowered from $40 million in 2001). As of May 2006, the U.S. has removed Libya from its list of states that sponsor terrorism and has normalised ties and removed sanctions. This clears the road for U.S. oil companies to exploit Libyan oil and is expected to have a positive impact on the Libyan economy. The NOC hopes to raise oil production from 1.80 million bpd in 2006 to 2 million bpd by 2008. FDI into the oil sector is likely, which is attractive due to its low cost of oil recovery, high oil quality, and proximity to European markets. International Crude Oil Market Handbook Most Libyan oil is sold on a term basis, including to the country's Oilinvest marketing network in Europe; to companies like Agip, OMV, Repsol YPF, Tupras, CEPSA, and Total; and small volumes to Asian and South African companies. EIA 2007 

 Statistic Amount 
 Proven Oil Reserves (2007E) 41.5 Goilbbl 
 Oil Production (2006E) 1.8 Moilbbl/d (95% crude) 
 Oil Consumption (2006E) 284000 oilbbl/d 
 Net Oil Exports (2006E) 1.5 Moilbbl/d 
 Crude Oil Distillation Capacity (2006E) 378 koilbbl/d 
 Proven Natural Gas Reserves (2007E) 52.7 Tcuft 
 Natural Gas Production (2006E) 3999 Gcuft 
 Natural Gas consumption (2005E) 206 Gcuft 

Notes:
1. Energy Information Administration (2007)

===Field Development and Exploration===

Oil is the major resource of Libya.
In November 2005, Repsol YPF discovered a significant oil deposit of light, sweet crude in the Murzuq Basin. Industry experts believe the discovery to be one of the biggest made in Libya for several years. Repsol YPF is joined by a consortium of partners including OMV, Total and Norsk Hydro. Also located in Murzuq Basin is Enis Elephant field. In October 1997, a consortium led by British company Lasmo, along with Eni and a group of five South Korean companies, announced that it had discovered large recoverable crude reserves 465 mi south of Tripoli. Lasmo estimated field production would cost around $1 per barrel. Elephant began production in February 2004.

WOC's Waha fields currently produce around 350000 oilbbl/d. In 2005, ConocoPhillips and co-venturers reached an agreement with NOC to return to its operations in Libya and extend the Waha concession 25 years. ConocoPhillips operates the Waha fields with a 16.33% share in the project. NOC has the largest share of the Waha concession, and additional partners include Marathon and Amerada Hess. EIA 2007 p.3 

===Refining and Downstream===
Libya has five domestic refineries:

 Refinery Capacity Operator 
 Zawia Refinery 120,000 ZOC 
 Ras Lanuf Refinery 220,000 Rasco 
 El-Brega Refinery 10,000 SOC 
 Tobruk Refinery 20,000 Agoco 
 Sarir Refinery 10,000 Agoco 

Notes:
1. Amounts in barrels per day.

==Diversification==
Pivot irrigation in Kufra, southeast Cyrenaica. Oil wealth has enabled Libya to pursue extravagant projects such as agriculture and the Great Manmade River in the Sahara Desert.
Modern buildings in Tripoli
In 2007, mining and hydrocarbon industries accounted for well over 95 percent of the Libyan economy. Diversification of the economy into manufacturing industries remain a long-term issue.

Although agriculture is the second-largest sector in the economy, Libya depends on imports in most foods. Climatic conditions and poor soils severely limit farm output, and domestic food production meets only about 25% of demand. Domestic conditions limit output, while higher incomes and a growing population have caused food consumption to rise. Because of low rainfall levels in Libya, agricultural projects such as the Kufra oasis rely on underground water sources. Libya's primary agricultural water source remains the Great Manmade River (GMMR), but significant resources are being invested in desalinization research to meet growing demand. Libyan agricultural projects and policies are overseen by a General Inspector; there is no Ministry of Agriculture, per se. Doing Business In LIBYA: A Country Commercial Guide for U.S. Companies, March, 2006 

==Labor market==
Libya posted a 3.3% rate of population growth during 1960-2003. In 2003, 86% of the population was urban, compared to 45% in 1970. Although no reliable estimates are available, unemployment is reportedly acute: over 50% of the population under the age of 20. Moreover, despite the bias of labor market regulations favoring Libyan workers, the mismatch of the educational system with market demand has produced a large pool of expatriate workers, with typically better-suited education and higher productivity. However, because of shortages for manual labor, Libya has also attracted important numbers of less skilled immigrants. Expatriate workers represent an estimated fifth of the labor force. Although, in the absence of a labor force survey, estimates are surrounded by considerable uncertainty Although significant, the proportion of expatriate workers is still below oil producing countries in the Persian Gulf. Foreign workers mainly come from the Maghreb, Egypt, Turkey, India, the Philippines, Malaysia, Thailand, Vietnam, Poland, Chad, Sudan, and Bosnia and Herzegovina. http://www.seenews.com/news/latestnews/bosnia_senergoinvestsees2007profitunchanging_signscontractsinlibya_-151444/ Bosnia's Energoinvest Sees 2007 Profit Flat, Signs Contracts in Libya, Algeria http://www.arabianbusiness.com/506991-bosnian-firm-clinches-52mn-libya-deal?ln=en Bosnian firm clinches $52mn Libya deal They tend to earn relatively high wages, taking either skilled or hard manual jobs. Census data for 2000 show the share of expatriates earning over LD 300 (US$230) per month was 20%, compared to 12% for Libyan nationals. A campaign encouraging conversion of qualified civil servants to entrepreneurs, in the face of public sector over employment and declining productivity, does not seem to be producing the desired results thus far. 

==External trade and finance==
Graphical depiction of Graphical depiction of Libya's product exports in 28 color-coded categories.
Libyan exports in 2006
The Government is in the process of preparing a financial sector reform program. Recent legislation setting corporate governance standards for financial institutions makes progress towards better management and greater operational independence of public banks. However, Libyan public banks still lack management structures supported by skills in critical areas like credit, investment, risk management, and information and control systems. The new banking law reinforces the independence of the Central Bank of Libya (CBL) and offers a legal framework for regulating banking activities, even if some provisions call for improvement. Despite progress brought by the new banking Law that specifies and limits its duties and responsibilities, the CBL remains the owner of the public banks, with the associated potential conflict of interest between ownership and regulation.

Financial sector reform has also progressed with partial interest rate liberalization. Interest rates have been liberalized on deposits, while a lending rate ceiling has been set above the discount rate. The Libyan Stock Exchange, established in 2007, is the first exchange of its kind in the country.

As of 13 March 2011, Libya Oil Holdings has had its 38m stake in Irish exploration firm Circle Oil frozen on foot of a European Union order that's been put in place to put pressure on the Gaddafi regime. Libya Stake in Circle Oil Frozen 

==Statistics==
Household income or consumption by percentage share:
lowest 11%:
NA%
highest 10%:
NA%

Industrial production growth rate:
2.7% (2009)

Electricity - production:
24 billion kWh (2007 est)

Electricity - production by source:
fossil fuel:
100%
hydro:
0%
nuclear:
0%
other:
0% (1998)

Electricity - consumption:
22.17 billion kWh (2007 est)

Electricity - exports:
104 million kWh (2007)

Electricity - imports:
77 million kWh (2007)

Agriculture - products:
wheat, barley, olives, dates, citrus, vegetables, peanuts, soybeans, cattle, corn

==International rankings==

 Organisation Survey Ranking 
 Heritage Foundation/The Wall Street Journal 2006 Index of Economic Freedom 152 out of 157 
 The Economist The World in 2005 - Worldwide quality-of-life index, 2005 70 out of 111 
 Energy Information Administration Greatest Oil Reserves by Country, 2006 9 out of 20 
 Reporters Without Borders Press Freedom Index (2007) 155 out of 169 
 Transparency International Corruption Perceptions Index 2007 131 out of 180 
 United Nations Development Programme Human Development Index 2005 58 out of 177 

==Notes==

==References==
* Energy Information Administration (2007) Libya: Country Analysis Brief
* World Bank (2006), Libya: Economic Report, Social & Economic Development Group
* P. Mobbs (2002) Mineral Industry of Libya
* T. Ahlbrandt (2001) Sirte Basin Province: Sirte-Zelten Total Petroleum System USGS
* Central Bank Of Libya Economic Bulletin Socialist Peoples Libyan Arab Jamahiriya
* National Authority for Information and Statistics, Socialist Peoples Libyan Arab Jamahiriya.
* Pilat D., Innovation and Productivity in Services - State of the Art, Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development, Directorate for Science, Technology, and Industry, Paris. 2000
* GSPLA. Agriculture achievements in 20 years. Secretariat of Agriculture Land Reclamation and Animal Wealth. 1989
* GSPLA. Agriculture in Libya. Facts and Figure 1970.
* Mohamed Al Genedal. Agriculture in Libya. Arab Book Publishers 1978.
* Ali Rahuma. Cost of barley and wheat production in some state managed agricultural projects. J. Agric. Res. 1989
* Future of food economics in the Arab State. Vol. 4. Statistics. 1979.
* Statistical index 1970. Ministry of Economic and Planning.

==External links==

* 
* Libya Connected - Business in Libya
* History of Exploratation of the Petroleum Geology of Libya
* Map of the oil and gas infrastructure in Libya

 
Libya
Libya



[[Communications in Libya]]

Communications in Libya describes the overall environment for the radio, television, telephone, Internet, and newspaper markets in Libya.

The control of the media by Colonel Gaddafi's regime came to an end after the fall of Tripoli in August 2011, resulting in a mushrooming of new media outlets. Journalists are experiencing unprecedented freedom. Libya has not yet adopted a media law, and there are no clear legal guidelines on libel and slander, or a code of ethics for journalists. 

== Radio ==

Libyan Radio and TV (LRT) is the successor to the Gaddafi-era state broadcaster. Dozens of radio outlets, many privately owned, broadcast from Libyan cities and from Middle East media hubs. The BBC World Service Arabic broadcasts on 91.5 FM in Tripoli, Benghazi, and Misrata. "Libya profile: Media", BBC News, 7 March 2012 

;Radio stations:
* Allibya FM
* Libya FM - Egypt-based
* Libyan Radio and Television (LRT) - state-run, operates Radio Libya, Al-Shababiyah, Al-Itha'ah al-Wataniya
* LJBC Radio
* Tribute FM: An English-language internet station broadcasting from Benghazi. Website
* Voice of Africa
* Voice of Free Libya - Benghazi-based, Al-Bayda, Misurata

;Radios:
:1.35 million (1997) "Radio receivers" in Libya > Media at NationMasters, 1997, accessed 6 July 2012 

== Television ==

Libyan Radio and TV (LRT) is the successor to the Gaddafi-era state broadcaster. More than 20 TV stations, many privately owned, broadcast from Libyan cities and from Middle East media hubs. 

;Television receivers:
:889,232 receivers, 149 per 1000 inhabitants (2005) Libyan Arab Jamahiriya", World Statistics Pocketbook, Series V No. 31, Statistics Division, Department of Economic and Social Affairs, United Nations (New York), 2007, accessed 6 July 2012 

;Television broadcast stations:
* Allibya TV
* Libya TV - aka Libya al-Ahrar; Qatar-based satellite station, launched in April 2011. Homepage
* Libya al-hurra TV
* Libya Al-Wataniya TV - state-run
* Libya Radio and Television (LRT) - state-run
* Al-Asimah TV - private

== Telephones ==

In the course of the 2011 Libyan civil war, the government severed the physical communications links between the rebel-held east and the rest of Libya. However, the newer and less centralised Libyana network held copies of the HLR and engineers were able to restore some local services. With some assistance from the international community, and funded by an expatriate Libyan, a limited international service became available in mid-April. NTC officials were reported to be negotiating with Qtel, the Qatari-owned service provider, to restore full service to the rebel-held areas. "How 'rebel' phone network evaded shutdown", Evan Hill, Al Jazeera, 23 April 2011 

;Telephones:
* 814,000 fixed subscriptions, 12.58 per 100 inhabitants (2012) "Fixed telephone subscriptions 2000-2012", International Telecommunications Union, accessed 26 August 2013 
* 1,228,300 fixed subscriptions, 19.33 per 100 inhabitants (2010) "Fixed telephone subscriptions 2000-2010", International Telecommunications Union, accessed 6 July 2012 

* 9.6 million mobile cellular subscriptions, 148.19 per 100 inhabitants (2012) "Mobile-cellular subscriptions 2000-2012", International Telecommunications Union, accessed 26 August 2013 
* 10.9 million mobile cellular subscriptions, 171.52 per 100 inhabitants (2010) 

;Mobile telephone operators:
* Al Madar
* Libyana

International dialing code: +218 "CIA World Factbook: Libya", U.S. Central Intelligence Agency, 26 June 2012 

==Internet==

Facebook, Twitter and YouTube played important roles in bringing news to the world audience during the revolt. Facebook remains a favorite platform to view and comment on the news. 

;Internet users:
* 1,115,025 users, 19.9% of the population (2012) "Percentage of Individuals using the Internet 2000-2012", International Telecommunication Union, accessed 26 August 2013. 
:904,604 users, 14.0% (2010) "Percentage of Individuals using the Internet 2000-2010", International Telecommunication Union, accessed 16 April 2012. 

;Fixed broadband Internet subscriptions:
* 67,300 subscriptions, 111th in the world, 1.0 subscriptions per 100 inhabitants (2012) Fixed broadband subscriptions, International Telecommunication Union. Accessed on 26 August 2013. 
* 72,800 subscriptions, 98th in the world, 1.2 subscriptions per 100 inhabitants (2010) Fixed broadband subscriptions, International Telecommunication Union. Accessed on 8 April 2012. 

;Internet hosts:
* 17,926 hosts, 121st in the world (2012) "Internet hosts", CIA World Factbook, U.S. Central Intelligence Agency, accessed 26 August 2013 
* 17,787 hosts, 122nd in the world (2011) "Internet hosts", CIA World Factbook, U.S. Central Intelligence Agency, accessed 2 April 2012 

;IPv4 addresses allocated:
* 299,008 addresses, 105th in the world, 44.4 per 1000 inhabitants (2012) Select Formats, Country IP Blocks. Accessed on 2 April 2012. Note: Site is said to be updated daily. 

;Top-level domain:
:.ly 

;Internet Service Providers (ISPs):

The Internet and telecommunications are mainly run by the government through a semi-private telecommunication company Libya Telecom & Technology. The company moderates and controls the use of the Internet in Libya.

* 23 ISPs 
* Libya Telecom & Technology (LTT) - a state-owned telecommunications company
* Al-Manarah - leading Libyan online community
* All Libyan Blogs - blog aggregator
* Bayt Al Shams (BsISP)
* Modern World Telecom (MWC)

===The Internet and the civil war===

In 2006 Reporters Without Borders (RWB) removed Libya from their list of Internet enemies after a fact-finding visit found no evidence of Internet censorship. List of the 13 Internet enemies Reporters Without Borders (Paris), 11 July 2006. The OpenNet Initiatives 20072008 technical test results contradicted that conclusion, however. In 2009 ONI classified Internet filtering in Libya as selective in the political area and as no evidence in social, conflict/security, and Internet tools. "ONI Country Profiles", Research section at the OpenNet Initiative web site, a collaborative partnership of the Citizen Lab at the Munk School of Global Affairs, University of Toronto; the Berkman Center for Internet & Society at Harvard University; and the SecDev Group, Ottawa 

Prior to the civil war, Internet filtering under the Gaddafi regime had become more selective, focusing on a few political opposition Web sites. This relatively lenient filtering policy coincided with what was arguably a trend toward greater openness and increasing freedom of the press. However, the legal and political climate continued to encourage self-censorship in online media. "ONI Country Profile: Libya", OpenNet Initiative, 6 August 2009 

On 18 February 2011, the day after the first protests that were to lead to the 2011 Libyan civil war, Libya appeared to have withdrawn all of its BGP prefix announcements from the Internet for a short period, cutting it off from the rest of the global Internet. The prefix were re-advertised six hours later. 

There was no traffic for several hours on 19 and 20 February. Service picked up over the next few days to almost normal levels until, at 6:00am on 3 March, traffic effectively ceased (except for very limited satellite links). The government had severed the underwater backbone fibre-optic cable that runs along the coast, linking networks in the east and servers in the west of the country. Engineers reckon the break is between the cities of Misrata and Khoms, and may be a physical or electronic rupture. 

From 10 July traffic began increasing again, and after a brief shutdown on 15 July, it was reaching about 15% of its pre-17 February levels up to 22 August, the day Tripoli fell to the rebels. Traffic began increasing again at that point, and as of 2 September was reaching daily levels in excess of 50% and often as high as 75% of pre-war levels. Graphs of Google traffic, which give a reasonable picture of all Internet traffic, Google Transparency Report, accessed 6 July 2012 

The overthrow of the Gaddafi regime in the fall of 2011 ended an era of censorship. In 2012, RWB removed Libya from its list of countries under surveillance. Internet Enemies, Reporters Without Borders (Paris), 12 March 2012 

== Newspapers ==

Following the fall of the Gaddafi regime in August 2011 former state-affiliated dailies have closed and new titles have appeared, many short-lived. Benghazi has emerged as a publishing hub. There are as yet few daily newspapers and print runs are small. 

;Daily newspapers
* Al-Bilad - private daily
* Brnieq
* February - state-owned daily
* Libya Herald - private online English-language daily
* New Quryna - Benghazi-based private daily

;Weekly newspapers:
* Tripoli Post - private English-language weekly Homepage

;Monthly magazines:
* Lana Magazine - Independent monthly printed magazine specialized in libyan affairs. Its articles are analytical and take an in-depth look at political, social and cultural issues in Libya. It's distributed in Tripoli, Benghazi, Sirt, Misrata, Derna and Kufra. Reem al-Barky is the editor-in-chief. The magazine has a Facebook Page too.

;News agencies:
* Al-Tadamun News Agency - originally started in Switzerland in February 2011, later moved to Benghazi, Libya 
* Libyan News Agency ("Lana") - state-run, formerly Jamahiriya News Agency ("Jana")
* Mathaba News Agency - independent pro-Gaddafi news site still in operation
* Tawasul News Agency (TNA) - private news agency, via social media
* Akhbar Libya 24 News Agency (AL24) - 24/7 private news agency, based in Tripoli and Benghazi, Facebook page,Twitter channel and Google+.

== See also ==

* Media of Libya

== References ==

 
 

[[Transport in Libya]]

Traffic congestion in Bayda, Libya in 2010.

==Railways==

Libya has had no railway in operation since 1965, all previous narrow gauge lines having been dismantled. Plans for a new network have been under development for some time (earthworks were begun between Sirte and Ras Ajdir, Tunisia border, in 2001-5), and in 2008 and 2009 various contracts were placed and construction work started on a standard gauge railway parallel to the coast from the Tunisian border at Ras Ajdir to Tripoli, and on to Misrata, Sirte, Benghazi and Bayda. Another railway line will run inland from Misrata to Sabha at the centre of a mineral-rich area. 

==Highways==
A flyover on an urban highway in the capital Tripoli.

Total:
83,200 km
Paved:
47,590 km
Unpaved:
35,610 km (1996 est.)

There are about 83,200 km of roads in Libya, 47,590 km of which are surfaced. 234 out of 1000 Libyans have cars, which is the highest rate in Africa. The best roads run along the coast between Tripoli and Tunis in Tunisia; also between Benghazi and Tobruk, connecting with Alexandria in Egypt. A fairly efficient bus service operates along these routes, with two main bus transport companies. One covers long-distance, international routes, while the other is chiefly engaged in shorter trips between towns. Bus fares are low and the standard of comfort, particularly on international routes is good, with air-conditioned vehicles and good service. 

Taxis are available in the larger towns, and are usually hired on a shared basis, although individual hire can be negotiated. Driving skills of taxi drivers are extremely variable. Taxis may have meters, but these are rarely in use. Car hire for self-drive is not recommended in Libya, although it is possible to hire a vehicle from agents in larger hotels. Vehicles are often old and poorly maintained, however, and are unequal to long-distance driving. Driving itself can be hazardous and there is a high rate of road accidents.

===Regional highways===
Libya has two routes in the Trans-African Highway network, but only one currently functions as such, the Cairo-Dakar Highway.

==Ports and harbours==

===Mediterranean Sea===
(west to east)
*Zuwara
*Tripoli
*Khoms
*Misrata
*Ra's Lanuf
*Brega
*Benghazi
*Derna
*Tobruk
----

==Merchant marine==
Total:
17 ships (1000 GRT or over) 96,062 GRT/
 
By type:
Cargo 9, Liquified Gas 3, Passenger/Cargo 2, Petroleum Tanker 1, Roll on/Roll off 2 
Foreign-owned: 4 (Kuwait 1, Turkey 2, UAE 1) (2005)

==Airports==
139 (2005) 
Most international flights arrive in and through Tripoli International Airport.

===Airports - with paved runways===
Total: 59
over 3,047 m: 23 
2,438 to 3,047 m: 6
1,524 to 2,437 m: 23
914 to 1,523 m: 5
under 914 m: 2 (2005)

===Airports - with unpaved runways===
Total: 80
over 3,047 m: 5
2,438 to 3,047 m: 2
1,524 to 2,437 m: 14
914 to 1,523 m: 41
under 914 m: 18 (2008)

==References==

 

[[Armed Forces of the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya]]

The Armed Forces of the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya consisted of the Libyan Army, Libyan Air Force and the Libyan Navy and other services including the People's Militia. In November 2010, before the Libyan civil war in 2011, the total number of Libyan personnel was estimated at 76,000 IISS Military Balance 2011, p. 7, 320. though that war wore the military's numbers away. There was no separate defence ministry; all defence activities were centralised under Gaddafi. There was a High Command of the Armed Forces (al-Qiyada al-ulya lil-quwwat al-musallaha). Hanspeter Mattes, Challenges to Security Sector Governance in the Middle East: The Libyan Case, Geneva Centre for the Democratic Control of Armed Forces, 2004 (http://se2.dcaf.ch/serviceengine/Files), p. 13. Arms production was limited and manufacturers were state-owned. Colonel Abu-Bakr Yunis Jabr was the last minister of defence of the Gaddafi-era military.

== Origins and history 194569 ==
The roots of the 19512011 Libyan armed forces can be traced to the Libyan Arab Force (popularly known as the Sanusi Army) of World War II. Library of Congress Country Studies: Libya, 1987. Shortly after Italy entered the war, a number of Libyan leaders living in exile in Egypt called on their compatriots to organise themselves into military units and join the British in the war against the Axis powers. Five battalions, which were initially designed for guerrilla warfare in the Jabal al Akhdar region of Cyrenaica, were established under British command. Because the high mobility of the desert campaigns required a considerable degree of technical and mechanical expertise, the Libyan forces were used primarily as auxiliaries, guarding military installations and prisoners. One battalion, however, participated in the fighting at Tobruk.

After Britain succeeded in occupying the Libyan territories, the need for the British-trained and equipped Sanusi troops appeared to be over. The Sanusi Army was reluctant to disband, however, and the majority of its members arranged to be transferred to the local police force in Cyrenaica under the British military administration. When Libya gained its independence in 1951, veterans of the original Sanusi Army formed the nucleus of the Royal Libyan Army. British Army troops, part of Middle East Command and comprising 25th Armoured Brigade and briefly 10th Armoured Division, were still present after independence and stayed in Libya until at least 1957. See "Britain, Libya and the Suez Crisis", Journal of Strategic Studies, April 2007. Despite the Sanussi lineage of the new army, King Idris I quickly came to distrust them. Pollack, 2002, p. 359. The Free Officers' coup of 1952 in Egypt led many Libyan officers to be disenchanted with Idris and become great followers of Gamal Abdel Nasser. This situation reached the stage that the British Army officers retained by Idris to train and advise the new armed forces deemed the force entirely untrustworthy. They increasingly saw their role as to watch the army rather than to raise its effectiveness.

Meanwhile Idris formed a navy in 1962 and an air force in 1963. He attempted to counter his growing doubts about the loyalty of the army by stripping it of potential. He placed loyal but often unqualified Cyrenaicans in all senior command positions, limited the armed forces to 6,500 men, kept the army lightly armed, and built up two rival paramilitary units, the National Security Force and the Cyrenaican Defence Force which was recruited from Cyrenaican Bedouin loyal to the Sanussi. In 1952 the CDF had 600 personnel organised as a personal bodyguard for the Emir. By 1969 the force had 6,000 personnel, organised into battalions. http://orbat.com/site/history/open_vol2/Cyrenaican%20Defence%20Force.pdf, accessed June 2011. See also Mattes, H. (1985) Von der Prtorianergarde Knig Idris I. zum Konzept des bewaffneten Volkes. Ein Beitrag zur Militrgeschichte Libyens. In Orient. 26(4): 523-548. Together the two forces had a total of 14,000 men armed with helicopters, armoured cars, anti-tank weapons, and artillery.

These measures did not prevent, however, a group of army officers led by then Captain Muammar Gaddafi (a signals officer) seizing power on 1 September 1969. Pollack says that the defeat of the Arabs during the Six-Day War of July 1967 was an important factor in the coup, as the officers believed that Libya should have dispatched forces to aid Egypt and the other Arab states. Idris had also tried to reform the military, but only half-heartedly, further frustrating young Libyan officers. Immediately after the coup, Gaddafi began to dismiss, arrest, or execute every officer above the rank of colonel in the armed forces, as well as some other lower-ranking officers closely linked to the monarchy. Then he began to reorganise the armed forces in line with his foreign policy plans. Pollack, 2002, p. 360. Expansion of the army and amalgamation of the CDF and NSF into the army was the first priority, and by 1970 the force numbered nearly 20,000. Attention was also focused on the Air Force, with the pre-coup strength of 400 personnel and ten Northrop F-5 'Freedom Fighter' jet fighters planned to be supplemented with large-scale purchases of Mirage III fighters from France.

== Forces under Gaddafi ==

===Army===
In 2009, the Libyan Army consisted of 25,000 volunteers with an additional 25,000 conscripts (total 50,000). At that time, the army was organised into 11 Border Defence and 4 Security Zones, one regime security brigade, 10 Tank Battalions, 10 Mechanized Infantry Battalions, 18 Infantry Battalions, 6 Commando Battalions, 22 Artillery Battalions, 4 SSM Brigade and 7 Air Defence Artillery Battalions. International Institute for Strategic Studies, The Military Balance 2009, p. 256. Khamis Gaddafi's 32nd Brigade was one of the main regime protection forces. The 'Khamis Brigade' was considered by US diplomats in 2009 as the most capable of defending the regime. Wikileaks, http://www.wikileaks.ch/cable/2009/12/09TRIPOLI960.html, United States diplomatic cables leak. In addition, the Revolutionary Guard Corps also served as a brigade-sized protection force for Gaddafi. In 2009, it emerged that a British Special Air Service team were training Libyan special forces. BBC. Under Gaddafi, conscription was listed as 18 months.

In addition, seven military regions had been listed in various sources as part of the Gaddafi-era military. These regions appear to have included the Western Military Region (Tripoli), the Middle Military Region (Sirte), the Eastern Military Region (Tobruk), the Mountain Military Region (Gharyan), and regions headquartered at Kufra and Benghazi. Jane's World Armies, March 2011. The final military region appears to have been the Southern Military Region headquartered at Sabha in the southeast. http://www.amazighworld.org/eng/news/index_show.php?id=110 

Though the Libyan army had a large amount of fighting equipment at its disposal, the vast majority was bought from the Soviet Union in the 1970s and 1980s and eventually became largely obsolete. A high percentage remained in storage and a large amount of equipment was also been sold to various African countries. No major purchases of equipment had been made in recent years largely due to the decline of the economy and military sanctions experienced throughout the 1990s. This and various other internal factors had seriously decayed the strength of the whole of the Libyan Armed Forces over the years and it lagged behind its major neighbours in terms of its military capabilities and real war fighting capability.
Libyan Air Defence missiles
Libya dispatched a contingent to the Arab Deterrent Force in Lebanon in 1976 as the Lebanese Civil War escalated. Britannica.com/EBchecked/topic/31428/Arab-Deterrent-Force In the spring of 1979, after the Arab League had extended the mandate of the Arab Deterrent Force, the Sudanese, the Saudis and the UAE troops departed Lebanon, the Libyan troops were essentially abandoned and had to find their own way home, if at all.

From the late 1970s to around 1987, the armed forces were involved in the Chadian-Libyan conflict with four major incursions into Chad. The Libyan Army suffered great losses in these conflicts, especially that of the Toyota War of 1987, largely due to poor tactics and Western aid to Chad. All of these incursions were eventually repulsed and Libya no longer occupies the Aouzou Strip or any other part of Chad.

The Libyan Army has ceased to function following the rebel victory in the Libyan civil war.

=== Army equipment ===
The Libyan ground forces had a large amount of mostly Soviet equipment in service. These numbers do not take into account equipment destroyed or captured during the 2011 Libyan civil war.

The IISS estimated tank numbers in 2009 as 2,025:
* T-55 - 500; 1,040 T-54/T-55 in store;
* T-62 - 100; 70 in store;
* T-72 - 150; 115 in store.

Russian official sources reported in 2010 that T-72s would be modernised with help from Russia. http://en.rian.ru/mlitary_news/20100707/159723546.html 750 BTR-50 and BTR-60s were also reported by the IISS.

The IISS estimated there were 50 BRDM-2 and 70 EE-9 Cascavel reconnaissance vehicles, 1,000 BMP-1s, plus BMDs. IISS 2009. Other reported wheeled vehicles in service include 100 EE-11 Urutu and Czechoslovak OT-64 SKOT. Middle East Military Balance, (2005), Military", Libya, Accessed April 24, 2007. 

The IISS estimated artillery in service in 2009 as totaling 2,421 pieces.

444 SP artillery pieces were reported:
* 122mm  130 2S1 Carnation;
* 152mm  140: 60 2S3 Akatsiya; 80 M-77 Dana;
* 155mm  174: 14 M-109; 160 VCA 155 Palmaria.

647+ towed artillery pieces were reported:
* 105mm  42+ M-101
* 122mm  250: 190 D-30; 60 D-74;
* 130mm  330 M-46;
* 152mm  25 M-1937.
* 155mm  ? M114 155 mm howitzer

830 multiple rocket launchers were reported:
* 107mm Type-63 - an estimated 300;
* 122mm  530: 200 BM-11; 230 BM-21 Grad; 100 RM-70 Dana (RM-70 multiple rocket launcher?).

The IISS also estimated that Libya had 500 mortars:
* 82mm  428;
* 120mm  48 M-43;
* 160mm  24 M-160.

Surface-to-surface missiles reported in service included FROG-7 and SCUD-B (416 missiles).

Anti-tank missiles reported in service included 400 French/German MILAN, and 620+ AT-3, AT-4, and AT-5, all of Soviet manufacture.

In 2009 the IISS estimated that Libya had Crotale, SA-7 Grail, SA-9/SA-13 surface to air missiles, and AA guns in Army service. A separate Air Defence Command had SA-2, SA-3, SA-5 Gammon, and SA-8b Gecko, plus guns.

Reported anti-aircraft artillery included Soviet 57 mm S-60, 23 mm self-propelled ZSU-23-4 and ZU-23-2, Czech M53/59 Praga, and Swedish Bofors 40mm guns.

Small arms reported in service included TT pistol, Browning Hi-Power, Beretta M12, FN P90, FN FAL, SKS, AK-47, AKM and AK-103 assault rifles, the FN F2000, Soviet RPD machine gun, RPK machine gun, PK machine guns, DShK heavy machine gun, KPV heavy machine guns, SG-43 Goryunov, and a number of RPG-type and anti-aircraft missile systems: RPG-2, RPG-7, 9K32 Strela-2.

===Arms and ammunition deliveries===
Even in the five years between 2005 and 2009, large quantities of arms and ammunition were delivered to Libya. It should be noted, however, that it is not always clear which armed service or police organisation received the weaponry. Amnesty International, 'Arms Transfers to the Middle East and North Africa: Lessons for an Effective Arms Trade Treaty,' ACT 30/117/2011, 2011, pp. 41-46. 
*Bulgaria delivered 1,850,594 worth of material in the category of small arms in 2006. In 2009, the country licensed the delivery of 3.73 million of material in the category of ammunition. It is not clear whether all 3.73 million of material was actually delivered.
*Serbia exported $1,920,185 of equipment including assault rifles for 'civilian and military end-users' to Libya in 2009. In 2008 Serbia exported $1,613,280 of equipment including automatic rifles and sub-machine guns. There also were large deliveries to brokers acting as intermediaries for several countries including Libya in 2005, 2006 and 2007.
*Malta delivered 7,936 million of what were described as 'non-military items' to Libya in 2009. There was a mistake in original reports which gave the value as 79 million. Despite being marked as 'non-military items,' the shipment comprised 1,800 Benelli 12 gauge shotguns, 7,500 semi-automatic Beretta Px4 Storm pistols, and 1,900 cal 9xI9mm Beretta Cx4 Storm semi-automatic carbines. They were destined for the General People's Committee for Public Security, effectively Libya's Ministry of the Interior.

===Air & Air Defence Forces===

Libyan Su-22 fighter-bomber, 1985
The Libyan Air Force was created after the US and UK pressured then-ruling King Idris to modernise his armed forces so that they could better stand off against revolutionary regimes in the Middle East. The LAF was created in 1963. The Libyan Air Force had an estimated personnel strength of 22,000 in 2005. There were 13 military airbases in Libya. Middle East Military Balance: Libya. 

After US forces had left Libya in 1970, Wheelus Air Base, a previous US facility about seven miles from Tripoli, became a Libyan Air Force installation and was renamed Okba Ben Nafi Air Base. OBN AB housed the LPAF's headquarters and a large share of its major training facilities.

All combat aircraft of the Libyan Air Force that were not in the rebel forces' hands were destroyed by NATO bombings during the civil war, effectively leading to the destruction of the Libyan Air Force. http://english.aljazeera.net/news/africa/2011/03/201132316258646677.html 

====Aircraft====
*Mikoyan-Gurevich MiG-17  22
*Mikoyan-Gurevich MiG-23  130
*Mikoyan-Gurevich MiG-25  68
*Sukhoi Su-22  90; The Libyan Air Force operated as many as 90 Su-22, with around 40 Su-22M3 and Su-22UM3K aircraft in service by the time of the 2011 Libyan civil war.
*Soko G-2 Galeb 116;(G2A-E version)
*Dassault Mirage III 8
*Dassault Mirage F1- 12 http://www.defensenews.com/article/20120301/DEFREG01/303010002/France-Renovate-Libyan-F1s-Provide-Training?odyssey=tab|topnews|text|FRONTPAGE 

Combat Aircrafts May 2011 issue included an article covering the air elements of the 2011 Libyan civil war.

The Libyan Air Defence Force was part of the Air Force and had the second largest defence network in the region (second to Egypt). However, the equipment  which was mainly Soviet weaponry from the 1960s and 1970s  was outdated and it proved inefficient during the 1986 bombing of Libya by the US Air Force. Only one of the 45 attacking US aircraft was shot down. Due to an embargo during the 1980s, the system could not be upgraded following the US attack. 

Surface-to-Air Missiles include:
*Lavochkin SA-2 Guideline  300;
*Isayev SA-3 Goa  250;
*Almaz SA-5 Gammon  380;
*S-200 missile systems  70;
*9K38 Igla  380;
*9K34 Strela-3  278;
*ZSU-23-4Shilka  200;
*ZSU-57-2  75;
*2K12 Kub - 50;

=== Navy ===

Libyan frigate Al Ghardabia in Valletta, 2005.
The Libyan Navy is the maritime force of Libya, established in November 1962. It is a fairly typical small navy with a few missile frigates, corvettes and patrol boats to defend the coastline, but with a very limited self-defence capability. The Navy has always been the smallest of Libya's services and has always been dependent on foreign sources for equipment, spare parts, and training. The total personnel of the Libyan Navy is about 8,000.

Its first warship was delivered in 1966. Initially the effective force was limited to smaller vessels, but this changed after the rise of Colonel Muammar Gaddafi in 1969. From this time, Libya started to buy armaments from Europe and the Soviet Union. The Customs and Harbour police were amalgamated with the Navy in 1970, extending the Navy's mission to include anti-smuggling and customs duties. Originally Libya received six submarines from the Soviet union in 1982, but it is very unlikely that the submarines are still operational.

Much of the Libyan Navy was rendered inoperable by NATO bombing in 2011, and the exact number of surviving vessels is unknown.

=== Paramilitary forces ===

====Revolutionary Guard Corps====
The Revolutionary Guard Corps (Liwa Haris al-Jamahiriya) or Jamahiriya Guard was a Libyan paramilitary elite unit that played the role of key protection force of the government of Muammar Gaddafi, until his death in October 2011. Composed of 3,000 men hand-picked from Gaddafi's tribal group in the Sirte region, the Guard was well armed, being provided with T-54 and T-62 tanks, APCs, MRLs, SA-8 and ZSU-23-4 SAMs taken from the army inventory. As of 2005, its commander was Hasan al-Kabir al-Gaddafi, a cousin of the former Libyan leader. http://www.meforum.org/878/libya-and-the-us-qadhafi-unrepentant 

The Revolutionary Guard developed from the Revolutionary Committees, even if the latter had at first been introduced only into workplaces and communities, and not extended to the military. After the early 1980s, however, the Revolutionary Guard, as a paramilitary wing of the Revolutionary Committees, became entrenched within the armed forces. They served as a parallel channel of control, a means of ideological indoctrination in the barracks, and an apparatus for monitoring suspicious behavior. The Revolutionary Guards reportedly held the keys to ammunition stockpiles at the main military bases, doling it out in small quantities as needed by the regular forces. Their influence increased after a coup attempt in May 1985, that was blocked mainly thanks to the action of the Revolutionary Guard that engaged regular army units in a series of street battles. 

==== Pan-African Legion ====
In about 1980, Muammar Gaddafi introduced the Islamic Pan-African Legion, a body of mercenaries recruited primarily among dissidents from Sudan, Egypt, Tunisia, Mali, and Chad. West African states with Muslim populations have also been the source of some personnel. Believed to consist of about 7,000 individuals, the force has received training from experienced Palestinian and Syrian instructors. Some of those recruited to the legion were said to have been forcibly impressed from among nationals of neighboring countries who migrated to Libya in search of work.

According to the Military Balance published by the International Institute for Strategic Studies, the force was organized into one armored, one infantry, and one paratroop/commando brigade. It has been supplied with T-54 and T-55 tanks, armored personnel carriers, and EE-9 armored cars. The Islamic Pan-African Legion was reported to have been committed during the fighting in Chad in 1980 and was praised by Gaddafi for its success there. However, it was believed that many of the troops who fled the Chadian attacks of March 1987 were members of the Legion. Library of Congress Country Study, Other Paramilitary Forces, 1988. 

==== Islamic Arab Legion ====
In an effort to realise Gaddafi's vision of a united Arab military force, plans for the creation of an Islamic Arab Legion were being announced from time to time. The goal, according to the Libyan press, would be to assemble an army of one million men and women fighters to prepare for the great Arab battle  the battle of liberating Palestine, of toppling the reactionary regimes, of annihilating the borders, gates, and barriers between the countries of the Arab homeland, and of creating the single Arab Jamahiriya from the ocean to the gulf. In March 1985, it was announced that the National Command of the Revolutionary Forces Command in the Arab Nation had been formed with Gaddafi at its head. A number of smaller radical Arab groups from Lebanon, Tunisia, Sudan, Iraq, the Persian Gulf states, and Jordan were represented at the inaugural meeting. Syrian Ba'ath Party and radical Palestinian factions were also present. Each of these movements was expected to earmark 10 per cent of its forces for service under the new command. As of April 1987, there was no information confirming the existence of such a militia. 

==== Peoples Militia ====
In 1987 the mission of the 45,000 People's Militia was territorial defence, and it was to function under the leadership of local military commanders. Gaddafi contended that it was the People's Militia that met the Egyptian incursions during the border clash of 1977, although the Egyptians insisted that their successful raids had been contested by regular army units. The militia forces are not known to have faced any other test that would permit an appraisal of their performance in home defence or as auxiliaries to the regular army. There was some evidence that local commanders had not responded energetically to their responsibility for training and supervising militia units. Militia units were reportedly generously equipped with arms, transport, and uniforms. In November 1985, it was announced that the first contingent of "armed people" trained as paratroopers had made a demonstration drop. http://lcweb2.loc.gov/cgi-bin/query/r?frd/cstdy:@field%28DOCID+ly0150%29 

The information above about the People's Militia is dated circa 1987; it is not clear whether the force still existed by the time of the 2011 civil war.

===Uniforms, ranks, and insignia as of 1987===

When the army and navy were formed, the uniforms adopted by each service reflected British military and naval tradition. Modifications have occurred over the intervening years, however, and in early 1987 Libyan uniforms were similar to those worn by military personnel of a number of Middle-Eastern Arab countries. The standard field uniform for Libyan paratroopers (Army commandos) was a two-piece camouflage uniform made of water repellent cotton. The shirt was similar in design to the United States Army fatigue shirt. The shirt and trousers were camouflaged in blue-green, light green, and dark brown. The standard headgear for paratroopers was a sky-blue beret. The uniforms of the air force, however, continued to resemble in both style and colour the uniforms of the United States Air Force, which served as a model when the Libyan Air Force was established. Library of Congress Country Study, 1988, Uniforms, Ranks, and Insignia of the Armed Forces. 

Originally the rank structure of all three services was similar to that of the British Armed Forces, but some modifications were introduced in light of the small size of the Libyan military establishment. In early 1979, the system prescribed by law still included nine officer grades and five enlisted ranks; there were no warrant officer equivalents. Although three general officer grades continued to be authorised, they have not been used since the 1969 coup. Promoted to the grade of colonel (aqid) after assuming power, Gaddafi maintained a ceiling on the grade level of his officer corps in keeping with his desire to avoid the ostentatious public image that the generals of the monarchy had conveyed. In January 1976, the Arab Socialist Union's National Congress attempted to promote Gaddafi to major general. The Libyan leader stated that he would accept the honour as an expression of gratitude from his compatriots but would retain the title of colonel because it had become an accepted and traditional part of his name. 

== After the 2011 Libyan civil war ==

== See also ==

* Green Resistance
* National Liberation Army
* Free Libyan Air Force

== References ==

== Further reading ==
* Global Security Article on Libya
* Derek Lutterbeck, 'Arming Libya: Transfers of Conventional Weapons Past and Present,' Contemporary Security Policy, 30:3 (December 2009), pp 505528, online published 30 November 2009
* Kenneth M. Pollack, Arabs at War: Military Effectiveness 194891, University of Nebraska Press, Lincoln and London, 2002, ISBN 0-8032-3733-2
* Mansour O. El-Kikhias Libyas Qaddafi: The Politics of Contradiction, pub 1997, ISBN 9780813014883, ISBN 0813014883
* International Crisis Group, 'Holding Libya Together: Security Challenges after Qadhafi,' Africa/Middle East Report No. 115, 14 December 2011

== External links ==
*Further reading on tribal/regime split of army

Libya

Libya
Libya
Libya
Libya



[[Foreign relations of Libya under Muammar Gaddafi]]

:This article is about the historical foreign relations of the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya. For the foreign relations of the current de facto Libyan government, see Foreign relations of Libya.

The foreign relations of the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya(19692011) underwent much fluctuation and change. They were marked by severe tension with the West (especially the United States, although relations were normalised in the early 21st century prior to the Libyan civil war) and by other national policies in the Middle East and Africa, including the Libyan government's financial and military support for numerous paramilitary and rebel groups.

==Timeline==
Colonel Gaddafi (left) with Egyptian President Gamal Abdel Nasser in 1969. Gaddafi moved Libya away from the West and initially sought Pan-Arabism.
Beginning in 1969, Colonel Muammar Gaddafi determined Libya's foreign policy. His principal foreign policy goals were Arab unity, elimination of Israel, advancement of Islam, support for Palestinians, elimination of outsideparticularly Westerninfluence in the Middle East and Africa, and support for a range of "revolutionary" causes.

After the 1969 coup, U.S.-Libyan relations became increasingly strained because of Libya's foreign policies supporting international terrorism and subversion against moderate Arab and African governments. Gaddafi closed American and British bases on Libyan territory and partially nationalized all foreign oil and commercial interests in Libya.

===1970s===
Export controls on military equipment and civil aircraft were imposed during the 1970s.

On 11 June 1972, Gaddafi announced that any Arab wishing to volunteer for Palestinian armed groups "can register his name at any Libyan embassy will be given adequate training for combat". He also promised financial support for attacks. Washington Post 12 June 1972 The New York Times 12 June 1972 In response, the United States withdrew its ambassador. On 7 October 1972, Gaddafi praised the Lod Airport massacre, carried out by the Japanese Red Army, and demanded Palestinian terrorist groups to carry out similar attacks. 

Gaddafi played a key role in promoting the use of oil embargoes as a political weapon for challenging the West, hoping that an oil price rise and embargo in 1973 would persuade the Westespecially the United Statesto end support for Israel. Gaddafi rejected both Soviet communism and Western capitalism and claimed he was charting a middle course for his government. The Columbia Encyclopedia, Sixth Edition, (20012005), "Qaddafi, Muammar al-", Bartleby Books. Retrieved 19 July 2006. 

In 1973 the Irish Naval Service intercepted the vessel Claudia in Irish territorial waters, which carried Soviet arms from Libya to the Provisional IRA. RTE Documentary: The Navy Bowyer Bell, p. 398. 
In 1976 after a series of terror attacks by the Provisional IRA, Gaddafi announced that "the bombs which are convulsing Britain and breaking its spirit are the bombs of Libyan people. We have sent them to the Irish revolutionaries so that the British will pay the price for their past deeds". 

Together with Fidel Castro and other Communist leaders, Gaddafi supported Soviet protege Haile Mariam Mengistu, the military ruler of Ethiopia, who was later convicted for a genocide that killed thousands.

In October 1978, Gaddafi sent Libyan troops to aid Idi Amin in the UgandaTanzania War when Amin tried to annex the northern Tanzanian province of Kagera, and Tanzania counterattacked. Amin lost the battle and later fled to exile in Libya, where he remained for almost a year. Biography, "Idi Amin", Cape Breton-Victoria Regional School Board. Retrieved 19 July 2006. 

Libya also was one of the main supporters of the Polisario Front in the former Spanish Sahara  a nationalist group dedicated to ending Spanish colonialism in the region. The Sahrawi Arab Democratic Republic (SADR) was proclaimed by Polisario on 28 February 1976, and Libya began to recognize the SADR as the legitimate government of Western Sahara starting 15 April 1980. It is still common for Sahrawi students to attend their schooling in Libya. 

Gaddafi also aided Jean-Bdel Bokassa, the self-proclaimed emperor of the short-lived Central African Empire. 

U.S. embassy staff members were withdrawn from Tripoli after a mob attacked and set fire to the embassy in December 1979. The U.S. government declared Libya a "state sponsor of terrorism" on 29 December 1979.

===1980s===
In May 1981, the U.S. government closed the Libyan "people's bureau" (embassy) in Washington, D.C. and expelled the Libyan staff in response their conduct generally violating internationally accepted standards of diplomatic behavior. Brent L. Smith: Terrorism in America: Pipe Pombs and Pipe Dreams, Ann Arbor (MI) 1992, p. 141. 

In August 1981, in the first incident of the Gulf of Sidra, two Libyan jets fired on U.S. aircraft participating in a routine naval exercise over international waters of the Mediterranean Sea claimed by Libya. The U.S. planes returned fire and shot down the attacking Libyan aircraft. On 11 December 1981, the State Department invalidated U.S. passports for travel to Libya (a de facto travel ban) and, for purposes of safety, advised all U.S. citizens in Libya to leave. In March 1982, the U.S. government prohibited imports of Libyan crude oil into the United States 
and expanded the controls on U.S.-origin goods intended for export to Libya. Licenses were required for all transactions, except food and medicine. In March 1984, U.S. export controls were expanded to prohibit future exports to the Ra's Lanuf petrochemical complex. In April 1985, all Export-Import Bank financing was prohibited.

In October 1981, Egyptian President Anwar Sadat was assassinated. Gaddafi applauded the murder and remarked that it was a "punishment" for Sadat's signing of the Camp David Accords with the United States and Israel. 

Libyan People's Bureau (Embassy) in London, Knightsbridge, 2008

In April 1984, Libyan refugees in London protested against the execution of two dissidents. Libyan diplomats shot at 11 people and killed Yvonne Fletcher, a British policewoman. The incident led to the breaking off of diplomatic relations between the United Kingdom and Libya for over a decade. Two months later, Gaddafi asserted that he wanted his agents to assassinate dissident refugees, even if they were just on pilgrimage in the holy city of Meccain August 1984, a Libyan plot in Mecca was thwarted by Saudi Arabian police. 

After the December 1985 Rome and Vienna airport attacks, which killed 19 and wounded around 140, Gaddafi indicated that he would continue to support the Red Army Faction, the Red Brigades, and the Irish Republican Army as long as European countries support anti-Gaddafi Libyans. 
The Foreign Minister of Libya also called the massacres "heroic acts". Seale, Patrick. Abu Nidal: A Gun for Hire. Hutchinson, 1992, p. 245. 

In 1986 Libyan state television announced that Libya was training suicide squads to attack American and European interests. 

Gaddafi claimed the Gulf of Sidra as his territorial water and his navy was involved in a conflict from January to March 1986.

On 5 April 1986, Libyan agents bombed "La Belle" nightclub in West Berlin, killing three people and injuring 229 people who were spending the evening there. Gaddafi's plan was intercepted by Western intelligence. More detailed information was retrieved years later when Stasi archives were investigated by the reunited Germany. Libyan agents who had carried out the operation from the Libyan embassy in East Germany were prosecuted by reunited Germany in the 1990s. Flashback: The Berlin disco bombing. BBC on 13 November 2001. 

Germany and the United States learned that the bombing in West Berlin had been ordered from Tripoli. On 14 April 1986, the United States carried out Operation El Dorado Canyon against Gaddafi and members of his regime. Air defenses, three army bases, and two airfields in Tripoli and Benghazi were bombed. The surgical strikes failed to kill Gaddafi but he lost a few dozen military officers. Qaddafi, terrorism, and the origins of the U.S. attack on Libya. Brian Lee Davis 

Gaddafi announced that he had won a spectacular military victory over the United States and the country was officially renamed the "Great Socialist People's Libyan Arab Jamahiriyah". However, his speech appeared devoid of passion and even the "victory" celebrations appeared unusual. Criticism of Gaddafi by ordinary Libyan citizens became more bold, such as defacing of Gaddafi posters. The raids against Gaddafi had brought the regime to its weakest point in 17 years.

The ChadianLibyan conflict (19781987) ended in disaster for Libya in 1987 with the Toyota War. France supported Chad in this conflict and two years later on 19 September 1989, a French airliner, UTA Flight 772, was destroyed by an in-flight explosion for which Libyan agents were convicted in absentia. The incident bore close similarities to the destruction of Pan Am Flight 103 (the Lockerbie Bombing) a year earlier. The downing of these two airliners along with the 1986 Berlin discotheque bombing seemed to establish a pattern of reprisal attacksin the form of terrorist bombingsby Libya or at least Libyan agents. The United Nations imposed sanctions on Libya for these two acts (with UN Security Council Resolutions 731, 748 and 883). The UN eventually lifted these sanctions (with Resolution 1506) in 2003 when Libya "accepted responsibility for the actions of its officials, renounced terrorism and arranged for payment of appropriate compensation for the families of the victims." In 2008 Libya established a fund to compensate victims of these three terrorist acts (and the 1986 US bombing of Tripoli and Benghazi).

Gaddafi fueled a number of Islamist and communist terrorist groups in the Philippines, as well as paramilitaries in Oceania. He attempted to radicalize New Zealand's Mori people in a failed effort to destabilise the U.S. ally. In Australia, he financed trade unions and some politicians who opposed the ANZUS alliance with the United States. In May 1987, Australia deported diplomats and broke off relations with Libya because of its activities in Oceania.

In late 1987 French authorities stopped a merchant vessel, the MV Eksund, which was delivering a 150 ton Libyan arms shipment to European terrorist groups.

In 1988, Libya was found to be in the process of constructing a chemical weapons plant at Rabta, a plant which became the largest such facility in the Third World.

Libya's relationship with the Soviet Union involved massive Libyan arms purchases from the Soviet bloc and the presence of thousands of east bloc advisers. Libya's useand heavy lossof Soviet-supplied weaponry in its war with Chad was a notable breach of an apparent Soviet-Libyan understanding not to use the weapons for activities inconsistent with Soviet objectives. As a result, Soviet-Libyan relations reached a nadir in mid-1987.

In January 1989, there was another encounter over the Gulf of Sidra between U.S. and Libyan aircraft which resulted in the downing of two Libyan jets.

===1990s===

In 1991, two Libyan intelligence agents were indicted by prosecutors in the United States and United Kingdom for their involvement in the December 1988 bombing of Pan Am Flight 103. Six other Libyans were put on trial in absentia for the 1989 bombing of UTA Flight 772 over Chad and Niger. The UN Security Council demanded that Libya surrender the suspects, cooperate with the Pan Am 103 and UTA 772 investigations, pay compensation to the victims' families, and cease all support for terrorism. Libya's refusal to comply led to the approval of Security Council Resolution 748 on 31 March 1992, imposing international sanctions on the state designed to bring about Libyan compliance. Continued Libyan defiance led to further sanctions by the UN against Libya in November 1993. (2003), "Libya", Global Policy Forum. Retrieved 19 July 2006. 

After the dissolution of the Warsaw Pact and the Soviet Union, Libya concentrated on expanding diplomatic ties with Third World countries and increasing its commercial links with Europe and East Asia. Following the imposition of U.N. sanctions in 1992, these ties significantly diminished. Following a 1998 Arab League meeting in which fellow Arab states decided not to challenge U.N. sanctions, Gaddafi announced that he was turning his back on pan-Arab ideas, one of the fundamental tenets of his philosophy.

Instead, Libya pursued closer bilateral ties, particularly with Egypt and Northwest African nations Tunisia and Morocco. It also has sought to develop its relations with Sub-Saharan Africa, leading to Libyan involvement in several internal African disputes in the Democratic Republic of Congo, Sudan, Somalia, Central African Republic, Eritrea, and Ethiopia. Libya also has sought to expand its influence in Africa through financial assistance, ranging from aid donations to impoverished neighbors such as Niger to oil subsidies to Zimbabwe. Gaddafi has proposed a borderless "United States of Africa" to transform the continent into a single nation-state ruled by a single government. This plan has been moderately well received, although more powerful would-be participants such as Nigeria and South Africa are skeptical.

Gaddafi also trained and supported Charles Taylor, who was indicted by the Special Court for Sierra Leone for war crimes and crimes against humanity committed during the conflict in Sierra Leone. 

Libya had close ties with Slobodan Miloevi's regime in Yugoslavia. Gaddafi aligned himself with the Orthodox Serbs against Bosnia and Herzegovina's Muslims and Kosovo's Albanians. Gaddafi supported Miloevi even when Miloevi was charged with large-scale ethnic cleansing against Albanians in Kosovo. 

In 1996, the Iran and Libya Sanctions Act (ILSA) was enacted, seeking to penalize non-U.S. companies which invest more than $40 million in Libya's oil and gasoline sector in any one year. ILSA was renewed in 2001, and the investment cap lowered to $20 million.

In 1999, less than a decade after the UN sanctions were put in place, Libya began to make dramatic policy changes in regard to the Western world, including turning over the Lockerbie suspects for trial. This diplomatic breakthrough followed years of negotiation, including a visit by UN Secretary General Kofi Annan to Libya in December 1998, and personal appeals by Nelson Mandela. Eventually UK Foreign Secretary Robin Cook persuaded the Americans to accept a trial of the suspects in the Netherlands under Scottish law, with the UN Security Council agreeing to suspend sanctions as soon as the suspects arrived in the Netherlands for trial. Libya also paid compensation in 1999 for the death of British policewoman Yvonne Fletcher, a move that preceded the reopening of the British embassy in Tripoli and the appointment of ambassador Sir Richard Dalton, after a 17-year break in diplomatic relations. 

===2000s===
Gaddafi with then-President of Russia Vladimir Putin in 2008
As of January 2002, Libya was constructing another chemical weapons production facility at Tarhuna. Citing Libya's support for terrorism and its past regional aggressions the United States voiced concern over this development. In cooperation with like-minded countries, the United States has since sought to bring a halt to the foreign technical assistance deemed essential to the completion of this facility. See Chemical weapon proliferation#Libya.

Following the fall of Saddam Hussein's regime in 2003, Gaddafi decided to abandon his weapons of mass destruction programs and pay almost 3 billion euros in compensation to the families of Pan Am Flight 103 and UTA Flight 772. Marcus, Jonathan, (15 May 2006), "Washington's Libyan fairy tale", BBC News. Retrieved 15 July 2006. The decision was welcomed by many western nations and was seen as an important step toward Libya rejoining the international community. UK. Politics, (25 March 2004), "Blair hails new Libyan relations", BBC news. Retrieved 15 July 2006. Since 2003 the country has made efforts to normalize its ties with the European Union and the United States and has even coined the catchphrase, 'The Libya Model', an example intended to show the world what can be achieved through negotiation, rather than force, when there is goodwill on both sides. By 2004 George W. Bush had lifted the economic sanctions and official relations resumed with the United States. Libya opened a liaison office in Washington, and the United States opened an office in Tripoli. In January 2004, Congressman Tom Lantos led the first official Congressional delegation visit to Libya.

Libya has supported Sudan's President Omar al-Bashir despite charges of a genocide in Darfur. 

The release, in 2007, of five Bulgarian nurses and a Palestinian doctor, who had been held since 1999, charged with conspiring to deliberately infect over 400 children with HIV, was seen as marking a new stage in Libyan-Western relations.

The United States removed Gaddafi's regime, after 27 years, from its list of states sponsoring terrorism. Lipton, Eric, April 2008, "Libya Seeks Exemption for Its Debt to Victims" New York Times. 

On 16 October 2007, Libya was elected to serve on the United Nations Security Council for two years starting in January 2008. 

In August 2008 Italian Prime Minister Silvio Berlusconi signed an agreement to pay Libya $5 billion over 25 years  this was a "complete and moral acknowledgement of the damage inflicted on Libya by Italy during the colonial era", the Italian prime minister said. Italy seals Libya colonial deal  BBC News In September 2008, US Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice met with Gaddafi and announced that US-Libya relations have entered a 'new phase'. US-Libya relations in 'new phase' 

Libyan-Swiss relations strongly suffered after the arrest of Hannibal Gaddafi for beating up his domestic servants in Geneva in 2008. In response, Gaddafi removed all his money held in Swiss banks and asked the United Nations to vote to abolish Switzerland as a sovereign nation. 

In February 2009, Gaddafi was selected to be chairman of the African Union for one year. The same year, the United Kingdom and Libya signed a prisoner-exchange agreement and then Libya requested the transfer of the convicted Lockerbie bomber, who finally returned home in August 2009. 
U.S. Secretary of State Hillary Clinton with Libyan National Security Adviser Mutassim Gaddafi in 2009

On 23 September 2009, Colonel Gaddafi addressed the 64th session of the UN General Assembly in New York, his first visit to the United States. 

As of 25 October 2009, Canadian visa requests were being denied and Canadian travelers were told they were not welcome in Libya. Specifically, Harper's government was planning to publicly criticize Gaddafi for praising the convicted Lockerbie bomber. 

The sincerity of the good faith efforts of the Libyan government may be questionable since Moroccan Foreign Minister Taieb Fassi Fihri, told a U.S. diplomat in 2009 that the Libyans were willing to host wounded Guinean junta leader Captain Moussa Dadis Camara after a failed assassination attempt in 2009. Libya also still provided bounties for heads of refugees who criticized Gaddafi, including 1 million dollars for Ashur Shamis, a Libyan-British journalist. 

===2010s===
During the start of the Arab Spring, Gaddafi condemned the Tunisian revolution in January 2011, saying protesters were misled by WikiLeaks and voicing solidarity with ousted President Zine El Abidine Ben Ali. 

The progress made by Gaddafi's government in improving relations with the Western world was swiftly set back by the regime's authoritarian crackdown on protests that began the following month. Many Western countries, including the United Kingdom, the United States, and eventually Italy condemned Libya for the brutal crackdown on the dissidents. Peru became the first of several countries to sever diplomatic relations with Tripoli on 22 February 2011, followed closely by African Union member state Botswana the following day. 

Libya was suspended from Arab League proceedings on 22 February 2011, the same day Peru terminated bilateral relations. In response, Gaddafi declared that in the view of his government, "The Arab League is finished. There is no such thing as the Arab League." 

On 10 March 2011, France became the first country to not just break off relations with the jamahiriya, but transfer diplomatic recognition to the rebel National Transitional Council established in Benghazi, declaring it to be "the sole legitimate representative of the Libyan people". As of 20 September 2011, a total of 98 countries have taken this step.

On 19 March 2011, a coalition of United Nations member states led by France, the United Kingdom, and the United States began military operations in Libyan airspace and territorial waters after the United Nations Security Council approved UNSCR 1973, ostensibly to prevent further attacks on civilians as loyalist forces closed in on Benghazi, the rebel headquarters. In response, Gaddafi declared that a state of "war with no limits" existed between Libya and the members of the coalition. Despite this, he sent a three-page letter to US President Barack Obama imploring him to "annul a wrong and mistaken action" and stop striking Libyan targets, repeatedly referring to him as "our son" and blaming the uprising on the terrorist group al Qaeda. 

==Relations with the West==
Embassy in Berlin
In 2003 Libya began to make policy changes with the open intention of pursuing a Western-Libyan dtente. The Libyan government announced its decision to abandon its weapons of mass destruction programs and pay almost $3 billion in compensation to the families of Pan Am Flight 103 and UTA Flight 772. Marcus, Jonathan, (15 May 2006), "Washington's Libyan fairy tale", BBC News. Retrieved 15 July 2006. 

Starting in 2003, the Libyan government restored normal diplomatic ties with the European Union and the United States and has even coined the catchphrase, "The Libya Model", an example intended to show the world what can be achieved through negotiation rather than force when there is goodwill on both sides. Hirsh, Michael, (11 May 2006), "The Real Libya Model", Newsweek. Retrieved 15 July 2006. 

On 31 October 2008, Libya paid $1.5 billion, sought through donations from private businesses, to a fund that would be used to compensate both US victims of the 1988 bombing of Pan Am flight 103 and the 1986 bombing of the La Belle disco in Germany. In addition, Libyan victims of US airstrikes that followed the Berlin attack will also be compensated with $300 million from the fund. US state department spokesman, Sean McCormack called the move a "laudable milestone ... clearing the way for continued and expanding US-Libyan partnership." This final payment under the US-Libya Claims Settlement Agreement was seen as a major step towards improving ties between the two, which had begun easing after Tripoli halted its arms programmes. George Bush also signed an executive order restoring Libya's immunity from terror-related lawsuits and dismissing pending compensation cases. http://english.aljazeera.net/news/americas/2008/10/20081031192535751952.html 

On 17 November 2008, FCO minister Bill Rammell signed five agreements with Libya. Rammell said: "I will today sign four bilateral agreements with my Libyan counterpart, Abdulatti al-Obidi, which will strengthen our judicial ties, as agreed during Tony Blair's visit to Libya in May last year. In addition, we are signing today a Double Taxation Convention which will bring benefits to British business in Libya and Libyan investors in the UK  benefits in terms of certainty, clarity and transparency and reducing tax compliance burdens. We are also in the final stages of negotiating an agreement to protect and promote investment."

"UK/Libya relations have significantly improved in recent years, following Libya's voluntary renunciation of WMD. Today we are partners in the UN Security Council. We also wish to assist Libya to establish closer relations with the European Union to continue and strengthen the reintegration of Libya within the international community. We therefore support the commencement of negotiations between Libya and the EU on a framework agreement which should cover a range of issues including political, social, economic, commercial and cultural relations between the EU and Libya." 

On 21 November 2008, the US Senate confirmed the appointment of Gene Cretz to be the first US ambassador to Libya since 1972. 

During the Libyan civil war, all European Union and NATO member states withdrew diplomatic staff from Tripoli and shut their embassies in the Libyan capital. Bulgarian Embassy Only EU Representation Open in Tripoli, Novinite, 31 March 2011 Several foreign embassies and UN offices were badly damaged by vandals on 1 May 2011, drawing condemnation from the United Kingdom and Italy. The UK also expelled the Libyan ambassador in London from the country. 

On 1 July 2011, Gaddafi threatened to sponsor attacks against civilians and businesses in Europe in what would be a resumption of his policies of the 1970s and 1980s. 

On 30 August 2008, Gaddafi and Italian Prime Minister Silvio Berlusconi signed a historic cooperation treaty in Benghazi. Under its terms, Italy will pay $5 billion to Libya as compensation for its former military occupation. In exchange, Libya will take measures to combat illegal immigration coming from its shores and boost investments in Italian companies. The treaty was ratified by Italy in 6 February 2009, and by Libya on 2 March, during a visit to Tripoli by Berlusconi. 

In June 2009, Gaddafi made his first visit to Rome, where he met Prime Minister Berlusconi, President Giorgio Napolitano, Senate President Renato Schifani, and Chamber President Gianfranco Fini, among others. The Democratic Party and Italy of Values opposed the visit, and many protests were staged throughout Italy by human rights organizations and the Radical Party. Gaddafi also took part in the G8 summit in L'Aquila in July as Chairman of the African Union.

In the 20052009 period, Italy has been the first EU arms exporter towards Libya, with a total value of 276.7m, of which one third only in the last 20082009 years. Italian exports cover one third of total EU arms exports towards Libya, and include mainly military aircraft but also missiles and electronic equipment. The Guardian, 1 March 2011 

During the Libyan civil war, Italy terminated relations with Tripoli and recognized the rebel authority in Benghazi as Libya's legitimate representative, effectively starting relations with the anti-Gaddafi government. The Italian government has urged the international community to follow suit. 

==International incidents==

===1986 Berlin discotheque bombing===

On 13 November 2001, a German court found four persons, including a former employee of the Libyan embassy in East Berlin, guilty in connection with the 1986 Berlin discotheque bombing, in which 229 people were injured and two U.S. servicemen were killed. The court also established a connection to the Libyan government. 

===Lockerbie bombing===
In November 1991, two Libyan intelligence agents, Abdelbaset al-Megrahi and Lamin Khalifah Fhimah, were charged with the December 1988 Lockerbie bombing. Libya refused to extradite the two accused to the U.S. or to Scotland. As a result, United Nations Security Council Resolution 748 was approved on 31 March 1992, requiring Libya to surrender the suspects, cooperate with the Pan Am Flight 103 and UTA Flight 772 investigations, pay compensation to the victims' families, and cease all support for terrorism. The UN imposed further sanctions with Resolution 883, a limited assets freeze and an embargo on selected oil equipment, in November 1993. (2003), "Libya", Global Policy Forum. Retrieved 19 July 2006. In 1999, six other Libyans who had been accused of the September 1989 bombing of Union Air Transport Flight 772 were put on trial in their absence by a Paris court. They were found guilty and sentenced to life imprisonment. (2003),"UTA 772: The forgotten flight", BBC News. 

The Libyan government eventually surrendered the two Lockerbie bombing suspects in 1999 for trial at the Scottish Court in the Netherlands and UN sanctions were suspended. On 31 January 2001, at the end of the Pan Am Flight 103 bombing trial, Megrahi was convicted of murder and sentenced to 27 years in prison. Fhimah was found not guilty and was freed to return to Libya. Megrahi appealed against his conviction but this was rejected in February 2002. In 2003, Libya wrote to the UN Security Council admitting "responsibility for the actions of its officials" in relation to the Lockerbie bombing, renouncing terrorism and agreeing to pay compensation to the relatives of the 270 victims. The previously suspended UN sanctions were then cancelled. Libya admits "responsibility for the actions of its officials" 

In June 2007, the Scottish Criminal Cases Review Commission decided that there may have been a miscarriage of justice and referred Megrahi's case back to Court of Criminal Appeal in Edinburgh for a second appeal. Libyan jailed over Lockerbie wins right to appeal Expected to last for a year, the appeal began in April 2009 and was adjourned in May 2009. Having been diagnosed with terminal cancer, Megrahi dropped the appeal and on 20 August 2009, was granted compassionate release from jail and repatriated to Libya. In an interview with the Wall Street Journal on 24 September 2009, the day after his address to the UN General Assembly in New York, Colonel Gaddafi said: "As a case, the Lockerbie question: I would say it's come to an end, legally, politically, financially, it is all over." 

===Benghazi hospital affair===

In the late 1990s, a Benghazi children's hospital was the site of an outbreak of HIV infection that spread to over 400 patients. Libya blamed the outbreak on five Bulgarian nurses and a Palestinian doctor, who were arrested and eventually sentenced to death (eventually overturned and a new trial ordered). The international view is that Libya has used the medics as scapegoats for poor hygiene conditions, and Bulgaria and other countries including the European Union and the United States repeatedly called on Tripoli to release them. A new trial began 11 May 2006, in Tripoli. On 6 December a study was released showing that some children had been infected before the six arrived in Libya, but it was too late for inclusion as evidence. On 19 December 2006, the six were again convicted and sentenced to death. They were finally released in June 2007, after mediation of French president Nicolas Sarkozy, in exchange for a variety of agreements with the EU, and they were returned to Bulgaria safely.

===Dispute with Switzerland===

On 15 July 2008 the fifth eldest son of Muammar Gaddafi, Hannibal Gaddafi, http://www.swissinfo.ch/eng/archive.html?siteSect=104&sid=9346795&ty=nd and his wife were held for two days and charged with assaulting two of their staff in Geneva, Switzerland and then released on bail on 17 July. Hannibal Gaddafi has a history of violent and aggressive behaviour having been charged with battery by his later wife and having attacked Italian police officers. 

The government of Libya subsequently put a boycott on Swiss imports, reduced flights between Libya and Switzerland, stopped issuing visas to Swiss citizens, recalled diplomats from Bern, and forced all Swiss companies such as ABB and Nestl to close offices. General National Maritime Transport Company, which owns a large refinery in Switzerland, also halted oil shipments to Switzerland. 

Two Swiss businessmen, Rachid Hamdani and Max Gldi, Libya head of ABB, who were in Libya at the time were denied permission to leave the country and were forced to take shelter at the Swiss embassy in Tripoli. Swiss businessmen jailed in Libya Both were initially sentenced to 6 months in prison for immigration offenses, but Hamdani was cleared on appeal and Gldi's sentence was reduced to four months. Gldi surrendered to Libyan authorities on 22 February 2010, while Hamdani returned to Switzerland on 24 February. Tages Anzeiger, 22 February 2010 

At the 35th G8 summit in July 2009, Muammar Gaddafi called Switzerland a "world mafia" and called for the country to be split between France, Germany and Italy. 

In August 2009 Swiss President Hans-Rudolf Merz visited Tripoli and issued a public apology to Libya for the arrest of Hannibal Gaddafi and his wife. Geneva's prosecutor dropped the case against the Gaddafis when the employees withdrew their formal complaint after reaching an undisclosed settlement.

===Schengen Area visa ban===
In February 2010, the dispute with Switzerland spread, with Libya refusing to issue entry visas to nationals of any of the countries within the Schengen Area, of which Switzerland is a part. This action was apparently taken in retaliation for Switzerland blacklisting 188 high-ranking officials from Libya, although there has been no official confirmation from Libya itself about why they have taken this action. 

As a result of the ban, foreign nationals from certain countries were not permitted entry into Libya at Tripoli airport, including 22 Italians and eight Maltese citizens, one of whom was forced to wait for 20 hours before he was able to return home. Three Italians, nine Portuguese nationals, a Frenchman and a European citizen who arrived from Cairo were repatriated. In addition to citizens of Schengen Area countries being refused entry, it has been reported that several Irish citizens have been turned away, despite Republic of Ireland not being a member of the Schengen agreement. An unnamed Libyan official at the airport asked to confirm the ban told Reuters: "This is right. This decision has been taken. No visas for Europeans, except Britain." 

In response, the European Commission criticised the actions, describing them as "unilateral and disproportionate", although no immediate 'tit-for-tat' response was announced. 

==Support for rebel and paramilitary groups==
The government of Libya has also received enormous criticism and trade restrictions from western countries and organizations for allegedly providing numerous armed rebel groups with weapons, explosives and combat training. The ideologies of some of these organizations have varied greatly. Most have been nationalist, with some having a socialist ideology; while others hold a more conservative and Islamic fundamentalist ideology.

Paramilitaries supported by Libya past and present include:

*The Provisional Irish Republican Army (IRA) of Ireland, an Irish paramilitary group that fought a 29-year war for a United Ireland. See Provisional IRA arms importation for details. Many of the break away Irish Republican groups which oppose the Good Friday Agreement (the Continuity Irish Republican Army and the Real Irish Republican Army) are believed to be in possession of a significant amount of the Libyan ammunition and semtex explosives delivered to the IRA during the 1970s and 1980s.

*The Palestine Liberation Organization of the disputed territories in the West Bank and Gaza Strip received support from Libya, as well as many other Arab states.

*The Moro National Liberation Front was a right-wing Islamic fundamentalist rebel army which fought in the Philippines against the military dictatorship of Ferdinand Marcos

*Umkhonto we Sizwe  Xhosa, for the "spear of the nation" was originally the military wing of the African National Congress (a multiracial, center-left political party) which fought against the white minority led Apartheid regime in South Africa. During the years of MK's underground struggle the group was supported by Libya.

*ETA  Basque Fatherland and Liberty, a Basque separatist group fighting for the independence of the Basques from Spain with ties to the Provisional Irish Republican Army also received training support from Libya in the 1960s and mid-'70s.

*Libya was also was one the main supporters of the Polisario Front in the former Spanish Sahara  a nationalist group dedicated to ending Spanish colonialism in the region, and from 1975, to combatting the Moroccan occupation of what is now known as Western Sahara. The Sahrawi Arab Democratic Republic (SADR) was proclaimed by Polisario on 28 February 1976, and Libya began to recognize the SADR as the legitimate government of Western Sahara starting 15 April 1980. While monetary and military Libyan support for the Sahrawi cause dwindled in the mid-1980s, after a rapprochement with Morocco, the enemy of Polisario, some Sahrawi refugee students are still able to apply for higher education in Libya. 

==Africa==
Libya claims about 19,400 km2 in northern Niger and part of southeastern Algeria. In addition, it is involved in a maritime boundary dispute with Tunisia. Anderson, Ewan W. (2003). 

As with all other African countries, Libya is a member of the Non-Aligned Movement. As with most international organizations to which Tripoli is a party, NAM recognizes it under the name Libyan Arab Jamahiriya. 

===Algeria===

AlgeriaLibya relations have generally been amicable. Entelis, John P. with Lisa Arone. "The Maghrib". Algeria: a country study. Library of Congress Federal Research Division (December 1993). This article incorporates text from this source, which is in the public domain. Libyan support for the Polisario Front in the Western Sahara facilitated early post independence Algerian relations with Libya. Libyan inclinations for full-scale political union, however, have obstructed formal political collaboration because Algeria has consistently backed away from such cooperation with its unpredictable neighbour. 

===Chad===
Aouzou strip (red)

Libya long claimed the Aouzou Strip, a strip of land in northern Chad rich with uranium deposits that was intensely involved in Chad's civil war in the 1970s and 1980s.

In 1973, Libya engaged in military operations in the Aouzou Strip to gain access to minerals and to use it as a base of influence in Chadian politics. Libya argued that the territory was inhabited by indigenous people who owed allegiance to the Senussi Order and subsequently to the Ottoman Empire, and that this title had been inherited by Libya. It also supported its claim with an unratified 1935 treaty between France and Italy, the colonial powers of Chad and Libya, respectively. After consolidating its hold on the strip, Libya annexed it in 1976. Chadian forces were able to force the Libyans to retreat from the Aouzou Strip in 1987.

A cease-fire between Chad and Libya held from 1987 to 1988, followed by unsuccessful negotiations over the next several years, leading finally to the 1994 International Court of Justice decision granting Chad sovereignty over the Aouzou Strip, which ended Libyan occupation.

Chadian-Libyan relations were ameliorated when Libyan-supported Idriss Dby unseated Habr on 2 December. Gaddafi was the first head of state to recognize the new regime, and he also signed treaties of friendship and cooperation on various levels; but regarding the Aouzou Strip Dby followed his predecessor, declaring that if necessary he would fight to keep the strip out of Libya's hands. M. Azevedo, p. 150 

The Aouzou dispute was concluded for good on 3 February 1994, when the judges of the ICJ by a majority of 16 to 1 decided that the Aouzou Strip belonged to Chad. The court's judgement was implemented without delay, the two parties signing as early as 4 April an agreement concerning the practical modalities for the implementation of the judgement. Monitored by international observers, the withdrawal of Libyan troops from the Strip began on 15 April and was completed by 10 May. The formal and final transfer of the Strip from Libya to Chad took place on 30 May, when the sides signed a joint declaration stating that the Libyan withdrawal had been effected. G. Simons, p. 78 

During the Libyan civil war, after meeting with high-level representatives of the Chadian government, United States Secretary of State Hillary Rodham Clinton announced that N'Djamena opposes Gaddafi and has reached out to the rival National Transitional Council in rebel-held Benghazi. This claim was disputed by at least one foreign policy analyst, who brought up previous remarks made by Ambassador Daoussa Dby, the Chadian president's half-brother, and said, "Dby's words seem to echo Gaddafi's claims that the terrorist group al-Qaeda masterminded the national uprising in Libya."

===Egypt===

After the neighboring countries of Egypt and Libya both gained independence in the early 1950s, relations were initially cooperative. Libya assisted Egypt in the 1973 Arab-Israeli War. Later, tensions arose due to Egypt's rapprochement with the west. Following the 1977 LibyanEgyptian War, relations were suspended for twelve years. However, since 1989 relations have steadily improved. With the progressive lifting of UN and US sanctions from 2003 to 2008, the two countries have been working together to jointly develop their oil and natural gas industries. 

==Europe==

 Country Formal Relations Began Notes 
 Belarus 1992 See BelarusLibya relations * Belarus has an embassy in Tripoli. Libya embassy in Tripoli (in Russian only) * Libya has an embassy in Minsk. * Since the Lockerbie bombing, Belarus has been one of the few European nations to maintain diplomatic relations with Libya. http://www.hurriyet.com.tr/english/world/10273995.asp?gid=237&sz=48222 
 Bulgaria See Foreign relations of Bulgaria Relations with Bulgaria have been troublesome after the a group of Bulgarian nurses and a Palestinian doctor were accused of infecting Libyan children with HIV when they worked at a Libyan hospital; the nurses were sentenced to death in a Libyan court, but the death sentences were ultimately commuted and the Bulgarian nurses and Palestinian doctor were sent back to Bulgaria. 
 Croatia See CroatiaLibya relations 
 Cyprus 1960s See CyprusLibya relations * Cyprus has an embassy in Tripoli. * Libya has an embassy in Nicosia. * Cyprus Foreign Affairs: List of bilateral treaties with Libya 
 Czech Republic 1993 See Czech Republic  Libya relations * The Czech Republic has an embassy in Tripoli. Czech embassy in Tripoli * Libya has an embassy in Prague. Czech Ministry of Foreign Affairs: direction of the Libya embassy in Prague * The Czech Republic imposed sanctions on Libya in 1997 under a United Nations resolution following the 1988 Lockerbie bombing. This was lifted in 2006 by Czech President Vclav Klaus. http://news.xinhuanet.com/english/2006-02/14/content_4178037.htm 
 Denmark See Denmark  Libya relations * Libya has an embassy in Copenhagen, Denmark. Embassy of Libya in Copenhagen * Denmark has a royal consualte in Tripoli, Libya. Embassies Of Other Nations To Libya Without Websites 
 France See FranceLibya relations Libya developed particularly close relations with France after the June 1967 War, when France relaxed its arms embargo on nonfront-line Middle East combatants and agreed to sell weapons to the Libyans. In 1974 Libya and France signed an agreement whereby Libya exchanged a guaranteed oil supply for technical assistance and financial cooperation. By 1976, however, Libya began criticizing France as an \"arms merchant\" because of its willingness to sell weapons to both sides in the Middle East conflict. Libya later criticized France for its willingness to sell arms to Egypt. Far more serious was Libya's dissatisfaction with French military intervention in the Western Sahara, Chad, and Zaire. In 1978 Gaddafi noted that although economic relations were good, political relations were not, and he accused France of having reverted to a colonialist policy that former French president Charles de Gaulle had earlier abandoned. In the 1980s, Libyan-French discord centered on the situation in Chad. As mentioned, the two countries found themselves supporting opposite sides in the Chadian Civil War. In late 1987, there were some French troops in Chad, but French policy did not permit its forces to cross the sixteenth parallel. Thus, direct clashes with Libyan soldiers seemed unlikely. On 10 March 2011, France was the first country in the world to recognise the National Transitional Council as the legitimate government of Libya, in the context of the Libyan civil war against Muammar Gaddafi. \"France recognises Libyan rebels\", BBC, 10 March 2011 
 Germany See GermanyLibya relations Germany is represented in Libya with an embassy in Tripoli, while Libya has an embassy in Berlin. The relationship between these countries was tense in the late 1980s following a bombing incident, but has improved since with increasingly close co-operation especially on economic matters. On 13 June 2011, Germany began to recognize the National Transitional Council as the sole legitimate government of Libya. 
 Greece See Foreign relations of Greece 
 Hungary * Hungary has an embassy in Tripoli. Since Libyan civil war the staff of Hungarys Tripoli embassy had stood their ground in representing during the civil war situation the interests of the European Union, the United States, Greece, Croatia, Canada and Italy, too. On 24 August 2011 the Hungarian government recognised the National Transitional Council (NTC) as the legitimate representative of Libya. * Libya has an embassy in Budapest. 
 Italy See Foreign relations of Italy 
 Malta See LibyaMalta relations * Both countries established diplomatic relations soon after Malta's independence. * Both countries had very close ties and cooperation during Dom Mintoff's governments. * Libya has an embassy in Valletta. * Malta has an embassy in Tripoli. 
 Russia See LibyaRussia relations * Russia has an embassy in Tripoli. * Libya has an embassy in Moscow. 
 Serbia 1955 See LibyaSerbia relations * Libya has an embassy in Belgrade. Serbian Ministry of Foreign Affairs: direction of the Libya embassy in Belgrade * Since 1963, Serbia has an embassy in Tripoli. * Serbian Ministry of Foreign Affairs about relations with Libya 
 Turkey 1955 See LibyaTurkey relations * Libya has an embassy in Ankara, and a general consulate in Istanbul. * Turkey has an embassy in Tripoli and a general consulate in Benghazi. * Turkish Ministry of Foreign Affairs about relations with Libya 
 Switzerland See LibyaSwitzerland relations * Libya had an embassy in Bern * Switzerland had an embassy in Tripoli Relations were severed in 2009, Gaddafi publicly called for the dissolution of Switzerland. 
 United Kingdom See Libya  United Kingdom relations * Libya has an embassy in London * The United Kingdom had an embassy in Tripoli 

==United States==

In early 2004, the U.S. State Department ended its ban on U.S. citizens using their passports for travel to Libya or spending money there. U.S. citizens began legally heading back to Libya for the first time since 1981.

On 15 May 2006 David Welch, Assistant Secretary of State for Near Eastern Affairs, announced that the U.S. had decided, after a 45-day comment period, to renew full diplomatic relations with Libya and remove Libya from the U.S. list of countries that foster terrorism. Welsh, David, (15 May 2006), "Issues Related to United States Relations With Libya", U.S. Department of State. Retrieved 10 August 2006. 
During this announcement, it was also said that the U.S. has the intention of upgrading the U.S. liaison office in Tripoli into an embassy. (15 May 2006), "US to renew full ties with Libya", BBC News. Retrieved 10 August 2006. The U.S. embassy in Tripoli opened in May, a product of gradual normalization of international relations after Libya accepted responsibility for the Pan Am 103 bombing. Libya's dismantling of its weapons of mass destruction was a major step towards this announcement.

The United States suspended its relations with Gaddafi's government indefinitely on 10 March 2011, when it announced it would begin treating the National Transitional Council in Benghazi as legitimate negotiating parties for the country's future. 

On 15 July 2011, Secretary of State Hillary Rodham Clinton announced that America would now recognize the National Transitional Council as the legitimate government of Libya, thus severing any and all recognition of Gaddafi's government as legitimate. 

==Asia and Oceania==

===Pakistan===

Since gaining independence from their respective colonial powers, both nations have had a strong relationship, partially due to their historic religious similarities.

===Vanuatu===

Vanuatu and Libya established official diplomatic relations in 1986, at the initiative of the former. The aim, for Vanuatu, was to obtain access to favourable economic relations with a major oil-producing country, and to strengthen its policy of non-alignment by establishing relations with a notable country not aligned with the Western Bloc. HUFFER, Elise, Grands hommes et petites les: La politique extrieure de Fidji, de Tonga et du Vanuatu, Paris: Orstom, 1993, ISBN 2-7099-1125-6, pp.272282 

==International recognition==

As of 18 October 2011, at least 100 UN member states have explicitly recognised the National Transitional Council, as have all international organisations to which Libya is a member. Only the 8 countries of the Bolivarian Alliance for the Americas and the African countries of Namibia and Zimbabwe have explicitly continued to denounce the NTC and insist on Gaddafi's legitimacy.

==See also==
*Diplomatic missions of Libya
*IranArab relations (Libya)
*Libya and nuclear technology
*List of diplomatic missions in Libya

==Notes==

==External links==
* Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Libya
*"Qaddafi Plays Quietly, But He's Still in the Game," The New York Times, 17 March 1991.
* Libya Embassies and consulates list

 



[[Liechtenstein]]

Liechtenstein, officially the Principality of Liechtenstein ( ; , Duden Aussprachewrterbuch, s.v. "Liechtenstein". ), is a doubly landlocked alpine country in Central Europe, bordered by Switzerland to the west and south and by Austria to the east and north. Its area is just over 160 km2, and it has an estimated population of 35,000. Its capital is Vaduz. The biggest town is Schaan. Liechtenstein has the highest gross domestic product per person in the world when adjusted by purchasing power parity. CIA  The World Factbook  Country Comparison :: GDP  per capita (PPP). Cia.gov. Retrieved on 2011-12-24. Liechtenstein also has one of the lowest unemployment rates in the world at 1.5%.

Liechtenstein is the smallest yet the richest (by measure of GDP per capita) German-speaking country and the only country to lie entirely in the Alps. It is known as a principality as it is a constitutional monarchy headed by a prince. Liechtenstein is divided into 11 municipalities. Much of its terrain is mountainous, making it a winter sports destination. Many cultivated fields and small farms characterize its landscape both in the south (Oberland, upper land) and in the north (Unterland, lower land). The country has a strong financial sector located in the capital, Vaduz, and has been identified as a tax haven. It is a member of the European Free Trade Association and part of the European Economic Area and the Schengen Area, but not of the European Union.

==History==

Gutenberg Castle, Balzers, Liechtenstein.
Vaduz Castle, overlooking the capital, is home to the Prince of Liechtenstein
Johann I Joseph, Prince of Liechtenstein
===Early history===
The oldest traces of hominid existence in Liechtenstein date back to the Middle Paleolithic era. History. swissworld.org. Retrieved on 2009-06-27 Neolithic farming settlements were founded in the valleys around 5300 BC.

Hallstatt and La Tne cultures flourished during the late Iron Age from around 450 BC possibly under some influence from the Greek and Etruscan civilisations. One of the most important tribal groups in the Alpine region were the Helvetii. In 58 BC, at the Battle of Bibracte, Julius Caesar, defeated the Alpine tribes bringing the region under closer control of the Roman Empire. By 15 BC, Tiberius, who was destined to be the second Roman emperor and his brother, Drusus, conquered the entire Alpine area. Lichtenstein was integrated into the Roman province of Raetia. The area was maintained by the Roman military, which maintained a large legionary camp called Brigantium (Austria) near Lake Constance and at Magia (Swiss). A roman road ran through the territory. In 259/60 Brigantium was destroyed by the Alemanni, a Germanic people who settled in the area in around 450.

In the Early Middle Ages, the Alemanni had settled the eastern Swiss plateau by the 5th century and the valleys of the Alps by the end of the 8th century. Lichtenstein formed part of eastern edge of Alemannia. The entire region became part of Frankish Empire in the 6th century following Clovis I's victory over the Alemanni at Tolbiac in 504. Switzerland history Nationsencyclopedia.com. Retrieved on 2009-11-27 History of Switzerland Nationsonline.org. Retrieved on 2009-11-27 

Lichtenstein remained under Frankish hegemony (Merovingian and Carolingian dynasties) until the empire was divided by the Treaty of Verdun in 843 AD following the death of Charlemagne. The territory of present day Lichtenstein belonged to East Francia until it was reunified with Middle Francia under the Holy Roman Empire around 1000 AD. 

===Foundation of a dynasty===
By 1200, dominions across the Alpine plateau were controlled by the Houses of Savoy, Zhringer, Habsburg, and Kyburg. Other regions were accorded the Imperial immediacy that granted the empire with direct control over the mountain passes. When the Kyburg dynasty fell in 1264 AD, the Habsburgs under King Rudolph I (Holy Roman Emperor in 1273) extended their territory to the eastern Alpine plateau that included the territory of Lichtenstein. This region was enfeoffed to the Counts of Hohenems prior to the creation of the Liechtenstein dynasty.

The family, from which the principality takes its name, originally came from Castle Liechtenstein in Lower Austria which they had possessed from at least 1140 AD until the 13th century (and again from 1807 onwards). Liechtenstein's acquired land, predominantly in Moravia, Lower Austria, Silesia, and Styria. As these territories were all held in feudal tenure for more senior feudal lords, particularly various branches of the Habsburgs, the Liechtenstein dynasty was unable to meet a primary requirement to qualify for a seat in the Imperial diet (parliament), the Reichstag. Even though several Liechtenstein princes served several Habsburg rulers as close advisers, without any territory held directly for the Imperial throne, they held little power in the Holy Roman Empire.

It was for this reason, the family sought to acquire lands that would be classed as unmittelbar, or held without any feudal tenure to the Holy Roman Emperor. During the early 17th century Karl I of Liechtenstein was made a prince by the Holy Roman Emperor Matthias after siding with him in a political battle. By 1699 Hans-Adam I had been allowed to purchase the minuscule Herrschaft ("Lordship") of Schellenberg and county of Vaduz (in 1699 and 1712 respectively) from the Hohenems. Tiny Schellenberg and Vaduz had exactly the political status required: no feudal lord other than their comital sovereign and the suzerain Emperor.

===Principality===
On 23 January 1719, after the lands had been purchased, Charles VI, Holy Roman Emperor, decreed that Vaduz and Schellenberg were united and elevated the newly formed territory to the dignity of Frstentum (principality) with the name "Liechtenstein" in honour of " true servant, Anton Florian of Liechtenstein". It was on this date that Liechtenstein became a sovereign member state of the Holy Roman Empire. It is a testament to the pure political expediency of the purchase that the Princes of Liechtenstein never visited their new principality for almost 100 years.

By early 19th century, as a result of the Napoleonic Wars in Europe, the Holy Roman Empire came under the effective control of France following the crushing defeat at Austerlitz by Napoleon in 1806. Emperor Francis II abdicated ending more than 850 years of feudal government. Napoleon reorganized much of the Empire into the Confederation of the Rhine. This political restructuring had broad consequences for Liechtenstein: the historical imperial, legal and political institutions had been dissolved. The state ceased to owe obligations to any feudal lord beyond its borders.

Modern publications generally attribute Liechtenstein's sovereignty to these events. Its prince ceased to owe obligations to any suzerain. From 25 July 1806 when the Confederation of the Rhine was founded, the Prince of Liechtenstein was a member, in fact a vassal of its hegemon, styled protector, the French Emperor Napoleon I, until the dissolution of the confederation on 19 October 1813.

Soon afterward, Liechtenstein joined the German Confederation (20 June 181524 August 1866) which was presided over by the Emperor of Austria.

In 1818, Johann I granted the territory a limited constitution. It was in the same year that Aloys became the first member of the House of Liechtenstein to step foot in the principality that bore their name. The next visit would not occur until 1842.

Developments during the 19th century included:
*1836, the first factory, for making ceramics, was opened.
*1861, the Savings and Loans Bank was founded along with the first cotton-weaving mill.
*1868, the Liechtenstein Army was disbanded for financial reasons.
*1886, two bridges over the Rhine to Switzerland were built. 
*1872, a railway line between Switzerland and the Austro-Hungarian Empire was constructed through Liechtenstein.

===20th century===
Until the end of World War I, Liechtenstein was closely tied first to the Austrian Empire and later to Austria-Hungary; the ruling princes continued to derive much of their wealth from estates in the Habsburg territories, and they spent much of their time at their two palaces in Vienna. The economic devastation caused by this war forced the country to conclude a customs and monetary union with its other neighbour, Switzerland. 

At the time of the dissolution of the Austro-Hungarian Empire, it was argued that Liechtenstein, as a fief of the Holy Roman Empire, was no longer bound to the emerging independent state of Austria, since the latter did not consider itself as the legal successor to the empire. This is partly contradicted by the Liechtenstein perception that the dethroned Austro-Hungarian Emperor still maintained an abstract heritage of the Holy Roman Empire.

Franz I, Prince of Liechtenstein from 1929 to 1938.

In 1929, 75-year-old Prince Franz I succeeded to the throne. Franz had just married Elisabeth von Gutmann, a wealthy Jewish woman from Vienna. Although Liechtenstein had no official Nazi party, a Nazi sympathy movement arose within its National Union party.
Local Liechtenstein Nazis identified Elizabeth as their Jewish "problem". 

In March 1938, just after the annexation of Austria by Nazi Germany, Prince Franz named as regent his 31-year-old first cousin twice removed and heir-presumptive, Prince Franz Joseph. Franz died in July that year, and Franz Joseph succeeded to the throne.

During World War II, Liechtenstein remained officially neutral, looking to neighboring Switzerland for assistance and guidance, while family treasures within the war zone were taken to Liechtenstein for safekeeping. At the close of the conflict, Czechoslovakia and Poland, acting to seize what they considered to be German possessions, expropriated the entirety of the Liechtenstein dynasty's hereditary lands and possessions in Bohemia, Moravia, and Silesia. The expropriations (subject to modern legal dispute at the International Court of Justice) included over 1600 km2 of agricultural and forest land, and several family castles and palaces.

Liechtenstein gave asylum to about 500 soldiers of the First Russian National Army (a collaborationist Russian force within the German Wehrmacht) at the close of World War II. About 200 of the group somewhat voluntarily agreed to return to the USSR. They departed in a train to Vienna and nothing was ever heard of them again. The remainder stayed in Liechtenstein for another year, resisting, with support from Liechtenstein, further pressure by the Soviet government to participate in the repatriation programme. (In contrast, due to agreements made during the Yalta Conference, the western Allies repatriated Soviet citizens.) Eventually the government of Argentina offered asylum and about a hundred people left. This is commemorated by a monument at the border town of Hinterschellenberg. It is also the theme of the French television documentary Le dernier secret de Yalta (Yalta's last secret) by Nicolas Jallot. 

Citizens of Liechtenstein were forbidden to enter Czechoslovakia during the Cold War. More recently the diplomatic conflict revolving around the controversial post-war Bene decrees resulted in Liechtenstein not sharing international relations with the Czech Republic or Slovakia. Diplomatic relations were established between Liechtenstein and the Czech Republic on 13 July 2009, and with Slovakia on 9 December 2009. 

===Financial center===
Liechtenstein was in dire financial straits following the end of the war in Europe. The Liechtenstein dynasty often resorted to selling family artistic treasures, including the priceless portrait "Ginevra de' Benci" by Leonardo da Vinci, which was purchased by the National Gallery of Art of the United States in 1967. However by the late 1970s it used its low corporate tax rates to draw many companies to the country becoming one of the wealthiest countries in the world.

The Prince of Liechtenstein is the world's sixth wealthiest monarch with an estimated wealth of USD $5 billion. D. Pendleton, C. Vorasasun, C. von Zeppelin, T. Serafin (1 September 2008). "The Top 15 Wealthiest Royals". Forbes. The country's population enjoys one of the world's highest standards of living.

==Government==
The centre of government in Vaduz.

Hans-Adam II, Prince of Liechtenstein as pictured by Erling Mandelmann in 1974

Liechtenstein has a constitutional monarch as Head of State, and an elected parliament which enacts law. It is also a direct democracy, where voters can propose and enact constitutional amendments and legislation independent of the legislature. The Constitution of Liechtenstein was adopted in March 2003, replacing the previous 1921 constitution which had established Liechtenstein as a constitutional monarchy headed by the reigning prince of the Princely House of Liechtenstein. A parliamentary system had been established, although the reigning Prince retained substantial political authority.

The reigning Prince is the head of state and represents Liechtenstein in its international relations (although Switzerland has taken responsibility for much of Liechtenstein's diplomatic relations). The Prince may veto laws adopted by parliament. The Prince can call referenda, propose new legislation, and dissolve parliament, although dissolution of parliament may be subject to a referendum. Country profile: Liechtenstein  Leaders BBC News, 6 December 2006. Retrieved 29 December 2006. 

Executive authority is vested in a collegiate government comprising the head of government (prime minister) and four government councilors (ministers). The head of government and the other ministers are appointed by the Prince upon the proposal and concurrence of parliament, thus reflecting the partisan balance of parliament. The constitution stipulates that at least two members of the government be chosen from each of the two regions. . Retrieved 11 January 2010. The members of the government are collectively and individually responsible to parliament; parliament may ask the Prince to remove an individual minister or the entire government.

Legislative authority is vested in the unicameral Landtag made up of 25 members elected for maximum four-year terms according to a proportional representation formula. Fifteen members are elected from the "Oberland" (Upper Country or region) and ten members are elected from the "Unterland" (Lower Country or region). . Retrieved 11 January 2010. Parties must receive at least 8% of the national vote to win seats in parliament, i.e. enough for 2 seats in the 25-seat legislature. Parliament proposes and approves a government, which is formally appointed by the Prince. Parliament may also pass votes of no confidence in the entire government or individual members.

Parliament elects from among its members a "Landesausschuss" (National Committee) made up of the president of the parliament and four additional members. The National Committee is charged with performing parliamentary oversight functions. Parliament can call for referenda on proposed legislation. Parliament shares the authority to propose new legislation with the Prince and with the number of citizens required for an initiative referendum. . Retrieved 11 January 2010. 

Judicial authority is vested in the Regional Court at Vaduz, the Princely High Court of Appeal at Vaduz, the Princely Supreme Court, the Administrative Court, and the State Court. The State Court rules on the conformity of laws with the constitution and has five members elected by parliament.

On 1 July 1984, Liechtenstein became the last country in Europe to grant women the right to vote. The referendum on women's suffrage, in which only men were allowed to participate, passed with 51.3% in favor. "Liechtenstein Women Win Right to Vote" The New York Times, 2 July 1984. Retrieved 8 July 2011. 

===New constitution===
In a national referendum in March 2003, nearly two-thirds of the electorate voted in support of Hans-Adam II's proposed new constitution to replace the 1921 one. The proposed constitution was criticised by many, including the Council of Europe, as expanding the powers of the monarchy (continuing the power to veto any law, and allowing the Prince to dismiss the government or any minister). The Prince threatened that if the constitution failed, he would, among other things, convert some of the royal property for commercial use and move to Austria. Liechtenstein Prince wins powers BBC News Online, 16 March 2003. Retrieved 29 December 2006. The princely family and the Prince enjoy tremendous public support inside the nation, and the resolution passed with about 64% in favour. A proposal to revoke the Prince's veto powers was rejected by 76% of voters in a 2012 referendum. 

Few national constitutions provide a right of secession, but municipalities in Liechtenstein are entitled to secede from the union by majority vote. http://www.llv.li/verfassung-e-01-02-09.doc.pdf 

==Geography==

The Rhine: Border between Liechtenstein and Switzerland (view to the Swiss Alps)
Fields of Balzers from Gutenberg Castle
Liechtenstein is situated in the Upper Rhine valley of the European Alps and is bordered to the east by Austria and to the south and west by Switzerland. The entire western border of Liechtenstein is formed by the Rhine. Measured south to north the country is about 24 km long. Its highest point, the Grauspitz, is 2599 m. Despite its Alpine location, prevailing southerly winds make the climate of Liechtenstein comparatively mild. In winter, the mountain slopes are well suited to winter sports.

New surveys using more accurate measurements of the country's borders in 2006 have set its area at 160 km2, with borders of 77.9 km. "Tiny Liechtenstein gets a little bigger", 29 December 2006. Thus, Liechtenstein discovered in 2006 that its borders are 1.9 km longer than previously thought. Liechtenstein redraws Europe map, BBC News, 28 December 2006. 

Liechtenstein is one of only two doubly landlocked countries in the world CIA World Factbook  Liechtenstein. being a landlocked country wholly surrounded by other landlocked countries (the other is Uzbekistan). Liechtenstein is the sixth-smallest independent nation in the world by land area.

The principality of Liechtenstein is divided into 11 communes called Gemeinden (singular Gemeinde). The Gemeinden mostly consist only of a single town or village. Five of them (Eschen, Gamprin, Mauren, Ruggell, and Schellenberg) fall within the electoral district Unterland (the lower county), and the remainder (Balzers, Planken, Schaan, Triesen, Triesenberg, and Vaduz) within Oberland (the upper county).

==Economy==
Looking southward at Vaduz city-centre.

Despite its limited natural resources, Liechtenstein is one of the few countries in the world with more registered companies than citizens; it has developed a prosperous, highly industrialized free-enterprise economy and boasts a financial service sector as well as a living standard which compares favourably with those of the urban areas of Liechtenstein's large European neighbours.

Very low business taxes (lowest in Europe after Andorra's 10% maximum tax rate)the corporate tax rate is a flat 12.5% Liechtenstein tax reform  Liechtenstein. IFLR1000. Retrieved on 2011-12-24. as well as easy Rules of Incorporation have induced about 73,700 holding (or so-called 'letter box') companies to establish registered offices in Liechtenstein. This provides about 30% of Liechtenstein's state revenue. Liechtenstein also generates revenue from Stiftungen ("foundations"), which are financial entities created to hide the true owner of nonresident foreigners' financial holdings. The foundation is registered in the name of a Liechtensteiner, often a lawyer.

Recently, Liechtenstein has displayed stronger determination to prosecute international money-launderers and has worked to promote the country's image as a legitimate finance center. In February 2008, the country's LGT Bank was implicated in a tax-fraud scandal in Germany, which strained the ruling family's relationship with the German government. Crown Prince Alois has accused the German government of trafficking in stolen goods. This refers to its $7.3 million purchase of private banking information offered by a former employee of LGT Group. Wiesmann, Gerrit. "Lilliput's giant-slayer." Financial Times, 23 February 2008. A Parasite's Priorities, 22 February 2008. However, the United States Senate's subcommittee on tax haven banks said that the LGT bank, which is owned by the princely family, and on whose board they serve, "is a willing partner, and an aider and abettor to clients trying to evade taxes, dodge creditors or defy court orders." 

Liechtenstein participates in a customs union with Switzerland and employs the Swiss franc as national currency. The country imports about 85% of its energy. Liechtenstein has been a member of the European Economic Area (an organization serving as a bridge between the European Free Trade Association (EFTA) and the European Union) since May 1995. The government is working to harmonize its economic policies with those of an integrated Europe. Since 2002, Liechtenstein's rate of unemployment has doubled. In 2008, it stood at 1.5%. Currently, there is only one hospital in Liechtenstein, the Liechtensteinisches Landesspital in Vaduz. The gross domestic product (GDP) on a purchasing power parity basis is $5.028 billion, or $141,100 per capita, which is the second highest in the world.

Liechtenstein is a large producer of ceramics and is the world's largest producer of sausage casings and false teeth. Liechtenstein - famous for more than false teeth? Other industries include electronics, textiles, precision instruments, metal manufacturing, power tools, anchor bolts, calculators, pharmaceuticals, and food products. Its most recognizable international company and largest employer is Hilti, a manufacturer of direct fastening systems and other high-end power tools. Liechtenstein produces wheat, barley, corn, potatoes, dairy products, livestock, and wine. Tourism accounts for a large portion of the country's economy.

===Taxation===
Since 1923 there has been no border control between Liechtenstein and Switzerland

The government of Liechtenstein taxes both personal and business income and principal (wealth). The basic rate of personal income tax is 1.2%. When combined with the additional income tax imposed by the communes, the combined income tax rate is 17.82%. Encyclopedia of the Nations. Nationsencyclopedia.com. Retrieved on 2011-12-24. An additional income tax of 4.3% is levied on all employees under the country's social security programme. This rate is higher for the self-employed, up to a maximum of 11%, making the maximum income tax rate about 29% in total. The basic tax rate on wealth is 0.06% per annum, and the combined total rate is 0.89%. The tax rate on corporate profits is 12.5%. 

Liechtenstein's gift and estate taxes vary depending on the relationship the recipient has to the giver and the amount of the inheritance. The tax ranges between 0.5% and 0.75% for spouses and children and 18% to 27% for non-related recipients. The estate tax is progressive.

The 2008 Liechtenstein tax affair is a series of tax investigations in numerous countries whose governments suspect that some of their citizens have evaded tax obligations by using banks and trusts in Liechtenstein; the affair broke open with the biggest complex of investigations ever initiated for tax evasion in the Federal Republic of Germany. It was also seen as an attempt to put pressure on Liechtenstein, then one of the remaining uncooperative tax havensalong with Andorra and Monacoas identified by the Paris-based Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development in 2007. On 27 May 2009 the OECD removed Liechtenstein from the blacklist of uncooperative countries. Removal from OECD List of Unco-operative Tax Havens. Oecd.org. Retrieved on 2011-12-24. 

In August 2009, the British Government Department, HM Revenue & Customs, agreed with Liechtenstein to start exchanging information. It is believed that up to 5,000 British investors have roughly 3 billion deposited in accounts and trusts in the country. UK signs Liechtenstein tax deal . BBC News (2009-08-11). Retrieved on 2011-12-24. 

==Demographics==

Administrative divisions of Liechtenstein
Liechtenstein is the fourth smallest country of Europe, after Vatican City, Monaco, and San Marino. Its population is primarily Alemannic-speaking, although its resident population is approximately one third foreign-born, primarily German speakers from Germany, Austria, and Switzerland, other Swiss, Italians, and Turks. Foreign-born people make up two-thirds of the country's workforce.

The official language is German; most speak an Alemannic dialect of German that is highly divergent from Standard German but closely related to those dialects spoken in neighbouring regions such as Switzerland and Vorarlberg, Austria. In Triesenberg, a dialect promoted by the municipality is spoken. However, Swiss Standard German is universally understood within the country. According to the 2000 census, 87.9% of the population is Christian, of whom 78.4% adhere to the Roman Catholic faith, while about 8% are Protestant. Compared to the 1990 census, the percentage of Christians fell, whereas Muslims and the undeclared more than doubled in size. . Retrieved on 2011-12-24. According to a 2009 Pew Research Center report, Muslims constitute approximately 4.8% of the population. Global Muslim Population  A Report on the Size and Distribution of the Worlds Muslim Population. October 2009 Pew Research Center 

 Religion 2000 1990 
 Catholics 78.4% 84.9% 
 Reformed Church 7.9% 9.4% 
 Christian-Orthodox Churches 1.1% 0.7% 
 Undeclared / no religion 7.0% 2.4% 
 Other Christian Churches 0.4% 0.1% 
 Muslims 4.8% 2.4% 
 Jewish 0.1% 0.0% 
 Other religions 0.3% 0.1% 
 Total: 100% 100% 

Liechtensteiners have an average life expectancy at birth of 80.31 years, male: 76.86 years, female: 83.77 years (2011 est.). The infant mortality rate is 4.64 deaths per 1,000 live births, according to recent estimates.

==Education==
The literacy rate of Liechtenstein is 100%. The Programme for International Student Assessment, coordinated by the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development, currently ranks Liechtenstein's education as the 10th best in the world. Range of rank on the PISA 2006 science scale. (PDF) . Retrieved on 2011-12-24. 

In Liechtenstein, there are four main centers for higher education:

* The University of Liechtenstein
* Private University in the Principality of Liechtenstein
* Liechtenstein Institute
* International Academy of Philosophy, Liechtenstein

==Transport==
There are about 250 km of paved roadway within Liechtenstein, with 90 km of marked bicycle paths.
Balzers Heliport

A 9.5 km railway connects Austria and Switzerland through Liechtenstein. The country's railways are administered by the Austrian Federal Railways as part of the route between Feldkirch, Austria, and Buchs, Switzerland. Liechtenstein is nominally within the Austrian Verkehrsverbund Vorarlberg Verkehrsverbund Vorarlberg. Vmobil.at. Retrieved on 2011-12-24. tariff region.
There are four stations in Liechtenstein, namely Schaan-Vaduz, Forst Hilti, Nendeln, and Schaanwald, served by an irregularly stopping train service that runs between Feldkirch and Buchs provided by the Austrian Federal Rail Service. While EuroCity and other long distance international trains also travel along the route, they do not normally stop at the stations within the borders of Liechtenstein.

Liechtenstein Bus is a subsidiary of the Swiss Postbus system, but separately run, and connects to the Swiss bus network at Buchs and at Sargans. Buses also run to the Austrian town of Feldkirch.

Liechtenstein has no airport. The nearest large airport is Zrich Airport near Zrich, Switzerland (130 km/80 mi by road). The nearest small airport is St. Gallen Airport (50 km/30 mi). Friedrichshafen Airport also provides access to Liechtenstein, as it is 85 km away. Balzers Heliport is Heliport Balzers FL LSXB. Tsis.ch. Retrieved on 2011-12-24. Heliports  Balzers LSXB  Heli-Website von Matthias Vogt. Heli.li. Retrieved on 2011-12-24. available for chartered helicopter flights.

==Culture==

City-centre with Kunstmuseum (Liechtenstein Art Museum)
Liechtenstein National Museum]]

As a result of its small size, Liechtenstein has been strongly affected by external cultural influences, most notably those originating in the southern German-speaking areas of Europe, including Austria, Baden-Wurttemberg, Bavaria, Switzerland, and specifically Tirol and Vorarlberg. The "Historical Society of the Principality of Liechtenstein" plays a role in preserving the culture and history of the country.

The largest museum is the Kunstmuseum Liechtenstein, an international museum of modern and contemporary art with an important international art collection. The building by the Swiss architects Morger, Degelo, and Kerez is a landmark in Vaduz. It was completed in November 2000 and forms a "black box" of tinted concrete and black basalt stone. The museum collection is also the national art collection of Liechtenstein.

The other important museum is the Liechtenstein National Museum (Liechtensteinisches Landesmuseum) showing permanent exhibition on the cultural and natural history of Liechtenstein as well as special exhibitions. There is also a stamp museum, ski museum and a 500-year old Rural Lifestyle Museum.

The most famous historical sites are Vaduz Castle, Gutenberg Castle, the Red House and the ruins of Schellenberg.

The Private Art Collection of the Prince of Liechtenstein, one of the world's leading private art collections, is shown at the Liechtenstein Museum in Vienna.

On the country's national holiday all subjects are invited to the castle of the head of state. A significant portion of the population attends the national celebration at the castle where speeches are made and complimentary beer is served. Letzing, John. "On Closer Inspection, Liechtenstein Shrinks - Then Shrugs." The Wall Street Journal. April 17, 2014. 

==Media==
The primary Internet service provider and Mobile network operator of Liechtenstein is Telecom Liechtenstein AG, located in Schaan. There is only one television channel in the country, the private channel 1FLTV created in 2008. At the moment, 1FLTV is not a member of the European Broadcasting Union. L-Radio, which was established in 2004, serves as Liechtenstein's radio station and is based in Triesen. L-Radio has a listener base of 50,000 and began as "air Radio Liechtenstein" on 15 October 1938. Liechtenstein also has two major newspapers; Liechtensteiner Volksblatt and Liechtensteiner Vaterland. The primary multimedia company in Liechtenstein is ManaMedia AG located in Vaduz.
Amateur radio is a hobby of some nationals and visitors. However, unlike virtually every other sovereign nation, Liechtenstein does not have its own ITU prefix. It uses Switzerland's callsign prefixes (typically "HB") followed by a zero.

Music and theatre are an important part of the culture. There are numerous music organizations such as the Liechtenstein Musical Company, the annual Guitar Days, and the International Josef Gabriel Rheinberger Society, which play in two main theatres.

==Sports==

Marco Bchel, the first Liechtensteiner Alpine skier to compete at six Winter Olympics.
Liechtenstein football teams play in the Swiss football leagues. The Liechtenstein Football Cup allows access for one Liechtenstein team each year to the UEFA Europa League; FC Vaduz, a team playing in the Swiss Challenge League, the second division in Swiss football, is the most successful team in the Cup, and scored their greatest success in the European Cup Winners' Cup in 1996 when they drew with and defeated the Latvian team FC Universitate Riga by 11 and 42, to go on to a lucrative fixture against Paris Saint-Germain F.C., which they lost 04 and 03.

The Liechtenstein national football team is regarded as an easy target for any team drawn against them; this was the basis for a book about Liechtenstein's unsuccessful qualifying campaign for the 2002 World Cup by British author, Charlie Connelly. In one surprising week during autumn 2004, however, the team managed a 22 draw with Portugal, who only a few months earlier had been the losing finalists in the European Championships. Four days later, the Liechtenstein team traveled to Luxembourg, where they defeated the home team 40 in a 2006 World Cup qualifying match. In the qualification stage of the European Championship 2008, Liechtenstein beat Latvia 10, a result which prompted the resignation of the Latvian coach. They went on to beat Iceland 30 on 17 October 2007, which is considered one of the most dramatic losses of the Icelandic national football team. On 7 September 2010, they came within seconds of a 11 draw against Scotland in Glasgow, having led 10 earlier in the second half, but Liechtenstein lost 21 thanks to a goal by Stephen McManus in the 97th minute. On 3 June 2011, Liechtenstein defeated Lithuania 20.

As an alpine country, the main sporting opportunity for Liechtensteiners to excel is in winter sports such as downhill skiing: the country's single ski area is Malbun. Hanni Wenzel won two gold medals and one silver medal in the 1980 Winter Olympics (she won bronze in 1976), and her brother Andreas won one silver medal in 1980 and one bronze medal in 1984 in the giant slalom event. With nine medals overall (all in alpine skiing), Liechtenstein has won more Olympic medals per capita than any other nation. It is the smallest nation to win a medal in any Olympics, Winter or Summer, and the only nation to win a medal in the Winter Games but not in the Summer Games. Other notable skiers from Liechtenstein are Marco Bchel, Tina Weirather, Willi Frommelt, Paul Frommelt and Ursula Konzett. Liechtenstein is also the home country of Stephanie Vogt, a professional women's tennis player.

===Youth===
Liechtenstein competes in the Switzerland U16 Cup Tournament, which offers young players an opportunity to play against top football clubs.

==Security and defense==
The Liechtenstein National Police is responsible for keeping order within the country. It consists of 87 field officers and 38 civilian staff, totaling 125 employees. All officers are equipped with small arms. The country has one of the world's lowest crime rates. Liechtenstein's prison holds few, if any, inmates, and those with sentences over two years are transferred to Austrian jurisdiction. The Liechtenstein National Police maintains a trilateral treaty with Austria and Switzerland that enables close cross-border cooperation among the police forces of the three countries. . Office for Foreign Affairs of Liechtenstein 

Liechtenstein follows a policy of neutrality and is one of the few countries in the world that maintains no military. The army was abolished soon after the Austro-Prussian War, in which Liechtenstein fielded an army of 80 men, although they were not involved in any fighting. The demise of the German Confederation in that war freed Liechtenstein from its international obligation to maintain an army, and parliament seized this opportunity and refused to provide funding for one. The Prince objected, as such a move would leave the country defenceless, but relented on 12 February 1868 and disbanded the force. The last soldier to serve under the colours of Liechtenstein died in 1939 at age 95. 

In March 2007, a 170-person Swiss infantry unit became lost during a training exercise and inadvertently crossed 1.5 km into Liechtenstein. The accidental invasion ended when the unit realized their mistake, and turned back. The Swiss army later informed Liechtenstein of the incursion and offered official apologies. 

During the 1980s the Swiss army fired off shells during an exercise and mistakenly burned a patch of forest inside Liechtenstein. The incident was said to be resolved "over a case of white wine." 

==See also==

*Liechtenstein wine
*List of Foundations established in Vaduz
*Outline of Liechtenstein

==References==

==External links==

* Official Portal of the Principality of Liechtenstein
* The Princely House of Liechtenstein
* Website of the Parliament of Liechtenstein
* Website of the Government of Liechtenstein
* Official tourism website of Liechtenstein
* Statistics Liechtenstein 
*
* Liechtenstein from UCB Libraries GovPubs
*
* Liechtenstein profile from the BBC News
*
*

 



[[Geography of Liechtenstein]]

Map of the Principality of Liechtenstein
Satellite image of Liechtenstein area, with the border shown in yellow

The principality of Liechtenstein encompasses most of the right (eastern) half of the Rhine Valley, wedged between Austria and Switzerland.

Along with Uzbekistan, Liechtenstein is one of only two doubly landlocked countries in the world; it contains a great variety of microclimates based on elevation.

Data from the CIA Factbook:
*Geographic coordinates:

*Area: 160 km (land, 0 km water)
*Land boundaries: total: 76 km; border countries: Austria 35 km, Switzerland 41 km
*Coastline: 0 km (landlocked)
*Maritime claims: none (landlocked)
*Climate: continental; cold, cloudy winters with frequent snow or rain; cool to moderately warm, cloudy, humid summers, great variety of microclimates based on elevation
*Terrain: mostly mountainous (Alps) with Rhine Valley in western third
*Natural resources: hydroelectric potential, arable land
*Lake: The only lake in Liechtenstein is the Gampriner Seele.
*Land use: arable land: 21.88%, permanent crops: 0%, other: 78.12% (2011)
*Natural hazards: NA
*Environment - international agreements:
** party to:
Air Pollution,
Air Pollution-Persistent Organic Pollutants,
Air Pollution-Nitrogen Oxides,
Air Pollution-Sulphur 85, Air Pollution-Sulphur 94,
Air Pollution-Volatile Organic Compounds,
Biodiversity,
Climate Change,
Climate Change-Kyoto Protocol,
Desertification,
Endangered Species,
Hazardous Wastes,
Ozone Layer Protection,
Wetlands,
**signed, but not ratified:
Law of the Sea

*Extreme points:
** North - River Rhine 
** South - summit of Mazorakopf/Falknishorn (2452 m) 
** East - border post 28, above Nenzinger Himmel 
** West - River Rhine 
** highest - Vorder Grauspitz (2599 m) 
** lowest - Bangserfeld (429 m) 

 

Extreme

[[Demographics of Liechtenstein]]

This article is about the demographic features of the population of Liechtenstein, including population density, ethnicity, education level, health of the populace, economic status, religious affiliations and other aspects of the population.

Liechtenstein is the fourth smallest country of Europe, after the Vatican City, Monaco, and San Marino. Its population is primarily ethnic Alemannic, although its resident population is approximately one third foreign-born, primarily German speakers from the Federal Republic of Germany, Austria, and the Swiss Confederation, other Swiss, Italians, and Turks. Foreign-born people make up two-thirds of the country's workforce. Nationals are referred to by the plural: Liechtensteiners.

The official language is German; most speak Alemannic, a German dialect highly divergent from Standard German, but closely related to those dialects spoken in neighbouring regions. 
In Triesenberg a quite distinct dialect, promoted by the municipality, is spoken. According to the 2000 census, 87.9% of the population is Christian, of which 76% adhere to the Roman Catholic faith, while about 7% are Protestant. The religious affiliation for most of the remainder is Islam - 4.8%, undeclared - 4.1% and no religion - 2.8% .

==Population==

Administrative divisions of Liechtenstein.

===2006===
Resident population by municipalities
As of December 31, 2006. 

Municipality/district Resident population 
 Vaduz 5,070 
 Triesen 4,674 
 Balzers 4,450 
 Triesenberg 2,566 
 Schaan 5,747 
 Planken 387 
 Upland 22,894 
 Eschen 4,141 
 Mauren 3,718 
 Gamprin 1,463 
 Ruggell 1,920 
 Schellenberg 1,032 
 Lowland 12,274 
 Liechtenstein 35,168 

===2007===
35,365 (December 31, 2007 est.), of which 66% are Liechtensteiners. 

==Vital statistics since 1901 Amt fr Statistiek Liechtenstein ==

 Average population Live births Deaths Natural change Crude birth rate (per 1000) Crude death rate (per 1000) Natural change (per 1000) 
 1901 7,500 283 169 114 37.9 22.6 15.3 
 1902 7,600 264 168 96 34.8 22.1 12.6 
 1903 7,700 273 166 107 35.4 21.5 13.9 
 1904 7,800 256 175 81 32.7 22.4 10.4 
 1905 7,900 248 181 67 31.2 22.8 8.4 
 1906 8,100 253 131 122 31.4 16.3 15.1 
 1907 8,200 231 147 84 28.3 18.0 10.3 
 1908 8,300 240 145 95 29.0 17.5 11.5 
 1909 8,400 226 145 81 26.9 17.3 9.6 
 1910 8,500 266 152 114 31.2 17.8 13.4 
 1911 8,600 239 153 86 27.7 17.7 10.0 
 1912 8,700 238 141 97 27.4 16.2 11.1 
 1913 8,700 243 135 108 27.9 15.5 12.4 
 1914 8,700 264 150 114 30.2 17.2 13.1 
 1915 8,700 213 139 74 24.4 15.9 8.5 
 1916 8,800 183 141 42 20.9 16.1 4.8 
 1917 8,800 200 116 84 22.8 13.2 9.6 
 1918 8,800 211 200 11 24.0 22.8 1.3 
 1919 8,800 220 119 101 25.0 13.5 11.5 
 1920 8,800 262 141 121 29.7 16.0 13.7 
 1921 8,800 253 122 131 28.6 13.8 14.8 
 1922 8,900 247 131 116 27.7 14.7 13.0 
 1923 9,000 222 151 71 24.6 16.7 7.9 
 1924 9,100 249 109 140 27.2 11.9 15.3 
 1925 9,300 200 128 72 21.6 13.8 7.8 
 1926 9,400 226 112 114 24.1 11.9 12.1 
 1927 9,500 215 141 74 22.6 14.8 7.8 
 1928 9,600 202 111 91 21.0 11.5 9.4 
 1929 9,800 206 106 100 21.1 10.9 10.2 
 1930 9,900 199 104 95 20.1 10.5 9.6 
 1931 10,000 207 130 77 20.7 13.0 7.7 
 1932 10,100 196 106 90 19.4 10.5 8.9 
 1933 10,200 240 119 121 23.5 11.7 11.9 
 1934 10,300 229 102 127 22.2 9.9 12.3 
 1935 10,400 226 130 96 21.7 12.5 9.2 
 1936 10,500 225 121 104 21.4 11.5 9.9 
 1937 10,600 226 145 81 21.3 13.7 7.6 
 1938 10,700 213 136 77 19.9 12.7 7.2 
 1939 10,800 255 136 119 23.6 12.6 11.0 
 1940 10,900 281 119 162 25.7 10.9 14.8 
 1941 11,000 249 117 132 22.6 10.6 12.0 
 1942 11,200 284 141 143 25.3 12.6 12.7 
 1943 11,500 301 128 173 26.2 11.1 15.1 
 1944 11,700 342 120 222 29.1 10.2 18.9 
 1945 12,000 324 148 176 27.0 12.3 14.7 
 1946 12,300 351 139 212 28.6 11.3 17.3 
 1947 12,600 314 174 140 25.0 13.9 11.2 
 1948 12,900 366 135 231 28.4 10.5 17.9 
 1949 13,300 311 131 180 23.5 9.9 13.6 
 1950 13,600 275 105 170 20.2 7.7 12.5 
 1951 13,900 290 114 176 20.9 8.2 12.7 
 1952 14,100 303 132 171 21.5 9.4 12.1 
 1953 14,300 317 137 180 22.2 9.6 12.6 
 1954 14,500 316 127 189 21.7 8.7 13.0 
 1955 14,800 300 125 175 20.3 8.5 11.9 
 1956 15,000 317 133 184 21.2 8.9 12.3 
 1957 15,200 351 127 224 23.1 8.4 14.7 
 1958 15,600 372 142 230 23.9 9.1 14.8 
 1959 16,000 345 127 218 21.5 7.9 13.6 
 1960 16,500 380 123 257 23.1 7.5 15.6 
 1961 16,900 359 131 228 21.3 7.8 13.5 
 1962 17,400 360 166 194 20.6 9.5 11.1 
 1963 18,100 398 146 252 22.0 8.1 13.9 
 1964 18,800 386 148 238 20.6 7.9 12.7 
 1965 19,200 395 156 239 20.6 8.1 12.5 
 1966 19,600 370 152 218 18.9 7.8 11.1 
 1967 20,200 411 158 253 20.4 7.8 12.5 
 1968 20,800 431 148 283 20.7 7.1 13.6 
 1969 21,100 420 168 252 19.9 8.0 12.0 
 1970 21,100 422 163 259 20.0 7.7 12.3 
 1971 21,600 350 186 164 16.2 8.6 7.6 
 1972 22,100 359 149 210 16.2 6.7 9.5 
 1973 22,800 403 178 225 17.7 7.8 9.9 
 1974 23,500 326 147 179 13.9 6.3 7.6 
 1975 23,800 306 179 127 12.8 7.5 5.3 
 1976 24,100 347 178 169 14.4 7.4 7.0 
 1977 24,400 309 148 161 12.6 6.1 6.6 
 1978 25,000 313 163 150 12.5 6.5 6.0 
 1979 25,600 370 173 197 14.5 6.8 7.7 
 1980 25,500 393 175 218 15.4 6.9 8.5 
 1981 25,700 369 161 208 14.4 6.3 8.1 
 1982 26,300 384 167 217 14.6 6.4 8.3 
 1983 26,400 348 151 197 13.2 5.7 7.4 
 1984 26,600 405 177 228 15.2 6.7 8.6 
 1985 26,900 373 171 202 13.9 6.4 7.5 
 1986 27,200 351 188 163 12.9 6.9 6.0 
 1987 27,600 365 180 185 13.2 6.5 6.7 
 1988 27,900 416 195 221 14.9 7.0 7.9 
 1989 28,300 373 172 201 13.2 6.1 7.1 
 1990 28,700 379 195 184 13.2 6.8 6.4 
 1991 29,200 416 187 229 14.2 6.4 7.8 
 1992 29,600 375 180 195 12.7 6.1 6.6 
 1993 30,100 415 178 237 13.8 5.9 7.9 
 1994 30,500 358 206 152 11.7 6.8 5.0 
 1995 30,800 425 225 200 13.8 7.3 6.5 
 1996 31,000 405 230 175 13.1 7.4 5.6 
 1997 31,200 435 230 205 13.9 7.4 6.6 
 1998 31,700 382 208 174 12.1 6.6 5.5 
 1999 32,200 430 206 224 13.3 6.4 7.0 
 2000 32,600 420 239 181 12.9 7.3 5.5 
 2001 33,200 401 220 181 12.1 6.6 5.5 
 2002 33,700 395 215 180 11.7 6.4 5.3 
 2003 34,100 347 217 130 10.2 6.4 3.8 
 2004 34,400 372 198 174 10.8 5.7 5.1 
 2005 34,800 381 215 166 11.0 6.2 4.8 
 2006 35,000 361 220 141 10.3 6.3 4.0 
 2007 35,300 351 227 124 10.0 6.4 3.5 
 2008 35,500 350 205 145 9.9 5.8 4.1 
 2009 35,700 406 229 177 11.4 6.4 5.0 
 2010 36,000 329 238 91 9.1 6.6 2.5 
 2011 36,300 395 248 147 10.9 6.8 4.1 
 2012 36,600 

==Ethnic groups==
Alemannic Germans 86%, Italian, Turkish, and other 14%

==Religions==

Roman Catholic 76.2%, Protestant 7%, other 6.2%, unknown 10.6% (July 2003) see also

 Religion Publication Census 2000 - Landesverwaltung Liechtenstein 2000 1990 
 Catholics 78.4% 84.9% 
 Reformed Church 7.9% 9.4% 
 Christian-orthodox Churches 1.1% 0.7% 
 Other Christian Churches 0.4% 0.1% 
 Muslims 4.8% 2.4% 
 Jews 0.1% 0.0% 
 Other religions 0.3% 0.1% 
 Undeclared / no religion 7.0% 2.4% 
 Total: 100% 100% 

== CIA World Factbook demographic statistics ==

The following demographic statistics are from the CIA World Factbook, unless otherwise indicated.

Age structure:
014 years: 16.1% (male 2,809/female 2,856)
1564 years: 69% (male 11,970/female 12,326)
65 years and over: 15% (male 2,304/female 2,971) (2011 est.)

Sex ratio:
at birth: 1.26 male(s)/female
under 15 years: 1.09 male(s)/female
1564 years: 1 male(s)/female
65 years and over: 0.81 male(s)/female
total population: 0.98 male(s)/female (2011 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 4.4 deaths/1,000 live births (2011 est.)

Life expectancy at birth: (14 in the world)
total population: 81.5 years
male: 79.37 years
female: 84.19 years (2011 est.)

Total fertility rate: 1.69 children born/woman (2011 est.)

HIV/AIDS - adult prevalence rate: N/A%

HIV/AIDS - people living with HIV/AIDS: N/A

HIV/AIDS - deaths: N/A

Nationality:
noun: Liechtensteiner(s)
adjective: Liechtenstein

Languages: German (official), Alemannic dialect

Literacy: (1 in the world)
definition: age 10 and over can read and write
total population: 100%
male: 100%
female: 100%

==See also==
*Languages of Liechtenstein
*Turks in Liechtenstein

== References ==

==External links==
*Amt fr Volkswirtschaft (Office of Economic Affairs)

Liechtenstein

[[Politics of Liechtenstein]]

Liechtenstein is a principality governed under a constitutional monarchy. It has a form of mixed constitution in which political power is shared by the monarch and a democratically elected parliament. There is a two-party system (though there are two minor parties as well) and a form of representative democracy in which the prime minister and head of government is responsible to parliament. However the Prince of Liechtenstein is head of state and exercises considerable political powers.

The executive power is exercised by the Cabinet of Liechtenstein (government). Legislative power is vested in both the government and the Landtag (Parliament). The party system is dominated by the conservative Progressive Citizens' Party and the liberal-conservative Patriotic Union. The Judiciary is independent of the executive and the legislature.

On 15 August 2002, in his National Day Address, Prince Hans-Adam II announced that after months of intensive negotiations, a compromise in the debate on constitutional reform had been reached. On 13 September, Prime Minister Otmar Hasler confirmed to Parliament that his government was drafting a bill for Parliament based on the compromise reached between the Prince and the Citizens' Forum. The draft bill, which would increase the executive powers of the monarch, went before Parliament for a first reading in November. Once approved by Parliament, the bill was then presented to voters in a referendum, Liechtenstein prince wins powers BBC News Online, 16 March 2003. Retrieved 29 December 2006. and approved by 64% of those voting on 16 March 2003.

==Executive branch==

|Prince
|Hans-Adam II
|
|13 November 1989
|-
|Prince-regent
|Alois
|
|15 August 2004
|-
|Prime Minister
|Adrian Hasler
|Progressive Citizens' Party
|27 March 2013

Hans-Adam II, Prince of Liechtenstein
The monarch is hereditary. Following legislative elections, the head of government is appointed by the prince and proposed and voted on by the parliament. Thus the government is usually composed of the members of the majority party. It is, however, also customary that the leader of the largest minority party in the Diet is appointed the deputy head of government by the monarch.
According to the constitution of Liechtenstein, the government is a collegiate body and consists of the head of government and four governmental councilors.

Amendment to the constitution or new law have to be adopted by Parliament, signed by both the Prince and the head of government, and published in the Principality's Law Gazette.

Prince Hans Adam II is the current head of state. His constitutional powers include the power to veto any legislation, to be used at his discretion, as well as the dissolution of the parliament (this may be subject to a referendum). He represents the state vis--vis foreign states. He signs international treaties either in person or delegates this function to a plenipotentiary. Some treaties under international law only become valid when they have been ratified by Parliament. On the basis of the names put forward by Parliament, the Prince nominates the government, district and high court judges, the judges of the Supreme Court, and the presidents and their deputies of the Constitutional Court and of the Administrative Court of Appeal. Country profile: Liechtenstein - Leaders BBC News, 6 December 2006. Retrieved 29 December 2006. The Prince's other authorities include exercising the right to mitigate and commute punishments that have been imposed with legal force and the abolition  i.e., the dismissal  of investigations that have been initiated. All judgments are issued in the name of the Prince.
Government and Parliament Building, Vaduz, Liechtenstein
The Government of Liechtenstein is based on the principle of collegiality; namely, of colleagues collaborating with each other. The government consists of the head of government and four Councilors. The members of the government are proposed by the Parliament and are appointed by the Prince. Only men or women born in Liechtenstein, and who are eligible to be elected to Parliament, may be elected to the government committee. The two electoral areas of the country, the highlands and the lowlands, are entitled to at least two members of the government, and their respective deputies must come from the same area. Principality of Liechtenstein - Government accessed 11 January 2010 

==Legislative branch==
The Prince's involvement in legislation consists in a right to take initiatives in the form of government bills and in the right to veto parliamentary proposals. The Prince has the power to enact princely decrees. Emergency princely decrees are possible when the security and welfare of the country is at stake. A countersignature by the head of government is, nevertheless, required. The Prince has the right to convene and adjourn parliament and, for serious reasons, to adjourn it for 3 months or to dissolve it.

The Landtag of Liechtenstein has 25 members, elected for a four year term by proportional representation in two multi-seat constituencies. Until 1989, 15 members represented the population of the two constituencies (six for the lowland area and nine for the highland area). Since 1989 the lowland constituency has been entitled to have 10 members and the highland area 15.
The Landtag's main task is to discuss and adopt resolutions on constitutional proposals and draft government bills. It has the additional duties of giving its assent to important international treaties; of electing members of the government, judges, and board members of the Principality's institutions; setting the annual budget and approving taxes and other public charges; and supervising the administration of the state.
The Landtag observes its rights and duties in the course of sessions of the whole Landtag and through the parliamentary commissions that it elects. All members of the Landtag exercise their mandates in addition to their normal professions or occupations. The President of the Landtag and his deputy are both elected at the opening meeting for the current year. The president convenes the individual meetings during the session, leads them, and represent the Landtag externally. Principality of Liechtenstein website - Parliamenary elections accessed 11 January 2010 During the parliamentary recess  normally from January to February/March  a "state committee" assumes Parliament's duties, and such a committee must also be elected in the case of any adjournment or dissolution of Parliament. A "state committee" consists of the president of Parliament and four other members. Principality of Liechtenstein website - Parliamentary Organization accessed 11 January 2010 
The duties and working procedures of Parliament are laid down in the constitution and in Parliament's standing orders.

Moreover the people of Liechtenstein have very strong direct democratic rights. At least 1000 citizens can initiate a referendum on any law. Referendums can suspend parliament or change the constitution, but at least 1500 citizens must vote affirmative, so referendums to suspend parliament or change the constitution fail if they have low turnout even if the required percentage of total voters is met.

==Political parties and elections==

The political parties are in practice politically decisive and are the moving forces with regard to the composition of the government. In the 2001-05 legislature period of office, one Councillor and three deputies were women.

From 1938 to 1997 Liechtenstein had a coalition government. Until recently there were only two parties in Parliament: the Patriotic Union and the Progressive Citizens' Party. Liechtenstein's distinctive form of coalition government came to an end in April 1997, when the Patriotic Union won an absolute majority of seats. It took sole responsibility for the government during the 1997 to 2001 Parliament, with its members filling all the positions on the government committee. Between 2001 and 2009, the Progressive Citizen's Party formed the government, winning an absolute majority in the 2001 elections and the most seats in the 2005 elections. The Patriotic Union once again won an absolute majority of seats in the February 2009 elections. Minority parties, as opposition parties, act as a check on the government in Parliament and on parliamentary commissions.

;Liechtenstein parliamentary election, 2013

==Judicial branch==

The Judiciary of Liechtenstein is made up of the Supreme Court (), the Princely Superior Court (), and the Princely Court ()

==Administrative divisions==
Liechtenstein is divided in eleven communes (); Balzers, Eschen, Gamprin, Mauren, Planken, Ruggell, Schaan, Schellenberg, Triesen, Triesenberg, and Vaduz.

==International organization participation==
CE, EBRD, ECE, EFTA, IAEA, ICC, ICRM, IFRCS, Intelsat, Interpol, IOC, ITU, OPCW, OSCE, PCA, UN, UNCTAD, UPU, WCL, WIPO, WTO

==References==



[[Economy of Liechtenstein]]

Low business taxes - the maximum tax rate is 20% - and easy incorporation rules have induced about 73,700 holding or so-called letter box companies to establish nominal offices in Liechtenstein, providing 30% of state revenues. The country participates in a customs union with Switzerland and uses the Swiss franc as its national currency. It imports more than 85% of its energy requirements. Liechtenstein has been a member of the European Economic Area (an organization serving as a bridge between European Free Trade Association (EFTA) and EU) since May 1995. The government is working to harmonize its economic policies with those of an integrated Europe.

== History ==
Since the signing of the Customs Treaty in 1919, Liechtenstein and Switzerland have represented one mutual economic area. Therefore, the borders between those states are open. The country also uses the Swiss franc as its national currency, and Swiss customs officers secure its border with Austria. Currently there are 21 Swiss border guards stationed in Liechtenstein and 20 Austria border guards securing its border (as of 2011). 

Liechtenstein is a member of EFTA, and joined the European Economic Area (EEA) in 1995 in order to benefit from the EU internal market. The capitalist economy and tax system make Liechtenstein a safe, trustworthy, and success-oriented place for private and business purposes, especially with its highly modern, internationally laid-out infrastructure and nearby connections to the whole world.

The Principality of Liechtenstein has gone through economic and cultural development in the last 40 years like no other Western country. In this short period, Liechtenstein developed from a mainly agricultural state to one of the most highly industrialized countries in the world.

== Foreign trade ==
An office of the Hilti Corporation in Hong Kong pictured in March 2010, an example of Liechtenstein's export economy

Besides its efficient industry, there also is a strong services sector. Four out of 10 employees work in the services sector, a relatively high proportion of whom are foreigners, including those who commute across the border from the neighboring states of Switzerland, Austria and Germany. Industrial exports more than doubled in 20 years from $1.21 billion (SFr. 2.2 billion) in 1988 to $2.9 billion (SFr. 4.6 billion) in 2008. Some 15.7% of Liechtenstein goods are exported to Switzerland, 62.6% to the EU, and 21.1% to the rest of the world. Liechtenstein imports more than 85% of its energy requirements from the Swiss. While Liechtenstein produces only 15% of its energy requirements. 

For the last 2 years, the United States has been the most important export market for Liechtenstein, totaling $561 million (SFr. 876 million); Germany is second, with $479 million (SFr. 748 million) worth of imports, and Switzerland third, with $375 million (SFr. 587 million). France and Italy were able to maintain their positions, while Austria and the United Kingdom have been overtaken by Taiwan and Japan.

About 32% of the country's revenues are invested in research and development, one of the driving forces of the success of Liechtenstein's economy. Total R&D spending in 2000 rose by 20.7% to approximately $140 million (213 million francees).

== Banking and finance ==
The Principality of Liechtenstein also is known as an important financial centre, primarily because it specializes in financial services for foreign entities. The country's low tax rate, loose incorporation and corporate governance rules, and traditions of strict bank secrecy have contributed significantly to the ability of financial intermediaries in Liechtenstein to attract funds from outside the country's borders. The same factors made the country attractive and vulnerable to money launderers, although late 2009 legislation has strengthened regulatory oversight of illicit funds transfers.

Liechtenstein has chartered 17 banks, three non-bank financial companies, and 71 public investment companies, as well as insurance and reinsurance companies. Its 270 licensed fiduciary companies and 81 lawyers serve as nominees for, or manage, more than 73,000 entities (primarily corporations, institutions, or trusts), partly for non-Liechtenstein residents. About one-third of these entities hold the controlling interest in other entities, chartered in countries other than Liechtenstein. The Principality's laws permit the corporations it charters to issue bearer shares. Until recently, the Principality's banking laws permitted banks to issue numbered accounts, but new regulations require strict know-your-customer practices for all accounts.

== Statistics ==
*GDP (PPP): $4.826 billion (2009)
*GDP - real growth rate: 3.8%% (2008)
*GDP (PPP) - per capita: purchasing power parity - $141,100 (2008)
*Inflation rate (consumer prices): 0.7% (2011)
*Labor force: 35,440 of whom about 10,440 are natives 7,550 are foreigners; 17,450 commute from Austria, Switzerland, and Germany to work each day (2008)
*Labor force - by occupation: agriculture: 8%; industry: 41%; services: 51% (31 December 2008)
*Unemployment rate: 1.5% (December 2007)
*Currency: Swiss franc (CHF)
*Exchange rates: Swiss francs per US dollar - 1.3467 (2003), 1.5586 (2002), 1.6876 (2001), 1.6888 (2000), 1.5022 (1999)
*Fiscal year: calendar year

===Budget===
*revenues: $420.8 million
*expenditures: $420.1 million, including capital expenditures of $NA (2000 est.)

===Industries===
electronics, metal manufacturing, textiles, ceramics, pharmaceuticals, food products, precision instruments, tourism
*Industrial production growth rate: N/A

===Electricity===
*production by source
**fossil fuel: 3330 MWh (3.12%)
**hydro: 76166 MWh (94.2%)
**nuclear: none (0%)
**solar/wind: 1361 MWh (2.68%)
*Electricity - production: 80,105 MWh (2010)
*Electricity - consumption:about 350,645 MWh (2010)
*Electricity - exports: none
*Electricity - imports: about 270,540 MWh (2010)

===Agriculture===
*Products
wheat, barley, corn, potatoes; livestock, dairy products

===Exports===
*Commodities: small specialty machinery, dental products, stamps, hardware, pottery
*Partners: EU 62.6%, Others 21.1%, Germany, the US, the UK, France, Italy, Austria, Taiwan and Japan, Switzerland 15.7% as of (2008)

===Imports===
*Commodities: agricultural products, raw materials, machinery, metal goods, textiles, foodstuffs, motor vehicles
*Partners: member states of the European Union, Switzerland, Germany and the US.

== See also ==

*Healthcare in Liechtenstein
*List of Foundations established in Vaduz

== References ==

== External links ==

 
Liectenstein

[[Telecommunications in Liechtenstein]]

This article concerns the systems of communications in Liechtenstein. Liechtenstein possesses a number of modern communications systems, some of which are shared with the neighbouring country of Switzerland. The country code and top-level domain for Liechtenstein is .li.

==Telephone and internet==
Liechtenstein's automatic telephone system is connected to the Swiss telephone networks via cable and microwave radio relay systems. There are 20,072 main line telephones in the country served by the network. In April 1999, Liechtenstein ceased to be a part of the Swiss telephone numbering plan, in which the country used the Swiss area code "075", opting instead to have a unique country calling code, "+423". There are 44 internet service providers in Liechtenstein and Switzerland combined.

==Radio and television==
There are four FM radio broadcast stations in Liechtenstein serving 21,000 radios. The television broadcast system is linked to the Swiss networks, with the Swiss services serving 12,000 televisions in Liechtenstein.

==References==

Much of the content of this article is adapted from the CIA World Factbook.

 



[[Foreign relations of Liechtenstein]]

Liechtenstein's foreign economic policy has been dominated by its customs union with Switzerland (and with Austria-Hungary until World War I). This union also led to its independent membership in the European Free Trade Association (EFTA) in 1991. Unlike Switzerland however (where citizens rejected membership in a referendum), Liechtenstein is part of the European Economic Area.

Liechtenstein was admitted to the United Nations in 1990. It is also a member of most specialized organizations of the UN system, a prominent exception being UNESCO.

Liechtenstein has resorted two times to international dispute settlement by the International Court of Justice, in the Nottebohm (Liechtenstein v. Guatemala) case against Guatemala in the 1950s and in a case concerning art property of the Liechtenstein family against Germany in 2005. It lost in both cases.

Liechtenstein maintains resident embassies in Austria, Belgium, Germany, Holy See, Switzerland and the United States, along with a number of missions to international organisations. Under a 1919 agreement between Liechtenstein and Switzerland, ambassadors of Switzerland are authorised to represent Liechtenstein in countries and in diplomatic situations unless Liechtenstein opts to send its own ambassador. Jorri Duursma, "Microstates: The Principality of Liechtenstein" in Christin Ingebritsen et al. (2006). Small States in International Relations. (University of Washington Press, Seattle) p. 89 at p. 124. 

Apart from Vatican City, Liechtenstein is the only country in the world not to host any embassy. There are, however, a number of honorary consulates in the principality. Most of these are situated in the capital Vaduz, however, some are found in Schaan, Schellenberg and Triesen.

==International dispute with the Czech Republic and Slovakia==

The country has an international dispute with the Czech Republic and Slovakia concerning the estates of its princely family in those countries. After World War II, Czechoslovakia, the predecessor of the Czech Republic and Slovakia, acting to seize what they considered to be German possessions, expropriated the entirety of the Liechtenstein dynasty's hereditary lands and possessions in Bohemia, Moravia, and Silesia which compose the Czech Republic. The expropriations (which were the subject of an unsuccessful court case brought by Liechtenstein in the German courts and the International Court of Justice) included over 1,600 km (which is ten times the size of Liechtenstein) of agricultural and forest land mostly in Moravia, also including several family castles and palaces. An offer from the Czech Republic to return the palaces and castles (without the surrounding land) was rejected by Liechtenstein. 

Liechtenstein recognised and established diplomatic relations with the Czech Republic on 13 July 2009 http://macedoniaonline.eu/content/view/7526/1/ and with Slovakia on 9 December 2009. Liechtenstein's ruling prince, Hans-Adam II, has announced that the principality will take no further legal action to recover the appropriated assets. 

==Membership in international organizations==

UN, CE, EBRD, ECE, EEA, EFTA, IAEA, ICC, ICRM, IFRCS, Intelsat, Interpol, IOC, ITU, OPCW, OSCE, PCA, UNCTAD, UPU, WCL, WIPO, WTO

Liechtenstein was never a member of the League of Nations. Its application to join that international organisation was refused in 1920 due to its small size. Participation of the Former Yugoslav States in the UN and multilateral Treaties 

==Honorary Consuls==
On 1 July 2007, Hans-Adam II and Liechtenstein's Prime Minister, Otmar Hasler, appointed Dr. Bruce S. Allen and Leodis C. Matthews, both in the United States of America, as the first two Honorary Consuls in history for the Principality of Liechtenstein. The U.S. does not maintain an embassy in Liechtenstein, and it is Switzerland's role to conduct and continue good relations between Switzerland, the U.S and the principality. Portal of the Principality of Liechtenstein - News & Statements 

==See also==

==References==

 

[[History of Lithuania]]

The history of Lithuania dates back to at least 1009, the first recorded written use of the term. Gudaviius, Edvardas (1999) Lietuvos Istorija: Nuo Seniausi Laik iki 1569 Met (Lithuanian History: From Ancient Times to the Year 1569) Vilnius, page 28, ISBN 5-420-00723-1 Lithuanians, a branch of the Baltic people, later conquered neighboring lands, establishing the Grand Duchy of Lithuania and in the 13th century the short-lived Kingdom of Lithuania. The Grand Duchy was a successful and lasting warrior state. The Duchy remained fiercely independent and was one of the last areas of Europe to adopt Christianity. In the 15th century, Lithuania became the largest state in Europe through the conquest of much of East Slav populated Ruthenia. R. Bideleux. A History of Eastern Europe: Crisis and Change. Routledge, 1998. p.122 The Grand Duchy, a formidable power, formed in 1385 a dynastic union with Poland and became Christianized, merging into the PolishLithuanian Commonwealth in 1569. In 1795, the Grand Duchy of Lithuania was erased from the political map with the Partitions of the Commonwealth. Afterward, the Lithuanians lived under the rule of the Russian Empire until the 20th century.

On February 16, 1918, Lithuania was reestablished as a democratic state. It remained independent until the outset of World War II, when it was occupied by the Soviet Union under the terms of the MolotovRibbentrop Pact. Following a brief occupation by Nazi Germany when the Nazis declared war on the Soviet Union, Lithuania was again absorbed into the Soviet Union for nearly 50 years. In the early 1990s, Lithuania restored its sovereignty and in the following years became integrated into the European political structures.

==Before statehood==

=== Early settlement ===
Kernav mounds

The first people arrived on the territory of modern Lithuania in the 10th millennium BC after the glaciers had retreated and the last glacial period had ended. According to historian Marija Gimbutas, the people came from two directions: from the Jutland Peninsula and from present-day Poland. They brought two different cultures as evidenced by the tools they used. They were traveling hunters and did not form more stable settlements. In the 8th millennium BC, the climate became much warmer and forests developed. The inhabitants traveled less and engaged in local hunting, gathering and fresh water fishing. During the 6th5th millennium BC, various animals were domesticated, dwellings became more sophisticated and could shelter larger families. Agriculture did not arrive until the 3rd millennium BC, because of demanding climate and terrain and a lack of suitable tools to cultivate the land. Crafts and trade also started to form at this time. 
Speakers of North-Western Indo-European might have arrived with the Corded Ware culture around 3200/3100 BC. CARPELAN, C.& PARPOLA, ASKO: Emergence, contacts and dispersal of Proto-Indo-European, Proto-Uralic and Proto-Aryan in archaeological perspective. In: Carpelan, Christian; Parpola, Asko; Koskikallio, Petteri (Eds), EARLY CONTACTS BETWEEN URALIC AND INDO-EUROPEAN: LINGUISTIC AND ARCHAEOLOGICAL CONSIDERATIONS. Suomalais-Ugrilaisen Seura, Helsinki, Finland, 2001. 

===Baltic tribes===

Baltic tribes around 1200, before the Teutonic conquests
 
The first Lithuanians were a branch of an ancient Indo-European group known as the Balts, whose tribes also included the original Prussian, Yotvingian and Latvian people. Krzysztof Baczkowski  Dzieje Polski pnoredniowiecznej (13701506) (History of Late Medieval Poland (13701506)), p. 55-61; Fogra, Krakw 1999, ISBN 83-85719-40-7 The Baltic tribes were not directly influenced by the Roman Empire, but they did maintain close trade contacts (see Amber Road). Tacitus in Germania, describing inhabitants of the south-eastern Baltic Sea shores, mentioned the (presumably Baltic) Aesti people around 97 AD. Western Balts differentiated and became known to the outside world first. Ptolemy in the 2nd century AD knew of the Galindians and Yotvingians and Western early medieval chroniclers mentioned Prussians, Curonians and Semigallians. 

Lithuania, located along the lower and middle Neman River basin, comprised mainly the culturally different regions of Samogitia (skeletal early medieval burials), and further east Auktaitija, or Lithuania proper (cremation early medieval burials). Jerzy Ochmaski, Historia Litwy History of Lithuania, Second Edition, p. 37. Ossolineum, Wrocaw 1982, ISBN 83-04-00886-6. The area was remote and not easily accessible or attractive to outsiders, including traders, which accounts for its separate linguistic, cultural and religious identity and delayed integration into the European patterns and trends. 

The linguistically very conservative (close to its early Indo-European roots) Lithuanian language is believed to have differentiated from the Latvian language, the most closely related existing language, around the 7th century. Likewise, in the traditional Lithuanian folklore and culture, pagan customs and mythology with many archaic elements were long preserved. Rulers' bodies were cremated up until the conversion to Christianity: the descriptions of the cremation ceremonies of the grand dukes Algirdas and Kstutis have survived in sources. 

Lithuania's name first written in 1009

The tribe of Lithuanians (Eastern Balts) is thought to have developed more intensely toward the end of the first millennium. The first known reference to Lithuania as a nation ("Litua") comes from the annals of the Monastery of Quedlinburg and is dated March 9, 1009. In 1009, the missionary Bruno of Querfurt arrived in Lithuania and baptized the Lithuanian ruler "King Nethimer". 

Today, the two remaining Baltic nationalities are Lithuanians and Latvians, but there were more Baltic groups or tribes in the past. Some of these have merged into Lithuanians and Latvians (Samogitians, Selonians, Curonians, Semigallians), while others no longer exist, having been conquered and assimilated by the Teutonic invaders (Prussians, Yotvingians, Sambians, Skalvians, Galindians). 

===Formation of Lithuanian state===

East of the Baltic tribes: Kievan Rus'

From the 9th to the 11th century coastal Balts were subjected to raids by the Vikings and kings of Denmark at times collected tribute. During the 1011th century, Lithuanian territories were among the lands paying tribute to Kievan Rus' and Yaroslav the Wise was among the Ruthenian rulers who invaded Lithuania (from 1040). From the mid-12th century, the Lithuanians were invading the Ruthenian territories themselves. Toward the end of the century Polotsk and Pskov (1183) were ravaged and the distant and powerful Novgorod Republic was repeatedly threatened by the excursions from the emerging Lithuanian war machine. Jerzy Ochmaski, Historia Litwy History of Lithuania, Second Edition, pp. 39-42 

In the 12th century and afterwards mutual raids involving Lithuanian and Polish forces were sporadically taking place, but the two countries were separated by the lands of the Yotvingians. The late 12th century brought German settlers to the mouth of the Daugava River area. Military confrontations with Lithuanians followed at that time and at the turn of the century, but for now the Lithuanians had the upper hand. Jerzy Ochmaski, Historia Litwy History of Lithuania, Second Edition, pp. 43-45 

From the late 12th century an organized Lithuanian military force existed; it was used for external raids, plundering and gathering of slaves. Such military and wealth-acquiring activities and the attendant social differentiation triggered a struggle for power in Lithuania, which initiated the formation of early statehood, from which the Grand Duchy of Lithuania developed. 

==Grand Duchy of Lithuania (13th century1569)==

===13th14th century Lithuanian state===

====Mindaugas and his kingdom====

Pope Innocent IV's bull regarding Lithuania's placement under the jurisdiction of the Bishop of Rome, Mindaugas' baptism and coronation

From the early 13th century, the nearly yearly foreign military excursions had become possible because of the increased cooperation and coordination among the tribes. Forty such expeditions took place between 1201 and 1236, against Latvia, which was then being conquered by the Germans, and against Ruthenia and Poland. Pskov was pillaged and burned in 1213. 

In 1219, twenty-one Lithuanian chiefs signed a peace treaty with GaliciaVolhynia. This event is widely accepted as the first proof that the Baltic tribes were uniting and consolidating. 

From the early 13th century, two German religious orders, the Livonian Brothers of the Sword and the Teutonic Knights, became established in the region. Under the pretense of converting the population to Christianity they conquered much of the area that is now Latvia and Estonia, in addition to parts of Lithuania. In response, a number of small Baltic tribal groups united under the rule of Mindaugas. Mindaugas, originally a kunigas or major chief, one of the five senior dukes listed in the 1219 treaty, is referred to as the ruler of all Lithuania as of 1236 in the Livonian Rhymed Chronicle. Mindaugas conquered the Black Ruthenia region (the vicinity of Grodno, Brest and Navahrudak). 

State of the Teutonic Order in 1260

The Livonian Brothers operated form 1202 from the mouth of the Daugava River area, gradually conquering the pagan tribes of the region. The Teutonic Order became established much further south and west, in Chemno Land in 1230 and proceeded to conquer the Baltic Old Prussians beginning in 1233. In 1236 the pope declared a crusade against the Lithuanians. 

The Samogitians, led by Vykintas, Mindaugas' rival, Jerzy Ochmaski, Historia Litwy History of Lithuania, Second Edition, pp. 46-47 soundly defeated the Livonian Brothers and their allies in the Battle of Saule in 1236, which forced the Brothers to merge with the Teutonic Knights in 1237. But Lithuania was trapped between the two branches of the Order. 

Around 1240 Mindaugas ruled over all of Auktaitija and was in process of extending his control to other areas, killing rivals or sending relatives and members of rival clans east to Ruthenia so they could conquer and settle there. They did that, but also rebelled and the Ruthenian duke Daniel of Galicia sensed an occasion to recover Black Ruthenia and organized in 124950 a powerful anti-Mindaugas (and "anti-pagan") coalition, which also included Mindaugas' rivals, Yotvingians, Samogitians and the Livonian Teutonic Knights. Hovewer, Mindaugas' brilliant moves took advantage of the divergent interests in the coalition he faced. Jerzy Ochmaski, Historia Litwy History of Lithuania, Second Edition, pp. 47-48 

Seal of Mindaugas

In 1250 Mindaugas entered into an agreement with the Teutonic Order; he consented to receive baptism (the act took place in 1251) and relinquish his claim over some lands in western Lithuania, for which he was to receive a crown in return. Mindaugas was then able to withstand a military assault (1251) from the remaining coalition, and, supported by the Knights, emerge as a victor and confirm his rule over Lithuania. Jerzy Ochmaski, Historia Litwy History of Lithuania, Second Edition, pp. 48-50 

On July 17, 1251, Pope Innocent IV signed two papal bulls, ordering the Bishop of Chemno to crown Mindaugas as King of Lithuania, appoint a bishop for Lithuania, and build a cathedral. In 1253, Mindaugas was crowned and the Kingdom of Lithuania was established, for the first and only time in Lithuanian history. Tomas Baranauskas. Lietuvos karalystei  750. 2001. Lithuania profile: history. U.S. Department of State Background Notes. Last accessed on 02 June 2013 Mindaugas "granted" parts of Yotvingia and Samogitia that he did not control to the Knights in 125359. A peace with Daniel of Galicia (1254) was cemented by a marriage deal involving Mindaugas' daughter and Daniel's son Shvarn. The rival nephew Tautvilas returned to his Duchy of Polotsk and Samogitia separated, soon to be ruled by another nephew Treniota. 

In 1260 Samogitians, victorious over the Teutonic Knights in the Battle of Durbe, agreed to submit themselves to Mindaugas' rule on the condition that he abandons the Christian religion; the King complied by terminating the emergent conversion of his country, renewed anti-Teutonic warfare (struggle for Samogitia) and expanded further his Ruthenian holdings. Jerzy Ochmaski, Historia Litwy History of Lithuania, Second Edition, pp. 50-53 It is not clear whether this was accompanied by his personal apostasy. Mindaugas thus established the basic tenets of medieval Lithuanian policy: defense against the German order expansion from the west and north, conquest of Ruthenia in the south and east. 

Mindaugas was the principal founder of the Lithuanian state. He managed to establish for a while a Christian kingdom, under the pope rather than the emperor, at the time when the remaining pagan peoples of Europe were being no longer peacefully converted, but conquered. 

====Traidenis, Teutonic conquests of Baltic tribes====

Daumantas of Pskov killed Mindaugas in revenge for the King's taking of Daumantas' wife

Mindaugas was murdered in 1263 by Daumantas and Treniota, which resulted in great unrest and civil war. Treniota, who took over, murdered Tautvilas but was killed in 1264 himself. The rule of Mindaugas' son Vaivilkas followed. He was the first Lithuanian duke known to become an Orthodox Christian and settle in Ruthenia, establishing a pattern to be followed by many others. Vaivilkas was killed in 1267. A power struggle between Shvarn and Traidenis resulted and ended in a victory of the latter. Traidenis' reign (126982) was the longest and most stable regime during the period of unrest. Tradenis reunified all Lithuanian lands, repeatedly raided Ruthenia (extending Mindaugas' possessions) and Poland, defeated the Teutonic Knights in Prussia and Livonia in 1279 and became the ruler of Yotvingia, Semigalia and eastern Prussia. Friendly relations with Poland followed and in 1279 Tradenis' daughter Gaudemunda Sophia married Bolesaw II of Masovia, a Piast duke. 

Pagan Lithuania was a target of Christian crusades of the Teutonic Knights and the Livonian Order. In 1241, 1259 and 1275 Lithuania was ravaged by raids from the Golden Horde, which earlier (123740) debilitated Kievan Rus', the country that had already suffered from its 12th century divisions. After Traidenis' death, the German Knights finalized their conquests of Baltic tribes and they could concentrate on Lithuania, especially on Samogitia, to connect the two branches of the Order. In particular, in 1274 the Great Prussian Rebellion ended and the Teutonic Knights proceeded to conquer other Baltic tribes: the Nadruvians and Skalvians in 127477, and the Yotvingians in 1283. The Livonian Order completed its conquest of Semigalia, the last Baltic ally of Lithuania, in 1291. 

====Vytenis, Lithuania's great expansion under Gediminas====

Peace agreement between Gediminas and the Teutonic Order

The House of Gediminas, Lithuania's great native ruling dynasty, began with Butigeidis and his brother Butvydas, who ruled 129294. They fought the Teutonic orders continuously from 1289. Butvydas' sons, the brothers Vytenis (12951315) and Gediminas (131541), after whom the Gediminid dynasty is named, had to deal with the increased Teutonic pressure, bloody and costly raids and incursions. Vytenis fought them effectively around 1298 and at about the same time was able to ally Lithuania with the German burghers of Riga. The Prussian Knights instigated a rebellion in Samogitia against the Lithuanian ruler in 12991300, followed by twenty incursions there in 130015. Grand Duke Gediminas was the first of the leaders responsible for Lithuania's state power and the great expansion into Ruthenia. Norman Davies, , p. 392, 1998 New York, HarperPerennial, ISBN 0-06-097468-0 

Having first to defend his realm against the Teutonic Knights, Gediminas fought them militarily, but also made diplomatic moves, cooperating with Riga in 132223 and taking advantage of the conflict of Archbishop Friedrich von Pernstein of Riga with the Knights. Gediminas conducted correspondence with Pope John XXII and West European rulers and other centers of power; he invited German colonists to settle in Lithuania. Responding to Gediminas' complaints about the aggression from the Teutonic Order, the Pope forced the Knights to obey a four year peace with Lithuania in 132427. Opportunities for Christianization of Lithuania were investigated by the Pope's legates, but without success. Gediminas' attempts to become baptized (132324) and establish Catholic Christianity in his country were thwarted by the Samogitians and Gediminas' Orthodox courtiers. Casimir, the son of the Polish king Wadysaw, married Gediminas' daughter Aldona, the future queen of Poland. A defensive alliance with Poland was concluded in 1325. Yearly incursions of the Knights resumed in 132840, to which the Lithuanians responded with raids into Prussia and Latvia. Jerzy Ochmaski, Historia Litwy History of Lithuania, Second Edition, pp. 53-55 

Expansion of the Grand Duchy of Lithuania in the 13-15th centuries

Gediminas extended the Grand Duchy of Lithuania to the east by challenging the Mongols, who from the 1230s invaded large areas of Rus'. A Concise History of Poland, by Jerzy Lukowski and Hubert Zawadzki. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2nd edition 2006, ISBN 0-521-61857-6, p. 38-39 The collapse of the political structure of Kievan Rus' created a partial regional power vacuum, into which Lithuania was able to expand. Through alliances and conquest, in competition with the Principality of Moscow (an Orthodox metropolitan Lithuanian seat was established in Navahrudak to further that end, under Metropolitan Theophilus until 1330), the Lithuanians eventually gained control of vast expanses, the western and southern portions of the former Kievan Rus'. Gediminas' rule stretched up to the western Smolensk region in the east, southern Polesia and temporarily Kiev, ruled around 1330 by Gediminas' brother Fiodor. Polotsk, Volhynia and Halych were parts of the Lithuanian military monarchy's political system. A number of masonry castles were built by Gediminas and his son Algirdas around Vilnius and also in Kaunas and Grodno. In the 14th century, many Lithuanian princes established in the territories to govern the Rus' lands accepted Eastern Christianity and assumed the Ruthenian custom and names, joining the culture of their subjects. Integration into the Lithuanian state structure was accomplished without disturbing the local ways of life. Historical territories of the former Ruthenian dukedoms were preserved under the Lithuanian rule, and the further from Vilnius, the more autonomous the localities tended to be. Lithuanian soldiers and Ruthenians together defended Ruthenian strongholds, at times paying tribute to the Golden Horde for some of the outlying localities. Ruthenian lands may have been ruled jointly by Lithuania and the Golden Horde as condominiums, until the time of Vytautas, who stopped paying tribute. Gediminas' state provided counterbalance for Moscow's influence and enjoyed good relations with the Ruthenian principalities of Pskov, Veliky Novgorod and Tver. Early military confrontations with Ivan Kalita's growing power of Moscow occurred around 1335. The Lithuanian-controlled area grew to include most of modern Belarus and Ukraine (the Dnieper River basin) and comprised a massive Lithuanian state that in the 14th and 15th century stretched from the Baltic Sea to the Black Sea. 

Lithuania was a peculiar and unique in Europe pagan-ruled "kingdom" and fast growing military power. It was suspended between the worlds of Byzantine and Latin Christianity. To be able to afford the extremely costly defense against the Teutonic Knights, it had to expand to the east. From the time of Mindaugas the country's rulers attempted to break the civilizational isolation, join the Western Christendom and thus (it was hoped) be protected from the Knights, but the Knights and other interests had been able to block the process. The Ruthenian territories acquired were vastly larger, more densely populated and developed (church organization, literacy) than ethnic Lithuania, but to keep their small native land Lithuanians needed a Western connection. During its earlier centuries, the Lithuanian state was able to function because of the contributions of the Ruthenian culture representatives. 

====Algirdas and Kstutis====

16th-century image of Algirdas, one of the great rulers of 14th-century Europe

Around 1318, Algirdas, Gediminas' elder son, married Anna or Maria of Vitebsk, the local duke's daughter, and settled in Vitebsk to rule the Principality. Of Gediminas' seven successor sons, four remained pagan and three became Orthodox Christians. Upon his death Gediminas divided his state among the seven sons, but Lithuania's precarious situation, especially on the Teutonic frontier, forced the brothers to keep the country together. Jerzy Ochmaski, Historia Litwy History of Lithuania, Second Edition, pp. 55-56 From 1345, Algirdas took over as the Grand Duke of Lithuania. He in practice ruled Lithuanian Ruthenia, while Lithuania proper was the domain of his equally able brother Kstutis. Algirdas fought the Golden Horde Tatars and the Principality of Moscow, Kstutis took upon himself the demanding struggle with the Teutonic Order. 

The warfare with the Order continued from 1345 and in 1348 the Knights defeated the Lithuanians at the Battle of Strva. Kstutis asked King Casimir of Poland to mediate with the pope Lithuania's Christianization, but the result was negative and Poland took from Lithuania in 1349 the Halych area and some Ruthenian lands further north. Lithuania's situation improved from 1350, when Algirdas formed an alliance with the Principality of Tver. Halych Ruthenia was ceded by Lithuania, which brought peace with Poland in 1352. Secured by those alliances, Algirdas and Kstutis embarked on the policies of Lithuania's great power and further expansion. 

Seal of Kstutis

Bryansk was taken in 1359 and in 1362 Algirdas captured Kiev after defeating the Mongols in the Battle of Blue Waters. Volhynia, Podolia and left-bank Ukraine were also incorporated. Kstutis heroically and with perseverance fought for the survival of ethnic Lithuanians, attempting to repel about thirty incursions by the militarily advanced Teutonic Knights and their European guest fighters. Kstutis also attacked the Teutonic possessions in Prussia on numerous occasions, but the Knights took Kaunas in 1362. Jerzy Ochmaski, Historia Litwy History of Lithuania, Second Edition, pp. 56-58 The dispute with Poland renewed itself and was settled by the peace of 1366, when Lithuania gave up a part of Volhynia including Volodymyr. A peace with the Livonian Knights was also accomplished in 1367. In 1368, 1370 and 1372 Algirdas invaded Muscovy and each time approached Moscow itself. An "eternal" peace was concluded after the last attempt, much needed by Lithuania, because of its involvement in heavy fighting with the Knights again in 137377. 

The two brothers and other Gediminas' offspring left many ambitious and endowed sons. Their rivalry weakened the country facing the Teutonic expansion and the newly assertive Grand Duchy of Moscow, buoyed by the 1380 Battle of Kulikovo victory over the Golden Horde and intent on unification of all Rus' lands under its rule. 

====Jogaila's conflict with Kstutis, Vytautas====

Jogaila's treaty with the Teutonic Knights precipitated the fall of Kstutis

Algirdas died in 1377 and his son Jogaila became grand duke when Kstutis was still alive. The Teutonic pressure was at its peak and Jogaila was inclined to cease defending Samogitia in order to concentrate on preserving the Ruthenian empire of Lithuania. The Knights saw the Lithuanian contradiction (Kstutis wanted to keep fighting on both fronts) and procured a separate armistice with the old duke in 1379. Jogaila made overtures to the Teutonic Order and concluded a secret treaty with them in 1380, contrary to Kstutis' principles and interests. Kstutis felt he could no longer support his nephew and, when Jogaila's forces were preoccupied with quenching a rebellion in Polotsk, entered Vilnius in 1381 in order to remove Jogaila from the throne. A civil war (138184) ensued. Kstutis' two raids against Teutonic possessions in 1382 brought back the tradition of his past exploits, but Jogaila retook Vilnius during his uncle's absence. Kstutis was captured and died in Jogaila's custody. Kstutis' son Vytautas escaped. Jerzy Ochmaski, Historia Litwy History of Lithuania, Second Edition, pp. 58-60 

Jogaila agreed to the Treaty of Dubysa with the Order in 1382, an indication of his weakness. A four-year truce stipulated Jogaila's conversion to Catholicism and the cession of half of Samogitia to the Teutonic Knights. Vytautas went to Prussia seeking support of the Knights for his claims, including the Duchy of Trakai, which he considered inherited from his father. Jogaila's refusal to submit to his cousin's and the Knights' demands resulted in their joint invasion of Lithuania in 1383. Vytautas, however, having failed to gain the entire Duchy, decided to establish contacts with the Grand Duke. Upon receiving from him the Grodno, Podlasie and Brest areas Vytautas switched sides in 1384, destroying the border strongholds entrusted to him by the Order. The two Lithuanian dukes acting together waged in 1384 a successful expedition against the Teutonic ruled lands. 

By that time, for the sake of its long-term survival, the Grand Duchy of Lithuania had initiated the processes leading to its imminent joining the European Christendom. 

====13th14th century Lithuanian society====

Gediminas' Tower, built under Vytautas

The Lithuanian state of the later 14th century was primarily binational, Lithuanian and Ruthenian (the future Belarus and Ukraine). Of its 800,000 square kilometers total area, 10% comprised ethnic Lithuania, populated by probably no more than 300,000 inhabitants. Lithuania was dependent for its survival on the human and material resources of the Ruthenian lands. Jerzy Ochmaski, Historia Litwy History of Lithuania, Second Edition, p. 60 

The increasingly differentiated Lithuanian society was led by the princes of the Gediminid and Rurik dynasties and the descendants of the former kunigas top chiefs, such as the Giedraitis, Olshanski and Svirski families. Below were the regular nobles or boyars, in Lithuania proper strictly subjected to the princes and living on modest family farms, each tended by a few feudal subjects or more often slave workers if the boyar could afford them. For their military and administrative services Lithuanian boyars were compensated by exemptions from public contributions, payments, and Ruthenian land grants. The majority of ordinary rural folks were free. They were obligated to provide crafts and numerous contributions and services; for not paying debts or other trespasses one could become a slave and join the foreign captured laborers. Jerzy Ochmaski, Historia Litwy History of Lithuania, Second Edition, pp. 6062 

The Ruthenian princes were Orthodox, and so became many Lithuanian princes, even some of those in Lithuania proper, or at least their wives. The masonry Ruthenian churches and monasteries housed learned monks, their writings (including Gospel translations) and collections of religious art. A Ruthenian side of town, populated by Lithuania's Orthodox subjects and containing their church, existed in Vilnius from the 14th century. The grand dukes' chancery was staffed by Orthodox churchmen, who, trained in the Church Slavonic language, developed in Vilnius the Chancery Slavonic, a Ruthenian written language useful for the state's official record keeping. The most important Grand Duchy's documents, the Lithuanian Metrica, the Lithuanian Chronicles and the Statutes of Lithuania, were all written in that language. 

German, Jewish and Armenian settlers were invited to live in Lithuania; the last two groups established their own denominational communities directly under the ruling dukes. The Tatars and Crimean Karaites were entrusted as soldiers for the dukes' personal guard. 

Towns developed to a much lesser degree than in nearby Prussia or Livonia. Outside of Ruthenia, the only cities were Vilnius (from 1323 Gediminas' capital), the old capital Trakai and Kaunas. Kernav and Kreva were the other old political centers. Vilnius in the 14th century was a major social, cultural and trade center, economically linking central and eastern Europe with the Baltic zone. Vilnius merchants enjoyed privileges that allowed them to trade over most of the Lithuanian state's territory. Of the passing Ruthenian, German (many from Riga) and Polish merchants, many settled in Vilnius and some built masonry residencies. The city was ruled by a governor named by the grand duke and its system of fortifications included three castles. Lithuanian (from the 13th century) and foreign currencies were widely used. Jerzy Ochmaski, Historia Litwy History of Lithuania, Second Edition, pp. 6263 

The state had a patrimonial structure of power. The Gediminid rule was hereditary, but the ruler would choose the son he considered most able to be his successor. Councils existed, but could only advise the duke. The huge state was divided into a hierarchy of territorial units, administered by designated officials, who were also empowered in judicial and military matters. 

The Lithuanians spoke in a number of Auktaitijan and Samogitian (West-Baltic) dialects. But the tribal peculiarities were disappearing and the increasing use of the name Lietuva was a testimony to the developing Lithuanian sense of separate identity. The forming Lithuanian feudal system preserved many aspects of the earlier societal organization, such as the family clan structure, free peasantry and some slavery. The land belonged now to the ruler and the nobility. Patterns imported primarily from Ruthenia were used for the organization of the state and its structure of power. Jerzy Ochmaski, Historia Litwy History of Lithuania, Second Edition, pp. 68-69 
 
Lithuania, not an officially Christian state, was an anomaly in Europe and had no allies. This situation was becoming increasingly untenable in the 1380s. 

===Christianization of the state, dynastic union with Poland===

====Jogaila's kingdom, Vytautas' rule in Lithuania====

St. Nicholas in Vilnius, the oldest church in Lithuania

As the power of the Lithuanian warlord dukes expanded to the south and east, the cultivated East Slavic Ruthenians moved in the opposite direction within their new statehood and exerted influence on the Lithuanian ruling class. Timothy Snyder, The Reconstruction of Nations, p. 17-18, 2003 New Haven & London, Yale University Press, ISBN 978-0-300-10586-5 They brought with them the Church Slavonic liturgy of the Eastern Orthodox Christian religion, a written Slavic language, the version of which known as Chancery Slavonic was developed to serve the Lithuanian court's document-producing needs for a few centuries, and developed laws, turning Vilnius into a major center of their civilization. By the time of Jogaila's acceptance of Catholicism at the Union of Krewo in 1385, the establishment of his realm and members of his family had been to a large extent assimilated into the Orthodox Christianity and became Russified (in part a result of the deliberate policy of the Gediminas ruling house). 

Ruthenian depiction of Christian Jogaila

Catholic influence and contacts, including German settlers and traders and missionaries from Riga, Jerzy Ochmaski, Historia Litwy History of Lithuania, Second Edition, p. 67 had also been increasing for some time around the northwest region of the empire, Lithuania proper. The Franciscan and Dominican monk orders existed in Vilnius from the time of Gediminas. Kstutis in 1349 and Algirdas in 1358 negotiated Christianization with the pope, the emperor and the Polish king. The conversion by force policy of the Teutonic Knights had actually been an impediment, delaying the progress of Western Christianity in the Grand Duchy. 

Jogaila, a grand duke since 1377, was himself still a pagan. He agreed to become a Catholic when offered the Polish crown and the child queen Jadwiga by leading Polish nobles, who were eager to take advantage of Lithuania's expansion. A Concise History of Poland, by Jerzy Lukowski and Hubert Zawadzki, p. 37 Lithuania's close association with Poland had thus begun, and lasted, in one form or another, for nearly five centuries. Timothy Snyder, The Reconstruction of Nations, p. 4 For the near future, Poland gave Lithuania a valuable ally against increasing threats from the Teutonic Knights and the Grand Duchy of Moscow. Lithuania, in which Ruthenians outnumbered Lithuanians proper several times, was not a stable political entity, and Jogaila's realistic choice may have been between a conversion-marriage based alliance with Muscovy or with Poland. A Russian deal was also negotiated with Dmitry Donskoy in 13831384, but Moscow was too far to help with the Teutonic problem and could pose a difficulty as a center competing for the loyalty of the Orthodox Lithuanian Ruthenians. A Concise History of Poland, by Jerzy Lukowski and Hubert Zawadzki, p. 38-40 

Grand Duke Vytautas, a Lithuanian hero, was Jogaila's first cousin and rival

Jogaila's baptism and the crowning as the King of Poland in 1386 were followed by the final and official Christianization of Lithuania. A Concise History of Poland, by Jerzy Lukowski and Hubert Zawadzki, p. 38-42 The establishment of the bishopric in Vilnius in 1387 and Jogaila's orders for his court and followers to convert to Catholicism were meant to deprive the Teutonic Knights of the justification for their practice of forced conversion through military onslaughts. Jogaila also needed Polish support in his struggle with cousin Vytautas. 

After the Lithuanian Civil War of 13811384 and the Lithuanian Civil War of 13891392, Vytautas the Great became the Grand Duke of Lithuania in 1392, under a compromise deal with Jogaila. A Concise History of Poland, by Jerzy Lukowski and Hubert Zawadzki, p. 44-45 Vytautas had been frustrated by Jogaila's Polish arrangements and rejected the prospect of Lithuania's subordination to Poland. During Vytautas' reign Lithuania reached the peak of its territorial expansion, but his ambitious plans were checked by the 1399 defeat, inflicted by the Golden Horde at the Battle of the Vorskla River. Prior to that expedition, in the Treaty of Salynas in 1398 Vytautas had to grant the Teutonic Order a large portion of Samogitia, a native Lithuanian land, greatly improving the position of the Order and their associated Knights of the Sword in Livonia. In his soon pursued attempts to retake the territory, the Grand Duke needed the help of the Polish King. Under Vytautas centralization of the state had begun, and the Lithuanian nobility became increasingly prominent in state politics. 

Oldest surviving manuscript in the Lithuanian language (beginning of the 16th century), rewritten from a 15th-century original text

The original Union of Krewo of 1385 had been renewed and defined further, but continuously with little clarity, due to the competing Polish and Lithuanian interests, by the "unions" of Vilnius (1401), Horodo (1413), Grodno (1432) and Vilnius (1499). A lasting connection of some sort between the two states was beneficial to Poles, Lithuanians, Ruthenians, Catholic and Orthodox, and the Jagiellonian rulers themselves, whose hereditary succession rights in Lithuania practically guaranteed their election as kings in Poland. A Concise History of Poland, by Jerzy Lukowski and Hubert Zawadzki, p. 41-42 

The Lithuanian-Polish alliance was able to defeat the mighty Teutonic Knights at the Battle of Grunwald in 1410, but they failed to take Marienburg, the Knights' fortress-capital. Several more wars resulted and in 1422, at the Peace of Melno, the Grand Duchy recovered Samogitia, which terminated its involvement in the wars with the Order. Samogitia was the last region of Europe to be Christianized. Later different foreign policies were pursued by Lithuania and Poland, accompanied by conflicts over Podolia and Volhynia, the Grand Duchy's territories in the southeast. A Concise History of Poland, by Jerzy Lukowski and Hubert Zawadzki, p. 44-48 

The dynastic link to Poland resulted in religious, political and cultural ties and increase of Western influence among the native Lithuanian nobility, and to a lesser extent among the Ruthenian boyars from the East, Lithuanian subjects. A Concise History of Poland, by Jerzy Lukowski and Hubert Zawadzki, p. 40-41 Catholic Lithuanians were granted preferential treatment and access to offices because of the policies of Vytautas, officially pronounced in 1413 at the Union of Horodo, and even more so of his successors, aimed at asserting the rule of a Catholicized, Lithuanian elite over the Rus' territories. A Concise History of Poland, by Jerzy Lukowski and Hubert Zawadzki, p. 55-56 Such policies increased the pressure on the local nobility to convert to Catholicism. The Grand Duchy of Lithuania was preserved as a separate state with separate institutions. Cities, including Vilnius, the capital the largest city, were granted the German system of laws (Magdeburg rights).

====Under Jagiellonian rulers====

First Lithuanian legal statute, implemented in 1522-1529

Following the deaths of Vytautas (1430), conflict ensued and Lithuania was ruled by rival successors. Afterwards, the Lithuanian nobility on two occasions technically broke the union between Poland and Lithuania, unilaterally selecting grand dukes from the Jagiellon dynasty. In 1440, the Lithuanian great lords elevated Casimir, King Jagieo's (Jogaila)'s second son. This was fixed by Casimir's election as king by the Poles in 1446. In 1492, in the case of Jagieo's grandsons, John Albert became the king, while Alexander the grand duke in Lithuania. Again, in 1501 Alexander succeeded John as king, which resolved the difficulty. 

On the Teutonic front, the Polish Crown continued the struggle, which in 1466 led to the Peace of Thorn and the recovery of much of the Piast dynasty territorial losses. A secular Prussian state was established in 1525. It would greatly impact the futures of both Lithuania and Poland. A Concise History of Poland, by Jerzy Lukowski and Hubert Zawadzki, p. 45-50 

The Tatar Crimean Khanate recognized suzerainty of the Ottoman Empire from 1475. Seeking slaves and booty the Tatars raided vast portions of the Grand Duchy, burning Kiev in 1482 and approaching Vilnius in 1505. Their activity resulted in the 1480s and 1490s in Lithuania's loss of its distant reaches on the Black Sea shores. The last two Jagiellon kings were Sigismund I and Sigismund II Augustus, during whose reign the intensity of Tatar raids diminished due to the appearance of the military caste of Cossacks at the southeastern territories and the growing power of the Grand Duchy of Moscow. A Concise History of Poland, by Jerzy Lukowski and Hubert Zawadzki, p. 52-55 

Martynas Mavydas' Catechism was published in Lithuanian in Knigsberg (1547)

Lithuania needed a close alliance with Poland when, at the end of the 15th century, the increasingly assertive Muscovy threatened some of Lithuania's Rus' principalities, seeking a "recovery" of the formerly Orthodox-ruled lands. In 1492, Ivan III of Russia unleashed what turned out to be a series of the MuscoviteLithuanian and later Livonian wars. A Concise History of Poland, by Jerzy Lukowski and Hubert Zawadzki, p. 56-58 

The border of Lithuania's loosely controlled eastern Ruthenian territory ran in 1492 less than one hundred miles from Moscow. But as a result of the warfare, a third of the Grand Duchy's land area was ceded to the Russian state in 1503. Then the loss of Smolensk in July 1514 was particularly disastrous, even though it was followed by the successful Battle of Orsha in September, as the Polish interests were reluctantly recognizing the necessity of their own involvement in Lithuania's defense. The peace of 1537 left Homel as the Grand Duchy's eastern edge. 

In the north prolonged multinational conflicts took place over the strategically and economically crucial Livonia region, the traditional territory of the Knights of the Sword. The Livonian Confederation formed an alliance with the Polish-Lithuanian side in 1557. Desired by both Lithuania and Poland, Livonia was then incorporated into the Polish Crown by Sigismund II. These developments caused Ivan IV of Russia to launch attacks in Livonia beginning in 1558, and later on Lithuania. The Grand Duchy's fortress of Polotsk fell in 1563, which was followed by a Lithuanian victory at the Battle of Ula in 1564, but not a recovery of Polotsk. Russian, Swedish and Polish-Lithuanian occupations subdivided Livonia. A Concise History of Poland, by Jerzy Lukowski and Hubert Zawadzki, p. 58-60 

The Jagiellonian dynasty founded by Jogaila (a branch of the Gediminids) ruled Poland and Lithuania continuously until 1572.

====Toward more integrated union====

Third Grand Duchy's Statute (1588 legal code) was still written in the Ruthenian language. Lithuanian coat of arms, "the Chase", is shown on the title page.

The Polish ruling establishment had been aiming at incorporation of the Grand Duchy of Lithuania into Poland since before the Union of Krewo. Jerzy Wyrozumski, Historia Polski do roku 1505 (History of Poland until 1505), p. 178-180; Pastwowe Wydawnictwo Naukowe (Polish Scientific Publishers PWN), Warszawa 1986, ISBN 83-01-03732-6 At that time and in the 15th century Lithuanians were able to fend off the Polish attempts, but the dynamics of power changed in the 16th century. In 1508 the Polish Sejm voted for finances for Lithuania's defense against Muscovy for the first time and an army was fielded. The Polish szlachtas executionist movement called for full incorporation of the Grand Duchy because of its increasing reliance on the Polish Crown's support against Moscow's encroachments. This problem had only grown more acute during the reign of Sigismund II Augustus, the last Jagiellon king and grand duke of Lithuania, who also had no heir who would inherit and continue the personal union. The preservation of the Polish-Lithuanian power appeared to require the monarch to force a decisive solution during his lifetime. The resistance to a closer and more permanent union was coming from Lithuania's ruling families, culturally increasingly Polonized, but attached to the Lithuanian heritage and their patrimonial rule, different from the already significantly developed democracy of nobles in Poland. A Concise History of Poland, by Jerzy Lukowski and Hubert Zawadzki, p. 74-82 

Legal evolution had lately been taking place in Lithuania nevertheless. In the Privilege of Vilnius of 1563 Sigismund restored full political rights to the Grand Duchy's Orthodox boyars, up to that time restricted by Vytautas and his successors; all members of the nobility were from then officially equal. Elective courts were established in 1565-66 and the Second Lithuanian Statute of 1566 created a hierarchy of local offices patterned on the Polish system. The Lithuanian legislative assembly assumed the same formal powers as the Polish sejm. 

Sigismund II Augustus took decisive steps to ensure preservation of the union after his death

The Polish Sejm of January 1569, deliberating in Lublin, was attended by the Lithuanian lords at Sigismund's insistence. Most left town on March 1, unhappy with the Poles' proposed right to acquire property and settle in Lithuania and other issues. Sigismund reacted by announcing the incorporation of the Grand Duchy's Volhynia and Podlasie voivodeships into the Polish Crown. Soon the large Kiev Voivodeship and Bratslav Voivodeship were also annexed. Ruthenian boyars in the formerly southeastern Grand Duchy mostly approved the territorial transfers: they were becoming members of the privileged Polish nobility. But the King also pressured many obstinate Crown deputies to agree on compromises important to the Lithuanian side. The arm twisting combined with reciprocal guarantees for Lithuanian nobles' rights in the Crown resulted in the "voluntary" passage of the Union act on July 1. The combined polity would from now be ruled by a common sejm, but separate hierarchies of major state offices were kept. Through this process that many in the Lithuanian establishment found objectionable, but in the end prudent to comply with, Sigismund managed to preserve for the time being the Polish-Lithuanian great power. Reforms necessary to protect its long-term success and survival were not undertaken. Stanisaw Grzybowski  Dzieje Polski i Litwy (1506-1648) (History of Poland and Lithuania (1506-1648)), p. 142-146; Fogra, Krakw 2000, ISBN 83-85719-48-2 

====Lithuanian Renaissance====

Poland and Lithuania in 1526, before the Union of Lublin

From the 16th to the mid-17th century culture, arts, and education flourished, fueled by the Renaissance and the Protestant Reformation. The Lutheran ideas of the Reformation entered the Livonian Confederation by the 1520s, and Lutheranism soon became the prevailing religion in the urban areas of the region, while Lithuania remained Catholic. Inge Lukaite, "The Reformation in Lithuania: A New Look," Lituanus (2011) 57#3 pp 9-31 

An influential book dealer was the humanist and bibliophile Francysk Skaryna (c. 14851540), who was the founding father of Belarusian letters. He wrote in his native Ruthenian (Chancery Slavonic) language and was typical in this respect of the earlier phase of the Renaissance in the Grand Duchy of Lithuania, which lasted until the middle of the 16th century, when Polish predominated in literary productions. Timothy Snyder, The Reconstruction of Nations, p. 21 Many educated Lithuanians came back from studies abroad and the Grand Duchy was boiling with active cultural life, sometimes referred to as Lithuanian Renaissance (not to be confused with Lithuanian National Revival in the 19th century).

At the time Italian architecture was introduced in Lithuanian cities, and Lithuanian literature written in Latin flourished. Also at that time the first handwritten and printed texts in the Lithuanian language emerged, and the formation of written Lithuanian language began. The process was led by Lithuanian scholars Abraomas Kulvietis, Stanislovas Rapalionis, Martynas Mavydas and Mikalojus Dauka.

==PolishLithuanian Commonwealth (15691795)==

===Formation===

Poland and Lithuania after the Union of Lublin (1569)

With the Union of Lublin of 1569 Poland and Lithuania formed a new state: the Republic of Both Nations (commonly known as Poland-Lithuania or the PolishLithuanian Commonwealth; Polish: Rzeczpospolita Obojga Narodw, Lithuanian: Abiej Taut Respublika). The Commonwealth, which officially consisted of the Crown of the Kingdom of Poland and the Grand Duchy of Lithuania, was ruled by Polish and Lithuanian nobility, together with kings, who were elected by the nobles. The Union was decided to have a common foreign policy, customs and currency. Separate Polish and Lithuanian armies were kept and separate but parallel ministerial and central offices established, organized according to the governmental practice developed in the Crown. The Lithuanian Tribunal, a high court for nobility affairs, was created in 1581. A Concise History of Poland, by Jerzy Lukowski and Hubert Zawadzki, p. 85 

===Languages===

Lithuanian-speaking areas in the 16th century

The Lithuanian language fell into disuse in the circles of the grand dukes' courts in the second half of the 15th century. Timothy Snyder, The Reconstruction of Nations, p. 18-19 A century later Polish was commonly used by ordinary Lithuanian nobility. Following the Union of Lublin, Polonization increasingly affected all aspects of Lithuanian public life, but it took well over a century for the process to be completed. The 1588 Third Statute of the Grand Duchy of Lithuania and the earlier legal codifications were written in the Ruthenian Chancery Slavonic language. Timothy Snyder, The Reconstruction of Nations, p. 44 From about 1700 Polish was used in the Grand Duchy's official documents, replacing the previous Ruthenian and Latin use. Norman Davies, Europe: A History, p. 392 Lithuania's ruling families and nobility had become linguistically and culturally Polonized, while retaining a sense of Lithuanian identity. A Concise History of Poland, by Jerzy Lukowski and Hubert Zawadzki, p. 81, 86 The integrating process of the Commonwealth nobility was not regarded as Polonization in the sense of modern nationality, but rather as participation in the Sarmatism cultural-ideological current, erroneously understood to imply also a common (Sarmatian) ancestry of all members of the noble class. A Concise History of Poland, by Jerzy Lukowski and Hubert Zawadzki, p. 86 The Lithuanian language however survived, despite the encroachments of the Ruthenian, Polish, Russian, Belarusian and German languages, as a peasant vernacular and from 1547 in written religious use. Norman Davies, Europe: A History, p. 228 

Western Lithuania had an important role in the preservation of the Lithuanian language and its culture. In Samogitia many nobles never ceased to speak Lithuanian natively. Lithuania Minor region in Prussia was populated mainly by Lithuanians and religiously dominated by Lutheran Reformation. The Lutherans promoted publishing of religious books in local languages, which is why Catechism by Martynas Mavydas was printed in Lithuanian in 1547 in nearby Knigsberg. 

===Religion===

Hetman Kristupas Radvila or Krzysztof Radziwi (15851640), a Lithuanian Calvinist and an accomplished military commander

The predominantly East Slavic population of the Grand Duchy was mostly Eastern Orthodox, and much of the Lithuanian state's nobility also remained Orthodox. Unlike the common people of the Lithuanian realm, at about the time of the union with Poland large portion of the nobility converted to Western Christianity. Following the Reformation movement many noble families converted to Calvinism in the 1550s and 1560s, and typically a generation later, conforming to the Counter-Reformation trends in the Commonwealth, to Roman Catholicism. Timothy Snyder, The Reconstruction of Nations, p. 22 The Protestant and Orthodox presence must have been very strong, because according to an undoubtedly exaggerating early 17th-century source, "merely one in a thousand remained a Catholic" in Lithuania at that time. Wacaw Urban, Epizod reformacyjny (The Reformation episode), p.30. Krajowa Agencja Wydawnicza, Krakw 1988, ISBN 83-03-02501-5. In the early Commonwealth religious toleration was the norm and was officially enacted by the Confederation of Warsaw in 1573. Timothy Snyder, The Reconstruction of Nations, p. 23 

By 1750 nominal Catholics comprised about 80% of the Commonwealth's population, the vast majority of the noble citizenry, and the entire legislature. In the east there were also the Eastern Orthodox Church adherents. However, Catholics in the Grand Duchy itself were split. Under half were Latin rite with strong allegiance to Rome. The others (mostly non-noble Ruthenians) followed the Eastern rite. They were the so-called Uniates, whose church was established at the Union of Brest in 1596, and they acknowledged only nominal obedience to Rome. At first the advantage went to the advancing Roman Catholic Church pushing back a retreating Orthodox Church. However after the first partition of the Commonwealth in 1772, the Orthodox had the support of the government and gained the upper hand. The Russian Orthodox Church paid special attention to the Uniates (who had once been Orthodox), and tried to bring them back. The contest was political and spiritual, using missionaries, schools, and pressure exerted by powerful nobles and landlords. By 1800 over 2 million of the Uniates had become Orthodox, and another 1.6 million by 1839. Richard Butterwick, "How Catholic Was the Grand Duchy of Lithuania in the Later Eighteenth Century?," Central Europe (2010) 8#2 pp 123-145. Kenneth Scott Latourette, Christianity in a Revolutionary Age (1959) 2:466-67 

===Grand Duchy, its grandeur and decline===

Administrative divisions of the Grand Duchy of Lithuania in the 17th century

The Union of Lublin and the integration of the two countries notwithstanding, for over two centuries Lithuania continued to exist as the Grand Duchy of Lithuania in the PolishLithuanian Commonwealth, retaining separate laws as well as an army and a treasury. Stone, Daniel. The PolishLithuanian state: 13861795. University of Washington Press, 2001. p. 63 At the time of the Union King Sigismund II Augustus removed Ukrainian and other territories from Lithuania and incorporated them into the Polish Crown. The Grand Duchy was left with today's Belarus and parts of western Russia, in addition to its ethnic Lithuanian lands. Jzef Andrzej Gierowski  Historia Polski 15051764 (History of Poland 15051764), p. 105-109, Pastwowe Wydawnictwo Naukowe (Polish Scientific Publishers PWN), Warszawa 1986, ISBN 83-01-03732-6 From 1573, the kings of Poland and the grand dukes of Lithuania were always the same person and were elected by the nobility, who were granted ever increasing liberties and privileges. These liberties, especially the liberum veto, led to political anarchy and the eventual dissolution of the state.

Within the Commonwealth, the Grand Duchy made important contributions to the Western and Eastern civilizations of Europe: Western Europe was supplied with grain, along the Danzig to Amsterdam sea route; the early Commonwealth's religious tolerance and democracy among the ruling noble class were unique in Europe; Vilnius was the only European capital located on the border of the worlds of the Western and Eastern Christianity and many religious faiths were practiced there; to the Jews, it was the "Jerusalem of the North" and the town of the Vilna Gaon, their great religious leader; the Vilnius University produced numerous illustrious alumni and was one of the most influential centers of learning in its part of Europe; the Vilnius school of Baroque made significant contributions to European architecture; the Lithuanian legal tradition gave rise to the Lithuanian Statutes, advanced legal codes; at the end of the Commonwealth's existence the first comprehensive written constitution in Europe was produced. After the Partitions, the Vilnius school of Romanticism produced the two great poets: Adam Mickiewicz and Juliusz Sowacki. 

Traditional ethnographic regions of Lithuania proper

The Commonwealth was greatly weakened by a series of wars, beginning in 1648 with Khmelnytsky's Cossack uprising. Timothy Snyder, The Reconstruction of Nations, p. 24 During the Northern Wars (16551661), the Lithuanian territory and economy were devastated by the Swedish army and Vilnius was burned and looted by the Russian forces. Before it could fully recover, Lithuania was again ravaged during the Great Northern War (17001721).

War, plague, and famine resulted in the loss of approximately 40% of the country's inhabitants. Foreign powers, especially Russia, became dominant players in the domestic politics of the Commonwealth. Numerous factions among the nobility, controlled and manipulated by the powerful magnate families, themselves often in conflict, used their "Golden Liberty" to prevent reforms. Some Lithuanian clans, such as the Radziwis, counted among the most powerful of Commonwealth nobles.

The Constitution of May 3, 1791, a culmination of the belated reform process of the Commonwealth, was passed by the Sejm (central legislature). It attempted to integrate Lithuania and Poland more closely, although the separation was kept by the added Reciprocal Guarantee of Two Nations. Partitions of the PolishLithuanian Commonwealth in 1772, 1793 and 1795 terminated the existence of the Commonwealth and saw the Grand Duchy of Lithuania divided between the Russian Empire, which took over 90% of the Duchy's territory, and the Kingdom of Prussia. The Third Partition took place after the failure of the Kociuszko Uprising, the last war waged by Poles and Lithuanians to preserve their statehood. Lithuania ceased to exist as a distinct entity for more than a century. 

==Under Imperial Russia, World War I (17951918)==

===Post-Commonwealth Lithuania (17951864); foundations of Lithuanian nationalism===
Adam Mickiewicz was a Polish-Lithuanian poet when the PolishLithuanian state no longer existed

Following the partitions of the Polish Lithuanian Commonwealth, the Russian Empire controlled the majority of Lithuania, including Vilnius, which was a part of the Vilna Governorate. In 1803 Emperor Alexander I revived and upgraded the old Jesuit academy as the imperial Vilnius University, the largest in the Russian Empire. The university and the regional educational system was directed on behalf of the Tsar by Prince Adam Czartoryski. Timothy Snyder, The Reconstruction of Nations, p. 26-27 In the early years of the 19th century, there were signs that Lithuania might be allowed some separate recognition by the Empire, however this had never happened.

Simonas Daukantas

These hopes were soon to be dashed, particularly subsequent to 1812, when Lithuanians eagerly welcomed Napoleon Bonaparte's French army as liberators, with many joining his offensive against Russia. After the French army's defeat and withdrawal, Tsar Alexander I decided to keep the University of Vilnius open and the poet Adam Mickiewicz was able to receive his education there. Timothy Snyder, The Reconstruction of Nations, p. 27 The south-western part of Lithuania included in Prussia in 1795 and in the short-lived Duchy of Warsaw established in 1807 became a part of the Russian-controlled Kingdom of Poland in 1815, while the rest of Lithuania continued to be administered as a Russian province.

Lithuanians and Poles revolted twice, in 1831 and 1863, but both attempts had failed and resulted in increased repression by the Russian authorities. After the November Uprising of 1831, Tsar Nicholas I began an intensive program of Russification and the University of Vilnius was closed. Timothy Snyder, The Reconstruction of Nations, p. 28 Lithuania became part of a new administrative region called Northwestern Krai (the former Grand Duchy of Lithuania). The Polish language schooling and cultural life were however largely able to continue in the former Grand Duchy, until the failure of the 1863 January Uprising. The Statutes of the Grand Duchy of Lithuania were annulled by the Russian Empire only in 1840, and serfdom was abolished in 1861. Timothy Snyder, The Reconstruction of Nations, p. 44-45 The Uniate Church, important in the Belarus part of the former Grand Duchy, was incorporated into the Orthodox Church in 1839. Timothy Snyder, The Reconstruction of Nations, p. 45 

Konstanty Kalinowski

The poetry of Adam Mickiewicz, emotionally attached to the Lithuanian setting and exploring Lithuania's medieval themes, influenced ideological foundations of the emerging Lithuanian national movement. Simonas Daukantas, who studied with Mickiewicz at Vilnius, promoted a return to Lithuania's pre-Commonwealth traditions and a renewal of the local culture, based on the Lithuanian language. With those ideas in mind he wrote already in 1822 (at that time not published) a history of Lithuania in Lithuanian. Teodor Narbutt wrote in Polish a voluminous Ancient History of the Lithuanian Nation (18351841), where he likewise expounded and expanded further the concept of historic Lithuania, whose days of glory had ended with the union with Poland (1569). Narbutt, invoking the German scholarship, pointed out the relationship between the Lithuanian and Sanskrit languages. It indicated the closeness of Lithuanian (preserved in considerable isolation from historic era foreign influences) to its old Indo-European roots and would later provide the "antiquity" argument for the national revival activists. By the middle of the 19th century the basic ideology of the future nationalist movement had thus been defined; it required, in order to establish a modern Lithuanian identity, a break with the Polish (early modern) tradition and cultural-linguistic dependence. Timothy Snyder, The Reconstruction of Nations, p. 31-35, 37-38 

Around the time of the January Uprising, there was a generation of Lithuanian leaders of the transitional period, between the Grand Duchy-oriented, bound with Poland, and the modern nationalist Lithuanian language-based movement. Jakb Gieysztor, Konstanty Kalinowski and Antanas Mackeviius wanted to form alliances with the local (Lithuanian and Belarusian speaking) peasants, who, empowered and given land, would presumably help defeat the Russian Empire, acting in their own self-interest. This created new dilemmas that had to do with languages used for such inter-class communication, and later led to the concept of a nation as the "sum of speakers of a vernacular tongue". Timothy Snyder, The Reconstruction of Nations, p. 26, 30 

===Formation of modern national identity and push for self-rule (18641918)===

Modern Lithuania with the former Russian Empire's administrative divisions (governorates) shown (18671914)

The 1864 failure of the January Uprising made on the one hand the Polish connection seem of no further practical use to Lithuanians, while on the other led to the creation of a class of emancipated and even prosperous Lithuanian peasants, custodians of the Lithuanian language. Educational opportunities, now more widely available also to young people of such common origins, were one of the crucial factors responsible for the Lithuanian revival. As schools were being de-Polonized and Lithuanian university students sent to St. Petersburg or Moscow rather than Warsaw, a cultural void resulted and it was not being successfully filled by the attempted Russification policies. Timothy Snyder, The Reconstruction of Nations, p. 31-33 

The Russian Empire regarded the Grand Duchy of Lithuania as an East Slavic realm that ought to be (and was being) "reunited" with Russia. Timothy Snyder, The Reconstruction of Nations, p. 49-51 In the following decades however, a national, Lithuanian ethnicity-based movement emerged. It was composed of activists of different social backgrounds and persuasions, often primarily Polish speaking, but united by their willingness and zeal to promote the Lithuanian culture and language as a strategy for building a modern nation. The restoration of the former Grand Duchy of Lithuania was no longer the objective of this movement and the territorial ambitions of its leaders were limited to the lands they considered (in the historic sense) ethnically Lithuanian. 

1864 Lithuanian language prayer book; it was printed in the Latin alphabet and therefore prohibited

In 1864 the Lithuanian language and the Latin alphabet were banned in junior schools. The prohibition on printing in the Lithuanian language reflected the Russian propaganda policy of "restoration" of the supposedly Russian beginnings of Lithuania. Lithuanians resisted the Russification by arranging printing abroad and smuggling the books in from the Prussian Lithuania Minor by knygneiai, the book smugglers. The tsarist authorities implemented a number of Russification policies, including a ban on Lithuanian press and the closing of cultural and educational institutions. Those were resisted by Lithuanians, led by Bishop Motiejus Valanius among others. 

Because many Lithuanian nobles were Polonized and only the poor and middle classes used Lithuanian (some of the latter also preferred to use Polish), Lithuanian was not considered a prestigious language. There were even expectations that the language would become extinct, as more and more territories in the east were Slavicized, and more people used Polish or Russian in daily life. The only place where Lithuanian was considered more prestigious and worthy of books and studying was the German-controlled Lithuania Minor. Even there, an influx of German immigrants threatened the native language and culture.

The language was already present among poor people and the language revival spread into more affluent strata, beginning with the release of Lithuanian newspapers, Aura and Varpas, then with the writing of poems and books in Lithuanian. These writings glorified the Grand Duchy of Lithuania, depicting the historic nation of great power and with many heroes.

Aura, originally spelled Auszra, formulated the ideas of Lithuanian nationalism

The two most prominent figures in the revival movement, Jonas Basanaviius and Vincas Kudirka, both originated from affluent Lithuanian peasantry and both attended the Marijampol (Mariampol) secondary school in the Suvalkai region, where serfdom had been eliminated in 1807, the time of Napoleon's takeover. The school was a Polish educational center, Russified after the Uprising, with the Lithuanian language classes introduced at that time. Timothy Snyder, The Reconstruction of Nations, p. 33-34 

Basanaviius studied medicine at Moscow, where he developed international connections, published in Polish on Lithuanian history and graduated in 1879. From there he went to Bulgaria, and in 1882 moved to Prague. In Prague he met and became influenced by the Czech national movement activists. In 1883 Basanaviius began working on a Lithuanian language review, which assumed the form of a newspaper named Aura (The Dawn). Published in German East Prussia, Aura was written in the Latin script, banned under the Russian rule where Cyrillic characters were required for printing in Lithuanian, and was smuggled to Lithuania, together with other Lithuanian publications and books. The review (forty issues in total), building on the work of the earlier writers, sought to establish continuities with the medieval Grand Duchy of Lithuania and exalted the Lithuanian common people in their role as the conduit of that (essential for the national revival) continuity. Timothy Snyder, The Reconstruction of Nations, p. 34-35 

Jonas Basanaviius, a preeminent figure in the Lithuanian National Revival movement

Russian restrictions at Marijampol secondary school were eased in 1872 and Kudirka, enrolled at that time, learned Polish there. He went on to study at the Warsaw imperial university, where he was influenced by Polish socialists. In 1889 Kudirka returned to Lithuania and worked on incorporating Lithuanian peasantry into mainstream politics, as the main building block of a modern nation. In 1898 he wrote a poem inspired by the opening strophe of Mickiewicz's masterpiece Pan Tadeusz, using the poet's famous invocation in a different language and for a differently understood, but resonating with the patriotism of the original, national purpose. The poem became the national anthem of Lithuania (Tautika Giesm). Timothy Snyder, The Reconstruction of Nations, p. 38-40 

The revival spearheaded the independence movement, with various organizations opposing Russian influence. Russian policy became harsher in response. Attacks took place against Catholic churches while a ban forbidding Lithuanian press continued.

The period from 1890 to 1904 (when the Russian ban was lifted) saw the publication of about 2,500 book titles in the Lithuanian Latin alphabet. The majority of these were published in Tilsit, a city in East Prussia, although some publications reached Lithuania from the United States. A largely standardized written version of the language was achieved by the turn of the twentieth century, based on historical and Auktaitijan (highland) usages. Lithuanian Language Institute Abstracts. The letters --, -- and -v- were taken from the modern (redesigned) Czech orthography, to avoid the Polish usage for corresponding sounds. Double Orthography in American Lithuanian Newspapers at the Turn of the Twentieth Century. Giedrius Subaius, University of Illinois at Chicago, September 2003. Retrieved 2009-03-17 Timothy Snyder, The Reconstruction of Nations, p. 36-37 The widely accepted Lithuanian Grammar, by Jonas Jablonskis, appeared in 1901. 

Vincas Kudirka

In 1879 Emperor Alexander II of Russia approved a proposal from the Russian military leadership to build the largest defensive structure in the entire Russian state  the 65 km2 Kaunas Fortress. Large numbers of Lithuanians went to the United States in 18671868 after a famine in Lithuania. Between 1868 and 1914, approximately 635,000 people, almost 20% of the population, left Lithuania. Lithuanian cities and towns were growing under the Russian rule, but the country remained underdeveloped by the European standards and job opportunities were limited; many Lithuanians left also for the industrial centers of the Empire, such as Riga and Saint Petersburg. Many cities in Lithuania were dominated by Jews and Polish-speaking people. Nevertheless, a Lithuanian National Revival movement laid the foundations of the modern Lithuanian nation and independent Lithuania.

A flyer with a proposed agenda for the Great Seimas of Vilnius; it was rejected by the delegates and a more politically activist schedule was adopted

Lithuania's nationalist movement continued to grow. During the Russia-wide revolutionary uprising of 1905, a large congress of Lithuanian representatives in Vilnius known as the Great Seimas of Vilnius demanded provincial autonomy for Lithuania (by which they meant the lesser northwestern portion of the former Grand Duchy of Lithuania, the territory they considered ethnically Lithuanian, including Vilnius and surrounding areas) Timothy Snyder, The Reconstruction of Nations, p. 53 on 5 December of that year. The tsarist regime made a number of concessions as the result of the 1905 uprising. The Baltic states could once again use their native languages in schooling and public discourse, Catholic churches were built in Lithuania. The Latin script replaced the Cyrillic script which had been forced upon Lithuanians for four decades. However, not even Russian liberals were prepared to concede autonomy similar to that that had already existed in Estonia and Latvia, albeit under Baltic German hegemony. Many Baltic Germans looked toward aligning the Baltics (Lithuania and Courland in particular) with Germany. Hiden, John and Salmon, Patrick. The Baltic Nations and Europe. London: Longman. 1994. 

After the outbreak of hostilities in World War I Germany occupied Lithuania and Courland in 1915. Vilnius fell to the Germans on 19 September 1915. An alliance with Germany in opposition to both tsarist Russia and Lithuanian nationalism became for the Baltic Germans a real possibility. Lithuania was incorporated into Ober Ost, occupational German government. As open annexation could result in a public relations backlash, the Germans planned to form a network of formally independent states that would in fact be completely dependent on Germany, the so-called Mitteleuropa. 

==Independent Lithuania (191840)==

===Declaration of independence===

Presidium and secretariat of the Vilnius Conference

The Germans allowed the Vilnius Conference (1822 September 1917) to convene (elections for a formal representative assembly were not permitted), demanding that Lithuanians declare loyalty to Germany and agree to an annexation. The Conference instead announced basic principles of a limited in territorial scope, but independent ethnic Lithuanian state, with cultural rights for the minorities; accordingly, the publication of the Conference's resolution was not allowed. The Conference elected a 20-member Council of Lithuania (Taryba) and empowered it to act as the executive authority of the Lithuanian people. The Council, led by Basanaviius, declared on 11 December Lithuanian independence as a German protectorate, and then adopted the outright Act of Independence of Lithuania on 16 February 1918. It proclaimed Lithuania as an independent republic, organized according to democratic principles. Timothy Snyder, The Reconstruction of Nations, p. 61 The Germans, weakened by the losses on the Western Front but still present in the country, did not support such a declaration and hindered attempts to establish actual independence. To prevent being incorporated into the German Empire, Lithuanians elected Monaco-born King Mindaugas II as the titular monarch of the Kingdom of Lithuania in July 1918. Mindaugas II never assumed the throne.

The original twenty members of the Council of Lithuania

In the meantime, initially also under the German occupation, an attempt to revive the Grand Duchy of Lithuania as a socialist multinational federal republic took place. Anton Lutskevich and his Belarusian National Council proclaimed in March 1918 the Belarusian People's Republic, which was to stretch from the Baltic to the Black Sea and include Vilnius. Lutskevich and the Council fled the approaching Red Army and left Minsk before it was taken over by the Bolsheviks in December 1918. Upon their arrival in Vilnius, they proposed a Belarusian-Lithuanian federation, which however generated no interest on the part of the Lithuanian leaders, who were in advanced stages of promoting national plans of their own. The Lithuanians were interested only in a state "within ethnographic frontiers", as they perceived it. Timothy Snyder, The Reconstruction of Nations, p. 60-61 

Germany lost the war and signed the Armistice of Compigne on 11 November 1918. Lithuanians quickly formed their first government, led by Augustinas Voldemaras, adopted a provisional constitution, and started organizing basic administrative structures. As the German army, defeated in the West, was withdrawing from the Eastern Front, it was followed by the Soviet forces, whose intention was to spread the global proletarian revolution. They created a number of puppet states, including on 16 December 1918 the Lithuanian Soviet Socialist Republic. By the end of December the Red Army reached Lithuanian borders, starting the LithuanianSoviet War.

Augustinas Voldemaras, Lithuania's first prime minister

On 1 January 1919 the German occupying army withdrew from Vilnius turning the city over to local Polish self-defense forces. The Lithuanian government evacuated Vilnius and moved west to Kaunas, which became the temporary capital of Lithuania. Vilnius was captured by the Soviet Red Army on 5 January 1919. As the Lithuanian army was in its infant stages, the Soviet forces moved largely unopposed and by mid-January 1919 controlled about  of the Lithuanian territory. Vilnius was now the capital of the Lithuanian Soviet Republic, and soon of the combined LithuanianBelarusian Soviet Republic. Timothy Snyder, The Reconstruction of Nations, p. 61-62 

From April 1919, the LithuanianSoviet War went parallel with the PolishSoviet War. Polish troops captured Vilnius from the Soviets on 21 April 1919. Timothy Snyder, The Reconstruction of Nations, p. 62 Poland had territorial claims over Lithuania, especially the Vilnius Region, and these tensions spilled over into the PolishLithuanian War. Jzef Pisudski of Poland, seeking a Polish-Lithuanian federation, but unable to find common ground with Lithuanian politicians, in August 1919 made an unsuccessful attempt to overthrow the Lithuanian government in Kaunas. Timothy Snyder, The Reconstruction of Nations, p. 62-65 

In mid-May the Lithuanian army, commanded by General Silvestras ukauskas, began an offensive against the Soviets in northeastern Lithuania. By the end of August 1919, the Soviets were pushed out of the Lithuanian territory. The Lithuanian army was then deployed against the paramilitary West Russian Volunteer Army, who invaded northern Lithuania. They were Germany-reactivated and supported German and Russian soldiers who sought to retain German control over the former Ober Ost. West Russian Volunteers were defeated and pushed out by the end of 1919. Thus the first phase of the Lithuanian Wars of Independence was over and Lithuanians could direct attention to internal affairs.

===Democratic Lithuania===
Demarcation lines between Poland and Lithuania 1919-1939

The Constituent Assembly of Lithuania was elected in April and first met in May 1920. In June it adopted the third provisional constitution and on 12 July 1920 signed the SovietLithuanian Peace Treaty. In the treaty the Soviet Union recognized fully independent Lithuania and its claims to the disputed Vilnius Region; Lithuania secretly allowed the Soviet forces passage through its territory, as they moved against Poland. Timothy Snyder, The Reconstruction of Nations, p. 63 On 14 July 1920, the advancing Soviet army captured Vilnius for a second time from Polish forces. However, they only handed the city over to Lithuanians on 26 August 1920, following the defeat of the Soviet offensive. The victorious Polish army returned and the SovietLithuanian Treaty increased hostilities between Poland and Lithuania. To prevent further fighting, the Suwaki Agreement was signed on 7 October 1920; it left Vilnius on the Lithuanian side of the armistice line. Timothy Snyder, The Reconstruction of Nations, p. 63-65 It had never gone into effect, because Polish General Lucjan eligowski, acting on Jzef Pisudski's orders, staged a military action presented as a mutiny. He invaded Lithuania on 8 October 1920, captured Vilnius the following day, and established in eastern Lithuania a short-lived Republic of Middle Lithuania on 12 October 1920. The "Republic" was a part of Pisudski's federalist scheme, which was never to materialize, because of the opposition from both the Polish and Lithuanian (represented now by the Lithuanian government) nationalists. 

Lithuanian-Polish territorial disputes in the early 1920s: the "Republic of Middle Lithuania" (green)

For 19 years, as the Vilnius Region had remained under Polish administration, Kaunas was the temporary capital of Lithuania. The League of Nations attempted to mediate the dispute and Paul Hymans proposed plans of a PolishLithuanian union. However, the negotiations broke down as neither side agreed to the compromise. Central Lithuania held a problematic election, boycotted by the Jews, Lithuanians and Belarusians, and was annexed into Poland on 24 March 1922. Timothy Snyder, The Reconstruction of Nations, p. 68-69 The Conference of Ambassadors awarded Vilnius to Poland in March 1923. Alfred Erich Senn. The Great Powers: Lithuania and the Vilna Question, 1920-1928. Brill. 1967. pp. 104, 112-113. Lithuania did not accept this decision and broke all relations with Poland. The two countries were officially at war over Vilnius, the historical capital of Lithuania, inhabited at that time largely by Polish-speaking and Jewish populations, between 1920 and 1938. Timothy Snyder, The Reconstruction of Nations, p. 15 Timothy Snyder, The Reconstruction of Nations, p. 78-79 The dispute continued to dominate Lithuanian domestic politics and foreign policy and doomed the relations with Poland for the entire interwar period. 

The Constituent Assembly, which adjourned in October 1920 due to threats from Poland, gathered again and initiated many reforms needed in the new state: obtained international recognition and membership in the League of Nations, passed the law of land reform, introduced national currency litas, and adopted the final constitution in August 1922. Lithuania became a democratic state, with Seimas (parliament) elected by men and women for a three-year term. The Seimas elected the president. The First Seimas was elected in October 1922, but could not form a government as the votes split equally 3838, and was forced to resign. Its only lasting achievement was the Klaipda Revolt from 1015 January 1923.

Lithuanian rebels during the Klaipda Revolt

Lithuania Minor, a region traditionally sought by Lithuanian nationalists, remained under the German rule, except for its northernmost part, the Lithuanian majority populated Klaipda Region. Lithuania took advantage of the Ruhr Crisis and captured the Klaipda Region, a territory detached from East Prussia according to the Treaty of Versailles and placed under the League of Nations-sponsored French administration. The region was incorporated as an autonomous district of Lithuania in May 1924. For Lithuania it was the only access to the Baltic Sea and an important industrial center, but the region's sizable German minority caused Lithuania problems in the 1930s, during the Nazi ascent to power. The Klaipda Revolt was the last armed conflict in Lithuania before World War II. 

The Second Seimas, elected in May 1923, was the only Seimas in independent Lithuania that served the full term. The Seimas continued the land reform, introduced social support systems, started repaying foreign debt. A national census took place in 1923.

===Authoritarian Lithuania===

Antanas Smetona, the first and last president of independent Lithuania during the interbellum. The 191839 period is often known as "Smetona's time".

The Third Seimas was elected in May 1926. For the first time the Lithuanian Christian Democratic Party-led Bloc (krikdemai) lost their majority and became an opposition. It was sharply criticized for signing the SovietLithuanian Non-Aggression Pact (Lithuanian claim to Poland-held Vilnius was recognized by the Soviets again) and accused of "Bolshevization" of Lithuania. As a result of growing tensions, the government was deposed during the 1926 Lithuanian coup d'tat in December. The coup, organized by the military, was supported by the Lithuanian Nationalists Union (tautininkai) and Lithuanian Christian Democrats. They installed Antanas Smetona as the President and Augustinas Voldemaras as the Prime Minister. Smetona suppressed the opposition and remained as an authoritarian leader until June 1940.

The Seimas thought that the coup was just a temporary measure and new elections should be called to return Lithuania to democracy. The legislative body was dissolved in May 1927. Later that year members of the Social Democrats and other leftist parties, named plekaitininkai after their leader, tried to organize an uprising against Smetona but were quickly subdued. Voldemaras grew increasingly independent of Smetona and was forced to resign in 1929. Three times in 1930 and once in 1934 he unsuccessfully attempted to return to power. In May 1928 Smetona, without the Seimas, announced the fifth provisional constitution. It continued to claim that Lithuania is a democratic state and vastly increased powers of the President. His party, the Lithuanian Nationalist Union, steadily grew in size and importance. Smetona adopted the title of "tautos vadas" (leader of the nation) and slowly started building personality cult. Many of the prominent political figures married into Smetona's family (Juozas Tbelis, Stasys Ratikis).

When the Nazi Party came into power in the Weimar Republic, GermanyLithuania relations worsened considerably as Nazi Germany did not accept the loss of the Klaipda Region. The Nazis sponsored anti-Lithuanian organizations in the region. In 1934, Lithuania put the activists on trial and sentenced about 100 people, including their leaders Ernst Neumann and Theodor von Sass. That prompted Germany, one of the main trade partners of Lithuania, to declare embargo of Lithuanian products. In response Lithuania shifted its exports to Great Britain. But that was not enough and peasants in Suvalkija organized strikes, which were violently suppressed. Smetona's prestige was damaged and in September 1936 he agreed to call the first elections to Seimas since the coup of 1926. Before the elections all political parties, except the National Union, were eliminated. Thus of the 49 members of the Fourth Seimas, 42 were from the National Union. It functioned as an advisory board to the President and in February 1938 adopted a new constitution, which granted the President even greater powers.

Lithuanian territorial issues 1939-1940

As tensions were rising in Europe following the annexation of Austria by Nazi Germany, Poland presented an ultimatum to Lithuania in March 1938. Poland demanded the re-establishment of normal diplomatic relations, which were broken after the eligowski's Mutiny in 1920, and threatened military actions in case of refusal. Lithuania, having a weaker military and unable to enlist international support for its cause, accepted the ultimatum. In the event of a Polish military action, Adolf Hitler ordered a German military takeover of southwest Lithuania, up to the Dubysa River, and his armed forces were being fully mobilized until the news of the Lithuanian acceptance. LithuaniaPoland relations somewhat normalized and the parties concluded treaties regarding railway transport, postal exchange, and other means of communication. Marian Zgrniak, Jzef aptos, Jacek Solarz,  Wielkie wojny XX wieku (1914-1945) Wars of the 20th Century (1914-1945), pp. 391-393; Fogra, Krakw 2006, ISBN 83-60657-00-9 

With many countries, including France and Estonia, supporting Poland in the conflict over Vilnius, Lithuania pursued policies friendly to Germany and the Soviet Union, but both powers soon encroached on Lithuania's territory and independence. Following the Nazi electoral success in Klaipda in December 1938 and a few days after the German occupation of Czechoslovakia, Lithuania received on 20 March 1939 an oral ultimatum from Joachim von Ribbentrop demanding to cede the Klaipda Region to Germany. The Lithuanian government accepted the ultimatum to avoid an armed intervention. The Klaipda Region was directly incorporated into the East Prussian province of the German Reich. Marian Zgrniak, Jzef aptos, Jacek Solarz,  Wielkie wojny XX wieku (1914-1945) Wars of the 20th Century (1914-1945), pp. 421-422 This triggered a political crisis in Lithuania and forced Smetona to form a new government which for the first time since 1926 included members of the opposition. The loss of Klaipda was a major blow to Lithuanian economy and the country shifted to the sphere of German influence. When Germany and the Soviet Union concluded the MolotovRibbentrop Pact in 1939 and divided Eastern Europe into spheres of influence, Lithuania was, at first, assigned to Germany, but that was changed after Smetona's refusal to participate in the German invasion of Poland. Alfred Erich Senn, "Perestroika in Lithuanian Historiography: The Molotov-Ribbentrop Pact," Russian Review (1990) 49#1 pp. 43-56 in JSTOR 

The interwar period of independence gave birth to the development of Lithuanian press, literature, music, arts, and theater as well as a comprehensive system of education with Lithuanian as the language of instruction. The network of primary and secondary schools was expanded and institutions of higher learning were established in Kaunas. Lithuanian society remained heavily agricultural with only 20% of the people living in cities. The influence of the Catholic Church was strong and birth rates high: the population increased by 22% to over three million during 192339, despite emigration to South America and elsewhere. 
In almost all cities and towns, traditionally dominated by Jews, Poles, Russians and Germans, ethnic Lithuanians became the majority; Lithuanians, for example, constituted 59% of the residents of Kaunas in 1923, as opposed to 7% in 1897. The right-wing dictatorship of 192640 had strangely stabilizing social effects, as it prevented the worst of antisemitic excesses as well as the rise of leftist and rightist political extremism. 

==World War II (193945)==

===Soviet Annexation===

Joseph Stalin, Joachim von Ribbentrop and others at the signing of the GermanSoviet Boundary and Friendship Treaty

In August 1939, Nazi Germany and the Soviet Union signed the MolotovRibbentrop Pact, with secret clauses assigning spheres of influence in the area of the Baltic Sea. Lithuania with Vilnius, initially assigned to the German sphere of influence, was transferred to the Soviet sphere in secret additional protocols of the GermanSoviet Boundary and Friendship Treaty of September 28, 1939. Vilnius, regarded by Lithuanians as their capital, but under Polish control before the war, was occupied by the Red Army on 19 September 1939 during the invasion of Poland; Lithuania petitioned Moscow for the city. Joseph Stalin apparently overruled the Soviet government circles inclined to grant Vilnius to the Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic Timothy Snyder, The Reconstruction of Nations, p. 80-81 and in the SovietLithuanian Mutual Assistance Pact of 10 October 1939 transferred a part of the Vilnius Region previously held by Poland, including Vilnius, to Lithuanian control in exchange for the stationing of 20,000 Soviet troops within Lithuania. Lithuania established its state authority in Vilnius and under the leadership of Prime Minister Antanas Merkys proceeded with Lithuanization of the city. Timothy Snyder, The Reconstruction of Nations, p. 80-83 

In 1940, once the Winter War in Finland was over and Germany was making rapid advances against Denmark and Norway and against France and the Low Countries, the Soviets heightened their diplomatic pressure on Lithuania, culminating in the Soviet ultimatum to Lithuania of June 14, 1940. The ultimatum demanded the formation of a new pro-Soviet government and admission of an unspecified number of Russian troops. Lithuania, already partially controlled by Soviet forces and unable to effectively resist, accepted the ultimatum. President Antanas Smetona fled Lithuania as the Soviet military (15 divisions with 150,000 soldiers) crossed the Lithuanian border on June 15, 1940. Timothy Snyder, The Reconstruction of Nations, p. 72, 82-83 

Soviet troops marching into Lithuania (June 1940)
Soviet representative Vladimir Dekanozov formed the new pro-Soviet puppet government, known as the People's Government. Justas Paleckis replaced Smetona as the acting President of Lithuania. The new government was a rubber stamp institution, carrying out orders from Moscow. The Fourth Seimas was disbanded and new show elections to the so-called People's Seimas were organized on July 1415, 1940. With only Communist-led Lithuanian People's Bloc candidates running and under conditions of general terror, official results showed over 90% voter turnout and 95% support for the Bloc. During its first session on July 21, the People's Seimas unanimously voted to convert Lithuania into the Lithuanian Soviet Socialist Republic and petitioned to join the Soviet Union. The application was approved by the Supreme Soviet of the Soviet Union on August 3, which completed the formalization of the annexation. By August 6, the Republic was subjected to complete Red Army control. Twenty to thirty thousand Lithuanians, Poles and Jews were deported by the Soviet NKVD to Siberia, Kazakhstan and elsewhere between June 1940 and June 1941, including Lithuanian Prime Minister Merkys and Foreign Minister Juozas Urbys. 

Immediately following the occupation, Soviet authorities began rapid Sovietization of Lithuania. All land was nationalized. To gain support for the new regime among the poorer peasants, large farms were distributed to small landowners. However, in preparation for eventual collectivization, agricultural taxes were dramatically increased in an attempt to bankrupt all farmers. Nationalization of banks, larger enterprises, and real estate resulted in disruptions in production causing massive shortages of goods. The Lithuanian litas was artificially undervalued and withdrawn by spring 1941. The standard of living plummeted. All religious, cultural, and political organizations were banned leaving only the Communist Party of Lithuania and its youth branch. An estimated 12,000 "enemies of the people" were arrested. During the June 1941 deportation campaign, some 12,600 people (mostly former military officers, policemen, political figures, intelligentsia and their families) were deported, under the policy of elimination of national elites, Timothy Snyder, The Reconstruction of Nations, p. 83-84 to Gulags in Siberia, where many perished due to inhumane conditions; 3,600 were imprisoned and over 1,000 killed. 

===Nazi occupation===

====Collaboration and resistance====
Lithuanian Jews and a German Wehrmacht soldier in Lithuania, June 1941

On 22 June 1941, Nazi Germany invaded the Soviet Union. The German forces moved rapidly, encountering only sporadic Soviet resistance. Vilnius was captured on 24 June 1941, and within a week Germany controlled all Lithuania. The retreating Soviet forces murdered between 1,000 and 1,500 people, mostly ethnic Lithuanians (see Rainiai massacre). Several thousand non-Jewish accused collaborators may have been killed in retribution. The Lithuanians generally greeted the Germans as liberators from the oppressive Soviet regime and hoped that Germany would restore some autonomy to Lithuania. Virgil Krapauskas' Book Reviews in Fall 2010 Lituanus, Volume 56, No.3 Book Reviews The Lithuanian Activist Front organized an anti-Soviet revolt known as the June Uprising, declared independence, and formed the Provisional Government of Lithuania with Juozas Ambrazeviius as Prime Minister. The Provisional Government was not forcibly dissolved, but stripped by the Germans of any actual power; it resigned on August 5, 1941. Saulius Suiedlis, The Burden of 1941, Lituanus, Volume 47, No.4 - Winter 2001 The Burden of 1941 Germany established the civil administration known as the Reichskommissariat Ostland and banned all Lithuanian political parties. After the rebel government's dissolution, the rudimentary local administrative structure remained intact and most local offices were headed by Lithuanians; this included the Lithuanian Police Department headquartered in Kaunas and other law enforcement agencies. Policy decisions would be made by high-ranking Germans and actually implemented by low-ranking Lithuanians. Overall, local self-government was quite developed in Lithuania and helped to sabotage or hinder several German initiatives, including raising a Waffen-SS unit or providing men for forced labor in Germany.

Steponas Kairys was the first chairman of the Supreme Committee for the Liberation of Lithuania

There was substantial cooperation and collaboration between the German forces and some Lithuanians. The Lithuanian Activist Front volunteered a police force, known as Tautinio Darbo Apsaugos Batalionas (TDA), hoping that it would be later transformed into regular army of independent Lithuania. Instead these units were employed by the Germans as auxiliary in massacres of the Jews during the Holocaust. Another infamous unit was the Lithuanian Security Police (Saugumo policija) operating in Vilnius. A number of other police battalions were formed; the auxiliary forces were sometimes employed outside of Lithuania and charged with securing communications, guarding prisoners, delivering supplies, etc. 

Harsh German policies of settling ethnic Germans in Lithuania, collecting large war provisions, gathering people for forced labor, conscripting men into the German army and the lack of true autonomy resulted in disillusionment commonly felt from the early 1942, widespread sympathy for the Western allies and produced a resistance movement. The most notable resistance organization, the Supreme Committee for the Liberation of Lithuania, was formed in 1943. Despite German pressure a Waffen-SS division was not established in Lithuania. Eventually, the Lithuanian general Povilas Plechaviius agreed to form the Lithuanian Territorial Defense Force (LTDF), which was to operate solely in the Lithuanian territory and be commanded by Lithuanian officers. When Germans did not honor the agreement and attempted to subordinate LTDF to the German army, Plechaviius disbanded it in May 1944.

Lithuanians also organized armed resistance, which was conducted by pro-Soviet partisans, operated in eastern Lithuania, and mainly consisted of minority Russians, Belarusians and Jews. This group fought for the re-incorporation of Lithuania into the Soviet Union. Soviet partisans committed a number of atrocities (for example, the Koniuchy massacre) and sacked towns and villages. Audron Janaviien. Sovietiniai diversantai Lietuvoje (19411944) at Genocid.lt The villagers were forced to organize local self-defense. The Polish Armia Krajowa (AK) also operated in eastern Lithuania, expecting post-war Poland to resume control of the Vilnius Region. AK was fighting not only against the Nazis, but also against the pro-Nazi Lithuanian police involved in attacks on Poles, Timothy Snyder, The Reconstruction of Nations, p. 84 Lithuanian Territorial Defense Force, and the Soviet partisans. Relationships between different national military organizations were often adversarial and became only more hostile and retributive as the war went on. 

====The Holocaust====

German soldiers and locals watch a Lithuanian synagogue burn

Before the Holocaust, Lithuania was home to about 210,000 or 250,000 Jews. 160,000 was the estimated number in 1937, but when Vilnius came under Lithuanian jurisdiction in October 1939 and refugees from Poland streamed in, it increased to over 250,000. About 90% or more of the Lithuanian Jews were murdered under the Nazi regime in three years (194144). A Lithuanian government commission counted 200-206,000 of which 190,000 were residents of the Republic of Lithuania. The Kaunas pogrom, a cruel massacre of the Jews, took place in late June 1941, soon after the German takeover. 

The mass scale genocide of Jews in Lithuania followed the establishment of the German civil administration in late July 1941. The Holocaust in Lithuania can be divided into three stages: mass executions (JuneDecember 1941), ghetto period (1942  March 1943), and final liquidation (April 1943  July 1944). Unlike in other Nazi-occupied countries where the Holocaust was introduced gradually, Einsatzgruppe A started executions in Lithuania on first days of war. Executions of Jews on a mass scale took place in Lithuania before the practice had spread to other occupied countries. The executions were carried out in three main groups: in Kaunas (Ninth Fort massacre), in Vilnius (Ponary massacre), and in the countryside (Rollkommando Hamann). Estimated 80% of Lithuanian Jews were killed before 1942. The surviving 43,000 Jews were concentrated in the Vilnius, Kaunas, iauliai, and venionys ghettos and forced to work for the benefit of German military industry. Timothy Snyder, The Reconstruction of Nations, p. 86 On June 21, 1943, Heinrich Himmler issued order to liquidate all ghettos and transfer remaining Jews to concentration camps. Vilnius Ghetto was liquidated, while Kaunas and iauliai were turned into concentration camps and existed until July 1944. Remaining Jews were sent to camps in Stutthof, Dachau and Auschwitz. Only about 2,0003,000 Lithuanian Jews were liberated from these camps. More survived by withdrawing into the interior of Russia before the war broke out or by escaping the ghettos and joining the Jewish partisans. The genocide rate of Jews in Lithuania was one of the highest in Europe, which was in part due to widespread Lithuanian cooperation with the German authorities, but relatively small numbers of Lithuanians participated in actual killings. There were "at least several thousand perpetrators", mainly uniformed military and police, commanded by the Nazi security services. Jews were widely considered to be responsible for the previous Soviet regime in Lithuania (see Jewish Bolshevism), the idea promoted by Nazi propaganda, Timothy Snyder, The Reconstruction of Nations, p. 84-85 and were resented for welcoming Soviet troops. There was also resistance to the German occupation, and some Lithuanians risked their own lives to save Jews; 723 Lithuanians are recognized as Righteous among the Nations for their efforts. About 20,000 Jews fled to the West in June 1941 and over 2,000 local Lithuanian families helped save several thousand Jews. Thousands of Jews returned or arrived from elsewhere with the advancing Red Army in summer of 1944. Of the 25,000 Jews registered in 1970, most left the Lithuanian SSR before 1990 and a few more thousand after independence. 

===Return of Soviet authority===

Emblem of the Lithuanian Soviet Socialist Republic

In the summer of 1944, the Soviet Red Army reached eastern Lithuania. By July 1944, the area around Vilnius came under control of the Polish Resistance fighters of Armia Krajowa, who also attempted a takeover of the German-held city during the ill-fated Operation Ostra Brama. Timothy Snyder, The Reconstruction of Nations, p. 88 The Red Army captured Vilnius with Polish help on 13 July. The Soviet Union re-occupied Lithuania and Joseph Stalin re-established the Lithuanian Soviet Socialist Republic in 1944 with its capital in Vilnius. The Soviets secured the passive agreement of the United States and Britain (see Yalta Conference and Potsdam Agreement). By January 1945, the Soviet forces captured Klaipda, on the Baltic coast. The heaviest World War II physical losses in Lithuania were suffered in 194445, when the Red Army pushed out the Nazi invaders. It is estimated that Lithuania lost 780,000 people between 1940 and 1954, under the Nazi and then Soviet occupations. 

==Soviet Lithuania (194490)==

===Stalinism and Soviet rule (194488)===

Antanas Sniekus was the leader of the Communist Party of Lithuania for 34 years. He was instrumental to the Lithuanization of Vilnius and helped prevent the city from being Russified. Timothy Snyder, The Reconstruction of Nations, p. 93 

The mass deportation campaigns of 19411952, exiled tens of thousands of families to forced settlements in Siberia and other remote parts of the Soviet Union. Between 1944 and 1953, nearly 120,000 people (5% of the population) were deported from Lithuania, thousands more had become political prisoners. Many leading intellectual figures and most Catholic priests were among the deported; many returned to Lithuania after 1953. Approximately 20,000 of local organized resistance fighters participated in unsuccessful partisan warfare against the Soviet regime in the 1940s and early 1950s. Most were killed or deported to Siberian gulags. Timothy Snyder, The Reconstruction of Nations, p. 95 During the years following the capitulation of Germany, between 40 and 60 thousand civilians and combatants perished in the context of the anti-Soviet insurgency. Considerably more ethnic Lithuanians died after than during the war. Robert van Voren. Undigested Past: The Holocaust in Lithuania. Rodopi. 2011. p. 2. 

Soviet authorities encouraged immigration of non-Lithuanian workers, especially Russians, as a way of integrating Lithuania into the Soviet Union and to encourage industrial development, but in Lithuania this process had not assumed the massive scale experienced by other European Soviet republics. Timothy Snyder, The Reconstruction of Nations, p. 94 

The Grand Courtyard of Vilnius University

However, to a great extent, Lithuanization rather than Russification had taken place in postwar Vilnius and elements of national revival characterize the period of Lithuania's existence as a Soviet republic. Lithuania's future shape and territorial and political integrity were determined by Joseph Stalin's decision to grant Vilnius to the Lithuanian SSR again in 1944. Subsequently, most Poles were resettled from Vilnius (but only a minority from the countryside and other parts of the Lithuanian SSR) by the application of the Soviet and Lithuanian communist policies, to be initially partially replaced by Russian immigrants. Vilnius was then increasingly settled by Lithuanians and assimilated by the Lithuanian culture, which fulfilled, albeit under the oppressive and limiting conditions of the Soviet rule, the long-held dream of Lithuanian nationalists. Timothy Snyder, The Reconstruction of Nations, p. 91-93 The economy of Lithuania did well in comparison with other regions of the Soviet Union. 

Former KGB headquarters in Vilnius

The national developments in Lithuania followed tacit compromise agreements worked out by the Soviet communists, Lithuanian communists and the Lithuanian intelligentsia. The Vilnius University was reopened after the war, operating in the Lithuanian language and with a largely Lithuanian student body. It became a center for Baltic studies. General schools in the Lithuanian SSR provided more instruction in Lithuanian than at any previous time in the country's history. The literary Lithuanian language was standardized and refined further as a language of scholarship and literature. The price the Lithuanian intelligentsia ended up paying for the national privileges was their much increased, after Stalin's death, Communist Party membership. Timothy Snyder, The Reconstruction of Nations, p. 93-95 

Between Stalin's death and the reforms of Mikhail Gorbachev Lithuania functioned as a Soviet society, with all its repressions and peculiarities. Agriculture remained collectivized, property nationalized, criticism of the Soviet system was severely punished. The country remained largely isolated from the non-Soviet world because of travel restrictions, the persecution of the Catholic Church continued and the nominally egalitarian society was extensively corrupted by the practice of connections and privileges for those who served the system. 

The communist era is memorialized in Grtas Park.

===Rebirth (198890)===

Lithuanians demonstrating during the visit of Mikhail Gorbachev, January 1990

Until mid-1988, all political, economic, and cultural life was controlled by the Communist Party of Lithuania (CPL). Lithuanians as well as people in two other Baltic republics distrusted the Soviet regime even more than people in other regions of the Soviet state and gave their own specific and active support to Mikhail Gorbachev's program of social and political reforms known as perestroika and glasnost. Under the leadership of intellectuals, the Reform Movement of Lithuania Sjdis was formed in mid-1988 and declared a program of democratic and national rights, winning nationwide popularity. Inspired by Sjdis, the Supreme Soviet of the Lithuanian SSR passed constitutional amendments on the supremacy of Lithuanian laws over Soviet legislation, annulled the 1940 decisions on proclaiming Lithuania a part of the Soviet Union, legalized a multi-party system, and adopted a number of other important decisions, including the return of the national state symbols  the flag and the anthem. A large number of CPL members also supported the ideas of Sjdis, and with Sjdis support, Algirdas Brazauskas was elected First Secretary of the Central Committee of the CPL in 1988. On 23 August 1989, 50 years after the MolotovRibbentrop Pact, in order to draw the world's attention to the fate of the Baltic nations, Latvians, Lithuanians and Estonians joined hands in a human chain that stretched 600 kilometres from Tallinn, to Riga, to Vilnius. The human chain was called the Baltic Way. In December 1989, the Brazauskas-led CPL declared its independence from the Communist Party of the Soviet Union and became a separate social democratic party, renaming itself in 1990 the Democratic Labour Party of Lithuania.

==Independent modern Lithuania (1990present)==

===Struggle for independence (199091)===

Troops parade to mark the events of March 11
In early 1990, Sjdis-backed candidates won the elections to the Lithuanian Supreme Soviet. On March 11, 1990, the Supreme Soviet proclaimed the re-establishment of Lithuanian independence. The Baltic republics were in the forefront of the struggle for independence and Lithuania was the first of the Soviet republics to declare independence. Vytautas Landsbergis, a leader of the Sjdis national movement, Timothy Snyder, The Reconstruction of Nations, p. 98-102 became the Head of State and Kazimira Prunskien led the Cabinet of Ministers. Provisional fundamental laws of the state were passed. 

On March 15, the Soviet Union demanded revocation of the independence and began employing political and economic sanctions against Lithuania. Soviet military was used to seize a few public buildings, but violence was largely contained until January 1991. During the January Events, the Soviet authorities attempted to overthrow the elected government by sponsoring the so-called National Salvation Committee. The Soviets forcibly took over the Vilnius TV Tower, killing 14 unarmed civilians and injuring 700. During this assault the only means of contact to the outside world available was an amateur radio station set up in the Lithuanian Parliament building by Tadas Vyniauskas whose call sign was LY2BAW. Their initial cries for help were received by an American amateur radio operator with the call sign N9RD in Indiana, USA. N9RD and later other radio operators from around the world were able to relay situational updates to relevant authorities until official State Department personnel were able to go on-air. Moscow failed to act further to crush the Lithuanian independence movement and the Lithuanian government continued to work.

During the national referendum on February 9, 1991, more than 90% of those who took part in the voting (76% of all eligible voters) voted in favor of an independent, democratic Lithuania. During the August Coup in Moscow, Soviet military troops took over several communications and other government facilities in Vilnius and other cities, but returned to their barracks when the coup failed. The Lithuanian government banned the Communist Party and ordered confiscation of its property. Following the failed coup, Lithuania received widespread international recognition and was admitted to the United Nations on September 17, 1991. 

===Contemporary Republic of Lithuania (1991present)===
Flag of Lithuania
As in many other formerly Soviet countries, popularity of the independence movement (Sjdis in the case of Lithuania) was diminishing due to worsening economic situation (rising unemployment, inflation, etc.). The Lithuanian Communist Party renamed itself Democratic Labour Party of Lithuania (LDDP) and ran against Sjdis in the 1992 parliamentary elections, gaining a majority of the seats. LDDP continued building the independent democratic state and transitioning from a centrally planned to a free market economy. In the 1996 parliamentary elections, the voters swung back to the rightist Homeland Union, led by the former Sjdis leader Vytautas Landsbergis.

As part of the economic transition, Lithuania organized a privatization campaign to sell government-owned residential real estate and commercial enterprises. The government issued investment vouchers to be used in privatization instead of actual currency. People cooperated in groups to collect larger amounts of vouchers for the public auctions and the privatization campaign. Lithuania, unlike Russia, did not create a small group of very wealthy and powerful people. The privatization started with small organizations, and large enterprises (such as telecoms or airlines) were sold several years later for hard currency in a bid to attract foreign investors. Lithuania's monetary system was to be based on litas, the currency used during the interwar period. Due to high inflation and other delays a temporary currency, talonas, was introduced (commonly called Vagnork or Vagnorlis after Prime Minister Gediminas Vagnorius). Eventually litas was issued in June 1993 and it was decided to peg it to the United States dollar in 1994 and to the Euro in 2002.

Vilnius, the capital of Lithuania
Despite Lithuania's achievement of complete independence, sizable numbers of Russian forces remained in its territory. Withdrawal of those forces was one of Lithuania's top foreign policy priorities. Russian troop withdrawal was completed by August 31, 1993. The first military of the reborn country were the Volunteer Forces, who first took an oath at the Supreme Council of Lithuania soon after the independence declaration. The Lithuanian military built itself to the common standard with an air force, navy and land army. Interwar paramilitary organisations such as Lithuanian Riflemen's Union, Young Riflemen, and Lithuanian Scouts were reestablished.

On April 27, 1993, a partnership with the Pennsylvania National Guard was established as part of the State Partnership Program. Congressional Research Service: The National Guard State Partnership http://www.fas.org/sgp/crs/misc/R41957.pdf. Retrieved 24 October 2012. 

Seeking closer ties with the West, Lithuania applied for the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) membership in 1994. The country had to go through a difficult transition from planned to free market economy, satisfying the requirements for the European Union (EU) membership. In May 2001, Lithuania became the 141st member of the World Trade Organization. In October 2002, Lithuania was invited to join the European Union and one month later to join the North Atlantic Treaty Organization; it became a member of both in 2004. 

As a result of the broader global financial crisis, the Lithuanian economy in 2009 experienced its worst recession since gaining independence from the Soviet Union in 1991. After a boom in growth sparked by Lithuanias 2004 accession to the European Union, the GDP contracted by 15% in 2009. Especially since the EU joining, large numbers of Lithuanians (up to 20% of the population) moved abroad in search of better economic opportunities, creating a significant demographic problem for the small country. True Lithuania www.truelithuania.com, accessed June 14, 2012 

== Historiography==
Krapauskas (2010) identifies three main tendencies in the recent historiography. The postmodern school is heavily influenced by the French Annales School and presents an entirely new agenda of topics and interdisciplinary research methodologies. Their approach is methodologically controversial and focuses on social and cultural history. It is largely free from the traditional political debates and does not look back to the interwar apoka era. Secondly, the critical-realists are political revisionists. They focus on controversial political topics in the twentieth century, and reverse 180 the Soviet era interpretations of what was good and bad for Lithuania. They use traditional historical methodologies, with a strong focus on political history. They are often opposed by the third school, the romantic-traditionalists. After severe constraints in the communist era, the romantic-traditionalists now are eager to emphasize the most positive version of the Lithuanian past and its cultural heritage. They pay less attention to the niceties of documentation and historiography, but they are not the puppets of political conservatives. Indeed, they include many of Lithuanias most respected historians. Virgil Krapauskas, "Recent Trends in Lithuanian Historiography" Lituanus (2010) 56#4 pp 5-28. 

==See also==
* Dissolution of the Soviet Union
* History of Belarus
* History of Estonia
* History of Europe
* History of the European Union
* History of Germany
* History of Latvia
* History of Russia
* History of Poland
* List of Presidents of Lithuania
* Prime Minister of Lithuania
* Politics of Lithuania

== Notes ==

a.This tiny fraction of Catholics in the early 17th century Grand Duchy is given by Kasper Cichocki (1545-1616), a Catholic parish priest near Sandomierz, who wrote on the subject of the extent of the heresies in the Commonwealth. According to Wacaw Urban, Calvinism and Eastern Orthodoxy predominated, and were followed by Catholicism and the Polish Brethren, with Lutheranism being numerically the least significant of the Christian denominations in Lithuania. 

b.Pisudski's family roots in the Polonized gentry of the Grand Duchy of Lithuania and the resulting point of view (seeing himself and people like him as legitimate Lithuanians) put him in conflict with the modern Lithuanian nationalists (who in Pisudski's lifetime redefined the scope of the "Lithuanian" connotation), by extension with other nationalists, and also with the Polish modern nationalist movement. Timothy Snyder, The Reconstruction of Nations, p. 40-41, 64-65, 68-69 

c.Vilnius was claimed and contested by Polish, Belarusian and Lithuanian communists before being granted by Joseph Stalin to the Lithuanian SSR in 1944. Timothy Snyder, The Reconstruction of Nations, p. 88, 93 

d.About 90% of Vilnius Jews had been exterminated by the Nazis in 1941-1944 and about 80% of Vilnius Poles were deported under the Soviet rule in 1944-1946, which left the city open to settlement by Lithuanians, or possibly Russians. Timothy Snyder, The Reconstruction of Nations, p. 72, 91 

e. It was a sizable force in comparison with the similar number (20,000) of underground anti-communist fighters operating at that time in Poland. Poland was a country with an over eight times the population of Lithuania, but legal opposition (the Polish People's Party) was primarily active there in the 1940s. Pawe Wroski, Dzie onierzy Wykltych. Cywilny opr czy III wojna? Rozmowa z dr hab. Rafaem Wnukiem (The day of cursed soldiers. Civil resistance or World War III? Conversation with Professor Rafa Wnuk). Gazeta Wyborcza wyborcza.pl 01.03.2013 

f. The main western powers recognized Lithuania only in 1922, when, after the Treaty of Riga, it had become clear that the PolishLithuanian Commonwealth was not going to be reestablished. 

g. Historically, there has been a scholarly dispute concerning the origin of the Balts. According to one major point of view, the Baltic peoples descend directly from the original Indo-European arrivals, who might have settled this part of Europe possibly as far back as about 3000 BC as the archeological Corded Ware culture. The linguistic argument has been the most "archaic" status of the Lithuanian language among the existing Indo-European languages of Europe. The competing idea takes into account the many words common to both the Baltic and Slavic languages and postulates a common, more recent Balto-Slavic ancestry. There has been no agreement regarding which archeological formation such hypothetical Proto-Balto-Slavic community could correspond to. Jerzy Ochmaski, Historia Litwy History of Lithuania, Second Edition, pp. 24-29 

h. The preservation of the rural Polish-speaking minority in the Vilnius Region (the intelligentsia element was mostly expelled after the war) turned out to be a source of lasting friction. After 1950 Stalin, playing on the Lithuanian against the Polish insecurities, allowed the formation of a network of Polish, communist ideology-preaching schools. This Soviet policy continued also after 1956, despite Lithuanian objections. The Polish community reacted with fear to the rebirth of assertive Lithuanian nationalism after 1988 and attempted to established a Polish autonomy in the Vilnius region in 1990-91. After some Polish activists supported the attempted communist coup in Moscow the Lithuanian authorities eliminated the Polish self-rule. The presently existing Electoral Action of Poles in Lithuania is seen by many Lithuanians as a communist rule residue with a nationalistic tint and conflicts over the language of education and naming rights continue, with an uneasy involvement of the government of Poland. The rural Polish-speaking areas are among the economically most depressed regions of Lithuania and high unemployment there has caused significant permanent emigration. The Lithuanian relations with the Russian minority, the actual left-over of the Soviet-imposed settlement, have not been a source of comparable tensions. Polsko zapeklowana cured. Aleksandra Pezda's conversation with the historian Krzysztof Buchowski. Gazeta Wyborcza wyborcza.pl 16.03.2012 

i. The widely used term "Russian Jews" is somewhat misleading, because the Jews within the Russian Empire were allowed to live only within the Pale of Settlement, as determined by Catherine the Great. The Pale coincided largely with the territory of the former PolishLithuanian Commonwealth, under Russia the western part of the Empire. 

j. Political-cultural autonomy for the Jews was offered by the Lithuanian delegation to the Paris Peace Conference in August 1919, but the idea was abandoned in 1924. During the interwar period the Lithuanian government supported financially Jewish education and religious activities and the Jewish minority remained very active in the social, cultural and scientific fields, economy, law and medicine. Antisemitic incidents became more pronounced in the 1930s. In a clearly less favorable situation was at that time the Polish minority in Lithuania. Saulius Suiedelis, Zagada ydw, pieko Litwinw of the Jews, hell for the Lithuanians. Zagada ydw, pieko Litwinw Gazeta Wyborcza wyborcza.pl 28.11.2013 

==References==

==Further reading==
* Alfonsas Eidintas, Alfredas Bumblauskas, Antanas Kulakauskas, Mindaugas Tamoaitis. The History of Lithuania (2013) 
* Aliauskiene, Milda, and Ingo W. Schrder, eds. Religious Diversity in Post-Soviet Society: Ethnographies of Catholic Hegemony & the New Pluralism in Lithuania (2011)
* Backus III, Oswald P. "The Problem of Feudalism in Lithuania, 1506-1548," Slavic Review (1962) 21#4 pp. 639659 in JSTOR
* Budreckis, Algirdas M. An introduction to the history of Lithuania (1985)
* Friedrich, Karin, and Barbara M. Pendzich, eds. Citizenship and Identity in a Multinational Commonwealth: Poland-Lithuania in Context, 1550-1772 (2011)
* Gimius, Kestutis K. "The Collectivization of Lithuanian Agriculture, 1944-50," Soviet Studies (1988) 40#3 pp. 460478.
* Kiaupa, Zigmantas. The History of Lithuania (2005)
* Kirby David G. The Baltic World 1772-1993 (Longman, 1995).
* Kuncevicius, Albinas et al. The History of Lithuania Before 1795 (2000)
* Lane, Thomas. Lithuania: Stepping Westward (2001); 20th century history esp. post 1991 online
* Liekis, Sarunas. 1939: The Year that Changed Everything in Lithuania's History (2009) excerpt and text search
* Lieven Anatol. The Baltic Revolution (2nd ed. 1994). against the USSR
* Misiunas Romuald J. The Baltic States: Years of Dependence, 1940-1990 (2nd ed. 1993).
* Snyder, Timothy. The Reconstruction of Nations: Poland, Ukraine, Lithuania, Belarus, 1569-1999 (2004) excerpt and text search
* Stone, Daniel. The PolishLithuanian state: 13861795 (University of Washington Press, 2001)
* Suziedelis, Saulius. The Sword and the Cross: A History of the Church in Lithuania (1988)
* Thaden Edward C. Russia's Western Borderlands, 1710-1870 (Princeton University Press, 1984).

===Historiography===
* Krapauskas, Virgil. "Recent Trends in Lithuanian Historiography" Lituanus (2010) 56#4 pp 528.

==External links==

*Pages and Forums on the Lithuanian History

 



[[Geography of Lithuania]]

Detailed relief map of Lithuania

The largest and most populous of the Baltic states, Lithuania has 60 mi of sandy coastline which faces the open Baltic Sea, between Latvia and Poland. Lithuania's major warm-water port of Klaipda lies at the narrow mouth of Curonian Lagoon, a shallow lagoon extending south to Kaliningrad and separated from the Baltic sea by Curonian Spit, where Kuri Nerija National Park was established for its remarkable sand dunes.

The Neman River and some of its tributaries are used for internal shipping (in 2000, 89 inland ships carried 900,000 tons of cargo, which is less than 1% of the total goods traffic).

Situated between 56.27 and 53.53 latitude and 20.56 and 26.50 longitude, Lithuania is glacially flat, except for morainic hills in the western uplands and eastern highlands no higher than 300 metres. The terrain is marked by numerous small lakes and swamps, and a mixed forest zone covers almost 33% of the country. The growing season lasts 169 days in the east and 202 days in the west, with most farmland consisting of sandy- or clay-loam soils. Limestone, clay, sand, and gravel are Lithuania's primary natural resources, but the coastal shelf offers perhaps 1600000 m3 of oil deposits, and the southeast could provide high yields of iron ore and granite.

According to some geographers, the geographical midpoint of Europe is just north of Lithuania's capital, Vilnius.

Geographic coordinates:

== Geographical position ==

Political map of Lithuania

Lithuania is situated on the eastern shore of the Baltic Sea. Lithuania's boundaries have changed several times since 1918, but they have been stable since 1945. Currently, Lithuania covers an area of about 65,200 square kilometres. About the size of West Virginia, it is larger than Belgium, Denmark, Latvia, the Netherlands, or Switzerland. Lithuania is situated on the eastern shore of the Baltic Sea and borders Latvia on the north, Belarus on the east and south, and Poland and the Kaliningrad region of Russia on the southwest. It is a country of gently rolling hills, many forests, rivers and streams, and lakes. Its principal natural resource is agricultural land.

Lithuania's northern neighbor is Latvia. The two countries share a border that extends 453 kilometres. Lithuania's eastern border with Belarus is longer, stretching 502 kilometers. The border with Poland on the south is relatively short, only ninety-one kilometers, but is very busy because of international traffic. Lithuania also has a 227-kilometre border with Russia. Russian territory adjacent to Lithuania is Kaliningrad Oblast, which is the northern part of the former German East Prussia, including the city of Kaliningrad. Finally, Lithuania has 108 kilometres of Baltic seashore with an ice-free harbor at Klaipda. The Baltic coast offers sandy beaches and pine forests and attracts thousands of vacationers.

== Topography and drainage ==

Lithuania lies at the edge of the North European Plain. Its landscape was shaped by the glaciers of the last Ice Age, which retreated about 25,00022,000 years BP (Before Present). Lithuania's terrain is an alternation of moderate lowlands and highlands. The highest elevation is 297.84 meters above sea level, found in the eastern part of the republic and separated from the uplands of the western region of Samogitia by the fertile plains of the southwestern and central regions. The landscape is punctuated by 2,833 lakes larger than 10,000 m and 1,600 smaller ponds. The majority of the lakes are found in the eastern part of the country. Lithuania also has 758 rivers longer than ten kilometres. The largest river is the Nemunas (total length 917 km), which originates in Belarus. The other larger waterways are the Neris (510 km), Venta (346 km), and eup (298 km) rivers. However, only 600 kilometers of Lithuania's rivers are navigable.

Once a heavily forested land, Lithuania's territory today consists of only 32.8 percent http://www.kontrastai.lt/?p=15825 woodlandsprimarily pine, spruce, and birch forests. Ash and oak are very scarce. The forests are rich in mushrooms and berries, as well as a variety of plants.

== Climate ==

Winter landscape in Lithuania

The country's climate, which ranges between maritime and continental, is relatively mild. Average temperatures on the coast are -2.5 C in January and 16 C in July. In Vilnius the average temperatures are -6 C in January and 16 C in July. Simply speaking, 20 C is frequent on summer days and 14 C at night. Temperatures can reach 30 or in summer. Some winters can be very cold. -20C occurs almost every winter. Winter extremes are -34 C in the seaside and -43 C in the east of Lithuania. The average annual precipitation is 800 mm on the coast, 900 mm in Samogitia highlands and 600 mmin the eastern part of the country. Snow occurs every year, it can be snowing from October to April. In some years sleet can fall in September or May. The growing season lasts 202 days in the western part of the country and 169 days in the eastern part. Severe storms are rare in the eastern part of Lithuania and common in the seaside.

The longest measured temperature records from the Baltic area cover about 250 years. The data show that there were warm periods during the latter half of the 18th century, and that the 19th century was a relatively cool period. An early 20th century warming culminated in the 1930s, followed by a smaller cooling that lasted until the 1960s. A warming trend has persisted since then. Climate trends in the Baltic 

Lithuania experienced a drought in 2002, causing forest and peat bog fires. Effects of 2002 drought in Lithuania The country suffered along with the rest of Northwestern Europe during a heat wave in the summer of 2006.

=== Extreme temperatures ===

Extreme temperatures in Lithuania by month www.meteo.lt: Records of Lithuanian climate 

 Extreme temperatures in Lithuania (C) 
 Month Jan Feb Mar Apr May Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec 
 Highest temperatures 12.6 C 16.5 C 21.8 C 28.8 C 34 C 35 C 37.5 C 36 C 32 C 26 C 18 C 15.6 C 
 Lowest Temperatures -40.5 C -42.9 C -37.7 C -23 C -6.8 C -2.8 C 0.9 C -2.9 C -6.3 C -19.5 C -23 C -34 C 

==Environment==

Concerned with environmental deterioration, Lithuanian governments have created several national parks and reservations. The country's flora and fauna have suffered, however, from an almost fanatical drainage of land for agricultural use. Environmental problems of a different nature were created by the development of environmentally unsafe industries. Air pollution problems exist mainly in the cities, such as Vilnius, Kaunas, Jonava, Maeikiai, Elektrnai, and Naujoji Akmenthe sites of fertilizer and other chemical plants, an oil refinery, power station, and a cement factory.

Water quality has also been an issue. The city of Kaunas, with a population of about 400,000, had no water purification plant until 1999; sewage was sent directly into the Neman River. Tertiary wastewater treatment is scheduled to come on-line in 2007. Wastewater treatment in Kaunas River and lake pollution are other legacies of Soviet carelessness with the environment. The Courland Lagoon, for example, separated from the Baltic Sea by a strip of high dunes and pine forests, is about 85 percent contaminated. Beaches in the Baltic resorts, such as the well-known vacation area of Palanga, are frequently closed for swimming because of contamination. Forests affected by acid rain are found in the vicinity of Jonava, Maeikiai, and Elektrnai, which are the chemical, oil, and power-generation centers. Lithuania was among the first former Soviet republics to introduce environmental regulations. However, because of Moscow's emphasis on increasing production and because of numerous local violations, technological backwardness, and political apathy, serious environmental problems now exist.

Natural hazards:
hurricane-force storms, blizzards, droughts, floods

Environmentcurrent issues:
contamination of soil and groundwater with petroleum products and chemicals at former Soviet military bases

Environmentinternational agreements:

* party to:

Air Pollution, Air Pollution-Nitrogen Oxides, Air Pollution-Persistent Organic Pollutants, Air Pollution-Sulphur 85, Air Pollution-Sulphur 94, Air Pollution-Volatile Organic Compounds, Biodiversity, Climate Change, Climate Change-Kyoto Protocol, Desertification, Endangered Species, Environmental Modification, Hazardous Wastes, Law of the Sea, Ozone Layer Protection, Ship Pollution, Wetlands

* signed, but not ratified:

== Natural resources ==

Lithuania has an abundance of limestone, clay, quartz sand, gypsum sand, and dolomite, which are suitable for making high-quality cement, glass, and ceramics. There also is an ample supply of mineral water, but energy sources and industrial materials are all in short supply. Oil was discovered in Lithuania in the 1950s, but only a few wells operate, and all that do are located in the western part of the country. It is estimated that the Baltic Sea shelf and the western region of Lithuania hold commercially viable amounts of oil, but if exploited this oil would satisfy only about 20 percent of Lithuania's annual need for petroleum products for the next twenty years. Lithuania has a large amount of thermal energy along the Baltic Sea coast which could be used to heat hundreds of thousands of homes, as is done in Iceland. In addition, iron ore deposits have been found in the southern region of Lithuania. But commercial exploitation of these deposits probably would require strip mining, which is environmentally unsound. Moreover, exploitation of these resources will depend on Lithuania's ability to attract capital and technology from abroad.

Natural resources:
peat, arable land, amber

Land use:

* arable land: 33.48%
* permanent crops: 0.47%
* other: 66.05% (2011)

Irrigated land:
13.4 km (2011)

Total renewable water resources:
24.9 km3 (2011)

== Area and boundaries ==

Area:

* total: 65,300 km
* land: 62,680 km
* water: 2,620 km

Land boundaries:

* total: 1,574 km
* border countries: Belarus 680 km, Latvia 576 km, Poland 91 km, Russia (Kaliningrad) 227 km

Coastline: 90 km

Maritime claims:

* territorial sea: 12 nmi

Elevation extremes:

* lowest point: Baltic Sea 0 m
* highest point: Auktojas Hill 294 m

== See also ==

* Lithuania

== Footnotes ==

== References ==

* 
* 

== External links ==

* Kursiu Nerija National Park

 

[[Demographics of Lithuania]]

Population of Lithuania (in millions) from 19502010.
This article is about the demographic features of the population of Lithuania, including population density, ethnicity, level of education, health, economic status, and religious affiliations.

==Prehistory==
The earliest evidence of inhabitants in present-day Lithuania dates back to 10,000 BC. Between 30002000 BC, the cord-ware culture people spread over a vast region of eastern Europe, between the Baltic Sea and the Vistula River in the West and the MoscowKursk line in the East. Merging with the indigenous peoples, they gave rise to the Balts, a distinct Indo-European ethnic group whose descendants are the present-day Lithuanian and Latvian nations and the former Old Prussians.

==Historical demographics==

===Grand Duchy of Lithuania===
:See also: Demographics and Languages of Grand Duchy of Lithuania, Demographics of the PolishLithuanian Commonwealth
Area of the Lithuanian language in the 16th century
Map showing changes in the territory of Lithuania from the 13th century to the present day
The name of Lithuania  Lithuanians  was first mentioned in 1009. Among its etymologies there are a derivation from the word Lietava, for a small river, a possible derivation from a word leiiai, but most probable is the name for union of Lithuanian ethnic tribes ('susilieti, lietis' means to unite and the word 'lietuva' means something which has been united).

The primary Lithuanian state, the Duchy of Lithuania, emerged in the territory of Lietuva, the ethnic homeland of Lithuanians. At the birth of the Grand Duchy of Lithuania (GDL), ethnic Lithuanians made up about 70% of the population. Statistical numbers, probably accepted in historiography (the sources, their treatment, the procedure of counting is not discussed in this book) are given, according which in 1260 there were about 0.27 million Lithuanians of 0.4 million of a whole population; in percentage: 67,5%. With the acquisition of new Ruthenian territories, this proportion decreased to 50% and later to 30%. By the time of the largest expansion towards Kievan Rus' lands, at the end of the 13th and during the 14th century, the territory of the GDL was about 800,000 km2, of which 10% was ethnically Lithuanian. Bjorn Wiemer, Dialect and language contacts on the territory of the Grand Duchy from the 15th century until 1939, Kurt Braunmller, Gisella Ferraresi, Aspects of multilingualism in European language history, John Benjamins Publishing Company, 2003, ISBN 90-272-1922-2, Google Print, p.109; 125 The ethnic Lithuanian population is estimated to have been 420,000 out of 1.4 million in 1375 (the territory was about 700,000 km2), and 550,000 out of 3.8 million in 1490 (territory: 850,000 km2) Letukien, N., Istorija. Politologija: kurso santrauka istorijos egzaminui, 2003, p. 182. There can be found also different numbers, for example: Kevin O'Connor, The history of the Baltic States, Greenwood Publishing Group, 2003, ISBN 0-313-32355-0, Google Print, p.17. Here author estimates that there were 9 millions of inhabitants in GDL, and 1 million of them were ethnic Lithuanians by 1387. Ruthenians were only nowadays Ukrainians and the whole Belarus including Smolensk and Mozhaisk Galindians were of Lithuanian ethnicity (belonging to the same family as Prussians or Latvians). In addition to the Ruthenians and Lithuanians, other significant ethnic groups throughout GDL were Jews and Tatars. The combined population of Poland and GDL in 1493 is estimated as 7.5 million, of whom 3.25 million were Poles, 3.75 million Ruthenians and 0.5 million Lithuanians. Based on 1493 population map (p.92) from Iwo Cyprian Pogonowski, Poland a Historical Atlas, Hippocrene Books, 1987, ISBN 0-88029-394-2 With the Union of Lublin Lithuanian Grand Duchy lost large part of lands to the Polish Crown (see demographics of the PolishLithuanian Commonwealth). An ethnic Lithuanian proportion being about 1/4 in GDL after the Union of Lublin was held till the partitions. There was much devastation and population loss throughout the GDL in the mid and late 17th century, Jarmo Kotilaine, Russia's foreign trade and economic expansion in the seventeenth century: windows on the world, BRILL, 2005, ISBN 90-04-13896-X, Google Print, p.45 including the ethnic Lithuanian population in Vilnius voivodeship. Besides devastation, the Ruthenian population declined proportionally after the territorial losses to the Russian Empire. In 1770 there were about 4.84 million inhabitants in GDL, of which the largest ethnic group were Ruthenians, about 1.39 million  Lithuanians. The voivodeships with a majority ethnic Lithuanian population were Vilnius, Trakai and Samogitian voivodeships, and these three voivodeships comprised the political center of the state. In the southern angle of Trakai voivodeship and south-eastern part of Vilnius voivodeship there were also many Belarusians; in some of the south-eastern areas they were the major linguistic group.

The Ruthenian population formed a majority in GDL from the time of the GDL's expansion in the mid 14th century; and the adjective "Lithuanian", besides denoting ethnic Lithuanians, from early times denoted any inhabitant of GDL, including Slavs and Jews.

The Ruthenian language, corresponding to today's Belarusian and Ukrainian, was then called Russian, and was used as one of the chancellery languages by Lithuanian monarchs. However there are fewer extant documents written in this language than those written in Latin and German from the time of Vytautas. Later, Ruthenian became the main language of documentation and writing. In the years that followed, it was the main language of government until the introduction of Polish as the chancellery language of the LithuanianPolish Commonwealth in 1697; however there are also examples of documents written in Ruthenian from the second half of the 18th century. Lietuvos Didiosios kunigaiktysts kanceliarins slav kalbos termino nusakymo problema Z. Zinkeviius The Lithuanian language was used orally in Vilnius, Trakai and Samogitian voivodeships, and by small numbers of people elsewhere. At the court of Zygmunt August, the last king of the Duchy, both Polish and Lithuanian were spoken. Daniel. Z Stone, A History of East Central Europe, p.4 

===Russian empire===
After partition of Lithuania in the late 18th century, it become a part of Russian empire. After the abolition of serfdom in 1861, the use of the Polish language noticeably increased in eastern Lithuania and western Belarus. Many Lithuanians, living further east, were unable to receive the Lithuanian printed books smuggled into Lithuania by knygneiai during the time of the ban on printing books in the Latin alphabet, and they switched to Polish. Although this also used the Latin alphabet, it was much less affected by the ban, because Polish was still used by the politically important class of the nobility, and also used predominantly in the biggest towns of Lithuania, and supported by the church.

===National revival===
The Lithuanian National Revival had begun to intensify by the end of the 19th century, and the number of Lithuanian speakers and people identifying themselves as ethnic Lithuanians started to increase; but at the same time many Polish speaking Lithuanians, especially former szlachta, cut themselves adrift from the Lithuanian nation. There were population losses due to several border changes, Soviet deportations, the Holocaust of the Lithuanian Jews, and German and Polish repatriations during and after World War II. After World War II, the ethnic Lithuanian population remained stable: 79.3% in 1959 to 83.5% in 2002. Lithuania's citizenship law and the Constitution meet international and OSCE standards, guaranteeing universal human and civil rights.

==Ethnic composition==

Lithuanians are neither Slavic nor Germanic, although the union with Poland, German and Russian colonization and settlement left cultural and religious influences.

=== Before WW II ===

+ Population of Lithuania according to ethnic group 1923/1925 1 
 Ethnicgroup census 1923 of Lithuania census 1925 of the Klaipda Region 
 Number % Number % 
 Lithuanians 1,701,863 89.3 37,626 26.6 
 Memels 34,337 24.2 
 Jews 153,743 7.6 578 0.4 
 Germans 29,231 1.4 59,337 41.9 
 Poles 65,599 3.2 29 0.0 
 Russians 50,460 2.5 267 0.2 
 Latvians 14,883 0.7 47 0.0 
 Belarusians 4,421 0.2 - - 
 Tatars 973 0.0 
 Romani 284 0.0 
 Karaites 141 0.0 
 Estonians 46 0.0 
 Ukrainians 43 0.0 
 Others 7,284 0.2 9,424 6.7 
 Total 2,028,971 141,645 
 1 Source: . The Klaipda Region was annexed from Germany in 1923, but was not included in the 1923 census. A separate census in the Klaipda region was held in 1925. 

===After WW II===

Among the Baltic states, Lithuania has the most homogeneous population. According to the census conducted in 2001, 83.4% of the population identified themselves as Lithuanians, 6.7% as Poles, 6.3% as Russians, 1.2% as Belarusians, and 2.3% as members of other ethnic groups. 
Number of Poles in Lithuania
Poles are concentrated in the Vilnius Region, the area controlled by Poland in the interwar period. There are especially large Polish communities in Vilnius district municipality (61.3% of the population) and alininkai district municipality (79.5%). Such concentrations would allow Election Action of Lithuania's Poles, an ethnic minority-based political party, to exert political influence, but the 5% rule prevents it from entering the parliament of Lithuania. The party is more active in local politics and controls several municipal councils.

+ Population of Lithuania according to ethnic group 19592011 
 Ethnicgroup census 19591 census 19702 census 19793 census 19894 census 20015 census 20115 
 Number % Number % Number % Number % Number % Number % 
 Lithuanians 2,150,767 79.3 2,506,751 80.1 2,712,233 80.0 2,924,251 79.6 2,907,293 83.4 2,561,314 84.2 
 Poles 230,107 8.5 240,203 7.7 247,022 7.3 257,994 7.0 234,989 6.7 200,317 6.6 
 Russians 231,014 8.5 267,989 8.6 303,493 8.9 344,455 9.4 219,789 6.3 176,913 5.8 
 Belarusians 30,256 1.1 45,412 1.5 57,584 1.7 63,169 1.7 42,866 1.2 36,227 1.2 
 Ukrainians 17,692 0.7 25,099 0.8 31,982 0.9 44,789 1.2 22,488 0.6 16,423 0.5 
 Jews 24,667 0.9 23,538 0.8 14,691 0.4 12,390 0.3 4,007 0.1 3,050 0.1 
 Tatars 3,020 0.1 3,454 0.1 3,984 0.1 5,135 0.1 3,235 0.1 2,793 0.1 
 Germans 11,166 0.4 1,904 0.1 2,616 0.1 2,058 0.1 3,243 0.1 2,418 0.1 
 Romani 1,238 0.1 1,880 0.1 2,306 0.1 2,718 0.1 2,571 0.1 2,115 0.1 
 Latvians 6,318 0.2 5,063 0.2 4,354 0.1 4,229 0.1 2,955 0.1 2,025 0.1 
 Estonians 352 0.0 551 0.0 546 0.0 598 0.0 400 0.0 314 0.0 
 Karaites 423 0.0 388 0.0 352 0.0 289 0.0 273 0.0 241 0.0 
 Others or unspecified 4,425 0.2 6,004 0.2 10,327 0.3 12,727 0.3 40,136 1.2 39,279 1.3 
 Total 2,711,445 3,128,236 3,391,490 3,674,802 3,483,972 3,043,429 
 1 Source: . 2 Source: . 3 Source: . 4 Source: . 5 Source: . 

Russians, even though they are almost as numerous as Poles, are much more evenly scattered and lack a strong political party. The most prominent community lives in Visaginas (52%). Most of them are scientists who moved with their families from the Russian SFSR to work at the Ignalina Nuclear Power Plant. A number of ethnic Russians (mostly military) left Lithuania after the declaration of independence in 1990.

Another major change in the ethnic composition of Lithuania was the extermination of the Jewish population during the Holocaust. Before World War II about 7.5% of the population was Jewish; they were concentrated in cities and towns and had a significant influence on crafts and business. They were called Litvaks and had a strong culture. The population of Vilnius, sometimes nicknamed Northern Jerusalem, was about 30% Jewish. Almost all of these Jews were killed during the Nazi German occupation, or later emigrated to the United States and Israel. Now there are only about 4,000 Jews living in Lithuania.

== Citizenship ==
Lithuania's membership of the European Union has made Lithuanian citizenship all the more appealing. Lithuanian citizenship is theoretically easier (see court ruling notes below) to obtain than that of many other European countriesonly one great-grandparent is necessary to become a Lithuanian citizen. Persons who held citizenship in the Republic of Lithuania prior to June 15, 1940, and their children, grandchildren, and great-grandchildren (provided that these persons did not repatriate) are eligible for Lithuanian citizenship .
 
Lithuanian citizens are allowed to travel throughout the European Union without a visa. As far as work is concerned, the United Kingdom, Sweden, Ireland, Spain, Portugal, Finland, and Greece place no restrictions on Lithuanians working in their respective countries. The other older member nations of the European Union still place restrictions on work, but these are merely transitional arrangements.

===Dual citizenship ruled unconstitutional===

The Lithuanian Constitutional Court ruled in November 2006 that a number of provisions of the Law of the Republic of Lithuania on citizenship are in conflict with the Lithuanian Constitution. In particular, the court ruled that a number of current provisions of the Citizenship Law implicitly or explicitly allowing dual citizenship are in conflict with the Constitution; such provisions amounted to the unconstitutional practice of making dual citizenship a common phenomenon rather than a rare exception. The provisions of the Citizenship Law announced unconstitutional are no longer valid and applicable to the extent stated by the Constitutional Court.

The Lithuanian Parliament amended the Citizenship Law substantially as a result of this court ruling, allowing dual Citizenship for children of at least one Lithuanian parent that are born abroad, but preventing Lithuanians from keeping their Lithuanian citizenship after obtaining citizenship of another country.

There are some special cases still permitting dual citizenship. See Lithuanian nationality law.

==Languages==

 
 

The Lithuanian language is the country's sole official language countrywide. It is the first language of almost 85% of population and is also spoken by 286,742 out of 443,514 non-Lithuanians. Census 2011: GYVENTOJAI PAGAL ISILAVINIM IR KALB MOKJIM The Soviet era had imposed the official use of Russian, so most adult Lithuanians speak Russian as a second language, while the Polish population generally speaks Polish. Russians who immigrated after World War II speak Russian as their first language. The younger generation usually speaks English as their second language, while a substantial portion of the total population (37%) speak at least two foreign languages. According to census of 2011, 30% of the population can speak English. 

Approximately 14,800 pupils started their 2012 school year in schools where the curriculum is conducted in Russian (down from 76,000 in 1991), and about 12,300 enrolled in Polish schools (compared to 11,400 in 1991 and 21,700 in 2001). There are also schools in the Belarusian language, as well as in French and English. General school pupils, Statistics Lithuania 

There are perhaps 50 speakers of Karaim, a Turkic language spoken by Karaite Jews, in Lithuania. UNESCO, Audio-visual resources. Retrieved 2011-09-12. 

Lithuanian Sign Language and Russian Sign Language are used by the deaf community.

== Religion ==

St. Anne's Church, Vilnius As per the 2011 census, 77.2% of Lithuanians identified themselves as Roman Catholic. Department of Statistics to the Government of the Republic of Lithuania. . 2013-03-15. The Church has been the majority denomination since the Christianisation of Lithuania at the end of the 14th century. Some priests actively led the resistance against the Communist regime (symbolised by the Hill of Crosses).

In the first half of the 20th century, the Lutheran Protestant church had around 200,000 members, 9% of the total population, mostly Protestant Lithuanians from the former Memel Territory and Germans, but it has declined since 1945. Small Protestant communities are dispersed throughout the northern and western parts of the country. Believers and clergy suffered greatly during the Soviet occupation, with many killed, tortured or deported to Siberia. Various Protestant churches have established missions in Lithuania since 1990. 4.1% are Orthodox, 0.8% are Old Believers (both mainly among the Russian minority), 0.8% are Protestant and 6.1% have no religion.

Lithuania was historically home to a significant Jewish community and was an important center of Jewish scholarship and culture from the 18th century, until the community, numbering about 160,000 before World War II, was almost entirely annihilated during the Holocaust. By 2011, around 3000 people in Lithuania identified themselves as Jews, while around 1200 identified with Judaic religious community. 

According to the 2005 Eurobarometer Poll, 12% said that "they do not believe there is any sort of spirit, god, or life force", 36% answered that "they believe there is some sort of spirit or life force" and 49% of Lithuanian citizens responded that "they believe there is a God".

== CIA World Factbook demographic statistics ==

The following demographic statistics are from the CIA World Factbook, unless otherwise indicated.

Age structure:
014 years: 14.2% (male 258,423/female 245,115)
1564 years: 69.6% (male 1,214,743/female 1,261,413)
65 years and over: 16.2% (male 198,714/female 376,771) (2009 est.)

Population growth rate:
0.28% (2009 est.)

Net migration rate:
0.72 migrant(s)/1,000 population (2009 est.)

Map of population density in Lithuania
Sex ratio:
at birth:
1.06 male(s)/female
under 15 years:
1.05 male(s)/female
1564 years:
0.96 male(s)/female
65 years and over:
0.53 male(s)/female
total population:
0.89 male(s)/female (2009 est.)

Infant mortality rate:
Total: 6.47 deaths/1,000 live births
male: 7.73 deaths/1,000 live births
female: 5.13 deaths/1,000 live births (2009 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
total population: 74.9 years
male: 69.98 years
female: 80.1 years (2009 est.)

Total fertility rate:
1.55 children born/woman (2009) 

Suicide rate:
31.5 suicides per every 100,000 people (2009) 

Divorce rate:
With 2.8 divorces per every 1000 people (2009), Lithuania in 2004 had one of the highest divorce rate in the European Union .

== Table of birth and death rates ==

===Before WW II===
:Source: Statistical yearbooks of Lithuania

 Average population (x 1000) Live births Deaths Natural change Crude birth rate (per 1000) Crude death rate (per 1000) Natural change (per 1000) 
 1915 2 137 38 722 43 596 4 874 18.1 20.4 2.3 
 1916 2 137 35 565 31 512 4 053 16.6 14.7 1.9 
 1917 2 134 32 266 43 047 10 781 15.1 20.2 5.1 
 1918 2 121 33 176 47 522 14 346 15.6 22.4 6.8 
 1919 2 108 41 095 51 930 10 835 19.5 24.6 5.1 
 1920 2 104 47 642 44 487 3 155 22.6 21.1 1.5 
 1921 2 116 51 864 31 915 19 949 24.5 15.1 9.4 
 1922 2 136 58 064 37 598 20 466 27.2 17.6 9.6 
 1923 2 161 60 869 32 432 28 437 28.2 15.0 13.2 
 1924 2 189 63 864 35 493 28 371 29.2 16.2 13.0 
 1925 2 217 63 743 37 179 26 564 28.8 16.8 12.0 
 1926 2 245 63 655 34 380 29 275 28.4 15.3 13.0 
 1927 2 273 66 114 38 897 27 217 29.1 17.1 12.0 
 1928 2 301 65 945 35 698 27 116 28.7 15.5 11.8 
 1929 2 328 63 083 39 669 23 414 27.1 17.0 10.1 
 1930 2 354 64 164 37 151 27 013 27.3 15.8 11.5 
 1931 2 380 63 419 37 478 25 941 26.6 15.7 10.9 
 1932 2 407 65 371 36 577 28 794 27.2 15.2 12.0 
 1933 2 436 62 145 32 749 29 396 25.5 13.4 12.1 
 1934 2 464 60 770 35 789 24 981 24.7 14.5 10.1 
 1935 2 488 57 970 34 595 23 375 23.3 13.9 9.4 
 1936 2 513 60 446 33 440 25 939 24.1 13.3 10.3 
 1937 2 538 56 393 33 260 22 433 22.2 13.1 8.8 
 1938 2 563 57 951 32 256 24 562 22.6 12.6 9.6 
 19391 2 432 54 184 32 983 21 201 22.3 13.6 8.7 

1 the figures of 1939 exclude the Klaipda Region

===After WW II===
:Source: Statistics Lithuania

 Average population (x 1000) Live births Deaths Natural change Crude birth rate (per 1000) Crude death rate (per 1000) Natural change (per 1000) Total fertility rate 
 1945 2 520 60 392 35 201 25 191 24.0 14.0 10.0 
 1946 2 530 58 399 37 688 20 711 23.1 14.9 8.2 
 1947 2 540 59 680 39 716 19 964 23.5 15.6 7.9 
 1948 2 550 58 780 35 137 23 643 23.1 13.8 9.3 
 1949 2 560 63 034 32 049 30 985 24.6 12.5 12.1 
 1950 2 567 60 719 30 870 29 849 23.7 12.0 11.6 
 1951 2 569 58 504 29 693 28 811 22.8 11.6 11.2 
 1952 2 576 56 944 28 166 28 778 22.1 10.9 11.2 
 1953 2 590 52 610 27 118 25 492 20.3 10.5 9.8 
 1954 2 607 54 229 25 559 28 670 20.8 9.8 11.0 
 1955 2 629 55 525 24 138 31 387 21.1 9.2 11.9 
 1956 2 653 53 741 21 869 31 872 20.3 8.2 12.0 
 1957 2 681 56 223 23 361 32 862 21.0 8.7 12.3 
 1958 2 711 61 190 22 103 39 087 22.6 8.2 14.4 
 1959 2 744 62 241 24 688 37 553 22.7 9.0 13.7 2,63 
 1960 2 782 62 485 21 611 40 874 22.5 7.8 14.7 2,59 
 1961 2 828 62 775 23 365 39 410 22.2 8.3 13.9 2,57 
 1962 2 865 59 728 24 925 34 803 20.8 8.7 12.1 2,64 
 1963 2 893 57 024 23 112 33 912 19.7 8.0 11.7 2,45 
 1964 2 928 55 856 21 830 34 026 19.1 7.5 11.6 2,31 
 1965 2 967 53 818 23 467 30 351 18.1 7.9 10.2 2,21 
 1966 3 006 54 275 23 799 30 476 18.1 7.9 10.1 2,34 
 1967 3 045 53 806 24 571 29 235 17.7 8.1 9.6 2,27 
 1968 3 083 54 258 25 725 28 533 17.6 8.3 9.3 2,25 
 1969 3 115 54 263 27 156 27 107 17.4 8.7 8.7 2,29 
 1970 3 144 55 519 28 048 27 471 17.7 8.9 8.7 2,40 
 1971 3 179 56 044 26 972 29 072 17.6 8.5 9.1 2,41 
 1972 3 214 54 616 29 252 25 364 17.0 9.1 7.9 2,35 
 1973 3 244 51 944 29 160 22 784 16.0 9.0 7.0 2,22 
 1974 3 274 51 941 29 612 22 329 15.9 9.0 6.8 2,21 
 1975 3 302 51 766 31 265 20 501 15.7 9.5 6.2 2,18 
 1976 3 329 52 296 31 972 20 324 15.7 9.6 6.1 2,18 
 1977 3 355 52 166 32 932 19 234 15.5 9.8 5.7 2,14 
 1978 3 379 51 821 34 008 17 813 15.3 10.1 5.3 2,09 
 1979 3 398 51 937 34 897 17 040 15.3 10.3 5.0 2,05 
 1980 3 413 51 765 35 871 15 894 15.2 10.5 4.7 1,99 
 1981 3 433 52 249 35 579 16 670 15.2 10.4 4.9 1,98 
 1982 3 457 53 141 35 040 18 101 15.4 10.1 5.2 1,97 
 1983 3 485 57 589 36 451 21 138 16.5 10.5 6.1 2,10 
 1984 3 514 57 576 38 666 18 910 16.4 11.0 5.4 2,07 
 1985 3 545 58 454 39 169 19 285 16.5 11.0 5.4 2,09 
 1986 3 579 59 705 35 788 23 917 16.7 10.0 6.7 2,12 
 1987 3 616 59 360 36 917 22 443 16.4 10.2 6.2 2,11 
 1988 3 655 56 727 37 649 19 078 15.5 10.3 5.2 2,02 
 1989 3 684 55 782 38 150 17 632 15.1 10.3 4.8 1,98 
 1990 3 698 56 868 39 760 17 108 15.3 10.7 4.6 2,02 
 1991 3 704 56 219 41 013 15 206 15.2 11.1 4.1 2,00 
 1992 3 700 53 617 41 455 12 162 14.5 11.2 3.3 1,94 
 1993 3 683 47 464 46 107 1 357 12.9 12.5 0.4 1,74 
 1994 3 657 42 376 46 486 4 110 11.6 12.7 1.1 1,57 
 1995 3 629 41 195 45 306 4 111 11.4 12.5 1.1 1,55 
 1996 3 602 39 066 42 896 3 830 10.8 11.9 1.1 1,49 
 1997 3 575 37 812 41 143 3 331 10.6 11.5 0.9 1,47 
 1998 3 549 37 508 40 793 3 285 10.6 11.5 0.9 1,46 
 1999 3 524 36 415 40 003 3 588 10.3 11.4 1.1 1,46 
 2000 3 500 34 149 38 919 4 770 9.8 11.1 1.3 1,39 
 2001 3 471 31 546 40 399 8 853 9.1 11.6 2.5 1,29 
 2002 3 443 30 014 41 072 11 058 8.7 11.9 3.2 1,23 
 2003 3 415 30 598 40 990 10 392 9.0 12.0 3.0 1,26 
 2004 3 377 30 419 41 340 10 921 9.0 12.2 3.2 1,27 
 2005 3 323 30 541 43 799 13 258 9.2 13.2 3.9 1,29 
 2006 3 270 31 265 44 813 13 548 9.6 13.7 4.1 1,33 
 2007 3 231 32 346 45 624 13 278 10.0 14.1 4.1 1,36 
 2008 3 198 35 065 43 832 8 767 11.0 13.7 2.7 1,45 
 2009 3 163 36 682 42 032 5 350 11.6 13.3 1.7 1,50 
 2010 3 097 35 626 42 120 6 494 11.5 13.6 2.1 1,50 
 2011 3 028 34 385 41 037 6 652 11.4 13.6 2.2 1,55 
 2012 2 988 30 459 40 938 10 479 10.2 13.7 3.5 1,60 
 2013 2 944 30 858 41 556 10 698 10.5 14.1 3.6 

===Current vital statistics===

- Number of births from January to February 2013 = 4525

- Number of births from January to February 2014 = 4596

- Number of deaths from January to February 2013 = 7886

- Number of deaths from January to February 2014 = 6781

During the period of JanuaryFebruary 2014 the natural increase was:

Natural increase from January to February 2013 = - 3361

Natural increase from January to February 2014 = - 2185

==Literacy and education==

According to the 2011 census, only around 0.2% of the Lithuanian population aged 10 and over were illiterate, the majority of them in rural areas. The proportion is similar for males and females. Statistics Lithuania, 2011 Census, Population by educational attainment and command of languages 

The general education system in Lithuania consists of primary, basic, secondary and tertiary education. Primary, basic and secondary (or high school) education is free of charge to all residents and is compulsory for pupils under 16 years of age. Ministry of Education and Science, Education, Lower secondary education Pre-primary education is also available free of charge to 5-year-old or 6-year-old children but is not compulsory. Pre-primary schooling is attended by about 90% of pre-school age children in Lithuania. Ministry of Education and Science, Education, Pre-school education Primary, basic and secondary education in Lithuania is available to some ethnic minorities in their native languages, including Polish, Russian and Belarussian.

Primary schooling () is available to kids that have reached 7 years of age (or younger, should the parents so desire) and lasts four years. Primary school students are not assessed through a grade system, instead using oral or written feedback. Students begin studying their first foreign language in their second year of primary school. Government of the Republic of Lithuania, The Official Gateway of Lithuania, Education System Data from the 2011 census showed that 99.1% of the population aged 20 and older have attained at least primary education, while around 27,000 pupils started the first grade in 2012. Statistics Lithuania, 2011 Census, Population by educational attainment, age group and municipality 

Basic education () covers grades 5 to 10. It is provided by basic, secondary, youth, vocational schools and gymnasiums. After completing the 10th grade, the students must take the basic education achievement test in the Lithuanian language, mathematics, and an elective basic education achievement test in Mother Tongue (Belarusian, Polish, Russian or German). In 2011, 90.9% of the population of Lithuania aged 20 or older had attained the basic level of education. 

Secondary education () in Lithuania is optional and available to students who have attained basic education. It covers two years (11-12th grades in secondary schools and 3-4th grades in gymnasiums). At this level, students have the opportunity to adapt their study plans (subjects and study level) to their individual preferences. Secondary education is completed upon passing national matura examinations. Matura examinations consist of as many as six separate examinations of which two (Lithuanian Language and Literature and one elective subject) are required to attain the diploma. As of 2011, 78.2% of the population of Lithuania aged 20 or older had attained the secondary level of education, including secondary education provided by vocational schools. 

More than 60% of the graduates from secondary school every year choose to continue education at colleges and universities of the Lithuanian higher education system. As of 2013, there were 23 universities (including academies and business schools recognized as such) and 24 colleges operating in Lithuania. Vilnius University, founded in 1579, is the oldest and largest university in Lithuania. More than 48,000 students enrolled to all higher education programmes in Lithuania in 2011, including level I (professional bachelor and bachelor), level II (masters) and level III (doctorate) studies. Ministry of Education and Science of the Republic of Lithuania, Lietuvos vietimas skaiiais, 2012 Higher education in Lithuania is partly state-funded, with free-of-charge access to higher education constitutionally guaranteed to students deemed "good". There are also stipends available to the best students.

==See also==
* Lithuania
* Lithuanians in Brazil
* Ethnic history of the Vilnius region
* Russians in Lithuania
* Aging of Europe

==Notes==

==External links==
* statistics about education in Lithuania (PDF)
* Key results of Lithuanian census
* Suicide statistics as of 2005 (Lith.)

 

[[Politics of Lithuania]]

Politics of Lithuania takes place in a framework of a parliamentary representative democratic republic, whereby the Prime Minister of Lithuania is the head of government, and of a multi-party system.

Executive power is exercised by the government, which is headed by the Prime Minister. Legislative power is vested in both the government and the unicameral Seimas (Lithuanian Parliament). Judicial power is vested in judges appointed by the President of Lithuania and is independent of executive and legislature power. The judiciary consists of the Constitutional Court, the Supreme Court, and the Court of Appeal as well as the separate administrative courts. The Constitution of the Republic of Lithuania established these powers upon its approval on October 25, 1992. Being a multi-party system, the government of Lithuania is not dominated by any single political party, rather it consists of numerous parties that must work with each other to form coalition governments.

==History==
Since Lithuania declared independence on March 11, 1990, it has kept strong democratic traditions. Drawing from the interwar experiences, politicians made many different proposals that ranged from strong parliamentarism to a presidential republic with checks and balances similar to the United States. Through compromise, a semi-presidential system was settled. Lina Kulikauskien, Lietuvos Respublikos Konstitucija (Constitution of Lithuania), Native History, CD, 2002. ISBN 9986-9216-7-8 In a referendum on October 25, 1992, the first general vote of the people since their declared independence, 56.75% of the total number of voters supported the new constitution. Nuo 1991 m. iki iol paskelbt referendum rezultatai (Results from Refrenda 1991-Present), Microsoft Word Document, Seimas. Accessed June 4, 2006. 

All major political parties declared their support for Lithuania's membership in NATO and the European Union (EU). Lithuania joined NATO on March 29, 2004, and joined the EU on May 1, 2004.

Since 1991, Lithuanian voters have shifted from right to left and back again, swinging between the Conservatives, led by Vytautas Landsbergis, and the (formerly Communist) Democratic Labour Party of Lithuania, led by president Algirdas Brazauskas. During this period, the prime minister was Gediminas Vagnorius.

Valdas Adamkus has been the president for most of the time since 1998. His prime minister was Rolandas Paksas, whose government got off to a rocky start and collapsed within seven months. The alternation between left and right was broken in the October 2000 elections when the Liberal Union and New Union parties won the most votes and were able to form a centrist ruling coalition with minor partners. President Adamkus played a key role in bringing the new centrist parties together. Artras Paulauskas, the leader of the center-left New Union (also known as the Social Liberal party), became the Chairman of the Seimas. In July 2001, the center-left New Union party forged an alliance with the Social Democratic Party of Lithuania and formed a new cabinet under former president Algirdas Brazauskas. On April 11, 2006, Artras Paulauskas was removed from his position and Viktoras Muntianas was elected Chairman of the Seimas. "Government of Lithuania". Vil S. Vaitas, P.E. and Associates International Consultants. Fairfax, VA. 

The cabinet of Algirdas Brazauskas resigned on May 31, 2006, as President Valdas Adamkus expressed no confidence in two of the Ministers, formerly party colleagues of Brazauskas, over ethical principles. Brazauskas decided not to remain in office as acting Prime Minister, and announced that he was finally retiring from politics. Even so, he led the ruling Social Democratic Party of Lithuania for one more year, until May 19, 2007, when he passed the reins to Gediminas Kirkilas. On November 27, 2008, Andrius Kubilius was appointed as a new Prime Minister.

==Government==

Government in Lithuania is made up of three branches originally envisioned by enlightenment philosopher Baron de Montesquieu: executive, legislative, and judicial. Each branch is separate and is set up to do checks and balances on each other branch.

===Executive branch===
The executive branch of the Lithuanian government consists of a President, a Prime Minister, and the President's Council of Ministers. It is in charge of running the government.

====President====
The President of Lithuania is the head of state of the country, elected directly for a five-year term and can serve maximum of two terms consecutively. The President, with the approval of the Seimas, is first responsible of appointing the Prime Minister. Upon the Prime Minister's nomination, the President also appoints, under the recommendation of the Prime Minister, the Council of Ministers (13 ministries), as well as a number of other top civil servants and the judges for all courts. The President also serves as the commander-in-chief, oversees foreign and security policy, addresses political problems of foreign and domestic affairs, proclaims state of emergency, considers the laws adopted by the Seimas, and performs other duties specified in the Constitution. Lithuanian Home Page 

President Valdas Adamkus has been the head-of-state since July 12, 2004, who followed interim President Artras Paulauskas after former President Rolandas Paksas was impeached in April 2004 for leaking classified information. Adamkus had previously served a term as Lithuanian President from 1998 to 2003, but lost to Paksas who also ran for President.

====Prime Minister====
The Prime Minister of Lithuania is the head of government of the country, appointed by the President and approved by the Seimas. The Prime Minister, within 15 days of being appointed, is responsible for choosing Ministers for the President to approve to each of the 13 Ministries. In general, the Prime Minister is in charge of the affairs of the country, maintains homeland security, carries out laws and resolutions of the Seimas and decrees of the President, maintains diplomatic relations with foreign countries and international organizations, and performs other duties specified in the Constitution. 

====Council of Ministers====
Similar to the cabinet of other nations, the Council of Ministers consists of 13 Ministers chosen by the Prime Minister and appointed by the President. Each Minister is responsible for his or her own Ministry of the Lithuanian government and must give reports on his or her Ministry when directed to. Lithuania in the European Union - Coordination of European Union Affairs in Lithuania The different Lithuanian Ministries are listed below. When the Prime Minister resigns or dies, the position is to be filled as soon as possible and the new leader will appoint a new Government.

====Current office holders====

|President
|Dalia Grybauskait
|Independent
|12 July 2009
|-
|Prime Minister
|Algirdas Butkeviius
|Social Democratic Party
|13 December 2012


==Legislative branch==
Seimas
The parliament (Seimas) has 141 members that are elected for a 4-year term. About half of the members are elected in single-member districts (71), and the other half (70) are elected in the nationwide vote using proportional representation by party lists. A party must receive at least 5% of the national vote to be represented in the Seimas.

==Political parties and elections==

==Judicial branch==
The judges of the Constitutional Court of the Republic of Lithuania (Lietuvos Respublikos Konstitucinis Teismas) for a single nine-year term are appointed by the Seimas from the candidates presented by the President (three judges), Chairman of Seimas (three judges) and the chairman of the Supreme Court (three judges).

==Administrative divisions==

Since 1994, with modifications in 2000, Lithuania is subdivided into 10 counties (Lithuanian: plural - apskritys, singular - apskritis), each named after their principal city (see: Counties of Lithuania). Counties are then subdivided into 60 municipalities (Lithuanian: plural - savivaldybs, singular - savivaldyb). Municipalities are further subdivided into over 500 elderships (Lithuanian: plural - seninijos, singular - seninija).

Counties are ruled by apskrities virininkas (officially translated as "governor") who is appointed by the central government in Vilnius. Their primary duty is to ensure that the municipalities obey the laws and constitution of Lithuania. They do not have great powers vested in them. Municipality governments are elected in democratic elections of municipality councils held every 4 years. Municipality mayors are elected by the municipality councils. Also, municipality councils appoint elders to be in charge of an eldership.

==International organization participation==

 Organization Acronym Date joined Notes 
 Bank for International Settlements BIS 
 Council of the Baltic Sea States CBSS March 5, 1992 
 Council of Europe COE May 14, 1993 
 European Community EC 
 Euro-Atlantic Partnership Council EAPC 
 European Bank for Reconstruction and Development EBRD January 30, 1992 
 United Nations Economic Commission for Europe ECE 
 European Union EU May 1, 2004 
 Food and Agriculture Organization FAO November 9, 1991 
 International Atomic Energy Agency IAEA November 18, 1993 
 World Bank IBRD July 6, 1992 
 International Civil Aviation Organization ICAO September 27, 1991 
 International Chamber of Commerce ICC 
 International Criminal Court ICC 
 International Trade Union Confederation ITUC 
 International Finance Corporation IFC March 21, 1992 
 International Red Cross and Red Crescent Movement IFRCS November 17, 1991 
 International Labour Organization ILO October 4, 1991 
 International Monetary Fund IMF March 29, 1992 
 International Maritime Organization IMO December 7, 1995 
 International Telecommunications Satellite Organization Intelsat (nonsignatory user) 
 International Criminal Police Organization - Interpol Interpol November 4, 1991 
 International Olympic Committee IOC 
 International Organization for Migration IOM November 28, 1995 
 International Organization for Standardization ISO January 1, 1992 (correspondent) 
 International Telecommunication Union ITU October 12, 1991 
 North Atlantic Treaty Organisation NATO April 1, 2004 
 Organisation for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons OPCW May 15, 1998 
 Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe OSCE September 10, 1991 
 United Nations UN September 17, 1991 
 United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization UNESCO October 15, 1991 
 United Nations Children's Fund UNICEF February 6, 1993 
 United Nations Mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina UNMIBH 
 United Nations Mission in Kosovo UNMIK 
 Universal Postal Union UPU January 10, 1992 
 World Customs Organization WCO June 18, 1992 
 Western European Union WEU (associate partner) 
 World Health Organization WHO November 25, 1991 
 World Intellectual Property Organization WIPO March 30, 1992 
 World Meteorological Organization WMO July 3, 1922 
 World Trade Organization WTO May 31, 2001 

==References==

==External links==
* Erik Herron's Guide to Politics of East Central Europe and Eurasia

 

[[Telecommunications in Lithuania]]

This article provides an overview of telecommunications in Lithuania, including radio, television, telephones, and the Internet.

== Radio ==

* Three radio networks operated by the public broadcaster (2007). "Communications", Lithuania, World Factbook, U.S. Central Intelligence Agency, 6 December 2013. Retrieved 26 December 2013. 
* Many privately owned commercial broadcasters, many with repeater stations in various regions throughout the country (2007). 
* Radios: 1.9 million (1997).

== Television ==

* Three channels operated by the public broadcster, with the third channel - a satellite channel - introduced in 2007. 
* Various privately owned commercial TV broadcasters operate national and multiple regional channels (2007). 
* Many privately owned local TV stations (2007). 
* Multi-channel cable and satellite TV services are available (2007). 
* Televisions: 1.7 million (1997).

== Telephones ==

* Main lines: 667,300 lines in use (2012), 89th in the world; 819,147 lines (2004).
* Mobile cellular: 5 million lines, 110th in the world (2012). 
* Telephone system: adequate, but is being modernized to provide an improved international capability and better residential access (2010). 
** Domestic: national fiber-optic cable interurban trunk system; rapid expansion of mobile-cellular services has resulted in a steady decline in the number of fixed-line connections; mobile-cellular teledensity stands at about 140 per 100 persons (2010). 
** International: major international connections to Denmark, Sweden, and Norway by submarine cable for further transmission by satellite; landline connections to Latvia and Poland (2010). 
* Country calling code: 370. 

== Internet ==

* Country code (top-level domain): .lt 
* Internet Service Providers: 32 ISPs (2001).
* Internet hosts: 1.2 million, 43rd in the world (2012). 
* IPv4: 2.2 million, 0.1% of the world total, 635 per 1000 people (2012). Select Formats, Country IP Blocks. Accessed on 2 April 2012. Note: Site is said to be updated daily. Population, The World Factbook, United States Central Intelligence Agency. Accessed on 2 April 2012. Note: Data are mostly for 1 July 2012. 
* Internet users: 2.4 million users, 85th in the world; 68.0% of the population, 50th in the world (2012). "Percentage of Individuals using the Internet 2000-2012", International Telecommunications Union (Geneva), June 2013, retrieved 22 June 2013 Calculated using penetration rate and population data from "Countries and Areas Ranked by Population: 2012", Population data, International Programs, U.S. Census Bureau, retrieved 26 June 2013 2.1 million users, 59.2% of the population (2008).
* Fixed broadband: 688,475 subscribers, 62nd in the world; 19.5% of the population, 49th in the world (2012). "Fixed (wired)-broadband subscriptions per 100 inhabitants 2012", Dynamic Report, ITU ITC EYE, International Telecommunication Union. Retrieved on 29 June 2013. 
* Mobile broadband: 301,488 subscribers, 106th in the world; 8.6% of the population, 97th in the world (2012). "Active mobile-broadband subscriptions per 100 inhabitants 2012", Dynamic Report, ITU ITC EYE, International Telecommunication Union. Retrieved on 29 June 2013. 
* Lithuania has the highest FTTH (Fiber to the home) penetration rate in Europe (18% in late 2009) according to FTTH Council Europe.
* ADSL services in Lithuania are provided by the monopoly carrier Teo LT. In the future this service might be used by other ISPs for their retail services. "Broadband Internet Zebra", TEO LT, AB. Retrieved 26 December 2013. 
* According to a study by Ookla Net Metrics, Lithuania had the second fastest Internet download and the fastest upload speed in the world in June 2013. 
* In 2013 at least two ISPs in Lithuania offered download speeds of up to 300 Mbit/s in their standard packages for home users.
* In 2014 fastest internet for home users in Lithuania was offered by "SkyNet" internet provider. Maximum internet speed was up to 1Gbit/s. "SkyNEt interneto planai", SkyNet LT. Accessed on 16 April 2014. In the second and third places are Teo LT "Teo LT interneto planai", Teo LT. Accessed on 16 April 2014. and Cgates "Cgates internet plans", Cgates LT. Accessed on 30 May 2014. with maximum internet speed up to 500Mbit/s.

===Censorship===

There are no government restrictions on access to the Internet or credible reports that the government monitors e-mail or Internet chat rooms without appropriate legal authority. Individuals and groups generally engage in the free expression of views via the Internet, including by e-mail, but authorities prosecute people for openly posting material on the Internet that authorities considered to be inciting hatred. "Lithuania", Country Reports on Human Rights Practices for 2012, Bureau of Democracy, Human Rights and Labor, U.S. Department of State, 22 March 2013. Retrieved 26 December 2013. 

The constitution provides for freedom of speech and press, and the government generally respects these rights in practice. An independent press, an effective judiciary, and a functioning democratic political system combine to promote these freedoms. However, the constitutional definition of freedom of expression does not protect certain acts, such as incitement to national, racial, religious, or social hatred, violence and discrimination, or slander, and disinformation. It is a crime to deny or "grossly trivialize" Soviet or Nazi German crimes against Lithuania or its citizens, or to deny genocide, crimes against humanity, or war crimes. In the first 11 months of 2012 authorities initiated investigations into 259 allegations of incitement of hatred and six of incitement of discrimination, most of them over the Internet. Authorities forwarded 69 of those allegations to the courts for trial, closed 68, and suspended 113 for lack of evidence; the others remained under investigation. Most allegations of incitement of hatred involved racist or anti-Semitic expression, or hostility based on sexual orientation, gender identity, or nationality. 

It is a crime to disseminate information that is both untrue and damaging to an individuals honor and dignity. Libel is punishable by a fine or imprisonment of up to one year, or up to two years for libelous material disseminated through the mass media. While it is illegal to publish material "detrimental to minors bodies" or thought processes, information promoting the sexual abuse and harassment of minors, promoting sexual relations among minors, or "sexual relations", the law is not often invoked and there are no indications that it adversely affects freedom of the media. 

The constitution prohibits arbitrary interference in an individuals personal correspondence or private and family life, but there were reports that the government did not respect these prohibitions in practice. The law requires authorities to obtain a judges authorization before searching an individuals premises and prohibits the indiscriminate monitoring by government or other parties of citizens correspondence or communications. However, domestic human rights groups allege that the government does not properly enforce the law. 

==See also==

* LITNET, an academic and research network in Lithuania.
* Ministry of Transport and Communications (Lithuania)

==References==
* 
* 

==External links==
* .lt domain registrar, Kaunas University of Technology.

 
Lithuania

[[Transport in Lithuania]]

This article provides an overview of the transport infrastructure of Lithuania. For transport in the Soviet Union, see Transport in the Soviet Union.

== Railways ==
Railway station in Vilnius

There is a total of 1,998 route km of railways, of which:
*1,807 km are broad gauge of &ndash; 122 km of which are electrified
*169 km are narrow gauge of &ndash; as of 2001
*22 km are standard gauge of 

=== Rail links with adjacent countries ===

* Latvia - yes
* Belarus - yes
* Russia (Kaliningrad) - yes
* Poland - yes - break-of-gauge / 

==Lithuanian road system==
Major highways in Lithuania
Lithuanian highways as a part of the Trans-European Network
(2006):
total:
21,328.09 km
paved:
12,912.22 km
unpaved:
8,415.87 km

=== Highways ===

==== Motorways most of route ====
* A1 highway (Lithuania) - connecting Vilnius, Kaunas and Klaipda (part of Via Baltica from Kaunas to Sitknai)
* A2 highway (Lithuania) - connecting Vilnius, Ukmerg and Panevys

==== Roads that are part of Via Baltica ====
* Via Baltica (E67)
** A5 highway (Lithuania) - connecting Kaunas and Suwaki
** A8 highway (Lithuania) - connecting Sitknai, Kdainiai and Panevys
** A17 highway (Lithuania) - Panevys bypass
** A10 highway (Lithuania) - connecting Panevys, Pasvalys and Riga

==== Interbellum built highways ====
* Samogitian highway - old highway built in the interbellum years connecting Kaunas and Klaipda. Now - road completely reconstructed to motorway from Kaunas to Ariogala. From Ariogala to Klaipeda, it serves as alternative road for a motorway A1 and connects local towns, like Ariogala, Raseiniai, Rietavas.
* Auktaitian Highway - old highway built in the interbellum years connecting Kaunas, Kdainiai, Panevys and Birai. Currently road is a part of land road 229 (Cinkikiai interchange-Kdainiai), Via Baltica (part from Kdainiai to Pasvalys) and land road 125 (from Pasvalys to Birai)

===A road system===
The A roads (Magistraliniai keliai) total 1748.84 km. 

* A1 Vilnius  Kaunas  Klaipda, 311.40 km
* A2 Vilnius  Panevys, 135.92 km
* A3 Vilnius  Medininkai, 33.99 km
* A4 Vilnius  Varna  Druskininkai, 134.46 km
* A5 Kaunas  Marijampol  Kalvarija, 97.06 km
* A6 Kaunas  Utena  Zarasai, 185.40 km
* A7 Marijampol  Vilkavikis  Kybartai, 42.21 km*
* A8 Panevys  Aristava  Sitknai, 87.86 km
* A9 Panevys  iauliai, 78.94 km
* A10 Panevys  Pasvalys  Saloiai, 66.10 km
* A11 iauliai  Palanga, 146.85 km
* A12 Jonikis  iauliai  Taurag  Panemun, 186.09 km
* A13 Klaipda  Palanga, 45.15 km
* A14 Vilnius  Utena, 95.60 km
* A15 Vilnius  alininkai, 49.28 km
* A16 Vilnius  Prienai  Marijampol, 137.51 km
* A17 Panevys bypass, 22.28 km
* A18 iauliai bypass, 17.08 km

=== Museum ===

* Lithuanian Road Museum

== Waterways ==
The are 600 km that are perennially navigable.

== Pipelines ==
In 1992, there were 105 km of crude oil pipelines, and 760 km of natural gas pipelines.

== Ports and harbors ==

===Sea ports===
Klaipda port
* Bting,
* Klaipda,
* ventoji

===River ports===
* Kaunas
* Rumiks
* Nida
* Juodkrant

== Merchant marine ==
The merchant marine consists of 47 ships of 1,000 GRT or over, together totaling 279,743 GRT/.

Ships by type: 
Cargo 25, Combination bulk 8, Petroleum tanker 2, Railcar carrier 1, Refrigerated cargo 6, Roll on/roll off 2, Short-sea passenger 3.

Note: These totals include some foreign-owned ships registered here as a flag of convenience: Denmark 13 (2002 est.)

== Airports ==
Vilnius International Airport
In Lithuania, there are four international airports:
* Vilnius International Airport
* Kaunas Airport
* Palanga International Airport
* iauliai International Airport

* Paved Runways : 9 in total
**over 3,047 m: 2
**1,524 to 2,437 m: 4
**under 914 m: 3

* Unpaved runways : 63 in total
**2,438 to 3,047 m: 3
**914 to 1,523 m: 5
**under 914 m: 55

== External links ==
* The public transport guide

 

[[Lithuanian Armed Forces]]

The Lithuanian Armed Forces consist of ~14,500 active personnel (~2,100 of them - civilian). Personnel size in 1998-2011 Ministry of National Defence Conscription was ended in September 2008. 

Lithuania's defence system is based on the concept of "total and unconditional defence" mandated by Lithuania's national National Security Strategy. The goal of Lithuania's defence policy is to prepare their society for general defence and to integrate Lithuania into Western security and defence structures. The defence ministry is responsible for combat forces, search and rescue, and intelligence operations. White Paper Lithuanian defence policy 

The 4,800 border guards fall under the Interior Ministry's supervision and are responsible for border protection, passport and customs duties, and share responsibility with the navy for smuggling / drug trafficking interdiction. A special security department handles VIP protection and communications security.

==Structure==
The Lithuanian Armed Forces consist of the Lithuanian Land Force, Lithuanian Air Force, Lithuanian Naval Force, Lithuanian Special Operations Force and other units: Logistics Command, Training and Doctrine Command, Headquarters Battalion, Military Police. Directly subordinated to the Chief of Defence are the Special Operations Forces and Military Police. The Reserve Forces are under command of the Lithuanian National Defence Volunteer Forces.

===Lithuanian Land Force===

Soldiers from MIB "Iron Wolf" during training.

The core of the Lithuanian Land Force structure is the Iron Wolf Mechanised Infantry Brigade (MIB "Iron Wolf") consisting of two mechanized infantry battalions (King Mindaugas and Lithuanian Grand Duke Algirdas battalions), two motorized infantry battalions (Grand Duchess Birut and Lithuanian Grand Duke Kestutis battalions), artillery battalion and Lithuanian Duke Vaidotas Forward support battalion. In the future, MIB Iron Wolf will also have air defence and anti-tank companies, which will ensure the brigades sustainability during operations. 

The Lithuanian Land forces are undertaking a major modernization. New weapons and heavier armour are going to be acquired. In 2007 the Land forces bought the German Heckler & Koch G36 rifle to replace the older Swedish Ak-4 as main weapon. It is planned to buy new armoured personnel carriers / Infantry fighting vehicles. Lithuania is determined to restructure the armed forces so that from the end of 2014, one tenth of the Land Forces could at any given time be deployed for international operations, while half of the Land Forces would be prepared to be deployed outside Lithuanias borders.

The volunteers have already successfully participated in international operations in the
Balkans, Afghanistan and Iraq. The NDVF consists of five territorial units and Lithuanian Grand Duke Butigeidis Dragoon Training Battalion.

===Lithuanian Air Force===

Lithuanian Air Force jet trainer Aero L-39ZA

The Lithuanian Air Force (LAF) is an integral part of the Lithuanian Armed Forces. The LTAF is formed from professional military servicemen and non-military personnel. Units are located at various bases across Lithuania:
*Kaunas (Headquarters and the Airspace Surveillance and Control Command);
*Karmlava (Air Space Control Centre);
*Nemirseta (providing basing for sea search and rescue detachment);
*iauliai (LAF Air Base, Air Force Armament and Equipment Repair Depot);
*Radvilikis (Air Defence Battalion). Air Force 

The initial formation of the LAF was the 2nd transport squadron with the transfer of 20 An-2 aircraft from civilian to military use, with initial basing at the Barushai air base on the 27 April 1992. These were joined by four L-39C Albatros aircraft purchased from Kazakhstan as part of the intended 16 to be used by the 1st fighter (training) squadron.

Mil Mi-8 helicopters were modernised by LAF (extended fuel tanks and avionics). In 2008 2 medium-range radars were acquired for the Air Forces Airspace Surveillance and Control Command.

Air space is patrolled by jet fighters from other NATO members, which are based out of the city iauliai (Zokniai Airport, known as the Aviation base) (see Baltic Air Policing). The European Union's External border (with Kaliningrad and Belarus) is patrolled by Aviation Unit of the Lithuanian State Border Guard Service which received new helicopters EC-120, EC-135 and EC-145.

===Lithuanian Navy===

Lithuanian Naval Force Vidar class ship N42 Jotvingis
The Navy has over 600 personnel. The Navy consists of the Warship Flotilla, the Sea Coastal Surveillance System, the Explosive Ordnance Disposal (EOD) Divers Team, the Naval Logistic Service, Training Center and Maritime Rescue Coordination Center. The Flotilla is the core component of the Navy, and consists of the Mine Countermeasures Squadron, the Patrol Ships Squadron, and the Harbour Boats Group. Navy The current Commander in Chief of the Lithuanian Navy is Rear Admiral Kstutis Macijauskas. The Naval base and Headquarters are located in the city of Klaipda. Command The Navy uses patrol ships for coastal surveillance.

The three newly acquired Flyvefisken class patrol vessels replaced the older Storm class patrol boats and Grisha class corvettes.

===Special Operations Force===

Lithuanian Special Operations Force soldiers during training
Lithuanian Special Operations Force (SOF) of Lithuanian Armed Forces has been in operation de facto since 2002 and it was established de jure on April 3, 2008, when amendments of National Defence System organisation and military service law came into force. Commander of Lithuanian Special Operations Force appointed SOF is formed from the Special Operations Unit. Special Forces 

SOF are responsible for the following tasks: special reconnaissance, direct actions, and military support. It is also in charge of other tasks, e.g. protection of VIP in peacetime. The core of the SOF is based on the Special Purpose Service, Vytautas the Great Jaeger Battalion and Combat Divers Service (CDS). Lithuanian Air Force Special Operations Element is subordinate to the Unit at the level of operations management.Structure of the SOF is flexible which makes it easy to form squadrons intended for concrete operations and missions from its elements. The SOF can be called upon inside the territory of Lithuania when law enforcement agencies lack or do not have necessary capabilities to react to terrorist attacks. Capabilities of special forces makes them the main national response force responsible for counter-terrorism operations and operations to prevent violations of sovereignty. 

SOF Squadron "Aitvaras" was deployed to Afghanistan on the operation "Enduring Freedom". From 2005 to 2006 SOF squadrons were on standby in NATO Response Force. 

==International cooperation==

===Lithuania and NATO===

Lithuanian Air Force L-39ZA with two Royal Netherlands Air Force F-16AM Fighting Falcon

Soon after restoration of independence, Lithuania applied for NATO membership in January 1994. Together with another six Middle and Eastern Europe countries, Lithuania was invited to join the North Atlantic Treaty Organization in 2002 Prague summit and became a member of the Alliance in March 2004. Lithuania entered NATO on full-fledged rights immediately after the procedures of joining the North Atlantic Treaty were completed and acquired rights to participate in the political decision-making process of the Alliance. Integration into the military structures of NATO became a long-term task of Lithuanian Armed Forces. Mechanised Infantry Brigade Iron Wolf was affiliated to the Danish Division on the basis of agreements signed by Denmark and Lithuania in August 2006. Lithuanian Armed Forces started to boost ability of the Brigade to cooperate with the forces of other NATO members. As Lithuania and the other Baltic states do not have capabilities to secure their airspace, Fighter jets of NATO members were deployed in Zokniai airport near the city iauliai to provide cover for the Baltic states airspace as soon as Lithuania acquired membership in the Alliance. After 5 years in the Alliance: periphery or front of NATO? 

Lithuania also cooperates with the two other Baltic states - Latvia and Estonia in several trilateral Baltic defence co-operation initiatives:
* Baltic Battalion (BALTBAT)  infantry battalion for participation in international peace support operations, headquartered near Riga, Latvia;
* Baltic Naval Squadron (BALTRON)  naval force with mine countermeasures capabilities, headquartered near Tallinn, Estonia;
* Baltic Air Surveillance Network (BALTNET)  air surveillance information system, headquartered near Kaunas, Lithuania;
* Joint military educational institutions: Baltic Defence College (BALTDEFCOL) in Tartu, Estonia, Baltic Diving Training Centre in Liepja, Latvia and Baltic Naval Communications Training Centre in Tallinn, Estonia. 
In January 2011, the Baltic states were invited to join NORDEFCO, the defence framework of the Nordic countries. In November 2012, the three countries agreed to create a joint military staff in 2013. Future co-operation will include sharing of national infrastructures for training purposes and specialisation of training areas (BALTTRAIN) and collective formation of battalion-sized contingents for use in the NATO rapid-response force. 

===Foreign missions and operations===
Lithuanian NDVF soldiers in the international mission in Afghanistan
Lithuanian soldiers take part in the international operations since 1993. Since the summer of 2005 Lithuania has been part of the International Security Assistance Force in Afghanistan (ISAF), leading a Provincial Reconstruction Team (PRT) in the town of Chaghcharan in the province of Ghor. The PRT includes personnel from Denmark, Iceland and USA. There are also special operation forces units in Afghanistan. They are placed in Kandahar province.

Since joining international operations in 1993 Lithuania has lost two soldiers. 1st Lt. Normundas Valteris fell in Bosnia (17 April 1996), Sgt. Arnas Jarmalaviius in Afghanistan (22 May 2008). In remembrance 

==Ranks==

==See also==
* Lithuanian army equipment
* Baltic Air Policing

==References==

==Further reading==
* The Military Strategy of the Republic of Lithuania
* Stefan Marx, 'Lithuania's Defence Structure,' Jane's Intelligence Review, September 1993, p. 407-409

==External links==

* Official Ministry of National Defence Republic of Lithuania website
* Official Lithuanian Armed Forces website
* Official Joint Headquarters of Lithuanian Armed Forces website
* Official YouTube channel of Lithuanian Armed Forces
* Official NATO Energy Security Center of Excellence website
* Official General Jonas emaitis Military Academy of Lithuania website

 

[[Foreign relations of Lithuania]]

Lithuania became a member of the United Nations on September 18, 1991, and is a signatory to a number of its organizations and other international agreements. It is also a member of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe, Lithuania's Leadership of the OSCE: Hearing before the Commission on Security and Cooperation in Europe, One Hundred Twelfth Congress, First Session, February 16, 2011 NATO and its adjunct North Atlantic Coordinating Council, the Council of Europe, and the European Union. Lithuania gained membership in the World Trade Organization on May 31, 2001. It also seeks membership in the OECD and other Western organizations.

Lithuania maintains foreign diplomatic missions in 94 countries on six continents and consular posts in two countries that are not represented by an embassy. Lithuania's liberal "zero-option" citizenship law has substantially erased tensions with its neighbors. Lithuania's suspension of two strongly ethnic Polish district councils on charges of blocking reform or disloyalty during the August 1991 coup had cooled relations with Poland, but bilateral cooperation markedly increased with the holding of elections in those districts and the signing of a bilateral Friendship Treaty in 1994. Although a similar bilateral friendship agreement was signed with Belarus in 1995, Lithuania has joined the United States and other European nations in urging the Government of Belarus to adopt democratic and economic reforms.

Lithuania has established diplomatic relations with 176 countries. 

==Disputes==

===Latvia===

*Talks continue over a maritime boundary dispute with Latvia, primarily concerning oil exploration rights.

===Russia===
*There are ongoing popular demands to formally condemn the crimes committed by the Soviet regime, including the occupation and annexation of the country to the Soviet Union.
*In 2005, a fighter aircraft accompanying a Russian spy plane over the Baltic Sea violated Lithuanian airspace for about 20 minutes before crashing near Kaunas Russian military aircraft crashes near Kaunas 
*In October 2006, Russia's FSB security service arrested an official in the Kaliningrad region accused of spying for Lithuania Russian arrest of an officer accused of spying for Lithuania 
*In August 2009, Russian customs officers had imposed special customs on Lithuanian trucks, lining up more than 20 kilometres of trucks from the Republic of Lithuania.

* Lithuania has an embassy in Moscow. Embassy of Lithuania in Moscow 
* Russia has an embassy in Vilnius, with consulates in Klaipeda. Embassy of Russia in Vilnius 
* Ambassador to Russian Federation is Rimantas idlauskas, ambassador to the Republic of Lithuania is Vladimir Chkhikvadze.

==Baltic Sea region states==
Lithuania is in warm and good relations with Latvia and Estonia. Latvia takes the 1st place on the list of Lithuanian investments abroad. Ministry of Foreign Affairs: Lithuania's Cooperation with Latvia 

===Denmark===

===Estonia===

===Finland===

===Germany===

===Latvia===
Date started 1991-10-05

* Latvia has an embassy in Vilnius. Embassy of the Republic of Latvia in the Republic of Lithuania 
* Lithuania has an embassy in Riga. Embassy of the Republic of Lithuania in the Republic of Latvia 
* The two states share 588 km of common border. Both countries are full members of the European Union.

===Poland===

* Lithuania has an embassy in Warsaw and a consulate general in Sejny.
* Poland has an embassy in Vilnius and an honorary consulate in Klaipda.
* There are around 250,000 Poles living in Lithuania and around 25,000 ethnic Lithuanians living in Poland.
* Both countries are full members of the Council of the Baltic Sea States.
* The countries share a common border of 103 km. Informacje o Polsce - informacje oglne. Page gives Polish PWN Encyklopedia as reference. 
Lithuania concluded the treaty of friendship with Poland in April 1994. However, disagreements over Lithuania's implementation of the treaty have soured relations and cooperation on energy issues and Lithuania remains unconnected to the Polish electricity grid and the countries are not connected by a non-Russian controlled gas pipeline, as previous promises to do both have been stalled by the row over the friendship treaty.

==Lithuania as a part of the Northern Europe region==

Lithuania is also an active member in the cooperation between Northern Europe countries. Lithuania is a member of Baltic Council, since its establishment in 1993. Baltic Council is a permanent organisation of international cooperation, located in Tallinn. It operates through the Baltic Assembly and Baltic Council of Ministers.

Lithuania also cooperates with Nordic and other two Baltic countries through NB8 cooperation format. The similar format, called NB6 unites Nordic and Baltic countries members of EU. The main goal of NB6 cooperation is to discuss and agree on positions before presenting them in the Council of the European Union and the meetings of the EU Foreign Affairs Ministers.

The Council of the Baltic Sea States (CBSS) was established in 1992 in Copenhagen as an informal regional political forum, which main aim is to promote integration process and to affiliate close contacts between the countries of the region. The members of CBSS are Denmark, Estonia, Finland, Germany, Iceland, Latvia, Lithuania, Norway, Poland, Russia, Sweden and European Commission. The observer states are Belarus, France, Italy, Netherlands, Romania, Slovakia, Spain, United States, United Kingdom, Ukraine.

The cooperation between the Nordic Council of Ministers and Lithuania is a political cooperation through which experience exchange contributes to realization of joint goals. One of its most important functions is to discover new trends and new possibilities for joint cooperation. The information office aims to represent Nordic concepts and demonstrate Nordic cooperation in Lithuania.

Lithuania, together with other two Baltic countries, is also a member of Nordic Investment Bank (NIB) and cooperates in NORDPLUS programme committed to education. Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Lithuania. . Retrieved on 03 April 2012. 

Baltic Development Forum (BDF) is an independent nonprofit organization which unites large companies, cities, business associations and institutions in the Baltic Sea region. In 2010 the 12th Summit of the BDF was held in Vilnius. Baltic Development Forum. . Retrieved on 03 April 2012. 

==Europe - other==

 Country Formal Relations Began Notes 
 Austria * Austria has an embassy in Vilnius. * Lithuania has an embassy in Vienna. Lithuanian embassy in Vienna (in German and Lithuanian only) * Both countries are full members of the European Union. * Lithuanian Ministry of Foreign affairs: list of bilateral treaties with Austria (in Lithuanian only) 
 Belarus 1991-10-24 * Belarus has an embassy in Vilnius. Belarussian embassy in Vilnius * Lithuania has an embassy in Minsk Lithuanian embassy in Minsk (in Lithuanian and Russian only) and a general consulate in Hrodna. Lithuanian general consulate in Hrodna (in Lithuanian and Russian only) * Both countries shares 680 km of common border. * Lithuanian Ministry of Foreign affairs: list of bilateral treaties with Poland (in Lithuanian only) 
 Bulgaria See BulgariaLithuania relations * Bulgaria has an embassy in Vilnius. Bulgarian embassy in Vilnius * Lithuania has an embassy in Sofia. * Lithuanian Ministry of Foreign affairs: list of bilateral treaties with Bulgaria (in Lithuanian only) * Lithuanian Ministry of Foreign affairs 
 Croatia See Foreign relations of Croatia 
 Czech Republic See Foreign relations of the Czech Republic 
 France See Foreign relations of France 
 Georgia See Foreign relations of Georgia 
 Greece See Foreign relations of Greece 
 Holy See See Foreign relations of the Holy See 
 Hungary See Foreign relations of Hungary 
 Iceland 1991-08-26 See IcelandLithuania relations * Iceland was the first country which recognised Lithuania's Independence from the USSR on January 11, 1991. Ministry of Foreign Affairs: Lithuanias Cooperation with Iceland 
 Ireland See Foreign relations of the Republic of Ireland 
 Italy See Foreign relations of Italy 
 Kosovo 2008-07-16 See KosovanLithuanian relations * Lithuania recognized Kosovo on 6 May 2008. Diplomatic relations commenced on 16 July 2008. 
 Malta * Malta is represented in Lithuania through a non resident ambassador based in Valletta (in the Ministry of Foreign Affairs) and an honorary consulate in Vilnius. Direction of the Maltese representations in Lithuania * Lithuania is represented in Malta through its embassy in Rome (Italy) and an honorary consulate in Valletta. Lithuania embassy in Rome (also accredited to Malta) * Both countries are full members of the European Union. * Lithuanian Ministry of Foreign affairs: list of bilateral treaties with Malta (in Lithuanian only) 
 Romania 1924-08-26 See LithuaniaRomania relations * Romania recognized Lithuanias independence on August 26, 1991. * Diplomatic relations between both countries have been resumed on September 13, 1991. * Lithuania has an embassy in Bucharest. embassy in Bucharest * Romania has an embassy in Vilnius. Romanian embassy in Vilnius * Both countries are full members of NATO,the European Union, and the Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe. * Lithuanian Ministry of Foreign affairs: list of bilateral treaties with Romania (in Lithuanian only) 
 Serbia 2000-12-14 * Lithuania is represented in Serbia through its embassy in Budapest (Hungary). Lithuanian embassy in Budapest (also accredited to Serbia) * Serbia is represented in Lithuania through its embassy in Warsaw (Poland) and the diplomatic office in Belgrade. * Lithuanian Ministry of Foreign Affairs: list of bilateral treaties with Serbia (in Lithuanian only) * Serbian Ministry of Foreign Affairs about relations with Lithuania 
 Slovakia 1993 * Lithuania is represented in Slovakia through its embassy in Vienna (Austria). * Slovakia is represented in Lithuania through its embassy in Riga (Latvia). * Both countries are full members of NATO and of the European Union. * Lithuanian Ministry of Foreign Affairs: list of bilateral treaties with Slovakia (in Lithuanian only) 
 Ukraine See LithuaniaUkraine relations * Lithuania has an embassy in Kiev and an honorary consulates in Lviv. Lithuanian embassy in Kiev (in Lithuanian and Ukrainian only) * Ukraine has an embassy in Vilnius and 3 honorary consulates (in Klaipda, alininkai and Visaginas). Ukrainian embassy in Vilnius * There are around 44,000 ethnic Ukrainians living in Lithuania and around 11,000 ethnic Lithuanians living in Ukraine. * Lithuanian Ministry of Foreign affairs: list of bilateral treaties with Ukraine (in Lithuanian only) 
 United Kingdom 1991-10 See Lithuania  United Kingdom relations * The UK recognized the restoration of Lithuanian independence on August 27, 1991. * The United Kingdom has an embassy in Vilnius and an honorary consulate in Klaipda. British embassy in Vilnius * Lithuania has an embassy in London and 5 honorary consulates (in Northern Ireland, Northumberland, Scotland, Wales and the West Midlands). Lithuanian embassy in London * There are around 100,000 Lithuanian people living in the United Kingdom. * Both countries are full members of NATO and of the European Union. * British Foreign and Commonwealth Office about relations with Lithuania * Lithuanian Ministry of Foreign affairs: list of bilateral treaties with Poland (in Lithuanian only) 

==Asia==

 Country Formal Relations Began Notes 
 Armenia * Armenia is represented in Lithuania through its embassy in Warsaw (Poland). * Lithuania has an embassy in Yerevan. * There are around 2,500 people of Armenian descent living in Lithuania. * Lithuanian Ministry of Foreign affairs: list of bilateral treaties with Armenia (in Lithuanian only) 
 Azerbaijan 1995-11-27 * Azerbaijan recognized the independence of Lithuania on September 10, 1991. * Lithuania recognized the independence of Azerbaijan on December 20, 1991. * Azerbaijan has an embassy in Vilnius. * Lithuania has an embassy in Baku. * Both countries are full members of the Council of Europe and the Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe (OSCE). *Lithuanian Ministry of Foreign Affairs: Cooperation with Azerbaijan *Foreign Minister of Lithuania to pay official visit to Azerbaijan 
 India *India has an Honorary Consulate in Vilnius * *Lithuania has an embassy in New Delhi and an Honorary Consulate in Mumbai,India. * 
 Israel See IsraelLithuania relations Israel recognized Lithuanias independence in 1991. Both countries established diplomatic relation in 1992. Israel is represented in Lithuania through its embassy in Riga (Latvia). Lithuania has an embassy in Tel Aviv and 2 honorary consulates (in Herzliya and Ramat Gan). 
 Japan See JapanLithuania relations Relations between Lithuania and Japan started on December 20, 1922, when Lithuania was recognized by Japan de jure. Ministry of Foreign Affairs: Lithuania's Cooperation with Japan Embassy of the Republic of Lithuania in Tokyo: Bilateral relations In 1939 the Consulate of Japan, headed by vice-consul Chiune Sugihara, was opened in Kaunas. It was closed in 1940 when Lithuania was annexed by the Soviet Union. On September 6, 1991, Japan recognized the independence of the Republic of Lithuania from USSR and on October 10, Diplomatic relations were restored. In 1997, Embassy of Japan was established in Lithuania, in 1998, Embassy of Lithuania was established in Japan. In 2006 May, Japanese Minister of Foreign Affairs Taro Aso visited Lithuania, and Kirkilas, the Prime Minister of Lithuania, visited Japan just three months later. Bilateral relations were strengthen by the official state visit of Emperor Akihito and Empress Michiko in 2007 May. 
 Kazakhstan * Kazakhstan has an embassy in Vilnius. Kazakh embassy in Vilnius * Lithuania has an embassy in Astana and an honorary consulate in Almaty. Lithuanian embassy in Astana (in Lithuanian and Russian only) * Lithuanian Ministry of Foreign Affairs: list of bilateral treaties with Kazakhstan (in Lithuanian only) 
 Malaysia 1994 See LithuaniaMalaysia relations Lithuania has an honorary consulate in Kuala Lumpur, while Malaysia embassy in Stockholm were also accredited to Lithuania. 
 Pakistan 
 
 People's Republic of China 1991-09-14 See People's Republic of China-Lithuania relations PR China has an embassy in Vilnius. Lithuania has an embassy in Beijing. In 1992, Embassy of China was established in Vilnius, in 1995, Embassy of Lithuania was established in Beijing. 
 South Korea 1991 See Foreign relations of South Korea Both countries established diplomatc relations in 1991. According to the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Trade of South Korea, there are as few as 41 South Koreans living in Lithuania. 

==North America==

===Canada===

===United States===

In 1998, the United States signed a "Charter of Partnership" with Lithuania and the other Baltic countries establishing bilateral working groups focusing on improving regional security, defense, and economic issues.

Lithuania has friendly relations with and support from the United States, who never recognized their forced incorporation into the Soviet Union. Since the fall of the U.S.S.R. in 1991, the United States and Lithuania have maintained strong economic and military ties, and the efforts of Lithuanian-Americans are said to have been an important factor both in restoring Lithuania's independence and in her admittance to NATO in 2004. Embassy of the Republic of Lithuania to the United States of America and to the United Mexican States: Lithuanian-US Political Relations Then-President George W. Bush visited Lithuania in November 2002 President's Visit to Eastern Europe and Russia: Nov. 19-23, 2002 and again in February 2007, US-Lithuania Relations - US Embassy Vilnius, Lithuania and expressed pride in Lithuania's determined commitment to democracy over the last two decades. Bush Interview by Lithuanian State Television - US Embassy Vilnius, Lithuania 

==Issues==

===Illicit drug trafficking===

Lithuania has been a trans-shipment point for opiates and other illicit drugs from Russia, Southwest Asia, Latin America, and Western Europe to Western Europe and Scandinavia Drug issues in the Baltics 

===Anti-terrorism===
Lithuania is a signatory to 8 of the 12 International Conventions related to counter-
terrorist activities Interpol 

===Human trafficking===
The International Organization for Migration (IOM) reports that about 1,000 citizens of Lithuania fall victim to trafficking annually. Most are women between the ages of 21 and 30 who are sold into prostitution Human Trafficking in the Baltics 

==See also==
* List of diplomatic missions in Lithuania
* List of diplomatic missions of Lithuania

==References==

 

[[History of Luxembourg]]

The history of Luxembourg is inherently entwined with that of surrounding countries, peoples, and ruling dynasties. Over time, the territory of Luxembourg has been eroded, whilst its ownership has changed repeatedly, and its political independence has grown gradually.

Although the recorded history of Luxembourg can be traced back to Roman times, the history of Luxembourg proper is considered to begin in 963. Over the following five centuries, the powerful House of Luxembourg emerged, but its extinction put an end to Luxembourg's independence. After a brief period of Burgundian rule, Luxembourg passed to the Habsburgs in 1477.

After the Eighty Years' War, Luxembourg became a part of the Southern Netherlands, which passed to the Austrian line of the Habsburg dynasty in 1713. After occupation by Revolutionary France, the 1815 Treaty of Paris transformed Luxembourg into a Grand Duchy in personal union with the Netherlands. The treaty also resulted in the second partition of Luxembourg, the first being in 1658 and the third in 1839. Although these treaties greatly reduced Luxembourg's territory, they increased its independence, which was confirmed after the Luxembourg Crisis in 1867.

In the following decades, Luxembourg fell further into Germany's sphere of influence, particularly after the creation of a separate ruling house in 1890. Luxembourg was occupied by Germany from 1914 until 1918 and again from 1940 until 1944. Since the Second World War, Luxembourg has become one of the world's richest countries, buoyed by a booming financial services sector, political stability, and European integration.

==Early history==

In the territory now covered by the Grand Duchy of Luxembourg, there is evidence of primitive inhabitants right back to the Paleolithic or old stone age over 35,000 years ago. The oldest artifacts from this period are decorated bones found at Oetrange.

However, the first real evidence of civilization is from the Neolithic or 5th millennium BC from which evidence of houses has been found. Traces have been found in the south of Luxembourg at Grevenmacher, Diekirch, Aspelt and Weiler-la-Tour. The dwellings were made of a combination of tree trunks for the basic structure, mud-clad wickerwork walls, and roofs of thatched reeds or straw. Pottery from this period has been found near Remerschen.

While there is not much evidence of communities in Luxembourg at the beginning of the Bronze Age, a number of sites dating back to the period between the 13th and the 8th century BC provide evidence of dwellings and reveal artifacts such as pottery, knives and jewelry. The sites include Nospelt, Dalheim, Mompach and Remerschen.
 
What is present-day Luxembourg was inhabited by Celts during the Iron Age (from roughly 600 BC until 100 AD).
The Gaulish tribe in what is present-day Luxembourg during and after the La Tne period was known as the Treveri, which reached the height of prosperity in the 1st century BC. They constructed a number of fortified settlements or oppida near the Moselle valley in what is now southern Luxembourg, western Germany and eastern France. Most of the archaeological evidence from this period has been discovered in tombs, many closely associated with Titelberg, a 50 ha site which reveals much about the dwellings and handicrafts of the period.

The Romans under Julius Caesar completed their conquest and occupation in 53 BC. The first known reference to the territory of present-day Luxembourg was by Julius Caesar in his Commentaries on the Gallic War. By and large, the Treveri were more co-operative with the Romans than most Gallic tribes, and the Treveri adapted readily to Roman civilization. Two revolts in the 1st century AD did not permanently damage their cordial relations with Rome.
The land of the Treveri was at first part of Gallia Celtica, but with the reform of Domitianin c. 90 was reassigned to Gallia Belgica.

Gallia Belgica was infiltrated by the Germanic Franks from the 4th century, and was abandoned by Rome in AD 406.
The territory of what would become Luxembourg by the 480s became part of MerovingianAustrasia and eventually part of the core territory of the Carolingian Empire.
With the Treaty of Verdun (843), it fell to Middle Francia, in 855 to Lotharingia and with the latter's division in 959 to the Duchy of Upper Lorraine within the Holy Roman Empire.

==Medieval Luxembourg (963  1477)==
Early settlements in the area of present-day Luxembourg City before the 10th century with the church Saint-Saveur, today the Church of St. Michael, built in 987

The history of Luxembourg properly began with the construction of Luxembourg Castle in the High Middle Ages. It was Siegfried I, count of Ardennes who traded some of his ancestral lands with the monks of the Abbey of St. Maximin in Trier in 963 for an ancient, supposedly Roman, fort named Lucilinburhuc. Modern historians explain the etymology of the word with Letze, meaning fortification which might have referred to either the remains of a Roman watchtower or to a primitive refuge of the early Middle Ages.

Around this fort a town gradually developed, which became the centre of a small but important state of great strategic value to France, Germany and the Netherlands. Luxembourg's fortress, located on a rocky outcrop known as the Bock, was steadily enlarged and strengthened over the years by successive owners, among others the Bourbons, Habsburgs and Hohenzollerns, which made it one of the strongest fortresses on the European continent, the Fortress of Luxembourg. Its formidable defences and strategic location caused it to become known as the Gibraltar of the North.

The Luxembourgish dynasty provided several Holy Roman Emperors, Kings of Bohemia, and Archbishops of Trier and Mainz. From the Early Middle Ages to the Renaissance, Luxembourg bore multiple names, depending on the author. These include Lucilinburhuc, Lutzburg, Ltzelburg, Luccelemburc, Lichtburg, among others.

=== Duchy ===

==Habsburg (14771795) and French (1795-1815) rule==
Coat of arms of the Counts, Dukes and Grand Dukes of LuxembourgIn these centuries the electors of Brandenburg, later kings of Prussia (Borussia), advanced their claim to the Luxembourg patrimony as heirs-general to William of Thuringia and his wife Anna of Bohemia, the disputed dukes of Luxembourg of the 1460s  Anna was the eldest daughter of the last Luxembourg heiress. From 1609 onwards, they had a territorial base in the vicinity, the Duchy of Cleves, the starting-point of the future Prussian Rhineland. This Brandenburger claim ultimately produced some results when some districts of Luxembourg were united with Prussia in 1813.

The first Hohenzollern claimant to descend from both Anna and her younger sister Elisabeth, was John George, Elector of Brandenburg (152598), his maternal grandmother having been Barbara Jagiellon. In the late 18th century, the younger line of Orange-Nassau (the princes who held sway in the neighbouring Dutch oligarchy) also became related to the Brandenburgers.

In 1598, the then possessor, Philip II of Spain, bequeathed Luxembourg and the other Low Countries to his daughter the Infanta Isabella Clara Eugenia and her husband Albert VII, Archduke of Austria. Albert was an heir and descendant of Elisabeth of Austria (d. 1505), queen of Poland, the youngest granddaughter of Sigismund of Luxembourg, the Holy Roman Emperor. Thus, Luxembourg returned to the heirs of the old Luxembourg dynasty  at least those of the line of Elisabeth. The Low Countries were a separate political entity during the couple's reign. After Albert's childless death in 1621, Luxembourg passed to his great-nephew and heir Philip IV of Spain, who through his paternal grandmother Anna of Austria, queen of Spain, Albert's sister, was the primogenitural heir to the Queen Elisabeth of Poland.

=== French invasion ===
Luxembourg was invaded by Louis XIV of France (husband of Maria Theresa, daughter of Philip IV) in 1684, an action that caused alarm among France's neighbours and resulted in the formation of the League of Augsburg in 1686. In the ensuing War of the Grand Alliance, France was forced to give up the duchy, which was returned to the Habsburgs by the Treaty of Ryswick in 1697.

During this period of French rule, the defences of the fortress were strengthened by the famous siege engineer Vauban. The French king's great-grandson Louis (171074) was, from 1712, the first heir-general of Albert VII. Albert VII was a descendant of Anna of Bohemia and William of Thuringia, having that blood through his mother's Danish great-great-grandmother, but was not the heir-general of that line. Louis was the first real claimant of Luxembourg to descend from both sisters, the daughters of Elisabeth of Bohemia, the last Luxembourg empress.

Habsburg rule was confirmed in 1715 by the Treaty of Utrecht, and Luxembourg was integrated into the Austrian Netherlands. Emperor Joseph and his successor Emperor Charles VI were descendants of Spanish kings who were heirs of Albert VII. Joseph and Charles VI were also descendants of Anna of Bohemia and William of Thuringia, having that blood through their mother, although they were heirs-general of neither line. Charles was the first ruler of Luxembourg to descend from both sisters, daughters of Elisabeth of Bohemia, the last Luxembourg empress.

Austrian rulers were more or less ready to exchange Luxembourg and other territories in the Low Countries. Their purpose was to round out and enlarge their power base, which in geographical terms was centered around Vienna. Thus, Bavarian candidate(s) emerged to take over the Duchy of Luxembourg, but this plan led to nothing permanent. Emperor Joseph II however made a preliminary pact to make a neighbour of Luxembourg, Charles Theodore, Elector Palatine, as Duke of Luxembourg and king in the Low Countries, in exchange of his possessions in Bavaria and Franconia. However, this scheme was aborted due to Prussia's opposition. Charles Theodore, who would thus have become Duke of Luxembourg, was genealogically a junior descendant of both Anna and Elisabeth, but main heir of neither.

During the War of the First Coalition, Luxembourg was conquered and annexed by Revolutionary France, becoming part of the dpartement of the Forts Literally 'woods', in reference to the Ardennes. in 1795. The annexation was formalised at Campo Formio in 1797. In 1798 Luxembourgish peasants rebelled against the French but the Rebellion was rapidly oppressed.This short Rebellion is called the Peasant's War.

==Developing independence (18151890)==
The three Partitions of Luxembourg.

Luxembourg remained more or less under French rule until the defeat of Napoleon in 1815, when the Congress of Vienna gave formal autonomy to Luxembourg. The Prussians had already in 1813 managed to wrest lands from Luxembourg, to strengthen the Prussian-possessed Duchy of Julich. The Bourbons of France held a strong claim to Luxembourg, the Emperor of Austria on the other hand had controlled the duchy until the revolutionary forces had joined it to the French republic (he reportedly was not enthusiastic about regaining Luxembourg and the Low Countries, being more interested in the Balkans).

The King of Prussia held the claim of the senior heiress, Anna. An additional claimant emerged, William I of the Netherlands who now ruled the Netherlands, and whose mother and wife were descendants of the Prussian royal family and thus also descendants of both daughters of the last Luxembourg heiress. Prussia and Orange-Nassau made the following exchange deal: Prussia received the Principality of Orange-Nassau, which included the ancestral lands of Nassau in Central Germany; the Prince of Orange in turn received Luxembourg.

Luxembourg, somewhat diminished in size (as the medieval lands had been slightly reduced by the French and Prussian heirs), was augmented in another way through the elevation to the status of grand duchy and placed under the rule of William I of the Netherlands. This was the first time that the duchy had a monarch who had no claim to inheritance of the medieval patrimony (as lineages through his mother and wife had a better entitled claimant, the Prussian king himself). However, Luxembourg's military value to Prussia prevented it from becoming a part of the Dutch kingdom. The fortress, ancestral seat of the medieval Luxembourgers, was taken over by Prussian forces, following Napoleon's defeat, and Luxembourg became a member of the German Confederation with Prussia responsible for its defense.

In July 1819 a contemporary from Britain visited Luxembourg: his journal offers some insights. Norwich Duff writes that "Luxembourg is considered one of the strongest fortifications in Europe, and  it appears so. It is situated in Holland (then as now used by English speakers as shorthand for the Netherlands) but by treaty is garrisoned by Prussians and 5,000 of their troops occupy it under a Prince of Hesse. The civil government is under the Dutch and the duties collected by them. The town is not very large but the streets are broader than the French towns and clean ands the houses are good.... got the cheapest of hot baths here at the principal house I ever had in my life: one franc."

Much of the Luxembourgish population joined the Belgian revolution against Dutch rule. Except for the fortress and its immediate vicinity Luxembourg was considered a province of the new Belgian state from 1830 to 1839. By the Treaty of London in 1839 the status of the grand duchy was confirmed as sovereign and in personal union to the king of the Netherlands. In turn, the predominantly French speaking part of the duchy was ceded to Belgium as the province de Luxembourg.

This loss left the Grand Duchy of Luxembourg a predominantly German state, although French cultural influence remained strong. The loss of Belgian markets also caused painful economic problems for the state. Recognizing this, the grand duke integrated it into the German Zollverein in 1842. Nevertheless, Luxembourg remained an underdeveloped agrarian country for most of the century. As a result of this about one in five of the inhabitants emigrated to the United States between 1841 and 1891.

=== Crisis of 1867 ===

It was not until 1867 that Luxembourg's independence was formally ratified, after a turbulent period which even included a brief time of civil unrest against plans to annex Luxembourg to Belgium, Germany or France. The crisis of 1867 almost resulted in war between France and Prussia over the status of Luxembourg. It involved competition between France and Prussia over control of Luxembourg, which had become free of German control when the German Confederation was abolished at the end of the Seven Weeks War in 1866.

William III, king of the Netherlands, which still had sovereignty over Luxembourg, was willing to sell the grand duchy to France's Emperor Napoleon III in order to retain Limbourg but backed out when Prussian chancellor Otto von Bismarck expressed opposition. The growing tension brought about a conference in London from March to May 1867 in which the British served as mediators between the two rivals. Bismarck manipulated public opinion, resulting in the denial of sale to France and the continued suzerainty of the Netherlands, a member of the customs union with close ties to Prussia. The issue was resolved by the second Treaty of London which guaranteed the perpetual independence and neutrality of the state. The fortress walls were pulled down and the Prussian garrison was withdrawn. Frdric Laux, "Bismarck et l'affaire du Luxembourg de 1867  la lumire des archives britanniques," and the Luxembourg Affair of 1867 in Light of British Archives Revue d'histoire diplomatique 2001 115(3): 183-202 Herbert Maks, "Zur Interdependenz innen- und auenpolitischer Faktoren in Bismarcks Politik in der luxemburgischen Frage 1866/67," Interdependence of Domestic and Foreign Factors in Bismarck's Policies on the Luxembourg Question, 1866-67 Francia Part 3 19./20. 1997 24(3): 91-115. 

Famous visitors to Luxembourg in the 18th and 19th centuries included the German poet Johann Wolfgang von Goethe, the French writers mile Zola and Victor Hugo, the composer Franz Liszt, and the English painter Joseph Mallord William Turner.

==Separation and the World Wars (18901945)==
Luxembourg remained a possession of the kings of the Netherlands until the death of William III in 1890, when the grand duchy passed to the House of Nassau-Weilburg due to a Nassau inheritance pact of 1783.

===First World War===

World War I affected Luxembourg at a time when the nation-building process was far from complete. The small grand duchy (about 260,000 inhabitants in 1914) opted for an ambiguous policy between 1914 and 1918. With the country occupied by Germans troops, the government, led by Paul Eyschen, chose to remain neutral. This strategy had been elaborated with the approval of Marie-Adlade, Grand Duchess of Luxembourg. Although continuity prevailed on the political level, the war caused social upheaval, which laid the foundation for the first trades union in Luxembourg.

===Interwar period===
The end of the occupation in November 1918 squared with a time of uncertainty on the international and national levels. The victorious Allies disapproved of the choices made by the local lites, and some Belgian politicians even demanded the (re)integration of the country into a greater Belgium. Within Luxembourg a strong minority asked for the creation of a republic. In the end, the grand duchy remained a monarchy but was led by a new head of state, Charlotte. In 1921 it entered into an economic and monetary union with Belgium, the Union conomique Belgo-Luxembourgeoise (UEBL). During most of the 20th century, however, Germany remained its most important economic partner.

The introduction of universal suffrage for men and women favored the Rechtspartei (party of the Right), which played the dominant role in the government throughout the 20th century, with the exception of 192526 and 197479, when the two other important parties, the Liberal and the Social-Democratic parties, formed a coalition. The success of the resulting party was due partly to the support of the church  the population was more than 90 percent Catholic  and of its newspaper, the Luxemburger Wort.

On the international level, the interwar period was characterized by an attempt to put Luxembourg on the map. Especially under Joseph Bech, head of the Department of Foreign Affairs, the country participated more actively in several international organizations, in order to ensure its autonomy. On December 16, 1920, Luxemburg became a member of the League of Nations. On the economic level in the 1920s and the 1930s, the agricultural sector declined in favor of industry, but even more so for the service sector. The proportion of the active population in this last sector rose from 18 percent in 1907 to 31 percent in 1935.

In the 1930s the internal situation deteriorated, as Luxembourgish politics were influenced by European left- and right-wing politics. The government tried to counter communist-led unrest in the industrial areas and continued friendly policies towards Nazi Germany, which led to much criticism. The attempts to quell unrest peaked with the Maulkuerfgesetz, the "muzzle" Law, which was an attempt to outlaw the Communist Party. The law was turned down in a 1937 referendum.

===Second World War===

Upon the outbreak of the Second World War in September 1939, the government of Luxembourg observed its neutrality and issued an official proclamation to that effect on September 6, 1939. Government of the Grand Duchy of Luxembourg, Luxembourg and the German Invasion: Before and After (London and New York, 1942) p. 32 On May 10, 1940, an invasion by German armed forces swept away the Luxembourgish government and monarchy into exile. The German troops, made up of the 1st, 2nd, and 10th Panzer Divisions invaded at 04:35. They did not encounter any significant resistance save for some bridges destroyed and some land mines, since the majority of the Luxembourgish Volunteer Corps stayed in their barracks. Luxembourgish police resisted the German troops, but to little avail; the capital city was occupied before noon. Total Luxembourgish casualties amounted to 75 police and soldiers captured, six police wounded, and one soldier wounded. Horne, Alistair, To Lose a Battle, p.258-264 

The Luxembourg royal family and their entourage received visas from Aristides de Sousa Mendes in Bordeaux. They crossed into Portugal and subsequently travelled to the United States in two groups: on the from Lisbon to Baltimore in July 1940, and on the Pan American airliner Yankee Clipper in October 1940. Throughout the war, Grand Duchess Charlotte broadcast via the BBC to Luxembourg to give hope to the people.

Luxembourg remained under German military occupation until August 1942, when the Third Reich formally annexed it as part of the Gau Moselland. The German authorities declared Luxembourgers to be German citizens and called up 13,000 for military service. 2,848 Luxembourgers eventually died fighting in the German army.

Luxembourgish opposition to this annexation took the form of passive resistance at first, as in the Spngelskrich (lit. "War of the Pins"), and in refusal to speak German. As French was forbidden, many Luxembourgers resorted to resuscitating old Luxembourgish words, which led to a renaissance of the language. The Germans met opposition with deportation, forced labour, forced conscription and, more drastically, with internment, deportation to concentration camps and execution.

Executions took place after the so-called general strike from 1 September to 3 September 1942, which paralyzed the administration, agriculture, industry and education in response to the declaration of forced conscription by the German administration on 30 August 1942. The Germans suppressed the strike violently: executing 21 strikers and deporting hundreds more to concentration camps. The then civilian administrator of Luxembourg, Gauleiter Gustav Simon, had declared conscription necessary to support the German war-effort. The general strike in Luxembourg remained one of the few mass strikes against the German war machine in Western Europe.

U.S. forces liberated most of the country in September 1944: they entered the capital city on 10 September 1944. During the Ardennes Offensive (Battle of the Bulge) German troops took back most of northern Luxembourg for a few weeks. Allied forces finally expelled the Germans in January 1945.

Between December 1944 and February 1945, the recently liberated city of Luxembourg was designated by the OB West (German Army Command in the West) as the target for V-3 superguns, which were originally intended to bombard London. Two V-3 guns based at Lampaden fired a total of 183 rounds at Luxembourg. Fortunately for the Luxembourgers, the V-3 was not very accurate. 142 rounds landed in Luxembourg, with 44 confirmed hits in the urban area, and the total casualties were 10 dead and 35 wounded. The bombardments ended with the American Army nearing Lampaden on 22 February 1945.

Altogether, of a pre-war population of 293,000, 5,259 Luxembourgers lost their lives during the hostilities.

==Modern history (since 1945)==
After World War II Luxembourg abandoned its politics of neutrality, when it became a founding member of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (1949) and the United Nations. It is a signatory of the Treaty of Rome, and constituted a monetary union with Belgium (Benelux Customs Union in 1948), and an economic union with Belgium and the Netherlands, the so-called BeNeLux.

Between 1945 and 2005, the economic structure of Luxembourg changed significantly. The crisis of the metallurgy sector, which began in the mid-1970s and lasted till the late 1980s, nearly pushed the country into economic recession, given the monolithic dominance of that sector. The Tripartite Coordination Committee, consisting of members of the government, management representatives, and trade union leaders, succeeded in preventing major social unrest during those years, thus creating the myth of a Luxembourg model characterized by social peace. Although in the early years of the 21st century Luxembourg enjoyed one of the highest GNP per capita in the world, this was mainly due to the strength of its financial sector, which gained importance at the end of the 1960s. Thirty-five years later, one-third of the tax proceeds originated from that sector. The harmonization of the tax system across Europe could, however, seriously undermine the financial situation of the grand duchy.

Luxembourg has been one of the strongest advocates of the European Union in the tradition of Robert Schuman. In 1957, Luxembourg became one of the six founding countries of the European Economic Community (later the European Union) and in 1999 it joined the euro currency area.

Encouraged by the contacts established with the Dutch and Belgian governments in exile, Luxembourg pursued a policy of presence in international organizations. It was one of the six founding members of the European Coal and Steel Community (ECSC) in 1952 and of the European Economic Community (EEC) in 1957. In the context of the Cold War, Luxembourg clearly opted for the West by joining the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) in 1949, thus renouncing its traditional neutrality, which had determined its international policy since the founding of the state. Engagement in European construction was rarely questioned subsequently, either by politicians or by the greater population.

Despite its small proportions, Luxembourg often played an intermediary role between larger countries. This role of mediator, especially between the two large and often bellicose nations of Germany and France, was considered one of the main characteristics of national identity, allowing the Luxembourger not to have to choose between one of these two neighbours. The country also hosted a large number of European institutions such as the European Court of Justice.

Luxembourgs small size no longer seemed to be a challenge to the existence of the country, and the creation of the Banque Centrale du Luxembourg (1998) and of the University of Luxembourg (2003) was evidence of the continuing desire to become a real nation. The decision in 1985 to declare Ltzebuergesch (Luxembourgish) the national language was also a step in the affirmation of the countrys independence. In fact, the linguistic situation in Luxembourg was characterized by trilinguilism: Ltzebuergesch was the spoken vernacular language, German the written language, in which Luxembourgers were most fluent, and French the language of official letters and law.

In 1985, the country became victim to a mysterious bombing spree, which was targeted mostly at electrical masts and other installations.

In 1995 Luxembourg provided the President of the European Commission, former Prime Minister Jacques Santer who later had to resign over corruption accusations against other commission members.

The current Prime Minister, Jean-Claude Juncker follows this European tradition. On 10 September 2004, Mr Juncker became the semi-permanent President of the group of finance ministers from the 12 countries that share the euro, a role dubbed "Mr Euro".

The present sovereign is Grand Duke Henri. Henri's father, Jean, succeeded his mother, Charlotte, on 12 November 1964. Jean's eldest son, Prince Henri, was appointed "Lieutenant Reprsentant" (Hereditary Grand Duke) on 4 March 1998. On 24 December 1999, Prime Minister Juncker announced Grand Duke Jean's decision to abdicate the throne on 7 October 2000, in favour of Prince Henri who assumed the title and constitutional duties of Grand Duke.

On 10 July 2005, after threats of resignation by Prime Minister Juncker, the proposed European Constitution was approved by 56.52% of voters.

==See also==
* County of Luxembourg
* List of monarchs of Luxembourg
* List of Prime Ministers of Luxembourg
* Politics of Luxembourg

General:
* History of Europe

==Footnotes==

==Further reading==
*Arblaster, Paul. A History of the Low Countries (Palgrave Essential Histories) (2005)
* Blom, J.C.H. History of the Low Countries (2006)
* de Vries, Johan. "Benelux, 1920-1970," in C. M. Cipolla, ed. The Fontana Economic History of Europe: Contemporary Economics Part One (1976) pp 171
* Kossmann, E. H. The Low Countries 17801940 (1978)

==External links==

* Luxembourg emigration in the 19th century - Offers reasons why people left Luxembourg in the 19th century.
* History of Luxembourg: Primary Documents
* History of Luxembourg  History of Luxembourg from 53 BC to the present.
* Historical Map of Luxembourg 1789
* National Museum of Military History

 



[[Geography of Luxembourg]]

Towns and rivers in Luxembourg
Luxembourg is a small country located in the Low Countries, part of North-West Europe It borders Belgium (148 kilometers) to the west and north, France (73 km) to the south, and Germany (138 km) to the east. Luxembourg is landlocked, separated from the North Sea by Belgium.

The topography of the country is divided very clearly between the hilly Oesling of the northern third of the Grand Duchy and the flat Gutland, which occupies the southern two-thirds. The country's longest river is the Sauer, which is a tributary of the Moselle, the basin of which includes almost all of Luxembourg's area. Other major rivers include the Alzette in the south and the Wiltz in the north.

The capital, and by far the largest city, is Luxembourg City, which is located in the Gutland, as are most of the country's main population centres, including Esch-sur-Alzette, Dudelange, and Differdange. Besides Luxembourg City, the other main towns are primarily located in the southern Red Lands region, which lines the border between Luxembourg and France to the south.

==Physical geography==
===Topography===
A map of Luxembourg's relief clearly illustrates the dichotomy between the hilly Oesling in the north and the southern Gutland.
Despite its small size, Luxembourg has a varied topography, with two main features to its landscape. The northern section of the country is formed by part of the plateau of the Ardennes, where the mountain heights range from 1,500 to almost 2,000 feet (460610 m) high. The rest of the country is made up of undulating countryside with broad valleys. The capital, Luxembourg City, is located in the southern part of the country.

===Green heart of Europe===
The most prominent landmark, the high plateau of the Ardennes in the north, took millions of years to carve. At its highest point, it reaches a height of 1,834 feet (559 m). Commonly known as the Oesling, the Ardennes region covers 325 sqmi, about 32% of the entire country. Rugged scenery predominates because river erosion over thousands of years has left a varied, low mountain landscape, densely covered with vegetation, sometimes with considerable variations in height. These differences in relief, together with stretches of water interspersed with forests, fields, and pastures are the main features that make the landscape so distinctive. Typical of this high area, however, is the infertile soil and poor drainage resulting in numerous peat bogs, which were once exploited as fuel. These factors, combined with heavy rainfall and frost, made this an inhospitable environment for the first settlers.

Even today, the living conditions in such an environment are not particularly favourable. Nevertheless, some 7,800 people make a living of the land through either forestry, small-scale farming, or environment work. Because the soil is so difficult to cultivate, most of the land is used for cattle pasture. The Ardennes region also includes the Upper Sre National Park, an important conservation area and a hiker's retreat.

South of the Sre River, the country is known as the Gutland. The region covers slightly over two-thirds of the country.

The terrain gently rises and falls with an average height of 700 feet (200 m). Agriculture is the main activity as term Gutland arises from the fertile soil and warm, dry summers experienced is this part of the Duchy compared to the Oesling region.

As a result, vegetables and fruit, such as strawberries, apples, plums, and cherries, are grown in large quantities. River erosion in this area has created deep gorges and caves, resulting in some spectacular scenery.

In the extreme south of the country lies "the land of the red rocks"- a reference to the deposits of minerals found here. Rich in iron ore, the district has been a mining and heavy industrial region since Roman if not earlier times and stretches for over 12 mi. The tall chimneys of the iron and steel works are typical landmarks of the industrial south. To the east lies the grape-growing valley of the Moselle. Numerous villages nestle in the deep valleys and behind the vineyards along the river banks. Most villages have at least one winery. Also in the east is the "Little Switzerland" area, characterized by wooded glens and ravines in unusual rock formations.

===Rivers and lakes===
Luxembourg has a number of minor rivers, such as the Eisch, the Alzette, and the Ptrusse, but the main river is the Moselle with its tributaries-the Sre and the Our. Together, their courses serve as a natural boundary between Luxembourg and Germany. Along their banks, many of the country's medieval castles can be found.

The Moselle actually rises in northeast France and flows north through Luxembourg for 19 mi to join the mighty Rhine at Koblenz, Germany. The Moselle is 320 mi long, and is navigable, due to canalization for 40 mi. Green slopes, covered with vines, flank the meandering course of the river.

Rising in Belgium, the Sre River flows for 107 mi in an easterly direction through Luxembourg and into the Moselle. Its sinuous course essentially cuts Luxembourg from east to west. The Our River, flowing along the northeastern border, is a tributary of the Sre. Its valley is surrounded by unspoiled countryside.

The Upper Sre lake is the largest stretch of water in the Grand Duchy. Surrounded by luxuriant vegetation and peaceful creeks, the lake is a centre for water sports, such as sailing, canoeing, and kayaking. Such outdoor activities, which has made it an attractive spot for tourists, have led to the growth of a local crafts industry.

The town of Esch-sur-Sre nestles at one end of the lake. Immediately above it, the river has been dammed to form a hydroelectric reservoir extending some 6 mi up the valley. The Upper Sre dam was built in the 1960s to meet the country's drinking water requirements.

===Extreme points===

Elevation extremes:
lowest point:
Moselle in Wasserbillig 133 m
highest point:
Kneiff in Troisvierges 560 m

==Human geography==
===Political geography===

===Demographic geography===

===Economic geography===

==Environment==
===Climate===
250px
Luxembourg is part of the West European Continental climatic region, and enjoys a temperate climate without extremes. Winters are mild, summers fairly cool, and rainfall is high.

Seasonal weather is somewhat different between the northern and southern regions. In the north there is considerable influence from the Atlantic systems, in which the passage of frequent pressure depressions gives rise to unstable weather conditions. This results in overcast skies and considerable drizzle in the winter.

Rainfall reaches 1200 mm a year in some areas. In the summer, excessive heat is rare and temperatures drop noticeably at night. Low temperatures and humidity make for what those living in this part of the country call, optimistically, an "invigorating climate".

In the south, although the rainfall is not significantly low, at around 800 mm, and the winters no milder, the principal difference is in the higher summer temperatures, especially in the Moselle Valley. Crops, especially wine grapes, thrive here. With a mean annual temperature of 10 C, the sunniest months are May to August. In the spring, the countryside is a riot of wildflowers and blossoms.

===Flora and fauna===
Luxembourg's flora is characterized by the country's location at the border between the Atlantic-European and Central-European climate zones. In the north, beech and oak trees are plentiful. The oak trees can grow up to 30 , with a diameter of 1.2 . They supply large quantities of excellent hardwood timber because of their strength.

Along the riverbanks, species like the Black Alder and willows can be found. Alder wood is pale yellow to reddish brown, fine-textured and durable even under water. It is also an important timber tree mainly because of its disease-resistant properties. Willow trees can reach a height of 20 m, and are valued for ornamental purposes.

The narrow, deeply incised valleys of the north also provide a habitat for rare plants and animals, especially the European Otter, a protected species. In the industrial south, among the abandoned quarries and deserted open pit mines, nature has reclaimed her own, and there are flowers everywhere.

===International agreements===
Party to:
Air Pollution, Air Pollution-Nitrogen Oxides, Air Pollution-Sulphur 85, Air Pollution-Sulphur 94, Air Pollution-Volatile Organic Compounds, Biodiversity, Climate Change, Desertification, Endangered Species, Hazardous Wastes, Marine Dumping, Nuclear Test Ban, Ozone Layer Protection, Ship Pollution, Tropical Timber 83, Tropical Timber 94, Wetlands

Signed, but not ratified:
Air Pollution-Persistent Organic Pollutants, Climate Change-Kyoto Protocol, Environmental Modification, Law of the Sea

==Geographical statistics==

Geographic coordinates:

Area:
total:
2 586 km
land:
2 586 km
water:
0 km

Natural resources:
iron ore (no longer exploited), arable land

Land use:
arable land:
23.9%
permanent crops:
0.56%
other:
75.52% (2011)

Irrigated land:
10 km (including Belgium) (1993 est.)

Total renewable water resources:
3.1 km3

==References==

==External links==
* Luxembourg Earth science portal

 

[[Demographics of Luxembourg]]

This article is about the demographic features of the population of Luxembourg, including population density, ethnicity, education level, health of the populace, economic status, religious affiliations and other aspects of the population.

The following is an overview of the demographics of Luxembourg. Demographic topics include basic statistics, most populous cites, and religious affiliation.

The population of Luxembourg as of 1 January 2013 was estimated at 537,039 (55.5 % Luxembourgers and 44.5 % of foreign nationality). "La progression de la population du Grand-Duch continue: 537 039 rsidants au 1er janvier 2013." Statnews 16/2013, op statec.lu, 18-04-2013. 

The people of Luxembourg are called Luxembourgers. Luxembourg Presidency - Being a Luxembourger 

== Vital statistics since 1900 ==
Vital statistics of Luxemburg 1900 till present.
The following table chronicles factors such as population, birth rates, and death rates in Luxembourg since 1900. Statistiques de Luxembourg 

 Average population (x 1000) Live births Deaths Natural change Crude birth rate (per 1000) Crude death rate (per 1000) Natural change (per 1000) Fertility rates 
 1900 234 7 037 5 109 1 928 30.1 21.9 8.2 
 1901 236 7 444 4 300 3 144 31.5 18.2 13.3 
 1902 238 7 416 4 460 2 956 31.1 18.7 12.4 
 1903 241 7 279 4 686 2 593 30.3 19.5 10.8 
 1904 243 7 535 4 952 2 583 31.0 20.4 10.6 
 1905 245 7 431 4 851 2 580 30.3 19.8 10.5 
 1906 248 7 516 4 844 2 672 30.3 19.6 10.8 
 1907 250 7 738 4 482 3 256 30.9 17.9 13.0 
 1908 253 7 639 4 933 2 706 30.2 19.5 10.7 
 1909 256 7 264 4 752 2 512 28.4 18.6 9.8 
 1910 258 7 065 4 321 2 744 27.4 16.7 10.6 
 1911 260 7 126 4 892 2 234 27.4 18.8 8.6 
 1912 262 7 051 4 556 2 495 26.9 17.4 9.5 
 1913 264 7 009 4 383 2 626 26.5 16.6 9.9 
 1914 266 6 781 4 446 2 335 25.5 16.7 8.8 
 1915 265 5 701 4 126 1 575 21.5 15.6 5.9 
 1916 264 4 958 4 246 712 18.8 16.1 2.7 
 1917 263 4 516 4 730 - 214 17.1 18.0 -0.8 
 1918 263 4 413 5 611 -1 198 16.8 21.4 -4.6 
 1919 262 4 638 4 627 11 17.7 17.7 0.0 
 1920 261 5 621 3 404 2 217 21.6 13.1 8.5 
 1921 261 5 494 3 444 2 050 21.1 13.2 7.9 
 1922 262 5 094 3 538 1 556 19.5 13.5 5.9 
 1923 263 5 468 3 581 1 887 20.8 13.6 7.2 
 1924 266 5 369 3 421 1 948 20.2 12.9 7.3 
 1925 268 5 619 3 791 1 828 21.0 14.1 6.8 
 1926 270 5 639 4 100 1 539 20.9 15.2 5.7 
 1927 278 5 864 3 909 1 955 21.1 14.1 7.0 
 1928 287 6 114 4 017 2 097 21.3 14.0 7.3 
 1929 292 6 210 4 553 1 657 21.3 15.6 5.7 
 1930 297 6 377 3 876 2 501 21.4 13.0 8.4 
 1931 300 5 988 3 971 2 017 20.0 13.3 6.7 
 1932 299 5 295 3 949 1 346 17.7 13.2 4.5 
 1933 298 4 895 3 725 1 170 16.4 12.5 3.9 
 1934 298 4 665 3 535 1 130 15.7 11.9 3.8 
 1935 297 4 523 3 740 783 15.2 12.6 2.6 
 1936 298 4 514 3 433 1 081 15.2 11.5 3.6 
 1937 299 4 514 3 555 959 15.1 11.9 3.2 
 1938 301 4 486 3 811 675 14.9 12.7 2.2 
 1939 300 4 511 3 804 707 15.0 12.7 2.4 
 1940 296 3 959 3 580 379 13.4 12.1 1.3 
 1941 292 4 029 4 065 - 36 13.8 13.9 -0.1 
 1942 290 4 506 4 220 286 15.6 14.6 1.0 
 1943 289 4 277 4 437 - 160 14.8 15.4 -0.6 
 1944 285 4 128 5 406 -1 278 14.5 18.9 -4.5 
 1945 284 3 775 4 585 - 810 13.3 16.2 -2.9 
 1946 286 4 263 3 525 738 14.9 12.3 2.6 
 1947 289 4 178 3 548 630 14.5 12.3 2.2 
 1948 292 4 162 3 400 762 14.3 11.6 2.6 
 1949 294 4 026 3 676 350 13.7 12.5 1.2 
 1950 296 4 116 3 401 715 13.9 11.5 2.4 
 1951 297 4 176 3 456 720 14.0 11.6 2.4 
 1952 299 4 535 3 557 978 15.2 11.9 3.3 
 1953 301 4 565 3 737 828 15.2 12.4 2.7 
 1954 303 4 713 3 421 1 292 15.6 11.3 4.3 
 1955 305 4 962 3 453 1 509 16.3 11.3 5.0 
 1956 307 4 833 3 878 955 15.8 12.6 3.1 2,08 
 1957 309 4 954 3 811 1 143 16.1 12.4 3.7 2,13 
 1958 310 4 959 3 512 1 447 16.0 11.3 4.7 2,13 
 1959 312 5 037 3 607 1 430 16.1 11.6 4.6 2,16 
 1960 314 5 019 3 716 1 303 16.0 11.8 4.1 2,37 
 1961 317 5 112 3 616 1 496 16.1 11.4 4.7 2,42 
 1962 321 5 137 4 037 1 100 16.0 12.6 3.4 2,41 
 1963 324 5 112 3 929 1 183 15.8 12.1 3.7 2,37 
 1964 328 5 229 3 857 1 372 16.0 11.8 4.2 2,40 
 1965 332 5 297 4 057 1 240 16.0 12.2 3.7 2,39 
 1966 334 5 194 4 133 1 061 15.6 12.4 3.2 2,36 
 1967 335 4 957 4 166 791 14.8 12.4 2.4 2,25 
 1968 336 4 780 4 138 642 14.2 12.3 1.9 2,14 
 1969 338 4 503 4 202 301 13.3 12.5 0.9 2,03 
 1970 339 4 476 4 168 308 13.2 12.3 0.9 1,97 
 1971 342 4 512 4 416 96 13.2 12.9 0.3 1,96 
 1972 347 4 138 4 120 18 11.9 11.9 0.1 1,75 
 1973 351 3 847 4 184 - 337 11.0 11.9 -1.0 1,58 
 1974 355 3 925 4 291 - 366 11.1 12.1 -1.0 1,57 
 1975 359 3 997 4 376 - 379 11.1 12.2 -1.1 1,55 
 1976 361 3 915 4 507 - 592 10.8 12.5 -1.6 1,48 
 1977 362 4 053 4 083 - 30 11.2 11.3 -0.1 1,49 
 1978 362 4 072 4 187 - 115 11.2 11.6 -0.3 1,47 
 1979 363 4 078 3 985 93 11.2 11.0 0.3 1,47 
 1980 364 4 169 4 113 56 11.4 11.3 0.2 1,49 
 1981 365 4 414 4 105 309 12.1 11.2 0.8 1,55 
 1982 366 4 300 4 133 167 11.8 11.3 0.5 1,49 
 1983 366 4 185 4 129 56 11.4 11.3 0.2 1,43 
 1984 366 4 192 4 072 120 11.5 11.1 0.3 1,42 
 1985 367 4 104 4 027 77 11.2 11.0 0.2 1,38 
 1986 368 4 309 3 970 339 11.7 10.8 0.9 1,43 
 1987 371 4 238 4 012 226 11.4 10.8 0.6 1,40 
 1988 374 4 603 3 840 763 12.3 10.3 2.0 1,51 
 1989 378 4 665 3 984 681 12.4 10.6 1.8 1,52 
 1990 382 4 936 3 773 1 163 12.9 9.9 3.0 1,62 
 1991 387 4 986 3 744 1 242 12.9 9.7 3.2 1,60 
 1992 392 5 149 4 022 1 127 13.1 10.3 2.9 1,62 
 1993 397 5 353 3 915 1 438 13.5 9.8 3.6 1,69 
 1994 403 5 451 3 800 1 651 13.5 9.4 4.1 1,72 
 1995 409 5 421 3 797 1 624 13.3 9.3 4.0 1,67 
 1996 414 5 689 3 895 1 794 13.7 9.4 4.3 1,76 
 1997 419 5 503 3 937 1 566 13.1 9.4 3.7 1,71 
 1998 425 5 386 3 901 1 485 12.7 9.2 3.5 1,67 
 1999 430 5 582 3 793 1 789 13.0 8.8 4.2 1,71 
 2000 436 5 723 3 754 1 969 13.1 8.6 4.5 1,79 
 2001 442 5 459 3 719 1 740 12.4 8.4 3.9 1,66 
 2002 446 5 345 3 744 1 601 12.0 8.4 3.6 1,63 
 2003 452 5 303 4 053 1 250 11.7 9.0 2.8 1,62 
 2004 458 5 452 3 578 1 874 11.9 7.8 4.1 1,65 
 2005 465 5 371 3 621 1 750 11.5 7.8 3.8 1,63 
 2006 473 5 514 3 766 1 748 11.7 8.0 3.7 1,65 
 2007 480 5 477 3 866 1 611 11.4 8.1 3.4 1,61 
 2008 489 5 596 3 595 2 001 11.5 7.4 4.1 1,60 
 2009 498 5 638 3 657 1 982 11.3 7.3 4.0 1,58 
 2010 507 5 874 3 760 2 114 11.6 7.4 4.2 1,63 
 2011 518 5 639 3 819 1 820 10.9 7.4 3.5 1,54 
 2012 531 6 026 3 876 2 150 11.4 7.3 4.1 1,65 

==Foreign population in Luxembourg==
300px
The foreign population resident in Luxembourg currently numbers over 238,800, corresponding to 44,5% of the total population (compared to 17% in the 1960s). These immigrants are overwhelmingly nationals of EU countries (accounting for over 90%), by far the greater part of whom originally come from Portugal, Italy and the two neighbouring countries, France and Belgium. For some years, there has also been a big increase in the number of immigrants and asylum seekers from the countries of Eastern Europe, and especially the new republics to have emerged from the former Yugoslavia (Bosnia and Herzegovina, Serbia and Montenegro). These immigrants include a considerable proportion of young people. Immigrants (especially asylum seekers) have a strong impact on the birth rate, accounting for nearly 50% of births in Luxembourg.

A more detailed breakdown by nationality shows that the Portuguese community is still the largest group, accounting for more than a third of the foreign population. The Italian population has been stable for the past ten years at approximatively 20 000. Some 47.000 foreigners come from bordering countries (France, Belgium and Germany).

==Religious affiliation==
The predominant religion of the Luxembourg population is Roman Catholic, with Protestant, Anglican, Jewish and Muslim minorities. According to a 1979 law, the government forbids collection of data on religious practices, but over 90% is estimated to be baptized Catholic (the Virgin Mary is the Patroness of the city of Luxembourg).

The Lutherans are the largest Protestant denomination in the country. Muslims are estimated to number approximately 6000 persons, notably including 1500 refugees from Montenegro; Orthodox (Albanian,Greek, Serbian, Russian, and Roman) adherents are estimated to number approximately 5000 persons, along with approximately 1000 Jews. Freedom of religion is provided by the Luxembourg Constitution. 

== CIA World Factbook demographic statistics ==
Demographics of Luxembourg, Data of FAO, year 2005 ; Number of inhabitants in thousands.

The following demographic statistics are from the CIA World Factbook, unless otherwise indicated.

===Age structure===

(2002 est.)
*014 years: 18.9% (male 43,634; female 41,164)
*1564 years: 67% (male 151,364; female 149,156)
*65 years and over: 14.1% (male 25,486; female 37,765)

===Immigration|Net migration rate===

8.64 migrant(s)/1,000 population (2007 est.)

===Sex ratio===

(2002 est.)
*at birth: 1.07 male(s)/female
*under 15 years: 1.06 male(s)/female
*1564 years: 1.01 male(s)/female
*65 years and over: 0.67 male(s)/female
*total population: 0.97 male(s)/female

===Infant mortality rate===

4.68 deaths/1,000 live births (2007 est.)

===Life expectancy at birth===

(2007 est.)
*total population: 79.03 years
*male: 75.76 years
*female: 82.52 years

===Total fertility rate===

1.7 children born/woman (2002 est.)

===HIV/AIDS===

* HIV/AIDS adult prevalence rate: 0.16% (1999 est.)

* HIV/AIDS deaths: fewer than 100 (1999 est.)

===Languages===

A plethora of languages are spoken in Luxembourg, but the three primary languages are Luxembourgish (national and administrative language), German (administrative language), and French (administrative language).

The following table lists the percentage of citizens of Luxembourg who are able to speak a native language, or two or more languages. "Europeans and their languages". http://ec.europa.eu/public_opinion/archives/ebs/ebs_243_en.pdf Eurobarometer. Retrieved May 10th, 2014. Published February 2006. 

 Luxembourgish French German English other 
 Native language 77% 6% 4% 1% 12% 
 Second language 13% 90% 88% 60% 
 Combined 90% 96% 92% 61% 

Additionally, people born in foreign countries and temporary guest workers make up more than a third (40%) of the population of Luxembourg. Although most of these foreign born people primarily speak German and French, a significant minority also are native Portuguese, Italian, and English. http://www.statistiques.public.lu/catalogue-publications/RP2011-premiers-resultats/2013/13-13-DE.pdf 

==Notes==
 

Luxembourg

[[Politics of Luxembourg]]

The politics of Luxembourg takes place in a framework of a parliamentary representative democratic monarchy, whereby the Prime Minister of Luxembourg is the head of government, and of a multi-party system. Executive power is under the constitution of 1868, as amended, exercised by the government, by the Grand Duke and the Council of Government (cabinet), which consists of a prime minister and several other ministers. Usually the prime minister is the leader of the political party or coalition of parties having the most seats in parliament. Legislative power is vested in both the government and parliament. The judiciary is independent of the executive and the legislature.

Legislative power is vested in the Chamber of Deputies, elected directly to five-year terms.

==Recent political history==
Since the end of World War II, the Christian Social People's Party (CSV) has usually been the dominant partner in governing coalitions. The Catholic-oriented CSV resembles Christian democratic political parties in other West European nations, and enjoys broad popular support. 

The Luxembourg Socialist Workers' Party (LSAP) is a party of social-democratic orientation which has been a junior partner in most governments from 1974 either with the CSV from 19841999 or the Democratic Party from 1974-1979.

The Democratic Party (DP) is a liberal party, drawing support from the professions, merchants, and urban middle class. Like other west European liberal parties, it advocates both social legislation and minimum government involvement in the economy. It also is strongly pro-NATO. The DP had been a junior partner in coalition governments with the CSV from 19992004 and 19791984, and senior partner in coalition governments with the LSAP from 1974-1979.

The Communist Party (PCL), which received 10%-18% of the vote in national elections from World War II to the 1960s, won only two seats in the 1984 elections, one in 1989, and none in 1994. Its small remaining support lies in the "steel belt" of the industrialized south.

The Greens have received growing support since it was officially formed in 1983. It opposes both nuclear weapons and nuclear power and supports environmental and ecological preservation measures. This party generally opposes Luxembourg's military policies, including its membership in the North Atlantic Treaty Organization.

In the June 2004 parliamentary elections, the CSV won 24 seats, the LSAP 14, the DP 10, the Greens 7, and the Alternative Democratic Reform Party 5. The Left and the Communist Party each lost its single seat in part due to their separate campaigns. The Democratic Party which had become the junior coalition partner in 1999 registered heavy losses. The long-reigning CSV was the main winner, partly due to the personal popularity of the prime minister Jean-Claude Juncker (CSV). In July 2004, it chose the LSAP as its coalition partner. Jean Asselborn (LSAP) was appointed as the Vice Prime Minister and Minister of Foreign Affairs and Immigration. In 2013, the CSV lost one seat (23 seats instead of 24).

A complete list of all governments is maintained on the website of the Government of Luxembourg. Government website 

In 2008, a bitter controversy over euthanasia had parliament pass a measure which would restrict the veto powers of the grand-duke, who had opposed the pro-euthanasia law on the grounds of his private Christian conscience, much like what had occurred in Belgium in the early 1990s on the topic of abortion.

==Executive branch==

| Grand Duke
| Henri
|
| 7 October 2000
|-
| Prime Minister
| Xavier Bettel
| DP
| 4 December 2013
|-
| Deputy Prime Minister
| Etienne Schneider
| LSAP
| 4 December 2013

Luxembourg has a parliamentary form of government with a constitutional monarchy operating according to absolute primogeniture. Under the constitution of 1868, executive power is exercised by the Grand Duke or Grand Duchess and the cabinet, which consists of a Prime Minister and several other ministers. The Grand Duke has the power to dissolve the legislature and reinstate a new one. However, since 1919, sovereignty has resided with the nation. Constitution of Luxembourg. Government of Luxembourg. URL accessed 19 May 2006. 
The monarch is hereditary. The prime minister and vice prime minister are appointed by the monarch, following popular election to the Chamber of Deputies; they are responsible to the Chamber of Deputies. The government is currently a coalition of the DP, LSAP and DG.

==Legislative branch==
The Chamber of Deputies (D'Chamber/Chambre des Dputs) has 60 members, elected for a five year term by proportional representation in four multi-seat constituencies.
The Council of State (Conseil d'tat) is an advisory body composed of 21 ordinary citizens appointed by the Grand Duke, advises the Chamber of Deputies in the drafting of legislation. Structure. Conseil d'Etat. URL accessed 19 May 2006. The function of councillor ends after a continuous or discontinuous period of fifteen years or when the relevant person reaches the age of seventy-two. The responsibilities of the members of the Conseil d'Etat are extracurricular to their normal professional duties.

==Political parties and elections==

==Judicial branch==
Luxembourg law is a composite of local practice, legal tradition, and French, Belgian, and German systems. The apex of the judicial system is the Superior Court of Justice (Cour Superieure de Justice), whose judges are appointed by the Grand Duke for life. The same goes for the Administrative Court (Tribunal Administratif).

==Administrative divisions==
The Grand Duchy is divided into three districts: Diekirch, Grevenmacher, Luxembourg.

==Military==
Luxembourg's contribution to its defence and to NATO consists of a small army. Being a landlocked country, it has no navy. It also has no air force. However 18 NATO Airborne Warning And Control System airplanes are registered as aircraft of Luxembourg as a matter of political and aviational convenience. Luxembourg - NATO AEW Force. 8 September 2005. Aeroflight.co.uk. URL accessed 9 May 2006. 

==International organization membership==
Luxembourg is member of ACCT, Australia Group, Benelux, CE, EAPC, EBRD, ECE, EIB, EMU, EU, FAO, IAEA, IBRD, ICAO, ICCt, ICC, ICRM, IDA, IEA, IFAD, IFC, IFRCS, ILO, IMF, IMO, Intelsat, Interpol, IOC, IOM, ISO, ITU, ITUC, NATO, NEA, NSG, OECD, OPCW, OSCE, PCA, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNIDO, UPU, WCO, WEU, WHO, WIPO, WMO, WTrO, Zangger Committee

==See also==
*List of political parties in Luxembourg

==References==

 

[[Economy of Luxembourg]]

The labour productivity level of Luxembourg is one of highest in Europe. OECD, 2012
The economy of Luxembourg is largely dependent on the banking, steel, and industrial sectors. Luxembourgers enjoy the second highest per capita gross domestic product in the world (CIA 2007 est.), behind Qatar. Luxembourg is seen as a diversified industrialized nation, contrasting the oil boom in Qatar, the major monetary source of that nation.

Although Luxembourg in tourist literature is aptly called the "Green Heart of Europe", its pastoral land coexists with a highly industrialized and export-intensive economy. Luxembourg enjoys a degree of economic prosperity almost unique among industrialized democracies.

In 2009, a budget deficit of 5% resulted from government measures to stimulate the economy, especially the banking sector, as a result of the world economic crisis. This was however reduced to 1.4% in 2010. "Luxembourg", CIA  The World Fact Book. Retrieved 8 September 2011. 

==History==

==Industries==

===Banking===
Luxembourg has been part of the eurozone since 1999.
Banking is the largest sector in the Luxembourg economy. The country has specialised in the cross-border fund administration business. As Luxembourg's domestic market is relatively small, the country's financial centre is predominantly international. At the end of March 2009, there were 152 banks in Luxembourg, with over 27,000 employees. Political stability, good communications, easy access to other European centres, skilled multilingual staff, a tradition of banking secrecy and cross-border financial expertise have all contributed to the growth of the financial sector. These factors have contributed to a Corruption Perceptions Index of 8.3 and a DAW Index ranking of 10 in 2012; the latter the highest in Europe. Transparency International, 2008 Germany accounts for the largest-single grouping of banks, with Scandinavian, Japanese, and major US banks also heavily represented. Total assets exceeded 929 billion at the end of 2008. More than 9,000 holding companies are established in Luxembourg. The European Investment Bankthe financial institution of the European Unionis also located there.

Concern about Luxembourg's banking secrecy laws, and its reputation as a tax haven, led in April 2009 to it being added to a "grey list" of nations with questionable banking arrangements by the G20 , a list from which it was removed in 2009. This concern has led Luxembourg to modify its tax legislation to avoid conflict with the tax authorities of European Union Members. For example, the classic tax exempt 1929 Holding Company was outlawed 31 December 2010, as it was deemed an illegal state aid by the European Commission. Luxembourg Company Registration Healy Consultants Retrieved 3 September 2013. 

===Steel===
A key event in the economic history of Luxembourg was the 1876 introduction of English metallurgy. The refining process led to the development of the steel industry in Luxembourg and founding of the Arbed company in 1911.

The iron and steel industry, located along the French border, is an important sector of the economy. Steel accounts for 29% of all exports (excluding services), 1.8% of GDP, 22% of industrial employment, and 3.9% of the work force.

The restructuring of the industry and increasing government ownership in Arbed (31%) began as early as 1974. As a result of timely modernization of facilities, cutbacks in production and employment, government assumption of portions of Arbed's debt, and recent cyclical recovery of the international demand for steel, the company is again profitable. Its productivity is among the highest in the world. US markets account for about 6% of Arbed's output. The company specializes in production of large architectural steel beams and specialized value-added products. There has been, however, a relative decline in the steel sector, offset by Luxembourg's emergence as a financial center. In 2001, through the merger with Aceralia and Usinor, Arbed became Arcelor. Arcelor was taken over in 2006 by Mittal Steel to form Arcelor-Mittal, the largest steel producer in the world.

===Telecommunications===
Government policies promote the development of Luxembourg as an audiovisual and communications center. Radio-Television-Luxembourg is Europe's premier private radio and television broadcaster. The government-backed Luxembourg satellite company "Socit europenne des satellites" (SES) was created in 1986 to install and operate a satellite telecommunications system for transmission of television programs throughout Europe. The first SES Astra satellite, the 16-channel RCA 4000 Astra 1A, was launched by the Ariane Rocket in December 1988. SES presently constitutes the world largest satellite services company in terms of revenue.

===Tourism===

Tourism is an important component of the national economy, representing about 8.3% of GDP in 2009 and employing some 25,000 people or 11.7% of the working population. "Lux is the place to be for business travellers", News 352, 10 February 2011. Retrieved 14 February 2011. Despite the current crisis, the Grand Duchy still welcomes over 900,000 visitors a year who spend an average of 2.5 nights in hotels, hostels or on camping sites. "Bulletin du Statec n6-2010". Retrieved 14 February 2011. Business travel is flourishing representing 44% of overnight stays in the country and 60% in the capital, up 11% and 25% between 2009 and 2010. "La saison touristique 2010 : une stabilisation  bas niveau", Ministre des Classes moyennes et du Tourisme. Retrieved 14 February 2011. 

===Agriculture===
Luxembourg's small but productive agricultural sector is highly subsidized, mainly by the EU and the government. It employs about 13% of the work force. Most farmers are engaged in dairy and meat production. Vineyards in the Moselle Valley annually produce about 15 million litres of dry white wine, most of which is consumed within Luxembourg and also in Germany, France, and Belgium on a lesser scale.

==Accounting principles==
Establishing accounts depends on the size of companies, and referring to three criteria: total of the balance sheet (total of assets without losses of the accounting year), the net amount of the turnover (net, such as it appears on the profit and loss account) and the average number of the workforce.

The control of medium and big companies must be made by one or several independent auditors of companies, appointed by the general assembly among the members of the Institute of Independent Auditors of Companies.
The control of small companies must be made by an accountant appointed by the general assembly for definite duration.
The conclusion of the independent auditors report can be:
 A certificate without reserve, that is to say an approval
 A certificate with reserves, that is to say that there is approval with reserves because of discords or doubts.
 A refusal to give a certificate.

The accountants associations have difficulties to get organized because of the importance of the State in the accounting system.

==Labour relations==
Labour relations have been peaceful since the 1930s. Most industrial workers are organized by unions linked to one of the major political parties. Representatives of business, unions, and government participate in the conduct of major labour negotiations.

Foreign investors often cite Luxembourg's labour relations as a primary reason for locating in the Grand Duchy. Unemployment in 1999 averaged less than 2.8% of the workforce, but reached 4.4% by 2007.

== Energy ==
In 1978, Luxembourg tried to build a 1,200 MW nuclear reactor but dropped the plans after threats of major protests. "Reactors." Wise  Nuclear issues information services. July 1978. 
Currently, Luxembourg uses imported oil and natural gas for the majority of its energy generation. LUXEMBOURG  Energy Mix Fact Sheet. Europa. January 2007. http://ec.europa.eu/energy/energy_policy/doc/factsheets/mix/mix_lu_en.pdf 

==Transportation==

Luxembourg has efficient road, rail and air transport facilities and services. The road network has been significantly modernised in recent years with 147 km of motorways connecting the capital to adjacent countries. The advent of the high-speed TGV link to Paris has led to renovation of the city's railway station while a new passenger terminal at Luxembourg Airport has recently been opened. There are plans to introduce trams in the capital and light-rail lines in adjacent areas within the next few years.

==Prospects==
According to a note from the Luxembourg statistical agency, the Luxembourg economy was set to grow 4.0% in 2011. The economic situation was particularly dynamic in late 2010 and early 2011 but there were signs of a slowdown, both in the international economic environment and in terms of national indicators. "Business and Economy", Embassy of Luxembourg in Washington. Retrieved 8 September 2011. GDP growth is set to enter a recession in 2012. "Growth in 2012", Which economies will grow and shrink the fastest in 2012?. The Economist online 4 January 2012. 

==See also==
*Economy of Europe
*List of companies of Luxembourg
*The Integrated Traffic and Landscape Concept for the Grand Duchy of Luxembourg

==References==

==External links==
* Economic Survey of Luxembourg 2010 from the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD)
* Government statistics 
* Luxembourg at the OECD
* Luxembourg in The World Factbook

 
Luxemburg
Luxembourg

[[Telecommunications in Luxembourg]]

Luxembourg is known for opening local television and radio stations in other countries, RTL Group is operated in many countries.

Telephones - main lines in use:
314,700 (1999)

Telephones - mobile cellular:
215,741 (2000)

Telephone system:
highly developed, completely automated and efficient system, mainly buried cables
domestic:
nationwide cellular telephone system; buried cable
international:
3 channels leased on TAT-6 coaxial submarine cable (Europe to North America)

Radio broadcast stations:
AM 2, FM 9, shortwave 2 (1999)

Radios:
285,000 (1997)

Television broadcast stations:
5 (1999)

Televisions:
285,000 (1998 est.)

Internet Service Providers (ISPs):
8 (2000)
Note: Work has started in 2006 on a city wide WiFi project called Hotcity. Bienvenue sur Hotcity 

Internet users:
100,000 (2001)

Luxembourg is the home of the world's biggest satellite company, SES, located in Betzdorf (49 41'36 N; 6 19'45 E)

Country code (Top-level domain): .lu

==References==
 

==See also==
*Luxembourg

 
Luxembourg



[[Transport in Luxembourg]]

Transport in Luxembourg is ensured principally by road, rail and air. There are also services along the River Moselle which forms the border with Germany. The road network has been significantly modernised in recent years with motorways to adjacent countries. The advent of the high-speed TGV link to Paris has led to renovation of the city's railway station while a new passenger terminal at Luxembourg Airport has recently been opened. There are plans to introduce trams in the capital and light-rail lines in adjacent areas. 

Luxembourg's rail network.

== Railways ==

Operated by Chemins de Fer Luxembourgeois (CFL), Luxembourg's railways form the backbone of the country's public transport network, linking the most important towns. The total length of operational (standard gauge) track is 274 km, though it was some 550 km at the end of the Second World War. There are regular services from Luxembourg City to Ettelbruck, Esch-sur-Alzette, Wasserbillig and Kleinbettingen while international routes extend to Trier, Brussels, Lige, Metz and Nancy. Les transports en commun au Grand-Duch. Retrieved 3 March 2009. 

The railway network links into Belgium, Germany and France. Some of the cross-border services are run by CFL, others by SNCF, NMBS/SNCB and DB.

There is now a frequent high-speed connection to Paris via the LGV Est line.

== Roads ==
===Road network===
Luxembourg's A7 motorway
The six Luxembourg motorways cover a total distance of 147 km, linking the capital with Trier (Germany), Thionville (France) and Arlon (Belgium) as well as with Esch-sur-Alzette and Ettelbruck in Luxembourg. Luxembourg's motorways are toll free. The speed limit is normally 130 km/h, 110 km/h in rainy weather. With 56.8 km of motorway per 1,000 km2, Luxembourg probably now has the highest density of motorways in Europe. Autostrade in Europe - Data updated to 1 January 2003. Retrieved 4 March 2009. 

The remaining road network in Luxembourg accounts for a total length of 2,820 km, consisting of 798 km of trunk roads (RN or routes nationales) and 2,022 km of secondary roads (CR or chemins ruraux). L'volution du rseau routier d'ordre suprieur. Administration des Ponts et Chausses. Retrieved 3 March 2009. 

===Bus services===

Comprehensive bus services linking the towns and villages of the Grand Duchy of Luxembourg are controlled by the RGTR (Rgime gnral des transports routiers) under the Ministry of Transport. Les autobus RGTR from Mobilitits Zentral. Retrieved 4 March 2009. 

Luxembourg City is served by 163 buses transporting some 28 million passengers per year (2007). There are 25 regular bus routes plus special bus services through the night. Ville de Luxembourg: Autobus. Retrieved 4 March 2009. 

The TICE or Syndicat des tramways intercommunaux dans le canton dEsch/Alzette operates several bus routes in the south-east of the country. Intercommunaux du Canton dEsch. Retrieved 4 March 2009. 

CFL, the Luxembourg railway company, operates some 17 bus routes, mainly serving towns and villages not accessible by rail. Horaires des lignes de bus CFL. Retrieved 4 March 2009. 

===Plans for reintroducing trams===
Luxembourg's last tramline closed in 1964 but the city is now planning to reintroduce trams by 2017, initially from the central station to Kirchberg and then to Luxembourg Airport. Mobil 2020. From Ministre des Transports, Luxembourg. Retrieved 2 March 2009. There are also plans to create light rail networks in several areas near the capital.
Moselle tourist boats at Remich

== Water ==
The River Moselle forms a 42 km natural border between Luxembourg and Germany in the south-east of the country. Especially in the summer months, the Marie-Astrid tourist boat operates regular services along the river. MS Princesse Marie-Astrid. Entente Touristique de la Moselle. Retrieved 4 March 2009. 

Mertert near Grevenmacher on the Moselle is Luxembourg's only commercial port. With two quays covering a total length of 1.6 km, it offers facilities connecting river, road and rail transport. It is used principally for coal, steel, oil, agricultural goods and building materials. Le Port de Mertert from Ministre des Transports. Retrieved 4 March 2009. 

== Air ==
Luxembourg Airport at Findel, some 6 km to the north of the city, is Luxembourg's only commercial airport. Thanks to its long runway (4,000 m), even the largest types of plane are able to use its facilities. Aviation from Ministre des Transports. Retrieved 4 March 2009. 

Luxembourg airport

Luxair, Luxembourg's international airline, and Cargolux, a cargo-only airline, operate out of the airport. In 2008, the airport ranked as Europes 5th largest and the worlds 23rd by cargo tonnage. Cargo Traffic 2007 FINAL from Airports Council International. Retrieved 4 March 2009. 

Luxair has regular passenger services to 20 European destinations and operates tourist flights to 17 more. Luxair Winter Timetable 2008/2009. Retrieved 4 March 2009. Other airlines operating flights to and from Luxembourg include British Airways, KLM, SAS, Swiss European Air Lines, and TAP Portugal.

A large new airport terminal building was opened in 2008 with excellent facilities, including a huge underground carpark.

== Pipelines ==
The trunk natural gas pipelines in Luxembourg have a total length of 155 km (2007). CIA World Factbook - Luxembourg. Retrieved 4 March 2009. 

Russia and Norway are the main producers. The Luxembourg network is connected to Germany, France and Belgium. Infos gaz naturel - Au Luxembourg from Erdgas. Retrieved 4 March 2009. 

== Merchant marine ==

From CIA World Factbook:
Total:
45 ships 
Ships by type:
bulk 6, cargo 3, chemical tanker 15, container 4, liquefied gas 1, passenger 3, petroleum tanker 3, roll on/roll off 9
note:
includes some foreign-owned ships registered here as a flag of convenience: Belgium 7, Denmark 1, France 17, Germany 5, Netherlands 2, United Kingdom 8, United States 4 (2008 est.)
Registered in other countries: Ukraine 1

==See also==
*The Integrated Traffic and Landscape Concept for the Grand Duchy of Luxembourg
*Trams in Luxembourg

==References==

 

[[Luxembourg Army]]

The Luxembourg Army is the national military of Luxembourg. Luxembourg has no navy, as the country is landlocked, or air force, although it does have aircraft. The Luxembourg Army was integrated into the Force Publique (Public Force) which included the Gendarmerie and the Police. The Gendarmerie was merged into the Grand Ducal Police in 2000. The army has been an all-volunteer force since 1967. It has a current strength of approximately 450 professional soldiers, 340 enlisted recruits and 100 civilians, and a total budget of $369 million, or 0.9% of GDP.

The army is under civilian control. The Commander-in-Chief is the Grand Duke. The professional head of the army is the Chief of Defence, currently Mario Daubenfeld. He answers to the civil Minister for Defence in the civilian government, currently Jean-Marie Halsdorf, in the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Immigration. The Grand Duke and the Chief of Defence are the only generals, with colonels as Deputy Chief of Defence and head of the Military Training Centre.

Luxembourg has participated in the Eurocorps since 1994, has contributed troops to the UNPROFOR and IFOR missions in former Yugoslavia, and participates with a small contingent in the current NATO SFOR mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina. The Luxembourg army is integrated into the Multinational Beluga Force under Belgian command. Luxembourg troops have also deployed to Afghanistan to support ISAF. Luxembourg has financially supported international peacekeeping missions during the 1991 Gulf War, in Rwanda and, more recently, Albania. The army also has participated in humanitarian relief missions such as setting up refugee camps for Kurds and providing emergency supplies to Albania.

== History ==

=== Militia (18171881) ===
On 8 January 1817, the Grand Duke of Luxembourg, William I published a constitutional law governing the organization of a Militia, the main provisions of which were to remain in force until the Militia was abolished in 1881. Up until 1840, Luxembourgs militiamen served in units of the Royal Netherlands Army. In 1839 William I became a party to the Treaty of London. Under the terms of the Treaty, Luxembourg and the newly formed Duchy of Limburg, both members of the German Confederation, were together required to provide a Federal Contingent distributed among a Light Infantry Battalion garrisoned in Echternach, a Cavalry Squadron in Diekirch, and an Artillery detachment in Ettelbruck. In 1846 the Cavalry and Artillery units where disbanded and the Luxembourg Contingent was separated from the Limburg Contingent. The establishment was now two Light Infantry Battalions, the first Battalion in Echternach and the second in Diekirch, two reserve Companies and a depot Company. In 1866, the Austro-Prussian war resulted in the dissolution of the Germanic Confederation and Luxembourg was declared neutral in perpetuity. A new military organization was established in 1867 with two Battalions known as the Corps des Chasseurs Luxembourgeois. In 1868 the contingent became one Light Infantry Battalion of 4 Companies. On 16 February 1881, the Light Infantry Battalion was disbanded with the abolition of the militia-based system.

=== Corps des Gendarmes et Volontaires ===
Soldiers of the Corps des Gendarmes et Volontaires pose for a photograph, 1910.
On 16 February 1881 the Corps des Gendarmes et Volontaires (Gendarmes and Volunteers Corps) was established. The Corps comprised two Companies, a Company of Gendarmes and a Company of Volunteers. In 1939 a corps of Auxiliary Volunteers was established and attached to the Company of Volunteers. Following the occupation of Luxembourg by Germany on the 10 May 1940, recruitment for the Company of Volunteers continued until 4 December 1940 when they were moved to Weimar in Germany to be trained as German police.

=== Luxembourg Battery ===
Luxembourg troops training in an English seaside town in 1943.

The Luxembourg Government in exile in London made agreements for a group of seventy Luxembourg volunteers to be assigned to in 1944 the Artillery Group of the 1st Belgian Infantry Brigade, commonly known as the Brigade Piron. A number of these Luxemburgish troops had fought in North Africa in the French Foreign Legion. The Luxembourg unit landed in Normandy on 6 August 1944. The Luxembourg Battery was an Artillery Troop equipped with four Ordnance QF 25 pounder howitzers.

Each of the Luxembourg guns were named after the children of Grand Duchess Charlotte: Princesses Elisabeth, Princess Marie Adelaide, Princess Marie Gabriele and Princess Alix.

=== Post-Liberation Luxembourg Army ===
In 1944 obligatory military service was introduced. In 1945, the Corps de la Garde Grand Ducale (Grand Ducal Guard Corps), garrisoned in the Saint-Esprit barracks in Luxembourg City and the 1st and 2nd Infantry Battalions were established, one in Walferdange and the other in Dudelange. The Luxembourg Army took charge of part of the French zone of occupation in Germany, the 2nd Battalion occupying part of the Bitburg district and a detachment from the 1st Battalion part of the Saarburg district. The 2nd Battalion remained in Bitburg until 1955. Luxembourg signed the Treaty of Brussels in March 1948, then the North Atlantic Treaty in 1949. In 1951 the Grand Ducal Guard was relocated to Walferdange and integrated with the Commandement des Troupes. The Grand Ducal Guard had special units for reconnaissance, anti-air warfare and radiac reconnaissance. From 1955 the Guard was organised into a Headquarters Company, a Garrison Platoon, a Reconnaissance Company and two Training Companies. In 1959 the Commandement des Troupes was disbanded and the Grand Ducal Guard was integrated into the Commandement du Territoire (Territorial Command). The establishment was reduced to a single Company, a Corporals' Training School and a Weapons Platoon. In 1960 the Grand Ducal Guard was again reorganised into four Platoons temporarily grouped into intervention and reinforcement detachments. In 1964 the Grand Ducal Guard was organized into a HQ, three Platoons, a reinforcement Platoon and the NCO school. On the 28 February 1966 the Grand Ducal Guard was officially disbanded.

=== Korean War ===
A Luxembourg soldier in Korea, 1953.

In 1950 seventeen countries, including Luxembourg, decided to send armed forces to assist the Republic of Korea. The Luxembourg contingent was incorporated into the 'Belgian United Nations Command' or the 'Korean Volunteer Corps'. The Belgo-Luxemburgish battalion arrived in Korea in 1951 and was attached to the US 3rd Infantry Division. Two Luxemburger soldiers were killed and 17 were wounded in the war. The Belgo-Luxemburgish battalion was disbanded in 1955.

=== Groupement Tactique Rgimentaire and Home Command ===
In 1954 the Groupement Tactique Rgimentaire (GTR), (Regimental Tactical Group) was established as Luxembourgs contribution to NATO and consisted of three Infantry Battalions, an Artillery Battalion, a Services Company, a Medical Company, a Transport Company, a Signals Company, a Company of Engineers, a Heavy Mortar Company, a Reconnaissance Company and a Headquarters Company. 

In addition to the GTR, the Army also included the Home Command comprising a Headquarters Company, a Company of Military Police, a Movements and Transportation Company, a Static Guard Battalion, and a Mobile Battalion. The GTR was disbanded in 1959.

=== 1st Artillery Battalion ===
In 1961, the 1st Artillery Battalion was placed at NATOs disposal. The battalion was organised as three Gun Batteries, each with six 105 mm field howitzers (British 25 pounder guns converted to 105 mm caliber) from the former GTR Artillery Battalion, a HQ Battery and a Service Battery. In 1963, the Battalion was attached to the US 8th Infantry Division. In 1966 the Grand Ducal Guard was disbanded and its taskings transferred to and performed by the Artillery Battalion. The 1st Artillery Battalion was disbanded in 1967.

=== 1st Infantry Battalion ===
Compulsory military service was abolished in 1967 and the 1st Infantry Battalion was established comprising a Headquarters and Services unit, two Motorized Infantry Companies and a Reconnaissance Company with two Recce Platoons and an Anti-Tank Platoon. From 1968 onwards it formed a part of NATOs ACE Mobile Force (Land) (AMF(L)). In 1985 the Battalion was replaced by a reinforced company consisting of an AMF Company with two Recce Platoons and an Anti-Tank Platoon, a Forward Air Control team, a National Support Element for logistics and a Medical Support element. In 2002 the AMF(L) was dissolved.

== Luxembourg Army Organization ==
Luxembourgish soldiers during national day.

The army of Luxembourg is a battalion sized formation with four separate companies which come under the control of the Centre Militaire (Military Centre), located in the "Caserne Grand-Duc Jean" barracks in the town of Diekirch.

===Compagnie A===
Compagnie A is the first of two rifle companies and it forms the Luxembourg contingent of the Eurocorps and will normally be integrated into the Belgian contribution during operations. As such it participates in Eurocorps' contribution to the NATO Response Force (entire company) and the EU Battlegroups (one platoon). The company consists of a command element and three reconnaissance platoons of four sections each plus a command section. Each section is equipped with two armored M1114 HMMWV armed with a .50 M2 Browning machine gun. The command section has a MAN X40 truck in addition to its pair of HMMWVs.

===Reconversion Service===
Compagnie B was the educational unit of the army, providing various educational courses for personnel to take in preparation for advancement. On May 19, 2011 Company B was redisgnated as the "Service de Reconversion" (Reconversion Service) with the mission to prepare volunteer soldiers for the return to civilian life. http://www.armee.lu/organisation/centre_militaire/CieB.php The service includes the L'Ecole de l'Armee (Army School). In order to attend this school a soldier must have at least 18 months of service. The School is divided into two sections:
*Level B - this is open for all soldiers at the end of their first 18 months of service. Soldiers follow two six-month periods of tuition in both general and military based subjects prior to taking examinations. Upon gaining 75% pass marks, they can proceed to the next level.
*Level A - Level A is open to soldiers who have achieved the required passes at Level B, or who have gained the equivalent in civilian life prior to their enlistment. Soldiers do a single six-month period of tuition in the same subjects as Level B, but for longer each week.

===Compagnie Commandement et Instruction===
The Compagnie Commandement et Instruction (Staff & Instruction Company) is the main military training unit of the Luxembourg Army, with instruction given in:
*Basic soldiering
*Driving
*Physical training

The Company is also responsible for the army's Elite Sports Section - this is for sportsmen who choose to join the army. Following their basic training, they join the Section de Sports d'Elite de l'Arme (SSEA).

===Compagnie D===
Compagnie D is the second rifle company - it provided Luxembourg's contribution to NATO's ACE Mobile Force (Land) (disbanded in 2002) as the Luxembourg Reconnaissance Company. Luxembourg's participation in various UN, EU and NATO missions is drawn from Compagnie D. As a rifle company, it mirrors Compagnie A in organisation, with a command element and three reconnaissance platoons.

==Special Forces of Luxembourg==
Luxembourg has two reconnaissance platoons, declared to NATO's Allied Mobile Force. They are elite rather than special forces.

The Grand Ducal Police has the Unit Spciale de la Police.

==Appearance==
Luxembourg military uniforms are similar to British uniforms. The military had dress, service or garrison, and field uniforms. Dress uniforms were worn mostly on formal occasions. The service uniform was worn for daily duty. Luxembourg Army uniforms consisted of service and field attire for both summer and winter and a dress uniform and mess jacket for officers. The winter service dress uniform, of olive drab wool, consisted of a single-breasted coat having patch pockets with flaps, a khaki shirt and tie, and trousers that were usually cuffless. The summer uniform was similar but was made of light tan material. Combat uniforms in olive-green, khaki-drab, or woodland camouflage pattern, worn with the United States PASGT helmet, are virtually indistinguishable from those worn until the 1990s by the United States Army

==Grades and insignia==
Guard in front of Grand Ducal Palace, Luxembourg in 2009
Guard in front of Grand Ducal Palace, Luxembourg in 2013
=== Flag Officers ===

* General (there are two, the Grand-Duke wearing a sabre and a crown and the Chef d'Etat Major, wearing a sabre and a star)

===Officers===
* Colonel (a crown and three stars)
* Lieutenant-Colonel (a crown and two stars)
* Major (a crown and a star)
* Captain (three stars)
* First lieutenant (two stars)
* Lieutenant (one star)

===Warrant Officer===
* Warrant Officer (a red-yellow-red stripe)

===Non-commissioned officers===
* Adjudant-Major (three yellow chevrons, two yellow stripes and a little yellow circle in the center)
* Adjudant-Chief (three yellow chevrons and two yellow stripes)
* Adjudant (three yellow chevrons and one yellow stripe)
* Chief-Sergeant (three yellow chevrons)
* First sergeant (two yellow chevrons)
* Sergeant (one yellow chevron)

===Career corporals===
* First chief corporal (one yellow chevron, three red chevrons and one red stripe)
* Chief corporal (one yellow and three red chevrons)
* First corporal (one yellow and two red chevrons)
* Corporal (one yellow and one red chevron)

===Volunteer soldiers===
* First chief soldier (three red chevrons)
* Chief soldier (two red chevrons)
* First soldier (one red chevron)
* Soldier (no insignia)

==Careers==
Officer: Those who have completed high school will enter a special 13-week-basic training in the army as warrant officer, thus visiting the military officer school after for 5 years (normally in Brussels, Belgium), before becoming a lieutenant in the Luxembourg army.

NCO: Those who have completed five years of high school and have served a 4 months as voluntary soldier, will do a 9-month-stage at the Infantry Training Department of the Belgian Army in Arlon, before becoming a sergeant in the Luxembourg army.

Career corporals: Those who haven't completed five years of high school may, after 3 years of service, become career corporals in the Luxembourg Army, if they pass physical and mental tests. They also have to pass a part of the NCO School in Belgium.

==Equipment==

=== Weapons ===
Steyr AUG A1.
Luxembourgish HMMWV on national day.
Four Luxembourg 25 pounder guns rebarrelled to 105 mm and fitted with new sights for gun salutes.
A NATO E-3 with the roundel of Luxembourg painted on its tail.

* Glock 17 9x19mm Parabellum pistol (Service pistol): Replaced Browning Hi-Power pistol
* Steyr AUG 5.56x45mm NATO rifle (Service rifle): Can be fitted with UA/1116 or KITE night sight, replaced FN FAL rifle
* Steyr AUG HBAR 5.56x45mm NATO automatic rifle
* FN MAG 7.62x51mm NATO machine gun: Can be fitted with KITE night sight
* M2 Browning machine gun .50 BMG
* 105 mm howitzer: (Re-barreled 25 pdr. guns) for ceremonial purposes
* M72 Light Anti-tank Weapon (LAW)
* BGM-71 TOW missiles: Replaced the M40 recoilless rifle

=== Vehicles ===
* Humvee vehicles, armoured and unarmoured (including 42 armoured M1114 HMMWV) PICTURE http://www.armyrecognition.com/europe/Belgique/exhibition/Active_Lion/images/Active_Lion_2005_Belgium_Army_10.JPG 
* Jeep Wrangler Rubicon: 15 http://www.militaryphotos.net/forums/showthread.php?76798-Looking-for-luxembourg-soldiers&p=5479299&viewfull=1#post5479299 
* MB 300D 4x4 (1st generation)
* MAN X40 trucks 4x4 and 6x6 PICTURE http://www.armyrecognition.com/europe/Belgique/exhibition/Active_Lion/images/Active_Lion_2005_Belgium_Army_08.JPG 
* Dingo 2 PRV (protected reconnaissance vehicle): 45 http://www.armee.lu/actualites/news.php?news=new_531 http://www.wort.lu/wort/web/letzebuerg/artikel/2010/06/98079/neue-dienstwagen-fuer-die-polizei.php armed with a .50 M2 Browning machine gun in a Protector remote weapon system, and fitted with Thales observation system
* Scania G480 8x8: 31 partially with ballistic protection system http://www.commercialmotor.com/big-lorry-blog/scania-gets-its-call-up-papers http://defense-update.com/wp/20100901_luxembourg-orders-mine-ballistic-protected-trucks-from-scania.html 

===Aircraft===

====NATO-owned====

NATO acquired 18 Boeing E-3As and support equipment for a NATO air defense force. Since all aircraft must be registered with a certain country, the decision was made to register the 18 NATO AWACS planes with Luxembourg, because until that point Luxembourg did not have an air force. The first NATO E-3 was delivered in January 1982. Presently 17 NATO E-3As are in the inventory, since one NATO E-3 was lost in a crash. The 20 aircraft of the NATO AEW Force are all registered to Luxembourg, flown by NATO pilots, and based at the NATO Air Base Geilenkirchen.

Aircraft Origin Type Versions In service Notes 
 Boeing CT-49A NATO military aviation OrBat NATO Trainer Cargo Aircraft (TCA) CT-49A (707-329C) 2 Modified military version of the Boeing 707-329C, specifically the CT-49A version of the Boeing C-137 Stratoliner. 
 Boeing E-3A NATO AWACS/AEW&C Aircraft E-3A Sentry 17 Military version (AWACS) of the Boeing 707-300, specifically the E-3A Sentry version of the Boeing C-137 Stratoliner. 

====Luxembourg-owned====
The government of Luxembourg has ordered 1 Airbus A400M transport aircraft in cooperation with the Belgian Air Component. The aircraft will be delivered in 2019.

Aircraft Origin Type Versions Ordered In service Notes 
 Airbus A400M Transport A400M 1 0 On order. Due to be delivered in 2019. 

====Retired Luxembourg Army Aviation aircraft====

Aircraft Origin Type Versions Operated In service Notes 
 Piper PA-18 Super Cub Trainer, Liaison aircraft L-18C 3 0 Entered service in 1952. Retired in 1968. 

===Communications equipment===
*VHF/PR4G: TRC-9100, TRC-9200V, TRC-9300B and TRC-9500

=== Former Equipment ===
*Rifles
**Karabiner 98k 7.92x57mm IS
**Ross rifle .303 British
**Pattern 1914 Enfield .303 British
**Lee-Enfield .303 British
**FN Model 1949 .30-06 Springfield
**FN FAL 7.62x51mm NATO

*Pistols and Revolvers
**Webley Revolver .38-200
**Browning Hi-Power 9x19mm Parabellum
**M1911 pistol .45 ACP

*Submachine guns
**Sten 9x19mm Parabellum
**Thompson submachine gun .45 ACP
**Sola submachine gun 9x19mm Parabellum
**Uzi 9x19mm Parabellum

*Machine guns
**Bren light machine gun .303 British
**FN BAR .30-06 Springfield
**Vickers machine gun .303 British
**M1919 Browning machine gun .30-06 Springfield
**M60 machine gun 7.62x51mm NATO

*Anti Tank 
**Boys anti-tank rifle .55 Boys
**PIAT
**Bazooka
**M18 recoilless rifle
**M20 recoilless rifle
**M40 recoilless rifle
**2-inch mortar
**Ordnance ML 3 inch Mortar
**M19 mortar
**M1 mortar
**M2 4.2 inch mortar
**L16 81mm Mortar

==Notable soldiers==
* mile Hamilius
* Bodry Gretsch
* Tessy Antony, born 1985, is among the more prominent former members of Luxembourg's military. From March to July 2004 she took part in a mission in Mitrovica, Former Yugoslavia as part of KFOR, the NATO peacekeeping force in Kosovo. In 2006 she married Prince Louis of Luxembourg, with whom she has two sons, Princes Gabriel and Noah. She is styled "Son Altesse Royale Princesse Tessy de Luxembourg".

==Footnotes==

==External links==
* Luxembourgish Army official website
* History of Luxembourg's Army

 



[[Foreign relations of Luxembourg]]

Luxembourg has long been a prominent supporter of European political and economic integration. In efforts foreshadowing European integration, Luxembourg and Belgium in 1921 formed the Belgium-Luxembourg Economic Union (BLEU) to create an inter-exchangeable currency and a common customs regime. Luxembourg is a member of the Benelux Economic Union and was one of the founding members of the European Economic Community (now the European Union). It also participates in the Schengen Group (named after the Luxembourg village where the agreements were signed), whose goal is the free movement of citizens among member states. At the same time, the majority of Luxembourgers have consistently believed that European unity makes sense only in the context of a dynamic transatlantic relationship, and thus have traditionally pursued a pro-NATO, pro-US foreign policy.

Luxembourg is the site of the European Court of Justice, the European Court of Auditors, the Statistical Office of the European Communities (Eurostat) and other vital EU organs. The Secretariat of the European Parliament is located in Luxembourg, but the Parliament usually meets in nearby Strasbourg.

==Luxembourg maintains embassies in the following countries==
Austria, Belgium, China, the Czech Republic, Denmark, France, Germany, Greece, India, Italy, Japan, Malaysia, the Netherlands, Poland, Portugal, Russia, Spain, Switzerland, the United Kingdom and the United States

==Luxembourg intends to open embassies in the following countries==
Turkey and the United Arab Emirates 'Dclaration sur la politique trangre et europenne de Jean Asselborn  la Chambre des Dputs, le mardi 16 novembre 2010" (Declaration on foreign and European Policy to the Chamber of Deputies by Jean Asselborn, Tuesday 16 November 2010) 

==The following countries maintain embassies in Luxembourg==
Austria, Belgium, Canada, China, Croatia, the Czech Republic, Denmark, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Ireland, Italy, Japan, the Netherlands, Poland, Portugal, Romania, Russia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, the United Kingdom and the United States

==Relations by country==

===Australia===

Australia is represented in Luxembourg through its embassy in Brussels (Belgium). Luxembourg is represented in Australia through the embassy of the Netherlands in Canberra and through an honorary consulate in East Lindfield.

===Canada===
* Canada is represented in Luxembourg through its embassy in Brussels (Belgium). Canadian embassy in Brussels (also accredited to Luxembourg) 
* Luxembourg is represented in Canada through its embassy in Washington, D.C. (USA), and 4 honorary consulates (in Calgary, Montreal, Toronto, and Vancouver). Luxembourg embassy in Washington (also accredited to Canada) 
* Both countries are full members of the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development, of NATO and of La Francophonie

===Czech Republic===
* The Czech Republic has an embassy in Luxembourg City. Czech embassy in Luxembourg City (in Czech and French only) 
* Luxembourg has an embassy in Prague. Luxembourg embassy in Prague 
* Both countries are full members of the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development, of the European Union and of NATO.
* Both countries shared a common fate in the 14th century when John the Blind of Luxembourg married Elika Pemyslovna sister of the deceased King Wenceslaus III of Bohemia and became king of Bohemia.

===Denmark===
* Denmark has an embassy in the city of Luxembourg. Embassy of Denmark in the Grand Duchy of Luxembourg 
* Luxembourg has an embassy in Copenhagen.
* Both countries are full members of the Council of Europe, the European Union, and NATO.

===Estonia===
Luxembourg recognised Estonia on February 22, 1923 and re-recognised Estonia on August 27, 1991. Both countries re-established diplomatic relations on August 29, 1991. Estonia is represented in Luxembourg through its embassy in Brussels (Belgium) and an honorary consulate in Luxembourg. Luxembourg is represented in Estonia through its embassy in Prague (Czech Republic). 

In 1937, a prominent Estonian political leader Artur Sirk, while a fugitive in Luxembourg was found dead, having apparently committed suicide by jumping out a second-story window. Although the Luxembourg Gendarmerie report assumed suicide, because of inconsistencies in the report, the Estonian charg d'affaires in Paris, Rudolph Mollerson was sent to investigate. The radical right in interwar Estonia, Andres Kasekamp, Pg 117 Estonian historians including Pusta K. Pusta, Saddiku Paevik, Gesilingen, 1964, vol. 1 and Tomingas W. Tomingas, Vaikiv Ajustu Eestis, New York, 1961 have argued that the death was an act of defenestration by agents of the first President of Estonia, Konstantin Pts.

As of December 31, 2007, foreign investments made in Estonia originating from Luxembourg totaled 225 million EUR accounting for 2% of the total volume of foreign direct investments. There are about 300 Estonians living in Luxembourg. An Estonian cultural association was founded in 1998. The Estonian President Arnold Rtel's state visit to Luxembourg was in May 2003, prime minister Andrus Ansip's in 2006. The Luxembourg Prime Minister Jean-Claude Juncker visited Estonia in 1999 and 2007.

* Trade agreement between Estonia and Belgium and Luxembourg (1935) 
* Agreement on Road Transport between Estonia, Latvia, Lithuania, Belgium, Luxembourg and the Netherlands (came into force 1.12.94) Text of Agreement on Road Transport between Estonia, Latvia, Lithuania, Belgium, Luxembourg and the Netherlands 
* Agreement Between Estonia and the Belgo-Luxembourg Economic Union on the Reciprocal Promotion and Protection of Investments (came into force 23.09.99) Text of the Agreement Between Estonia and the Belgo-Luxembourg Economic Union on the Reciprocal Promotion and Protection of Investments. 
* Agreement Between Estonia and the States of Benelux on Readmission of Persons (came into force 1.02.05)
* Agreement on the Avoidance of Double Taxation and the Prevention of Income and Capital Tax evasion (signed 23.05.2006) 

===Finland===
* Luxembourg recognised Finland's independence on October 25, 1921.
* Luxembourg is represented in Finland through its embassy in Copenhagen. http://formin.finland.fi/public/default.aspx?nodeid=17234&contentlan=2&culture=en-US 
* Finland has an embassy and an honorary consulate general in Luxembourg. Embassy of Finland in Luxembourg 
* Ministry for Foreign Affairs of Finland about relations with Luxembourg

===Greece===
* Greece has an embassy in Luxembourg.
* Luxembourg has an embassy in Athens and 3 honorary consulates in Athens, Patras and Thessaloniki.
* Both countries are full members of NATO and of the European Union.
* Greek Ministry of Foreign Affairs about relations with Luxembourg
* Luxemborugs Ministry of Foreign Affairs about relations with Greece (in French only)

===Hungary===
* Hungary has an embassy in Luxembourg City.
* Luxembourg is represented in Hungary through its embassy in Vienna (Austria).
* Both countries are full members of the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development, of the European Union and of NATO.

===Ireland===
* Ireland has an embassy in Luxembourg City. Irish embassy in Luxembourg City 
* Luxembourg has an honorary consulate in Dublin.
* Both countries are full members of the Council of Europe, of the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development and of the European Union.

===Israel===
In November 1947, Luxembourg voted in favor of the partition plan to create a Jewish state. Israel and Luxembourg established full diplomatic relations in 1949. Due to Luxembourg's small size, the Israeli embassy is located in Brussels and Luxembourg is represented politically by the Dutch embassy and economically by the Belgian embassy.

===Italy===
* Italy has an embassy in Luxembourg City. Italian embassy in Luxembourg City (in French and Italian only) 
* Luxembourg has an embassy in Rome and 9 honorary consulates (in Florence, Genoa, Milan, Naples, Palermo, Perugia, Riccione, Turin, and Venice). Luxembourg embassy in Rome (in Italian only) 
* Both countries are full members of the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development, of the European Union and of NATO.
* There are around 19,000 people of Italian descent living in Luxembourg.

===Kosovo===
Luxembourg recognized the independence of Kosovo on 21 February 2008. Luxembourg has promised to give Kosovo 30 million over the next five years. Luxembourg said that the money was mainly for focus on professional training for Pristina and Mitrovica North authorities.

===Lithuania===
* Formal relations started on 1992-03-23.
* Luxembourg did not recognise the annexation of the Baltic States by the USSR in 1940-1991 either de iure or de facto.
* Lithuania is represented in Luxembourg through its embassy in Brussels (Belgium) and through an honorary consulate in Luxembourg City. Lithuanian embassy in Brussels (also accredited to Luxembourg) 
* Luxembourg is represented in Lithuania through its embassy in Warsaw (Poland) and through an honorary consulate in Vilnius.
* Both countries are full members of NATO and of the European Union.
* Lithuanian Ministry of Foreign Affairs: list of bilateral treaties with Luxembourg

===Malta===
*Malta is represented in Luxembourg through its embassy in Brussel (Belgium) and through an honorary consulate in Luxembourg City.

===Pakistan===

===Romania===
Both countries established diplomatic relations on December 10, 1910. Since August 19, 1991, Romania has an embassy in Luxembourg City. Romanian embassy in Luxembourg City (in French and Romanian only) Luxembourg is represented in Romania through its embassy in Athens (Greece) and two honorary consulates (in Bucharest and Sibiu).

===Russia===

Luxembourg has an embassy in Moscow and an honorary consulate in Saint Petersburg. Russia has an embassy in the city of Luxembourg. 

Both countries are full members of the Council of Europe, the Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe, and the United Nations.

In the history of bilateral relations, the first Russian president to come on an official visit to Luxembourg was Vladimir Putin on 24 May 2007. As bilateral trade had more than tripled from USD 66.6 million in 2003 to USD 228.3 million in 2006, time had come to strengthen the ties between the two countries, energy and finance being the key areas of cooperation between Russia and Luxembourg.

===Turkey===
Luxembourg is represented in Turkey through its embassy in Ankara, which was opened in 1987. http://www.mfa.gov.tr/relations-between-turkey-and-the-grand-duchy-of-luxembourg.en.mfa 

There are 500 ethnic Turk's living in Luxembourg, 200 of whom have dual citizenship. The trade volume between the two States had reached $217 million in 2011. 

Luxembourg strongly supports Turkey's candidacy as a full European Union member. http://news.xinhuanet.com/english2010/world/2011-11/30/c_131279225.htm http://www.todayszaman.com/news-264336-luxembourg-fm-says-eu-needs-turkey-to-become-global-actor.html 

===Ukraine===
* Luxembourg is represented in Ukraine through its embassy in Prague (Czech Republic) and through an honorary consulate in Kiev.
* Ukraine is represented in Luxembourg through its embassy in Brussels (Belgium) and through an honorary consulate in Luxembourg City. Ukrainian embassy in Brussels (also accredited to Luxembourg) 

===United Kingdom===

===United States===
Embassy of Luxembourg in Washington, D.C.

The United States, fighting on the Allied side, contributed to Luxembourg's liberation in World War I and World War II. More than 5,000 American soldiers, including U.S. Army General George S. Patton, are buried at the Luxembourg American Cemetery and Memorial near the capital of Luxembourg City, and there are monuments in many towns to American liberators. The strong U.S.-Luxembourg relationship is expressed both bilaterally and through common membership in NATO, the Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD), and the Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe (OSCE).

===Vietnam===

Both countries signed diplomatic relations in 1973. Luxembourg's representation in Vietnam is through its embassy in Beijing, China. "Embassy Information", EmabssyInformation.com, retrieved 28 April 2009. Vietnam is represented through its embassy in Brussels, Belgium. "List of Vietnamese Embassies and Consulates abroad", 48th International Mathematical Olympiad, retrieved 28 April 2009. 

==See also==
* List of diplomatic missions in Luxembourg
* List of diplomatic missions of Luxembourg

==References==
 

==External links==
*Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Luxembourg
* Australia Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade about the relations with Luxembourg

 

[[London Underground]]

The London Underground (also known as the Tube or simply the Underground) is a public metro system serving a large part of Greater London and parts of the home counties of Buckinghamshire, Hertfordshire and Essex. The system serves 270 stations and has 402 km of track, 55% of which is above ground. The network incorporates the world's first underground railway, the Metropolitan Railway, which opened in 1863 and is now part of the Circle, Hammersmith & City and Metropolitan lines; and the first line to operate underground electric traction trains, the City & South London Railway in 1890, now part of the Northern line. The network has expanded to 11 lines, and in 2012/13 carried 1.23 billion passengers.

The system's first tunnels were built just below the surface using the cut and cover method. Later, circular tunnels  which give rise to its nickname the Tube  were dug through the London Clay at a deeper level. The early lines were marketed as the UNDERGROUND in the early 20th century on maps and signs at central London stations. The private companies that owned and ran the railways were merged in 1933 to form the London Passenger Transport Board. The current operator, London Underground Limited (LUL), is a wholly owned subsidiary of Transport for London (TfL), the statutory corporation responsible for most elements of the transport network in Greater London.

, 91 per cent of operational expenditure is covered by passenger fares. The Travelcard ticket was introduced in 1983 and Oyster, an electronic ticketing system, in 2003.

Today in official publicity and in general, the term 'Tube' embraces the whole Underground system, not just the lines that run in deep-level tunnels. The schematic Tube map, designed by Harry Beck in 1931, was voted a national design icon in 2006 and now includes other lines - the Docklands Light Railway and London Overground - as well as the non-rail Emirates Air Line. London Underground celebrated 150 years of operations in 2013, with various events marking the milestone. 

==History==

===Origins===
The Metropolitan Railway opened using GWR broad gauge locomotives
The idea of an underground railway linking the City of London with some of the railway termini in its urban centre was proposed in the 1830s, and the Metropolitan Railway was granted permission to build such a line in 1854. The world's first underground railway, it opened in January 1863 between Paddington and Farringdon using gas-lit wooden carriages hauled by steam locomotives. It was hailed as a success, carrying 38,000 passengers on the opening day, and borrowing trains from other railways to supplement the service. The Metropolitan District Railway (commonly known as the District Railway) opened in December 1868 from South Kensington to Westminster as part of a plan for an underground 'inner circle' connecting London's main-line termini. The Metropolitan and District railways completed the Circle line in 1884, built using the cut and cover method. Both railways expanded, the District building five branches to the west reaching Ealing, Hounslow, Uxbridge, Richmond and Wimbledon and the Metropolitan eventually extended as far as in Buckinghamshire, more than 50 mi from Baker Street and the centre of London.

For the first deep-level tube line, the City and South London Railway, two 10 ft diameter circular tunnels were dug between King William Street (close to today's Monument station) and Stockwell, under the roads to avoid the need for agreement with owners of property on the surface. This opened in 1890 with electric locomotives that hauled carriages with small opaque windows, nicknamed padded cells. The Waterloo and City Railway opened in 1898, followed by the Central London Railway in 1900, known as the "twopenny tube". These two ran electric trains in circular tunnels having diameters between 11 ft and 12 ft, whereas the Great Northern and City Railway, which opened in 1904, was built to take main line trains from Finsbury Park to a Moorgate terminus in the City and had 16 ft diameter tunnels.

alt=Sketch showing about a dozen people standing on an underground railway platform with a train standing at the platform. Several more people are visible inside the train, which has the words "Baker St" visible on its side.
In the early 20th century, the District and Metropolitan railways needed to electrify and a joint committee recommended an AC system, the two companies co-operating because of the shared ownership of the inner circle. The District, needing to raise the finance necessary, found an investor in the American Charles Yerkes who favoured a DC system similar to that in use on the City & South London and Central London railways. The Metropolitan Railway protested about the change of plan, but after arbitration by the Board of Trade, the DC system was adopted. Yerkes soon had control of the District Railway and established the Underground Electric Railways Company of London (UERL) in 1902 to finance and operate three tube lines, the Baker Street and Waterloo Railway (Bakerloo), the Charing Cross, Euston and Hampstead Railway (Hampstead) and the Great Northern, Piccadilly and Brompton Railway, (Piccadilly), which all opened between 1906 and 1907. When the 'Bakerloo' was so named in July 1906, The Railway Magazine called it an undignified "gutter title". By 1907 the District and Metropolitan Railways had electrified the underground sections of their lines.

A joint marketing agreement between most of the companies in the early years of the 20th century included maps, joint publicity, through ticketing and UNDERGROUND signs outside stations in Central London. The Bakerloo line was extended north to Queen's Park to join a new electric line from Euston to Watford, but World War I delayed construction and trains reached in 1917. During air raids in 1915 people used the tube stations as shelters. An extension of the Central line east to Ealing was also delayed by the war and completed in 1920. After the war government-backed financial guarantees were used to expand the network and the tunnels of the City and South London and Hampstead railways were linked at Euston and Kennington, although the combined service was not named the Northern line until later. The Metropolitan promoted housing estates near the railway with the "Metro-land" brand and nine housing estates were built near stations on the line. Electrification was extended north from Harrow to Rickmansworth, and branches opened from Rickmansworth to Watford in 1925 and from Wembley Park to Stanmore in 1932. The Piccadilly line was extended north to Cockfosters and took over District line branches to Harrow (later Uxbridge) and Hounslow.

===London Transport===
In 1933, London's underground railways, tramway and bus operators were merged to form the London Passenger Transport Board, which became known as London Transport, and Harry Beck's diagrammatic tube map appeared for the first time. The outlying lines of the former Metropolitan Railway closed, the Brill Tramway in 1935, and the line from Quainton Road to Verney Junction in 1936. The 193540 New Works Programme included the extension of the Central and Northern lines and the Bakerloo line to take over the Metropolitan's Stanmore branch. World War II suspended these plans after the Bakerloo line had reached Stanmore and the Northern line High Barnet and Mill Hill East in 1941. During the war many tube stations were used as air-raid shelters. Following bombing in 1940 passenger services over the West London Line were suspended, leaving Olympia exhibition centre without a railway service until a District line shuttle from Earl's Court began after the war. After work restarted on the Central line extensions in east and west London, these were complete in 1949. After Britain's railways were nationalised in 1948 the reconstruction of the main line railways was given priority over the maintenance of the Underground and most of the unfinished plans of the pre-war New Works Programme were shelved or postponed.

However, the District line needed new trains and an unpainted aluminium train entered service in 1953, this becoming the standard for new trains. In the early 1960s the Metropolitan line was electrified as far as Amersham, British Rail providing services for the former Metropolitan line stations between Amersham and Aylesbury. The Victoria line was dug under central London and, unlike the earlier tubes, the tunnels did not follow the roads above. The line opened in 196871 with the trains being driven automatically and magnetically encoded tickets collected by automatic gates gave access to the platforms. In 1976 the isolated Northern City Line was taken over by British Rail and linked up with the main line railway at Finsbury Park.
Platform edge doors at Westminster tube station.
In 1979 another new tube, the Jubilee line, named in honour of Queen Elizabeth's Silver Jubilee, took over the Stanmore branch from the Bakerloo line and was extended through to the Docklands in 1999. Under the control of the Greater London Council, London Transport introduced a system of fare zones for buses and underground trains that cut the average fare in 1981. Fares increased following a legal challenge but the fare zones were retained, and in the mid-1980s the Travelcard and the Capitalcard were introduced. To comply with new safety regulations issued as a result of the King's Cross fire and to combat graffiti a train refurbishment project was launched in July 1991. In 1984 control of London Buses and the London Underground passed to London Regional Transport (LRT), which reported directly to Secretary of State for Transport. One person operation had been planned in 1968, but conflict with the trade unions delayed introduction until the 1980s.

In the early years of the 21st century London Underground was reorganised in a Public-Private Partnership where private infrastructure companies (infracos) upgraded and maintained the railway. In 2003 control passed to Transport for London (TfL) that had been opposed to the arrangement. One infraco went into administration in 2007 and TfL took over the responsibilities, TfL taking over the other in 2010. Electronic ticketing in the form of the contact-less Oyster card was introduced in 2003. The East London line closed in 2007 so that it could be converted into a London Overground line, and in December 2009 the Circle line changed from serving a closed loop around the centre of London to a spiral also serving Hammersmith. 

==Transport for London==

Transport for London (TfL) was created in 2000 as the integrated body responsible for London's transport system. It replaced London Regional Transport. It assumed control of London Underground Limited in July 2003. TfL is part of the Greater London Authority and is constituted as a statutory corporation regulated under local government finance rules. It has three subsidiaries: London Transport Insurance (Guernsey) Ltd, TfL Trustee Company Ltd and Transport Trading Ltd (TTL), and London Underground Limited is a subsidiary of TTL. 

The TfL Board is appointed by the Mayor of London. The Mayor also sets the structure and level of public transport fares in London. However the day-to-day running of the corporation is left to the Commissioner of Transport for London. The current Commissioner is Peter Hendy. The Mayor is responsible for producing an integrated transport strategy for London and for consulting the GLA, TfL, local councils and others on the strategy. The Mayor is also responsible for setting TfL's budget. The GLA is consulted on the Mayor's transport strategy, and inspects and approves the Mayor's budget. It is able to summon the Mayor and senior staff to account for TfL's performance. London TravelWatch, a body appointed by and reporting to the Assembly, deals with complaints about transport in London. 

==Infrastructure==

===Railway===
The Underground serves 270 stations. Fourteen Underground stations are outside Greater London, of which five (Amersham, Chalfont & Latimer, Chesham, and Chorleywood on the Metropolitan line, and Epping on the Central line), are beyond the M25 London Orbital motorway. Of the 32 London boroughs, six (Bexley, Bromley, Croydon, Kingston, Lewisham and Sutton) are not served by the Underground network, while Hackney has Old Street and Manor House only just inside its boundaries.

A Northern line deep-tube train leaves a tunnel mouth just north of Hendon Central station.
London Underground's eleven lines total 402 km in length, making it the fourth longest metro system in the world. These are made up of the sub-surface network and the deep-tube lines. The Circle, District, Hammersmith & City, and Metropolitan lines form the sub-surface network, with railway tunnels just below the surface and of a similar size to those on British main lines. The Hammersmith & City and Circle lines share stations and most of their track with each other, as well as with the Metropolitan and District lines. The Bakerloo, Central, Jubilee, Northern, Piccadilly, Victoria and Waterloo & City lines are deep-level tubes, with smaller trains that run in two circular tunnels (tubes) with a diameter about 11 ft. These lines have the exclusive use of a pair of tracks, except for the Piccadilly line, which shares track with the District line between Acton Town and Hanger Lane Junction and with the Metropolitan line between Rayners Lane and Uxbridge, and the Bakerloo line, which shares track with London Overground services north of Queen's Park. Fifty-five per cent of the system runs on the surface, and there are 20 mi of cut-and-cover tunnel and 93 mi of tube tunnel. Many of the central London underground stations on deep-level tube lines are higher than the running lines to assist deceleration when arriving and acceleration when departing. Trains generally run on the left-hand track, although in some places the tunnels are above each other, for example the Central line east of St Paul's station, or the running tunnels are on the right, for example on the Victoria line between Warren Street and King's Cross St. Pancras to allow cross-platform interchange with the Northern line between northbound and southbound trains at Euston. 

The lines are electrified with a four-rail DC system: a conductor rail between the rails is energised at 210 V and a rail outside the running rails at +420 V, giving a potential difference of 630 V. On the sections of line shared with mainline trains, such as the District line from East Putney to Wimbledon and Gunnersbury to Richmond, and the Bakerloo line north of Queen's Park, the centre rail is bonded to the running rails. 

===Lines===

 Name Map colour Firstoperated Type Length No.Sta Current Stock Future Stock Tripsper annum Avg. tripsper mile 
 (1000)2011/12 figures 
 Bakerloo line Brown 1906 DeepTube 23.2 km14.5mi 25 1972 Stock N/A 111,136 7,665 
 Central line Red 1900 DeepTube 74 km46mi 49 1992 Stock N/A 260,916 5,672 
 Circle line Yellow 1871 Subsurface 27.2 km17mi 36 S Stock N/A 114,609 4,716 
 District line Green 1868 Subsurface 64 km40mi 60 D78 StockS Stock S Stock 208,317 5,208 
 Hammersmith & City line Pink 1864 Subsurface 25.5 km 15.9mi 29 S Stock N/A 114,609 4,716 
 Jubilee line Silver 1979 DeepTube 36.2 km22.5mi 27 1996 Stock N/A 213,554 9,491 
 Metropolitan line Purple 1863 Subsurface 66.7 km41.5mi 34 S Stock N/A 66,779 1,609 
 Northern line Black 1890 DeepTube 58 km36mi 50 1995 Stock N/A 252,310 7,009 
 Piccadilly line Dark Blue 1906 DeepTube 71 km44.3mi 53 1973 Stock N/A 210,169 4,744 
 Victoria line Light Blue 1968 DeepTube 21 km13.3mi 16 2009 Stock N/A 199,988 15,093 
 Waterloo & City line Turquoise 1898 DeepTube 2.5 km1.5mi 2 1992 Stock N/A 15,892 10,595 
 

===Former main lines===
The Underground uses a number of railways and alignments that were built by main-line railway companies.
*Bakerloo line: Between Queen's Park and Harrow & Wealdstone this runs largely parallel to the London & North Western Railway (LNWR) main line that opened in 1837. The Bakerloo line route has always been segregated, and was laid out by the LNWR in 191215.
*Central line: The railway from just south of Leyton to just south of Loughton was built by Eastern Counties Railway in 1856 on the same alignment in use today. The Underground also uses the line built in 1865 by the Great Eastern Railway (GER) between Loughton to Ongar via Epping. The connection to the main line south of Leyton was closed in 1970 and removed in 1972. The line from Epping to Ongar was closed in 1994; most of the line is in use today by the heritage Epping Ongar Railway. The line between Newbury Park and Woodford junction (west of Roding Valley) via Hainault was built by the GER in 1903, the connections to the main line south of Newbury Park closing in 1947 (in the Ilford direction) and 1956 (in the Seven Kings direction).
*Central line: The line from just north of White City to Ealing Broadway was built in 1917 by the Great Western Railway (GWR) and passenger service introduced by the Underground in 1920. North Acton to West Ruislip was built by GWR on behalf of the Underground in 19478 as parallel line to the pre-existing tracks from Old Oak Common junction towards and beyond, which date from 1904. , the original Old Oak Common junction to route sees one main-line train a day to/from Paddington. 
*District line: South of Kensington Olympia short sections of the 1862 West London Railway (WLR) and its 1863 West London Extension Railway (WLER) were used when District extended from Earl's Court in 1872. The District had its own bay platform at Olympia built in 1958 along with track on the bed of the 1862/3 WLR/WLER northbound. Southbound WLR/WLER became the new northbound main line at this time, and a new southbound main-line track was built through site of former goods yard. The 1872 junction closed in 1958, while a further connection to the WLR just south of Olympia closed in 1992, and the branch is now segregated.
*District line: The line between Campbell Road junction (now closed), near Bromley-by-Bow, and Barking was built by the London, Tilbury & Southend Railway (LTSR) in 1858. The slow tracks were built 190305, when District services were extended from Bow Road (though there were no District services east of East Ham from 1905 to 1932). The slow tracks were shared with LTSR stopping and goods trains until segregated by 1962, when main-line trains stopped serving intermediate stations.
*District line: The railway from Barking to Upminster was built by LTSR in 1885 and the District extended over the route in 1902. District withdrew between 1905 and 1932, when the route was quadrupled. Main-line trains ceased serving intermediate stations in 1962, and the District line today only uses the 1932 slow tracks.
*District line: The westbound track between east of Ravenscourt Park and Turnham Green and Turnham Green to Gunnersbury follows the alignment of a railway built by the London & South Western Railway (LSWR) in 1869. Eastbound track between Turnham Green and east of Ravenscourt Park follows the alignment built in 1911; this was closed 1916 before being re-used when the Piccadilly line was extended in 1932.
*District line: The line between East Putney and Wimbledon was built by the LSWR in 1889. The last regular main-line service ran in 1941 but it still sees a few Waterloo services at the start and end of the daily timetable. Maund, Richard (2013). Passenger Train Services over Unusual Lines. 
*Hammersmith & City: Between Paddington and Westbourne Park tube station, the line is parallel to the main line. The Great Western main line opened in 1836, serving a temporary terminus the other side of Bishop's Road and when the current Paddington station opened in 1854, the line passed to the south of the old station. On opening in 1864 the Hammersmith & City ran via the main line to a junction at Westbourne Park, until 1867 when two tracks opened to the south of the main line, with a crossing near Westbourne Bridge, Paddington. The current two tracks to the north of the main line and the subway east of Westbourne Park opened in 1878. The H & C route is now completely segregated from the main line.
*Jubilee line: Between Canning Town and Stratford was built the GER in 1846 with passenger services starting in 1847, making this the oldest railway in use as part of today's Underground system. The original alignment was quadrupled "in stages between 1860 and 1892" for freight services before being lifted as traffic declined during the 20th century and re-laid for Jubilee line services that started in 1999. The current Docklands Light Railway (ex-North London Line) uses the original eastern alignment and the Jubilee uses the western alignment.
*Northern line: The line from East Finchley to Mill Hill East was opened in 1867, and from Finchley Central to High Barnet in 1872, both by the Great Northern Railway.
*Piccadilly line: westbound track between east of Ravenscourt Park and Turnham Green built by LSWR in 1869, originally used for eastbound main-line and District services, eastbound track built in 1911 and closed 1916 and re-used when the Piccadilly line was extended in 1932.

===Main line routes currently sharing track with LUL===
*Bakerloo line - Queen's Park to Harrow & Wealdstone, shared with London Overground Euston to Watford Junction service
*District line - Gunnersbury to Richmond, shared with London Overground North London Line
*District line - East Putney to Wimbledon, shared with South West Trains services when diverted
*Metropolitan line - Harrow-on-the-Hill to Amersham, shared with Chiltern Railways Marylebone to Aylesbury service

===Trains===

 A sub-surface Metropolitan line A Stock train (left) passes a deep-tube Piccadilly line 1973 Stock train (right) in the siding at Rayners Lane.
London Underground trains come in two sizes, larger sub-surface trains and smaller deep-tube trains. Since the early 1960s all passenger trains have been electric multiple units with sliding doors and a train last ran with a guard in 2000. All lines use fixed length trains with between six and eight cars, except for the Waterloo & City line that uses four cars. New trains are designed for maximum number of standing passengers and for speed of access to the cars and have regenerative braking and public address systems. Since 1999 all new stock has had to comply with accessibility regulations that require such things as access and room for wheelchairs, and the size and location of door controls. All underground trains are required to comply with the The Rail Vehicle Accessibility (Non Interoperable Rail System) Regulations 2010 (RVAR 2010) by 2020. 

Stock on sub-surface lines is identified by a letter (such as S Stock, used on the Metropolitan line), while tube stock is identified by the year of intended introduction (for example, 1996 Stock, used on the Jubilee line).

===Ventilation and cooling===

When the Bakerloo line opened in 1906 it was advertised with a maximum temperature of 60 F, but over time the tube tunnels have warmed up. In 1938 approval was given for a ventilation improvement programme, and a refrigerating unit was installed in a lift shaft at Tottenham Court Road. More recently, temperatures of 47 C were reported in the 2006 European heat wave. It was pointed out in 2002 that, if animals were being transported, temperatures on the Tube would break European Commission animal welfare laws. A 2000 study reported that air quality was seventy-three times worse than at street level, with a passenger breathing the same mass of particulates during a twenty minute journey on the Northern line as smoking a cigarette. The main purpose of the London Underground's ventilation fans is to extract hot air from the tunnels, and fans across the network are being refurbished, although complaints of noise from local residents preclude their use at full power at night. 

In June 2006 a groundwater cooling system was installed at Victoria station. In 2012, air-cooling units were installed on platforms at Green Park station using cool deep groundwater and at Oxford Circus using chiller units at the top of an adjacent building. New air-conditioned trains are being introduced on the sub-surface lines, but space is limited on tube trains for air-conditioning units and these would heat the tunnels even more. The Deep Tube Programme, investigating replacing the trains for the Bakerloo and Piccadilly lines, is looking for trains with better energy conservation and regenerative braking, on which it might be possible to install a form of air-conditioning. 

===Lifts and escalators===

Escalators at Canary Wharf station
Originally access to the deep-tube platforms was by a lift. Each lift was manned, and at some quiet stations in the 1920s the ticket office was moved into the lift, or it was arranged that the lift could be controlled from the ticket office. The first escalator on the London Underground was installed in 1911 between the District and Piccadilly platforms at Earl's Court and from the following year new deep-level stations were provided with escalators instead of lifts. The escalators had a diagonal shunt at the top landing. In 1921 a recorded voice instructed passengers to stand on the right and signs followed in World War II. Travellers were asked to stand on the right so that anyone wishing to overtake them at the end would have an extra section of moving stairway. The first 'comb' type escalator was installed in 1924 at Clapham Common. In the 1920s and 1930s many lifts were replaced by escalators.

There are 426 escalators on the London Underground system and the longest, at 60 m, is at Angel. The shortest, at Stratford, gives a vertical rise of 4.1 m. There are 164 lifts, and numbers have increased in recent years due to a programme to increase accessibility. 

===Wi-Fi and mobile phone reception===
In summer 2012 London Underground, in partnership with Virgin Media, tried out Wi-Fi hot spots in many stations, but not in the tunnels, that allowed passengers free internet access. The free trial proved successful and was extended to the end of 2012 whereupon it switched to a service freely available to subscribers to Virgin Media and others, or as a paid-for service. Even without subscribing to paid-for Wi-Fi services, the free signals can be used by smartphones to alert a traveller that they have arrived at a specific station. It is not currently possible to use mobile phones underground, and a project to extend the network before the 2012 Olympics was abandoned due to commercial and technical difficulties. 

==Proposed improvements and expansions==

===New lines===
Crossrail is under construction and expected to open in 2018, providing a new underground route across central London integrated with, but not part of the London Underground system. Two options are being considered for the route of Crossrail 2 on a north-south alignment across London, with hopes that it could be open by 2033. 

===Line extensions===

====Croxley Rail Link====

The Croxley Rail Link involves re-routing the Metropolitan line's Watford branch from the current terminus at Watford over part of the disused Croxley Green branch line to with stations at Cassiobridge, Watford Vicarage Road and . Funding was agreed in December 2011, and the final approval for the extension was given on 24 July 2013. Construction work is expected to start in June 2014 and end by January 2016. 

====Northern line extension to Battersea====

It is planned that the Northern line be extended to Battersea with an intermediate station at Nine Elms. In December 2012, the Treasury confirmed that it will provide a guarantee that allows the Greater London Authority to borrow up to 1 billion from the Public Works Loan Board, at a preferential rate, to finance the construction of the line. In April 2013, Transport for London applied for the legal powers of a Transport and Works Act Order to proceed with the extension, with a decision expected in the summer of 2013. The stations could open in 2020. 

====Bakerloo line extension to Camberwell====

In 1931 the extension of the Bakerloo line from Elephant & Castle to Camberwell was approved, with stations at Albany Road and an interchange at . However, with post-war austerity, the plan was abandoned. In 2006 Ken Livingstone, the then Mayor of London, announced that within twenty years Camberwell would have a tube station. Transport for London has indicated that extensions, possibly to Camberwell, could play a part in the future transport strategy for South London over the coming years. However, no such planning of an extension has been revealed. There have also been many other proposals to extend the line to Streatham, Lewisham, and even beyond Lewisham, taking over the suburban Hayes line via Catford Bridge to relieve some capacity on the suburban rail network.

====Central line extension to Uxbridge====
The London Borough of Hillingdon has proposed that the Central line be extended from West Ruislip to Uxbridge via Ickenham, claiming this would cut traffic on the A40 in the area. 

===Infrastructure===
The signalling system on the Northern line is being replaced to increase capacity on the line by 20 per cent by the end of 2014. Capacity can be increased further if the operation of the Charing Cross and Bank branches are separated. 
New S Stock trains are being introduced on the sub-surface (District, Metropolitan, Hammersmith & City and Circle) lines, and the track, electrical supply and signalling systems are being upgraded in a programme to increase peak-hour capacity, which is scheduled for completion by the end of 2018. A control room for the sub-surface network has been built in Hammersmith and an automatic train control (ATC) system is to replace signalling equipment installed from the 1940s. Bombardier won the contact in June 2011, but was released by agreement in December 2013 and London Underground are looking for a new contractor. Options for new trains for the Bakerloo and Piccadilly lines are being considered. 

==Travelling==

===Ticketing===
The Oyster card, a contactless smart card used across the London transport system

The Underground uses Transport for London's zonal fare system to calculate fares. There are nine zones, zone 1 being the central zone, which includes the loop of the Circle line with a few stations to the south of River Thames. The only London Underground stations in Zones 7 to 9 are on the Metropolitan line beyond Moor Park, outside Greater London. Some stations are in two zones, and the cheapest fare applies. Paper tickets or the contactless Oyster card can be used for travel. Single and return tickets are available in either format, but Travelcards (season tickets) for longer than a day are available only on Oyster cards. 

TfL introduced the Oyster card in 2003; this is a pre-payment smartcard with an embedded contactless RFID chip. It can be loaded with Travelcards and used on the Underground, the Overground, buses, trams, the Docklands Light Railway, and National Rail services within London. Fares for single journeys are cheaper than paper tickets, and a daily cap limits the total cost in a day to the price of a Day Travelcard. The Oyster card must be 'touched in' at the start and end of a journey, otherwise it is regarded as 'incomplete' and the maximum fare charged. In March 2012 the cost of this in the previous year to travellers was 66.5 million. Contactless payment cards can be used instead of an Oyster card on buses, and it is planned to extend this to the Underground in early 2014. 

A concessionary fare scheme is operated by London Councils for residents who are disabled or meet certain age criteria. Residents born before 1951 were eligible after their 60th birthday, whereas those born in 1955 will need to wait for they are 66. Called a "Freedom Pass" it allows for free travel on TfL-operated routes at all times and is valid on some National Rail services within London at weekends and after 09:30 on Monday to Fridays. Since 2010, the Freedom Pass has included an embedded holder's photograph; it lasts five years between renewals. 

In addition to automatic and staffed ticket gates, the Underground is patrolled by both uniformed and plain-clothes ticket inspectors with hand-held Oyster-card readers. Passengers travelling without a valid ticket must pay a penalty fare of 80 (or 40 if paid within 21 days) and can be prosecuted for fare evasion under the Regulation of Railways Act 1889 and Transport for London Byelaws. 

===Hours of operation===
The tube closes overnight, the first trains running from about 05:00 to just after 01:00 the following morning, with later starting times at weekends. The nightly closures are used for maintenance, but some lines stay open at New Year and close later during major public events such as the 2012 London Olympics. London Underground are planning to run a 24-hour service on Friday and Saturday nights on some lines at the weekend from 2015, following completion of upgrades. Some lines are closed for scheduled engineering work at weekends to update the system. 

The Underground runs limited service on Christmas Eve with some lines closing early, and does not operate on Christmas Day. Since 2010 a dispute between London Underground and trade unions over holiday pay has resulted in a limited service on Boxing Day. 

===Accessibility===
The gap between a train and the platform edge at Victoria. "Mind the gap" signs and announcements have been made at stations with curved platforms since 1926 and recorded messages have been used since the late 1960s.
Accessibility by people with limited mobility was not considered when most of the system was built, and before 1993 fire regulations prohibited wheelchairs on the underground. The stations on the Jubilee Line Extension, opened in 1999, were designed for accessibility, but retrofitting accessibility features to the older stations is a major investment that is planned to take over twenty years. A 2010 London Assembly Report concluded that over ten per cent of the people of London had reduced mobility, and with an ageing population, numbers will increase in the future.

TfL produces a version of the tube map that indicates stations that are step-free from street to platforms. There can also be a step from platform to train as large as 12 in and a gap between the train and curved platforms, and these distances are marked on the map. Access from platform to train at some stations can be assisted using a boarding ramp operated by staff, and a section has been raised on some platforms to reduce the step. 

 there are 66 stations with step-free access from platform to train, and there are plans to provide step-free access at another 28 in ten years. By 2016 a third of stations are to have platform humps that reduce the step from platform to train. New trains, such as those being introduced on the sub-surface network, have access and room for wheelchairs, improved audio and visual information systems and accessible door controls. 

===Delays and overcrowding===
An overcrowded Northern line train. Overcrowding is a regular problem for Tube passengers, especially during peak hours.
During peak hours, stations can get so crowded they need to be closed. Passengers may not get on the first train and the majority of passengers do not find a seat on their trains, some trains having more than four passengers every square metre. When asked, passengers report overcrowding as the aspect of the network that they are least satisfied with, and overcrowding has been linked to poor productivity and potential poor heart health. Capacity increases have been overtaken by increased demand, and peak overcrowding has increased by 16 per cent since 2004/5.

Compared with 2003/4, the reliability of the network had increased in 2010/11, with Lost Customer Hours reduced from 54 million to 40 million. Passengers are entitled to a refund if their journey is delayed by 15 minutes or more due to circumstances within the control of TfL, and in 2010, 330,000 passengers of a potential 11 million Tube passengers claimed compensation for delays. A number of mobile phone apps and services have been developed to help passengers claim their refund more efficiently. 

===Safety===

London Underground is authorised to operate trains by the Office of Rail Regulation, and the latest Safety Certification and Safety Authorisation is valid until 2017. there had been 310 days since the last major incident, when a passenger had died after falling on the track. 

In November 2011 it was reported that 80 people had committed suicide in the previous year on the London Underground, up from 46 in 2000. Most platforms at deep tube stations have pits, often referred to as 'suicide pits', beneath the track. These were constructed in 1926 to aid drainage of water from the platforms, but halve the likelihood of a fatality when a passenger falls or jumps in front of a train. 

==Design and the arts==

===Map===
The left side shows the 1933 Beck map and the right side the map as it appeared in 2012

Early maps of the Metropolitan and District railways were city maps with the lines superimposed, and the District published a pocket map in 1897. A Central London Railway route diagram appears on a 1904 postcard and 1905 poster, similar maps appearing in District Railway cars in 1908. In the same year, following a marketing agreement between the operators, a joint central area map that included all the lines was published. See a copy on commons A new map was published in 1921 without any background details, but the central area was squashed, requiring smaller letters and arrows. Harry Beck had the idea of expanding this central area, distorting geography, and simplifying the map so that the railways appeared as straight lines with equally spaced stations. He presented his original draft in 1931, and after initial rejection it was first printed in 1933. Today's tube map is an evolution of that original design, and the ideas are used by many metro systems around the world. 

Currently the standard tube map shows the Docklands Light Railway, London Overground and Emirates Air Line as well as the London Underground; a more detailed map covering a larger area, published by National Rail and Transport for London, includes London Tramlink and suburban railway services. The tube map came second in a BBC and London Transport Museum poll asking for a favourite UK design icon of the 20th century and the underground's 150th anniversary was celebrated by a Google Doodle on the search engine. 

===Roundel===

While the first use of a roundel in a London transport context was the trademark of the London General Omnibus Company registered in 1905, it was first used on the Underground in 1908 when the UERL placed a solid red circle behind station nameboards on platforms to highlight the name. The word "UNDERGROUND" was placed in a roundel instead of a station name on posters in 1912 by Charles Sharland and Alfred France, as well as on undated and possibly earlier posters from the same period. Frank Pick thought the solid red disc cumbersome and took a version where the disc became a ring from a 1915 Sharland poster and gave it to Edward Johnston to develop, and registered the symbol as a trademark in 1917. The roundel was first printed on a map cover using the Johnston typeface in June 1919, and printed in colour the following October.
Roundel and "way out" arrow on a platform at Bethnal Green station

After the UERL was absorbed into the London Passenger Transport Board in 1933, it used forms of the roundel for buses, trams and coaches, as well as the Underground. The words "London Transport" were added inside the ring, above and below the bar. The Carr-Edwards report, published in 1938 as possibly the first attempt at a graphics standards manual, introduced stricter guidelines. Between 1948 and 1957 the word "Underground" in the bar was replaced by "London Transport". , forms of the roundel, with differing colours for the ring and bar, is used for other TfL services, such as London Buses, Tramlink, London Overground, London River Services and Docklands Light Railway. Crossrail, due to open in 2018, is to be identified with a roundel. The 100th anniversary of the roundel was celebrated in 2008 by TfL commissioning 100 artists to produce works that celebrate the design. 

===Architecture===

Seventy of the 270 London Underground stations use buildings that are on the Statutory List of Buildings of Special Architectural or Historic Interest, and five have entrances in listed buildings. The Metropolitan Railway's original seven stations were inspired by Italianate designs, with the platforms lit by daylight from above and by gas lights in large glass globes. Early District Railway stations were similar and on both railways the further from central London the station the simpler the construction. The City & South London Railway opened with red-brick buildings, designed by Thomas Phillips Figgis, topped with a lead-covered dome that contained the lift mechanism. The Central London Railway appointed Harry Bell Measures as architect, who designed its pinkish-brown steel-framed buildings with larger entrances.
Russell Square, one of the UERL stations designed by Leslie Green clad in ox-blood tiles
In the first decade of the 20th century Leslie Green established a house style for the tube stations built by the UERL, which were clad in ox-blood faience blocks. Green pioneered using building design to guide passengers with direction signs on tiled walls, with the stations given a unique identity with patterns on the platform walls. Many of these tile patterns survive, though a significant number of these are now replicas. Harry W. Ford was responsible for the design of at least 17 UERL and District Railway stations, including Barons Court and Embankment, and claimed to have first thought of enlarging the U and D in the UNDERGROUND wordmark. The Met's architect Charles Walter Clark had used a neo-classical design for rebuilding Baker Street and Paddington Praed Street stations before World War I and, although the fashion had changed, continued with Farringdon in 1923. The buildings had metal lettering attached to pale walls. Clark would later design "Chiltern Court", the large, luxurious block of apartments at Baker Street, that opened in 1929. In the 1920s and 1930s, Charles Holden designed a series of modernist and art-deco stations some of which he described as his 'brick boxes with concrete lids'. Holden's design for the Underground's headquarters building at 55 Broadway included avant-garde sculptures by Jacob Epstein, Eric Gill and Henry Moore. 

When the Central line was extended east, the stations were simplified Holden proto-Brutalist designs, and a cavernous concourse built at Gants Hill in honour of early Moscow Metro stations. Misha Black was appointed design consultant for the 1960s Victoria line, contributing to the line's uniform look, but each station had an individual tile motif. The stations of the 1990s extension of the Jubilee line were much larger than before and designed by architects such as Norman Foster and Michael Hopkins.

Many platforms have unique interior designs to help passenger identification. The tiling at Baker Street incorporates repetitions of Sherlock Holmes's silhouette and at Tottenham Court Road semi-abstract mosaics by Eduardo Paolozzi feature musical instruments, tape machines and butterflies. Robyn Denny designed the murals on the Northern line platforms at Embankment. 

===Typography===

The first posters used a number of type fonts, as was contemporary practice, and station signs used sans serif block capitals. The Johnston typeface was developed in upper and lower case in 1916, and a complete set of blocks, marked Johnston Sans, was made by the printers the following year. A bold version of the capitals was developed by Johnston in 1929. The Met changed to a serif letterform for its signs in the 1920s, used on the stations rebuilt by Clark. However, Johnston was adopted systemwide after the formation the LPTB in 1933 and the LT wordmark was applied to locomotives and carriages. Johnston was redesigned, becoming New Johnston, for photo-typesetting in the early 1980s when Elichi Kono designed a range that included Light, Medium and Bold, each with its italic version. The typesetters P22 developed today's electronic version, sometimes called TfL Johnston, in 1997.

===Posters and patron of the arts===
1913 Underground poster by Tony Sarg
Early advertising posters proclaimed the advantages of travelling using various letter forms. Graphic posters first appeared in the 1890s, and it became possible to print colour images economically in the early 20th century. The Central London Railway used colour illustrations in their 1905 poster, and from 1908 the underground group, under Pick's direction, used images of country scenes, shopping and major events on posters to encourage use of the tube. Pick found he was limited by the commercial artists the printers used, and so commissioned work from artists and designers such as Dora Batty, Edward McKnight Kauffer, the cartoonist George Morrow, Herry (Heather) Perry, Graham Sutherland, Charles Sharland and the sisters Anna and Doris Zinkeisen. According to Ruth Artmonsky, over 150 women artists were commissioned by Pick and latterly Christian Barman to design posters for London Underground, London Transport and London County Council Tramways. The Johnson Sans letter form began appearing on posters from 1917. The Met, strongly independent, used images on timetables and on the cover of its Metro-land guide that promoted the country it served for the walker, visitor and later the house-hunter. By the London Transport was formed in 1933 the UERL was considered a patron of the arts and over 1000 works were commissioned in the 1930s, such as the cartoon images of Charles Burton and Kauffer's later abstract cubist and surrealist images.

Harold Hutchison became London Transport publicity officer in 1947, after World War II and nationalisation, and introduced the "pair poster", where an image on a poster was paired with text on another. Numbers of commissions dropped, to eight a year in the 1950s and just four a year in the 1970s, with images from artists such Harry Stevens and Tom Eckersley. Art on the Underground was introduced in 1986 by Henry Fitzhugh to revive London Transport as a patron of the arts with the Underground commissioning six works a year, judged first on artistic merit. In that year Peter Lee, Celia Lyttleton and a poster by David Booth, Malcolm Fowler and Nancy Fowler were commissioned. Today commissions range from the pocket tube map cover to installations in a station. Similarly, Poems on the Underground has commissioned poetry since 1986 that are displayed in carriages. 

===In popular culture===

The Underground (including several fictitious stations ) has been featured in many movies and television shows, including Skyfall, Die Another Day, Sliding Doors, An American Werewolf in London, Creep, Tube Tales and Neverwhere. The London Underground Film Office received over 200 requests to film in 2000. The Underground has also featured in music such as The Jam's "Down in the Tube Station at Midnight" and in literature such as the graphic novel V for Vendetta. Popular legends about the Underground being haunted persist to this day. 

 has a level named Underground where most of the level takes place between the dockyards and Westminster while the player and a team of SAS attempt to take down cargo being shipped using London Underground. The London Underground map serves as a playing field for the conceptual game of Mornington Crescent (which is named after a station on the Northern line) and the board game The London Game.

===In literature===
* London Underground Aldgate tube station plays an important role in the Sherlock Holmes story The Adventure of the Bruce-Partington Plans (published in the anthology His Last Bow).

==Notable people==
*Charles Pearson (17931862) suggested an underground railway in London in 1845 and from 1854 promoted a scheme that eventually became the Metropolitan Railway.
*John Fowler (18171898) was the railway engineer that designed the Metropolitan Railway.
*Edward Watkin (18191901) was chairman of the Metropolitan Railway from 1872 to 1894.
*James Henry Greathead (18441896) was the engineer that dug the Tower Subway using a method using a wrought iron shield patented by Peter W. Barlow, and later used the same tunnelling shield to build the deep-tube London & South London and Central London railways.
*Charles Yerkes (18371905) was an American who founded the Underground Electric Railways Company of London (UERL) in 1902, which opened three tube lines and electrified the District Railway.
*Edgar Speyer (18621932) Financial backer of Yerkes who served as UERL chairman from 1906 to 1915 during its formative years.
*Albert Stanley (18741948) was manager of the UERL from 1907, and became the first chairman of the London Passenger Transport Board (LPTB) in 1933.
*Frank Pick (18781941) was UERL publicity officer from 1908, commercial manager from 1912 and joint managing director from 1928. He was chief executive and vice chairman of the LPTB from 1933 to 1940. It was Pick that commissioned Edward Johnston to create the typeface and redesign the roundel, and established the Underground's reputation as patrons of the arts as users of the best in contemporary poster art and architecture.
*Robert Selbie (18681930) was manager of the Metropolitan Railway from 1908 until his death, marketing it using the Metro-land brand.
*Edward Johnston (18721944) developed the Johnston Sans typeface, still in use today on the London Underground.
*Harry Beck (19021974) designed the tube map, named in 2006 as a British design icon.
*MacDonald Gill (18841947), cartographer credited with drawing, in 1914, "the map that saved the London Underground".

==See also==

*
*List of London Underground stations
*List of busiest London Underground stations
*Timeline of the London Underground
*Tube Challenge

==References==

==Bibliography==

*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
* Snippet view at google.com, retrieved 20 August 2012
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*

==External links==

*London Underground (Transport for London) Home page
* London Underground Morphing Map
*
*Last Tube Times for London Underground
*Underground Journeys Architect Charles Holden's work for London Underground, from the Royal Institute of British Architects
* Stepen Knights London Underground Track Maps (archive link)
*London Underground API
*London Underground map and history

 



[[Large technical system]]

A large technical system (LTS) is a system or network of enormous proportions or complexity. The study of LTSs is a subdiscipline of history of science and technology.

The book Rescuing Prometheus by Thomas P. Hughes documents the development of four such systems, including the Boston central artery tunnel and the Internet.

== References ==
*



[[Lulea University of Technology]]

#redirect Lule University of Technology


[[Lund University]]

Lund University () is one of Europe's oldest universities and one of Scandinavia's largest institutions for education and research; Lund University, Sweden, Euro Scholars Website Lund University, The Solander Program Website About Lund University it is consistently ranked among the world's top 100 universities. Top 200 Universities, Website of QS Top Universities Shanghai Jiao Tong University's Academic Ranking of World Universities - 2007, 2006, 2005 The Complete List: The Top 100 Global Universities The university, located in the city of Lund in the province of Scania, Sweden, traces its roots back to 1425, when a Franciscan studium generale was founded in Lund next to the Lund Cathedral, arguably making it the oldest institution of higher education in Scandinavia followed by studia generalia in Uppsala in 1477 and Copenhagen in 1479. The current university was however not founded until 1666 after Sweden acquired Scania in the 1658 peace agreement with Denmark. A Brief History of Lund University 

Lund University has eight faculties, Organisation with additional campuses in the cities of Malm and Helsingborg, with 47,000 students in more than 280 different programmes and around 2,250 separate courses. The University has some 680 partner universities in over 50 countries and it belongs to the League of European Research Universities as well as the global Universitas 21 network. 

Two major facilities for materials research are currently under construction in Lund: MAX IV, which will be a world-leading synchrotron radiation laboratory and European Spallation Source (ESS), a European facility that will be home to the worlds most powerful neutron source.

The university traditionally centers on the Lundagrd park adjacent to the Lund Cathedral, with various departments spread in different locations in town, but mostly concentrated in a belt stretching north from the park connecting to the university hospital area and continuing out to the northeastern periphery of the town, where one finds the large campus of the Faculty of Engineering.

== History ==

Lund University main building, built in 1882, drawn by Helgo Zettervall.

=== Medieval origins ===
The city of Lund has a long history as a center for learning and was the ecclesiastical centre and seat of the archbishop of Denmark. A cathedral school (the Katedralskolan) for the training of clergy was established in 1085 and is today Scandinavia's oldest school.

A studium generale (a medieval university education) was founded in 1425, although it was not until 1438 that education was started by the Franciscan order for a baccalaureus degree. 

=== 17th-19th centuries ===
After the Treaty of Roskilde in 1658, the Scanian lands came under the possession of the Swedish Crown, which quickly founded the Lund University in 1666 as a means of Swedification. It was the fifth university under the Swedish king, after Uppsala University (1477), the University of Tartu (1632, now in Estonia), the Academy of bo (1640, now in Finland), and the University of Greifswald (founded 1456; Swedish 16481815, now in Germany). It is the second-oldest university on Swedish ground today.

The university was named Academia Carolina after Charles X Gustav of Sweden. The name was in some formal use until the late 19th century, when Lund University became the widespread denomination.

The university was at its founding granted four faculties: law, theological, medicine and philosophy. They were the cornerstones, and for more than 200 years this system was in effect. Towards the end of the 17th century, the number of students hovered around 100. Some notable professors in the early days were Samuel Pufendorf, a juridical historian; and Canutus Hahn and Kristian Papke in philosophy.

The Scanian War in 1676 led to a shut-down, which lasted until 1682. The university was re-opened largely due to regional patriots, but the university was not to enjoy a high status until well into the 19th century. Lecturing rooms were few, and lectures were held in the Lund Cathedral and its adjacent chapel. The professors were underpaid.

View of the Historical Museum building in the 19th century.
In 1713, Charles XII of Sweden entered Lund. He stayed in Lund for three years, in between his warlike expeditions. The town of Lund and the university attracted a temporary attention boost. The most notable lecturer during this time was Andreas Rydelius.

Peace was finally restored with the death of Charles XII in 1718, and during the first half of the 18th century the university was granted added funds. The number of students was now well around 500. Despite not being on par with Uppsala University, it had still built a solid reputation and managed to attract prominent professors.

Around 1760 the university reputation dropped as the number of students fell below 200, most of whom hailed from around the province. However, by 1780 its reputation was largely restored, and continued to rise through the 1820s. This was largely owing to popular and well-educated lecturers particularly in philology; the prominent professor Esaias Tegnr was a particularly notable character with widespread authority. He, in turn, attracted others towards Lund. One of these was the young theological student C. G. Brunius, who studied ancient languages under Tegnr and were later to become professor of Greek. With time he was to devote himself to architectures and he redesigned several of Lund's buildings, as well as churches of the province.

=== 20th century - present ===
The University Square in the 1910s.
In the early 20th century, the university had a student population as small as one thousand, consisting largely of upper-class pupils training to become civil servants, lawyers and doctors. In the coming decades it started to grow significantly, until it became one of the country's largest. In 1964 the social sciences were split from the Faculty of Humanities. Lund Institute of Technology was established in 1961 but was merged with Lund University eight years later.

In recent years, Lund University has been very popular among applicants to Swedish higher education institutions, both nationally Utbildning Gymnasieungdomars studieintresse lsret 2009/2010 and internationally. Lund University most popular for new master's students Study in Sweden blog For studies starting in autumn 2012, Lund received 11,160 foreign master's applications from 152 countries, which was roughly one third of all international applications to Swedish universities. 

===Women at the university===
The first woman to study in Lund was Hildegard Bjrck (spring of 1880) who had previously studied in Uppsala and had there been the first Swedish woman ever to get an academic degree. Her tenure in Lund was however very brief and the medical student Hedda Andersson who entered the university later in 1880 (two years before the next woman to do so) is usually mentioned as the first woman at Lund University. Lund University Medical Faculty Hedda Andersson (1861-1950) Hilma Borelius was the first woman who finished a doctorate in Lund, in 1910. The first woman to be appointed to a professor's chair was the historian Birgitta Odn (1965). In 1992 Boel Flodgren, Professor of Business Law, was appointed rector magnificus (or, strictly speaking, rectrix magnifica) of Lund University. As such, she was the first woman to be the head of a European university.

== Campus ==
Kungshuset, the oldest university building (completed 1584), currently houses the Department of Philosophy.
The university's facilities are mainly located in the small city of Lund in Scania, about 15 km away from central Malm and 50 km from Copenhagen. The university's prominence and large student population have much impact on the city, effectively making it a university town. Over a hundred university buildings - Campus map scatter around town, most of them in an area covering more than 1 km, stretching towards the north-east from Lundagrd park in the very centre of town. Buildings in and around Lundagrd include the main building, Kungshuset, the Historical Museum and the Academic Society's headquarters. The main library building is located in a park 400 meters to the north, followed by the large hospital complex.

Lund University has a satellite campus in nearby Malm, Sweden's third largest city. The Faculty of Fine and Perforning Arts' three academies: Malm Art Academy, Malm Academy of Music and Malm Theatre Academy, are all located in Malm. The city is also the location of Skne University Hospital, where Lund University performs a considerable amount of research and medical training.

Campus Helsingborg is, as the name suggests, located in the city of Helsingborg, almost 50 km from Lund. Opened in 2000, it consists of a building in the city centre, right next to the central train station and the harbour. Nearly 3,000 students are based on the campus. Campus Helsingborg - about The Department of Service Management and the Department of Communication and Media are among those located at the campus in Helsingborg.

Teaching and training at the School of Aviation (LUSA) takes place at an airfield next to the town of Ljungbyhed, about 40 km away from Lund.

=== Library ===
University Library
Lund University library was established in 1666 at the same time as the university and is one of Sweden's oldest and largest. Since 1698 it has received legal deposit copies of everything printed in the country. Today six Swedish libraries receive legal deposit copies, but only Lund and the Royal Library in Stockholm are required to keep everything for posterity. Swedish imprints make up half of the collections, which amount to 170,000 linear metres of shelving (2006). The library serves 620,000 loans per year, the staff is 200 full-time equivalents, and the 33 branch libraries house 2600 reading room desks. Lund University library website, statistics for 2006, http://www.lub.lu.se/om-lub/organisation/lub-i-siffror-2006.html 

The current main building at Helgonabacken opened in 1907. Before that, the old building was Liberiet close to the city's cathedral. Liberiet was built as a library in the 15th century, but now serves as a cafe.

=== Hospital ===
Education and research in the health sciences at the university is operated in cooperation with Skne University Hospital, located in both Lund and Malm. Medical education takes place in the Biomedical Centre, next to the hospital in Lund. Nursing and occupational therapy are taught in the Health Sciences Centre nearby. The university also operates the Clinical Research Centre in Malm, featuring many specialized laboratories.

== Organisation ==
Sphinxes overlooking Lundgrd Park.

=== Administration ===
The University Board is the University's highest decision-making body. The Board comprises the Vice-Chancellor, representatives of the teaching staff and students, and representatives of the community and business sector. Lund University - Who Runs the University? Chair of the board is Margot Wallstrm. Executive power lies with the Vice-Chancellor and the University Management Group, to which most other administrative bodies are subordinate. Lund University - Organisational Structure 

=== Faculties ===
Lund University is divided into eight faculties: 
*Faculties of Humanities and Theology
*Faculty of Engineering (LTH)
*Faculty of Fine & Performing Arts
*Faculty of Law
*Faculty of Medicine
*Faculty of Science
*Faculty of Social Sciences
*School of Economics and Management

=== Research centres ===
The university is also organised into more than 20 institutes and research centres, Institutes and Research Centres such as:
Esaias Tegnr statue near the towering Lund Cathedral.
*Lund University Centre for Sustainability Studies (LUCSUS)
*Biomedical Centre
*Centre for Biomechanics
*Centre for Chemistry and Chemical Engineering - Kemicentrum
*Centre for East and South-East Asian Studies
*Centre for European Studies
*Centre for Geographical Information Systems (GIS Centrum)
*Centre for Innovation, Research and Competence in the Learning Economy (CIRCLE)
*Center for Middle Eastern Studies at Lund University
*Centre for Molecular Protein Science
*Centre for Risk Analysis and Management (LUCRAM)
*International Institute for Industrial Environmental Economics at Lund University (IIIEE)
*Lund Functional Food Science Centre
*Lund University Diabetes Centre (LUDC)
*MAX lab - Accelerator physics, synchrotron radiation and nuclear physics research
*Pufendorf Institute
*Raoul Wallenberg Institute for Human Rights and Humanitarian Law
*Swedish South Asian Studies Network

== Academics ==

===Education===
Approximately 27,700 students study within one of the 274 educational programs, the eighty-five international master's programmes or the 2000 free-standing courses. Around five hundred courses are, or can be, held in English for the benefit of international exchange students. There are several programmes allowing foreign students to study abroad at the University. Notable exchangees include United States Supreme Court Justice Ruth Bader Ginsburg, who spent time at Lund University in the 1960s conducting research. Linda, Bayer "Ruth Bader Ginsburg" (Philadelphia: Chelsea House Publishers, 2000), 46. The university offers 9 out of the 20 most sought after programmes in Sweden. The master's programme in International Marketing is the most popular choice in the country, with almost a thousand applications yearly.

===Research===
Lund University is well known as one of Scandinavia's largest research universities. It ranks among top performers in the European Union in terms of papers accepted for publication in scientific journals. The University Model for the 21st Century It is one of Sweden's top receiver of research grants, most of which come from government-funded bodies. Lu - Research Excellence Areas The EU is the university's second largest external research funder and Lund is the 23rd largest receiver of funding within the union's Seventh Framework Programme. Interim Evaluation of the Seventh Framework Programme The university is active in many internationally important research areas such as nanotechnology, climate change and stem cell biology. 

===Innovation===
One of the most famous innovations based on research from Lund University is diagnostic ultrasound, which is today a routine method of examination in hospitals around the world. Other
examples of pioneering innovations are the artificial kidney, which laid the foundations for the multinational company Gambro and which makes life easier for dialysis patients worldwide, and Bluetooth technology, which enables wireless communication over short distances. Over 300 years of useful Research - Lund University. Retrieved 30 April 2013. 

===Rankings===

Lund University is among the most renowned institutions of higher learning in the Nordic countries and is rarely ranked below 100 in the world by the most influential ranking agencies. In 2013, it ranked 1st among comprehensive universities in Scandinavia and 123rd in the world by the Times Higher Education World University Rankings, World University Rankings - Lund University - 2013-14 and in the Academic Ranking of World Universities, compiled by Shanghai Jiao Tong University, it was in the 101-150 category. Lund was ranked 67th in the world in the 2013/14 QS World University Rankings. 

In 2011, Times Higher Education compiled a special world ranking based exclusively on reputation for teaching and research, where Lund University appeared in the 71-80 category. Top Universities by Reputation 2011 In the same year, QS issued world university rankings by subject, QS World University Rankings by Subject placing Lund within the top 50 in environmental sciences, geography and area studies, physical sciences and civil and structural engineering.

In 2014, the National Secretary of Higher Education, Science, Technology and Innovation, Ecuador (Senescyt), as a parameter for awarding scholarships, created a list of top Universities around the world placing Lund University in Top 1 in "Natural Sciences, Mathematics and Statistics" Natural Sciences, Mathematics and Statistics and Top 3 in both fields: "Information Technology and Communication" Information Technology and Communication and "Engineering, Manufacturing and Construction". Engineering, Manufacturing and Construction 

The 2013-2014 Times Higher Education World University Rankings' Engineering and Technology table placing Lund University 78 around the world. 

The Academic Ranking of World Universities in Engineering/Technology and Computer Sciences - 2013 placed to Lund University 76-100 category. 

The 2013-2014 URAP (University Ranking by Academic Performance) placed to Lund University 69 in the world with qualification A++.

== Student life ==
AF-Borgen, the student-run complex at the heart of student life in Lund, May 2002.
Lund student life is based on three central structures: the student nations, the Academic Society (AF) and the student unions. Before July 1, 2010, students were required to enroll in a student union, nation or AF in order to receive grades at the university, but this is no longer compulsory. Students may still enroll in these organizations if they wish.

=== Student nations ===

The nations in Lund are a central part of the university's history, initially serving as residential colleges for students, organized by geographic origin. stgta Nation, the oldest nation, was established in 1668, two years after the university was founded. While the nations still offer limited housing, today they are best described as student societies.

Today students may enroll in any nation, although the nations still preserve their geographic names. In most cases it does not matter what nation one enrolls in, but different nations offer different activities for interested students.

Each nation has student housing, but the accommodations in no way meet demand, and they are usually appointed according to a queue system. Each nation has at least one pub evening per week, with a following night club. The solemn peak event in the course of an activity year is the organization of student balls once a year. Most well known of the nation balls (as opposed to balls organized by student unions) is the ball hosted by Gteborgs Nation - called the "Gustaf II Adolf Ball" (also known as the "GA-Ball"). Most nations also host at least one banquet per week, where a three course dinner is served. Each nation also has different activities for students interested in sports, arts, or partying. All activities within the nations are voluntary.

=== The Academic Society ===
Another view of AF-Borgen 
In 1830, Professor Carl Adolph Agardh formed Akademiska Freningen (The Academic Society), commonly referred to as AF, with the goal of "developing and cultivating the academic life" by bringing students and faculty from all departments and student nations together in one organization. Prince Oscar I, then Sweden's Chancellor of Education, donated 2000 Kronor to help found the society. In 1848, construction began on AF-Borgen (the AF Fortress), which is located opposite the Main Building in Lundagrd. To this day, AF is the center of student life in Lund, featuring many theater companies, a prize-winning student radio (Radio AF), and organizing the enormous Lundakarnevalen (the Lund Carnival) every four years. "AF Bostder", an independent foundation with close ties to Akademiska Freningen, maintains over 5,700 student residences in Lund. AF Bostder History 

=== Student unions ===
The Delphi residential area, located in the northern part of Lund, is one of the large student housing complexes run by AF Bostder.
The student unions represent students in various decision-making boards within the university and council students regarding their rights, housing and career options. There are nine student unions, one for each faculty and an additional union for doctoral students. Lund's Doctoral Student Union is further divided into councils, one for each faculty except for the faculties of engineering and fine and performing arts. Studentlund, International Guide 2010 

The unions are incorporated into the Association of Lund University Student Unions (LUS). It has two full-time representatives who go to weekly meetings with the vice-chancellor and other organizational university bodies. The student union association runs services such as loan institute, a day-care centre and a website with housing information. It also publishes the monthly Lundagrd magazine.

==Notable people connected to Lund University==

Samuel von Pufendorf.
Tage Erlander & Bertil Ohlin 1954.
Ruth Bader Ginsburg, SCOTUS photo portrait.
Karl Manne Siegbahn, Nobel Prize in Physics.
Swedish author Viktor Rydberg with signature.

Alumni and faculty of Lund University is associated with, among other things: the creation of the first implantable pacemaker, the development of echocardiography, the spread of modern physiotherapy, the discovery of the role of dopamine as an independent neurotransmittor, the determination of the number of chromosomes of man, the development of the Bluetooth technology, and the creation of the Rydberg formula.

The following is a selected list of some notable people who have been affiliated with Lund University as students or academics.

=== Humanities and economics ===
Samuel Pufendorf (1632-1694) was a notable jurist and philosopher known for his natural law theories, influencing Adam Smith as well as Thomas Jefferson. Olof von Dalin (1708-1763) was an influential Swedish writer and historian of the late enlightenment era. Peter Wieselgren (1800-1877) was a Swedish priest, literature critic and prominent leader of the Swedish temperance movement. Knut Wicksell (1851-1926) was an influential economist, sometimes considered one of the founders of modern macro economics. Oscar Olsson (1877-1950) was an important developer of self-education in Sweden and known as the father of study circles. Bertil Ohlin (1899-1979) received the Nobel Prize in economic sciences in 1977 for theories concerning international trade and capital, and was the leader of the Liberals Peoples Party (Folkpartiet) for 23 years. Gunnar Jarring (1907-2002) was Swedens ambassador in UN 1956-1958, and Swedens ambassador in Washington DC 1958-1964. Britta Holmstrm (1911-1992) was the founder of Individuell Mnniskohjlp (IM), a human rights organization with activities in 12 countries. Torsten Hgerstrand (1916-2004) was an internationally renowned geographer, considered the father of time geography and receiver of the Laurat Prix International de Gographie Vautrin Lud in 1992. Judith Wallerstein (1921-2012) was a renowned psychologist and internationally recognized authority on the effects of marriage and divorce on children and their parents.

=== Biology and medicine ===
Carl Linnaeus (17071778), began his academic career in Lund by studying medicine and botany for a year before moving to Uppsala. He is known as the father of modern taxonomy, and is also considered one of the fathers of modern ecology. Pehr Henrik Ling (1776-1839) is considered the prime developer of natural gymnastics, the father of Swedish massage, and one of the most important contributors to the development and spread of modern physical therapy. Carl Adolph Agardh (1787-1859) made important contributions to the study of algae and played an important role as a politician in raising educational standards in Sweden. Elias Magnus Fries (1794-1878) was a notable botanist who played a prominent role in the creation of the modern taxonomy of mushrooms. Nils Alwall (1904-1986) was a pioneer in hemodialysis who constructed the first practical dialysis machine, commercialized by The Gambro Company. Rune Elmqvist (1906-1996) was a physician and medical engineer who developed the first implantable pacemaker as well as the first inkjet ECG printer. Lars Leksell (1907-1986) was a notable neurosurgeon who was the father of radiosurgery and later the inventor of the Gamma Knife. Inge Edler (1911-2001) developed the medical ultrasonography in 1953, commonly known as echocardiography, together with Hellmuth Hertz, and was awarded the Lasker Clinical Medical Research Award in 1977. Sune Bergstrm (1916-2004) and Bengt Samuelsson (1934-) were awarded the Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine in 1982 for discoveries concerning prostaglandins and related biologically active substances". Arvid Carlsson (1923-) was awarded the Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine in 2000 for discoveries concerning signal transduction in the nervous system" and is noted for having discovered the role of dopamine as an independent neurotransmitter 

=== Mathematical and technical subjects ===
Per Georg Scheutz (1785-1873) was a Swedish lawyer, publicist and inventor who created the first working programmable difference engine with a printing unit. Martin Wiberg (1826-1905) was a prolific inventor who, among many things, created the first difference engine the size of a sewing machine that could calculate and print logarithmic tables. Johannes Rydberg (1854-1919) was a renowned physicist famous for the Rydberg formula and the Rydberg constant. Carl Charlier (1862-1934) was an internationally acclaimed astronomer who made important contributions to astronomy as well as statistics and was awarded the James Craig Watson Medal in 1924 and the Bruce Medal in 1933. Manne Siegbahn (1886-1978), a student of Rydberg, was awarded the Nobel Prize in Physics 1924 for his discoveries and research in the field of X-ray spectroscopy. Oskar Klein (1894-1977) was an internationally renowned theoretical physicist famous for the Klein-Karluza theory, the Klein-Gordon equation, and the Klein-Nishina formula. Pehr Edman (1916-1977) was a renowned biochemist who developed a method for sequencing proteins, known as the Edman degradation, and has been called the father of modern biochemistry. Hellmuth Hertz (1920-1990) developed the echocardiography together with Inge Edler (see above), and was also the first to develop the ink jet technology of printing. Lars Hrmander FieldsMedalFrontArchimedes (1931-2012) is sometimes considered the foremost contributor to the modern theory of linear partial differential equations and received the Fields Medal in 1962 for his early work on equations with constant coefficients. Karl Johan strm (1934-) is a notable control theorist, who in 1993 was awarded the IEEE Medal of Honor for fundamental contributions to theory and applications of adaptive control technology. Sven Mattisson (1955-) is an electrical engineer who was one of the developers of the Bluetooth technology.

=== Politics and law ===
Rutger Macklean (1742-1816) was a prominent captain, politician and land owner remembered for introducing agricultural reforms leading to more effective large-scale farming in Sweden. Ernst Wigforss (1881-1977) was Swedens finance minister 1925-1926 and 1932-1949 and has been considered the foremost developer of the Swedish Social Democracy. sten Undn (1886-1974) was an internationally recognized professor of law and Swedens minister of foreign affairs 1924-1926 and 1945-1962. Tage Erlander (1901-1985) was Swedens prime minister 1945-1969, potentially a record of uninterrupted tenure in parliamentary democracies, and led his party through eleven elections. Ruth Bader Ginsburg (1933-) is a justice of the supreme court of the USA, the second female justice to be in this position. Ingvar Carlsson (1934-) served as Swedens prime minister 1986-1991 and 1994-1996 and as Swedens deputy prime minister 1982-1986. Rupiah Banda (1937-) was the president of Zambia 2008-2011 and its vice president 2006-2008. Leif Silbersky (1938-) is a notable lawyer and author famous for representing so called high-profile cases in Sweden. Marianne Lundius (1949-) is since 2010 the president of the Supreme court of Sweden, the first female justice in this position. Utoni Nujoma (1952-) was Namibias minister of foreign affairs 2010-2012 and is since 2012 the countrys minister of justice.

=== Literature and culture ===
Thomas Thorild (1759-1808) was a notable Swedish writer, poet, and philosopher who, among many things, was an early proponent of gender equality. Esaias Tegnr (1782-1846) was an influential writer, poet, bishop and professor of the Greek language, perhaps most famous for his work Frithiofs Saga. Viktor Rydberg (1828-1895) was a notable journalist, writer and researcher, most famous for his works Tomten and Singoalla and regarded as one of Swedens most important authors of the 19th century. Frans G Bengtsson (1894-1954) was a Swedish writer and poet famous for his novels The Long Ships (Rde Orm) which have been translated to at least 23 languages. Fritiof Nilsson Piraten (1895-1972) was a Swedish lawyer and popular author, known for his works Bombi Bitt och Jag and Bock i rtagrd. Hjalmar Gullberg (1898-1961) was a notable writer and poet who was also the head of the Swedish Radio Theatre 1936-1950. Ivar Harrie (1899-1973) was one of the founders of the newspaper Expressen, as well as its editor in chief 1944-1960. Hans Alfredsson (1931-) is a Swedish comedian, author and actor, sometimes regarded as the foremost representative of the so-called Lundahumorn (the humour from Lund). Axwell (Born as Axel Christofer Hedfors, 1977-) is a world-renowned DJ, perhaps best known as a member of the trio the Swedish House Maffia.

=== Business and entrepreneurship ===
Hans Rausing (1926-) was the managing director of Tetra Pak 1954-1985 and the companys chairman 1985-1993, and has been ranked as the third richest man in Sweden. Pehr G. Gyllenhammar (1935-) is a businessman who was the CEO and chairman of Volvo 1971-1983 and 1983-1993 respectively, the chairman of Procordia 1990-1992, Aviva 1998-2005, Investment AB Kinnevik 2004-2007, and is the current vice chairman of Rothschild Europe. Bertil Hult (1941-) founded EF Education from his dormitory in Lund and was the companys CEO until 2002 and chairman until 2008. Olof Stenhammar (1941-) is a Swedish financier and businessman who founded Optionsmklarna, OM, that later changed its name to OMX and today is a part of the NASDAQ OMX Group. Michael Treschow (1943-) is the current chairman of Unilever and was the CEO of Atlas Copco and Elektrolux 1991-1998 and 1998-2002 respectively, as well as the chairman of Ericsson 2002-2011. Stefan Persson (1947-) was the CEO of H&M 1982-1997 and has been the companys chairman since 1998 and has been ranked among the top ten richest men in the world. Dan Olofsson (1950-) is a Swedish entrepreneur and philanthropist who founded the company Sigma and the foundation Star for Life and is a large shareholder in the company F. Anders Dahlvig (1957-) was the CEO and President of the IKEA group between 1999 and 2009, during which IKEA experienced an average growth of 11 percent, and is the current chairman of the New Wave Group. Charlotta Falvin (1966-) is a Swedish businesswoman who is the chairman of the companies Teknopol, Barista, Multi-Q and Ideon AB and the previous CEO of TAT and Decuma. Cristina Stenbeck (1977-) is a Swedish businesswoman who is the current chairman of Investment AB Kinnevik.

==Partner universities==
LTH's Design Centre.

Lund University cooperates with universities on all continents, both in areas of research and student exchange. Apart from being a member of the prestigious LERU and Universitas 21 networks, the university participates in the European Erasmus and Nordplus programmes. It also coordinates several intercontinental projects, mostly through the Erasmus Mundus programme.

== See also ==
* List of early modern universities in Europe
*Royal Swedish Physiographic Society in Lund
*Open Access Scholarly Publishers Association, of which Lund University Library is a member
*

== References ==

* Lunds universitet from Nordisk familjebok, in Swedish.
* Lunds universitets historia : utgiven av universitetet till dess 300-rsjubileum. 4 volumes. Lund: Lunds universitet 1968-1983. (The standard work on the history of the university.)
*Magnus Laurentius Sthl, Biographiske underrttelser om professorer vid Kongl. universitetet i Lund, ifrn dess inrttning till nrvarande tid. ("Biographical notes on professors at the Royal University of Lund from its foundation until the current time") Christianstad: L. Littorin, 1834. (public domain book available on Google Print, )

== External links ==
*Lund University - Official site
*Lund University YouTube - Official YouTube Channel
*Lund University Facebook - Official Facebook Page
*Faculty of Engineering, LTH - Official site
*Lund School of Economics and Management - Official site

 



[[Lord Peter Wimsey]]

Lord Peter Death The name Death is usually pronounced , but in Murder Must Advertise Lord Peter (investigating undercover under the name Death Bredon) says "It's spelt Death. Pronounce it any way you like. Most of the people who are plagued with it make it rhyme with teeth, but personally I think it sounds more picturesque when rhymed with breath." Bredon Wimsey is a fictional character in a series of detective novels and short stories by Dorothy L. Sayers, in which he solves mysteries; usually murders. A bon vivant who solves mysteries for his own amusement, Wimsey is an archetype for the British gentleman detective.

Born in 1890 and ageing in real time, Wimsey is described as being of average height, with straw-coloured hair, a beaked nose, and a vaguely foolish face. Reputedly his looks were patterned after those of academic Roy Ridley. http://www.princeton.edu/~achaney/tmve/wiki100k/docs/Lord_Peter_Wimsey.html He also possessed considerable intelligence and athletic ability, evidenced by his playing cricket for Oxford University while earning a First. He created a spectacularly successful publicity campaign for Whifflet cigarettes while working for Pym's Publicity Ltd, and at age 40 was able to turn three cartwheels in the office corridor, stopping just short of the boss's open office door (Murder Must Advertise).

Among Lord Peter's hobbies, apart from criminology, is collecting incunabula. He is an expert on matters of food (especially wine) and male fashion, and on classical music. He excels at the piano, including Bach's works for keyboard instruments. One of Lord Peter's cars is a 12-cylinder ("double-six") 1927 Daimler four-seater, which (like all his cars) he calls "Mrs. Merdle" after a character in Little Dorrit (by Charles Dickens) who "hated fuss".
"Mrs. Merdle"; a Daimler double-six V12 50hp Corsica drophead coup body designed by Reid Railton (1931)
a Daimler double-six V12 50hp four-door saloon made for Anna Neagle and given her by her husband

==Biography==

===Background===
Lord Peter Wimsey's (fictional) ancestry begins with the 12th-century knight Gerald de Wimsey, who went with King Richard The Lion Heart on the Third Crusade and took part in the Siege of Acre. Strong Poison, Ch. XXI. This makes the Wimseys an unusually ancient family, since "Very few English noble families go that far in the first creation; rebellions and monarchic head choppings had seen to that" (as reviewer Janet Hitchman noted in the introduction to Striding Folly). The family coat of arms is blazoned as "Sable, 3 mice courant, argent; crest, a domestic cat couched as to spring, proper". The family motto, displayed under its coat of arms, is "As my Whimsy takes me." Clouds of Witness reissue, Dorothy Sayers. London: Victor Gollancz, 1935 (preface) 

===Early life===
Lord Peter was the second of the three children of Mortimer Wimsey, 15th Duke of Denver, and Honoria Lucasta Delagardie, who lives on throughout the novels as the Dowager Duchess of Denver. The Dowager Duchess is witty and intelligent, and strongly supports her younger son, whom she plainly prefers over his less intelligent, more conventional older brother, Gerald, the 16th Duke. Gerald's snobbish wife, Helen, who detests Wimsey, and their devil-may-care heir, Viscount St. George (Wimsey's nephew, who likes him), also make appearances in the novels. So does Lady Mary, the younger sister of the Duke and Lord Peter, who leans strongly to the political left and scandalizes her family by marrying a policeman of working class origins. 

As a boy, the young Peter Wimsey was, to the great distress of his father, strongly attached to an old, smelly poacher living at the edge of the family estate.

According to the novels, Lord Peter was educated at Eton College and Balliol College, Oxford, graduating with a first-class degree in history. He was also an outstanding cricketer, whose performance would still be well remembered decades later, leading to the near unmasking of his incognito in Murder Must Advertise. Though not taking up an academic career, he was left with an enduring and deep love for Oxford.

At this time, Lord Peter was considerably influenced by his maternal uncle Paul Delagardie, who took it upon himself to instruct his nephew in the facts of life as Paul himself understood them  i.e. to conduct various love affairs, often in the more permissive atmosphere of France, and treat his various lovers respectfully but avoid any deep emotional entanglements.

To his uncle's disappointment, Peter eventually fell deeply in love with a young woman named Barbara and became engaged to her. When the First World War broke out, he hastened to join the British Army, releasing Barbara from her engagement in case he was killed or mutilated. The girl later married another, less principled, officer. Just before the start of World War I in 1914 Wimsey helped capture a thief-although the stolen jewels in the case surfaced 20 years later in The Nine Tailors.

Wimsey served on the Western Front from 1914 to 1918, reaching the rank of Major in the Rifle Brigade. He was appointed an Intelligence Officer, and on one occasion he infiltrated the staff room of a German officer. Whose Body?, Ch.11 Though not explicitly stated, that feat implies that Wimsey spoke a fluent and unaccented German. As noted in Have His Carcase, he communicated at that time with British Intelligence using the Playfair cipher and became proficient in its use.

For reasons never clarified, after the end of his spy mission, Wimsey in the later part of the war moved from Intelligence and resumed the role of a regular line officer. He was a conscientious and effective commanding officer, popular with the men under his commandan affection still retained by Wimsey's former soldiers many years after the war, as is evident from a short passage in Clouds of Witness and an extensive reminiscence in Gaudy Night.

In particular, while in the army he met Sergeant Mervyn Bunter, who had previously been in service. In 1918, Wimsey was severely wounded by artillery fire near Caudry in France. He suffered a breakdown due to shell shock (which we now call post-traumatic stress disorder but which was then often thought, by those without first-hand experience of it, to be a species of malingering) and was eventually sent home. After sharing this experience, which the Dowager Duchess referred to as "a jam", Wimsey and Bunter arranged that if they were both to survive the war, Bunter would become Wimsey's valet. Throughout the books, Bunter takes care to address Wimsey as "My Lord". Nevertheless, he is a friend as well as a servant, and Wimsey again and again expresses amazement at Bunter's high efficiency and competence in virtually every sphere of life.

After the war he was ill for many months, recovering at the family's ancestral home in Duke's Denver, a fictional settingas is the Dukedom of Denver about 15 miles (24 km) beyond the real Denver in Norfolk, on the A10 near Downham Market. Wimsey was for a time unable to give servants any orders whatsoever, since his wartime experience made him associate the giving of an order with causing the death of the person to whom the order was given. Bunter arrived and, with the approval of the Dowager Duchess, took up his post as valet. Bunter moved Wimsey to a London flat at 110A Piccadilly, W1, while Wimsey recovered. Even much later, however, Wimsey would have relapsesespecially when his actions caused a murderer to be hanged. As noted in Whose Body?, on such occasions Bunter would take care of Wimsey and tenderly put him to bed, and they would revert to being "Major Wimsey" and "Sergeant Bunter".

===Detective work===
Lord Peter begins his hobby of investigation by recovering The Attenbury Emeralds in 1921. He also becomes good friends with Scotland Yard detective Charles Parker, a sergeant in 1921 who eventually rises to the rank of Commander. Bunter, a man of many talents himself, not least photography, often proves instrumental in Peter's investigations. However, Wimsey is not entirely well. At the end of the investigation in Whose Body? (1923) he hallucinates that he is back in the trenches. He soon recovers his senses and goes on a long holiday.

The next year, he travels (in Clouds of Witness, 1926) to the fictional Riddlesdale in North Yorkshire to assist his older brother Gerald, who has been accused of murdering Captain Denis Cathcart, their sister's fianc. As Gerald is the Duke of Denver, he is tried by the entire House of Lords, as required by the law at that time, to much scandal and the distress of his wife Helen. Their sister, Lady Mary, also falls under suspicion. Lord Peter clears the Duke and Lady Mary, to whom Parker is attracted.

As a result of the slaughter of men in the First World War, there was in the UK a considerable imbalance between the sexes. It is not exactly known when Wimsey recruited Miss Climpson to run an undercover employment agency for women, a means to garner information from the otherwise inaccessible world of spinsters and widows, but it is prior to Unnatural Death (1927), in which Miss Climpson assists Wimsey's investigation of the suspicious death of an elderly cancer patient.

As recounted in the short story "The Adventurous Exploit of the Cave of Ali Baba", in December 1927 Wimsey fakes his own death, supposedly while hunting big game in Tanganyika, to penetrate and break up a particularly dangerous and well-organised criminal gang. Only Wimsey's mother and sister, the loyal Bunter and Inspector Parker know he is still alive. Emerging victorious after more than a year masquerading as "the disgruntled sacked servant Rogers", Wimsey remarks that "We shall have an awful time with the lawyers, proving that I am me." In fact, he returns smoothly to his old life, and the interlude is never referred to in later books.

During the 1920s, Wimsey has affairs with various women, which are the subject of much gossip in Britain and Europe. This part of his life remains hazy: it is hardly ever mentioned in the books set in the same period; most of the scanty information on the subject is given in flashbacks from later times, after he meets Harriet Vane and relations with other women become a closed chapter. In Busman's Honeymoon Wimsey facetiously refers to a gentleman's duty "to remember whom he had taken to bed" so as not to embarrass his bedmate by calling her by the wrong name.

There are several references to a relationship with a famous Viennese opera singer, and Bunter  who evidently was involved with this, as with other parts of his master's life  recalls Wimsey being very angry with a French mistress who mistreated her own servant.
The only one of Wimsey's earlier women to appear in person is the artist Marjorie Phelps, who plays an important role in The Unpleasantness at the Bellona Club. She has known Wimsey for years and is attracted to him, though it is not explicitly stated whether they were lovers. Wimsey likes her, respects her, and enjoys her company  but that isn't enough. In Strong Poison, she is the first person other than Wimsey himself to realise that he has fallen in love with Harriet.

In Strong Poison Lord Peter encounters Harriet Vane, a cerebral, Oxford-educated mystery writer, while she is on trial for the murder of her former lover. He falls in love with her at first sight. Wimsey saves her from the gallows, but she believes that gratitude is not a good foundation for marriage, and politely but firmly declines his frequent proposals. Lord Peter encourages his friend and foil, Chief Inspector Charles Parker, to propose to his sister, Lady Mary Wimsey, despite the great difference in their rank and wealth. They marry and have a son, named Charles Peter ("Peterkin"), and a daughter, Mary Lucasta.

While on a fishing holiday in Scotland, Wimsey instigates and takes part in the investigation of the murder of an artist, related in Five Red Herrings. Despite the rejection of his marriage proposal, he continues to court Miss Vane. In Have His Carcase, he finds Harriet is not in London, but learns from a reporter that she has discovered a corpse while on a walking holiday on England's south coast. Wimsey is at her hotel the next morning. He not only investigates the death and offers proposals of marriage, but also acts as Harriet's patron and protector from press and police. Despite a prickly relationship, they work together to identify the murderer.

Back in London, Wimsey goes undercover as "Death Bredon" at an advertising firm, working as a copywriter (Murder Must Advertise). Bredon is framed for murder, leading Charles Parker to "arrest" Bredon for murder in front of numerous witnesses. To distinguish Death Bredon from Lord Peter Wimsey, Parker smuggles Wimsey out of the police station and urges him to get into the papers. Accordingly Wimsey accompanies "a Royal personage" to a public event, leading the press to carry pictures of both "Bredon" and Wimsey. In 1934 Wimsey in (The Nine Tailors) must unravel a 20 year old case of missing jewels; an unknown corpse; a missing World War I soldier believed alive; a murderous escaped convict believed dead and a mysterious code concerning church bells.

By 1935 Lord Peter is in continental Europe, acting as an unofficial attach to the British Foreign Office. Harriet Vane contacts him about a problem she has been asked to investigate in her college at Oxford (Gaudy Night). At the end of their investigation, Vane finally accepts Peter's proposal of marriage.

The couple marry on 8 October 1935, at St. Cross Church, Holywell Street, Oxford, as depicted in the opening collection of letters and diary entries in Busman's Honeymoon. The Wimseys honeymoon at Talboys, a house in east Hertfordshire near where Harriet had lived as a child, that Peter has bought for her as a wedding present. There they find the body of the previous owner, and spend their honeymoon solving the case, thus having the eponymous "Busman's Honeymoon".

Over the next five years, according to Sayers' short stories, the Wimseys have three sons: Bredon Delagardie Peter Wimsey (born in October 1936 in the story "The Haunted Policeman"); Roger Wimsey (born 1938), and Paul Wimsey (born 1940). However, according to the wartime publications of The Wimsey Papers, published in The Spectator, the second son was called Paul. It may be presumed that Paul is named after Lord Peter's maternal uncle Paul Delagardie. "Roger" is an ancestral Wimsey name. Sayers told friends orally that Harriet and Peter were to eventually have five children in all. 

In the final Wimsey story, the 1942 short story "Talboys", Peter and Harriet are enjoying rural domestic bliss with their three sons when Bredon, their first-born, is accused of the theft of prize peaches from the neighbour's tree. Peter and the accused set off to investigate and, of course, prove Bredon's innocence.

==Fictional bibliography==
Incunabulum: Lord Peter has a noted collection of early editions of Dante, including an Aldine edition of The Divine Comedy (Whose Body?)
Wimsey is described as having authored numerous books, among them the following fictitious works:
*Notes on the Collecting of Incunabula
*The Murderer's Vade-Mecum

==The stories==
Dorothy Sayers wrote 11 Wimsey novels and a number of short stories featuring Wimsey and his family . Other recurring characters include Inspector Charles Parker, the family solicitor Mr. Murbles, barrister Sir Impey Biggs, newshound Salcombe Hardy, and financial whiz the Honourable Freddy Arbuthnot, who finds himself entangled in the case in the first of the Wimsey books, 1923's Whose Body?.

Sayers wrote no more Wimsey murder mysteries, and only one story involving him, after the outbreak of the Second World War. In one of The Wimsey Papers, a series of fictionalised commentaries in the form of mock letters between members of the Wimsey family published in the Spectator, there is a reference to Harriet's difficulty in continuing to write murder mysteries at a time when European dictators were openly committing mass murders with impunity; this seems to have reflected Sayers' own wartime feeling. The Wimsey Papers included a reference to Wimsey and Bunter setting out during the war on a secret mission of espionage in Europe.

The only occasion when Sayers returned to Wimsey was the 1942 short story "Talboys". The war at that time devastating Europe received only a single oblique reference. Though Sayers lived until 1957, she never again took up the Wimsey books after this final effort. In effect, rather than killing off her detective, as Conan Doyle unsuccessfully tried with his, Sayers pensioned Wimsey off to a happy, satisfying old age. Thus, Peter Wimsey remained forever fixed on the background of inter-war England, and the books are nowadays often read for their evocation of that period as much as for the intrinsic detective mysteries.

In Jill Paton Walsh's continuations A Presumption of Death and The Attenbury Emeralds Wimsey and Bunter have returned successfully from their secret mission in 1940 and his nephew Lord St. George is killed while serving as an RAF pilot in the Battle of Britain. Consequently when Wimsey's brother dies of a heart attack in 1951 during a fire in Bredon Hall at Duke's Denver Wimsey becomes the Duke of Denver.

==Origins==
In How I Came to Invent the Character of Lord Peter Wimsey, Barbara Reynolds, Dorothy L. Sayers: Her Life and Soul, "not entirely accurate, but why should it be?", p. 230. Sayers wrote:

Janet Hitchman, in the preface to Striding Folly, remarks that "Wimsey may have been the sad ghost of a wartime lover(...). Oxford, as everywhere in the country, was filled with bereaved women, but it may have been more noticeable in university towns where a whole year's intake could be wiped out in France in less than an hour." There is, however, no verifiable evidence of any such World War I lover of Sayers on whom the character of Wimsey might be based.

Another theory is that Wimsey was based, at least in part, on Eric Whelpton, who was a close friend of Sayers at Oxford. Ian Carmichael, who played the part of Wimsey in the first BBC television adaptation and studied the character and the books thoroughly, said that the character was Sayers' conception of the 'ideal man', based in part on her earlier romantic misfortunes.

The novels are set in Britain contemporaneously with when they were written, from the early 1920s to the late 1930s. Sayers' final Wimsey story "Talboys" is set in 1942.

==Social satire==
Many episodes in the Wimsey books express a mild satire of the British class system, in particular in depicting the relationship between Wimsey and Bunter. The two of them are clearly the best and closest of friends, yet Bunter is invariably punctilious in using "my lord" even when they are alone, and "his lordship" in company. In a brief passage written from Bunter's point of view in Busman's Honeymoon Bunter is seen, even in the privacy of his own mind, to be thinking of his employer as "His Lordship". Wimsey and Bunter even mock the Jeeves and Wooster relationship.

In Whose Body?, when Wimsey is caught by a severe recurrence of his World War I shell-shock and nightmares and being taken care of by Bunter, the two of them revert to being "Major Wimsey" and "Sergeant Bunter". In that role, Bunter  sitting at the bedside of the sleeping Wimsey  is seen to mutter affectionately "Bloody little fool!" Whose Body?, ch. 8 

In "The Vindictive Story of the Footsteps That Ran," the staunchly democratic Doctor Hartman invites Bunter to sit down to eat together with himself and Wimsey, at the doctor's modest apartment. Wimsey does not object, but Bunter strongly does: "If I may state my own preference, sir, it would be to wait upon you and his lordship in the usual manner". Whereupon Wimsey remarks: "Bunter likes me to know my place" Quoted in Frederick B. Gowan, "The Decline and Transformation of the British Class System", pp. 45, 73 

At the conclusion of Strong Poison, Inspector Parker asks "What would one naturally do if one found one's water-bottle empty?" (a point of crucial importance in solving the book's mystery). Wimsey promptly answers "Ring the bell." Whereupon Miss Murchison, the indefatigable investigator employed by Wimsey for much of this book, comments "Or, if one wasn't accustomed to be waited on, one might use the water from the bedroom jug."

==Dramatic adaptations==

In 1935, the British film The Silent Passenger was released, in which Lord Peter (played by Peter Haddon) solved a mystery on the boat train crossing the English Channel. Sayers disliked the film and James Brabazon describes it as an "oddity, in which Dorothy's contribution was altered out of all recognition."

The novel Busman's Honeymoon was originally a stage play by Sayers and her friend Muriel St. Clare Byrne. A 1940 film of Busman's Honeymoon (US: The Haunted Honeymoon), starring Robert Montgomery and Constance Cummings as Lord and Lady Peter was released, but the characters and events bore little resemblance to Sayers' writing, and she refused to even see the film. A more faithful BBC television version of the play, with Harold Warrender as Lord Peter, was transmitted live on 2 October 1947. A second live BBC version was broadcast on 3 October 1957, with Peter Gray as Wimsey.

The cover of Gaudy Night, from the BBC series. Featuring Edward Petherbridge as Lord Peter Wimsey Several other Lord Peter Wimsey novels were also made into television productions by the BBC, in two separate series. Lord Peter Wimsey was played by Ian Carmichael in a series of separate serials that ran between 1972 and 1975, adapting five novels (Clouds of Witness, The Unpleasantness at the Bellona Club, Five Red Herrings, Murder Must Advertise and The Nine Tailors), and by Edward Petherbridge in 1987, in which three of the four major Wimsey/Vane novels (Strong Poison, Have His Carcase and Gaudy Night) were dramatised. Harriet Vane was played by Harriet Walter. The BBC was unable to secure the rights to turn Busman's Honeymoon into a proposed fourth and last part of the planned 13-episode series, so the series was produced as ten episodes. The three adaptations were transmitted under the title A Dorothy L. Sayers Mystery. Both the 1970s productions and the 1987 series are now available on videotape and DVD.

Edward Petherbridge also played Wimsey in the UK production of the Busman's Honeymoon play staged at the Lyric Hammersmith and on tour in 1988, with the role of Harriet being taken by his real-life spouse, Emily Richard.

Ian Carmichael starred as Wimsey in radio adaptations of the novels made by the BBC, all of which have been available on cassette and CD from the BBC Radio Collection. In the original series, which ran on Radio 4 from 197383, no adaptation was made of the seminal Gaudy Night, perhaps because the leading character in this novel is Harriet and not Peter; this was corrected in 2005 when a version specially recorded for the BBC Radio Collection was released starring Carmichael and Joanna David. The CD also includes a panel discussion on the novel, the major participants in which are P. D. James and Jill Paton Walsh. Gaudy Night was released as an unabridged audio book read by Ian Carmichael in 1993.

==Bibliography==

=== Novels ===
With year of first publication

*Whose Body? (1923)
*Clouds of Witness (1926)
*Unnatural Death (1927)
*The Unpleasantness at the Bellona Club (1928)
*Strong Poison (1931)
*Five Red Herrings (1931)
*Have His Carcase (1932)
*Murder Must Advertise (1933)
*The Nine Tailors (1934)
*Gaudy Night (1935)
*Busman's Honeymoon (1937)
*Thrones, Dominations (1998; unfinished manuscript completed by Jill Paton Walsh)
*A Presumption of Death (2002; by Jill Paton Walsh)
*The Attenbury Emeralds (2010; by Jill Paton Walsh)
*The Late Scholar (2014; by Jill Paton Walsh)

===Short story collections===
*Lord Peter Views the Body (1928)
*Hangman's Holiday (1933; also contains non-Wimsey stories)
*In the Teeth of the Evidence (1939; also contains non-Wimsey stories)
*Striding Folly (1972)
*Lord Peter (1972; see the article for complete list of stories.)

In addition there are
*The Wimsey Papers, published between Nov. 1939 and Jan. 1940 in The Spectator Magazinea series of mock letters by members of the Wimsey family, being in effect fictionalised commentaries on life in England at the inception of the war.

===Unpublished work===
Various

==Books about Lord Peter by other authors==
* Ask a Policeman (1934), a collaborative novel by members of The Detection Club, wherein several authors 'exchanged' detectives. The Lord Peter Wimsey sequence was penned by Anthony Berkeley.
* The Wimsey Family (1977) by C. W. Scott-Giles ISBN 0-06-013998-6
* Lord Peter Wimsey Cookbook (1981) by Elizabeth Bond Ryan and William J. Eakins ISBN 0-89919-032-4
* Thrones, Dominations (1998) completed by Jill Paton Walsh
* The Lord Peter Wimsey Companion (2002) by Stephan P. Clarke ISBN 0-89296-850-8 published by The Dorothy L. Sayers Society.
* Conundrums for the Long Week-End : England, Dorothy L. Sayers, and Lord Peter Wimsey (2000) by Robert Kuhn McGregor, Ethan Lewis ISBN 0-87338-665-5
* A Presumption of Death, (2002) (novel by Jill Paton Walsh, based loosely on The Wimsey Papers)
* The Attenbury Emeralds (September 2010) by Jill Paton Walsh

As a footnote, Lord Peter Wimsey has also been included by the science fiction writer Philip Jos Farmer as a member of the Wold Newton family; and Laurie R. King's detective character Mary Russell meets up with Lord Peter at a party in the novel A Letter of Mary.

==See also==

*Eric Whelpton

==References==

==External links==
* Lord Peter Wimsey chronology
* Lord Peter Wimsey portrait at Balliol, Oxford
* Extensive review of the Wimsey books in "Second Glance: Dorothy Sayers and the Last Golden Age" by Joanna Scutts
* Lord Peter Wimsey in the International Movie Database (IMDb)



[[Letter (message)]]

Click here for page 2.]]
A thank-you letter from Katharine Hepburn to Alan Light thanking him for his condolences in regards of Cary Grant's death
A letter is a written message from one party to another containing information. Gary Blake and Robert W. Bly, The Elements of Technical Writing, pg. 125. New York: Macmillan Publishers, 1993. ISBN 0020130856 Letters have been sent since antiquity and are mentioned in the Iliad Homer, Iliad, 6. 16770. by Homer (lived around 7th or 8th centuries B.C.) and works by both Herodotus and Thucydides mention letters. Ebbeler, J. (2009) "Tradition, innovation, and epistolary mores" in Rousseau, P. (ed.) A companion to late antiquity. Chichester: Wiley-Blackwell, p. 270. ISBN 978-1-4051-1980-1 

==History of letter writing==

Historically, letters have existed from the time of ancient India, ancient Egypt and Sumer, through Rome, Greece and China, up to the present day. Letters make up several of the books of the Bible. Archives of correspondence, whether for personal, diplomatic, or business reasons, serve as primary sources for historians. At certain times, the writing of letters has risen to be an art form and a genre of literature, for instance in Byzantine epistolography. "Epistolography" in The Oxford Dictionary of Byzantium, Oxford University Press, New York & Oxford, 1991, p. 718. ISBN 0195046528 

In the ancient world letters were written on a various different materials, including metal, lead, wax-coated wooden tablets, pottery fragments, animal skin, and papyrus. From Ovid, we learn that Acontius used an apple for his letter to Cydippe. Ovid, Her. 20 

As communication technology has diversified, posted letters have become less important as a routine form of communication. For example, the development of the telegraph drastically shortened the time taken to send a communication, by sending it between distant points as an electrical signal. At the telegraph office closest to the destination, the signal was converted back into writing on paper and delivered to the recipient. The next step was the telex which avoided the need for local delivery. Then followed the fax (facsimile) machine: a letter could be transferred electrically from the sender to the receiver through the telephone network as an image. Today, the internet, by means of email, plays a large part in written communications; however, these email communications are not generally referred to as letters but rather as e-mail (or email) messages, messages or simply emails or e-mails, with the term "letter" usually being reserved for communications on paper.

==The study of letter writing==
Due to the timelessness and universality of letter writing, there is a wealth of letters and instructional materials (for example, manuals, as in the medieval ars dictaminis) on letter writing throughout history. The study of letter writing usually involves both the study of rhetoric and grammar. Carol Poster and Linda C. Mitchell, eds., Letter-Writing Manuals and Instruction from Antiquity to the Present (Columbia, SC: U of South Carolina Press, 2007). 

==Advantages of letters==
Despite email, letters are still popular, particularly in business and for official communications. Letters have several advantages over email:
*No special device is needed to receive a letter, just a postal address, and the letter can be read immediately on receipt.
*An advertising mailing can reach every address in a particular area.
*A letter provides an immediate, and in principle permanent, physical record of a communication, without the need for printing. Letters, especially those with a signature and/or on an organisation's own notepaper, are more difficult to falsify than an e-mail and thus provide much better evidence of the contents of the communication.
*Letters in the sender's own handwriting are less impersonal than an e-mail.
*If required, small physical objects can be enclosed in the envelope with the letter.
*Letters cannot transmit malware!

==The letter delivery process==
Here is how a letter gets from the sender to the recipient:
# Sender writes letter and places it in an envelope on which the recipient's address is written in the centre front of the envelope. Sender ensures that the recipient's address includes the Zip or Postal Code (if applicable) and often includes his/her return address on the envelope.
# Sender buys a postage stamp and attaches it to the front of the envelope on the top right corner on the front of the envelope. (For large volume mailings, postage stamps are not used: a franking machine or other means are used to pay for postage.
# Sender puts the letter in a postbox.
# The national postal service of the sender's country (e.g. Royal Mail, UK; US Postal Service, US; Australia Post in Australia; or Canada Post in Canada) empties the postbox and takes all the contents to the regional sorting office.
# The sorting office then sorts each letter by address and postcode and delivers the letters destined for a particular area to that area's post office. Letters addressed to a different region are sent to that region's sorting office, to be sorted further.
# The local post office dispatches the letters to their delivery personnel who deliver them to the appropriate addresses.

This whole process, depending on how far the sender is from the recipient, can take anywhere from a day to 34 weeks. International mail is sent via trains and airplanes to other countries.

==Types of letter==
There are a number of different types of letter:

*Audio letter
*Solicitation Letter
*Business letter
*Cease and desist letter
*Chain letter
*Cover letter
*Crossed letter
*Dear John letter
*Epistle
*Form letter
*Hate mail
*Hybrid mail (semi-electronic delivery)
*Letter of credence
*Letter of credit

*Letter of introduction
*Letter of intent
*Letter of marque
*Letter of thanks
*Letter of resignation
*Letters patent
*Letter to the editor
*Love letter
*National Letter of Intent
*Open letter
*Poison pen letter
*Query letter
*Recommendation letter and the closely related employment reference letter
*Sales letter
*Informal letter

==Gallery==

File:From Caroline Weston to Deborah Weston; Tuesday, June 1, 1841? p1.jpg|By writing both across and down, the sender of a letter could save on postage.
File:Cesare Borgia, handwritten letter 1.jpg|A hand-written letter of Cesare Borgia.
File:Wish list.jpg|A child's letter to Santa Claus.
File:Letter from Arthur Conan Doyle to Herbert Greenhough Smith.jpg|A letter from Arthur Conan Doyle about The Hound of the Baskervilles.
File:Invitation to Space Needle groundbreaking, 1961.jpg|An invitation letter to the ground-breaking of the Seattle Space Needle, 1961.
File:Letter of Resignation of Richard M. Nixon, 1974.jpg|The resignation letter of Richard Nixon, 1974.

==See also==
*Address
*Envelope
*Letter box
*Mail
*Manuscript
*Pen pal
*Salutation
*Secrecy of letters
*Snail mail
*Valediction

==References==

==External links==

* 
*handwrittenletters.com
*Letters as historical sources.
*The First English Family Letters at History Today.

 



[[Lesbian]]

The word lesbian can refer to a woman's identity, to desire, or to romantic or sexual activity between women. (Sappho and Erinna in a Garden at Mytilene by Simeon Solomon)

A lesbian is a female homosexual; a female who experiences romantic love or sexual attraction to other females. "Lesbian", Oxford English Dictionary, Second Edition, 1989. Retrieved on January 7, 2009. Zimmerman, p. 453. The term lesbian is also used with regard to sexual identity or sexual behavior, or as an adjective to characterize or associate nouns with female homosexuality or same-sex attraction. 

The concept of "lesbian," to differentiate women with a shared sexual orientation, is a 20th-century construct. Throughout history, women have not had the same freedom or independence to pursue homosexual relationships as men, but neither have they met the same harsh punishment as homosexual men in some societies. Instead, lesbian relationships have often been regarded as harmless and incomparable to heterosexual ones unless the participants attempted to assert privileges traditionally enjoyed by men. As a result, little in history was documented to give an accurate description of how female homosexuality is expressed. When early sexologists in the late 19th century began to categorize and describe homosexual behavior, hampered by a lack of knowledge about homosexuality or women's sexuality, they distinguished lesbians as women who did not adhere to female gender roles and incorrectly designated them mentally illa designation which has been reversed in the global scientific community.

Women in homosexual relationships responded to this designation either by hiding their personal lives or accepting the label of outcast and creating a subculture and identity that developed in Europe and the United States. Following World War II, during a period of social repression when governments actively persecuted homosexuals, women developed networks to socialize with and educate each other. Greater economic and social freedom allowed them gradually to be able to determine how they could form relationships and families. With second wave feminism and growth of scholarship in women's history and sexuality in the 20th century, the definition of lesbian broadened, sparking a debate about sexual desire as the major component to define what a lesbian is. Some women who engage in same-sex sexual activity may reject not only identifying as lesbians but as bisexual as well, while other women's self-identification as lesbian may not align with their sexual orientation or sexual behavior; sexual identity is not necessarily the same as one's actual sexual orientation or sexual behavior, due to various reasons, such as the fear of identifying their sexual orientation in a homophobic setting.

Portrayals of lesbians in the media suggest that society at large has been simultaneously intrigued and threatened by women who challenge feminine gender roles, and fascinated and appalled with women who are romantically involved with other women. Women who adopt a lesbian identity share experiences that form an outlook similar to an ethnic identity: as homosexuals, they are unified by the heterosexist discrimination and potential rejection they face from their families, friends, and others as a result of homophobia. As women, they face concerns separate from men. Lesbians may encounter distinct physical or mental health concerns arising from discrimination, prejudice, and minority stress. Political conditions and social attitudes also affect the formation of lesbian relationships and families in open.

==Origin and transformation of the term==
Sappho of Lesbos, depicted here in a 1904 painting by John William Godward, gave the term lesbian the connotation of erotic desire between women.

The word lesbian is derived from the name of the Greek island of Lesbos, home to the 6th-century BCE poet Sappho. From various ancient writings, historians have gathered that a group of young women were left in Sappho's charge for their instruction or cultural edification. Foster, p. 18. Not much of Sappho's poetry remains, but that which does reflects the topics she wrote about: women's daily lives, their relationships, and rituals. She focused on the beauty of women and proclaimed her love for girls. Aldrich, pp. 4749. Before the late 19th century, the word lesbian referred to any derivative or aspect of Lesbos, including a type of wine. An attempt by natives of Lesbos (also called "Mytilene" in Greece) in 2008 to reclaim the word to refer only to people from the island was unsuccessful in a Greek court. Inhabitants of Lesbos claimed the use of lesbian to refer to female homosexuality violated their human rights and "disgrace them around the world." (Lesbos locals lose lesbian appeal, BBC News Europe 22, 2008. Retrieved on February 3, 2009.) 

In 1890, the term lesbian was used in a medical dictionary as an adjective to describe tribadism (as "lesbian love"): sexual gratification of two women by simulating intercourse. Lesbianism, to describe erotic relationships between women, had been documented in 1870. The terms were interchangeable with sapphist and sapphism around the turn of the 20th century. The use of lesbian in medical literature became prominent; by 1925, the word was recorded as a noun to mean the female equivalent of a sodomite. 

Havelock Ellis (18591939), one of a number of sexologists responsible for the now-invalid categorization of 'lesbianism' as a medical problem.
The development of medical knowledge was a significant factor in further connotations of the term lesbian. In the middle of the 19th century, medical writers attempted to establish ways to identify male homosexuality, which was considered a significant social problem in most Western societies. In categorizing behavior that indicated what was referred to as "inversion" by German sexologist Magnus Hirschfeld, researchers determined what was normal sexual behavior for men and women, and therefore to what extent men and women varied from the "perfect male sexual type" and the "perfect female sexual type". Aldrich, p. 168. 

Far less literature focused on female homosexual behavior than on male homosexuality, as medical professionals did not consider it a significant problem. In some cases, it was not acknowledged to exist. However, sexologists Richard von Krafft-Ebing from Germany, and Britain's Havelock Ellis wrote some of the earliest and more enduring categorizations of female same-sex attraction, approaching it as a form of insanity. Faderman (1981), p. 241. Krafft-Ebing, who considered lesbianism (what he termed "Uranism") a neurological disease, and Ellis, who was influenced by Krafft-Ebing's writings, disagreed about whether sexual inversion was generally a lifelong condition. Ellis believed that many women who professed love for other women changed their feelings about such relationships after they had experienced marriage and a "practical life". Faderman (1981), p. 242. 

However, Ellis conceded that there were "true inverts" who would spend their lives pursuing erotic relationships with women. These were members of the "third sex" who rejected the roles of women to be subservient, feminine, and domestic. Faderman (1981), p. 240. Invert described the opposite gender roles and the related attraction to women instead of men; since women in the Victorian period were considered unable to initiate sexual encounters, women who did so with other women were thought of as possessing masculine sexual desires. Jennings, p. 77. 

The work of Krafft-Ebing and Ellis was widely read, and helped to create public consciousness of female homosexuality. In Germany between 1898 and 1908 over a thousand articles were published regarding the topic of homosexuality. (Faderman , p. 248) Between 1896 and 1916, 566 articles on women's "perversions" were published in the United States. (Faderman, , p. 49.) The sexologists' claims that homosexuality was a congenital anomaly were generally well-accepted by homosexual men; it indicated that their behavior was not inspired by nor should be considered a criminal vice, as was widely acknowledged. In the absence of any other material to describe their emotions, homosexuals accepted the designation of different or perverted, and used their outlaw status to form social circles in Paris and Berlin. Lesbian began to describe elements of a subculture. Aldrich, 178179. 

Lesbians in Western cultures in particular often classify themselves as having an identity that defines their individual sexuality, as well as their membership to a group that shares common traits. Rust, Paula C. (November 1992). "The Politics of Sexual Identity: Sexual Attraction and Behavior Among Lesbian and Bisexual Women", Social Problems, 39 (4), pp. 366386. Women in many cultures throughout history have had sexual relations with other women, but they rarely were designated as part of a group of people based on who they had physical relations with. As women have generally been political minorities in Western cultures, the added medical designation of homosexuality has been cause for the development of a subcultural identity. Aldrich, p. 239. 

==Female homosexuality without identity in Western culture==

===General===

The varied meanings of lesbian since the early 20th century have prompted some historians to revisit historic relationships between women before the wide usage of the word was defined by erotic proclivities. Discussion from historians caused further questioning of what qualifies as a lesbian relationship. As lesbian-feminists asserted, a sexual component was unnecessary in declaring oneself a lesbian if the primary and closest relationships were with women. When considering past relationships within appropriate historic context, there were times when love and sex were separate and unrelated notions. Rothblum, pp. 47. In 1989, an academic cohort named the Lesbian History Group wrote: Because of society's reluctance to admit that lesbians exist, a high degree of certainty is expected before historians or biographers are allowed to use the label. Evidence that would suffice in any other situation is inadequate here... A woman who never married, who lived with another woman, whose friends were mostly women, or
who moved in known lesbian or mixed gay circles, may well have been a lesbian. ... But this sort of evidence is not 'proof'. What our critics want is incontrovertible evidence of sexual activity between women. This is almost impossible to find. Norton, p. 184. 

Female sexuality is often not adequately represented in texts and documents. Until very recently, much of what has been documented about women's sexuality has been written by men, in the context of male understanding, and relevant to women's associations to menas their wives, daughters, or mothers, for example. Rabinowitz, p. 2. Often artistic representations of female sexuality suggest trends or ideas on broad scales, giving historians clues as to how widespread or accepted erotic relationships between women were.

===Ancient Greece and Rome===

History is often analyzed with contemporary ideologies; Ancient Greece as a subject enjoyed popularity by the ruling class in Britain during the 19th century. Based on their social priorities, British scholars interpreted ancient Greece as a westernized, white, and masculine society, and essentially removed women from historical importance. Rabinowitz, p. 11. Women in Greece were sequestered with each other, and men with men. In this homosocial environment erotic and sexual relationships between males were common and recorded in literature, art, and philosophy. Hardly anything is recorded about homosexual activity between women. There is some speculation that similar relationships existed between women and girls. The poet Alcman used the term aitis, as the feminine form of aiteswhich was the official term for the younger participant in a pederastic relationship. Bremmer, pp. 2728. Aristophanes, in Plato's Symposium, mentions women who love women, but uses the term trepesthai (to be focused on) instead of eros, which was applied to other erotic relationships between men, and between men and women. Aldrich, p. 47. 

Historian Nancy Rabinowitz argues that ancient Greek red vase images portraying women with their arms around another woman's waist, or leaning on a woman's shoulders can be construed as expressions of romantic desire. Rabinowitz, p. 115. Much of the daily lives of women in ancient Greece is unknown, specifically their expressions of sexuality. Although men participated in pederastic relationships outside of marriage, there is no clear evidence that women were allowed or encouraged to have same-sex relationships before or during marriage as long as their marital obligations were met. Women who appear on Greek pottery are depicted with affection, and in instances where women appear only with other women, their images are eroticized: bathing, touching one another, with dildos placed in and around such scenes, and sometimes with imagery also seen in depictions of heterosexual marriage or pederastic seduction. Whether this eroticism is for the viewer or an accurate representation of life is unknown. Rabinowitz, p. 148. 

Women in Ancient Rome were similarly subject to men's definitions of sexuality. Modern scholarship indicates that men viewed female homosexuality with hostility. They considered women who engaged in sexual relations with other women to be biological oddities that would attempt to penetrate womenand sometimes menwith "monstrously enlarged" clitorises. Verstraete, p. 238. According to scholar James Butrica, lesbianism "challenged not only the Roman male's view of himself as the exclusive giver of sexual pleasure but also the most basic foundations of Rome's male-dominated culture". No historical documentation exists of women who had other women as sex partners. Verstraete, pp. 239240. 

===Early Modern Europe===
Lesbianism and hermaphroditism, depicted here in an engraving circa 1690, were very similar concepts during the Renaissance.
Female homosexuality has not received the same negative response from religious or criminal authorities as male homosexuality or adultery has throughout history. Whereas sodomy between men, men and women, and men and animals was punishable by death in Britain, acknowledgment of sexual contact between women was nonexistent in medical and legal texts. The earliest law against female homosexuality appeared in France in 1270. Norton, p. 191. In Spain, Italy, and the Holy Roman Empire, sodomy between women was included in acts considered unnatural and punishable by burning to death, although few instances are recorded of this taking place. Aldrich, p. 130. 

The earliest such execution occurred in Speier, Germany, in 1477. Forty days' penance was demanded of nuns who "rode" each other or were discovered to have touched each other's breasts. An Italian nun named Sister Benedetta Carlini was documented to have seduced many of her sisters when possessed by a Divine spirit named "Splenditello"; to end her relationships with other women, she was placed in solitary confinement for the last 40 years of her life. Norton, p. 190. Female homoeroticism, however, was so common in English literature and theater that historians suggest it was fashionable for a period during the Renaissance. Jennings. p. 1. 

Ideas about women's sexuality were linked to contemporary understanding of female physiology. The vagina was considered an inward version of the penis; where nature's perfection created a man, often nature was thought to be trying to right itself by prolapsing the vagina to form a penis in some women. Jennings, p. 12. These sex changes were later thought to be cases of hermaphrodites, and hermaphroditism became synonymous with female same-sex desire. Medical consideration of hermaphroditism depended upon measurements of the clitoris; a longer, engorged clitoris was thought to be used by women to penetrate other women. Penetration was the focus of concern in all sexual acts, and a woman who was thought to have uncontrollable desires because of her engorged clitoris was called a "tribade" (literally, one who rubs). Jennings, pp. 1416. Not only was an abnormally engorged clitoris thought to create lusts in some women that led them to masturbate, but pamphlets warning women about masturbation leading to such oversized organs were written as cautionary tales. For a while, masturbation and lesbian sex carried the same meaning. Aldrich, p. 129. 

Class distinction, however, became linked as the fashion of female homoeroticism passed. Tribades were simultaneously considered members of the lower class trying to ruin virtuous women, and representatives of an aristocracy corrupt with debauchery. Satirical writers began to suggest that political rivals (or more often, their wives) engaged in tribadism in order to harm their reputations. Queen Anne was rumored to have a passionate relationship with Sarah Churchill, Duchess of Marlborough, her closest adviser and confidante. When Churchill was ousted as the queen's favorite, she purportedly spread allegations of the queen having affairs with her bedchamberwomen. Aldrich, p. 137. Marie Antoinette was also the subject of such speculation for some months between 1795 and 1796. Jennings, pp. 1718. 

===Female husbands===
Gender masquerade as a dramatic device was popular in the 16th and 17th centuries, such as this scene from Twelfth Night painted by Frederick Pickersgill.

Hermaphroditism appeared in medical literature enough to be considered common knowledge, although cases were rare. Homoerotic elements in literature were pervasive, specifically the masquerade of one gender for another to fool an unsuspecting woman into being seduced. Such plot devices were used in Shakespeare's Twelfth Night (1601), The Faerie Queene by Edmund Spenser in 1590, and James Shirley's The Bird in a Cage (1633). Jennings, pp. 111, 2224. Extraordinary cases during the Renaissance of women taking on male personae and going undetected for years or decades have been recorded. Whether these cases would be more accurately described in contemporary sociology as transgender is debated, and based on the individual details of each case. 

If found, punishments ranged from death, to time in the pillory, to being ordered never to dress as a man again. Henry Fielding wrote a pamphlet titled The Female Husband in 1746, based on the life of Mary Hamilton, who married women on three separate occasions, and was sentenced to public whipping in four separate towns and six months in jail. Similar examples were procured of Catharine Linck in Prussia in 1717, executed in 1721; Swiss Anne Grandjean married and relocated with her wife to Lyons, but was exposed by a woman with whom she had had a previous affair and sentenced to time in the stocks and prison. Faderman, pp. 5154. 

Queen Christina of Sweden's tendency to dress as a man was well known during her time, and excused because of her noble birth. She was brought up as a male and there was speculation at the time that she was a hermaphrodite. Even after Christina abdicated the throne in 1654 to avoid marriage, she was known to pursue romantic relationships with women. Faderman, pp. 5455. 

Some historians view cases of cross-dressing women to be manifestations of women seizing power they would naturally be unable to enjoy in feminine attire, or their way of making sense out of their desire for women. Lillian Faderman argues that Western society was threatened by women who rejected their feminine roles. Catharine Linck and other women who were accused of using dildos, such as two nuns in 16th century Spain executed for using "material instruments", were punished more severely than those who did not. Two marriages between women were recorded in Cheshire, England, in 1707 (between Hannah Wright and Anne Gaskill) and 1708 (between Ane Norton and Alice Pickford) with no comment about both parties being female. Jennings, p. 30. Aldrich, p. 136. Reports of clergymen with lax standards who performed weddingsand wrote their suspicions about one member of the wedding partycontinued to appear for the next century.

Outside of Europe women were able to dress as men and go undetected. Deborah Sampson fought in the American Revolution as a man named Robert Shurtlieff, and pursued relationships with women. Katz, pp. 212214. Edward De Lacy Evans was born female in Ireland, but took a male name during the voyage to Australia and lived as a man for 23 years in Victoria, marrying three times. Aldrich, p. 224. Percy Redwood created a scandal in New Zealand in 1909 when he was found to be Amy Bock, who had married a woman from Port Molyneaux; newspapers argued whether it was a sign of insanity or an inherent character flaw. Coleman, Jenny (2001). "Unsettled Women: Deviant Genders in Late Nineteenth and Early Twentieth Century New Zealand", Journal of Lesbian Studies, 5 (1/2), pp. 1326. 

===Re-examining romantic friendships===
Intimacy between women was fashionable between the 17th and 19th centuries, although sexuality was rarely publicly acknowledged.

During the 17th through 19th centuries, a woman expressing passionate love for another woman was fashionable, accepted, and encouraged. These relationships were termed romantic friendships, Boston marriages, or "sentimental friends", and were common in the U.S., Europe, and especially in England. Documentation of these relationships is possible by a large volume of letters written between women. Whether the relationship included any genital component was not a matter for public discourse, but women could form strong and exclusive bonds with each other and still be considered virtuous, innocent, and chaste; a similar relationship with a man would have destroyed a woman's reputation. In fact, these relationships were promoted as alternatives to and practice for a woman's marriage to a man. Faderman (1981), pp. 7477. In a rare instance of sexuality being the focus of a romantic friendship, two Scottish schoolteachers in the early 19th century were accused by a student of visiting in the same bed, kissing, and making the bed shake. The student's grandmother reported the teachers to the authorities, who were skeptical that their actions were sexual in nature, or that they extended beyond the bounds of normal friendship: "Are we to say that every woman who has formed an intimate friendship and has slept in the same bed with another is guilty? Where is the innocent woman in Scotland?" (Aldrich, p. 233.) 

One such relationship was between Lady Mary Wortley Montagu, who wrote to Anne Wortley in 1709: "Nobody was so entirely, so faithfully yours ... I put in your lovers, for I don't allow it possible for a man to be so sincere as I am." Faderman (1981), p. 119. Similarly, English poet Anna Seward had a devoted friendship to Honora Sneyd, who was the subject of many of Seward's sonnets and poems. When Sneyd married despite Seward's protest, Seward's poems became angry. However, Seward continued to write about Sneyd long after her death, extolling Sneyd's beauty and their affection and friendship. Faderman (1981), pp. 132136. As a young woman, writer and philosopher Mary Wollstonecraft was attached to a woman named Fanny Blood. Writing to another woman by whom she had recently felt betrayed, Wollstonecraft declared, "The roses will bloom when there's peace in the breast, and the prospect of living with my Fanny gladdens my heart:You know not how I love her." Faderman (1981), p. 139. Wollstonecraft and Blood set up a girls' boarding school so they could live and work together, and Wollstonecraft named her first child after Blood. Wollstonecraft's first novel , in part, addressed her relationship with Fanny Blood. Foster, pp. 5560. 

Eleanor Butler and Sarah Ponsonby had a relationship that was hailed as devoted and virtuous, after eloping and living 51 years together in Wales.

Perhaps the most famous of these romantic friendships was between Eleanor Butler and Sarah Ponsonby, nicknamed the Ladies of Llangollen. Butler and Ponsonby eloped in 1778, to the relief of Ponsonby's family (concerned about their reputation had she run away with a man) Faderman, p. 75. to live together in Wales for 51 years and be thought of as eccentrics. Aldrich, pp. 227229. Their story was considered "the epitome of virtuous romantic friendship" and inspired poetry by Anna Seward and Henry Wadsworth Longfellow. Jennings, pp. 4546. Diarist Anne Lister, captivated by Butler and Ponsonby, recorded her affairs with women between 1817 and 1840. Some of it was written in code, detailing her sexual relationships with Marianna Belcombe and Maria Barlow. Castle, p. 390. Both Lister and Eleanor Butler were considered masculine by contemporary news reports, and though there were suspicions that these relationships were sapphist in nature, they were nonetheless praised in literature. Aldrich, p. 233. Castle, pp. 339, 400. 

Romantic friendships were also popular in the U.S. Enigmatic poet Emily Dickinson wrote over 300 letters and poems to Susan Gilbert, who later became her sister-in-law, and engaged in another romantic correspondence with Kate Scott Anthon. Anthon broke off their relationship the same month Dickinson entered self-imposed lifelong seclusion. Foster, pp. 145148. Nearby in Hartford, Connecticut, African American freeborn women Addie Brown and Rebecca Primus left evidence of their passion in letters: "No kisses is like youres". Aldrich, p. 234. In Georgia, Alice Baldy wrote to Josie Varner in 1870, "Do you know that if you touch me, or speak to me there is not a nerve of fibre in my body that does not respond with a thrill of delight?" Aldrich, p. 232. 

Around the turn of the 20th century, the development of higher education provided opportunities for women. In all-female surroundings, a culture of romantic pursuit was fostered in women's colleges. Older students mentored younger ones, called on them socially, took them to all-women dances, and sent them flowers, cards, and poems that declared their undying love for each other. Faderman (1981), pp. 297313. These were called "smashes" or "spoons", and they were written about quite frankly in stories for girls aspiring to attend college in publications such as Ladies Home Journal, a children's magazine titled St. Nicholas, and a collection called Smith College Stories, without negative views. Foster, p. 255. Enduring loyalty, devotion, and love were major components to these stories, and sexual acts beyond kissing were consistently absent. 

Women who had the option of a career instead of marriage labeled themselves New Women, and took their new opportunities very seriously. First Lady Eleanor Roosevelt exchanged rings with and wrote letters to journalist Lorena Hickok, expressing her love and desire to kiss Hickock; her writings were in the style of romantic friendship. The view that Roosevelt's relationship with Hickok may have been sexual, therefore deserving of the lesbian label, created controversy among Roosevelt's biographers. (Faderman , pp. 297313.) Faderman calls this period "the last breath of innocence" before 1920 when characterizations of female affection were connected to sexuality, marking lesbians as a unique and often unflattering group. Specifically, Faderman connects the growth of women's independence and their beginning to reject strictly prescribed roles in the Victorian era to the scientific designation of lesbianism as a type of aberrant sexual behavior. Faderman (1991), pp. 4549. 

==Identity and gender in historical Western culture==

===Construction of lesbian identity===
Berlin's thriving lesbian community in the 1920s published this magazine between 1924 and 1933.

For some women, the realization that they participated in behavior or relationships that could be categorized as lesbian caused them to deny or conceal it, such as professor Jeannette Augustus Marks at Mount Holyoke College, who lived with the college president, Mary Woolley, for 36 years. Marks discouraged young women from "abnormal" friendships and insisted happiness could only be attained with a man. Other historical figures rejected being labeled as lesbians despite their behavior: Djuna Barnes, author of Nightwood, a novel about an affair Barnes had with Thelma Wood, earned the label "lesbian writer", which she protested by saying, "I am not a lesbian. I just loved Thelma." Virginia Woolf, who modeled the hero/ine in Orlando on Vita Sackville-West, with whom she was having an affair, set herself apart from women who pursued relationships with other women by writing, "These Sapphists love women; friendship is never untinged with amorosity." (Castle, pp. 45.) Other women, however, embraced the distinction and used their uniqueness to set themselves apart from heterosexual women and gay men. Zimmerman, p. 383. 

From the 1890s to the 1930s, American heiress Natalie Clifford Barney held a weekly salon in Paris to which major artistic celebrities were invited and where lesbian topics were the focus. Combining Greek influences with contemporary French eroticism, she attempted to create an updated and idealized version of Lesbos in her salon. Edsall, p. 234. Her contemporaries included artist Romaine Brooks, who painted others in her circle; writers Colette, Djuna Barnes, social host Gertrude Stein, and novelist Radclyffe Hall.

Berlin had a vibrant homosexual culture in the 1920s: about 50 clubs catering to lesbians existed, women had their own magazine titled Die Freundin (The Girlfriend) between 1924 and 1933, and another titled Garonne specifically for male transvestites and lesbians. Aldrich, pp. 241244. In 1928 a book titled The Lesbians of Berlin written by Ruth Margarite Rllig further popularized the German capital as a center of lesbian activity. Clubs varied between large establishments so popular that they were tourist attractions to small neighborhood cafes where only local women went to find other women. "Das Lila Lied" ("The Lavender Song") served as an anthem to the lesbians of Berlin. Homosexuality was illegal in Germany, though sometimes tolerated, as some functions were allowed by the police who took the opportunity to register the names of homosexuals for future reference. Tamagne, pp. 5357. Magnus Hirschfeld's Scientific-Humanitarian Committee, which promoted tolerance for homosexuals in Germany, welcomed lesbian participation, and a surge of lesbian-themed writing and political activism in the German feminist movement became evident. Edsall, pp. 230231. 

Radclyffe Hall's image appeared in many newspapers discussing the content of The Well of Loneliness.

In 1928, Radclyffe Hall published a novel titled The Well of Loneliness. Its plot centers around Stephen Gordon, a woman who identifies herself as an invert after reading Krafft-Ebing's Psychopathia Sexualis, and lives within the homosexual subculture of Paris. The novel included a foreword by Havelock Ellis and was intended to be a call for tolerance for inverts by publicizing their disadvantages and accidents of being born inverted. Faderman (1981), p. 320. Hall subscribed to Ellis and Krafft-Ebing's theories and rejected Freud's theory that same-sex attraction was caused by childhood trauma and was curable. The publicity Hall received was due to unintended consequences; the novel was tried for obscenity in London, a spectacularly scandalous event described as "the crystallizing moment in the construction of a visible modern English lesbian subculture" by professor Laura Doan. Doan, p. XIII. 

Newspaper stories frankly divulged that the book's content includes "sexual relations between Lesbian women", and photographs of Hall often accompanied details about lesbians in most major print outlets within a span of six months. Doan, p. XV. Hall reflected the appearance of a "mannish" woman in the 1920s: short cropped hair, tailored suits (often with pants), and monocle that became widely recognized as a "uniform". When British women participated in World War I, they became familiar with masculine clothing, and were considered patriotic for wearing uniforms and pants. However, postwar masculinization of women's clothing became associated with lesbians. Doan, pp. 6466. 

Harlem resident Gladys Bentley was renowned for her blues songs about her affairs with women

In the United States, the 1920s was a decade of social experimentation, particularly with sex. This was heavily influenced by the writings of Sigmund Freud, who theorized that sexual desire would be sated unconsciously, despite an individual's wish to ignore it. Freud's theories were much more pervasive in the U.S. than in Europe. With the well-publicized notion that sexual acts were a part of lesbianism and their relationships, sexual experimentation was widespread. Large cities that provided a nightlife were immensely popular, and women began to seek out sexual adventure. Bisexuality became chic, particularly in America's first gay neighborhoods. Faderman (1991), pp. 6367. 

No location saw more visitors for its possibilities of homosexual nightlife than Harlem, the predominantly African American section of New York City. White "slummers" enjoyed jazz, nightclubs, and anything else they wished. Blues singers Ma Rainey, Bessie Smith, Ethel Waters, and Gladys Bentley sang about affairs with women to visitors such as Tallulah Bankhead, Beatrice Lillie, and the soon-to-be-named Joan Crawford. Faderman (1991), p. 71. Zimmerman, p. 354. Homosexuals began to draw comparisons between their newly recognized minority status and that of African Americans. Faderman (1991), p. 68. Among African American residents of Harlem, lesbian relationships were common and tolerated, though not overtly embraced. Some women staged lavish wedding ceremonies, even filing licenses using masculine names with New York City. Faderman (1991), p. 73. Most women, however, were married to men and participated in affairs with women regularly; bisexuality was more widely accepted than lesbianism. Zimmerman, p. 355. 

Across town, Greenwich Village also saw a growing homosexual community; both Harlem and Greenwich Village provided furnished rooms for single men and women, which was a major factor in their development as centers for homosexual communities. Norton, p. 181. The tenor was different in Greenwich Village than Harlem, however. Bohemiansintellectuals who rejected Victorian idealsgathered in the Village. Homosexuals were predominantly male, although figures such as poet Edna St. Vincent Millay and social host Mabel Dodge were known for their affairs with women and promotion of tolerance of homosexuality. Faderman, pp. 8283. Women in the U.S. who could not visit Harlem or live in Greenwich Village for the first time were able to visit saloons in the 1920s without being considered prostitutes. The existence of a public space for women to socialize in bars that were known to cater to lesbians "became the single most important public manifestation of the subculture for many decades", according to historian Lillian Faderman. Faderman (1991), pp. 7980. 

===The Great Depression===
The primary component necessary to encourage lesbians to be public and seek other women was economic independence, which virtually disappeared in the 1930s with the Great Depression. Most women in the U.S. found it necessary to marry, to a "front" such as a gay man where both could pursue homosexual relationships with public discretion, or to a man who expected a traditional wife. Independent women in the 1930s were generally seen as holding jobs that men should have. Faderman (1991), pp. 9496. 

The social attitude made very small and close-knit communities in large cities that centered around bars, while simultaneously isolating women in other locales. Speaking of homosexuality in any context was socially forbidden, and women rarely discussed lesbianism even amongst themselves; they referred to openly gay people as "in the Life". Faderman (1991), pp. 105112. Historian Vern Bullough published a paper based on an unfinished study of mental and physical traits performed by a lesbian in Salt Lake City during the 1920s and 1930s. The compiler of the study reported on 23 of her colleagues, indicating there was an underground lesbian community in the conservative city. Bullough remarked that the information was being used to support the attitude that lesbians were not abnormal or maladjusted, but it also reflected that women included in the study strove in every way to conform to social gender expectations, viewing anyone who pushed the boundaries of respectability with hostility. Bullough wrote, "In fact, their very success in disguising their sexual orientation to the outside world leads us to hypothesize that lesbianism in the past was more prevalent than the sources might indicate, since society was so unsuspecting." (Bullough, Vern; Bullough, Bonnie 1977. "Lesbianism in the 1920s and 1930s: A Newfound Study", Signs, pp. 895904.) Freudian psychoanalytic theory was pervasive in influencing doctors to consider homosexuality as a neurosis afflicting immature women. Homosexual subculture disappeared in Germany with the rise of the Nazis in 1933. Aldrich, pp. 191193. 

===World War II===
Women's experiences in the work force and the military during World War II gave them economic and social options that helped to shape lesbian subculture.
The onset of World War II caused a massive upheaval in people's lives as military mobilization engaged millions of men. Women were also accepted into the military in the U.S. Women's Army Corps (WACs) and U.S. Navy's Women Accepted for Volunteer Emergency Service (WAVES). Unlike processes to screen out male homosexuals, which had been in place since the creation of the American military, there were no methods to identify or screen for lesbians; they were put into place gradually during World War II. Despite common attitudes regarding women's traditional roles in the 1930s, independent and masculine women were directly recruited by the military in the 1940s, and frailty discouraged. Berube, pp. 2833. 

Some women were able to arrive at the recruiting station in a man's suit, deny ever having been in love with another woman, and be easily inducted. Sexual activity, however, was forbidden, and blue discharge was almost certain if one identified oneself as a lesbian. As women found each other, they formed into tight groups on base, socialized at service clubs, and began to use code words. Historian Allan Brub documented that homosexuals in the armed forces either consciously or subconsciously refused to identify themselves as homosexual or lesbian, and also never spoke about others' orientation. Berube, p. 104. 

The most masculine women were not necessarily common, though they were visible so they tended to attract women interested in finding other lesbians. Women had to broach the subject about their interest in other women carefully, sometimes taking days to develop a common understanding without asking or stating anything outright. Berube, p. 100. Women who did not enter the military were aggressively called upon to take industrial jobs left by men, in order to continue national productivity. The increased mobility, sophistication, and independence of many women during and after the war made it possible for women to live without husbands, something that would not have been feasible under different economic and social circumstances, further shaping lesbian networks and environments. Faderman (1991), pp. 129130. 

===Postwar years===
The first edition of The Ladder, mailed to hundreds of women in the San Francisco area, urged women to take off their masks.

Following World War II, a nationwide movement pressed to return to pre-war society as quickly as possible in the U.S. Adam, p. 56. When combined with the increasing national paranoia about communism and psychoanalytic theory that had become pervasive in medical knowledge, homosexuality became an undesired characteristic of employees working for the U.S. government in 1950. Homosexuals were thought to be vulnerable targets to blackmail, and the government purged its employment ranks of open homosexuals, beginning a widespread effort to gather intelligence about employees' private lives. Edsall, p. 277. State and local governments followed suit, arresting people for congregating in bars and parks, and enacting laws against cross-dressing for men and women. Adam, p. 59. 

The U.S. military and government conducted many interrogations, asking if women had ever had sexual relations with another woman and essentially equating even a one-time experience to a criminal identity, thereby severely delineating heterosexuals from homosexuals. Faderman (1991), pp. 150155. In 1952 homosexuality was listed as a pathological emotional disturbance in the American Psychiatric Association's Diagnostic and Statistical Manual. Edsall, p. 247. The view that homosexuality was a curable sickness was widely believed in the medical community, general population, and among many lesbians themselves. Esterberg, Kristin Gay (February 1990). "From Illness to Action: Conceptions of Homosexuality in The Ladder, 19561965", The Journal of Sex Research, 27 (1), pp. 6580. 

Attitudes and practices to ferret out homosexuals in public service positions extended to Australia Willett, pp. 1011. and Canada. Warner, p. 27. A section to create an offence of "gross indecency" between females was added to a bill in the United Kingdom House of Commons and passed there in 1921, but was rejected in the House Of Lords, apparently because they were concerned any attention paid to sexual misconduct would also promote it. Jennings, pp. 109114. 

==== Underground socializing ====
Very little information was available about homosexuality beyond medical and psychiatric texts. Community meeting places consisted of bars that were commonly raided by police once a month on average, with those arrested exposed in newspapers. In response, eight women in San Francisco met in their living rooms in 1955 to socialize and have a place to dance. When they decided to make it a regular meeting, they became the first organization for lesbians in the U.S., titled the Daughters of Bilitis (DOB). The DOB began publishing a magazine titled The Ladder in 1956; inside the front cover of every issue was their mission statement, the first of which stated was "Education of the variant". It was intended to provide women with knowledge about homosexualityspecifically relating to women, and famous lesbians in history. However, by 1956 the term "lesbian" had such a negative meaning that the DOB refused to use it as a descriptor, choosing "variant" instead. Gallo, p. 3. 

The DOB spread to Chicago, New York, and Los Angeles, and The Ladder was mailed to hundredseventually thousandsof DOB members discussing the nature of homosexuality, sometimes challenging the idea that it was a sickness, with readers offering their own reasons why they were lesbians, and suggesting ways to cope with the condition or society's response to it. British lesbians followed with the publication of Arena Three beginning in 1964, with a similar mission. Jennings, pp. 153158. 

Though marketed to heterosexual men, lesbian pulp fiction provided an identity to isolated women in the 1950s.

==== Butch and femme dichotomy ====

As a reflection of categories of sexuality so sharply defined by the government and society at large, lesbian subculture developed extremely rigid gender roles between women, particularly among the working class in the U.S. and Canada. Although many municipalities had enacted laws against cross-dressing, some women would socialize in bars as butches: dressed in men's clothing and mirroring traditional masculine behavior. Others wore traditionally feminine clothing and assumed a more diminutive role as femmes. Butch and femme modes of socialization were so integral within lesbian bars that women who refused to choose between the two would be ignored, or at least unable to date anyone, and butch women becoming romantically involved with other butch women or femmes with other femmes was unacceptable. Faderman (1991), pp. 167168. 

Butch women were not a novelty in the 1950s; even in Harlem and Greenwich Village in the 1920s some women assumed these personae. In the 1950s and 1960s, however, the roles were pervasive and not limited to North America: from 1940 to 1970, butch/femme bar culture flourished in Britain, though there were fewer class distinctions. Jennings, pp. 141143. They further identified members of a group that had been marginalized; women who had been rejected by most of society had an inside view of an exclusive group of people that took a high amount of knowledge to function in. Faderman (1991), pp. 170174. Butch and femme were considered coarse by American lesbians of higher social standing during this period. Many wealthier women married to satisfy their familial obligations, and others escaped to Europe to live as expatriates. Faderman (1991), pp. 175178. 

==== Lesbian themed fiction ====
Regardless of the lack of information about homosexuality in scholarly texts, another forum for learning about lesbianism was growing. A paperback book titled Women's Barracks describing a woman's experiences in the Free French Forces was published in 1950. It told of a lesbian relationship the author had witnessed. After 4.5 million copies were sold, it was consequently named in the House Select Committee on Current Pornographic Materials in 1952. Stryker, p. 49. Its publisher, Gold Medal Books, followed with the novel Spring Fire in 1952, which sold 1.5 million copies. Gold Medal Books was overwhelmed with mail from women writing about the subject matter, and followed with more books, creating the genre of lesbian pulp fiction. Stryker, pp. 5457. 

Between 1955 and 1969 over 2,000 books were published using lesbianism as a topic, and they were sold in corner drugstores, train stations, bus stops, and newsstands all over the U.S. and Canada. Most were written by, and almost all were marketed to heterosexual men. Coded words and images were used on the covers. Instead of "lesbian", terms such as "strange", "twilight", "queer", and "third sex", were used in the titles, and cover art was invariably salacious. Zimet, pp. 1724. A handful of lesbian pulp fiction authors were women writing for lesbians, including Ann Bannon, Valerie Taylor, Paula Christian, and Vin Packer/Ann Aldrich. Bannon, who also purchased lesbian pulp fiction, later stated that women identified the material iconically by the cover art. . Dir. Fernie, L., Weissman. Videocassette. Women Make Movies Home Video, 1994. Many of the books used cultural references: naming places, terms, describing modes of dress and other codes to isolated women. As a result, pulp fiction helped to proliferate a lesbian identity simultaneously to lesbians and heterosexual readers. Nestle, Joan (1983). "Desire So Big It Had to Be Brave", Lesbian Herstory Archives. 

===Second wave feminism ===
The social rigidity of the 1950s and early 1960s encountered a backlash as social movements to improve the standing of African Americans, the poor, women, and gays all became prominent. Of the latter two, the gay rights movement and the feminist movement connected after a violent confrontation occurred in New York City in the 1969 Stonewall riots. Aldrich, pp. 212216. What followed was a movement characterized by a surge of gay activism and feminist consciousness that further transformed the definition of lesbian.

The sexual revolution in the 1970s introduced the differentiation between identity and sexual behavior for women. Many women took advantage of their new social freedom to try new experiences. Women who previously identified as heterosexual tried sleeping with women, though many maintained their heterosexual identity. Faderman (1991), p. 203. However, with the advent of second wave feminism, lesbian as a political identity grew to describe a social philosophy among women, often overshadowing sexual desire as a defining trait. A militant feminist organization named Radicalesbians published a manifesto in 1970 entitled "The Woman-Identified Woman" that declared "A lesbian is the rage of all women condensed to the point of explosion". Schlager, p. 70. A similar statement appeared in a militant feminist pamphlet in Leeds, England, stating "Our definition of a political lesbian is a woman-identified woman who does not fuck men. It does not mean compulsory sexual activity with women." (Jennings, p. 177.) 

Militant feminists expressed their disdain with an inherently sexist and patriarchal society, and concluded the most effective way to overcome sexism and attain the equality of women would be to deny men any power or pleasure from women. For women who subscribed to this philosophydubbing themselves lesbian-feministslesbian was a term chosen by women to describe any woman who dedicated her approach to social interaction and political motivation to the welfare of women. Sexual desire was not the defining characteristic of a lesbian-feminist, but rather her focus on politics. Independence from men as oppressors was a central tenet of lesbian-feminism, and many believers strove to separate themselves physically and economically from traditional male-centered culture. In the ideal society, named Lesbian Nation, "woman" and "lesbian" were interchangeable. Faderman (1991), pp. 218219. 

In 1980, poet and essayist Adrienne Rich expanded upon the political meaning of lesbian by proposing a continuum of lesbian existence based on "woman-identified experience". Rich, Adrienne (Summer 1980). "Compulsory Heterosexuality and Lesbian Existence", Signs, 5 (4), pp. 631660. All relationships between women, Rich proposed, have some lesbian element, regardless if they claim a lesbian identity: mothers and daughters, women who work together, and women who nurse each other, for example. Such a perception of women relating to each other connects them through time and across cultures, and Rich considered heterosexuality a condition forced upon women by men. Several years earlier, DOB founders Del Martin and Phyllis Lyon similarly relegated sexual acts as unnecessary in determining what a lesbian is, by providing their definition: "a woman whose primary erotic, psychological, emotional and social interest is in a member of her own sex, even though that interest may not be overtly expressed". Martin and Lyon, p. 7. 

Although lesbian-feminism was a significant shift, not all lesbians agreed with it. Lesbian-feminism was a youth-oriented movement: its members were primarily college educated, with experience in New Left and radical causes, but they had not seen any success in persuading radical organizations to take up women's issues. Schlager, p. 11. Many older lesbians who had acknowledged their sexuality in more conservative times felt maintaining their ways of coping in a homophobic world was more appropriate. The Daughters of Bilitis folded in 1970 over which direction to focus on: feminism or gay rights issues. Esterberg, Kristen (September, 1994). "From Accommodation to Liberation: A Social Movement Analysis of Lesbians in the Homophile Movement." Gender and Society, 8, (3) pp. 424443. 

As equality was a priority for lesbian-feminists, disparity of roles between men and women or butch and femme were viewed as patriarchal. Lesbian-feminists eschewed gender role play that had been pervasive in bars, as well as the perceived chauvinism of gay men; many lesbian-feminists refused to work with gay men, or take up their causes. Faderman (1991), pp. 210211. However, lesbians who held a more essentialist view that they had been born homosexual and used the descriptor "lesbian" to define sexual attraction, often considered the separatist, angry opinions of lesbian-feminists to be detrimental to the cause of gay rights. Faderman (1991), pp. 217218. 

==Outside of Western culture==

===Middle East===

Female homosexual behavior may be present in every culture, although the concept of a lesbian as a woman who pairs exclusively with other women is not. Attitudes about female homosexual behavior are dependent upon women's roles in each society, and each culture's definition of sex. Women in the Middle East have been historically segregated from men. In the 7th and 8th centuries, some extraordinary women dressed in male attire when gender roles were less strict, but the sexual roles that accompanied European women were not associated with Islamic women. The Caliphal court in Baghdad featured women who dressed as men, including false facial hair, but they competed with other women for the attentions of men. Murray and Roscoe, pp. 98104. 

Highly intelligent women, according to the 12th century writings of Sharif al-Idrisi, were more likely to be lesbians; their intellectual prowess put them on a more even par with men. Relations between women who lived in harems, and fears of women being sexually intimate in Turkish baths were expressed in writings by men. Women, however, were mostly silent and men likewise rarely wrote about lesbian relationships. It is unclear to historians if the rare instances of lesbianism mentioned in literature are an accurate historical record or intended to serve as fantasies for men. A 1978 treatise about repression in Iran asserted that women were completely silenced: "In the whole of Iranian history, woman has been allowed to speak out for such tendencies ... To attest to lesbian desires would be an unforgivable crime." 

Although the authors of Islamic Homosexualities argued this did not mean women could not engage in lesbian relationships, a lesbian anthropologist in 1991 visited Yemen and reported that women in the town she visited were unable to comprehend her romantic relationship to another woman. Women in Pakistan are expected to marry men; those who do not are ostracized. Women, however, may have intimate relations with other women as long as their wifely duties are met, their private matters are kept quiet, and the woman with whom they are involved is somehow related by family or logical interest to her lover. Murray and Roscoe, pp. 283284. 

The United Nations estimate for the number of honor killings in the world is 5000 per year. Many women's groups in the Middle East and Southwest Asia suspect that more than 20,000 women are honor killed in the world each year. 

===The Americas===

Indigenous people in North and South America conceptualized a third gender for men-women and women-men. These roles were recorded of the Coahuiltecan Indians in Texas, Timucuan in Florida, and Cueva in Panama. In Cree, the term for a man who took the role of a woman was ayekkwew; the Zuni word for a woman who took the role of a man was katsotse (boy-girl), Aldrich, p. 147. and the Mohave give women the term hwame. Aldrich, p. 226. The cross-gender roles have less to do with sexuality than with spirituality and occupation. A "two-spirit" woman who has a relationship with a non cross-gender woman is thought to be a "hetero-gender" relationship. Aldrich, p. 149. 

In Latin America, lesbian consciousness and associations appeared in the 1970s, increasing while several countries transitioned to or reformed democratic governments. Harassment and intimidation have been common even in places where homosexuality is legal, and laws against child corruption, morality, or "the good ways" (faltas a la moral o las buenas costumbres), have been used to persecute homosexuals. Mogrovejo, Norma (2004). "Relevancia de las lesbianas en Amrica Latina: la recuperacin de nuestra historia" (Relevance of lesbians in Latin America: the recovery of our history). In Drucker, Pter; Mercad, Enrique. Arco iris diferentes. Siglo XXI. ISBN 978-968-23-2486-4. (In Spanish) p. 103. From the Hispanic perspective, the conflict between the lesbophobia of feminists and the misogyny from gay men has created a difficult path for lesbians and associated groups. Mogrovejo (2004), pp. 85100. 

Argentina was the first Latin American country with a gay rights group, Nuestro Mundo (NM, or Our World), created in 1969. Six mostly secret organizations concentrating on gay or lesbian issues were founded around this time, but persecution and harassment were continuous and grew worse with the dictatorship of Jorge Rafael Videla in 1976, when all groups were dissolved in the Dirty War. Lesbian rights groups have gradually formed since 1986 to build a cohesive community that works to overcome philosophical differences with heterosexual women. Mogrovejo (2000), pp. 281294. 

The Latin American lesbian movement has been the most active in Mexico, but has encountered similar problems in effectiveness and cohesion. While groups try to promote lesbian issues and concerns, they also face misogynistic attitudes from gay men and homophobic views from heterosexual women. In 1977, Lesbos, the first lesbian organization for Mexicans, was formed. Several incarnations of political groups promoting lesbian issues have evolved; 13 lesbian organizations were active in Mexico City in 1997. Ultimately, however, lesbian associations have had little influence both on the homosexual and feminist movements. Mogrovejo (2004), pp. 8894. 

In Chile, the dictatorship of Augusto Pinochet forbade the creation of lesbian groups until 1984, when Ayuqueln ("joy of being" in Mapuche) was first founded, prompted by the very public beating death of a woman amid shouts of "Damned lesbian!" from her attacker. The lesbian movement has been closely associated with the feminist movement in Chile, although the relationship has been sometimes strained. Ayuqueln worked with the International Lesbian Information Service, the International Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual, Trans and Intersex Association, and the Chilean gay rights group Movimiento de Integracin y Liberacin Homosexual (Movement to Integrate and Liberate Homosexuals) to remove the sodomy law still in force in Chile. 

Lesbian consciousness began in Nicaragua in 1986, when the Sandinista National Liberation Front expelled gay men and lesbians from its midst. State persecution prevented the formation of associations until AIDS became a concern, when educational efforts forced sexual minorities to band together. The first lesbian organization was Nosotras, founded in 1989. An effort to promote visibility from 1991 to 1992 provoked the government to declare homosexuality illegal in 1994, effectively ending the movement, until 2004, when Grupo Safo  Grupo de Mujeres Lesbianas de Nicaragua was created, four years before homosexuality became legal again. Mogrovejo (2004), pp. 100-103 

The meetings of feminist lesbians of Latin America and the Caribbean, sometimes shortened to "Lesbian meetings", have been an important forum for the exchange of ideas for Latin American lesbians since the late 1980s. With rotating hosts and biannual gatherings, its main aims are the creation of communication networks, to change the situation of lesbians in Latin America (both legally and socially), to increase solidarity between lesbians and to destroy the existing myths about them. Rachid, p. 260 

===Africa===

Cross-gender roles and marriage between women has also been recorded in over 30 African societies. Aldrich, p. 262. Women may marry other women, raise their children, and be generally thought of as men in societies in Nigeria, Cameroon, and Kenya. The Hausa people of Sudan have a term equivalent to lesbian, kifi, that may also be applied to males to mean "neither party insists on a particular sexual role". Aldrich, p. 259. 

Near the Congo River a female who participates in strong emotional or sexual relationships with another female among the Nkundo people is known as yaikya bonsngo (a woman who presses against another woman). Lesbian relationships are also known in matrilineal societies in Ghana among the Akan people. In Lesotho, females engage in what is commonly considered sexual behavior to the Western world: they kiss, sleep together, rub genitals, participate in cunnilingus, and maintain their relationships with other females vigilantly. Since the people of Lesotho believe sex requires a penis, however, they do not consider their behavior sexual, nor label themselves lesbians. Aldrich, pp. 237238. 

In South Africa, lesbians are raped by heterosexual men with a goal of punishment of "abnormal" behavior and reinforcement of societal norms. 

 The crime was first identified in South Africa 
Janoff, Douglas. Pink Blood: Homophobic Violence in Canada. Toronto: University of Toronto, 2005.
 where it is sometimes supervised by members of the woman's family or local community, 

 and is a major contributor to HIV infection in South African lesbians. Corrective rape is not recognized by the South African legal system as a hate crime despite the fact that the South African Constitution states that no person shall be discriminated against based on their social status and identity, including sexual orientation. 
Mieses, Alexa. "Gender Inequality and Corrective Rape of Women Who Have Sex with Women." GMHC Treatment Issues (2009): 13.
 
Mabuse, Nkepile. "'Corrective Rape' Motivated by Hate." World's Untold Stories. CNN. London, 7 Nov. 2011.
 Legally, South Africa protects gay rights extensively, but the government does not do anything to prevent corrective rape, and women do not have much faith in the police and their investigations. 
Di Silvio, Lorenzo. "Correcting Corrective Rape: Carmichele and Developing South Africas Affirmative Obligations To Prevent Violence Against Women." Georgetown Law Journal 99 (2011): 1469515.
 
Mabuse, Nkepile. "Horror of South Africa's 'corrective Rape.'" CNN. Cable News Network, 28 Oct. 2011.
 

Corrective rape is on the rise in South Africa. More than 10 lesbians are raped or gang-raped weekly, as estimated by Luleki Sizwe, a South African nonprofit. 
"South African lesbians at risk for corrective rape." Contemporary Sexuality. 45.7 (2011): 8.
 It is estimated that at least 500 lesbians become victims of corrective rape every year and that 86% of black lesbians in the Western Cape live in fear of being sexually assaulted, as reported by the Triangle Project in 2008. Yet, victims of corrective rape are less likely to report it because of the negative social view of homosexuality. 

===Asia===
A historic shunga woodblock printing from Japan depicting two women having sex.
China before westernization was another society that segregated men from women. Historical Chinese culture has not recognized a concept of sexual orientation, or a framework to divide people based on their same-sex or opposite-sex attractions. Sullivan and Jackson, p. 29. Although there was a significant culture surrounding homosexual men, there was none for women. Outside of their duties to bear sons to their husbands, women were perceived as having no sexuality at all. Aldrich, p. 311. 

This did not mean that women could not pursue sexual relationships with other women, but that such associations could not impose upon women's relationships to men. Rare references to lesbianism were written by Ying Shao, who identified same-sex relationships between women in imperial courts who behaved as husband and wife as dui shi (paired eating). "Golden Orchid Associations" in Southern China existed into the 20th century and promoted formal marriages between women, who were then allowed to adopt children. Norton, p. 187. Westernization brought new ideas that all sexual behavior not resulting in reproduction was aberrant. Sullivan and Jackson, pp. 3031. 

Two women kissing, Indian erotica, Kamasutra
The liberty of being employed in silk factories starting in 1865 allowed some women to style themselves tzu-shu nii (never to marry) and live in communes with other women. Other Chinese called them sou-hei (self-combers) for adopting hairstyles of married women. These communes passed because of the Great Depression and were subsequently discouraged by the communist government for being a relic of feudal China. Norton, p. 195. In contemporary Chinese society, tongzhi (same goal or spirit) is the term used to refer to homosexuals; most Chinese are reluctant to divide this classification further to identify lesbians. Sullivan and Jackson, p. 28. 

In Japan, the term rezubian, a Japanese pronunciation of "lesbian", was used during the 1920s. Westernization brought more independence for women and allowed some Japanese women to wear pants. Aldrich, p. 246. The cognate tomboy is used in the Philippines, and particularly in Manila, to denote women who are more masculine. Sullivan and Jackson, p. 122. Virtuous women in Korea prioritize motherhood, chastity, and virginity; outside of this scope, very few women are free to express themselves through sexuality, although there is a growing organization for lesbians named Kkirikkiri. Sullivan and Jackson, p. 75. The term pondan is used in Malaysia to refer to gay men, but since there is no historical context to reference lesbians, the term is used for female homosexuals as well. Sullivan and Jackson, p. 145. As in many Asian countries, open homosexuality is discouraged in many social levels, so many Malaysians lead double lives. Sullivan and Jackson, pp. 148150. 

In India, a 14th-century Indian text mentioning a lesbian couple who had a child as a result of their lovemaking is an exception to the general silence about female homosexuality. This invisibility disappeared with the release of a film titled Fire in 1996, prompting some theaters in India to be attacked by extremists. Terms used to label homosexuals are often rejected by Indian activists for being the result of imperialist influence, but most discourse on homosexuality centers on men. Women's rights groups in India continue to debate the legitimacy of including lesbian issues in their platforms, as lesbians and material focusing on female homosexuality are frequently suppressed. Vanita, Ruth (2007). "Lesbian Studies and Activism in India", Journal of Lesbian Studies, 11 (3/4), pp. 245253. 

==Demographics==

===The Kinsey Report===
Kinsey's scale of sexual responses, indicating the varying degrees of bisexuality

The most extensive early study of female homosexuality was provided by the Institute for Sex Research, who published an in-depth report of the sexual experiences of American women in 1953. More than 8,000 women were interviewed by Alfred Kinsey and the staff of the Institute for Sex Research in a book titled Sexual Behavior in the Human Female, popularly known as part of the Kinsey Report. The Kinsey Report's dispassionate discussion of homosexuality as a form of human sexual behavior was revolutionary. Up to this study, only physicians and psychiatrists studied sexual behavior, and almost always the results were interpreted with a moral view. Bullough, Vern (May 1998). "Alfred Kinsey and the Kinsey Report: Historical Overview and Lasting Contribution", The Journal of Sex Research, 35 (2), pp. 127131. 

Kinsey and his staff reported that 28% of women had been aroused by another female, and 19% had a sexual contact with another female. Kinsey, p. 453. Sexual contact, according to Kinsey, included lip kissing, deep kissing, body touching, manual breast and genital stimulation, oral breast and genital stimulation, and object-vaginal penetration. (Kinsey, pp. 466467.) Of women who had sexual contact with another female, half to two-thirds of them had orgasmed. Single women had the highest prevalence of homosexual activity, followed by women who were widowed, divorced, or separated. The lowest occurrence of sexual activity was among married women; those with previous homosexual experience reported they got married to stop homosexual activity. Kinsey, pp. 453454. 

Most of the women who reported homosexual activity had not experienced it more than ten times. Fifty-one percent of women reporting homosexual experience had only one partner. Kinsey, p. 458. Women with post-graduate education had a higher prevalence of homosexual experience, followed by women with a college education; the smallest occurrence was among women with education no higher than eighth grade. Kinsey, p. 460. However, Kinsey's methodology was criticized. John Tukey criticizes sample procedure 

Based on Kinsey's scale where 0 represents a person with an exclusively heterosexual response and 6 represents a person with an exclusively homosexual one, and numbers in between represent a gradient of responses with both sexes, 6% of those interviewed ranked as a 6: exclusively homosexual. Apart from those who ranked 0 (71%), the largest percentage in between 0 and 6 was 1 at approximately 15%. Kinsey, pp. 468473. However, the Kinsey Report remarked that the ranking described a period in a person's life, and that a person's orientation may change. Among the criticisms the Kinsey Report received, a particular one addressed the Institute for Sex Research's tendency to use statistical sampling, which facilitated an over-representation of same-sex relationships by other researchers who did not adhere to Kinsey's qualifications of data. 

===The Hite Report===
Twenty-three years later, in 1976, sexologist Shere Hite published a report on the sexual encounters of 3,019 women who had responded to questionnaires, under the title The Hite Report. Hite's questions differed from Kinsey's, focusing more on how women identified, or what they preferred rather than experience. Respondents to Hite's questions indicated that 8% preferred sex with women and 9% answered that they identified as bisexual or had sexual experiences with men and women, though they refused to indicate preference. Hite, p. 261. 

Hite's conclusions are more based on respondents' comments than quantifiable data. She found it "striking" that many women who had no lesbian experiences indicated they were interested in sex with women, particularly because the question was not asked. Hite, p. 262. Hite found the two most significant differences between respondents' experience with men and women were the focus on clitoral stimulation, and more emotional involvement and orgasmic responses. Hite, p. 274. Since Hite performed her study during the popularity of feminism in the 1970s, she also acknowledged that women may have chosen the political identity of a lesbian.

===Population estimates===
Lesbians in the U.S. are estimated to be about 2.6% of the population, according to a National Opinion Research Center survey of sexually active adults who had had same-sex experiences within the past year, completed in 2000. Wright, John, ed. "Homosexuality in the U.S., 19982000", The New York Times Almanac (2009), Penguin Reference. ISBN 0-14-311457-3, p. 314. A survey of same-sex couples in the United States showed that between 2000 and 2005, the number of people claiming to be in same-sex relationships increased by 30%five times the rate of population growth in the U.S. The study attributed the jump to people being more comfortable self-identifying as homosexual to the federal government. The study estimated the total population of gays, lesbians, and bisexuals at 8.8 million, but did not differentiate between men and women. (Gates, Gary 2006. "Same-sex Couples and the Gay, Lesbian, Bisexual Population: New Estimates from the American Community Survey", The Williams Institute on Sexual Orientation Law and Public Policy, University of California Los Angeles, pp. 125.) 

The government of the United Kingdom does not ask citizens to define their sexuality. However, a survey by the UK Office for National Statistics (ONS) in 2010 found that 1.5% of Britons identified themselves as gay or bisexual, and the ONS suggests that this is in line with other surveys showing the number between 0.3% and 3%. Estimates of lesbians are sometimes not differentiated in studies of same-sex households, such as those performed by the U.S. census, and estimates of total gay, lesbian, or bisexual population by the U.K. government. However, polls in Australia have recorded a range of self-identified lesbian or bisexual women from 1.3% to 2.2% of the total population. Wilson, Shaun (December 2004). "Gay, lesbian, bisexual and transgender identification and attitudes to same-sex relationships in Australia and the United States", People and Place 12 (4), pp. 1222. 

==Health==

===Physical===
In terms of medical issues, lesbians are referred to as women who have sex with women (WSW) because of the misconceptions and assumptions about women's sexuality and some women's hesitancy to disclose their accurate sexual histories even to a physician. King, p. 219. Many self-identified lesbians neglect to see a physician because they do not participate in heterosexual activity and require no birth control, which is the initiating factor for most women to seek consultation with a gynecologist when they become sexually active. Zimmerman, p. 359. As a result, many lesbians are not screened regularly with Pap smears. The U.S. government reports that some lesbians neglect seeking medical screening in the U.S.; they lack health insurance because many employers do not offer health benefits to domestic partners. "Frequently Asked Questions: Lesbian Health", womenshealth.gov. U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. Retrieved January 12, 2009. 

The result of the lack of medical information on WSW is that medical professionals and some lesbians perceive lesbians as having lower risks of acquiring a sexually transmitted disease or types of cancer. When women do seek medical attention, medical professionals often fail to take a complete medical history. In a recent study of 2,345 lesbian and bisexual women, only 9.3% had claimed they had ever been asked their sexual orientation by a physician. A third of the respondents believed disclosing their sexual history would result in a negative reaction, and 30% had received a negative reaction from a medical professional after identifying themselves as lesbian or bisexual. Mravack, Sally A. (July 2006)."Primary Care for Lesbians and Bisexual Women", American Family Physician 74 (2) pp. 279286. A patient's complete history helps medical professionals identify higher risk areas and corrects assumptions about the personal histories of women. In a similar survey of 6,935 lesbians, 77% had had sexual contact with one or more male partners, and 6% had that contact within the previous year. Another summary of overall surveys found that women who identify as lesbian, 8095% had previous sexual contact with men, and some report sexual behavior that was risky. (King, p. 221.) 

Heart disease is listed by the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services as the number one cause of death for all women. Factors that add to risk of heart disease include obesity and smoking, both of which are more prevalent in lesbians. Studies show that lesbians have a higher body mass and are generally less concerned about weight issues than heterosexual women, and lesbians consider women with higher body masses to be more attractive than heterosexual women do. Lesbians are more likely to exercise regularly than heterosexual women, and lesbians do not generally exercise for aesthetic reasons, although heterosexual women do. Research is needed to determine specific causes of obesity in lesbians. 

Lack of differentiation between homosexual and heterosexual women in medical studies that concentrate on health issues for women skews results for lesbians and non-lesbian women. Reports are inconclusive about occurrence of breast cancer in lesbians. It has been determined, however, that the lower rate of lesbians tested by regular Pap smears makes it more difficult to detect cervical cancer at early stages in lesbians. The risk factors for developing ovarian cancer rates are higher in lesbians than heterosexual women, perhaps because many lesbians lack protective factors of pregnancy, abortion, contraceptives, breast feeding, and miscarriages. Vo, Christine, Carney, Michael (December 2007). "Ovarian Cancer Hormonal and Environmental Risk Effect", Obstetrics and Gynecology Clinics34 (4) pp. 687700. 

Some sexually transmitted diseases are communicable between women, including human papillomavirus (HPV)specifically genital wartssquamous intraepithelial lesions, trichomoniasis, syphilis, and herpes simplex virus (HSV). Transmission of specific sexually transmitted diseases among women who have sex with women depends on the sexual practices women engage in. Any object that comes in contact with cervical secretions, vaginal mucosa, or menstrual blood, including fingers or penetrative objects may transmit sexually transmitted diseases. Women Who Have Sex with Women (WSW), Centers for Disease Control, 2006 (MMWR August 4, 2006 / Vol. 55 / No. RR11). Retrieved on January 9, 2009. Orogenital contact may indicate a higher risk of acquiring HSV, Frenkl, Tara Lee, Potts, Jeannette (February 2008). "Sexually Transmitted Infections", Urologic Clinics of North America, 35 (1) pp. 3346. even among women who have had no prior sex with men. King, p. 226. 

Bacterial vaginosis (BV) occurs more often in lesbians, but it is unclear if BV is transmitted by sexual contact; it occurs in celibate as well as sexually active women. BV often occurs in both partners in a lesbian relationship; Risser, Jan M.H., Risser, William L., Risser, Amanda (December 2008). "Epidemiology of Infections in Women", Infectious Disease Clinics of North America, 22 (4), pp. 581599. a recent study of women with BV found that 81% had partners with BV. King, p. 229. Lesbians are not included in a category of frequency of human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) transmission, although transmission is possible through vaginal and cervical secretions. The highest rate of transmission of HIV to lesbians is among women who participate in intravenous drug use or have sexual intercourse with bisexual men. Zimmerman, 360. HIV/AIDS Surveillance Report: Cases of HIV Infection and AIDS in the United States and Dependent Areas, 2006. Centers for Disease Control. Retrieved on January 9, 2009. 

===Mental===
Since medical literature began to describe homosexuality, it has often been approached from a view that sought to find an inherent psychopathology as the root cause, influenced by the theories of Sigmund Freud. Although he considered bisexuality inherent in all people, and said that most have phases of homosexual attraction or experimentation, exclusive same-sex attraction he attributed to stunted development resulting from trauma or parental conflicts. Edsall, p. 242. A 1966 survey of psychological literature on homosexuality began with Freud's 1924 theory that it is a fixation on the opposite sex parent. As Freud's views were the foundation of psychotherapy, further articles agreed with this, including one in 1951 that asserted that homosexuals are actually heterosexuals that play both gender roles, and homosexuals are attempting to perpetuate "infantile, incestuous fixation(s)" on relationships that are forbidden. (Zucker, Luise 1966, "Mental Health and Homosexuality", Journal of Sex Research 2 (2), pp. 111125.) Much literature on mental health and lesbians centered on their depression, substance abuse, and suicide. Although these issues exist among lesbians, discussion about their causes shifted after homosexuality was removed from the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual in 1973. Instead, social ostracism, legal discrimination, internalization of negative stereotypes, and limited support structures indicate factors homosexuals face in Western societies that often adversely affect their mental health. Cochran, Susan; Sullivan, J; Mays, Vickie (February 2003). "Prevalence of Mental Disorders, Psychological Distress, and Mental Health Services Use Among Lesbian, Gay, and Bisexual Adults in the United States", Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 71 (1), pp. 5361. 

Women who identify as lesbian report feeling significantly different and isolated during adolescence. Schlager, p. 153. These emotions have been cited as appearing on average at 15 years old in lesbians and 18 years old in women who identify as bisexual. Rust, Paula, (March, 1993). "Coming out" in the Age of Social Constructionism: Sexual Identity Formation among Lesbian and Bisexual Women", Gender and Society, 7 (1), pp. 5077. On the whole, women tend to work through developing a self-concept internally, or with other women with whom they are intimate. Women also limit who they divulge their sexual identities to, and more often see being lesbian as a choice, as opposed to gay men, who work more externally and see being gay as outside their control. 

Anxiety disorders and depression are the most common mental health issues for women. Depression is reported among lesbians at a rate similar to heterosexual women, Solarz, p. 69. although generalized anxiety disorder is more likely to appear among lesbian and bisexual women than heterosexual women. Lesbian and bisexual women are also more likely to report symptoms of multiple disorders that include major depression, panic disorder, alcohol and drug abuse. (Cochran, et al., 2003) Depression is a more significant problem among women who feel they must hide their sexual orientation from friends and family, or experience compounded ethnic or religious discrimination, or endure relationship difficulties with no support system. Schlager, pp. 157158. Men's shaping of women's sexuality has proven to have an effect on how lesbians see their own bodies. Studies have shown that heterosexual men and lesbians have different standards for what they consider attractive in women. Lesbians who view themselves with male standards of female beauty may experience lower self-esteem, eating disorders, and higher incidence of depression. Haines, Megan; et al. (2008). "Predictors and Effects of Self-Objectification in Lesbians", Psychology of Women Quarterly 32, pp. 181187. More than half the respondents to a 1994 survey of health issues in lesbians reported they had suicidal thoughts, and 18% had attempted suicide. Solarz, p. 70. 

A population-based study completed by the National Alcohol Research Center found that women who identify as lesbian or bisexual are less likely to abstain from alcohol. Lesbians and bisexual women have a higher likelihood of reporting problems with alcohol, as well as not being satisfied with treatment for substance abuse programs. Drabble, Laurie, Trocki, Karen (2005). "Alcohol Consumption, Alcohol-Related Problems, and Other Substance Use Among Lesbian and Bisexual Women", Journal of Lesbian Studies, 9 (3), pp. 1930. Many lesbian communities are centered in bars, and drinking is an activity that correlates to community participation for lesbians and bisexual women. Solarz, p. 81. 

==Media representation==

===Summary===

Lesbians portrayed in literature, film, and television often shape contemporary thought about women's sexuality. The majority of media about lesbians is produced by men; women's publishing companies did not develop until the 1970s, films about lesbians made by women did not appear until the 1980s, and television shows portraying lesbians written by women only began to be created in the 21st century. As a result, homosexualityparticularly dealing with womenhas been excluded because of symbolic annihilation. When depictions of lesbians began to surface, they were often one-dimensional, simplified stereotypes. Schlager, pp. 389390. 

===Literature===

In addition to Sappho's accomplishments, Sappho has also served as a subject of many works of literature by writers such as John Donne, Alexander Pope, Pierre Lous, and several anonymous writers, that have addressed her relationships with women and men. She has been used as an embodiment of same-sex desire, and as a character in fictions loosely based on her life. (Castle, pp. 125, 208, 252, 319, 566.) literary historian Jeannette Howard Foster includes the Book of Ruth, Foster, pp. 2223. Terry Castle also lists the Book of Ruth as an example of early lesbianism in literature (Castle, p. 108.) and ancient mythological tradition as examples of lesbianism in classical literature. Greek stories of the heavens often included a female figure whose virtue and virginity were unspoiled, who pursued more masculine interests, and who was followed by a dedicated group of maidens. Foster cites Camilla and Diana, Artemis and Callisto, and Iphis and Ianthe as examples of female mythological figures who showed remarkable devotion to each other, or defied gender expectations. Foster, pp. 2427. The Greeks are also given credit with spreading the story of a mythological race of women warriors named Amazons. En-hedu-ana, a priestess in Ancient Iraq who dedicated herself to the Sumerian goddess Inanna, has the distinction of signing the oldest-surviving signed poetry in history. She characterized herself as Inanna's spouse. Norton, p. 189. 

For ten centuries after the fall of the Roman Empire, lesbianism disappeared from literature. Castle, p. 11. Foster points to the particularly strict view that Everepresentative of all womencaused the downfall of mankind; original sin among women was a particular concern, especially because women were perceived as creating life. Foster, pp. 3031. During this time, women were largely illiterate and not encouraged to engage in intellectual pursuit, so men were responsible for shaping ideas about sexuality. Castle, p. 6. 

In 1516th-century French and English depictions of relationships between women (Lives of Gallant Ladies by Brantme in 1665, John Cleland's 1749 erotica Memoirs of a Woman of Pleasure, L'Espion Anglais by various authors in 1778), writers' attitudes spanned from amused tolerance to arousal, whereupon a male character would participate to complete the act. Physical relationships between women were often encouraged; men felt no threat as they viewed sexual acts between women to be accepted when men were not available, and not comparable to fulfillment that could be achieved by sexual acts between men and women. Faderman (1981), pp. 2628. At worst, if a woman became enamored of another woman, she became a tragic figure. Physical and therefore emotional satisfaction was considered impossible without a natural phallus. Male intervention into relationships between women was necessary only when women acted as men and demanded the same social privileges. Faderman (1981), p. 29. 

"In Bed" (1893) by Henri de Toulouse-Lautrec, a Parisian who employed the association between lesbianism and prostitution 

Lesbianism became almost exclusive to French literature in the 19th century, based on male fantasy and the desire to shock bourgeois moral values. Faderman (1981), pp. 264, 268. Honor de Balzac, in The Girl with the Golden Eyes (1835), employed lesbianism in his story about three people living amongst the moral degeneration of Paris, and again in Cousin Bette and Sraphta. His work influenced novelist Thophile Gautier's Mademoiselle de Maupin, which provided the first description of a physical type that became associated with lesbians: tall, wide-shouldered, slim-hipped, and athletically inclined. Foster, pp. 5165. Charles Baudelaire repeatedly used lesbianism as a theme in his poems "Lesbos", "Femmes damnes 1" ("Damned Women"), and "Femmes damnes 2". Castle, p. 435. 

Reflecting French society, as well as employing stock character associations, many of the lesbian characters in 19th-century French literature were prostitutes or courtesans: personifications of vice who died early, violent deaths in moral endings. Faderman (1981), pp. 281283 Samuel Taylor Coleridge's 1816 poem "Christabel" and the novella Carmilla (1872) by Joseph Sheridan Le Fanu both present lesbianism associated with vampirism. Faderman (1981), p. 277, 288289. Portrayals of female homosexuality not only formed European consciousness about lesbianism, but Krafft-Ebing cited the characters in Gustave Flaubert's Salammbo (1862) and Ernest Feydeau's Le Comte de Chalis (1867) as examples of lesbians because both novels feature female protagonists who do not adhere to social norms and express "contrary sexual feeling", although neither participated in same-sex desire or sexual behavior. Foster, p. 72. Havelock Ellis used literary examples from Balzac and several French poets and writers to develop his framework to identify sexual inversion in women. Faderman (1981), p. 254. 

Gradually, women began to author their own thoughts and literary works about lesbian relationships. Until the publication of The Well of Loneliness, most major works involving lesbianism were penned by men. Foster suggests that women would have encountered suspicion about their own lives had they used same-sex love as a topic, and that some writers including Louise Lab, Charlotte Charke, and Margaret Fuller either changed the pronouns in their literary works to male, or made them ambiguous. Foster, pp. 116127. Author George Sand was portrayed as a character in several works in the 19th century; writer Mario Praz credited the popularity of lesbianism as a theme to Sand's appearance in Paris society in the 1830s. Faderman (1981), p. 263. The cross-dressing Sand was also the subject of a few of Elizabeth Barret Browning's sonnets.(Castle, pp. 426427.) Charlotte Bront's Villette in 1853 initiated a genre of boarding school stories with homoerotic themes. Castle, p. 429. 

In the 20th century, Katherine Mansfield, Amy Lowell, Gertrude Stein, H.D., Vita Sackville-West, Virginia Woolf, and Gale Wilhelm wrote popular works that had same-sex relationships or gender transformations as themes. Some women, such as Marguerite Yourcenar and Mary Renault, wrote or translated works of fiction that focused on homosexual men, like some of the writings of Carson McCullers. All three were involved in same-sex relationships, but their primary friendships were with gay men. Norton, p. 182. Foster further asserts 1928 was a "peak year" for lesbian-themed literature; in addition to The Well of Loneliness, three other novels with lesbian themes were published in England: Elizabeth Bowen's The Hotel, Woolf's Orlando, and Compton MacKenzie's satirical novel Extraordinary Women. Lanser, 1979, p. 39. Unlike The Well of Loneliness, none of these novels were banned. Foster, pp. 281287. A fifth novel in 1928, American author Djuna Barnes' Ladies Almanack, is a roman  clef of a lesbian literary and artistic salon in Paris and circulated at first within those circles; Susan Sniader Lanser calls it a "sister-text" to Hall's landmark work, (Lanser, Susan Sniader 1979, "Speaking in Tongues: 'Ladies Almanack' and the Language of Celebration". Frontiers: A Journal of Women Studies, 4 (3), pp. 3946.) as Barnes includes a character based on Radclyffe Hall and passages that may be a response to The Well of Loneliness (Barnes, p. xxxi.) 

As the paperback book came into fashion, lesbian themes were relegated to pulp fiction. Many of the pulp novels typically presented very unhappy women, or relationships that ended tragically. Marijane Meaker later wrote that she was told to make the relationship end badly in Spring Fire because the publishers were concerned about the books being confiscated by the U.S. Postal Service. Packer, Vin (Marijane Meaker). Spring Fire, Introduction. 2004, Cleis Press. Patricia Highsmith, writing as Claire Morgan, wrote The Price of Salt in 1951 and refused to follow this directive, but instead used a pseudonym. Castle, pp. 10241025. 

Following the Stonewall riots, lesbian themes in literature became much more diverse and complex, and shifted the focus of lesbianism from erotica for heterosexual men to works written by and for lesbians. Feminist magazines such as The Furies, and Sinister Wisdom replaced The Ladder. Serious writers who used lesbian characters and plots included Rita Mae Brown's Rubyfruit Jungle (1973), which presents a feminist heroine who chooses to be a lesbian. Schlager, p. 377. Poet Audre Lorde confronts homophobia and racism in her works, and Cherre Moraga is credited with being primarily responsible for bringing Latina perspectives to lesbian literature. Further changing values are evident in the writings of Dorothy Allison, who focuses on child sexual abuse and deliberately provocative lesbian sadomasochism themes. Schlager, p. 379. 

===Film===
Lesbianism, or the suggestion of it, began early in filmmaking. The same constructs of how lesbians were portrayedor for what reasonsas what had appeared in literature were placed on women in the films. Women challenging their feminine roles was a device more easily accepted than men challenging masculine ones. Actresses appeared as men in male roles because of plot devices as early as 1914 in A Florida Enchantment featuring Edith Storey. In Morocco (1930) Marlene Dietrich kisses another woman on the lips, and Katharine Hepburn plays a man in Christopher Strong in 1933 and again in Sylvia Scarlett (1936). Hollywood films followed the same trend set by audiences who flocked to Harlem to see edgy shows that suggested bisexuality. Benshoff, pp. 2728. 

Overt female homosexuality was introduced in 1929's Pandora's Box between Louise Brooks and Alice Roberts. However, the development of the Hays Code in 1930 censored most references to homosexuality from film under the umbrella term "sex perversion". German films depicted homosexuality and were distributed throughout Europe, but 1931's Mdchen in Uniform was not distributed in the U.S. because of the depiction of an adolescent's love for a female teacher in boarding school. 

Lesbianism or homosexuality was never spoken of in The Children's Hour, but it is clear why Shirley MacLaine's character hangs herself.

Because of the Hays Code, lesbianism after 1930 was absent from most films, even those adapted with overt lesbian characters or plot devices. Lillian Hellman's play The Children's Hour was converted into a heterosexual love triangle and retitled These Three. Biopic Queen Christina in 1933, starring Greta Garbo, veiled most of the speculation about Christina of Sweden's affairs with women. Russo, p. 58. Homosexuality or lesbianism was never mentioned outright in the films while the Hays Code was enforced. The reason censors stated for removing a lesbian scene in 1954's The Pit of Loneliness was that it was, "Immoral, would tend to corrupt morals". Russo, p. 102. The code was relaxed somewhat after 1961, and the next year William Wyler remade The Children's Hour with Audrey Hepburn and Shirley MacLaine. After MacLaine's character admits her love for Hepburn's, she hangs herself; this set a precedent for miserable endings in films addressing homosexuality. Russo, p. 139. 

Gay characters also were often killed off at the end, such as the death of Sandy Dennis' character at the end of The Fox in 1968. If not victims, lesbians were depicted as villains or morally corrupt, such as portrayals of brothel madames by Barbara Stanwyck in Walk on the Wild Side from 1962 and Shelley Winters in The Balcony in 1963. Lesbians as predators were presented in Rebecca (1940), women's prison films like Caged (1950), or in the character Rosa Klebb in From Russia, With Love (1963). Russo, pp. 143156. Lesbian vampire themes have reappeared in Dracula's Daughter (1936), Blood and Roses (1960), Vampyros Lesbos (1971), and The Hunger (1983). Russo, p. 49. Basic Instinct (1992) featured a bisexual murderer played by Sharon Stone; it was one of several films that set off a storm of protests about the depiction of gays as predators. Brenshoff, pp. 250151. 

The first film to address lesbianism with significant depth was The Killing of Sister George in 1968, which was filmed in The Gateways Club, a longstanding lesbian pub in London. It is the first to claim a film character who identifies as a lesbian, and film historian Vito Russo considers the film a complex treatment of a multifaceted character who is forced into silence about her openness by other lesbians. Russo, pp. 170173. Personal Best in 1982, and Lianna in 1983 treat the lesbian relationships more sympathetically and show lesbian sex scenes, though in neither film are the relationships happy ones. Personal Best was criticized for engaging in the cliched plot device of one woman returning to a relationship with a man, implying that lesbianism is a phase, as well as treating the lesbian relationship with "undisguised voyeurism". Benshoff, pp. 185186. More ambiguous portrayals of lesbian characters were seen in Silkwood (1983), The Color Purple (1985), and Fried Green Tomatoes (1991), despite explicit lesbianism in the source material. The Celluloid Closet. Dir. Epstein, R., Friedman, J. DVD, Home Box Office, 1996. 

An era of independent filmmaking brought different stories, writers, and directors to films. Desert Hearts arrived in 1985, to be one of the most successful. Directed by lesbian Donna Deitch, it is loosely based on Jane Rule's novel Desert of the Heart. It received mixed critical commentary, but earned positive reviews from the gay press. Brenshoff, pp. 194195. The late 1980s and early 1990s ushered in a series of films treating gay and lesbian issues seriously, made by gays and lesbians, nicknamed New Queer Cinema. Brenshoff, p. 237. Films using lesbians as a subject included Rose Troche's avant garde romantic comedy Go Fish (1994) and the first film about African American lesbians, Cheryl Dunye's The Watermelon Woman, in 1995. Brenshoff, pp. 241242. 

Realism in films depicting lesbians developed further to include romance stories such as The Incredibly True Adventure of Two Girls in Love and When Night Is Falling, both in 1995, Better Than Chocolate (1999), and the social satire But I'm A Cheerleader in 2001. Brenshoff, p. 270. A twist on the lesbian-as-predator theme was the added complexity of motivations of some lesbian characters in Peter Jackson's Heavenly Creatures (1994), the Oscar-winning biopic of Aileen Wuornos, Monster (2003), and the exploration of fluent sexuality and gender in Chasing Amy (1997), Kissing Jessica Stein (2001), and Boys Don't Cry (1999). Brenshoff, pp. 274280. The film V for Vendetta shows a dictatorship in future Britain that forces lesbians, homosexuals, and other "unwanted" people in society to be systematically slaughtered in concentration camps. In the film, a lesbian actress named Valerie, who was killed in such a manner, serves as inspiration for the masked rebel V and his ally Evey Hammond, who set out to overthrow the dictatorship.

===Television===

Homosexuality addressed by television started much later than films. Local talk shows in the late 1950s first addressed homosexuality by inviting panels of experts (usually not gay themselves) to discuss the problems of gay men in society. Lesbianism was rarely included. The first time a lesbian was portrayed on network television was the NBC drama The Eleventh Hour in the early 1960s, in a teleplay about an actress who feels she is persecuted by her female director, and in distress, calls a psychiatrist who explains she is a latent lesbian who has deep-rooted guilt about her feelings for women. When she realizes this, however, she is able to pursue healthy heterosexual relationships. Tropiano, pp. 79. 

Invisibility for lesbians continued in the 1970s when homosexuality became the subject of dramatic portrayals, first with medical dramas (Bold Ones: The New Doctors|The Bold Ones], Marcus Welby, M.D., Medical Center) featuring primarily male patients coming out to doctors, or staff members coming out to other staff members. These shows allowed homosexuality to be discussed clinically, with the main characters guiding troubled gay characters or correcting homophobic antagonists, while simultaneously comparing homosexuality to psychosis, criminal behavior, or drug use. Tropiano, pp. 1344. 

Another stock plot device in the 1970s was the gay character in a police drama. They served as victims of blackmail or anti-gay violence, but more often as criminals. Beginning in the late 1960s with N.Y.P.D., Police Story, and Police Woman, the use of homosexuals in stories became much more prevalent, according to Vito Russo, as a response to their higher profiles in gay activism. Russo, pp. 186189. Lesbians were included as villains, motivated to murder by their desires, internalized homophobia, or fear of being exposed as homosexual. One episode of Police Woman earned protests by the National Gay Task Force before it aired for portraying a trio of murderous lesbians who killed retirement home patients for their money. Tropiano, p. 68. NBC edited the episode because of the protests, but a sit-in was staged in the head of NBC's offices. Tropiano, p. 69. 

In the middle of the 1970s, gays and lesbians began to appear as police officers or detectives, facing coming out issues. This did not extend to CBS' groundbreaking show Cagney & Lacey in 1982, starring two female police detectives. CBS production made conscious attempts to soften the characters so they would not appear to be lesbians. Tropiano, pp. 7576. In 1991, a bisexual lawyer portrayed by Amanda Donohoe on L.A. Law shared the first significant lesbian kiss 21 Jump Street included a kiss between series regular Holly Robinson Peete and guest star Katy Boyer in "A Change of Heart" (1990) but it did not inspire the critical or popular attention later such kisses would engender. (Capsuto, p. 235) on primetime television with Michele Greene, stirring a controversy despite being labeled "chaste" by The Hollywood Reporter. Tropiano, p. 89. 

Ellen DeGeneres's (pictured with her Emmy Award) coming out in the media as well as her sitcom, "ranks, hands down, as the single most public exit in gay history", changing media portrayals of lesbians in Western culture. Streitmatter, p. 104. 

Though television did not begin to use recurring homosexual characters until the late 1980s, some early situation comedies used a stock character that author Stephen Tropiano calls "gay-straight": supporting characters who were quirky, did not comply with gender norms, or had ambiguous personal lives, that "for all purposes should be gay". These included Zelda from The Many Loves of Dobie Gillis, Miss Hathaway from The Beverly Hillbillies, and Jo from The Facts of Life. Tropiano, pp. 185186. In the mid-1980s through the 1990s, sitcoms frequently employed a "coming out" episode, where a friend of one of the stars admits she is a lesbian, forcing the cast to deal with the issue. Designing Women, The Golden Girls, and Friends used this device with women in particular. Tropiano, pp. 202204. 

Recurring lesbian characters who came out were seen on Married With Children, Mad About You, and Roseanne, in which a highly publicized episode had ABC executives afraid a televised kiss between Roseanne and Mariel Hemingway would destroy ratings and ruin advertising. The episode was instead the week's highest rated. Schlager, p. 394, 399. By far the sitcom with the most significant impact to the image of lesbians was Ellen. Publicity surrounding Ellen's coming out episode in 1997 was enormous; Ellen DeGeneres appeared on the cover of Time magazine the week before the airing of "The Puppy Episode" with the headline "Yep, I'm Gay". Parties were held in many U.S. cities to watch the episode, and the opposition from conservative organizations was intense. WBMA-LP, the ABC affiliate in Birmingham, Alabama, even refused to air the first run of the episode, citing conservative values of the local viewing audience, which earned the station some infamy and ire in the LGBT community. Even still, "The Puppy Episode" won an Emmy for writing, but as the show began to deal with Ellen Morgan's sexuality each week, network executives grew uncomfortable with the direction the show took and canceled it. Tropiano, pp. 245249. 

Dramas following L.A. Law began incorporating homosexual themes, particularly with continuing storylines on Relativity, Picket Fences, ER, and and Trek: Deep Space Nine|Deep Space Nine], both of which tested the boundaries of sexuality and gender. Tropiano, pp. 128136. A show directed at adolescents that had a particularly strong cult following was Buffy the Vampire Slayer. In the fourth season of Buffy, Tara and Willow admit their love for each other without any special fanfare and the relationship is treated as are the other romantic relationships on the show. Tropiano, pp. 183184. 

What followed was a series devoted solely to gay characters from network television. Showtime's American rendition of Queer as Folk ran for five years, from 2000 to 2005; two of the main characters were a lesbian couple. Showtime promoted the series as "No Limits", and Queer as Folk addressed homosexuality graphically. The aggressive advertising paid off as the show became the network's highest rated, doubling the numbers of other Showtime programs after the first season. Tropiano, pp. 150152. In 2004, Showtime introduced The L Word, a dramatic series devoted to a group of lesbian and bisexual women, running its final season in 2009.

==Current issues of lesbians==

===Lesbian chic and popular culture===
 The cover of Vanity Fair that marked the arrival of lesbian chic as a social phenomenon in the 1990s

The invisibility of lesbians has gradually eroded since the early 1980s. This is in part due to public figures who have caused speculation and comment in the press about their sexuality and lesbianism in general. The primary figure earning this attention was Martina Navratilova, who served as tabloid fodder for years as she denied being lesbian, admitted to being bisexual, had very public relationships with Rita Mae Brown and Judy Nelson, and acquired as much press about her sexuality as she did her athletic achievements. Navratilova spurred what scholar Diane Hamer termed "constant preoccupation" in the press with determining the root of same-sex desire. Hamer, pp. 5777. 

Other public figures acknowledged their homosexuality and bisexuality, notably musicians k.d. lang and Melissa Etheridge, and Madonna's pushing of sexual boundaries in her performances and publications. In 1993, lang and self-professed heterosexual supermodel Cindy Crawford posed for the cover of Vanity Fair in a provocative arrangement that showed Crawford shaving lang's face, as lang lounged in a barber's chair wearing a pinstripe suit. The image "became an internationally recognized symbol of the phenomenon of lesbian chic", according to Hamer. Hamer, p. 1. The year 1994 marked a rise in lesbian visibility, particularly appealing to women with feminine appearances. Between 1992 and 1994, Mademoiselle, Vogue, Cosmopolitan, Glamour, Newsweek, and New York magazines featured stories about women who admitted sexual histories with other women. Streitmatter, pp. 7778. 

One analyst reasoned the recurrence of lesbian chic was due to the often-used homoerotic subtexts of gay male subculture being considered off limits because of AIDS in the late 1980s and 1990s, joined with the distant memory of lesbians as they appeared in the 1970s: unattractive and militant. In short, lesbians became more attractive to general audiences when they ceased having political convictions. Hamer, pp. 8790. All the attention on feminine and glamorous women created what culture analyst Rodger Streitmatter characterizes as an unrealistic image of lesbians packaged by heterosexual men; the trend influenced an increase in the inclusion of lesbian material in pornography aimed at men. Streitmatter, p. 81. 

A resurgence of lesbian visibility and sexual fluidity was noted in 2009 with celebrities such as Cynthia Nixon and Lindsay Lohan commenting openly on their relationships with women, and reality television addressing same-sex relationships. Psychiatrists and feminist philosophers write that the rise in women acknowledging same-sex relationships is due to growing social acceptance, but also concede that "only a certain kind of lesbianslim and elegant or butch in just the right androgynous wayis acceptable to mainstream culture". Fischer, Mary (April 23, 2009). Why women are leaving men for other women, CNN.com/Oprah.com. Retrieved on April 23, 2009. 

===Sexuality and lesbian identity===
The presence of sexual activity between women as necessary to define a lesbian or a relationship continues to be debated. According to feminist writer Naomi McCormick, women's sexuality is constructed by men, whose primary indicator of lesbian sexual orientation is sexual experience with other women. The same indicator is not necessary to identify a woman as heterosexual, however. McCormick states that emotional, mental, and ideological connections between women are as important or more so than the genital. McCormick, pp. 6061. Nonetheless, in the 1980s, a significant movement rejected the desexualization of lesbianism by cultural feminists, causing a heated controversy called the Sex Wars. Faderman (1991), pp. 246252. Butch and femme roles returned, although not as strictly followed as they were in the 1950s. They became a mode of chosen sexual self-expression for some women in the 1990s. Once again, women felt safer claiming to be more sexually adventurous, and sexual flexibility became more accepted. Faderman, Lillian (April 1992). "The Return of Butch and Femme: A Phenomenon in Lesbian Sexuality in the 1980s and 1990s", Journal of the History of Sexuality, 2 (4), pp. 578596. 

The focus of this debate often centers on a phenomenon named by sexologist Pepper Schwartz in 1983. Schwartz found that long-term lesbian couples report having less sexual contact than heterosexual or homosexual male couples, calling this lesbian bed death. However, lesbians dispute the study's definition of sexual contact, and introduced other factors such as deeper connections existing between women that make frequent sexual relations redundant, greater sexual fluidity in women causing them to move from heterosexual to bisexual to lesbian numerous times through their livesor reject the labels entirely. Further arguments attested that the study was flawed and misrepresented accurate sexual contact between women, or sexual contact between women has increased since 1983 as many lesbians find themselves freer to sexually express themselves. Nichols, Margaret (November, 2004). "Lesbian Sexuality/Female Sexuality: Rethinking Lesbian Bed Death", Sexual and Relationship Therapy, 19 (4), pp. 364371. 

More discussion on gender and sexual orientation identity has affected how many women label or view themselves. Most people in western culture are taught that heterosexuality is an innate quality in all people. When a woman realizes her romantic and sexual attraction to another woman, it may cause an "existential crisis"; many who go through this adopt the identity of a lesbian, challenging what society has offered in stereotypes about homosexuals, to learn how to function within a homosexual subculture. Schlager, p. 93. Lesbians in Western cultures generally share an identity that parallels those built on ethnicity; they have a shared history and subculture, and similar experiences with discrimination which has caused many lesbians to reject heterosexual principles. This identity is unique from gay men and heterosexual women, and often creates tension with bisexual women. 

Social theorists state that often behavior and identity do not match: women may label themselves heterosexual but have sexual relations with women, self-identified lesbians may have sex with men, or women may find that what they considered an immutable sexual identity has changed over time. A 2001 article on differentiating lesbians for medical studies and health research suggested identifying lesbians using the three characteristics of identity only, sexual behavior only, or both combined. The article declined to include desire or attraction as it rarely has bearing on measurable health or psychosocial issues. Brogan, Donna, Frank, Erica, Elon, Lisa, O'Hanlon, Katherine (January 2001). "Methodological Concerns in Defining Lesbian for Health Research", Epidemiology, 12 (1), pp. 109113. Researchers say that there is no standard definition of lesbian because "he term has been used to describe women who have sex with women, either exclusively or in addition to sex with men (i.e., behavior); women who self-identify as lesbian (i.e., identity); and women whose sexual preference is for women (i.e., desire or attraction)" and that "he lack of a standard definition of lesbian and of standard questions to assess who is lesbian has made it difficult to clearly define a population of lesbian women". How and where study samples were obtained can also affect the definition. 

===Families and politics===
A lesbian couple married in San Francisco in 2004

Although homosexuality among females has taken place in many cultures in history, a recent phenomenon is the development of family among same-sex partners. Before the 1970s, the idea that same-sex adults formed long-term committed relationships was unknown to many people. The majority of lesbians (between 60% and 80%) report being in a long-term relationship. Schlager, p. 117. Sociologists credit the high number of paired women to gender role socialization: the inclination for women to commit to relationships doubles in a lesbian union. Unlike heterosexual relationships that tend to divide work based on sex roles, lesbian relationships divide chores evenly between both members. Studies have also reported that emotional bonds are closer in lesbian and gay relationships than heterosexual ones. Schlager, pp. 118119. 

Family issues were significant concerns for lesbians when gay activism became more vocal in the 1960s and 1970s. Custody issues in particular were of interest since often courts would not award custody to mothers who were openly homosexual, even though the general procedure acknowledged children were awarded to the biological mother. Schlager, pp. 125126. Jennings, p. 182. Several studies performed as a result of custody disputes viewed how children grow up with same-sex parents compared to single mothers who did not identify as lesbians. They found that children's mental health, happiness, and overall adjustment is similar to children of divorced women who are not lesbians. Sexual orientation, gender identity, and sex roles of children who grow up with lesbian mothers are unaffected. Differences that were found include the fact that divorced lesbians tend to be living with a partner, fathers visit divorced lesbian mothers more often than divorced nonlesbian mothers, and lesbian mothers report a greater fear of losing their children through legal means. 

Improving opportunities for growing families of same-sex couples has shaped the political landscape within the past ten years. A push for same-sex marriage or civil unions in western countries has replaced other political objectives. , ten countries and six U.S. states offer same-sex marriage; civil unions are offered as an option in some European countries, U.S. states and individual municipalities. The ability to adopt domestically or internationally children or provide a home as a foster parent is also a political and family priority for many lesbians, as is improving access to artificial insemination. Schlager, pp. 128129. 

==See also==

* Biology and sexual orientation
* Lesbian science fiction
* Lesbian sexual practices
* Lesbianism in erotica
* List of lesbian periodicals
* Yuri (genre)

==Footnotes==

==Notes==

==References==

* Adam, Barry (1987). The Rise of a Gay and Lesbian Movement, G. K. Hall & Co. ISBN 0-8057-9714-9
* Aldrich, Robert, ed. (2006). Gay Life and Culture: A World History, Thames & Hudson, Ltd. ISBN 0-7893-1511-4
* Barnes, Djuna. With an introduction by Susan Sniader Lanser. (1992). Ladies Almanack, New York University Press. ISBN 0-8147-1180-4
* Berube, Allan (1990). Coming Out Under Fire: The History of Gay Men and Women in World War II, The Free Press. ISBN 0-7432-1071-9
* Bremmer, Jan (ed.) (1989). From Sappho to de Sade: Moments in the History of Sexuality, Routledge. ISBN 0-415-02089-1
* Brenshoff, Harry, Griffin, Sean (2006). Queer Images: A History of Gay and Lesbian Film in America, Rowman & Littlefield Publishers, Inc. ISBN 0-7425-1971-6
* Castle, Terry, ed. (2003). The Literature of Lesbianism: A Historical Anthology from Ariosto to Stonewall, Columbia University Press. ISBN 0-231-12510-0
* Doan, Laura (2001). Fashioning Sapphism: The Origins of a Modern English Lesbian Culture, Columbia University Press. ISBN 0-231-11007-3
* Edsall, Nicholas (2003). Toward Stonewall: Homosexuality and Society in the Modern Western World, University of Virginia Press. ISBN 0-8139-2211-9
* Faderman, Lillian (1981). Surpassing the Love of Men: Romantic Friendship and Love Between Women from the Renaissance to the Present, Quill. ISBN 0-688-00396-6
* Faderman, Lillian (1991). Odd Girls and Twilight Lovers: A History of Lesbian Life in Twentieth Century America, Penguin Books. ISBN 0-14-017122-3
* Foster, Jeannette H. (1956). Sex Variant Women in Literature, Naiad Press edition, 1985. ISBN 0-930044-65-7
* Gallo, Marcia (2006). Different Daughters: A History of the Daughters of Bilitis and the Rise of the Lesbian Rights Movement, Seal Press. ISBN 1-58005-252-5
* Hamer, Diane, Budge, Belinda, eds. (1994). The Good, The Bad, and the Gorgeous: Popular Culture's Romance with Lesbianism, Pandora. ISBN 0-04-440910-9
* Holmes, King, Sparling, P., et al., eds. (2008). Sexually Transmitted Diseases, McGraw-Hill Medical. ISBN 0-07-141748-6
* Hite, Shere (1976). The Hite Report: A Nationwide Study on Female Sexuality , MacMillan. ISBN 0-02-551851-8
* Institute for Sex Research (Kinsey, et al.) (1953). Sexual Behavior in the Human Female, Saunders.
* Jennings, Rebecca (2007). A Lesbian History of Britain, Greenwood World Publishing. ISBN 1-84645-007-1
* Katz, Jonathan (1976). Gay American History: Lesbians and Gay Men in the U.S.A. Thomas Y. Crowell Company. ISBN 0-690-01165-2
* Martin, Del, Lyon, Phyllis (1991). Lesbian / Woman, Volcano Press. ISBN 0-912078-91-X
* McCormick, Noami (1994). Sexual Salvation: Affirming Women's Sexual Rights and Pleasures, Praeger Publishers. ISBN 0-275-94359-3
* Mogrovejo, Norma (2004). "Relevancia de las lesbianas en Amrica Latina: la recuperacin de nuestra historia". In Drucker, Pter; Mercad, Enrique (in Spanish). Arco iris diferentes. Siglo XXI. ISBN 978-968-23-2486-4.
* Murray, Stephen O. and Roscoe, Will (1997). Islamic Homosexualities: Culture, History and Literature, New York University Press. ISBN 0-8147-7468-7
* Norton, Rictor (1997). The Myth of the Modern Homosexual: Queer History and the Search for Cultural Unity, Cassell. ISBN 0-304-33892-3
* Rabinowitz, Nancy, Auanger, Lisa, eds. (2002). Among Women: From the Homosocial to the Homoerotic in the Ancient World, University of Texas Press. ISBN 0-292-77113-4
* Rachid, Mara (2000). "Encuentros de lesbianas". In George Haggerty & Bonnie Zimmerman (Eds.), Encyclopedia of lesbian and gay histories and cultures. Taylor & Francis. ISBN 978-0-8153-1920-7
* Rothblum, Esther, Brehoney, Kathleen, eds. (1993). Boston Marriages: Romantic But Asexual Relationships Among Contemporary Lesbians, University of Massachusetts Press. ISBN 0-87023-875-2
* Russo, Vito (1987). The Celluloid Closet: Homosexuality in the Movies, Harper & Row. ISBN 0-06-096132-5
* Schlager, Neil, ed. (1998). Gay & Lesbian Almanac. St. James Press. ISBN 1-55862-358-2
* Solarz, Andrea L. (ed), (1999). "Lesbian Health: Current Assessment and Directions For the Future", Committee on Lesbian Health Research Priorities, Neuroscience and Behavioral Health Program Health Sciences Policy Program, Health Sciences Section, Institute of Medicine. ISBN 0-585-04728-6
* Streitmatter, Rodger (2009). From 'Perverts' to 'Fab Five': The Media's Changing Depiction of Gay Men and Lesbians, Routledge. ISBN 0-7890-3670-3
* Stryker, Susan (2001). Queer Pulp: Perverted Passions from the Golden Age of the Paperback, Chronicle Books, LLC. ISBN 0-8118-3020-9
* Sullivan, Gerard, Jackson, Peter, eds. (2001). Gay and Lesbian Asia: Culture, Identity, Community, Harrington Park Press. ISBN 1-56023-146-7
* Tamagne, Florence (2004). A History of Homosexuality in Europe Berlin, London, Paris, 19191939: Volume 1, Algora. ISBN 0-585-49198-4
* Tropiano, Stephen (2002). Prime Time Closet: A History of Gays and Lesbians on TV, Applause Theater and Cinema Books. ISBN 1-55783-557-8
* Verstraete, Beert; , Vernon (eds.) (2005). Same-Sex Desire and Love in Greco-Roman Antiquity and In the Classical Tradition of the West, Harrington Park Press. ISBN 1-56023-604-3
* Warner, Tom (2002). Never Going Back: A History of Queer Activism in Canada, University of Toronto Press. ISBN 0-8020-8460-5
* Willett, Graham (2000). Living Out Loud: A History of Gay and Lesbian Activism in Australia, Allen & Unwin. ISBN 1-74115-113-9
* Zimet, Jaye (1999). Strange Sisters: The Art of Lesbian Pulp Fiction, 19491969, Viking Studio. ISBN 0-14-028402-8
* Zimmerman, Bonnie, ed (2003). Lesbian Histories and Cultures: An Encyclopedia, Garland Publishers. ISBN 0-203-48788-5

==External links==

* 
* 'Late-Life Lesbians' Reveal Fluidity Of Sexuality  audio report by NPR

 
 
 1


[[Lambda]]

Lambda (uppercase , lowercase ; lam(b)da) is the 11th letter of the Greek alphabet. In the system of Greek numerals lambda has a value of 30. Lambda is related to the Phoenician letter Lamed Lamedh. Letters in other alphabets that stemmed from lambda include the Latin L and the Cyrillic letter El (, ). The ancient grammarians and dramatists give evidence to the pronunciation as () in Classical Greek times. Herbert Weir Smyth. A Greek Grammar for Colleges. I.1.c In Modern Greek the name of the letter, , is pronounced ; the spoken letter itself has the sound of as with Latinate "L".

In early Greek alphabets, the shape and orientation of lambda varied. Most variants consisted of two straight strokes, one longer than the other, connected at their ends. The angle might be in the upper-left, lower-left ("Western" alphabets), or top ("Eastern" alphabets). Other variants had a vertical line with a horizontal or sloped stroke running to the right. With the general adoption of the Ionic alphabet, Greek settled on an angle at the top; the Romans put the angle at the lower-left.

The HTML 4 character entity references for the Greek capital and small letter lambda are "&amp;#923;" and "&amp;#955;", respectively. World Wide Web Consortium W3C. HTML 4.01 Specification, 24. Character entity references in HTML 4. 
The Unicode number for lambda is 03BB.

The Greek alphabet on a black figure vessel, with a Phoenician-lamed-shaped lambda. (The gamma has the shape of modern lambda.)

==Symbol==
===Upper-case letter ===

* The lambda particle is a type of subatomic particle in subatomic particle physics.
* Lambda is the set of logical axioms in the axiomatic method of logical deduction in first-order logic.
* Lambda was used as a shield pattern by the Spartan Army. This stood for Lakedaimon, the name of the region of Sparta.
* Lambda is the von Mangoldt function in mathematical number theory.
* In statistics, Wilks's lambda is used in multivariate analysis of variance (MANOVA analysis) to compare group means on a combination of dependent variables.
* In the spectral decomposition of matrices, lambda indicates the diagonal matrix of the eigenvalues of the matrix (mathematics).
* In computer science, lambda is the time window over which a process is observed for determining the working memory set for a digital computer's virtual memory management.
* In astrophysics, lambda represents the likelihood that a small body will encounter a planet or a dwarf planet leading to a deflection of a significant magnitude. An object with a large value of lambda is expected to have cleared its neighborhood, satisfying the current definition of a planet.
* In crystal optics, lambda is used to represent the period of a lattice.
* In NATO military operations, a chevron (a capital lambda symbol) is painted on the vehicles of this military alliance for identification.
* In chemistry there are  (delta) and  (lambda) isomers, see: coordination complex
* In electrochemistry, lambda denotes the "equivalent conductance" of an electrolyte solution.
* In cosmology, lambda is the symbol for the cosmological constant.
* In optics, lambda denotes the grating pitch of a Bragg reflector.
* In handwritten Russian, this letter represents  in both uppercase and lowercase formats.

===Lower-case letter ===

Lower-case lambda
* In evolutionary algorithms,  indicates the number of offspring that would be generated from  current population in each generation. The terms  and  are originated from Evolution strategy notation.
* Lambda indicates the wavelength of any wave, especially in physics, electronics engineering, and mathematics.
* Lambda indicates the radioactivity decay constant in nuclear physics and radioactivity. This constant is very simply related (by a multiplicative constant) to the half-life of any radioactive material.
* In probability theory, lambda represents the density of occurrences within a time interval, as modeled by the Poisson distribution.
* In mathematical logic and computer science, lambda is used to introduce anonymous functions expressed with the concepts of lambda calculus.
* Lambda is a symbol for one microliter (1 L), that is, one cubic millimeter (1 mm3). This use is currently deprecated.
* Lambda indicates an eigenvalue in the mathematics of linear algebra.
* In the physics of electric fields, lambda sometimes indicates the linear charge density of a uniform line of electric charge (measured in coulombs per meter).
* Lambda denotes a Lagrange multiplier in multi-dimensional calculus.
* In solid-state electronics, lambda indicates the channel length modulation parameter of a MOSFET.
* There is a lambda phage virus in biology.
* In ecology, lambda denotes the long-term intrinsic growth rate of a population. This value is often calculated as the dominant eigenvalue of the age/size class matrix (mathematics).
* In formal language theory and in computer science, lambda denotes the empty string. 
* In telecommunications, lambda indicates the wavelength in a wavelength-division multiplexing optical communications system. This is actually a form of the long-established concept of frequency-division multiplexing.
* Lambda denotes the Lebesgue measure in mathematical set theory.
* The Goodman and Kruskal's lambda in statistics indicates the proportional reduction in error when one variable's values are used to predict the values of another variable.
* Lambda denotes the oxygen sensor in a vehicle that measures the air-to-fuel ratio in the exhaust gases of an internal-combustion engine.
* A Lambda 4S solid-fuel rocket was used to launch Japan's first orbital satellite in 1970. 
* Lambda denotes the failure rate of devices and systems in reliability theory, and it is measured in failure events per hour. Numerically, this lambda is also the reciprocal of the mean time between failures.
* In criminology, lambda denotes an individual's frequency of offenses.
* In cartography and navigation, lambda denotes the longitude of a location.
* Lambda is the symbol of the musician Richard D. James or Aphex Twin.
* Lambda denotes Christopher Langton's parameter for the classification of Stephen Wolfram's classes of cellular automata.
* In electrochemistry, lambda also denotes the ionic conductance of a given ion (The composition of the ion is generally shown as a subscript to the lambda character).
* In neurobiology, lambda denotes the length constant (or exponential rate of decay) of the electric potential across the cell membrane along a length of a nerve cell's axon.
* In the science and technology of heat transfer, lambda denotes the heat of vaporization per mole of material (a.k.a. its "latent heat"). Wankat Separation Process Engineering 2nd ed, Prentice Hall 
* In the technology and science of celestial navigation, lambda denotes the longitude as opposed to the Roman letter "L", which denotes the latitude.
* King Louis XIII of France used the letter lambda as his personal symbol rather than monogram.
* In Volvo automobiles, lambda denotes an engine, fuel, or ignition system failure.
* A block style Lambda is used as a recurring symbol in the Valve computer game series Half-Life, referring to the Lambda complex of the fictional Black Mesa Research Facility.
* The lambda was selected as a symbol by the Gay Activists Alliance of New York in 1970, and declared the international symbol for gay and lesbian rights by the International Gay Rights Congress in Edinburgh, Scotland, in 1974.
* The "lambda sign" is used for diagnosis of dichorionic twins in obstetric ultrasonography

==Lambda, the word==
* In programming languages such as Lisp, Python and Ruby lambda is an operator used to denote anonymous functions or closures, following the usage of lambda calculus. An example of this use of lambda in the Python language is this section of computer code that sorts a list alphabetically by the last character of each entry:
>>> list = ['woman', 'man', 'horse', 'boat', 'plane', 'dog']
>>> sorted(list, key = lambda word: (word[-1]))
['horse', 'plane', 'dog', 'woman', 'man', 'boat']
* In the C# programming language a lambda expression is an anonymous function that can contain expressions and statements. 
* The language Unlambda is a functional programming language based upon combinatory logic, a simplification of the lambda calculus that does not involve the lambda at all, hence the un- prefix.
* An automotive oxygen sensor (O2 sensor) is also known as a lambda probe, sensor, sond, or sonde.
* Lambda is used in art and photography to refer to a digital Type C print, or to the equipment that is used to produce it.
* Lambda was used by Pythagoras to denote the "Lambda number sequence" 1, 2, 3, 4, 9, 8, 27, ..., formed by the integers of the form 2i and 3i, for nonnegative integer i.
* In the study of gasoline engines, Lambda sometimes refers to the air/fuel mixture going into the engine.

==Lambda as a name==
*Stargate SG-1 uses a modified upper-case lambda, with a small circle above the apex, to indicate Earth. This symbol has since become associated with the entire franchise. 
*The popular science fiction universe of Star Wars uses a transport vehicle known as the Lambda-class shuttle that when viewed forward has the shape of the lowercase lambda. 
*Lambda is occasionally used in graphic design to represent a stylised 'A'. Examples include the Disney movie , the logo of the band Angels & Airwaves, the logo of the band Dream Theater, the logo of electronics company Samsung, and the logo of the engineering consultancy Atkins. Conversely, the name of the band ucifer (pronounced lucifer) is sometimes spelled Aucifer.
*The upper-case lambda is used as the alias of Providence, Rhode Island based musician Xavier Valentine. 
*The Half-Life franchise of video games uses an encircled block style lower-case lambda as the franchise logo (Half-Life 2 adds the numeral 2 into the logo as superscript), prominently featured on the chest of Gordon Freeman's (the protagonist) powered armor, known as an HEV suit. In the first game, the logo appears at the entrances of the Black Mesa Research Facility's Lambda Complex, which conducted teleportation research. In Half-Life 2 and its Episodes, the encircled block lambda is the universal symbol of the Resistance, often spraypainted to mark the location of safehouses and hidden supply caches; full-time Resistance members wear armbands containing a lower-case lambda without the circle.
*In the 2D fighting game series BlazBlue, a recurring character named Lambda-11 appears in the various games' story modes and as a playable character.
*Several gay rights organizations, such as Lambda Legal and the Lambda Literary Award derive their names from the use of a lower-case lambda as a symbol for gay and lesbian rights.
*In the RPG game Tales of Graces, originally made for the Wii, Lambda is the name of the main story's antagonist.
*There is a PlayStation Vita game known as Cytus Lambda.

==Character Encodings==

Unicode uses the spelling "lamda" in character names, instead of "lambda".

* Greek Lambda / Coptic Laula

* Mathematical Lambda

These characters are used only as mathematical symbols. Stylized Greek text should be encoded using the normal Greek letters, with markup and formatting to indicate text style.

== See also ==
* Greek letters used in mathematics, science, and engineering
* ,  - El (Cyrillic)
* Fraser alphabet#Consonants
* Half-Life (video game)

==References==
 



[[Lore]]

Lore may refer to:
* Lore (Clannad album)
* Lore (Today I Caught the Plague album)
* Lore (anatomy), the region between the eyes and nostrils of birds, reptiles, and amphibians
* Lore (company), a social network for learning
* Lor (East Timor), a city and subdistrict in Lautm District
* Lore (film), a 2012 film
* Lore Sjberg (born 1970), internet humourist
* Lore (Star Trek), a fictional android
* Folklore, acquired knowledge or traditional beliefs
* Oral lore or oral tradition, orally conveyed cultural knowledge and traditions

==See also==

* Lores, a locality within La Perna, Spain



[[Lamiaceae]]

Lamium purpureum, showing the bilaterally symmetrical flower

The Lamiaceae or Labiatae (the mint or deadnettle family) are a family of flowering plants. They have traditionally been considered closely related to Verbenaceae, Raymond M. Harley, Sandy Atkins, Andrey L. Budantsev, Philip D. Cantino, Barry J. Conn, Rene J. Grayer, Madeline M. Harley, Rogier P.J. de Kok, Tatyana V. Krestovskaja, Ramn Morales, Alan J. Paton, and P. Olof Ryding. 2004. "Labiatae" pages 167-275. In: Klaus Kubitzki (editor) and Joachim W. Kadereit (volume editor). The Families and Genera of Vascular Plants volume VII. Springer-Verlag: Berlin; Heidelberg, Germany. ISBN 978-3-540-40593-1 but in the 1990s, phylogenetic studies suggested that many genera classified in Verbenaceae belong instead in Lamiaceae. Cantino, P.D., Harley, R.M. & Wagstaff, S.J. 1992. Genera of Labiatae: status and classification. Pp. 511-522. In: Raymond M. Harley and Tom Reynolds (editors). Advances in Labiate Science. Richmond, Royal Botanic Gardens, Kew. Steven J. Wagstaff, Laura Hickerson, Russ Spangler, Patrick A. Reeves, and Richard G. Olmstead. 1998. "Phylogeny in Labiatae s.l., inferred from cpDNA sequences". Plant Systematics and Evolution 209(3-4):265-274. The currently accepted version of Verbenaceae may not be more closely related to Lamiaceae than some of the other families in the order Lamiales. Peter F. Stevens. 2001 onwards. Angiosperm Phylogeny Website At: Missouri Botanical Garden Website. (see External links below). It is not yet known which of the families in Lamiales is closest to Lamiaceae.

The family has a cosmopolitan distribution. Vernon H. Heywood, Richard K. Brummitt, Ole Seberg, and Alastair Culham. Flowering Plant Families of the World. Firefly Books: Ontario, Canada. ISBN 978-1-55407-206-4. The enlarged Lamiaceae contains about 236 genera and 6,900 to 7,200 species. The largest genera are Salvia (900), Scutellaria (360), Stachys (300), Plectranthus (300), Hyptis (280), Teucrium (250), Vitex, (250) Thymus (220), and Nepeta (200). Clerodendrum was once a genus of over 400 species, but by 2010, it had been narrowed to about 150. Yao-Wu Yuan, David J. Mabberley, Dorothy A. Steane, and Richard G. Olmstead. 2010. "Further disintegration and redefinition of Clerodendrum (Lamiaceae): Implications for the understanding of the evolution of an intriguing breeding strategy". Taxon 59(1):125-133. 

The plants are frequently aromatic in all parts and include many widely used culinary herbs, such as basil, mint, rosemary, sage, savory, marjoram, oregano, hyssop, thyme, lavender, and perilla. Some are shrubs; trees, such as teak; or, rarely, vines. Many members of the family are widely cultivated, owing not only to their aromatic qualities but also their ease of cultivation: these plants are among the easiest plants to propagate by stem cuttings. Besides those grown for their edible leaves, some are grown for decorative foliage, such as coleus. Others are grown for food purposes, but seeds are utilized instead of leaves, such as with chia.

The original family name is Labiateae, so given because the flowers typically have petals fused into an upper lip and a lower lip. Although this is still considered an acceptable alternative name, most botanists now use the name "Lamiaceae" in referring to this family.

The leaves emerge oppositely, each pair at right angles to the previous one (called decussate) or whorled.

The stems are frequently square in cross section, but this is not found in all members of the family, and is sometimes found in other plant families.

The flowers are bilaterally symmetrical with 5 united petals, 5 united sepals. They are usually bisexual and verticillastrate (a flower cluster that looks like a whorl of flowers but actually consists of two crowded clusters).

==Genera==
The last revision of the entire family was published in 2004. It described and provided keys to 236 genera. These are marked with an asterisk in the list below. A few genera have been established or resurrected since 2004. These are marked with a plus sign. The remaining genera in the list are mostly of historical interest only and are from a source that includes such genera without explanation. "List of genera in Lamiaceae". In: "Lamiaceae". In: "List of families". In: "Families and genera in GRIN. (see External links below) Few of these are recognized in modern treatments of the family. Adelosa is a nomen dubium. No specimen exists and no one knows what Carl Ludwig Blume described as Adelosa in 1850.

Kew Gardens provides a list of genera that includes additional information and is easy to read. List of Genera in Lamiaceae. At: Vascular Plant Families and Genera. At: World Checklist of Selected Plant Families. At: Electronic Plant Information Center. At: Website of Royal Botanic Gardens, Kew. (see External Links below). The list at the Angiosperm Phylogeny Website is frequently updated. List of Genera in Lamiaceae. At: Peter F. Stevens. 2001 onwards. Angiosperm Phylogeny Website At: Missouri Botanical Garden Website. (see External links below). 

*Acanthomintha
*Achyrospermum
Acinos
Acrocephalus
*Acrotome
*Acrymia
Adelosa
*Aegiphila
*Aeollanthus
*Agastache
*Ajuga
*Ajugoides
*Alajja
*Alvesia
*Amasonia
*Amethystea
*Anisochilus
*Anisomeles
Archboldia
*Asterohyptis
*Ballota
*Basilicum
Becium
*Benguellia
*Blephilia
*Bostrychanthera
Bovonia
*Brachysola
*Brazoria
*Bystropogon
Calamintha
*Callicarpa
*Capitanopsis
Capitanya
*Caryopteris
*Catoferia
*Cedronella
Ceratanthus
*Chaiturus
*Chamaesphacos
*Chaunostoma
*Chelonopsis
*Chloanthes
*Cleonia
*Clerodendrum
*Clinopodium
*Colebrookea
*Collinsonia
*Colquhounia
*Comanthosphace
*Congea
*Conradina
Coridothymus
*Cornutia
*Craniotome

*Cryphia
*Cuminia
*Cunila
*Cyanostegia
*Cyclotrichium
*Cymaria
*Dauphinea
*Dicerandra
*Dicrastylis
Discretitheca
Dorystoechas
*Dracocephalum
*Drepanocaryum
*Elsholtzia
*Endostemon
Englerastrum
*Eremostachys
*Eriope
*Eriophyton
Eriopidion
*Eriothymus
Erythrochlamys
Euhesperida
*Eurysolen
*Faradaya
*Fuerstia
*Galeopsis
*Garrettia
Geniosporum
*Glechoma
*Glechon
*Glossocarya
*Gmelina
*Gomphostemma
*Gontscharovia
*Hanceola
*Haplostachys
*Haumaniastrum
*Hedeoma
*Hemiandra
*Hemigenia
*Hemiphora
*Hemizygia
*Hesperozygis
*Heterolamium
*Hoehnea
*Holmskioldia
*Holocheila
Holostylon
*Horminum
*Hosea
*Hoslundia
*Huxleya
*Hymenocrater
*Hymenopyramis
*Hypenia

*Hypogomphia
*Hyptidendron
*Hyptis
*Hyssopus
Isodictyophorus
*Isodon
*Isoleucas
+Kalaharia
*Karomia
Keiskea
Kudrjaschevia
*Kurzamra
*Lachnostachys
*Lagochilus
*Lagopsis
*Lallemantia
*Lamiophlomis
*Lamium
*Lavandula
*Leocus
*Leonotis
*Leonurus
*Lepechinia
*Leucas
Leucophae
*Leucosceptrum
Limniboza
*Lophanthus
*Loxocalyx
*Lycopus
*Macbridea
*Madlabium
*Mallophora
*Marmoritis
*Marrubium
*Marsypianthes
*Matsumurella
*Meehania
*Melissa
*Melittis
*Mentha
*Meriandra
Mesona
*Metastachydium
*Microcorys
*Micromeria
*Microtoena
*Minthostachys
*Moluccella
*Monarda
*Monardella
*Monochilus
*Mosla
*Neoeplingia
Neohyptis
Neorapinia

*Nepeta
*Newcastelia
Nosema
*Notochaete
*Obtegomeria
*Ocimum
Octomeron
*Ombrocharis
*Oncinocalyx
*Origanum
*Orthosiphon
*Otostegia
+Ovieda
*Oxera
*Panzerina
*Paralamium
*Paraphlomis
*Paravitex
*Peltodon
*Pentapleura
*Perilla
*Perillula
*Peronema
*Perovskia
Perrierastrum
Petitia
*Petraeovitex
*Phlomidoschema
*Phlomis
*Phyllostegia
*Physopsis
*Physostegia
*Piloblephis
Pitardia
*Pityrodia
*Platostoma
*Plectranthus
*Pogogyne
*Pogostemon
*Poliomintha
*Prasium
*Premna
*Prostanthera
*Prunella
*Pseudocarpidium
*Pseudocaryopteris
*Pseudoeremostachys
*Pseudomarrubium
Puntia
*Pycnanthemum
*Pycnostachys
Rabdosiella
*Renschia
*Rhabdocaulon
*Rhaphiodon
*Rhododon

*Rosmarinus
*Rostrinucula
*Rotheca
*Roylea
*Rubiteucris
+Rydingia
Sabaudia
*Saccocalyx
Salazaria
*Salvia
*Satureja
*Schizonepeta
*Schnabelia
*Scutellaria
*Sideritis
*Siphocranion
Solenostemon
*Spartothamnella
*Sphenodesme
*Stachydeoma
*Stachyopsis
*Stachys
*Stenogyne
*Sulaimania
*Suzukia
*Symphorema
Symphostemon
*Synandra
*Syncolostemon
*Tectona
*Teijsmanniodendron
+Tetraclea
*Tetradenia
*Teucridium
*Teucrium
*Thorncroftia
*Thuspeinanta
*Thymbra
*Thymus
*Tinnea
*Trichostema
*Tripora
*Tsoongia
*Vitex
*Viticipremna
+Volkameria
*Warnockia
*Wenchengia
*Westringia
Wiedemannia
*Wrixonia
Xenopoma
*Zataria
*Zhumeria
*Ziziphora

Leucas aspera in Hyderabad, India.
Orthosiphon thymiflorus flower.

==Recent changes==
The circumscription of several genera has changed since 2004. Tsoongia, Paravitex, and Viticipremna have been sunk into synonymy with Vitex. Gemma L.C. Bramley, Flix Forest, and Rogier P.J. de Kok. 2009. "Troublesome tropical mints: re-examining generic limits of Vitex and relations (Lamiaceae) in South East Asia". Taxon 58(2):500-510. Huxleya has been sunk into Volkameria. Kalaharia, Volkameria, Ovieda, and Tetraclea have been segregated from a formerly polyphyletic Clerodendrum. Rydingia has been separated from Leucas. Anne-Cathrine Scheen and Victor A. Albert. 2007. "Nomenclatural and taxonomic changes within the Leucas clade (Lamioideae; Lamiaceae)". Systematics and Geography of Plants 77(2):229-238. The remaining Leucas is paraphyletic over four other genera. Anne-Cathrine Scheen and Victor A. Albert. 2009. "Molecular Phylogenetics of the Leucas Group (Lamioideae; Lamiaceae)". Systematic Botany 34(1):173-181. 

==Subfamilies and tribes==
In 2004, Lamiaceae were divided into seven subfamilies with ten genera not placed in any of the subfamilies. The unplaced genera are: Tectona, Callicarpa, Hymenopyramis, Petraeovitex, Peronema, Garrettia, Cymaria, Acrymia, Holocheila, and Ombrocharis. The subfamilies are Symphorematoideae, Viticoideae, Ajugoideae, Prostantheroideae, Nepetoideae, Scutellarioideae, and Lamioideae. The subfamily Viticoideae is probably not monophyletic. Prostantheroideae and Nepetoideae are divided into tribes. These are shown in the phylogenetic tree below.

==Phylogeny==
Most of the genera of Lamiaceae have never been sampled for DNA for molecular phylogenetic studies. Most of those that have been are included in the following phylogenetic tree. The phylogeny depicted below is based on seven different sources. Jin-Shun Zhong, Jie Li, Lang Li, John G. Conran, and Hsi-wen Li. 2010. "Phylogeny of Isodon (Schrad. ex Benth.) Spach (Lamiaceae) and Related Genera Inferred from Nuclear Ribosomal ITS, trnL-trnF Region, and rps16 Intron Sequences and Morphology". Systematic Botany 35(1):207-219. Jay B. Walker and Kenneth J. Sytsma. 2007. "Staminal Evolution in the Genus Salvia (Lamiaceae): Molecular Phylogenetic Evidence for Multiple Origins of the Staminal Lever". Annals of Botany 100(2):375-391. P. Olof Ryding. 2010. "Pericarp structure and phylogeny of tribe Mentheae (Lamiaceae)". Plant Systematics and Evolution 285(3-4):165175 

==References==

== External links ==

* List of genera in family LABIATAE At: Dicotyledons At: List Genera within a Family At: Vascular Plant Families and Genera At: About the Checklist At: World Checklist of Selected Plant Families At: Data Sources At: ePIC At: Scientific Databases At: Kew Gardens
* List of Genera in Lamiaceae At: Lamiaceae At: Lamiales At: Angiosperm Phylogeny Website At: Missoure Botanical Garden Website
* List of genera At: Lamiaceae At: List of families At: Families and Genera in GRIN At: Queries At: GRIN taxonomy for plants
* Lamiaceae in L. Watson and M.J. Dallwitz (1992 onwards). The families of flowering plants: descriptions, illustrations, identification, information retrieval. http://delta-intkey.com
* Lamiaceae images
* Family Lamiaceae Flowers in Israel
*Chilean Lamiaceae Chileflora
* Family Lamiaceae (Labiatae) Plant Life Forms

 


[[Long shot]]

An example of a wide shot in the 1963 film Cleopatra

In photography, filmmaking and video production, a long shot (sometimes referred to as a full shot or a wide shot) typically shows the entire object or human figure and is usually intended to place it in some relation to its surroundings. It has been suggested that long-shot ranges usually correspond to approximately what would be the distance between the front row of the audience and the stage in live theatre. It is now common to refer to a long shot as a "wide shot" because it often requires the use of a wide-angle lens. When a long shot is used to set up a location and its participants in film and video, it is called an establishing shot.

A related notion is that of an extreme long shot. This can be taken from as much as a quarter of a mile away, and is generally used as a scene-setting, establishing shot. It normally shows an exterior, e.g. the outside of a building, or a landscape, and is often used to show scenes of thrilling action e.g. in a war film or disaster movie. There will be very little detail visible in the shot, as it is meant to give a general impression rather than specific information.

== See also ==
*Camera operator
*Video production
*Videographer

==References==
*



[[Logarithm]]

The graph of the logarithm to base 2 crosses the x axis (horizontal axis) at 1 and passes through the points with coordinates (2, 1), (4, 2), and (8, 3). For example, log2(8) 3, because 23 8. The graph gets arbitrarily close to the y axis, but does not meet or intersect it.

The logarithm of a number is the exponent to which another fixed value, the base, must be raised to produce that number. For example, the logarithm of 1000 to base 10 is 3, because 10 to the power 3 is 1000: 1000 101010 103. More generally, for any two real numbers b and x where b is positive and b  1,
:

The logarithm to base 10 (b = 10) is called the common logarithm and has many applications in science and engineering. The natural logarithm has the irrational (transcendental) number e ( 2.718) as its base; its use is widespread in pure mathematics, especially calculus. The binary logarithm uses base 2 (b = 2) and is prominent in computer science.

Logarithms were introduced by John Napier in the early 17th century as a means to simplify calculations. They were rapidly adopted by navigators, scientists, engineers, and others to perform computations more easily, using slide rules and logarithm tables. Tedious multi-digit multiplication steps can be replaced by table look-ups and simpler addition because of the factimportant in its own rightthat the logarithm of a product is the sum of the logarithms of the factors:
:
provided that b, x and y are all positive and b  1.
The present-day notion of logarithms comes from Leonhard Euler, who connected them to the exponential function in the 18th century.

Logarithmic scales reduce wide-ranging quantities to smaller scopes. For example, the decibel is a logarithmic unit quantifying sound pressure and signal power ratios. In chemistry, pH is a logarithmic measure for the acidity of an aqueous solution. Logarithms are commonplace in scientific formulae, and in measurements of the complexity of algorithms and of geometric objects called fractals. They describe musical intervals, appear in formulae counting prime numbers, inform some models in psychophysics, and can aid in forensic accounting.

In the same way as the logarithm reverses exponentiation, the complex logarithm is the inverse function of the exponential function applied to complex numbers. The discrete logarithm is another variant; it has applications in public-key cryptography.

==Motivation and definition==
The idea of logarithms is to reverse the operation of exponentiation, that is raising a number to a power. For example, the third power (or cube) of 2 is 8, because 8 is the product of three factors of 2:
:
It follows that the logarithm of 8 with respect to base 2 is 3, so log2 8 = 3.

===Exponentiation===
The third power of some number b is the product of three factors of b. More generally, raising b to the n-th power, where n is a natural number, is done by multiplying n factors of b. The n-th power of b is written b'n, so that
:
Exponentiation may be extended to b'y, where b is a positive number and the exponent y is any real number. For example, b1 is the reciprocal of b, that is, 1/b. (For further details, including the formula b'm + n = b'm  b'n, see exponentiation or , esp. section 2 for an elementary treatise.)

===Definition===
The logarithm of a positive real number x with respect to base b, a positive real number not equal to 1, is the exponent by which b must be raised to yield x. In other words, the logarithm of x to base b is the solution y to the equation , chapter 1 
: 

The logarithm is denoted "logb(x)" (pronounced as "the logarithm of x to base b" or "the base-b logarithm of x"). In the equation y = logb(x), the value y is the answer to the question "To what power must b be raised, in order to yield x?". This question can also be addressed (with a richer answer) for complex numbers, which is done in section "Complex logarithm", and this answer is much more extensively investigated in the page for the complex logarithm.

===Examples===
For example, log2(16) 4, since 24 2222 16. Logarithms can also be negative:
:
since
: 
A third example: log10(150) is approximately 2.176, which lies between 2 and 3, just as 150 lies between 102 100 and 103 1000. Finally, for any base b, logb(b) 1 and 1=logb(1) = 0, since b1 b and b0 1, respectively.

==Logarithmic identities==

Several important formulas, sometimes called logarithmic identities or log laws, relate logarithms to one another. All statements in this section can be found in , , or , for example. 

===Product, quotient, power and root===
The logarithm of a product is the sum of the logarithms of the numbers being multiplied; the logarithm of the ratio of two numbers is the difference of the logarithms. The logarithm of the p-th power of a number is p times the logarithm of the number itself; the logarithm of a p-th root is the logarithm of the number divided by p. The following table lists these identities with examples. Each of the identities can be derived after substitution of the logarithm definitions x = blogb(x), and/or y = blogb(y), in the left hand sides.

 Formula Example 
 product 
 quotient 
 power 
 root 

===Change of base===
The logarithm logb(x) can be computed from the logarithms of x and b with respect to an arbitrary base k using the following formula:
: 
Typical scientific calculators calculate the logarithms to bases 10 and e. , p. 21 Logarithms with respect to any base b can be determined using either of these two logarithms by the previous formula:
:
Given a number x and its logarithm logb(x) to an unknown base b, the base is given by:
: 

==Particular bases==
Among all choices for the base, three are particularly common. These are b = 10, b = e (the irrational mathematical constant  2.71828), and b = 2. In mathematical analysis, the logarithm to base e is widespread because of its particular analytical properties explained below. On the other hand, base-10 logarithms are easy to use for manual calculations in the decimal number system: , chapter 17, p. 275 
:
Thus, log10(x) is related to the number of decimal digits of a positive integer x: the number of digits is the smallest integer strictly bigger than log10(x). , p. 20 For example, log10(1430) is approximately 3.15. The next integer is 4, which is the number of digits of 1430. The logarithm to base two is used in computer science, where the binary system is ubiquitous, and in music theory, where a pitch ratio of two (the octave) is ubiquitous and the cent is the binary logarithm (scaled by 1200) of the ratio between two adjacent equally-tempered pitches.

The following table lists common notations for logarithms to these bases and the fields where they are used. Many disciplines write log(x) instead of logb(x), when the intended base can be determined from the context. The notation blog(x) also occurs. The "ISO notation" column lists designations suggested by the International Organization for Standardization (ISO 31-11). 

 Base b Name for logb(x) ISO notation Other notations Used in 
 2 binary logarithm lb(x) ld(x), log(x), lg(x), log2(x) computer science, information theory, mathematics, music theory 
 e natural logarithm ln(x) log(x)(in mathematics and many programming languages) mathematical analysis, physics, chemistry,statistics, economics, and some engineering fields 
 10 common logarithm lg(x) log(x), log10(x)(in engineering, biology, astronomy) various engineering fields (see decibel and see below), logarithm tables, handheld calculators, spectroscopy 

==History==

===Predecessors===

The Babylonians sometime in 20001600 BC may have invented the quarter square multiplication algorithm to multiply two numbers using only addition, subtraction and a table of quarter squares. However, it could not be used for division without an additional table of reciprocals (or the knowledge of a sufficiently simple algorithm to generate reciprocals). Large tables of quarter squares were used to simplify the accurate multiplication of large numbers from 1817 onwards until this was superseded by the use of computers.

The Indian mathematician Virasena worked with the concept of ardhaccheda: the number of times a number of the form 2n could be halved. For exact powers of 2, this is the logarithm to that base, which is a whole number; for other numbers, it is undefined. He described relations such as the product formula and also introduced integer logarithms in base 3 (trakacheda) and base 4 (caturthacheda) 

Michael Stifel published Arithmetica integra in Nuremberg in 1544, which contains a table of integers and powers of 2 that has been considered an early version of a logarithmic table. 
 
 

In the 16th and early 17th centuries an algorithm called prosthaphaeresis was used to approximate multiplication and division. This used the trigonometric identity
:
or similar to convert the multiplications to additions and table lookups. However, logarithms are more straightforward and require less work. It can be shown using Euler's Formula that the two techniques are related.

===From Napier to Euler===
alt=A baroque picture of a sitting man with a beard.

The method of logarithms was publicly propounded by John Napier in 1614, in a book titled Mirifici Logarithmorum Canonis Descriptio (Description of the Wonderful Rule of Logarithms). Joost Brgi independently invented logarithms but published six years after Napier. 

Johannes Kepler, who used logarithm tables extensively to compile his Ephemeris and therefore dedicated it to Napier, , p. 44 remarked:

By repeated subtractions Napier calculated (1  107)L for L ranging from 1 to 100. The result for L=100 is approximately 0.99999 = 1  105. Napier then calculated the products of these numbers with 107(1  105)L for L from 1 to 50, and did similarly with 0.9998  (1  105)20 and 0.9  0.99520. These computations, which occupied 20 years, allowed him to give, for any number N from 5 to 10 million, the number L that solves the equation

:

Napier first called L an "artificial number", but later introduced the word "logarithm" to mean a number that indicates a ratio: (logos) meaning proportion, and (arithmos) meaning number. In modern notation, the relation to natural logarithms is:
 

:

where the very close approximation corresponds to the observation that

:

The invention was quickly and widely met with acclaim. The works of Bonaventura Cavalieri (Italy), Edmund Wingate (France), Xue Fengzuo (China), and
Johannes Kepler's Chilias logarithmorum (Germany) helped spread the concept further. 
, section 2 

thumb
In 1647 Grgoire de Saint-Vincent related logarithms to the quadrature of the hyperbola, by pointing out that the area f(t) under the hyperbola from x 1 to x t satisfies
:
The natural logarithm was first described by Nicholas Mercator in his work Logarithmotechnia published in 1668, although the mathematics teacher John Speidell had already in 1619 compiled a table of what were effectively natural logarithms, based on Napier's work. , p. 152 Around 1730, Leonhard Euler defined the exponential function and the natural logarithm by
:
:
Euler also showed that the two functions are inverse to one another. 
 , section 9-3 , p. 484, 489 

===Logarithm tables, slide rules, and historical applications===
The 1797 Encyclopdia Britannica explanation of logarithms

By simplifying difficult calculations, logarithms contributed to the advance of science, and especially of astronomy. They were critical to advances in surveying, celestial navigation, and other domains. Pierre-Simon Laplace called logarithms

::"...n admirable artifice which, by reducing to a few days the labour of many months, doubles the life of the astronomer, and spares him the errors and disgust inseparable from long calculations." , p. 44 

A key tool that enabled the practical use of logarithms before calculators and computers was the table of logarithms. , section 2 The first such table was compiled by Henry Briggs in 1617, immediately after Napier's invention. Subsequently, tables with increasing scope and precision were written. These tables listed the values of logb(x) and b'x for any number x in a certain range, at a certain precision, for a certain base b (usually b = 10). For example, Briggs' first table contained the common logarithms of all integers in the range 11000, with a precision of 8 digits. As the function f(x) b'x is the inverse function of logb(x), it has been called the antilogarithm. , section 4.7., p. 89 The product and quotient of two positive numbers c and d were routinely calculated as the sum and difference of their logarithms. The product cd or quotient c/d came from looking up the antilogarithm of the sum or difference, also via the same table:
:
and
:

For manual calculations that demand any appreciable precision, performing the lookups of the two logarithms, calculating their sum or difference, and looking up the antilogarithm is much faster than performing the multiplication by earlier methods such as prosthaphaeresis, which relies on trigonometric identities. Calculations of powers and roots are reduced to multiplications or divisions and look-ups by
:
and
:

Many logarithm tables give logarithms by separately providing the characteristic and mantissa of x, that is to say, the integer part and the fractional part of log10(x). , p. 264 The characteristic of 10  x is one plus the characteristic of x, and their significands are the same. This extends the scope of logarithm tables: given a table listing log10(x) for all integers x ranging from 1 to 1000, the logarithm of 3542 is approximated by
:

Another critical application was the slide rule, a pair of logarithmically divided scales used for calculation, as illustrated here:

alt=A slide rule: two rectangles with logarithmically ticked axes, arrangement to add the distance from 1 to 2 to the distance from 1 to 3, indicating the product 6.

The non-sliding logarithmic scale, Gunter's rule, was invented shortly after Napier's invention. William Oughtred enhanced it to create the slide rulea pair of logarithmic scales movable with respect to each other. Numbers are placed on sliding scales at distances proportional to the differences between their logarithms. Sliding the upper scale appropriately amounts to mechanically adding logarithms. For example, adding the distance from 1 to 2 on the lower scale to the distance from 1 to 3 on the upper scale yields a product of 6, which is read off at the lower part. The slide rule was an essential calculating tool for engineers and scientists until the 1970s, because it allows, at the expense of precision, much faster computation than techniques based on tables. 

==Analytic properties==
A deeper study of logarithms requires the concept of a function. A function is a rule that, given one number, produces another number. , or see the references in function An example is the function producing the x-th power of b from any real number x, where the base b is a fixed number. This function is written
:

===Logarithmic function===
To justify the definition of logarithms, it is necessary to show that the equation
:
has a solution x and that this solution is unique, provided that y is positive and that b is positive and unequal to 1. A proof of that fact requires the intermediate value theorem from elementary calculus. , section III.3 This theorem states that a continuous function that produces two values m and n also produces any value that lies between m and n. A function is continuous if it does not "jump", that is, if its graph can be drawn without lifting the pen.

This property can be shown to hold for the function f(x) = b'x. Because f takes arbitrarily large and arbitrarily small positive values, any number y > 0 lies between f(x0) and f(x1) for suitable x0 and x1. Hence, the intermediate value theorem ensures that the equation f(x) = y has a solution. Moreover, there is only one solution to this equation, because the function f is strictly increasing (for b > 1), or strictly decreasing (for 0 < b < 1). 

The unique solution x is the logarithm of y to base b, logb(y). The function that assigns to y its logarithm is called logarithm function or logarithmic function (or just logarithm).

The function logb(x) is essentially characterized by the above product formula
:
More precisely, the logarithm to any base b > 1 is the only increasing function f from the positive reals to the reals satisfying f(b) = 1 and item (4.3.1) 
:

===Inverse function===
alt=The graphs of two functions.
The formula for the logarithm of a power says in particular that for any number x,
:
In prose, taking the x-th power of b and then the base-b logarithm gives back x. Conversely, given a positive number y, the formula
:
says that first taking the logarithm and then exponentiating gives back y. Thus, the two possible ways of combining (or composing) logarithms and exponentiation give back the original number. Therefore, the logarithm to base b is the inverse function of f(x) b'x. , section 1.6 

Inverse functions are closely related to the original functions. Their graphs correspond to each other upon exchanging the x- and the y-coordinates (or upon reflection at the diagonal line x = y), as shown at the right: a point (t, u = b't) on the graph of f yields a point (u, t = logb'u) on the graph of the logarithm and vice versa. As a consequence, logb(x) diverges to infinity (gets bigger than any given number) if x grows to infinity, provided that b is greater than one. In that case, logb(x) is an increasing function. For b < 1, logb(x) tends to minus infinity instead. When x approaches zero, logb(x) goes to minus infinity for b > 1 (plus infinity for b < 1, respectively).

===Derivative and antiderivative===
alt=A graph of the logarithm function and a line touching it in one point.
Analytic properties of functions pass to their inverses. Thus, as f(x) = b'x is a continuous and differentiable function, so is logb(y). Roughly, a continuous function is differentiable if its graph has no sharp "corners". Moreover, as the derivative of f(x) evaluates to ln(b)b'x by the properties of the exponential function, the chain rule implies that the derivative of logb(x) is given by 
: 
That is, the slope of the tangent touching the graph of the base-b logarithm at the point (x, logb(x)) equals 1/(xln(b)). In particular, the derivative of ln(x) is 1/x, which implies that the antiderivative of 1/x is ln(x) + C. The derivative with a generalised functional argument f(x) is
:
The quotient at the right hand side is called the logarithmic derivative of f. Computing f'(x) by means of the derivative of ln(f(x)) is known as logarithmic differentiation. , p. 386 The antiderivative of the natural logarithm ln(x) is: 
: 
Related formulas, such as antiderivatives of logarithms to other bases can be derived from this equation using the change of bases. 

===Integral representation of the natural logarithm===
alt=A hyperbola with part of the area underneath shaded in grey.
The natural logarithm of t agrees with the integral of 1/x dx from 1 to t:
:
In other words, ln(t) equals the area between the x axis and the graph of the function 1/x, ranging from 1=x = 1 to 1=x = t (figure at the right). This is a consequence of the fundamental theorem of calculus and the fact that derivative of ln(x) is 1/x. The right hand side of this equation can serve as a definition of the natural logarithm. Product and power logarithm formulas can be derived from this definition. , section III.6 For example, the product formula 1=ln(tu) = ln(t) + ln(u) is deduced as:

:

The equality (1) splits the integral into two parts, while the equality (2) is a change of variable (1=w = x/t). In the illustration below, the splitting corresponds to dividing the area into the yellow and blue parts. Rescaling the left hand blue area vertically by the factor t and shrinking it by the same factor horizontally does not change its size. Moving it appropriately, the area fits the graph of the function 1=f(x) = 1/x again. Therefore, the left hand blue area, which is the integral of f(x) from t to tu is the same as the integral from 1 to u. This justifies the equality (2) with a more geometric proof.

alt=The hyperbola depicted twice. The area underneath is split into different parts.

The power formula 1=ln(t'r) = r ln(t) may be derived in a similar way:

:
The second equality uses a change of variables (integration by substitution), 1=w = x1/r.

The sum over the reciprocals of natural numbers,
:
is called the harmonic series. It is closely tied to the natural logarithm: as n tends to infinity, the difference,
:
converges (i.e., gets arbitrarily close) to a number known as the EulerMascheroni constant. This relation aids in analyzing the performance of algorithms such as quicksort. , sections 11.5 and 13.8 

There is also another integral representation of the logarithm that is useful in some situations.

:

This can be verified by showing that it has the same value at 1=x = 1, and the same derivative.

===Transcendence of the logarithm===
Real numbers that are not algebraic are called transcendental; for example, [[Pi|]] and e are such numbers, but is not. Almost all real numbers are transcendental. The logarithm is an example of a transcendental function. The GelfondSchneider theorem asserts that logarithms usually take transcendental, i.e., "difficult" values. , p. 10 

==Calculation==
Logarithms are easy to compute in some cases, such as log10(1,000) = 3. In general, logarithms can be calculated using power series or the arithmetic-geometric mean, or be retrieved from a precalculated logarithm table that provides a fixed precision. , sections 4.2.2 (p. 72) and 5.5.2 (p. 95) , section 6.3, p. 105111 
Newton's method, an iterative method to solve equations approximately, can also be used to calculate the logarithm, because its inverse function, the exponential function, can be computed efficiently. , section 1 for an overview Using look-up tables, CORDIC-like methods can be used to compute logarithms if the only available operations are addition and bit shifts. Moreover, the binary logarithm algorithm calculates lb(x) recursively based on repeated squarings of x, taking advantage of the relation
:

===Power series===
;Taylor series

alt=An animation showing increasingly good approximations of the logarithm graph.
For any real number z that satisfies 0 < z < 2, the following formula holds: 
:
This is a shorthand for saying that ln(z) can be approximated to a more and more accurate value by the following expressions:
:
For example, with z 1.5 the third approximation yields 0.4167, which is about 0.011 greater than ln(1.5) 0.405465. This series approximates ln(z) with arbitrary precision, provided the number of summands is large enough. In elementary calculus, ln(z) is therefore the limit of this series. It is the Taylor series of the natural logarithm at z = 1. The Taylor series of ln z provides a particularly useful approximation to ln(1+z) when z is small, |z| 0. Using the Sigma notation, this is also written as
:
This series can be derived from the above Taylor series. It converges more quickly than the Taylor series, especially if z is close to 1. For example, for z = 1.5, the first three terms of the second series approximate ln(1.5) with an error of about . The quick convergence for z close to 1 can be taken advantage of in the following way: given a low-accuracy approximation y  ln(z) and putting
:
the logarithm of z is:
:
The better the initial approximation y is, the closer A is to 1, so its logarithm can be calculated efficiently. A can be calculated using the exponential series, which converges quickly provided y is not too large. Calculating the logarithm of larger z can be reduced to smaller values of z by writing z a  10b, so that ln(z) ln(a) + b  ln(10).

A closely related method can be used to compute the logarithm of integers. From the above series, it follows that:
:
If the logarithm of a large integer n is known, then this series yields a fast converging series for log(n+1).

===Arithmetic-geometric mean approximation===
The arithmetic-geometric mean yields high precision approximations of the natural logarithm. ln(x) is approximated to a precision of 2p (or p precise bits) by the following formula (due to Carl Friedrich Gauss): 

:

Here M denotes the arithmetic-geometric mean. It is obtained by repeatedly calculating the average (arithmetic mean) and the square root of the product of two numbers (geometric mean). Moreover, m is chosen such that

:

Both the arithmetic-geometric mean and the constants  and ln(2) can be calculated with quickly converging series.

==Applications==
alt=A photograph of a nautilus' shell.
Logarithms have many applications inside and outside mathematics. Some of these occurrences are related to the notion of scale invariance. For example, each chamber of the shell of a nautilus is an approximate copy of the next one, scaled by a constant factor. This gives rise to a logarithmic spiral. Benford's law on the distribution of leading digits can also be explained by scale invariance. , chapter 6, section 64 Logarithms are also linked to self-similarity. For example, logarithms appear in the analysis of algorithms that solve a problem by dividing it into two similar smaller problems and patching their solutions. , p. 21, section 1.3.2 The dimensions of self-similar geometric shapes, that is, shapes whose parts resemble the overall picture are also based on logarithms.
Logarithmic scales are useful for quantifying the relative change of a value as opposed to its absolute difference. Moreover, because the logarithmic function log(x) grows very slowly for large x, logarithmic scales are used to compress large-scale scientific data. Logarithms also occur in numerous scientific formulas, such as the Tsiolkovsky rocket equation, the Fenske equation, or the Nernst equation.

===Logarithmic scale===

alt=A graph of the value of one mark over time. The line showing its value is increasing very quickly, even with logarithmic scale.
Scientific quantities are often expressed as logarithms of other quantities, using a logarithmic scale. For example, the decibel is a logarithmic unit of measurement. It is based on the common logarithm of ratios10 times the common logarithm of a power ratio or 20 times the common logarithm of a voltage ratio. It is used to quantify the loss of voltage levels in transmitting electrical signals, , section 5.2 to describe power levels of sounds in acoustics, , section 23.0.2 and the absorbance of light in the fields of spectrometry and optics. The signal-to-noise ratio describing the amount of unwanted noise in relation to a (meaningful) signal is also measured in decibels. , p. 48 In a similar vein, the peak signal-to-noise ratio is commonly used to assess the quality of sound and image compression methods using the logarithm. , p. 180 

The strength of an earthquake is measured by taking the common logarithm of the energy emitted at the quake. This is used in the moment magnitude scale or the Richter scale. For example, a 5.0 earthquake releases 10 times and a 6.0 releases 100 times the energy of a 4.0. , section 4.4. Another logarithmic scale is apparent magnitude. It measures the brightness of stars logarithmically. , section 8.3, p. 231 Yet another example is pH in chemistry; pH is the negative of the common logarithm of the activity of hydronium ions (the form hydrogen ions take in water). The activity of hydronium ions in neutral water is 107 molL1, hence a pH of 7. Vinegar typically has a pH of about 3. The difference of 4 corresponds to a ratio of 104 of the activity, that is, vinegar's hydronium ion activity is about 103 molL1.

Semilog (log-linear) graphs use the logarithmic scale concept for visualization: one axis, typically the vertical one, is scaled logarithmically. For example, the chart at the right compresses the steep increase from 1 million to 1 trillion to the same space (on the vertical axis) as the increase from 1 to 1 million. In such graphs, exponential functions of the form f(x) = a  b'x appear as straight lines with slope equal to the logarithm of b.
Log-log graphs scale both axes logarithmically, which causes functions of the form f(x) = a  x'k to be depicted as straight lines with slope equal to the exponent k. This is applied in visualizing and analyzing power laws. , section 34 

===Psychology===
Logarithms occur in several laws describing human perception: , p. 355356 , p. 48 
Hick's law proposes a logarithmic relation between the time individuals take for choosing an alternative and the number of choices they have. , p. 61 Fitts's law predicts that the time required to rapidly move to a target area is a logarithmic function of the distance to and the size of the target. , reprinted in In psychophysics, the WeberFechner law proposes a logarithmic relationship between stimulus and sensation such as the actual vs. the perceived weight of an item a person is carrying. , p. 304 (This "law", however, is less precise than more recent models, such as the Stevens' power law. , lemmas Psychophysics and Perception: Overview )

Psychological studies found that individuals with little mathematics education tend to estimate quantities logarithmically, that is, they position a number on an unmarked line according to its logarithm, so that 10 is positioned as close to 100 as 100 is to 1000. Increasing education shifts this to a linear estimate (positioning 1000 10x as far away) in some circumstances, while logarithms are used when the numbers to be plotted are difficult to plot linearly. 

===Probability theory and statistics===
Three probability density functions (PDF) of random variables with log-normal distributions. The location parameter , which is zero for all three of the PDFs shown, is the mean of the logarithm of the random variable, not the mean of the variable itself.
alt=A bar chart and a superimposed second chart. The two differ slightly, but both decrease in a similar fashion.
Logarithms arise in probability theory: the law of large numbers dictates that, for a fair coin, as the number of coin-tosses increases to infinity, the observed proportion of heads approaches one-half. The fluctuations of this proportion about one-half are described by the law of the iterated logarithm. , section 12.9 

Logarithms also occur in log-normal distributions. When the logarithm of a random variable has a normal distribution, the variable is said to have a log-normal distribution. Log-normal distributions are encountered in many fields, wherever a variable is formed as the product of many independent positive random variables, for example in the study of turbulence. 
 

Logarithms are used for maximum-likelihood estimation of parametric statistical models. For such a model, the likelihood function depends on at least one parameter that must be estimated. A maximum of the likelihood function occurs at the same parameter-value as a maximum of the logarithm of the likelihood (the "log likelihood"), because the logarithm is an increasing function. The log-likelihood is easier to maximize, especially for the multiplied likelihoods for independent random variables. , section 11.3 

Benford's law describes the occurrence of digits in many data sets, such as heights of buildings. According to Benford's law, the probability that the first decimal-digit of an item in the data sample is d (from 1 to 9) equals log10(d + 1)  log10(d), regardless of the unit of measurement. , section 2.1 Thus, about 30% of the data can be expected to have 1 as first digit, 18% start with 2, etc. Auditors examine deviations from Benford's law to detect fraudulent accounting. 

===Computational complexity===
Analysis of algorithms is a branch of computer science that studies the performance of algorithms (computer programs solving a certain problem). , pages 1-2 Logarithms are valuable for describing algorithms that divide a problem into smaller ones, and join the solutions of the subproblems. , p. 143 

For example, to find a number in a sorted list, the binary search algorithm checks the middle entry and proceeds with the half before or after the middle entry if the number is still not found. This algorithm requires, on average, log2(N) comparisons, where N is the list's length. , section 6.2.1, pp. 409426 Similarly, the merge sort algorithm sorts an unsorted list by dividing the list into halves and sorting these first before merging the results. Merge sort algorithms typically require a time approximately proportional to N  log(N). The base of the logarithm is not specified here, because the result only changes by a constant factor when another base is used. A constant factor, is usually disregarded in the analysis of algorithms under the standard uniform cost model. 

A function f(x) is said to grow logarithmically if f(x) is (exactly or approximately) proportional to the logarithm of x. (Biological descriptions of organism growth, however, use this term for an exponential function. , chapter 19, p. 298 ) For example, any natural number N can be represented in binary form in no more than log2(N) + 1 bits. In other words, the amount of memory needed to store N grows logarithmically with N.

===Entropy and chaos===
alt=An oval shape with the trajectories of two particles.

Entropy is broadly a measure of the disorder of some system. In statistical thermodynamics, the entropy S of some physical system is defined as
:
The sum is over all possible states i of the system in question, such as the positions of gas particles in a container. Moreover, p'i is the probability that the state i is attained and k is the Boltzmann constant. Similarly, entropy in information theory measures the quantity of information. If a message recipient may expect any one of N possible messages with equal likelihood, then the amount of information conveyed by any one such message is quantified as log2(N) bits. , section III.I 

Lyapunov exponents use logarithms to gauge the degree of chaoticity of a dynamical system. For example, for a particle moving on an oval billiard table, even small changes of the initial conditions result in very different paths of the particle. Such systems are chaotic in a deterministic way, because small measurement errors of the initial state predictably lead to largely different final states. , section 1.9 At least one Lyapunov exponent of a deterministically chaotic system is positive.

===Fractals===
alt=Parts of a triangle are removed in an iterated way.

Logarithms occur in definitions of the dimension of fractals. Fractals are geometric objects that are self-similar: small parts reproduce, at least roughly, the entire global structure. The Sierpinski triangle (pictured) can be covered by three copies of itself, each having sides half the original length. This makes the Hausdorff dimension of this structure log(3)/log(2)  1.58. Another logarithm-based notion of dimension is obtained by counting the number of boxes needed to cover the fractal in question.

===Music===

Logarithms are related to musical tones and intervals. In equal temperament, the frequency ratio depends only on the interval between two tones, not on the specific frequency, or pitch, of the individual tones. For example, the note A has a frequency of 440 Hz and B-flat has a frequency of 466 Hz. The interval between A and B-flat is a semitone, as is the one between B-flat and B (frequency 493 Hz). Accordingly, the frequency ratios agree:
:
Therefore, logarithms can be used to describe the intervals: an interval is measured in semitones by taking the base-21/12 logarithm of the frequency ratio, while the base-21/1200 logarithm of the frequency ratio expresses the interval in cents, hundredths of a semitone. The latter is used for finer encoding, as it is needed for non-equal temperaments. , chapter 5 

 Interval(the two tones are played at the same time) 1/12 tone Semitone Just major third Major third Tritone Octave 
 Frequency ratio r 
 Corresponding number of semitones 
 Corresponding number of cents 

===Number theory===
Natural logarithms are closely linked to counting prime numbers (2, 3, 5, 7, 11, ...), an important topic in number theory. For any integer x, the quantity of prime numbers less than or equal to x is denoted (x). The prime number theorem asserts that (x) is approximately given by
:
in the sense that the ratio of (x) and that fraction approaches 1 when x tends to infinity. , theorem 4.1 As a consequence, the probability that a randomly chosen number between 1 and x is prime is inversely proportional to the numbers of decimal digits of x. A far better estimate of (x) is given by the
offset logarithmic integral function Li(x), defined by
:
The Riemann hypothesis, one of the oldest open mathematical conjectures, can be stated in terms of comparing (x) and Li(x). The ErdsKac theorem describing the number of distinct prime factors also involves the natural logarithm.

The logarithm of n factorial, n! = 1  2  ...  n, is given by
:
This can be used to obtain Stirling's formula, an approximation of n! for large n. , chapter 4 

==Generalizations==

===Complex logarithm===

alt=An illustration of the polar form: a point is described by an arrow or equivalently by its length and angle to the x axis.

The complex numbers a solving the equation

:

are called complex logarithms. Here, z is a complex number. A complex number is commonly represented as z = x + iy, where x and y are real numbers and i is the imaginary unit. Such a number can be visualized by a point in the complex plane, as shown at the right. The polar form encodes a non-zero complex number z by its absolute value, that is, the distance r to the origin, and an angle between the x axis and the line passing through the origin and z. This angle is called the argument of z. The absolute value r of z is

:

The argument is not uniquely specified by z: both  and ' =  + 2 are arguments of z because adding 2 radians or 360 degrees to  corresponds to "winding" around the origin counter-clock-wise by a turn. The resulting complex number is again z, as illustrated at the right. However, exactly one argument  satisfies  <  and   . It is called the principal argument, denoted Arg(z), with a capital A. , Definition 1.6.3 (An alternative normalization is 0  Arg(z) < 2. , section 5.9 )

alt=A density plot. In the middle there is a black point, at the negative axis the hue jumps sharply and evolves smoothly otherwise.
Using trigonometric functions sine and cosine, or the complex exponential, respectively, r and  are such that the following identities hold: , section 1.2 

:

This implies that the a-th power of e equals z, where

:

 is the principal argument Arg(z) and n is an arbitrary integer. Any such a is called a complex logarithm of z. There are infinitely many of them, in contrast to the uniquely defined real logarithm. If n = 0, a is called the principal value of the logarithm, denoted Log(z). The principal argument of any positive real number x is 0; hence Log(x) is a real number and equals the real (natural) logarithm. However, the above formulas for logarithms of products and powers do not generalize to the principal value of the complex logarithm. , theorem 6.1. 

The illustration at the right depicts Log(z). The discontinuity, that is, the jump in the hue at the negative part of the x- or real axis, is caused by the jump of the principal argument there. This locus is called a branch cut. This behavior can only be circumvented by dropping the range restriction on . Then the argument of z and, consequently, its logarithm become multi-valued functions.

===Inverses of other exponential functions===
Exponentiation occurs in many areas of mathematics and its inverse function is often referred to as the logarithm. For example, the logarithm of a matrix is the (multi-valued) inverse function of the matrix exponential. , chapter 11. Another example is the p-adic logarithm, the inverse function of the p-adic exponential. Both are defined via Taylor series analogous to the real case. , section II.5. In the context of differential geometry, the exponential map maps the tangent space at a point of a manifold to a neighborhood of that point. Its inverse is also called the logarithmic (or log) map. 

In the context of finite groups exponentiation is given by repeatedly multiplying one group element b with itself. The discrete logarithm is the integer n solving the equation
:
where x is an element of the group. Carrying out the exponentiation can be done efficiently, but the discrete logarithm is believed to be very hard to calculate in some groups. This asymmetry has important applications in public key cryptography, such as for example in the DiffieHellman key exchange, a routine that allows secure exchanges of cryptographic keys over unsecured information channels. Zech's logarithm is related to the discrete logarithm in the multiplicative group of non-zero elements of a finite field. 

Further logarithm-like inverse functions include the double logarithm ln(ln(x)), the super- or hyper-4-logarithm (a slight variation of which is called iterated logarithm in computer science), the Lambert W function, and the logit. They are the inverse functions of the double exponential function, tetration, of f(w) wew, and of the logistic function, respectively. , p. 357 

===Related concepts===
From the perspective of pure mathematics, the identity log(cd) log(c) + log(d) expresses a group isomorphism between positive reals under multiplication and reals under addition. Logarithmic functions are the only continuous isomorphisms between these groups. , section V.4.1 By means of that isomorphism, the Haar measure (Lebesgue measure) dx on the reals corresponds to the Haar measure dx/x on the positive reals. , section 1.4 In complex analysis and algebraic geometry, differential forms of the form df/f are known as forms with logarithmic poles. , section 2 

The polylogarithm is the function defined by
:
It is related to the natural logarithm by Li1(z) = ln(1  z). Moreover, Lis(1) equals the Riemann zeta function (s). 

==See also==
* Exponential function
* Index of logarithm articles

==Notes==

==References==

==External links==
* 
* 
* Khan Academy: Logarithms, free online micro lectures
* 
* 
* 



[[L. Ron Hubbard]]

Lafayette Ronald Hubbard (March 13, 1911  January 24, 1986), better known as L. Ron Hubbard (, ) and often referred to by his initials, LRH, was an American author and the founder of the Church of Scientology. After establishing a career as a writer, becoming best known for his science fiction and fantasy stories, he developed a self-help system called Dianetics which was first expounded in book form in May 1950. He subsequently developed his ideas into a wide-ranging set of doctrines and rituals as part of a new religious movement that he called Scientology. His writings became the guiding texts for the Church of Scientology and a number of affiliated organizations that address such diverse topics as business administration, literacy and drug rehabilitation.

Although many aspects of Hubbard's life story are disputed, there is general agreement about its basic outline. Bromley, p. 89 Born in Tilden, Nebraska, he spent much of his childhood in Helena, Montana. He traveled in Asia and the South Pacific in the late 1920s after his father, an officer in the United States Navy, was posted to the U.S. naval base on Guam. He attended George Washington University in Washington, D.C. at the start of the 1930s, before dropping out and beginning his career as a prolific writer of pulp fiction stories. He served briefly in the United States Marine Corps Reserve and was an officer in the United States Navy during World War II, briefly commanding two ships, the USS YP-422 and USS PC-815. He was removed both times when his superiors found him incapable of command. The last few months of his active service were spent in a hospital, being treated for a duodenal ulcer. http://web.archive.org/web/20080612145705/http://www.latimes.com/business/la-scientology062490,0,2050131,full.story 

Later he developed Dianetics, something that he called "the modern science of mental health". He founded Scientology in 1952 and oversaw the growth of the Church of Scientology into a worldwide organization. During the late 1960s and early 1970s, he spent much of his time at sea on his personal fleet of ships as "Commodore" of the Sea Organization, an elite inner group of Scientologists. His expedition came to an end when Britain, Greece, Spain, Portugal, and Venezuela all closed their ports to his fleet. At one point, a court in Australia revoked the church's status as a religion. Similarly, a high court in France convicted Hubbard of fraud in absentia. He returned to the United States in 1975 and went into seclusion in the California desert. In 1983 L. Ron Hubbard was named as an unindicted co-conspirator in an international information infiltration and theft project called "Operation Snow White". He spent the remaining years of his life on his ranch near Creston, California, where he died in 1986.

The Church of Scientology describes Hubbard in hagiographic terms, Christensen, p. 228 and he portrayed himself as a pioneering explorer, world traveler, and nuclear physicist with expertise in a wide range of disciplines, including photography, art, poetry, and philosophy. His critics including his own son have characterized him as a liar, a charlatan, and mentally unstable. Though many of his autobiographical statements have been proven to be fictitious, Urban, Hugh B. "Fair Game: Secrecy, Security, and the Church of Scientology in Cold War America." Journal of the American Academy of Religion 74:2 (2006) the Church rejects any suggestion that its account of Hubbard's life is not historical fact. Rothstein, p. 21. 

==Early life==

Lafayette Ronald Hubbard was born in 1911, in Tilden, Nebraska. Hall, Timothy L. American religious leaders, p. 175. New York: Infobase Publishing, 2003. ISBN 978-0-8160-4534-1 He was the only child of Ledora May ( Waterbury), who had trained as a teacher, and Harry Ross Hubbard, a former United States Navy officer. Miller, Russell. Bare-faced Messiah: the true story of L. Ron Hubbard, p. 11. London: Joseph, 1987. ISBN 0-7181-2764-1, OCLC 17481843 Christensen, pp. 236237 After moving to Kalispell, Montana, they settled in Helena in 1913. Hubbard's father rejoined in the Navy in April 1917, during World War I, while his mother May worked as a clerk for the state government. Miller, p. 19 

Biographical accounts published by the Church of Scientology describe Hubbard as "a child prodigy of sorts" who rode a horse before he could walk and was able to read and write by the age of four. Tucker, p. 300 A Scientology profile says that he was brought up on his grandfather's "large cattle ranch in Montana" "About The Author," in Hubbard, L. Ron: You Lived Before This Life|Have You Lived Before This Life?: A Scientific Survey: A Study of Death and Evidence of Past Lives], p. 297. Los Angeles: Church of Scientology Publications Organization, 1977. ISBN 978-0-88484-055-8 where he spent his days "riding, breaking broncos, hunting coyote and taking his first steps as an explorer". His grandfather is described as a "wealthy Western cattleman" from whom Hubbard "inherited his fortune and family interests in America, Southern Africa, etc." Quoted in Rolph, p. 17 Scientology claims that Hubbard became a "blood brother" of the Native American Blackfeet tribe at the age of six through his friendship with a Blackfeet medicine man. "L. Ron Hubbard and American Pulp Fiction," in Hubbard, L. Ron: "The Great Secret," p. 107108. Hollywood, CA: Galaxy Press, 2008. ISBN 978-1-59212-371-1 

Queen Anne High School, Seattle, which L Ron Hubbard attended in 19261927
However, contemporary records show that his grandfather, Lafayette Waterbury, was a veterinarian, not a rancher, and was not wealthy. Hubbard was actually raised in a townhouse in the center of Helena. Atack, p. 48 According to his aunt, his family did not own a ranch but did own one cow and four or five horses on a few acres of land outside the city. Sappell, Joel; Welkos, Robert (June 24, 1990). "The Making of L. Ron Hubbard: Creating the Mystique." Los Angeles Times, p. A38:1 Hubbard lived over a hundred miles from the Blackfeet reservation. The tribe did not practice blood brotherhood and no evidence has been found that he had ever been a Blackfeet blood brother. Sappell, Joel; Welkos, Robert (June 24, 1990). "The Making of L. Ron Hubbard: Staking a Claim to Blood Brotherhood." Los Angeles Times, p. A38:5 

During the 1920s the Hubbards repeatedly relocated around the United States and overseas. After Hubbard's father Harry rejoined the Navy, his posting aboard the USS Oklahoma in 1921 required the family to relocate to the ship's home ports, first San Diego, then Seattle. Miller, p. 23 During a journey to Washington, D.C. in 1923 Hubbard learned of Freudian psychology from Commander Joseph "Snake" Thompson, a U.S. Navy psychoanalyst and medic. Whitehead, p. 46 Scientology biographies describe this encounter as giving Hubbard training in a particular scientific approach to the mind, which he found unsatisfying. Christensen, p. 238 Hubbard was active in the Boy Scouts in Washington, D.C. and earned the rank of Eagle Scout in 1924, two weeks after his 13th birthday. In his diary, Hubbard claimed he was the youngest Eagle Scout in the U.S. Miller, p. 25 

The following year, Harry Ross Hubbard was posted to Puget Sound Naval Shipyard at Bremerton, Washington. Miller, p. 27 His son was enrolled at Union High School, Bremerton, and later studied at Queen Anne High School in Seattle. Miller, p. 28 In 1927 Hubbard's father was sent to the U.S. Naval Station on Guam in the Mariana Islands of the South Pacific. Although Hubbard's mother also went to Guam, Hubbard himself did not accompany them but was placed in his grandparents' care in Helena, Montana to complete his schooling. 

Between 1927 and 1929 Hubbard traveled to Japan, China, the Philippines and Guam. Scientology texts present this period in his life as a time when he was intensely curious for answers to human suffering and explored ancient Eastern philosophies for answers, but found them lacking. Christensen, pp. 239240 He is described as traveling to China "at a time when few Westerners could enter" "About the Author," in Hubbard, L. Ron: Battlefield Earth. (No page number given.) Los Angeles: Galaxy Press, 2005. ISBN 978-1-59212-007-9 and according to Scientology, spent his time questioning Buddhist lamas and meeting old Chinese magicians. According to church materials, his travels were funded by his "wealthy grandfather". "Appendix" in Hubbard, L. Ron: Hymn of Asia. (No page number given.) Los Angeles : Church of Scientology of California, Publications Organization, 1974. ISBN 0-88404-035-6 

Hubbard's unofficial biographers present a very different account of his travels in Asia. Hubbard's diaries recorded two trips to the east coast of China. The first was made in the company of his mother while traveling from the United States to Guam in 1927. It consisted of a brief stop-over in a couple of Chinese ports before traveling on to Guam, where he stayed for six weeks before returning home. He recorded his impressions of the places he visited and disdained the poverty of the inhabitants of Japan and China, whom he described as "gooks" and "lazy ignorant". His second visit was a family holiday which took Hubbard and his parents to China via the Philippines in 1928. Atack, p. 54 Miller, p. 31 

Aerial view of Qingdao, China, taken in 1930, two years after Hubbard's visit
After his return to the United States in September 1927, Hubbard enrolled at Helena High School but earned only poor grades. Miller, p. 34 He abandoned school the following May and went back west to stay with his aunt and uncle in Seattle. He joined his parents in Guam in June 1928. His mother took over his education in the hope of putting him forward for the entrance examination to the United States Naval Academy at Annapolis, Maryland.

Between October and December 1928 a number of naval families, including Hubbard's, traveled from Guam to China aboard the cargo ship . The ship stopped at Manila in the Philippines before traveling on to Qingdao (Tsingtao) in China. Hubbard and his parents made a side trip to Beijing before sailing on to Shanghai and Hong Kong, from where they returned to Guam. Miller, p. 41 Scientology accounts present a different version of events, saying that Hubbard "made his way deep into Manchuria's Western Hills and beyond  to break bread with Mongolian bandits, share campfires with Siberian shamans and befriend the last in the line of magicians from the court of Kublai Khan". "L. Ron Hubbard Biographical Profile: Asia and the South Pacific." Church of Scientology International, 2010, retrieved February 17, 2011. 

However, Hubbard did not record these events in his diary. Atack, p. 57 He remained unimpressed with China and the Chinese, writing: "A Chinaman can not live up to a thing, he always drags it down." He characterized the sights of Beijing as "rubberneck stations" for tourists and described the palaces of the Forbidden City as "very trashy-looking" and "not worth mentioning". He was impressed by the Great Wall of China near Beijing, Miller, p. 42 but concluded of the Chinese: "They smell of all the baths they didn't take. The trouble with China is, there are too many chinks here." Miller, p. 43 

Back on Guam, Hubbard spent much of his time writing dozens of short stories and essays Miller, p. 44 and failed the Naval Academy entrance examination. In September 1929 Hubbard was enrolled at the Swavely Preparatory School in Manassas, Virginia, to prepare him for a second attempt at the examination. Miller, p. 45 However, he was ruled out of consideration due to his near-sightedness. Miller, p. 46 He was instead sent to Woodward School for Boys in Washington, D.C. to qualify for admission to George Washington University. He successfully graduated from the school in June 1930 and entered the university the following September. Miller, p. 47 

==University and explorations==
Professor's Gate at George Washington University
Hubbard studied civil engineering during his two years at George Washington University at the behest of his father, who "decreed that I should study engineering and mathematics". Atack, p. 59 While he did not graduate from George Washington, his time there subsequently became important because, as George Malko puts it, "many of his researches and published conclusions have been supported by his claims to be not only a graduate engineer, but 'a member of the first United States course in formal education in what is called today nuclear physics.'" However, a Church of Scientology biography describes him as "never noted for being in class" and says that he "thoroughly detest his subjects". "A Brief Biography of L. Ron Hubbard," Ability, Church of Scientology Washington, D.C. Issue 111, January 1959. He earned poor grades, was placed on probation in September 1931 and dropped out altogether in the fall of 1932. Malko, p. 31 Wallis, p. 18 

Scientology accounts say that he "studied nuclear physics at George Washington University in Washington, D.C., before he started his studies about the mind, spirit and life" "Foreword," in Hubbard, L. Ron: Scientology: The Fundamentals of Thought, p. vii. Los Angeles: Bridge Publications, 2007. ISBN 978-1-4031-4420-1 and Hubbard himself stated that he "set out to find out from nuclear physics a knowledge of the physical universe, something entirely lacking in Asian philosophy". His university records indicate that his exposure to "nuclear physics" consisted of one class in "atomic and molecular phenomena" for which he earned an "F" grade. Streeter, p. 206 

Scientologists claim he was more interested in extracurricular activities, particularly writing and flying. According to church materials, "he earned his wings as a pioneering barnstormer at the dawn of American aviation" and was "recognized as one of the country's most outstanding pilots. With virtually no training time, he takes up powered flight and barnstorms throughout the Midwest." L. Ron Hubbard: A Chronicle, 19301940." Church of Scientology International, 2007, retrieved February 17, 2011. His airman certificate, however, records that he qualified to fly only gliders rather than powered aircraft and gave up his certificate when he could not afford the renewal fee. Atack, p. 64 

During Hubbard's final semester he organized an expedition to the Caribbean for "fifty young gentleman rovers" aboard the schooner Doris Hamlin commencing in June 1932. The aims of the "Caribbean Motion Picture Expedition" were stated as being to explore and film the pirate "strongholds and bivouacs of the Spanish Main" and to "collect whatever one collects for exhibits in museums". Miller, p. 52 It ran into trouble even before it left the port of Baltimore: Ten participants quit and storms blew the ship far off course to Bermuda. Eleven more members of the expedition quit there and more left when the ship arrived at Martinique. Miller, p. 54 With the expedition running critically short of money, the ship's owners ordered it to return to Baltimore. Miller, p. 55 

Hubbard blamed the expedition's problems on the captain: "the ship's dour Captain Garfield proved himself far less than a Captain Courageous, requiring Ron Hubbard's hand at both the helm and the charts." L. Ron Hubbard Biographical Profile  Caribbean Motion Picture Expedition." Church of Scientology International, 2010, retrieved February 17, 2011. Specimens and photographs collected by the expedition are said by Scientology accounts to have been acquired by the University of Michigan, the U.S. Hydrographic Office, an unspecified national museum and the New York Times, Hubbard, L. Ron. Mission into Time, p. 7. Copenhagen: AOSH DK Publications Department A/S, 1973. ISBN 87-87347-56-3 though none of those institutions have any record of this. Miller, p. 56 Hubbard later wrote that the expedition "was a crazy idea at best, and I knew it, but I went ahead anyway, chartered a four-masted schooner and embarked with some fifty luckless souls who haven't stopped their cursings yet." Hubbard, L. Ron, "The Camp-Fire," Adventure magazine, vol. 93 no. 5, October 1, 1935. Quoted in Atack, p. 62 He called it "a two-bit expedition and financial bust", Maisel, Albert (December 5, 1950). "Dianetics  Science or Hoax?" Look magazine, p. 79 which resulted in some of its participants making legal claims against him for refunds. Atack, p. 63 

Luquillo, Puerto Rico, near where scientologists claim Hubbard carried out the "West Indies Mineralogical Survey" in 1932
After leaving university Hubbard traveled to Puerto Rico on what the Church of Scientology calls the "Puerto Rican Mineralogical Expedition". "L. Ron Hubbard Biographical Profile  Puerto Rican Mineralogical Expedition." Church of Scientology, 2010, retrieved February 8, 2011. Scientologists claim he "made the first complete mineralogical survey of Puerto Rico" as a means of "augmenting his pay with a mining venture", during which he "sluiced inland rivers and crisscrossed the island in search of elusive gold" as well as carrying out "much ethnological work amongst the interior villages and native hillsmen". Hubbard's unofficial biographer Russell Miller writes that neither the United States Geological Survey nor the Puerto Rican Department of Natural Resources have any record of any such expedition. 

According to Miller, Hubbard traveled to Puerto Rico in November 1932 after his father volunteered him for the Red Cross relief effort following the devastating 1932 San Ciprian hurricane. In a 1957 lecture Hubbard said that he had been "a field executive with the American Red Cross in the Puerto Rico hurricane disaster". Hubbard, L. Ron. "Creating a Third Dynamic / United Survival Action Clubs," lecture of December 30, 1957. Ability Congress, 5th lecture. According to his own account, Hubbard spent much of his time prospecting unsuccessfully for gold. Towards the end of his stay on Puerto Rico he appears to have done some work for a Washington, D.C. firm called West Indies Minerals Incorporated, accompanying a surveyor in an investigation of a small property near the town of Luquillo, Puerto Rico. The survey was unsuccessful. A few years later, Hubbard wrote:

==Early literary career and Alaskan expedition==

Illustration by Edd Cartier for Hubbard's story "Fear" Nicholls, Peter. Encyclopedia of Science Fiction, 1978, p.108, ISBN 0-586-05380-8 
Hubbard became a well-known and prolific writer for pulp fiction magazines during the 1930s. Scientology texts describe him as becoming "well established as an essayist" even before he had concluded college. Scientology claims he "solved his finances, and his desire to travel by writing anything that came to hand" and to have earned an "astronomical" rate of pay for the times. L. Ron Hubbard, the writer. Los Angeles, CA : Bridge Publications, 1989. (No page number in original.) 

His literary career began with contributions to the George Washington University student newspaper, The University Hatchet, as a reporter for a few months in 1931. Six of his pieces were published commercially during 1932 to 1933. The going rate for freelance writers at the time was only a cent a word, so Hubbard's total earnings from these articles would have been less than $100. Miller, p. 63 The pulp magazine Thrilling Adventure became the first to publish one of his short stories, in February 1934. "About L. Ron Hubbard  Master Storyteller." Galaxy Press, 2010, retrieved February 8, 2011. Over the next six years, pulp magazines published around 140 of his short stories "L. Ron Hubbard Biographical Profile  L. Ron Hubbard's Fiction Books." Church of Scientology International, 2010, retrieved February 8, 2011. under a variety of pen names, including Winchester Remington Colt, Kurt von Rachen, Ren Lafayette, Joe Blitz and Legionnaire 148. Miller, p. 72 

Although he was best known for his fantasy and science fiction stories, Hubbard wrote in a wide variety of genres, including adventure fiction, aviation, travel, mysteries, westerns and even romance. Hubbard knew and associated with writers such as Isaac Asimov, Robert A. Heinlein, L. Sprague de Camp and A. E. van Vogt. Asimov, Isaac. Memory Yet Green|In Memory Yet Green: The Autobiography of Isaac Asimov, 1920-1954], p. 413. New York: Doubleday, 1979. ISBN 978-0-385-13679-2 His first full-length novel, Buckskin Brigades, was published in 1937. He became a "highly idiosyncratic" writer of science fiction after being taken under the wing of editor John W. Campbell, Stableford, Brian. Historical dictionary of science fiction literature, p. 164. Lanham, MD: Scarecrow Press, 2004. ISBN 978-0-8108-4938-9 who published many of Hubbard's short stories and also serialized a number of well-received novelettes that Hubbard wrote for Campbell's magazines Unknown and Astounding. These included Fear, Final Blackout and Typewriter in the Sky. Miller, p. 86 

According to the Church of Scientology, Hubbard was "called to Hollywood" to work on film scripts in the mid-1930s, although Scientology accounts differ as to exactly when this was (whether 1935, "About the Author" in Hubbard, L. Ron: Dianetics Today, p. 989. Los Angeles: Church of Scientology of California, 1975. ISBN 0-88404-036-4 1936 or 1937 ). He wrote the script for The Secret of Treasure Island, a 1938 Columbia Pictures movie serial. Harmon, Jim; Donald F. Glut. The Great Movie Serials: Their Sound and Fury, p. 329. London: Routledge, 1973. ISBN 978-0-7130-0097-9 The Church of Scientology claims he also worked on the Columbia serials The Mysterious Pilot (1937), The Great Adventures of Wild Bill Hickok (1938) and The Spider Returns (1941), though his name does not appear on the credits. Hubbard also claimed to have written Dive Bomber (1941), Hubbard, L. Ron. "The Story of Dianetics and Scientology," lecture of October 18, 1958 Atack, p. 65 Cecil B. DeMille's The Plainsman (1936) and John Ford's Stagecoach (1939). Miller, p. 69 

Hubbard's literary earnings helped him to support his new wife, Margaret "Polly" Grubb. She was already pregnant when they married on April 13, 1933, but she had a spontaneous abortion shortly afterwards; a few months later, she became pregnant again. Miller, p. 61 On May 7, 1934, she gave birth prematurely to a son who was named Lafayette Ronald Hubbard, Jr. and the nickname "His Nibs", invariably shortened to "Nibs". Miller, p. 64 Their second child, Katherine May, was born on January 15, 1936. Miller, p. 70 The Hubbards lived for a while in Laytonsville, Maryland, but were chronically short of money. Miller, p. 62 

In the spring of 1936 they moved to Bremerton, Washington. They lived there for a time with Hubbard's aunts and grandmother before finding a place of their own at nearby South Colby. According to one of his friends at the time, Robert MacDonald Ford, the Hubbards were "in fairly dire straits for money" but sustained themselves on the income from Hubbard's writing. Miller, p. 74 Hubbard spent an increasing amount of time in New York City, Miller, p. 71 working out of a hotel room where his wife suspected him of carrying on affairs with other women. Miller, p. 75 Miller, p. 84 

Hubbard's authorship in mid-1938 of a still-unpublished manuscript called Excalibur is highlighted by the Church of Scientology as a key step in developing the principles of Scientology and Dianetics. The manuscript is said by Scientologists to have outlined "the basic principles of human existence" and to have been the culmination of twenty years of research into "twenty-one races and cultures including Pacific Northwest Indian tribes, Philippine Tagalogs and, as he was wont to joke, the people of the Bronx". "L. Ron Hubbard Biographical Profile  Founder." Church of Scientology International, 2010, retrieved February 17, 2011. 

According to Arthur J. Cox, a contributor to John W. Campbell's Astounding magazine, Hubbard told a 1948 convention of science fiction fans that Excalibur inspiration came during an operation in which he "died" for eight minutes. Gardner, p. 272 (Gerry Armstrong, Hubbard's archivist, explains this as a dental extraction performed under nitrous oxide, a chemical known for its hallucinogenic effects Atack, p. 66 ):

Arthur J. Burks, the President of the American Fiction Guild, wrote that an excited Hubbard called him and said: "I want to see you right away. I have written THE book." Hubbard believed that Excalibur would "revolutionize everything" and that "it was somewhat more important, and would have a greater impact upon people, than the Bible." Burks, Arthur J (December 1961). "Excalibur." The Aberree. It proposed that all human behavior could be explained in terms of survival and that to understand survival was to understand life. Miller, p. 80 As Hubbard biographer Jon Atack notes, "the notion that everything that exists is trying to survive became the basis of Dianetics and Scientology." 

According to Burks, Hubbard "was so sure he had something 'away out and beyond' anything else that he had sent telegrams to several book publishers, telling them that he had written 'THE book' and that they were to meet him at Penn Station, and he would discuss it with them and go with whomever gave him the best offer." However, nobody bought the manuscript. Forrest J Ackerman, later Hubbard's literary agent, recalled that Hubbard told him "whoever read it either went insane or committed suicide. And he said that the last time he had shown it to a publisher in New York, he walked into the office to find out what the reaction was, the publisher called for the reader, the reader came in with the manuscript, threw it on the table and threw himself out of the skyscraper window." Ackerman, Forrest J (November 19, 1997) Secret Lives: L. Ron Hubbard. Channel 4 Television. Hubbard's failure to sell Excalibur depressed him; he told his wife in an October 1938 letter: "Writing action pulp doesn't have much agreement with what I want to do because it retards my progress by demanding incessant attention and, further, actually weakens my name. So you see I've got to do something about it and at the same time strengthen the old financial position." Letter from L. Ron Hubbard, October 1938, quoted in Miller, p. 81 He went on:

The manuscript later became part of Scientology mythology. An early 1950s Scientology publication offered signed "gold-bound and locked" copies for the sum of $1,500 apiece (equivalent to about $29,000 now). It warned that "four of the first fifteen people who read it went insane" and that it would be "eleased only on sworn statement not to permit other readers to read it. Contains data not to be released during Mr. Hubbard's stay on earth." Quoted in Malko, p. 39 

Ketchikan, Alaska, where Hubbard and his wife were stranded during the "Alaskan Radio-Experimental Expedition"
Hubbard joined The Explorers Club in February 1940 on the strength of his claimed explorations in the Caribbean and survey flights in the United States. Miller, p. 85 He persuaded the club to let him carry its flag on an "Alaskan Radio-Experimental Expedition" to update the U.S. Coast Pilot guide to the coastlines of Alaska and British Columbia and investigate new methods of radio position-finding. Miller, p. 88 The expedition consisted of Hubbard and his wifethe children were left at South Colbyaboard his ketch Magician. Miller, p. 89 

Scientology accounts of the expedition describe "Hubbard's recharting of an especially treacherous Inside Passage, and his ethnological study of indigenous Aleuts and Haidas" and tell of how "along the way, he not only roped a Kodiak Bear, but braved seventy-mile-an-hour winds and commensurate seas off the Aleutian Islands." "L. Ron Hubbard Biographical Profile  Alaskan Radio-Experimental Expedition" Church of Scientology International, 2010, retrieved February 17, 2011. They are divided about how far Hubbard's expedition actually traveled, whether 700 mi or 2000 mi. 

Hubbard told The Seattle Star in a November 1940 letter that the expedition was plagued by problems and did not get any further than Ketchikan near the southern end of the Alaska Panhandle, far from the Aleutian Islands. Atack, p. 68 Magician's engine broke down only two days after setting off in July 1940. The Hubbards reached Ketchikan on August 30, 1940, after many delays following repeated engine breakdowns. The Ketchikan Chronicle reportedmaking no mention of the expeditionthat Hubbard's purpose in coming to Alaska "was two-fold, one to win a bet and another to gather material for a novel of Alaskan salmon fishing". Having underestimated the cost of the trip, he did not have enough money to repair the broken engine. He raised money by writing stories and contributing to the local radio station Miller, p. 91 and eventually earned enough to fix the engine, making it back to Puget Sound on December 27, 1940. 

==Military career==

Lts (jg) L. Ron Hubbard and Thomas S. Moulton in Portland, Oregon in 1943
After returning from Alaska, Hubbard applied to join the United States Navy. His Congressman, Warren G. Magnuson, wrote to President Roosevelt to recommend Hubbard as "a gentleman of reputation" who was "a respected explorer" and had "marine masters papers for more types of vessels than any other man in the United States". Hubbard was described as "a key figure" in writing organizations, "making him politically potent nationally". The Congressman concluded: "Anything you can do for Mr Hubbard will be appreciated." His friend Robert MacDonald Ford, by now a State Representative for Washington, sent a letter of recommendation describing Hubbard as "one of the most brilliant men I have ever known". Hubbard was said by Scientologists to be "a powerful influence" in the Northwest and to be "well known in many parts of the world and has considerable influence in the Caribbean and Alaska". The letter declared that "for courage and ability I cannot too strongly recommend him." Ford later said that Hubbard had written the letter himself: "I don't know why Ron wanted a letter. I just gave him a letter-head and said, 'Hell, you're the writer, you write it!'" Miller, p. 93 

Hubbard was commissioned as a Lieutenant (junior grade) in the U.S. Naval Reserve on July 19, 1941. His military service forms a major element of his public persona as portrayed by Scientologists. Atack, p. 70 The Church of Scientology presents him as a "much-decorated war hero who commanded a corvette and during hostilities was crippled and wounded". Lamont, pp. 1920 Scientology publications say he served as a "Commodore of Corvette squadrons" in "all five theaters of World War II" and was awarded "twenty-one medals and palms" for his service. Rolph, p. 16 He was "severely wounded and was taken crippled and blinded" to a military hospital, where he "worked his way back to fitness, strength and full perception in less than two years, using only what he knew and could determine about Man and his relationship to the universe". He said that he had seen combat repeatedly, telling A. E. van Vogt that he had once sailed his ship "right into the harbor of a Japanese occupied island in the Dutch East Indies. His attitude was that if you took your flag down the Japanese would not know one boat from another, so he tied up at the dock, went ashore and wandered around by himself for three days." Miller, p. 141 

Hubbard's official Navy service records indicate that "his military performance was, at times, substandard" and he received only four campaign medals rather than twenty-one. He was never recorded as being injured or wounded in combat and so never received a Purple Heart. Most of his military service was spent ashore in the continental United States on administrative or training duties. He served for a short time in Australia but was sent home after quarreling with his superiors. He briefly commanded two anti-submarine vessels, the USS YP-422 and USS PC-815, in coastal waters off Massachusetts, Oregon and California in 1942 and 1943 respectively. 

After Hubbard reported that the PC-815 had attacked and crippled or sunk two Japanese submarines off Oregon in May 1943, his claim was rejected by the commander of the Northwest Sea Frontier. Hubbard and Thomas Moulton, his second in command on the PC-815, later said the Navy wanted to avoid panic on the mainland. Streeter, p. 208 A month later Hubbard unwittingly sailed the PC-815 into Mexican territorial waters and conducted gunnery practice off the Coronado Islands, in the belief that they were uninhabited and belonged to the United States. The Mexican government complained and Hubbard was relieved of command. A fitness report written after the incident rated Hubbard as unsuitable for independent duties and "lacking in the essential qualities of judgment, leadership and cooperation". Miller, p. 107 He served for a while as the Navigation and Training Officer for the USS Algol while it was based at Portland. A fitness report from this period recommended promotion, describing him as "a capable and energetic officer, very temperamental", and an "above average navigator". Atack, p. 81; Streeter, p. 208 However, he never held another such position and did not serve aboard another ship after the Algol.

The USS PC-815, Hubbard's second and final command
Hubbard's war service has great significance in the history and mythology of the Church of Scientology, as he is said to have cured himself through techniques that would later underpin Scientology and Dianetics. According to Moulton, Hubbard told him that he had been machine-gunned in the back near the Dutch East Indies. Hubbard asserted that his eyes had been damaged as well, either "by the flash of a large-caliber gun" or when he had "a bomb go off in my face". Scientology texts say that he returned from the war "linded with injured optic nerves, and lame with physical injuries to hip and back" and was twice pronounced dead. 

His medical records state that he was hospitalized with an acute duodenal ulcer rather than a war injury. He told his doctors that he was suffering from lameness caused by a hip infection and he told Look magazine in December 1950 that he had suffered from "ulcers, conjunctivitis, deteriorating eyesight, bursitis and something wrong with my feet". He was still complaining in 1951 of eye problems and stomach pains, which had given him "continuous trouble" for eight years, especially when "under nervous stress". This came well after Hubbard had promised that Dianetics would provide "a cure for the very ailments that plagued the author himself then and throughout his life, including allergies, arthritis, ulcers and heart problems". 

The Church of Scientology says that Hubbard's key breakthrough in the development of Dianetics was made at Oak Knoll Naval Hospital in Oakland, California. According to the Church,

An October 1945 Naval Board found that Hubbard was "considered physically qualified to perform duty ashore, preferably within the continental United States". Atack, p. 84 He was discharged from hospital on December 4, 1945, and transferred to inactive duty on February 17, 1946. He resigned his commission with effect from October 30, 1950. The Church of Scientology says he quit because the U.S. Navy "attempted to monopolize all his researches and force him to work on a project 'to make man more suggestible' and when he was unwilling, tried to blackmail him by ordering him back to active duty to perform this function. Having many friends he was able to instantly resign from the Navy and escape this trap." The Navy said in a statement in 1980: "There is no evidence on record of an attempt to recall him to active duty." 

The Church disputes the official record of Hubbard's naval career. It asserts that the records are incomplete and perhaps falsified "to conceal Hubbard's secret activities as an intelligence officer". In 1990 the Church provided the Los Angeles Times with a document that was said to be a copy of Hubbard's official record of service. The U.S. Navy told the Times that "its contents are not supported by Hubbard's personnel record." The New Yorker reported in February 2011 that the Scientology document was considered to be a forgery. 

==Occult involvement in Pasadena==
Hubbard's life underwent a turbulent period immediately after the war. According to his own account, he "was abandoned by family and friends as a supposedly hopeless cripple and a probable burden upon them for the rest of my days". Hubbard, L. Ron. "My Philosophy," Church of Scientology International, 1965, retrieved February 17, 2011. His daughter Katherine presented a rather different version: his wife had refused to uproot their children from their home in Bremerton, Washington, to join him in California. Their marriage was by now in terminal difficulties and he chose to stay in California. Miller, p. 125 

In August 1945 Hubbard moved into the Pasadena mansion of John "Jack" Whiteside Parsons. A leading rocket propulsion researcher at the California Institute of Technology and a founder of the Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Parsons led a double life as an avid occultist and Thelemite, follower of the English ceremonial magician Aleister Crowley and leader of a lodge of Crowley's magical order, Ordo Templi Orientis (OTO). Miller, p. 113 He let rooms in the house only to tenants who he specified should be "atheists and those of a Bohemian disposition". Miller, p. 114 

Hubbard befriended Parsons and soon became sexually involved with Parsons's 21-year-old girlfriend, Sara "Betty" Northrup. Miller, p. 117 Despite this Parsons was very impressed with Hubbard and reported to Crowley:

Parsons and Hubbard collaborated on the "Babalon Working", a sex magic ritual intended to summon an incarnation of Babalon, the supreme Thelemite Goddess. It was undertaken over several nights in February and March 1946 in order to summon an "elemental" who would participate in further sex magic. Urban, Hugh B. Magia sexualis: sex, magic, and liberation in modern Western esotericism, p. 137. Berkeley, CA: University of California Press, 2006. ISBN 978-0-520-24776-5 As Richard Metzger describes it,

The "elemental" arrived a few days later in the form of Marjorie Cameron, who agreed to participate in Parsons' rites. Soon afterwards, Parsons, Hubbard and Sara agreed to set up a business partnership, "Allied Enterprises", in which they invested nearly their entire savingsthe vast majority contributed by Parsons. The plan was for Hubbard and Sara to buy yachts in Miami and sail them to the West Coast to sell for a profit. Hubbard had a different idea; he wrote to the U.S. Navy requesting permission to leave the country "to visit Central & South America & China" for the purposes of "collecting writing material"in other words, undertaking a world cruise. Pendle, p. 268 Aleister Crowley strongly criticized Parsons's actions, writing: "Suspect Ron playing confidence trick  Jack Parsons weak fool  obvious victim prowling swindlers." Parsons attempted to recover his money by obtaining an injunction to prevent Hubbard and Sara leaving the country or disposing of the remnants of his assets. Pendle, p. 269 They attempted to sail anyway but were forced back to port by a storm. A week later, Allied Enterprises was dissolved. Parsons received only a $2,900 promissory note from Hubbard and returned home "shattered". He had to sell his mansion to developers soon afterwards to recoup his losses. Pendle, p. 270 

Hubbard's fellow writers were well aware of what had happened between him and Parsons. L. Sprague de Camp wrote to Isaac Asimov on August 27, 1946, to tell him:

Scientology accounts do not mention Hubbard's involvement in occultism. He is instead described as "continu to write to help support his research" during this period into "the development of a means to better the condition of man". "L. Ron Hubbard: A Chronicle, 19411949." Church of Scientology International, retrieved February 8, 2011. The Church of Scientology has nonetheless acknowledged Hubbard's involvement with the OTO; a 1969 statement, written by Hubbard himself, Atack, p. 90 said:

The Church of Scientology says Hubbard was "sent in" by his fellow science fiction author Robert Heinlein, "who was running off-book intelligence operations for naval intelligence at the time". However, Heinlein's authorized biographer has said that he looked into the matter at the suggestion of Scientologists but found nothing to corroborate claims that Heinlein had been involved, and his biography of Heinlein makes no mention of the matter. Wright, Lawrence (February 14, 2011)."The Apostate: Paul Haggis vs. the Church of Scientology." The New Yorker, retrieved February 8, 2011. 

On August 10, 1946, Hubbard bigamously married Sara, while still married to Polly. It was not until 1947 that his first wife learned that he had remarried. Hubbard agreed to divorce Polly in June that year and the marriage was dissolved shortly afterwards, with Polly given custody of the children. Miller, p. 134 

==Origins of Dianetics==
Masters of Sleep, one of Hubbard's last works of pulp fiction, on the cover of the October 1950 issue of Fantastic Adventures
After Hubbard's wedding to Sara, the couple settled at Laguna Beach, California, where Hubbard took a short-term job looking after a friend's yacht Miller, p. 132 before resuming his fiction writing to supplement the small disability allowance that he was receiving as a war veteran. Streeter, p. 210 Working from a trailer in a run-down area of North Hollywood, Hubbard sold a number of science fiction stories that included his Ole Doc Methuselah series and the serialized novels The End Is Not Yet and To the Stars. However, he remained short of money and his son, L. Ron Hubbard Jr, testified later that Hubbard was dependent on his own father and Margaret's parents for money and his writings, which he was paid at a penny per word, never garnered him any more than $10,000 prior to the founding of Scientology. He repeatedly wrote to the Veterans Administration (VA) asking for an increase in his war pension. In October 1947 he wrote:

The VA eventually did increase his pension, Miller, p. 139 but his money problems continued. On August 31, 1948, he was arrested in San Luis Obispo, California, and subsequently pled guilty to a charge of petty theft, for which he was ordered to pay a $25 fine. Miller, p. 142 According to the Church of Scientology, around this time he "accept an appointment as a Special Police Officer with the Los Angeles Police Department and us the position to study society's criminal elements" and also "worked with neurotics from the Hollywood film community". "Letters from the Birth of Dianetics." Church of Scientology International, 2004, retrieved February 8, 2011 

Hubbard has been quoted as telling a science fiction convention in 1948: "Writing for a penny a word is ridiculous. If a man really wants to make a million dollars, the best way would be to start his own religion." 

In late 1948 Hubbard and Sara moved to Savannah, Georgia. Miller, p. 143 Here, Scientology sources say, he "volunteer his time in hospitals and mental wards, saving the lives of patients with his counseling techniques". "L. Ron Hubbard: A Chronicle, 19411949" Church of Scientology International, 2007, retrieved February 14, 2011. Hubbard began to make the first public mentions of what was to become Dianetics. He wrote in January 1949 that he was working on a "book of psychology" about "the cause and cure of nervous tension", which he was going to call The Dark Sword, Excalibur or Science of the Mind. Miller, p. 144 In April 1949, Hubbard wrote to several professional organizations to offer his research. One such letter can be found on the Church of Scientology's official L. Ron Hubbard website. See "Letters from the Birth of Dianetics," Church of Scientology International, 2004, retrieved February 8, 2011. None were interested, so he turned to his editor John W. Campbell, who was more receptive due to a long-standing fascination with fringe psychologies and psychic powers ("psionics") that "permeated both his fiction and non-fiction". Luckhurst, Roger. Science Fiction, p. 74. Malden, MA: Polity, 2005. ISBN 978-0-7456-2893-6 

Campbell invited Hubbard and Sara to move into a cottage at Bay Head, New Jersey, not far from his own home at Plainfield. In July 1949, Campbell recruited an acquaintance, Dr. Joseph Winter, to help develop Hubbard's new therapy of "Dianetics". Campbell told Winter:

Hubbard collaborated with Campbell and Winter to refine his techniques, Atack, p. 106 testing them on science fiction fans recruited by Campbell. Miller, p. 150 The basic principle of Dianetics was that the brain recorded every experience and event in a person's life, even when unconscious. Bad or painful experiences were stored as what he called "engrams" in a "reactive mind". These could be triggered later in life, causing emotional and physical problems. By carrying out a process he called "auditing", a person could be regressed through his engrams to re-experiencing past experiences. This enabled engrams to be "cleared". The subject, who would now be in a state of "Clear", would have a perfectly functioning mind with an improved IQ and photographic memory. Streeter, pp. 210211 The "Clear" would be cured of physical ailments ranging from poor eyesight to the common cold, Atack, p. 108 which Hubbard asserted were purely psychosomatic. 

Winter submitted a paper on Dianetics to the Journal of the American Medical Association and the American Journal of Psychiatry but both journals rejected it. Winter, p. 18 Hubbard and his collaborators decided to announce Dianetics in Campbell's Astounding Science Fiction instead. In an editorial, Campbell said: "Its power is almost unbelievable; it proves the mind not only can but does rule the body completely; following the sharply defined basic laws set forth, physical ills such as ulcers, asthma and arthritis can be cured, as can all other psychosomatic ills." Quoted in Miller, p. 145 The birth of Hubbard's second daughter Alexis Valerie, delivered by Winter on March 8, 1950, came in the middle of the preparations to launch Dianetics. Miller, p. 152 A "Hubbard Dianetic Research Foundation" was established in April 1950 in Elizabeth, New Jersey, with Hubbard, Sara, Winter and Campbell on the board of directors. Dianetics was duly launched in Astounding's May 1950 issue and on May 9, Hubbard's companion book was published. Atack, p. 107 

==From Dianetics to Scientology==

Hubbard conducting a Dianetics seminar in Los Angeles, 1950
Hubbard called Dianetics "a milestone for man comparable to his discovery of fire and superior to his invention of the wheel and the arch". It was an immediate commercial success and sparked what Martin Gardner calls "a nation-wide cult of incredible proportions". Gardner, p. 265 By August 1950, Hubbard's book had sold 55,000 copies, was selling at the rate of 4,000 a week and was being translated into French, German and Japanese. Five hundred Dianetic auditing groups had been set up across the United States. Staff (August 21, 1950). "Dianetics book review; Best Seller." Newsweek 

Dianetics was poorly received by the press and the scientific and medical professions. The American Psychological Association criticized Hubbard's claims as "not supported by empirical evidence". Scientific American said that Hubbard's book contained "more promises and less evidence per page than any publication since the invention of printing", Rabi, Isaac Isador. "Book Review." Scientific American, January 1951 while The New Republic called it a "bold and immodest mixture of complete nonsense and perfectly reasonable common sense, taken from long acknowledged findings and disguised and distorted by a crazy, newly invented terminology". Gumpert, Martin. (August 14, 1950) "Dianetics: book review by Martin Gumpert." The New Republic Some of Hubbard's fellow science fiction writers also criticized it; Isaac Asimov considered it "gibberish" while Jack Williamson called it "a lunatic revision of Freudian psychology". Miller, p. 153 

Several famous individuals became involved with Dianetics. Aldous Huxley received auditing from Hubbard himself; Atack, p. 113 the poet Jean Toomer Kerman, Cynthia Earl; Eldridge, Richard. The lives of Jean Toomer: a hunger for wholeness, pp. 317318. Baton Rouge: Louisiana State University Press, 1989. ISBN 978-0-8071-1548-0 and the science fiction writers Theodore Sturgeon Sturgeon, Theodore; Williams, Paul. Baby is three, p. 414. Berkeley, CA: North Atlantic Books, 1999. ISBN 978-1-55643-319-1 and A. E. van Vogt became trained Dianetics auditors. Van Vogt temporarily abandoned writing and became the head of the newly established Los Angeles branch of the Hubbard Dianetic Research Foundation. Other branches were established in New York, Washington, D.C., Chicago, and Honolulu. Melton, p. 190 

Although Dianetics was not cheap, a great many people were nonetheless willing to pay; van Vogt later recalled "doing little but tear open envelopes and pull out $500 checks from people who wanted to take an auditor's course". Miller, p. 166 Financial controls were lax. Hubbard himself withdrew large sums with no explanation of what he was doing with it. On one occasion, van Vogt saw Hubbard taking a lump sum of $56,000 (equivalent to $0.5 million at 2010 prices) out of the Los Angeles Foundation's proceeds. One of Hubbard's employees, Helen O'Brien, commented that at the Elizabeth, N.J. branch of the Foundation, the books showed that "a month's income of $90,000 is listed, with only $20,000 accounted for". O'Brien, p. 27 

Hubbard played a very active role in the Dianetics boom, writing, lecturing and training auditors. Many of those who knew him spoke of being impressed by his personal charisma. Jack Horner, who became a Dianetics auditor in 1950, later said, "He was very impressive, dedicated and amusing. The man had tremendous charisma; you just wanted to hear every word he had to say and listen for any pearl of wisdom." Miller, pp. 159160 Isaac Asimov recalled in his autobiography how, at a dinner party, he, Robert Heinlein, L. Sprague de Camp and their wives "all sat as quietly as pussycats and listened to Hubbard. He told tales with perfect aplomb and in complete paragraphs." As Atack comments, he was "a charismatic figure who compelled the devotion of those around him". Atack, p. 377 Christopher Evans described the personal qualities that Hubbard brought to Dianetics and Scientology:

Hubbard's supporters soon began to have doubts about Dianetics. Winter became disillusioned and wrote that he had never seen a single convincing Clear: "I have seen some individuals who are supposed to have been 'clear,' but their behavior does not conform to the definition of the state. Moreover, an individual supposed to have been 'clear' has undergone a relapse into conduct which suggests an incipient psychosis." Winter, p. 34 He also deplored the Foundation's omission of any serious scientific research. Miller, p. 169 Dianetics lost public credibility in August 1950 when a presentation by Hubbard before an audience of 6,000 at the Shrine Auditorium in Los Angeles failed disastrously. Whitehead, p. 67 He introduced a Clear named Sonya Bianca and told the audience that as a result of undergoing Dianetic therapy she now possessed perfect recall. However, Gardner writes, "in the demonstration that followed, she failed to remember a single formula in physics (the subject in which she was majoring) or the color of Hubbard's tie when his back was turned. At this point, a large part of the audience got up and left." Gardner, p. 270 

Hubbard also faced other practitioners moving into leadership positions within the Dianetics community. It was structured as an open, public practice in which others were free to pursue their own lines of research and claim that their approaches to auditing produced better results than Hubbard's. Stark, Rodney; Bainbridge, William Sims. The future of religion: secularization, revival, and cult formation, pp. 268269. Berkeley: University of California Press, 1986. ISBN 978-0-520-05731-9 The community rapidly splintered and its members mingled Hubbard's ideas with a wide variety of esoteric and even occult practices. Marshall, Gordon. In praise of sociology, p. 186. London: Routledge, 1990. ISBN 978-0-04-445688-9 By late 1950, the Elizabeth, N.J. Foundation was in financial crisis and the Los Angeles Foundation was more than $200,000 in debt. Miller, p. 173 Winter and Art Ceppos, the publisher of Hubbard's book, resigned under acrimonious circumstances. Campbell also resigned, criticizing Hubbard for being impossible to work with, and blamed him for the disorganization and financial ruin of the Foundations. By the summer of 1951, the Elizabeth, N.J. Foundation and all of its branches had closed. 

The collapse of Hubbard's marriage to Sara created yet more problems. He had begun an affair with his 20-year-old public relations assistant in late 1950, while Sara started a relationship with Dianetics auditor Miles Hollister. Miller, p. 170 Hubbard secretly denounced the couple to the FBI in March 1951, portraying them in a letter as communist infiltrators. According to Hubbard, Sara was "currently intimate with but evidently under coercion. Drug addiction set in fall 1950. Nothing of this known to me until a few weeks ago." Hollister was described as having a "sharp chin, broad forehead, rather Slavic". He was said to be the "center of most turbulence in our organization" and "active and dangerous". Miller, p. 180 The FBI did not take Hubbard seriously: an agent annotated his correspondence with the comment, "Appears mental." 

Three weeks later, Hubbard and two Foundation staff seized Sara and his year-old daughter Alexis and forcibly took them to San Bernardino, California, where he attempted unsuccessfully to find a doctor to examine Sara and declare her insane. Atack, p. 117 He let Sara go but took Alexis to Havana, Cuba. Sara filed a divorce suit on April 23, 1951, that accused him of marrying her bigamously and subjecting her to sleep deprivation, beatings, strangulation, kidnapping and exhortations to commit suicide. Martin, Walter Ralston; Zacharias, Ravi K. (ed.). The Kingdom of the Cults, p. 338. Minneapolis: Bethany House, 2003. ISBN 978-0-7642-2821-6 The case led to newspaper headlines such as "Ron Hubbard Insane, Says His Wife." Staff (April 24, 1951). "Ron Hubbard Insane, Says His Wife." San Francisco Chronicle Sara finally secured the return of her daughter in June 1951 by agreeing to a settlement with her husband in which she signed a statement, written by him, declaring:

Dianetics appeared to be on the edge of total collapse. However, it was saved by Don Purcell, a millionaire businessman and Dianeticist who agreed to support a new Foundation in Wichita, Kansas. Their collaboration ended after less than a year when they fell out over the future direction of Dianetics. Streissguth, p. 71 The Wichita Foundation became financially nonviable after a court ruled that it was liable for the unpaid debts of its defunct predecessor in Elizabeth, N.J. The ruling prompted Purcell and the other directors of the Wichita Foundation to file for voluntary bankruptcy in February 1952. Hubbard resigned immediately and accused Purcell of having been bribed by the American Medical Association to destroy Dianetics. Hubbard established a "Hubbard College" on the other side of town where he continued to promote Dianetics while fighting Purcell in the courts over the Foundation's intellectual property. Miller, p. 200 

Only six weeks after setting up the Hubbard College and marrying a staff member, 18-year-old Mary Sue Whipp, Hubbard closed it down and moved with his new bride to Phoenix, Arizona. He established a Hubbard Association of Scientologists International to promote his new "Science of Certainty"Scientology. Atack, p. 129 

==Rise of Scientology==

Hubbard established an "Academy of Scientology" at this Northwest, Washington, D.C. building in 1955. It is now the L. Ron Hubbard House museum.
The Church of Scientology attributes its genesis to Hubbard's discovery of "a new line of research", first set out in his book Science of Survival"that man is most fundamentally a spiritual being". "L. Ron Hubbard: A Chronicle, 19501959. Church of Scientology International, 2007, retrieved February 8, 2011. Non-Scientologist writers have suggested alternative motives: that he aimed "to reassert control over his creation", that he believed "he was about to lose control of Dianetics", or that he wanted to ensure "he would be able to stay in business even if the courts eventually awarded control of Dianetics and its valuable copyrights to ... the hated Don Purcell." Miller, p. 203 

Hubbard expanded upon the basics of Dianetics to construct a spiritually oriented (though at this stage not religious) doctrine based on the concept that the true self of a person was a thetanan immortal, omniscient and potentially omnipotent entity. DeChant, Dell; Danny L. Jorgensen. "The Church of Scientology: A Very New American Religion" in Neusner, Jacob. World religions in America: an introduction," p. 226. Westminster John Knox Press, 2003. ISBN 0-664-22475-X Hubbard taught that the thetans, having created the material universe, had forgotten their god-like powers and become trapped in physical bodies. Bromley, p. 91 Scientology aimed to "rehabilitate" each person's thetan to restore its original capacities and become once again an "Operating Thetan". Hubbard insisted humanity was imperiled by the forces of "aberration", which were the result of engrams carried by the immortal thetans for billions of years. 

Hubbard introduced a device called an E-meter that he presented as having, as Miller puts it, "an almost mystical power to reveal an individual's innermost thoughts". Miller, p. 204 He promulgated Scientology through a series of lectures, bulletins and books such as A History of Man ("a cold-blooded and factual account of your last sixty trillion years") and Scientology: 8-8008 ("With this book, the ability to make one's body old or young at will, the ability to heal the ill without physical contact, the ability to cure the insane and the incapacitated, is set forth for the physician, the layman, the mathematician and the physicist.") Miller, p. 206 

Scientology was organized in a very different way from the decentralized Dianetics movement. The Hubbard Association of Scientologists (HAS) was the only official Scientology organization. Training procedures and doctrines were standardized and promoted through HAS publications, and administrators and auditors were not permitted to deviate from Hubbard's approach. Branches or "orgs" were organized as franchises, rather like a fast food restaurant chain. Each franchise holder was required to pay ten percent of income to Hubbard's central organization. They were expected to find new recruits, known as "raw meat", but were restricted to providing only basic services. Costlier higher-level auditing was only provided by Hubbard's central organization. Tucker, p. 304 

Although this model would eventually be extremely successful, Scientology was a very small-scale movement at first. Hubbard started off with only a few dozen followers, generally dedicated Dianeticists; a seventy-hour series of lectures in Philadelphia in December 1952 was attended by just 38 people. Miller, p. 210 Hubbard was joined in Phoenix by his 18-year-old son Nibs, who had been unable to settle down in high school. Miller, p. 207 Nibs had decided to become a Scientologist, moved into his father's home and went on to become a Scientology staff member and "professor". Miller, p. 232 Hubbard also traveled to the United Kingdom to establish his control over a Dianetics group in London. It was very much a shoestring operation; as Helen O'Brien later recalled, "there was an atmosphere of extreme poverty and undertones of a grim conspiracy over all. At 163 Holland Park Avenue was an ill-lit lecture room and a bare-boarded and poky office some eight by ten feet  mainly infested by long haired men and short haired and tatty women." O'Brien, p. 49 On September 24, 1952, only a few weeks after arriving in London, Hubbard's wife Mary Sue gave birth to her first child, a daughter whom they named Diana Meredith de Wolfe Hubbard. Miller, p. 208 

In February 1953, Hubbard acquired a doctorate from the unaccredited Sequoia University. According to a Scientology biography, this was "given in recognition of his outstanding work on Dianetics" and "as an inspiration to the many people ... who had been inspired by him to take up advanced studies in this field ..." The British government concluded in the 1970s that Sequoia University was a "degree mill" operated by Joseph Hough, a Los Angeles chiropractor. Miller cites a telegram sent by Hubbard on February 27, 1953, in which he instructed Scientologist Richard de Mille to procure him a Ph.D. from Hough urgently"FOR GOSH SAKES EXPEDITE. WORK HERE UTTERLY DEPENDANT ON IT." Miller, p. 212 Hough's "university" was closed down by the Californian authorities in 1971. British government officials noted in a report written in 1977: "It has not and never had any authority whatsoever to issue diplomas or degrees and the dean is sought by the authorities 'for questioning'." Smith, Graham (August 7, 2009). "Scientology founder L Ron Hubbard exposed as a 'fraud' by British diplomats 30 years ago." Daily Mail, retrieved February 8, 2011. 

A few weeks after becoming "Dr." Hubbard, he wrote to Helen O'Brienwho had taken over the day-to-day management of Scientology in the United Statesproposing that Scientology should be transformed into a religion. Streeter, p. 215; Miller, p. 213 As membership declined and finances grew tighter, Hubbard had reversed the hostility to religion he voiced in Dianetics. Kent, Stephen A. "The Creation of 'Religious' Scientology." Religious Studies and Theology 18:2, pp. 97126. 1999. ISSN 1747-5414 His letter to O'Brien discussed the legal and financial benefits of religious status. The idea may not have been new; Hubbard has been quoted as telling a science fiction convention in 1948: "Writing for a penny a word is ridiculous. If a man really wants to make a million dollars, the best way would be to start his own religion." Methvin, Eugene H. (May 1990). "Scientology: Anatomy of a Frightening Cult." Reader's Digest. pp. 16. Lawrence, Sara. (April 18, 2006) "The Secrets of Scientology" The Independent. Retrieved February 17, 2011. Staff. (April 5, 1976). "Religion: A Sci-Fi Faith." Time. Retrieved February 17, 2011. The Church of Scientology has denied that Hubbard said this and insists that it is a misattributed quote that was said instead by George Orwell, although they offer no proof of this claim. Did L. Ron Hubbard state that the way to make money was to start a religion? Church of Scientology International, 2003, retrieved February 8, 2011. Hubbard outlined plans for setting up a chain of "Spiritual Guidance Centers" charging customers $500 for twenty-four hours of auditing ("That is real money ... Charge enough and we'd be swamped."). He wrote:

O'Brien was not enthusiastic and resigned the following September, worn out by work. Miller, p. 214 She criticized Hubbard for creating "a temperate zone voodoo, in its inelasticity, unexplainable procedures, and mindless group euphoria". O'Brien, p. vii He nonetheless pressed ahead and on December 18, 1953, he incorporated the Church of Scientology, Church of American Science and Church of Spiritual Engineering in Camden, New Jersey. Williams, Ian. The Alms Trade: Charities, Past, Present and Future, p. 127. New York: Cosimo, 2007. ISBN 978-1-60206-753-0 Hubbard, his wife Mary Sue and his secretary John Galusha became the trustees of all three corporations. Voltz, Tom. Scientology und (k)ein Ende, p. 75. Solothurn: Walter, 1995. ISBN 978-3-530-89980-1 Hubbard later denied founding the Church of Scientology, and to this day, Scientologists maintain that the "founding church" was actually the Church of Scientology of California, established on February 18, 1954, by Scientologist Burton Farber. Atack, p. 137 The reason for Scientology's religious transformation was explained by officials of the HAS:

Scientology franchises became Churches of Scientology and some auditors began dressing as clergymen, complete with clerical collars. If they were arrested in the course of their activities, Hubbard advised, they should sue for massive damages for molesting "a Man of God going about his business". A few years later he told Scientologists: "If attacked on some vulnerable point by anyone or anything or any organization, always find or manufacture enough threat against them to cause them to sue for peace ... Don't ever defend, always attack." Miller, p. 239 Any individual breaking away from Scientology and setting up his own group was to be shut down:

The 1950s saw Scientology growing steadily. Hubbard finally achieved victory over Don Purcell in 1954 when the latter, worn out by constant litigation, handed the copyrights of Dianetics back to Hubbard. Atack, p. 138 Most of the formerly independent Scientology and Dianetics groups were either driven out of business or were absorbed into Hubbard's organizations. Atack, p. 139 Hubbard marketed Scientology through medical claims, such as attracting polio sufferers by presenting the Church of Scientology as a scientific research foundation investigating polio cases. Streissguth, p. 74 One advertisement during this period stated:

Scientology became a highly profitable enterprise for Hubbard. Atack, p. 142 He implemented a scheme under which he was paid a percentage of the Church of Scientology's gross income and by 1957 he was being paid about $250,000 annuallyequivalent to $1.9 million at 2010 prices. Miller, p. 227 His family grew, too, with Mary Sue giving birth to three more childrenGeoffrey Quentin McCaully on January 6, 1954; Mary Suzette Rochelle on February 13, 1955; Miller, p. 221 and Arthur Ronald Conway on June 6, 1958. Miller, p. 230 In the spring of 1959, he used his new-found wealth to purchase Saint Hill Manor, an 18th-century country house in Sussex, formerly owned by Sawai Man Singh II, the Maharaja of Jaipur. The house became Hubbard's permanent residence and an international training center for Scientologists. 

==Controversies and crises==
By the start of the 1960s, Hubbard was the leader of a worldwide movement with thousands of followers. A decade later, however, he had left Saint Hill Manor and moved aboard his own private fleet of ships as the Church of Scientology faced worldwide controversy.

The Church of Scientology says that the problems of this period were due to "vicious, covert international attacks" by the United States government, "all of which were proven false and baseless, which were to last 27 years and finally culminated in the Government being sued for 750 million dollars for conspiracy." Behind the attacks, stated Hubbard, lay a vast conspiracy of "psychiatric front groups" secretly controlling governments: "Every single lie, false charge and attack on Scientology has been traced directly to this group's members. They have sought at great expense for nineteen years to crush and eradicate any new development in the field of the mind. They are actively preventing any effectiveness in this field." Hubbard, L. Ron. "Constitutional Destruction." June 9, 1969, retrieved February 8, 2011. 

Hubbard believed that Scientology was being infiltrated by saboteurs and spies and introduced "security checking" to identify those he termed "potential trouble sources" and "suppressive persons". Members of the Church of Scientology were interrogated with the aid of E-meters and were asked questions such as "Have you ever practiced homosexuality?" and "Have you ever had unkind thoughts about L. Ron Hubbard?" Atack, p. 150 For a time, Scientologists were even interrogated about crimes committed in past lives: "Have you ever destroyed a culture?" "Did you come to Earth for evil purposes?" "Have you ever zapped anyone?" Hubbard, L. Ron. "Sec Check Whole Track," HCO Bulletin of June 19, 1961; quoted in Atack, p. 152 

He also sought to exert political influence, advising Scientologists to vote against Richard Nixon in the 1960 presidential election and establishing a Department of Government Affairs "to bring government and hostile philosophies or societies into a state of complete compliance with the goals of Scientology". This, he said, "is done by high-level ability to control and in its absence by a low-level ability to overwhelm. Introvert such agencies. Control such agencies." Hubbard, L. Ron. "Department of Government Affairs," HCO Policy Letter of August 15, 1960; quoted in Miller, p. 241 

The U.S. Government was already well aware of Hubbard's activities. The FBI had a lengthy file on him, including a 1951 interview with an agent who considered him a "mental case". Miller, p. 181 Police forces in a number of jurisdictions began exchanging information about Scientology through the auspices of Interpol, which eventually led to prosecutions. Fooner, Michael. Interpol: issues in world crime and international criminal justice, p. 13. New York: Plenum Press, 1989. ISBN 978-0-306-43135-7 In 1958, the U.S. Internal Revenue Service withdrew the Washington, D.C. Church of Scientology's tax exemption after it found that Hubbard and his family were profiting unreasonably from Scientology's ostensibly non-profit income. The Food and Drug Administration took action against Scientology's medical claims, seizing thousands of pills being marketed as "radiation cures" Miller, p. 228 as well as publications and E-meters. The Church of Scientology was required to label them as being "ineffective in the diagnosis or treatment of disease". Atack, p. 154 

Following the FDA's actions, Scientology attracted increasingly unfavorable publicity across the English-speaking world. Wallis, p. 192 It faced particularly hostile scrutiny in Victoria, Australia, where it was accused of brainwashing, blackmail, extortion and damaging the mental health of its members. Wallis, p. 215 The Victorian state government established a Board of Inquiry into Scientology in November 1963. Miller, p. 250 Its report, published in October 1965, condemned every aspect of Scientology and Hubbard himself. He was described as being of doubtful sanity, having a persecution complex and displaying strong indications of paranoid schizophrenia with delusions of grandeur. His writings were characterized as nonsensical, abounding in "self-glorification and grandiosity, replete with histrionics and hysterical, incontinent outbursts". Miller, pp. 252253 Sociologist Roy Wallis comments that the report drastically changed public perceptions of Scientology:

The report led to Scientology being banned in Victoria, Wallis, p. 193 Western Australia and South Australia, Wallis, p. 196 and led to more negative publicity around the world. Newspapers and politicians in the UK pressed the British government for action against Scientology. In April 1966, hoping to form a remote "safe haven" for Scientology, Hubbard traveled to the southern African country Rhodesia (today Zimbabwe) and looked into setting up a base there at a hotel on Lake Kariba. Despite his attempts to curry favour with the local governmenthe personally delivered champagne to Prime Minister Ian Smith's house, but Smith refused to see himRhodesia promptly refused to renew Hubbard's visa, compelling him to leave the country. Reitman (2011), pp. 8081 In July 1968, the British Minister of Health, Kenneth Robinson, announced that foreign Scientologists would no longer be permitted to enter the UK and Hubbard himself was excluded from the country as an "undesirable alien". Atack, p. 183 Further inquiries were launched in Canada, New Zealand and South Africa. 

Hubbard took three major new initiatives in the face of these challenges. "Ethics Technology" was introduced to tighten internal discipline within Scientology. It required Scientologists to "disconnect" from any organization or individualincluding family membersdeemed to be disruptive or "suppressive". Atack, p. 155 Scientologists were also required to write "Knowledge Reports" on each other, reporting transgressions or misapplications of Scientology methods. Hubbard promulgated a long list of punishable "Misdemeanors", "Crimes", and "High Crimes". Atack, p. 156 The "Fair Game" policy was introduced, which was applicable to anyone deemed an "enemy" of Scientology: "May be deprived of property or injured by any means by any Scientologist without any discipline of the Scientologist. May be tricked, sued or lied to or destroyed." Hubbard, L. Ron. "Penalties for Lower Conditions." HCO Policy Letter of October 18, 1967, Issue IV. Quoted in Atack, pp. 175176 Wallis, pp. 144145 

At the start of March 1966, Hubbard created the Guardian's Office (GO), a new agency within the Church of Scientology that was headed by his wife Mary Sue. Atack, p. 161 It dealt with Scientology's external affairs, including public relations, legal actions and the gathering of intelligence on perceived threats. Atack, p. 165 As Scientology faced increasingly negative media attention, the GO retaliated with hundreds of writs for libel and slander; it issued more than forty on a single day. Atack, p. 189 Hubbard ordered his staff to find "lurid, blood sex crime actual evidence on attackers". Atack, p. 160 

Finally, at the end of 1966, Hubbard acquired his own fleet of ships. He established the "Hubbard Explorational Company Ltd" which purchased three shipsthe Enchanter, a forty-ton schooner, Miller, p. 264 the Avon River, an old trawler, Miller, p. 265 and the Royal Scotman , a former Irish Sea cattle ferry that he made his home and flagship. Miller, p. 269 The ships were crewed by the Sea Organization or "Sea Org", a group of Scientologist volunteers, with the support of a couple of professional seamen. Miller, p. 272 

==Commodore of the Sea Org==

Corfu town, where the Sea Org moored in 19681969
After Hubbard created the Sea Org "fleet" in early 1967 it began an eight-year voyage, sailing from port to port in the Mediterranean Sea and eastern North Atlantic. The fleet traveled as far as Corfu in the eastern Mediterranean and Dakar and the Azores in the Atlantic, but rarely stayed anywhere for longer than six weeks. Ken Urquhart, Hubbard's personal assistant at the time, later recalled:

When Hubbard established the Sea Org he publicly declared that he had relinquished his management responsibilities. According to Miller, this was not true. He received daily telex messages from Scientology organizations around the world reporting their statistics and income. The Church of Scientology sent him $15,000 a week and millions of dollars were transferred to his bank accounts in Switzerland and Liechtenstein. Miller, p. 299 Couriers arrived regularly, conveying luxury food for Hubbard and his family Miller, p. 300 or cash that had been smuggled from England to avoid currency export restrictions. Miller, p. 290 

Along the way, Hubbard sought to establish a safe haven in "a friendly little country where Scientology would be allowed to prosper", as Miller puts it. Miller, p. 310 The fleet stayed at Corfu for several months in 19681969. Hubbard renamed the ships after Greek godsthe Royal Scotman was rechristened Apolloand he praised the recently established military dictatorship. The Sea Org was represented as "Professor Hubbard's Philosophy School" in a telegram to the Greek government. Miller, p. 295 In March 1969, however, Hubbard and his ships were ordered to leave. Miller, p. 296 In mid-1972, Hubbard tried again in Morocco, establishing contacts with the country's secret police and training senior policemen and intelligence agents in techniques for detecting subversives. Miller, p. 311 The program ended in failure when it became caught up in internal Moroccan politics, and Hubbard left the country hastily in December 1972. Miller, p. 312 

At the same time, Hubbard was still developing Scientology's doctrines. A Scientology biography states that "free of organizational duties and aided by the first Sea Org members, L. Ron Hubbard now had the time and facilities to confirm in the physical universe some of the events and places he had encountered in his journeys down the track of time." In 1965, he designated several existing Scientology courses as confidential, repackaging them as the first of the esoteric "OT levels". Atack, p. 159 Two years later he announced the release of OT3, the "Wall of Fire", revealing the secrets of an immense disaster that had occurred "on this planet, and on the other seventy-five planets which form this Confederacy, seventy-five million years ago". Hubbard, L. Ron. "Ron's Journal '67," quoted in Atack, p. 173. Scientologists were required to undertake the first two OT levels before learning how Xenu, the leader of the Galactic Confederacy, had shipped billions of people to Earth and blown them up with hydrogen bombs, following which their traumatized spirits were stuck together at "implant stations", brainwashed with false memories and eventually became contained within human beings. Atack, p. 32 The discovery of OT3 was said to have taken a major physical toll on Hubbard, who announced that he had broken a knee, an arm, and his back during the course of his research. Atack, p. 173 A year later, in 1968, he unveiled OT levels 4 to 6 and began delivering OT training courses to Scientologists aboard the Royal Scotman. Atack, p. 177 

Scientologists around the world were presented with a glamorous picture of life in the Sea Org and many applied to join Hubbard aboard the fleet. What they found was rather different from the image. Most of those joining had no nautical experience at all. Mechanical difficulties and blunders by the crews led to a series of embarrassing incidents and near-disasters. Following one incident in which the rudder of the Royal Scotman was damaged during a storm, Hubbard ordered the ship's entire crew to be reduced to a "condition of liability" and wear gray rags tied to their arms. Miller, p. 285 The ship itself was treated the same way, with dirty tarpaulins tied around its funnel to symbolize its lower status. According to those aboard, conditions were appalling; the crew was worked to the point of exhaustion, given meagre rations and forbidden to wash or change their clothes for several weeks. Miller, p. 286 Hubbard maintained a harsh disciplinary regime aboard the fleet, punishing mistakes by confining people in the Royal Scotman bilge tanks without toilet facilities and with food provided in buckets. Atack, p. 180 At other times erring crew members were thrown overboard with Hubbard looking on and, occasionally, filming. Atack, p. 186 David Mayo, a Sea Org member at the time, later recalled:

From about 1970, Hubbard was attended aboard ship by the children of Sea Org members, organized as the Commodore's Messenger Organization (CMO). They were mainly young girls dressed in hot pants and halter tops, who were responsible for running errands for Hubbard such as lighting his cigarettes, dressing him or relaying his verbal commands to other members of the crew. Miller, p. 301 Sappell, Joel; Welkos, Robert (June 24, 1990). "The Mind Behind the Religion : Life With L. Ron Hubbard." Los Angeles Times, retrieved February 20, 2011. In addition to his wife Mary Sue, he was accompanied by all four of his children by her, though not his first son Nibs, who had defected from Scientology in late 1959. Miller, p. 236 The younger Hubbards were all members of the Sea Org and shared its rigors, though Quentin Hubbard reportedly found it difficult to adjust and attempted suicide in mid-1974. Miller, p. 325 

==Life in hiding==
The Internal Revenue Service building in Washington D.C., one of the targets of Hubbard's "Snow White Program"
During the 1970s, Hubbard faced an increasing number of legal threats. French prosecutors charged him and the French Church of Scientology with fraud and customs violations in 1972. He was advised that he was at risk of being extradited to France. Corydon, Bent. L. Ron Hubbard: Messiah or Madman?, p. 94. Fort Lee, N.J.: Barricade Books, 1992. ISBN 978-0-942637-57-1 Hubbard left the Sea Org fleet temporarily at the end of 1972, living incognito in Queens, New York, Miller, p. 314 until he returned to his flagship in September 1973 when the threat of extradition had abated. Miller, p. 318 Scientology sources say that he carried out "a sociological study in and around New York City". "L. Ron Hubbard: A Chronicle, 19701979." Church of Scientology International, 2007, retrieved February 8, 2011. 

Hubbard's health deteriorated significantly during this period. A chain-smoker, he also suffered from bursitis and excessive weight, and had a prominent growth on his forehead. Miller, p. 316 He suffered serious injuries in a motorcycle accident in 1973 and had a heart attack in 1975 that required him to take anticoagulant drugs for the next year. Atack, p. 255 In September 1978, Hubbard had a pulmonary embolism, falling into a coma, but recovered. Atack, p. 256 

He remained active in managing and developing Scientology, establishing the controversial Rehabilitation Project Force in 1974 Atack, p. 206 and issuing policy and doctrinal bulletins. Atack, p. 204 However, the Sea Org's voyages were coming to an end. The Apollo was banned from several Spanish ports and was expelled from Curaao in October 1975. Atack, p. 209 The Sea Org came to be suspected of being a CIA operation, leading to a riot in Funchal, Madeira, when the Apollo docked there. At the time, The Apollo Stars, a musical group founded by Hubbard and made up entirely of shipbound members of the Sea Org, was offering free on-pier concerts in an attempt to promote Scientology, and the riot occurred at one of these events. Hubbard decided to relocate back to the United States to establish a "land base" for the Sea Org in Florida. Miller, p. 334 The Church of Scientology attributes this decision to the activities on the Apollo having "outgrow the ship's capacity". 

In October 1975, Hubbard moved into a hotel suite in Daytona Beach. The Fort Harrison Hotel in Clearwater, Florida, was secretly acquired as the location for the "land base". On December 5, 1975, Hubbard and his wife Mary Sue moved into a condominium complex in nearby Dunedin. Miller, p. 336 Their presence was meant to be a closely guarded secret but was accidentally compromised the following month. Miller, p. 338 Hubbard immediately left Dunedin and moved to Georgetown, Washington, D.C., accompanied by a handful of aides and messengers, but not his wife. Miller, p. 340 Six months later, following another security alert in July 1976, Hubbard moved to another safe house in Culver City, California. He lived there for only about three months, relocating in October to the more private confines of the Olive Tree Ranch near La Quinta. Miller, p. 343 His second son Quentin committed suicide a few weeks later in Las Vegas. Miller, p. 344 

Throughout this period, Hubbard was heavily involved in directing the activities of the Guardian's Office (GO), the legal bureau/intelligence agency that he had established in 1966. He believed that Scientology was being attacked by an international Nazi conspiracy, which he termed the "Tenyaka Memorial", through a network of drug companies, banks and psychiatrists in a bid to take over the world. Beresford, David (February 7, 1980). "Snow White's dirty tricks." London: The Guardian In 1973, he instigated the "Snow White Program" and directed the GO to remove negative reports about Scientology from government files and track down their sources. Miller, pp. 317318 The GO was ordered to "get all false and secret files on Scientology, LRH ... that cannot be obtained legally, by all possible lines of approach ... i.e., job penetration, janitor penetration, suitable guises utilizing covers." His involvement in the GO's operations was concealed through the use of codenames. The GO carried out covert campaigns on his behalf such as Operation Bulldozer Leak, intended "to effectively spread the rumor that will lead Government, media, and individual [Suppressive Persons] to conclude that LRH has no control of the C of S and no legal liability for Church activity". He was kept informed of GO operations, such as the theft of medical records from a hospital, harassment of psychiatrists and infiltrations of organizations that had been critical of Scientology at various times, such as the Better Business Bureau, the American Medical Association, and American Psychiatric Association. Marshall, John (January 24, 1980). "The Scientology Papers: Hubbard still gave orders, records show." Toronto: Globe and Mail 

Members of the GO infiltrated and burglarized numerous government organizations, including the U.S. Department of Justice and the Internal Revenue Service. Streissguth, p. 75 After two GO agents were caught in the Washington, D.C. headquarters of the IRS, the FBI carried out simultaneous raids on GO offices in Los Angeles and Washington, D.C. on July 7, 1977. They retrieved wiretap equipment, burglary tools and some 90,000 pages of incriminating documents. Hubbard was not prosecuted, though he was labeled an "unindicted co-conspirator" by government prosecutors. His wife Mary Sue was indicted and subsequently convicted of conspiracy. She was sent to a federal prison along with ten other Scientologists. Reitman (2007), p. 323 

Hubbard's troubles increased in February 1978 when a French court convicted him in absentia for obtaining money under false pretenses. He was sentenced to four years in prison and a 35,000FF ($7,000) fine. Marshall, John (January 26, 1980). "The Scientology Papers: The hidden Hubbard." Toronto: Globe and Mail He went into hiding in April 1979, moving to an apartment in Hemet, California, where his only contact with the outside world was via ten trusted Messengers. He cut contact with everyone else, even his wife, whom he saw for the last time in August 1979. Atack, p. 258 Hubbard faced a possible indictment for his role in Operation Freakout, the GO's campaign against New York journalist Paulette Cooper, and in February 1980 he disappeared into deep cover in the company of two trusted Messengers, Pat and Anne Broeker. Atack, p. 259 Miller, p. 364 

For the first few years of the 1980s, Hubbard and the Broekers lived on the move, touring the Pacific Northwest in a recreational vehicle and living for a while in apartments in Newport Beach and Los Angeles. Sappell, Joel; Welkos, Robert W. (June 24, 1990). The Mind Behind the Religion : Chapter Four : The Final Days : Deep in hiding, Hubbard kept tight grip on the church." Los Angeles Times, retrieved February 8, 2011. Hubbard used his time in hiding to write his first new works of science fiction for nearly thirty yearsBattlefield Earth (1982) and Mission Earth, a ten-volume series published between 1985 and 1987. Queen, Edward L.; Prothero, Stephen R.; Shattuck, Gardiner H. Encyclopedia of American religious history, Volume 1, p. 493. New York: Infobase Publishing, 2009. ISBN 978-0-8160-6660-5 They received mixed responses; as writer Jeff Walker puts it, they were "treated derisively by most critics but greatly admired by followers". Walker, Jeff. The Ayn Rand Cult, p. 275. Chicago: Open Court, 1999. ISBN 978-0-8126-9390-4 Hubbard also wrote and composed music for three of his albums, which were produced by the Church of Scientology. The book soundtrack Space Jazz was released in 1982. Mission Earth and The Road to Freedom were released posthumously in 1986. 

In Hubbard's absence, members of the Sea Org staged a takeover of the Church of Scientology and purged many veteran Scientologists. A young Messenger, David Miscavige, became Scientology's de facto leader. Mary Sue Hubbard was forced to resign her position and her daughter Suzette became Miscavige's personal maid. Miller, p. 366 

==Death and legacy==
The ranch in San Luis Obispo County, California where Hubbard spent his final years
For the last two years of his life, Hubbard lived in a luxury Blue Bird motorhome on Whispering Winds, a 160-acre ranch near Creston, California. He remained in deep hiding while controversy raged in the outside world about whether he was still alive and if so, where. He spent his time "writing and researching", according to a spokesperson, and pursued photography and music, overseeing construction work and checking on his animals. Brown, Mark (January 30, 1986). "Creston provided quiet retreat for controversial church leader." The County Telegram-Tribune, San Luis Obispo, pp. 1A/5A. He repeatedly redesigned the property, spending millions of dollars remodeling the ranch housewhich went virtually uninhabitedand building a quarter-mile horse-racing track with an observation tower, which reportedly was never used. 

He was still closely involved in managing the Church of Scientology via secretly delivered orders and continued to receive large amounts of money, of which Forbes magazine estimated "at least $200 million gathered in Hubbard's name through 1982." In September 1985, the IRS notified the Church that it was considering indicting Hubbard for tax fraud. Behar, Richard (October 27, 1986). "The prophet and profits of Scientology." Forbes 400 (Forbes) 

Hubbard suffered further ill-health, including chronic pancreatitis, during his residence at Whispering Winds. He suffered a stroke on January 17, 1986, and died a week later. Church of Scientology. L. Ron Hubbard's death. Image of Death Certificate. Retrieved on: 2012-06-15. His body was cremated following an autopsy and the ashes were scattered at sea. Miller, p. 375 Scientology leaders announced that his body had become an impediment to his work and that he had decided to "drop his body" to continue his research on another planet, Petrowsky, Marc. Sects, cults, and spiritual communities: a sociological analysis, p. 144. Westport, Conn.: Praeger, 1998. ISBN 978-0-275-95860-2 having "learned how to do it without a body". Atack, p. 354 

Hubbard was survived by his wife Mary Sue and all of his children except his second son Quentin. His will provided a trust fund to support Mary Sue; her children Arthur, Diana and Suzette; and Katherine, the daughter of his first wife Polly. (February 7, 1986). "Hubbard Left Most of Estate to Scientology Church; Executor Appointed." The Associated Press He disinherited two of his other children. Atack, p. 356 L. Ron Hubbard, Jr. had become estranged, changed his name to "Ronald DeWolf" and, in 1982, sued unsuccessfully for control of his father's estate. Lamont, p. 154 Alexis Valerie, Hubbard's daughter by his second wife Sara, had attempted to contact her father in 1971. She was rebuffed with the implied claim that her real father was Jack Parsons rather than Hubbard, and that her mother had been a Nazi spy during the war. Miller, p. 306 Both later accepted settlements when litigation was threatened. In 2001, Diana and Suzette were reported to still be Church members, while Arthur had left and become an artist. Hubbard's great-grandson, Jamie DeWolf, is a noted slam poet. Lattin, Don (February 12, 2001). "Scientology Founder's Family Life Far From What He Preached." San Francisco Chronicle, retrieved February 12, 2011. 

The copyrights of his works and much of his estate and wealth were willed to the Church of Scientology. In a bulletin dated May 5, 1980, Hubbard told his followers to preserve his teachings until an eventual reincarnation when he would return "not as a religious leader but as a political one". The Church of Spiritual Technology (CST), a sister organization of the Church of Scientology, has engraved Hubbard's entire corpus of Scientology and Dianetics texts on steel tablets stored in titanium containers. They are buried at the Trementina Base in a vault under a mountain near Trementina, New Mexico, on top of which the CST's logo has been bulldozed on such a gigantic scale that it is visible from space. Gallagher, Eugene V.; Ashcraft, Michael. African Diaspora Traditions and Other American Innovations, p. 172; vol 5 of Introduction to New and Alternative Religions in America. Westport, Conn.: Greenwood Publishing Group, 2006. ISBN 978-0-275-98717-6 

Hubbard is the Guinness World Record holder for the most published author, with 1,084 works, most translated book (70 languages for The Way to Happiness) and most audiobooks (185 as of April 2009). According to Galaxy Press, Hubbard's Battlefield Earth has sold over 6 million copies and Mission Earth a further 7 million, with each of its ten volumes becoming New York Times bestsellers on their release. However, the Los Angeles Times reported in 1990 that Hubbard's followers had been buying large numbers of the books and re-issuing them to stores to boost sales. Sappell, Joel; Welkos, Robert W. (June 28, 1990). "Costly Strategy Continues to Turn Out Bestsellers." Los Angeles Times, retrieved February 15, 2011. Opinions are divided about his literary legacy. Scientologists have written of their desire to "make Ron the most acclaimed and widely known author of all time". The sociologist William Sims Bainbridge writes that even at his peak in the late 1930s Hubbard was regarded by readers of Astounding Science Fiction as merely "a passable, familiar author but not one of the best", while by the late 1970s "the fiction subculture wishes it could forget him" and fans gave him a worse rating than any other of the "Golden Age" writers. Bainbridge, William Sims. "Science and Religion: The Case of Scientology," in Bromley, David G.; Hammond, Phillip E. (eds). The Future of new religious movements, p. 63. Macon, GA: Mercer University Press, 1987. ISBN 978-0-86554-238-9 

In 2004, eighteen years after Hubbard's death, the Church claimed eight million followers worldwide. According to religious scholar J. Gordon Melton, this is an overestimate, counting as Scientologists people who had merely bought a book. The City University of New York's American Religious Identification Survey found that by 2009 only 25,000 Americans identified as Scientologists. Associated Press. "Defections, court fights test Scientology." MSNBC.com, November 1, 2009, retrieved February 14, 2011 Hubbard's presence still pervades Scientology. Every Church of Scientology maintains an office reserved for Hubbard, with a desk, chair and writing equipment, ready to be used. Reitman (2007), p. 324 Lonnie D. Kliever notes that Hubbard was "the only source of the religion, and he has no successor". Hubbard is referred to simply as "Source" within Scientology and the theological acceptability of any Scientology-related activity is determined by how closely it adheres to Hubbard's doctrines. Rothstein, p. 24 Hubbard's name and signature are official trademarks of the Religious Technology Center, established in 1982 to control and oversee the use of Hubbard's works and Scientology's trademarks and copyrights. The RTC is the central organization within Scientology's complex corporate hierarchy and has put much effort into re-checking the accuracy of all Scientology publications to "ensur the availability of the pure unadulterated writings of Mr. Hubbard to the coming generations" 

The Danish historian of religions Mikael Rothstein describes Scientology as "a movement focused on the figure of Hubbard". He comments: "The fact that life is mythologized is as obvious as in the cases of Jesus, Muhammad or Siddartha Gotama. This is how religion works. Scientology, however, rejects this analysis altogether, and goes to great lengths to defend every detail of Hubbard's amazing and fantastic life as plain historical fact." Hubbard is presented as "the master of a multitude of disciplines" who performed extraordinary feats as a photographer, composer, scientist, therapist, explorer, navigator, philosopher, poet, artist, humanitarian, adventurer, soldier, scout, musician and many other fields of endeavor. The Church of Scientology portrays Hubbard's life and work as having proceeded seamlessly, "as if they were a continuous set of predetermined events and discoveries that unfolded through his lifelong research" even up to and beyond his death. 

According to Rothstein's assessment of Hubbard's legacy, Scientology consciously aims to transfer the charismatic authority of Hubbard to institutionalize his authority over the organization, even after his death. Hubbard is presented as a virtually superhuman religious ideal just as Scientology itself is presented as the most important development in human history. Rothstein, p. 20 As Rothstein puts it, "reverence for Scientology's scripture is reverence for Hubbard, the man who in the Scientological perspective single-handedly brought salvation to all human beings." David G. Bromley of the University of Virginia comments that the real Hubbard has been transformed into a "prophetic persona", "LRH", which acts as the basis for his prophetic authority within Scientology and transcends his biographical history. 

==Biographies==
Gerry Armstrong, formerly Hubbard's official biographical researcher, whose trial disclosed many details of Hubbard's life

Following Hubbard's death, Bridge Publications has published several stand-alone biographical accounts of his life. Marco Frenschkowski notes that "non-Scientologist readers immediately recognize some parts of Hubbard's life are here systematically left out: no information whatsoever is given about his private life (his marriages, divorces, children), his legal affairs and so on." Frenschkowski, Marco. "L. Ron Hubbard and Scientology: An annotated bibliographical survey of primary and selected secondary literature," Marburg Journal of Religion, 4:1, July 1999, retrieved February 8, 2011. The Church maintains an extensive website presenting the official version of Hubbard's life. Available at www.lronhubbard.org It also owns a number of properties dedicated to Hubbard including the Los Angeles-based L. Ron Hubbard Life Exhibition, a presentation of Hubbard's life, and the Author Services Center, dedicated to Hubbard's writings, Cowan, Douglas E.; Bromley, David G. Cults and new religions: a brief history, p. 30. Oxford: Blackwell, 2008. ISBN 20089781405161282 and the L. Ron Hubbard House in Washington, D.C.

In late 2012, Bridge published a comprehensive official biography of Hubbard, titled The L. Ron Hubbard Series: A Biographical Encyclopedia, written primarily by Dan Sherman, the official Hubbard biographer at the time. This series is the most recent official Church of Scientology biography of Hubbard, as published by Bridge Publications. It is a 17 volume series, each focusing on various different aspects of Hubbard's life, from his Music, to photography and other ventures he was involved in. It is advertised as a "Biographic Encyclopedia" and is primarily authored by the official biographer, Dan Sherman. http://www.lronhubbard.org/books/ron-series/biographical-encyclopedia.html 

To date, there has not been a single volume comprehensive official biography published 
 Gallagher, Eugene V. The new religious movements experience in America, p. 216. Greenwood Publishing Group, 2004. ISBN 978-0-313-32807-7 During his lifetime, a number of brief biographical sketches were also published in his Scientology books. The Church of Scientology issued "the only authorized LRH Biography" in October 1977(it has since been followed by the Sherman "Biographic Encyclopedia"). Flag Information Letter 67, "L.R.H. Biography." Sea Organization, October 31, 1977. His life was illustrated in print in What Is Scientology?, a glossy publication published in 1978 with paintings of Hubbard's life contributed by his son Arthur. Miller, p. 350 

In the late 1970s two men began to assemble a very different picture of Hubbard's life. Michael Linn Shannon, a resident of Portland, Oregon, became interested in Hubbard's life story after an encounter with a Scientology recruiter. Over the next four years he collected previously undisclosed records and documents. He intended to write an expos of Hubbard and sent a copy of his findings and key records to a number of contacts but was unable to find a publisher. Atack, p. 46 

Shannon's findings were acquired by Gerry Armstrong, a Scientologist who had been appointed Hubbard's official archivist. He had been given the job of assembling documents relating to Hubbard's life for the purpose of helping Omar V. Garrison, a non-Scientologist who had written two books sympathetic to Scientology, to write an official biography. However, the documents that he uncovered convinced both Armstrong and Garrison that Hubbard had systematically misrepresented his life. Garrison refused to write a "puff piece" and declared that he would not "repeat all the falsehoods they Church of Scientology had perpetuated over the years". He wrote a "warts and all" biography while Armstrong quit Scientology, taking five boxes of papers with him. The Church of Scientology and Mary Sue Hubbard sued for the return of the documents while settling out of court with Garrison, requiring him to turn over the nearly completed manuscript of the biography. Shelor, George-Wayne. "Writer tells of Hubbard's 'faked past'." Clearwater Sun, May 10, 1984 In October 1984 Judge Paul G. Breckenridge ruled in Armstrong's favor, saying:

In November 1987, the British journalist and writer Russell Miller published Bare-faced Messiah, the first full-length biography of L. Ron Hubbard. He drew on Armstrong's papers, official records and interviews with those who had known Hubbard including ex-Scientologists and family members. The book was well-received by reviewers but the Church of Scientology sought unsuccessfully to prohibit its publication on the grounds of copyright infringement. Murtagh, Peter (October 10, 1987). "Scientologists fail to suppress book about church's founder." The Guardian. Other critical biographical accounts are found in Bent Corydon's L. Ron Hubbard, Messiah or Madman? (1987) and Jon Atack's A Piece of Blue Sky (1990).

==In popular culture==
Hubbard appears as a major character in Paul Malmont's historical novel The Astounding, the Amazing, and the Unknown (2011).

==Bibliography==

According to the Church of Scientology, Hubbard produced some 65 million words on Dianetics and Scientology, contained in about 500,000 pages of written material, 3,000 recorded lectures and 100 films. His works of fiction included some 500 novels and short stories. 

==Notes==

==References==

* Atack, Jon. A Piece of Blue Sky: Scientology, Dianetics, and L. Ron Hubbard exposed. Carol Publishing Group, 1990. ISBN 978-0-8184-0499-3, 
* Behar, Richard Pushing Beyond the U.S.: Scientology makes its presence felt in Europe and Canada
* Bromley, David G. "Making Sense of Scientology: Prophetic, Contractual Religion," in Lewis, James R. (ed.), Scientology. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2009. ISBN 978-0-19-533149-3 
* Christensen, Dorthe Refslund. "Inventing L. Ron Hubbard: On the Construction and Maintenance of the Hagiographic Mythology of Scientology's Founder," pp. 227258 in Lewis, James R.; Petersen, Jesper Aagaard: Controversial new religions. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2005. ISBN 978-0-19-515683-6, , available through Oxford Scholarship Online, 
* Evans, Christopher. Cults of Unreason. New York: Farrar, Straus and Giroux, 1974. ISBN 0-374-13324-7, 
* Gardner, Martin. Fads and fallacies in the name of science. New York: Courier Dover Publications, 1957. ISBN 978-0-486-20394-2, 
* Jacobsen, Jeff Day, Robert RJ. What the Church of Scientology Doesn't Want You To Know
* Lamont, Stewart. Inc.|Religion Inc.: The Church of Scientology]. London: Harrap, 1986. ISBN 978-0-245-54334-0, 
* Malko, George. Scientology: The Now Religion. New York: Delacorte Press, 1970. 
* Melton, J. Gordon. Encyclopedic handbook of cults in America. Taylor & Francis; 1992. ISBN 978-0-8153-1140-9
* Miller, Russell. Messiah|Bare-faced Messiah: the true story of L. Ron Hubbard]. London: Joseph, 1987. ISBN 0-7181-2764-1, 
* O'Brien, Helen. Dianetics in Limbo: A Documentary About Immortality. Philadelphia: Whitmore Publishing, 1966. 
* Pendle, George. Strange Angel: The Otherworldly Life of Rocket Scientist John Whiteside Parsons. Orlando, FL: Houghton Mifflin Harcourt, 2006. ISBN 978-0-15-603179-0, 
* Reitman, Janet. "Inside Scientology," pp. 305348 of American Society of Magazine Editors (Ed.) The Best American Magazine Writing 2007. New York: Columbia University Press, 2007. ISBN 978-0-231-14391-2, 
* Reitman, Janet. . Boston, MA: Houghton Mifflin Harcourt, 2011. ISBN 978-0-618-88302-8, 
* Rolph, Cecil Hewitt What You Like|Believe What You Like: what happened between the Scientologists and the National Association for Mental Health]. London: Deutsch, 1973. ISBN 978-0-233-96375-4, 
* Rothstein, Mikael. "Scientology, scripture and sacred traditions," in Lewis, James R.; Hammer, Olav (eds.): The invention of sacred tradition. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2007. ISBN 978-0-521-86479-4, 
* Streeter, Michael. Behind closed doors: the power and influence of secret societies. London: New Holland Publishers, 2008. ISBN 978-1-84537-937-7, 
* Streissguth, Thomas. Charismatic cult leaders. Minneapolis: The Oliver Press, 1995. ISBN 978-1-881508-18-2, 
* Tucker, Ruth A. Gospel|Another Gospel: Cults, Alternative Religions, and the New Age Movement]. Grand Rapids, MI: Zondervan, 2004. ISBN 978-0-310-25937-4, 
* Wallis, Roy. The road to total freedom: a sociological analysis of Scientology. New York: Columbia University Press, 1977. ISBN 978-0-231-04200-0, 
* Whitehead, Harriet. Renunciation and reformulation: a study of conversion in an American sect. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 1987. ISBN 978-0-8014-1849-5, 
* Winter, Joseph A. A Doctor's Report on Dianetics: Theory and Therapy. New York: Julian Press, 1951. 

==External links==

;Sites run by Church of Scientology International
*Official L. Ron Hubbard site
*Biographical Profile of L. Ron Hubbard
*L. Ron Hubbard: A Chronicle

;Publishers' sites
* Author Services Inc. Publisher of L. Ron Hubbard's fiction
* Bridge Publications Inc. Publisher of L. Ron Hubbard's Scientology and Dianetics works
*Writers of the Future A contest founded in the early 1980s by L. Ron Hubbard to encourage upcoming fiction and fantasy writers

;Unofficial biographies (online)
*Bare Faced Messiah by Russell Miller
*A Biography of L. Ron Hubbard by Michael Linn Shannon

;Further mention of Hubbard
*Biographical documentation from The New Yorker
*Operation Clambake. Critical material on Hubbard and Scientology
*U.S. Government FBI Files for Hubbard via The Smoking Gun
* - Granada TV, 1967.
*Frenschkowski, Marco, L. Ron Hubbard and Scientology: An annotated bibliographical survey of primary and selected secondary literature, Marburg Journal of Religion, Vol. 1. No. 1. July 1999, ISSN 1612-2941
*
*
*L. Ron Hubbard at the Internet Book List

 



[[Luddite]]

The Leader of the Luddites, engraving of 1812

The Luddites were 19th-century English textile artisans who protested against newly developed labour-saving machinery from 1811 to 1817. The stocking frames, spinning frames and power looms introduced during the Industrial Revolution threatened to replace the artisans with less-skilled, low-wage labourers, leaving them without work.

Although the origin of the name Luddite () is uncertain, a popular theory is that the movement was named after Ned Ludd, a youth who allegedly smashed two stocking frames in 1779, and whose name had become emblematic of machine destroyers. Anstey at Welcome to Leicester (visitoruk.com) According to this source, "A half-witted Anstey lad, Ned Ludlam or Ned Ludd, gave his name to the Luddites, who in the 1800s followed his earlier example by smashing machinery in protest against the Industrial Revolution." Palmer, Roy, 1998, The Sound of History: Songs and Social Comment, Oxford University Press, ISBN 978-0-19-215890-1, p. 103 Chambers, Robert (2004), Book of Days: A Miscellany of Popular Antiquities in Connection with the Calendar, Part 1, Kessinger, ISBN 978-0-7661-8338-4, p. 357 The name evolved into the imaginary General Ludd or King Ludd, a figure who, like Robin Hood, was reputed to live in Sherwood Forest. 

== Background ==

The movement can be seen as part of a rising tide of English working-class discontent in the early 19th century. An agricultural variant of Luddism, centering on the breaking of threshing machines, occurred during the widespread Swing Riots of 1830 in southern and eastern England. Harrison. The Common People. pp. 249253 

Spasmodic rises in food prices provoked Keelmen in the port of Tyne to riot in 1710 and tin miners to plunder granaries at Falmouth in 1727. There was a rebellion in Northumberland and Durham in 1740, and manhandling of Quaker corn dealers in 1756. More peaceably, skilled artisans in the cloth, building, shipbuilding, printing and cutlery trades organised friendly societies to insure themselves against unemployment and sickness and sometimes, similar to guilds, against intrusion of 'foreign' labour into their trades. Charles Wilson, England's Apprenticeship, 1603-1763 (1965), p. 344-5. PRO, SP 36/4/22. 

The Luddite movement emerged during the harsh economic climate of the Napoleonic Wars, which saw a rise in difficult working conditions in the new textile factories. The movement began in Nottingham on 11 March 1811 and spread rapidly throughout England over the following two years. Handloom weavers burned mills and pieces of factory machinery.

==History==
===Luddite acts 1811-1813===
The Luddites met at night on the moors surrounding industrial towns, where they would practise drills and manoeuvres. Their main areas of operation were Nottinghamshire in November 1811, followed by the West Riding of Yorkshire in early 1812 and Lancashire by March 1813. Luddites battled the British Army at Burton's Mill in Middleton and at Westhoughton Mill, both in Lancashire. Rumours abounded at the time that local magistrates employed agents provocateur to instigate the attacks. Using the pseudonym King Ludd, the Luddites and their supporters anonymously sent death threats toand even attackedmagistrates and food merchants. 

===Isolated incidents post 1814===
Activists smashed Heathcote's lacemaking machine in Loughborough in 1816. He and other industrialists had secret chambers constructed in their buildings that could be used as hiding places during an attack. 

In 1817, an unemployed Nottingham stockinger and probable ex-Luddite named Jeremiah Brandreth led the Pentrich Rising, which was a general uprising unrelated to machinery, but which could be viewed as the last major Luddite act.

==Government response==
Later interpretation of machine breaking (1812), showing two men superimposed on an 1844 engraving from the Penny magazine which shows a post 1820s Jacquard loom. Machine-breaking was criminalised by the Parliament of the United Kingdom as early as 1721, the penalty being penal transportation, but as a result of continued opposition to mechanisation the Frame Breaking Act 1812 made the death penalty available: see "criminal damage in English law".

The British Army clashed with the Luddites on several occasions. At one time, more British soldiers were fighting the Luddites than were fighting Napoleon on the Iberian Peninsula. Hobsbawm, Eric (1964) "The Machine Breakers" in Labouring Men. Studies in the History of Labour., London, Weidenfeld and Nicolson, page 6 Three Luddites, led by George Mellor, ambushed and assassinated a mill owner named William Horsfall from Ottiwells Mill at Crosland Moor in Marsden, West Yorkshire. Horsfall had remarked that he would "Ride up to his saddle in Luddite blood." Mellor fired the fatal shot to Horsfall's groin, and all three men were arrested.

The British government sought to suppress the Luddite movement with a mass trial at York in January 1813, following the attack on Cartwrights mill at Rawfolds near Cleckheaton. The government charged over sixty men, including Mellor and his companions, with various crimes in connection with Luddite activities. While some of those charged were actual Luddites, many had no connection to the movement. These trials were not legitimate judicial reckonings of each defendant's guilt, but show trials intended to deter other Luddites from continuing their activities. By meting out harsh consequences, including, in many cases, execution and penal transportation, the trials quickly ended the movement. 

Parliament subsequently made "machine breaking" (i.e. industrial sabotage) a capital crime with the 
Frame Breaking Act "Destruction of Stocking Frames, etc. Act 1812" at books.google.com and the Malicious Damage Act. "The Malicious Damage Act, 1812 at books.google.com Lord Byron opposed this legislation, becoming one of the few prominent defenders of the Luddites after the treatment of the defendants at the York trials.

==In contemporary thought==
The title Luddite developed a secondary meaning: a "Luddite" is a term describing those opposed to, or slow to adopt or incorporate into their lifestyle, industrialisation, automation, computerisation or new technologies in general. "Luddite" Compact Oxford English Dictionary at AskOxford.com. Accessed February 22, 2010. In 1956, there is a parliamentary speech that said 'Organised workers were by no means wedded to a Luddite Philosophy'. 

Economists use the term Luddite fallacy to explain that: The notion of technological unemployment leading to structural unemployment (and being macroeconomically injurious). If a technological innovation results in a reduction of necessary labour inputs, then the industry-wide cost of production falls, which lowers the competitive price and increases the equilibrium supply point, which will require an increase in aggregate labour inputs to reach, theoretically. ).

==See also==
*Development criticism
*Neo-Luddism
*Simple living
*Technophobia
*Turner Controversy - return to pre-industrial methods of production

==Notes==

==References==

==Further reading==

*
*
*
*
*
*
* 
*
*
* 

==External links==

*The Luddite Link - Comprehensive historical resources for the original West Yorkshire Luddites, University of Huddersfield. 
*The Uprising Series, a series of creative events marking the bicentenary of the Luddites' uprisings in West Yorkshire, led by the Lawrence Batley Theatre, Huddersfield
*Is it O.K. to be a Luddite? by Thomas Pynchon
*Luddism and the Neo-Luddite Reaction by Martin Ryder, University of Colorado at Denver School of Education
*The Luddites and the Combination Acts from the Marxists Internet Archive



[[Anarchist communism]]

Anarchist communism (also known as anarcho-communism, free communism, libertarian communism, According to anarchist historian Max Nettlau, the first use of the term "libertarian communism" was in November 1880, when a French anarchist congress employed it to more clearly identify its doctrines." "Anarchist communism is also known as anarcho-communism, communist anarchism, or, sometimes, libertarian communism.""Anarchist communism - an introduction" by Libcom.org" The terms libertarian communism and anarchist communism thus became synonymous within the international anarchist movement as a result of the close connection they had in Spain (with libertarian communism becoming the prevalent term).""Anarchist Communism & Libertarian Communism" by Gruppo Comunista Anarchico di Firenze. from "L'informatore di parte", No.4, October 1979, quarterly journal of the Gruppo Comunista Anarchico di Firenze "The 'Manifesto of Libertarian Communism' was written in 1953 by Georges Fontenis for the Federation Communiste Libertaire of France. It is one of the key texts of the anarchist-communist current." "Manifesto of Libertarian Communism" by Georges Fontenis "In 1926 a group of exiled Russian anarchists in France, the Delo Truda (Workers' Cause) group, published this pamphlet. It arose not from some academic study but from their experiences in the 1917 Russian revolution." "The Organizational Platform of the Libertarian Communists" by Delo Truda and communist anarchism "The Schism Between Individualist and Communist Anarchism" by Wendy McElroy "Anarchist communism is also known as anarcho-communism, communist anarchism, or, sometimes, libertarian communism." Anarchist communism - an introduction by Jacques Roux ) is a theory of anarchism which advocates the abolition of the state, capitalism, wages and private property (while retaining respect for personal property), "The revolution abolishes private ownership of the means of production and distribution, and with it goes capitalistic business. Personal possession remains only in the things you use. Thus, your watch is your own, but the watch factory belongs to the people." Alexander Berkman. "What Is Communist Anarchism?" and in favor of common ownership of the means of production, direct democracy, and a horizontal network of voluntary associations and workers' councils with production and consumption based on the guiding principle: "from each according to his ability, to each according to his need". Fabbri, Luigi. "Anarchism and Communism." Northeastern Anarchist #4. 1922. 13 October 2002. Makhno, Mett, Arshinov, Valevski, Linski (Dielo Trouda). "The Organizational Platform of the Libertarian Communists". 1926. Constructive Section: available here 

Some forms of anarchist communism such as insurrectionary anarchism are strongly influenced by egoism and radical individualism, believing anarcho-communism is the best social system for the realization of individual freedom. Christopher Gray, Leaving the Twentieth Century, p. 88. "Towards the creative Nothing" by Renzo Novatore Post-left anarcho-communist Bob Black after analysing insurrectionary anarcho-communist Luigi Galleani's view on anarcho-communism went as far as saying that "communism is the final fulfillment of individualism...The apparent contradiction between individualism and communism rests on a misunderstanding of both...Subjectivity is also objective: the individual really is subjective. It is nonsense to speak of emphatically prioritizing the social over the individual,...You may as well speak of prioritizing the chicken over the egg. Anarchy is a method of individualization. It aims to combine the greatest individual development with the greatest communal unity."Bob Black. Nightmares of Reason. "Modern Communists are more individualistic than Stirner. To them, not merely religion, morality, family and State are spooks, but property also is no more than a spook, in whose name the individual is enslaved - and how enslaved!...Communism thus creates a basis for the liberty and Eigenheit of the individual. I am a Communist because I am an Individualist. Fully as heartily the Communists concur with Stirner when he puts the word take in place of demand - that leads to the dissolution of property, to expropriation. Individualism and Communism go hand in hand."Max Baginski. "Stirner: The Ego and His Own" on Mother Earth. Vol. 2. No. 3 MAY, 1907 Some anarcho-communists view anarcho-communism as a way of reconciling the opposition between the individual and society. "Communism is the one which guarantees the greatest amount of individual liberty  provided that the idea that begets the community be Liberty, Anarchy...Communism guarantees economic freedom better than any other form of association, because it can guarantee wellbeing, even luxury, in return for a few hours of work instead of a day's work." "Communism and Anarchy" by Peter Kropotkin This other society will be libertarian communism, in which social solidarity and free individuality find their full expression, and in which these two ideas develop in perfect harmony.Organisational Platform of the Libertarian Communists by Dielo Truda (Workers' Cause) "I see the dichotomies made between individualism and communism, individual revolt and class struggle, the struggle against human exploitation and the exploitation of nature as false dichotomies and feel that those who accept them are impoverishing their own critique and struggle.""MY PERSPECTIVES" by Willful Disobedience Vol. 2, No. 12 L. Susan Brown, 'The Politics of Individualism,' Black Rose Books (2002) L. Susan Brown, Does Work Really Work? 

Anarcho-communism developed out of radical socialist currents after the French Revolution "Chapter 41: The Anarchists" in The Great French Revolution 1789-1793 by Peter Kropotkin but was first formulated as such in the Italian section of the First International. Nunzio Pernicone, Italian Anarchism 1864 - 1892, pp. 111-113, AK Press 2009. The theoretical work of Peter Kropotkin took importance later as it expanded and developed pro-organizationalist and insurrectionary anti-organizationalist sections. 

To date, the best-known examples of an anarchist communist society (i.e., established around the ideas as they exist today and achieving worldwide attention and knowledge in the historical canon), are the anarchist territories during the Spanish Revolution "This process of education and class organization, more than any single factor in Spain, produced the collectives. And to the degree that the CNT-FAI (for the two organizations became fatally coupled after July 1936) exercised the major influence in an area, the collectives proved to be generally more durable, communist and resistant to Stalinist counterrevolution than other republican-held areas of Spain." Murray Bookchin. To Remember Spain: The Anarchist and Syndicalist Revolution of 1936 and the Free Territory during the Russian Revolution. Through the efforts and influence of the Spanish Anarchists during the Spanish Revolution within the Spanish Civil War, starting in 1936 anarchist communism existed in most of Aragon, parts of the Levante and Andalusia, as well as in the stronghold of Anarchist Catalonia before being crushed by the combined forces of the regime that won the war, Hitler, Mussolini, Spanish Communist Party repression (backed by the USSR) as well as economic and armaments blockades from the capitalist countries and the Second Spanish Republic itself. Murray Bookchin. To Remember Spain: The Anarchist and Syndicalist Revolution of 1936 During the Russian Revolution, anarchists such as Nestor Makhno worked to create and defendthrough the Revolutionary Insurrectionary Army of Ukraineanarchist communism in the Free Territory of the Ukraine from 1919 before being conquered by the Bolsheviks in 1921.

==History==

===Early developments===
Sylvain MarchalAnarchist communist currents appeared during the English Civil War and the French Revolution of the 17th and 18th centuries, respectively. Gerrard Winstanley, who was part of the radical Diggers movement in England, wrote in his 1649 pamphlet, The New Law of Righteousness, that there "shall be no buying or selling, no fairs nor markets, but the whole earth shall be a common treasury for every man," and "there shall be none Lord over others, but every one shall be a Lord of himself." Robert Graham, Anarchism - A Documentary History of Libertarian Ideas - Volume One: From Anarchy to Anarchism (300CE to 1939), Black Rose Books, 2005 During the French Revolution, Sylvain Marchal, in his Manifesto of the Equals (1796), demanded "the communal enjoyment of the fruits of the earth" and looked forward to the disappearance of "the revolting distinction of rich and poor, of great and small, of masters and valets, of governors and governed." 

=== Joseph Djacque and the Revolutions of 1848 ===

An early anarchist communist was Joseph Djacque, the first person to describe himself as "libertarian". Joseph Djacque, De l'tre-humain mle et femelle - Lettre  P.J. Proudhon par Joseph Djacque (in French) The Anarchist FAQ Editorial Collective. "150 years of Libertarian". Unlike Proudhon, he argued that, "it is not the product of his or her labor that the worker has a right to, but to the satisfaction of his or her needs, whatever may be their nature." "l'Echange", article in Le Libertaire no 6, September 21, 1858, New York. Returning to New York he was able to serialise his book in his periodical Le Libertaire, Journal du Mouvement social. Published in 27 issues from June 9, 1858 to February 4, 1861, Le Libertaire was the first anarcho-communist journal published in the United States. This was the first anarchist journal to use the term "libertarian". According to the anarchist historian Max Nettlau, the first use of the term libertarian communism was in November 1880, when a French anarchist congress employed it to more clearly identify its doctrines. The French anarchist journalist Sbastien Faure, later founder and editor of the four-volume Anarchist Encyclopedia, started the weekly paper Le Libertaire (The Libertarian) in 1895. 
Joseph Djacque
Djacque "rejected Blanquism, which was based on a division between the disciples of the great peoples Architect and the people, or vulgar herd, and was equally opposed to all the variants of social republicanism, to the dictatorship of one man and to the dictatorship of the little prodigies of the proletariat. With regard to the last of these, he wrote that: a dictatorial committee composed of workers is certainly the most conceited and incompetent, and hence the most anti-revolutionary, thing that can be found...(It is better to have doubtful enemies in power than dubious friends). He saw anarchic initiative, reasoned will and the autonomy of each as the conditions for the social revolution of the proletariat, the first expression of which had been the barricades of June 1848 (see Revolutions of 1848). In Djacques view, a government resulting from an insurrection remains a reactionary fetter on the free initiative of the proletariat. Or rather, such free initiative can only arise and develop by the masses ridding themselves of the authoritarian prejudices by means of which the state reproduces itself in its primary function of representation and delegation. Djacque wrote that: By government I understand all delegation, all power outside the people, for which must be substituted, in a process whereby politics is transcended, the people in direct possession of their sovereignty, or the organised commune. For Djacque, the communist anarchist utopia would fulfil the function of inciting each proletarian to explore his or her own human potentialities, in addition to correcting the ignorance of the proletarians concerning social science." 

===The International Workingmen's Association (18641876)===

Carlo CafieroThe collectivist anarchists advocated remuneration for the type and amount of labor adhering to the principle "to each according to deeds"; Kropotkin, Peter. The Wages System. 1920. Also available here; quote: "Such, in a few words, is the organization which the Collectivists desire ... their principles are: collective property in the instruments of labor and remuneration of each worker according to the time spent in productive toil, taking into account the productiveness of his work." but held out the possibility of a post-revolutionary transition to a communist system of distribution according to need. As Bakunin's associate, James Guillaume, put it in his essay, Ideas on Social Organization (1876), "When... production comes to outstrip consumption... veryone will draw what he needs from the abundant social reserve of commodities, without fear of depletion; and the moral sentiment which will be more highly developed among free and equal workers will prevent, or greatly reduce, abuse and waste." James Guillaume, Ideas on Social Organization 

Anarchist communism as a coherent, modern economic-political philosophy was first formulated in the Italian section of the First International by Carlo Cafiero, Emilio Covelli, Errico Malatesta, Andrea Costa and other ex-Mazzinian Republicans. Out of respect for Mikhail Bakunin, they did not make their differences with collectivist anarchism explicit until after Bakunin's death. James Guillaume, "Michael Bakunin - A Biographical Sketch" The collectivist anarchists sought to collectivize ownership of the means of production while retaining payment proportional to the amount and kind of labor of each individual, but the anarcho-communists sought to extend the concept of collective ownership to the products of labor as well. While both groups argued against capitalism, the anarchist communists departed from Proudhon and Bakunin, who maintained that individuals have a right to the product of their individual labor and to be remunerated for their particular contribution to production. But, Errico Malatesta put it: "...instead of running the risk of making a confusion in trying to distinguish what you and I each do, let us all work and put everything in common. In this way each will give to society all that his strength permits until enough is produced for every one; and each will take all that he needs, limiting his needs only in those things of which there is not yet plenty for every one." Malatesta, Errico. A Talk About Anarchist Communism Between Two Workers. Also available at: http://dwardmac.pitzer.edu/anarchist_Archives/malatesta/MalatestaATAC.html 
Errico Malatesta
Cafiero explains in Anarchy and Communism (1880) that private property in the product of labor will lead to unequal accumulation of capital and, therefore, the reappearance of social classes and their antagonisms, and thus the resurrection of the state: "If we preserve the individual appropriation of the products of labour, we would be forced to preserve money, leaving more or less accumulation of wealth according to more or less merit rather than need of individuals." At the Florence Conference of the Italian Federation of the International in 1876, held in a forest outside Florence due to police activity, they declared the principles of anarcho-communism, beginning with:

"The Italian Federation considers the collective property of the products of labour as the necessary complement to the collectivist programme, the aid of all for the satisfaction of the needs of each being the only rule of production and consumption which corresponds to the principle of solidarity. The federal congress at Florence has eloquently demonstrated the opinion of the Italian International on this point..."

The above report was made in an article by Malatesta and Cafiero in the (Swiss) Jura Federation's bulletin later that year.

===Peter Kropotkin===

Peter Kropotkin (1842-1921), often seen as the most important theorist of anarchist communism, outlined his economic ideas in The Conquest of Bread and Fields, Factories and Workshops. Kropotkin felt that cooperation is more beneficial than competition, arguing in his major scientific work that this was well-illustrated in nature. He advocated the abolition of private property (while retaining respect for personal property) through the "expropriation of the whole of social wealth" by the people themselves, Peter Kropotkin, Words of a Rebel, p99. and for the economy to be co-ordinated through a horizontal network of voluntary associations Peter Kropotkin, The Conquest of Bread, p145. where goods are distributed according to the physical needs of the individual, rather than according to labor. Marshall Shatz, Introduction to Kropotkin: The Conquest of Bread and Other Writings, Cambridge University Press 1995, p. xvi "Anarchist communism called for the socialization not only of production but of the distribution of goods: the community would supply the subsistence requirements of each individual member free of charge, and the criterion, 'to each according to his labor' would be superseded by the criterion 'to each according to his needs.'" He further argued that these "needs," as society progressed, would not merely be physical needs but "s soon as his material wants are satisfied, other needs, of an artistic character, will thrust themselves forward the more ardently. Aims of life vary with each and every individual; and the more society is civilized, the more will individuality be developed, and the more will desires be varied." Peter Kropotkin, The Conquest of Bread Chapter IX The Need For Luxury 

He maintained that, in anarcho-communism:

Peter Kropotkin
Individuals and groups would use and control whatever resources they needed, as the aim of anarchist communism was to place "the product reaped or manufactured at the disposal of all, leaving to each the liberty to consume them as he pleases in his own home." The Place of Anarchism in the Evolution of Socialist Thought He supported the expropriation of private property into the commons or public goods (while retaining respect for personal property), to ensure that everyone would have access to what they needed without being forced to sell their labour to get it.

He said that a "peasant who is in possession of just the amount of land he can cultivate," and "a family inhabiting a house which affords them just enough space... considered necessary for that number of people" and the artisan "working with their own tools or handloom" would not be interfered with, Kropotkin Act for yourselves. N. Walter and H. Becker, eds. (London: Freedom Press 1985) 1045 arguing that "he landlord owes his riches to the poverty of the peasants, and the wealth of the capitalist comes from the same source." 

In summation, Kropotkin described an anarchist communist economy as functioning like this:

While many anarcho-communists are opposed to trade, some post-left and post-scarcity anarcho-communists, and ones with syndicalist sympathies, are not opposed to trade. Some support a non-monetary form of trade in the form of non-monetary commons. Others such as Tiziana Terranova easily see anarcho-communism being compatible with a non-hierarchical, open access, free association, non-monetary form of trade such as P2P. Tiziana Terranova, "Free Labor: Producing Culture for the Digital Economy". 07-26-2005 

===Organizationalism vs. insurrectionarism and expansion===

In "1876, at the Berne conference of the International Working Men's Association, the Italian anarchist Errico Malatesta argued that the revolution "consists more of deeds than words", and that action was the most effective form of propaganda. In the bulletin of the Jura Federation he declared "the Italian federation believes that the insurrectional fact, destined to affirm socialist principles by deed, is the most efficacious means of propaganda." "Propaganda by the deed" by Workers Solidarity No 55 published in October 1998 

As anarcho-communism emerged in the mid-19th century it had an intense debate with bakuninist collectivism and as such within the anarchist movement over participation in syndicalism and the workers movement as well as on other issues. "This inability to break definitively with collectivism in all its forms also exhibited itself over the question of the workers' movement, which divided anarchist-communism into a number of tendencies." "Anarchist-Communism" by Alain Pengam 
So "In the theory of the revolution" of anarcho-communism as elaborated by Peter Kropotkin and others "it is the risen people who are the real agent and not the working class organised in the enterprise (the cells of the capitalist mode of production) and seeking to assert itself as labour power, as a more 'rational' industrial body or social brain (manager) than the employers.". 

Luigi Galleani influential anarcho-communist advocate of insurrectionary anarchism

So "between 1880 and 1890" with the "perspective of an immanent revolution," who was "opposed to the official workers' movement, which was then in the process of formation (general Social Democratisation). They were opposed not only to political (statist) struggles but also to strikes which put forward wage or other claims, or which were organised by trade unions." But "While they were not opposed to strikes as such, they were opposed to trade unions and the struggle for the eight-hour day. This anti-reformist tendency was accompanied by an anti-organisational tendency, and its partisans declared themselves in favour of agitation amongst the unemployed for the expropriation of foodstuffs and other articles, for the expropriatory strike and, in some cases, for 'individual recuperation' or acts of terrorism." 

But after Peter Kropotkin along others decided to enter labor unions after their initial reservations, there remained "the anti-syndicalist anarchist-communists, who in France were grouped around Sebastien Faure's Le Libertaire. From 1905 onwards, the Russian counterparts of these anti-syndicalist anarchist-communists become partisans of economic terrorism and illegal 'expropriations'." Illegalism as a practice emerged and within it "The acts of the anarchist bombers and assassins ("propaganda by the deed") and the anarchist burglars ("individual reappropriation") expressed their desperation and their personal, violent rejection of an intolerable society. Moreover, they were clearly meant to be exemplary, invitations to revolt." 

Proponents and activists of these tactics among others included Johann Most, Luigi Galleani, Victor Serge, Giuseppe Ciancabilla and Severino Di Giovanni. The Italian Giuseppe Ciancabilla (18721904) wrote in "Against organization" that "we don't want tactical programs, and consequently we don't want organization. Having established the aim, the goal to which we hold, we leave every anarchist free to choose from the means that his sense, his education, his temperament, his fighting spirit suggest to him as best. We don't form fixed programs and we don't form small or great parties. But we come together spontaneously, and not with permanent criteria, according to momentary affinities for a specific purpose, and we constantly change these groups as soon as the purpose for which we had associated ceases to be, and other aims and needs arise and develop in us and push us to seek new collaborators, people who think as we do in the specific circumstance." "Against organization" by Giuseppe Ciancabilla. Retrieved 2010-06-10. 

By the 1880s anarcho-communism was already present in the United States as can be seen in the publication of the journal Freedom: A Revolutionary Anarchist-Communist Monthly by Lucy Parsons and Lizzy Holmes. "Lucy Parsons: Woman Of Will" at the Lucy Parsons Center Lucy Parsons debated in her time in the US with fellow anarcha-communist Emma Goldman over issues of free love and feminism. Another anarcho-communist journal later appeared in the US called The Firebrand. Most anarchist publications in the US were in Yiddish, German, or Russian, but Free Society was published in English, permitting the dissemination of anarchist communist thought to English-speaking populations in the US. "Free Society was the principal English-language forum for anarchist ideas in the United States at the beginning of the twentieth century." Emma Goldman: Making Speech Free, 19021909, p.551. Around that time these American anarcho-communist sectors entered in debate with the individualist anarchist group around Benjamin Tucker. "Tucker and other individualist anarchists argued in the pages of Liberty that anarchist communism was a misnomer because communism implied state authority and true anarchists were against all forms of authority, even the authority of small groups. To individualist anarchists, communistic anarchism, with its ideals of to each according to need, from each according to ability, necessarily implied authority over others, because it did not privilege individual liberty as the highest virtue. But for anarchist communist, who saw economic freedom as central, individual liberty without food and shelter seemed impossible. Unlike the individualist tradition, whose ideas had had years of exposure through the English language anarchist press in America with the publication of The Word from 1872 to 1893 and Liberty from 1881 to 1908, communistic anarchism had not been advocated in any detail.""The Firebrand and the Forging of a New Anarchism: Anarchist Communism and Free Love" by Jessica Moran In February 1888 Berkman left for the United States from his native Russia. Avrich, Anarchist Portraits, p. 202. Soon after his arrival in New York City, Berkman became an anarchist through his involvement with groups that had formed to campaign to free the men convicted of the 1886 Haymarket bombing. Pateman, p. iii. He, as well as Emma Goldman, soon came under the influence of Johann Most, the best-known anarchist in the United States, and an advocate of propaganda of the deedattentat, or violence carried out to encourage the masses to revolt. Walter, p. vii. Newell, p. vi. Berkman became a typesetter for Most's newspaper Freiheit. 

According to anarchist historian Max Nettlau, the first use of the term "libertarian communism" was in November 1880, when a French anarchist congress employed it to more clearly identify its doctrines. The French anarchist journalist Sbastien Faure started the weekly paper Le Libertaire (The Libertarian) in 1895. 

===Revolution, platformism, and synthesism===

Nestor MakhnoIn Ukraine the anarcho-communist guerrilla leader Nestor Makhno led an independent anarchist army in Ukraine during the Russian Civil War. A commander of the peasant Revolutionary Insurrectionary Army of Ukraine, also known as the Anarchist Black Army, Makhno led a guerrilla campaign opposing both the Bolshevik "Reds" and monarchist "Whites". The revolutionary autonomous movement of which he was a part made various tactical military pacts while fighting various forces of reaction and organizing the Free Territory of Ukraine, an anarchist society, committed to resisting state authority, whether capitalist or Bolshevik. Yekelchyk 2007, p 80. After successfully repelling Austro-Hungarian, White, and Ukrainian Nationalist forces, the Makhnovists militia forces and anarchist communist territories in the Ukraine were eventually crushed by Bolshevik military forces.

In the Mexican Revolution the Mexican Liberal Party was established and during the early 1910s it lead a series of military offensives leading to the conquest and occupation of certain towns and districts in Baja California with the leadership of anarcho-communist Ricardo Flores Magn. "The Magonista Revolt in Baja California Capitalist Conspiracy or Rebelion de los Pobres?" by Lawrence D. Taylor Kropotkin's The Conquest of Bread, which Flores Magn considered a kind of anarchist bible, served as basis for the short-lived revolutionary communes in Baja California during the "Magnista" Revolt of 1911 During the Mexican Revolution Emiliano Zapata and his army and allies, including Pancho Villa, fought for agrarian reform in Mexico. Specifically, they wanted to establish communal land rights for Mexico's indigenous population, which had mostly lost its land to the wealthy elite of European descent. Zapata was partly influenced by Ricardo Flores Magn. The influence of Flores Magn on Zapata can be seen in the Zapatistas' Plan de Ayala, but even more noticeably in their slogan (this slogan was never used by Zapata) "Tierra y libertad" or "land and liberty", the title and maxim of Flores Magn's most famous work. Zapata's introduction to anarchism came via a local schoolteacher, Otilio Montao Snchez  later a general in Zapata's army, executed on May 17, 1917  who exposed Zapata to the works of Peter Kropotkin and Flores Magn at the same time as Zapata was observing and beginning to participate in the struggles of the peasants for the land.

A group of exiled Russian anarchists attempted to address and explain the anarchist movement's failures during the Russian Revolution. They wrote the Organizational Platform of the General Union of Anarchists which was written in 1926 by Dielo Truda ("Workers' Cause"). The pamphlet is an analysis of the basic anarchist beliefs, a vision of an anarchist society, and recommendations as to how an anarchist organization should be structured. The four main principles by which an anarchist organization should operate, according to the Platform, are ideological unity, tactical unity, collective action, and federalism. The platform argues that "We have vital need of an organization which, having attracted most of the participants in the anarchist movement, would establish a common tactical and political line for anarchism and thereby serve as a guide for the whole movement".

The Platform attracted strong criticism from many sectors on the anarchist movement of the time including some of the most influential anarchists such as Voline, Errico Malatesta, Luigi Fabbri, Camillo Berneri, Max Nettlau, Alexander Berkman, "Wooden shoes or platform shoes? on the organizational platform of the libertarian communists" by Bob Black Emma Goldman and Gregori Maximoff. Malatesta, after initially opposing the Platform, later came to agreement with the Platform confirming that the original difference of opinion was due to linguistic confusion: "...I find myself more or less in agreement with their way of conceiving the anarchist organisation (being very far from the authoritarian spirit which the "Platform" seemed to reveal) and I confirm my belief that behind the linguistic differences really lie identical positions." Malatesta, On Collective Responsibility 
Sbastien Faure, French anarcho-communist proponent of synthesis anarchism
Two texts were made by the anarchist communists Sebastian Faure and Volin as responses to the Platform, each proposing different models, are the basis for what became known as the organisation of synthesis, or simply "synthesism". 
Voline published in 1924 a paper calling for "the anarchist synthesis" and was also the author of the article in Sebastian Faure's Encyclopedie Anarchiste on the same topic. The main purpose behind the synthesis was that the anarchist movement in most countries was divided into three main tendencies: communist anarchism, anarcho-syndicalism, and individualist anarchism and so such an organization could contain anarchists of this 3 tendencies very well. Faure in his text "Anarchist synthesis" has the view that "these currents were not contradictory but complementary, each having a role within anarchism: anarcho-syndicalism as the strength of the mass organisations and the best way for the practice of anarchism; libertarian communism as a proposed future society based on the distribution of the fruits of labour according to the needs of each one; anarcho-individualism as a negation of oppression and affirming the individual right to development of the individual, seeking to please them in every way. The Dielo Truda platform in Spain also met with strong criticism. Miguel Jimenez, a founding member of the Iberian Anarchist Federation (FAI), summarized this as follows: too much influence in it of marxism, it erroneously divided and reduced anarchists between individualist anarchists and anarcho-communist sections, and it wanted to unify the anarchist movement along the lines of the anarcho-communists. He saw anarchism as more complex than that, that anarchist tendencies are not mutually exclusive as the platformists saw it and that both individualist and communist views could accommodate anarchosyndicalism. "Jimnez evit ahondar demasiado en sus crticas hacia la naturaleza abiertamente marxista de algunas partes de la Plataforma, limitndose a aludir a la crtica de Santilln en La Protesta, que afirmaba que los rusos no haban sido el nico grupo responsable de permitir la infiltracin de las ideas marxistas, lo que iba claramente dirigido a los sindicalistas de Espaa17. Jimnez acept que la Plataforma haba sido un intento encomiable de resolver el eterno problema de la desunin dentro de las filas anarquistas, pero consideraba que el programa ruso tena sus defectos. La Plataforma se basaba en una premisa errnea sobre la naturaleza de las tendencias dentro del movimiento anarquista: divida a los anarquistas en dos grupos diferentes, individualistas y comunistas, y con ello rechazaba la influencia de los primeros y propona la unificacin del movimiento anarquista en torno a la ideas de los segundos. Jimnez afirmaba que la realidad era mucho ms compleja: esas diferentes tendencias dentro del movimiento anarquista no eran contradictorias ni excluyentes. Por ejemplo, era posible encontrar elementos en ambos grupos que apoyaran las tcticas del anarcosindicalismo. Por tanto, rechazaba el principal argumento de los plataformistas segn el cual las diferentes tendencias se excluan entre s." Jason Garner. "La bsqueda de la unidad anarquista: la Federacin Anarquista Ibrica antes de la II Repblica." Sbastian Faure had strong contacts in Spain and so his proposal had more impact in Spanish anarchists than the Dielo Truda platform even though individualist anarchist influence in Spain was less strong than it was in France. The main goal there was conciling anarcho-communism with anarcho-syndicalism. "Debido a sus contactos e influencia con el movimiento del exilio espaol, la propuesta de Faure arraig ms en los crculos espaoles que la Plataforma, y fue publicada en las prensas libertarias tanto en Espaa como en Blgica25. En esencia, Faure intentaba reunir a la familia anarquista sin imponer la rgida estructura que propona la Plataforma, y en Espaa se acept as. Opuesta a la situacin de Francia, en Espaa la influencia del anarquismo individualista no fue un motivo serio de ruptura. Aunque las ideas de ciertos individualistas como Han Ryner y mile Armand tuvieron cierto impacto sobre el anarquismo espaol, afectaron slo a aspectos como el sexo y el amor libre."Jason Garner. "La bsqueda de la unidad anarquista: la Federacin Anarquista Ibrica antes de la II Repblica." 

Gruppo Comunista Anarchico di Firenze held that the during early twentieth century, the terms libertarian communism and anarchist communism became synonymous within the international anarchist movement as a result of the close connection they had in Spain (see Anarchism in Spain) (with libertarian communism becoming the prevalent term). "Anarchist Communism & Libertarian Communism" by Gruppo Comunista Anarchico di Firenze. from "L'informatore di parte", No. 4, October 1979, quarterly journal of the Gruppo Comunista Anarchico di Firenze, on Libcom.org 

=== The Spanish Revolution ===

Buenaventura Durruti, an influential leader of the anarchist militias during the Spanish Civil War
The most extensive application of anarcho-communist ideas (i.e., established around the ideas as they exist today and achieving worldwide attention and knowledge in the historical canon), happened in the anarchist territories during the Spanish Revolution In Spain, the national anarcho-syndicalist trade union Confederacin Nacional del Trabajo initially refused to join a popular front electoral alliance, and abstention by CNT supporters led to a right wing election victory. But in 1936, the CNT changed its policy and anarchist votes helped bring the popular front back to power. Months later, the former ruling class responded with an attempted coup causing the Spanish Civil War (19361939). In response to the army rebellion, an anarchist-inspired movement of peasants and workers, supported by armed militias, took control of Barcelona and of large areas of rural Spain where they collectivised the land. But even before the fascist victory in 1939, the anarchists were losing ground in a bitter struggle with the Stalinists, who controlled the distribution of military aid to the Republican cause from the Soviet Union. The events known as the Spanish Revolution was a workers' social revolution that began during the outbreak of the Spanish Civil War in 1936 and resulted in the widespread implementation of anarchist and more broadly libertarian socialist organizational principles throughout various portions of the country for two to three years, primarily Catalonia, Aragon, Andalusia, and parts of the Levante. Much of Spain's economy was put under worker control; in anarchist strongholds like Catalonia, the figure was as high as 75%, but lower in areas with heavy Communist Party of Spain influence, as the Soviet-allied party actively resisted attempts at collectivization enactment. Factories were run through worker committees, agrarian areas became collectivised and run as libertarian communes. Anarchist historian Sam Dolgoff estimated that about eight million people participated directly or at least indirectly in the Spanish Revolution, which he claimed "came closer to realizing the ideal of the free stateless society on a vast scale than any other revolution in history." Dolgoff (1974), p. 5 Stalinist-led troops suppressed the collectives and persecuted both dissident Marxists and anarchists. 

=== Post-war years ===
Anarcho-communism entered into internal debates once again over the issue of organization in the post-World War II era. Founded in October 1935 the Anarcho-Communist Federation of Argentina (FACA, Federacin Anarco-Comunista Argentina) in 1955 renamed itself as the Argentine Libertarian Federation. The Fdration Anarchiste (FA) was founded in Paris on December 2, 1945, and elected the platformist anarcho-communist George Fontenis as its first secretary the next year. It was composed of a majority of activists from the former FA (which supported Voline's Synthesis) and some members of the former Union Anarchiste, which supported the CNT-FAI support to the Republican government during the Spanish Civil War, as well as some young Resistants. On 1950 a clandestin group formed within the FA called Organisation Pense Bataille (OPB) led by George Fontenis. Cdric Gurin. "Pense et action des anarchistes en France : 1950-1970" The Manifesto of Libertarian Communism was written in 1953 by Georges Fontenis for the Federation Communiste Libertaire of France. It is one of the key texts of the anarchist-communist current known as platformism. "Manifesto of Libertarian Communism" by Georges Fontenis, on Libcom.org The OPB pushed for a move which saw the FA change its name into the Fdration Communiste Libertaire (FCL) after the 1953 Congress in Paris, while an article in Le Libertaire indicated the end of the cooperation with the French Surrealist Group led by Andr Breton. The new decision making process was founded on unanimity: each person has a right of veto on the orientations of the federation. The FCL published the same year the Manifeste du communisme libertaire. Several groups quit the FCL in December 1955, disagreeing with the decision to present "revolutionary candidates" to the legislative elections. On August 1520, 1954, the Ve intercontinental plenum of the CNT took place. A group called Entente anarchiste appeared which was formed of militants who didnt like the new ideological orientation that the OPB was giving the FCL seeing it was authoritarian and almost marxist. "Si la critique de la dviation autoritaire de la FA est le principal fait de ralliement, on peut ressentir ds le premier numro un tat d'esprit qui va longtemps coller  la peau des anarchistes franais. Cet tat d'esprit se caractrise ainsi sous une double forme : d'une part un rejet inconditionnel de l'ennemi marxiste, d'autre part des questions sur le rle des anciens et de l'volution idologique de l'anarchisme. C'est Fernand Robert qui attaque le premier : "Le LIB est devenu un journal marxiste. En continuant  le soutenir, tout en reconnaissant quil ne nous plat pas, vous fates une mauvaise action contre votre idal anarchiste. Vous donnez la main  vos ennemis dans la pense. Mme si la FA disparat, mme si le LIB disparat, l'anarchie y gagnera. Le marxisme ne reprsente plus rien. Il faut le mettre bas ; je pense la mme chose des dirigeants actuels de la FA. L'ennemi se glisse partout." Cdric Gurin. "Pense et action des anarchistes en France : 1950-1970" The FCL lasted until 1956 just after it participated in state legislative elections with 10 candidates. This move alienated some members of the FCL and thus produced the end of the organization. A group of militants who didn't agree with the FA turning into FCL reorganized a new Federation Anarchiste which was established on December, 1953. This included those who formed L'Entente anarchiste who joined the new FA and then dissolved L'Entente. The new base principles of the FA were written by the individualist anarchist Charles-Auguste Bontemps and the non-platformist anarcho-communist Maurice Joyeux which established an organization with a plurality of tendencies and autonomy of groups organized around synthesist principles. According to historian Cdric Gurin, "the unconditional rejection of Marxism became from that moment onwards an identity element of the new Federation Anarchiste" and this was motivated in a big part after the previous conflict with George Fontenis and his OPB. 
Voline, influential Russian anarcho-communist who went on exile to France after escaping persecution of the Soviet state
In Italy the Italian Anarchist Federation was founded in 1945 in Carrara. It adopted an "Associative Pact" and the "Anarchist Program" of Errico Malatesta. It decided to publish the weekly Umanit Nova retaking the name of the journal published by Errico Malatesta. Inside the FAI a tendency grouped as (GAAP - Anarchist Groups of Proletarian Action) led by Pier Carlo Masini was founded which "proposed a Libertarian Party with an anarchist theory and practice adapted to the new economic, political and social reality of post-war Italy, with an internationalist outlook and effective presence in the workplaces...The GAAP allied themselves with the similar development within the French Anarchist movement" as lead by George Fontenis. Masini, Pier Carlo, 1923-1998 Another tendency which didnt identify either with the more classical FAI or with the GAAP started to emerge as local groups. These groups emphasized direct action, informal affinity groups and expropriation for financing anarchist activity. "Vivir la Anarqua .Artculo en solidaridad con Alfredo Bonanno y Christos Stratigopoulos" From within these groups the influential insurrectionary anarchist Alfredo Maria Bonanno will emerge influenced by the practice of the Spanish exiled anarchist Jos Lluis Faceras. In the early seventies a platformist tendency emerged within the Italian Anarchist Federation which argued for more strategic coherence and social insertion in the workers movement while rejecting the syntesist "Associative Pact" of Malatesta which the FAI adhered to. These groups started organizing themselves outside the FAI in organizations such as O.R.A. from Liguria which organized a Congress attended by 250 delegates of grupos from 60 locations. This movement was influential in the autonomia movements of the seventies. They published Fronte Libertario della lotta di classe in Bologna and Comunismo libertario from Modena. The Federation of Anarchist Communists (Federazione dei Comunisti Anarchici), or FdCA, was established in 1985 in Italy from the fusion of the Organizzazione Rivoluzionaria Anarchica (Revolutionary Anarchist Organisation) and the Unione dei Comunisti Anarchici della Toscana (Tuscan Union of Anarchist Communists).

The International of Anarchist Federations (IAF/IFA) was founded during an international anarchist conference in Carrara in 1968 by the three existing European anarchist federations of France (Fdration Anarchiste), Italy(Federazione Anarchica Italiana) and Spain (Federacin Anarquista Ibrica) as well as the Bulgarian federation in French exile. These organizations were also inspired on synthesist principles. 

=== Contemporary times ===
Libertarian Communism was a socialist journal founded in 1974 and produced in part by members of the Socialist Party of Great Britain. "papers relating to Libertarian Communism (a splinter group of the SPGB) including journals and miscellaneous correspondence, 1970-1980 (1 box)""Socialist Party of Great Britain" at Archives Hub at the Great Research Centre The synthesist Italian Anarchist Federation and the platformist Federation of Anarchist Communists continue existing today in Italy but insurrectionary anarchism continues to be relevant as the recent establishment of the Informal Anarchist Federation shows. In the seventies in France the Fdration Anarchiste evolved into a joining of the principles of both synthesis anarchism and platformism but later the platformist organizations Libertarian Communist Organization (France) in 1976 and Alternative libertaire in 1991 appeared with this last one existing until today alongside the synthesist Fdration Anarchiste. In recent times platformist organisations founded the now-defunct International Libertarian Solidarity network and its successor, the Anarkismo network; which is run collaboratively by roughly 30 platformist organisations around the world. On the other hand contemporary insurrectionary anarchism inherits the views and tactics of anti-organizational anarcho-communism "Say you want an insurrection" by Crimethinc and illegalism.." "Anarchism, insurrections and insurrectionalism" by Joe Black "Some insurrectionists see precedents in the propaganda of the deed carried out by Nineteenth-century assassins and the illegalism associated with Jules Bonnot and his fellow bank robbers. We can trace the lineage of current insurrectionist theory from Errico Malatesta and Luigi Galleani""Say you want an insurrection" by Crimethinc The Informal Anarchist Federation (not to be confused with the synthesist Italian Anarchist Federation also FAI ) is an Italian insurrectionary anarchist organization. MIPT Terrorism Knowledge Base It has been described by Italian intelligence sources as a "horizontal" structure of various anarchist terrorist groups, united in their beliefs in revolutionary armed action. In 2003, the group claimed responsibility for a bomb campaign targeting several European Union institutions. Currently alongside the previously mentioned federations, the International of Anarchist Federations includes the Argentine Libertarian Federation, the Anarchist Federation of Belarus, the Federation of Anarchists in Bulgaria, the Czech-Slovak Anarchist Federation, the Federation of German speaking Anarchists in Germany and Switzerland, and the Anarchist Federation in the United Kingdom and Ireland. IFA-IAF pagina oficial 

==Economic theory==

Anarcho-communism stresses egalitarianism and the abolition of social hierarchy and class distinctions arising from unequal wealth distribution, as well as the abolition of money and private property (while retaining respect for personal property). Replacing these approaches would be collective production and distribution of wealth by means of voluntary association. In anarchist communism, the state and private property would no longer exist. Each individual and group would be free to contribute to production and to satisfy their needs based on their own choice. Systems of production and distribution would be managed by their participants.

The abolition of wage labor is central to anarchist communism. With distribution of wealth being based on self-determined needs, people would be free to engage in whatever activities they found most fulfilling and would no longer have to engage in work for which they have neither the temperament nor the aptitude. 

Anarchist communists argue that there is no valid way of measuring the value of any one person's economic contributions because all wealth is a collective product of current and preceding generations. Alexander Berkman. What Is Communist Anarchism? For instance, one could not measure the value of a factory worker's daily production without taking into account how transportation, food, water, shelter, relaxation, machine efficiency, emotional mood etc. contributed to their production. To truly give numerical economic value to anything, an overwhelming amount of externalities and contributing factors would need to be taken into account  especially current or past labor contributing to the ability to utilize future labor. As Kropotkin put it: "No distinction can be drawn between the work of each man. Measuring the work by its results leads us to absurdity; dividing and measuring them by hours spent on the work also leads us to absurdity. One thing remains: put the needs above the works, and first of all recognize the right to live, and later on, to the comforts of life, for all those who take their share in production.." Kropotkin, Peter. "The Collectivist Wage System". The Conquest of Bread, G. P. Putnam's Sons, New York and London, 1906, Chapter 13, Section 4 

Anarchist communists argue that any economic system based on wage labor and private property requires a coercive state apparatus to enforce property rights and to maintain unequal economic relationships that inevitably arise from differences in wages or amount of property. They further argue that markets and systems of currency divide labor into classes and assign arbitrary numerical values to an individual's work and attempt to regulate production, consumption and distribution. They argue that money restricts an individual's ability to consume the products of their labor by limiting their intake with prices and wages. Anarchist communists recognize money as fundamentally quantitative in nature, rather than qualitative. They believe production should be a qualitative matter, and that consumption and distribution should be self-determined by each individual without arbitrary value assigned to labor, goods and services by others. In place of a market, most anarcho-communists support a currency-less gift economy where goods and services are produced by workers and distributed in community stores where everyone (including the workers who produced them) is essentially entitled to consume whatever they want or need as "payment" for their production of goods and services. A gift economy does not necessarily involve an immediate return (such as with remuneration); compensation comes in the form of whatever the person decides is of equal value to their products of labor (what is commonly called bartering). Any limits on production and distribution would be determined by the individuals within the groups involved, rather than by capitalist owners, corporations, investors, banks or other artificial market pressures.
The Conquest of Bread by Peter Kropotkin, influential work which presents the economic vision of anarcho-communism
Communist anarchism shares many traits with collectivist anarchism but has defining differences. Collectivist anarchism believes in collective ownership but communist anarchism negates the entire concept of ownership in favor of the concept of usage. Alexander Berkman. What is Anarchism?, p. 217 Thus, things are seen as either private possessions used by an individual, or social possessions used to produce for society. Anarcho-communists believe that means of production should not be owned by any one person or entity, leaving it free to be used by individuals for their own self-determined needs and wants. Land and housing would no longer be subject to rent or property taxes (and therefore, its use would be free of eviction threats). It would instead be subject simply to the desires of occupants on an egalitarian basis. For example, in an apartment building in which many live, no one person would have a say in the arrangements. All who live there would be involved in decision-making. It's typically argued that everyone should share certain responsibilities on a revolving-door basis rather than relegate them to any particular individual. This way, no one would get stuck doing labor considered relatively degrading.

Crucially, the abstract relationship of "landlord" and "tenant" would no longer exist, as such titles are held to occur under conditional legal coercion and are not absolutely necessary to occupy buildings or spaces. (Intellectual property rights would also cease, since they are a form of private property.) In addition to believing rent and other fees are exploitative, anarcho-communists feel these are arbitrary pressures inducing people to carry out unrelated functions. For example, they question why one should have to work for 'X hours' a day to merely live somewhere. So instead of working conditionally for the sake of the wage earned, they believe in working directly for the objective at hand. From this it follows that, rather than land being for sale or rent, vacant land and housing would be freely taken regardless of one's employment or financial status (essentially, the "for sale" sign could be replaced by a "vacant" sign).
Therefore, in anarcho-communist theory, land used by individuals for themselves or their families, or productive property used to produce for an individual (such as a small farm), would be considered private possessions (personal property) rather than social possessions. The individual would be perfectly free to create something and keep it as long as it is not a crucial means of production for the community or general public.
So an artist's paintbrushes would not need outside approval to be utilized, and the same basic principle would apply to other personal items such as one's toothbrush, musical instruments or book collection, which others needn't tamper with. However, if the matter at hand involves production for society (such as a factory which makes toothbrushes, musical instruments or books), it would become a social possession, accountable to all who work within it and the consuming public.
In that regard, anarcho-communism could be considered a compromise between collective and individual use. Kropotkin Act for yourselves. N. Walter and H. Becker, eds. (London: Freedom Press 1985) 1045 

Anarcho-communists reject mutualist economics because they believe that market competition, even non-capitalist markets, inherently create inequalities in wealth and land which would lead to inequalities of power - thus the recreation of the State and capitalism as some workers would have more access to capital and defence force than others. They reject collectivist economics arguing that remuneration would require a type of currency, which, again, anarcho-communists reject as an artificial measurement of the value of labor. They further argue that those who are not part of collective groups or unions in workers' councils and collectives could be alienated from access to capital, and thus promote free common use over ownership by society.

==Philosophical debates==

===Motivation===
Anarchist communists reject the claim that wage labor is necessary because people are by "nature" lazy and selfish. They point out that even the so-called "idle rich" sometimes find useful things to do despite having all their needs satisfied by the labour of others. Anarcho-communists generally do not agree with the belief in a pre-set 'human nature', arguing that human culture and behavior is very largely determined by socialization. Many, like Peter Kropotkin, also believe that human evolutionary tendency is for humans to cooperate with each other for mutual benefit and survival instead of existing as lone competitors. Peter Kropotkin 

While anarchist communists Peter Kropotkin and Murray Bookchin believed that the members of such a society would spontaneously perform all necessary labour because they would recognize the benefits of communal enterprise and mutual aid, 
* Kropotkin, Peter , 1998 paperback, London: Freedom Press. ISBN 0-900384-36-0, also at Project Gutenberg and at Wikisource
* Kropotkin, Peter The Conquest of Bread, first published 1892, also at Anarchy Archives and at Wikisource
* Kropotkin, Peter Fields, Factories and Workshops, available at Anarchy Archives and at Wikisource
* Bookchin, Murray Post Scarcity Anarchism (1971 and 2004) ISBN 1-904859-06-2. others such as Nestor Makhno and Ricardo Flores Magn had the conviction that all those able to work in an anarchist communist society should be obligated to do so, excepting groups like children, the elderly, the sick, or the infirm. Dielo Trouda Editorial Group. "Supplement to the Organizational Platform (Questions and Answers)". 2 November 1926. "Supplement to the Organizational Platform (Questions and Answers)" Puente, Isaac. "Libertarian Communism". 1932. The Cienfuegos Press Anarchist Review #6. Orkney. English Translation 1982. Also available at: http://flag.blackened.net/liberty/libcom.html Berneri, Camilo. "The Problem of Work". pp. 5982, Why Work?. Vernon Richards (ed.). p. 74 Flores, Magn; Rivera, Librado; Figueroa, Anselmo; Magon, Enrique Flores. "Manifesto". 23 September 1911. Dreams of Freedom: A Ricardo Flores Magn Reader. Chaz Bufe and Mitchell Cowen Verter (ed.) 2005. pp. 139, 141 and 144 Kropotkin did not think laziness or sabotage would be a major problem in an authentically anarchist-communist society, but he did agree that a freely associated anarchist commune could, and probably should, deliberately disassociate from those not fulfilling their communal agreement to do their share of work. Kropotkin, Peter The Conquest of Bread, Ch. 12, Objections, first published 1892, also at dwardmac.pitzer.edu 

===Freedom, work, and leisure===
Anarchist communists support communism as a means for ensuring the greatest freedom and well-being for everyone, rather than only the wealthy and powerful. In this sense, anarchist communism is a profoundly egalitarian philosophy.

Anarchist communism as an anarchist philosophy is against hierarchy in all its forms. "...whatever else may be said, this much is for sure: the welfare of humanity, which the future can and will bring, lies in communism. It excludes in logical ways all authority and servitude, and therefore equals anarchy." "Anarchist Communism" by Johann Most Anarchist communists do not think that anyone has the right to be anyone else's master, or 'boss' as this is a concept of capitalism and the state and implies authority over the individual. Some contemporary anarchist communists and advocates of post-left anarchy, such as Bob Black, reject the concept of work altogether in favor of turning necessary subsistence tasks into voluntary free play. 

Peter Kropotkin said that the main authoritarian mistakes in communist experiments of the past were their being based on "religious enthusiasm" "nearly all communities were founded by an almost religious wave of enthusiasm. People were asked to become "pioneers of humanity;" to submit to the dictates of a punctilious morality, to become quite regenerated by Communist life, to give all their time, hours of work and of leisure, to the community, to live entirely for the community. This meant acting simply like monks and to demand  without any necessity  men to be what they are not."Peter Kropotkin. "Communism and Anarchy" and the desire to live "as a family" "The second mistake lay in the desire to manage the community after the model of a family, to make it "the great family" They lived all in the same house and were thus forced to continuously meet the same "brethren and sisters." It is already difficult often for two real brothers to live together in the same house, and family life is not always harmonious; so it was a fundamental error to impose on all the "great family" instead of trying, on the contrary, to guarantee as much freedom and home life to each individual." Peter Kropotkin. "Communism and Anarchy" where the individual had to "submit to the dictates of a punctilious morality". For him anarcho-communism should be based on the right of free association and dissasociation for individuals and groups and on significantly lowering the amount of hours each individual dedicates to necessary labor. Peter Kropotkin. "Communism and Anarchy" He says that "to recognise a variety of occupations as the basis of all progress and to organise in such a way that man may be absolutely free during his leisure time, whilst he may also vary his work, a change for which his early education and instruction will have prepared him  this can easily be put in practice in a Communist society  this, again, means the emancipation of the individual, who will find doors open in every direction for his complete development." 

===Individualism and collectivism===
Some anarcho-communists (and collectivist anarchists as well) reject "individualism" and "collectivism" as illusory concepts. They argue that an individual sacrificing themselves for the "greater good" or being ruled by the "community" or "society" is not possible because society is composed of individuals rather than being a cohesive unit separate from the individual, and argue that collective control over the individual is tyrannical and un-anarchistic. The Place of Anarchism in the Evolution of Socialist Thought, pp 1415 Others, such as Lucien van der Walt and Michael Schmidt, argue that: "The anarchists did not ... identify freedom with the right of everybody to do exactly what one pleased but with a social order in which collective effort and responsibilities- that is to say, obligations - would provide the material basis and social nexus in which individual freedom could exist." They argued that "genuine freedom and individuality could only exist in a free society" and that in contrast to "misanthropic bourgeois individualism" anarchism was based in "a deep love of freedom, understood as a social product, a deep respect for human rights, a profound celebration of humankind and its potential and a commitment to a form of society where a 'true individuality' was irrevocably linked to 'the highest communist socieability'". Schmidt, Michael and van der Walt, Lucien. . I. AK Press, 2009, Page 48 

Egoist philosophical positions are important in anarcho-communist insurrectionary anarchism. In the early 20th century the Italian individualist anarchist Renzo Novatore advocated both revolution and anarcho-communism when he said "revolution is the fire of our will and a need of our solitary minds; it is an obligation of the libertarian aristocracy. To create new ethical values. To create new aesthetic values. To communalize material wealth. To individualize spiritual wealth." "Towards the creative Nothing" by Renzo Novatore From Stirnerist positions he also disrespected private property when he said that "Only ethical and spiritual wealth" was "invulnerable. This is the true property of individuals. The rest no! The rest is vulnerable! And all that is vulnerable will be violated!" This can also be seen in the contemporary writings of insurrectionary anarchism, as can be seen in the work of Wolfi Landstreicher, Alfredo Bonanno and others. Post-left anarcho-communist Bob Black after analysing insurrectionary anarcho-communist Luigi Galleani's view on anarcho-communism went as far as saying that "communism is the final fulfillment of individualism ... The apparent contradiction between individualism and communism rests on a misunderstanding of both ... Subjectivity is also objective: the individual really is subjective. It is nonsense to speak of emphatically prioritizing the social over the individual, ... You may as well speak of prioritizing the chicken over the egg. Anarchy is a method of individualization. It aims to combine the greatest individual development with the greatest communal unity. Bob Black, Nightmares of Reason. 

On the article by Max Baginski called "Stirner: The Ego and His Own" published in the American anarchist magazine Mother Earth there is the following affirmation "Modern Communists are more individualistic than Stirner. To them, not merely religion, morality, family and State are spooks, but property also is no more than a spook, in whose name the individual is enslaved - and how enslaved! The individuality is nowadays held in far stronger bondage by property, than by the combined power of State, religion and morality ... The prime condition is that the individual should not be forced to humiliate and lower himself for the sake of property and subsistence. Communism thus creates a basis for the liberty and Eigenheit of the individual. I am a Communist because I am an Individualist. Fully as heartily the Communists concur with Stirner when he puts the word take in place of demand - that leads to the dissolution of private property, to expropriation. Individualism and Communism go hand in hand." Max Baginski. "Stirner: The Ego and His Own" on Mother Earth. Vol. 2. No. 3 MAY, 1907 

===Property===
Anarchist communists counter the capitalist conception that communal property can only be maintained by force and that such a position is neither fixed in nature Kropotkin, Peter. Mutual Aid. nor unchangeable in practice, citing numerous examples of communal behavior occurring naturally even within capitalist systems. Colin Ward. Anarchism in Action. Anarchist communists call for the abolition of private property while maintaining respect for personal property. As such the prominent anarcho-communist Alexander Berkman maintained that "The revolution abolishes private ownership of the means of production and distribution, and with it goes capitalistic business. Personal possession remains only in the things you use. Thus, your watch is your own, but the watch factory belongs to the people.Land, machinery, and all other public utilities will be collective property, neither to be bought nor sold. Actual use will be considered the only title-not to ownership but to possession. The organization of the coal miners, for example, will be in charge of the coal mines, not as owners but as the operating agency. Similarly will the railroad brotherhoods run the railroads, and so on. Collective possession, cooperatively managed in the interests of the community, will take the place of personal ownership privately conducted for profit." Alexander Berkman. "What Is Communist Anarchism?" 

===The commune as an economic democracy===
Anarcho-communism has been critical of a simple call for workers ownership of workplaces and their administration as cooperatives. Murray Bookchin has put it this way: "what of the syndicalist ideal of "collectivized" self-managed enterprises that are coordinated by like occupations on a national level and coordinated geographically by "collectives" on a local level?...Here, the traditional socialist criticism of this syndicalist form of economic management is not without its point: the corporate or private capitalist, "worker-controlled" or not  ironically, a technique in the repertoire of industrial management that is coming very much into vogue today as "workplace democracy" and "employee ownership" and constitutes no threat whatever to private property and capitalism...In any case, "economic democracy" has not simply meant "workplace democracy" and "employee ownership." Many workers, in fact, would like to get away from their factories if they could and find more creative artisanal types of work, not simply "participate" in "planning" their own misery. What "economic democracy" meant in its profoundest sense was free, "democratic" access to the means of life, the counterpart of political democracy, that is, the guarantee of freedom from material want. It is a dirty bourgeois trick, in which many radicals unknowingly participate, that "economic democracy" has been re-interpreted as "employee ownership" and "workplace democracy" and has come to mean workers' "participation" in profit sharing and industrial management rather than freedom from the tyranny of the factory, rationalized labor, and "planned production," which is usually exploitative production with the complicity of the workers." "Municipalization: Community Ownership of the Economy" by Murray Bookchin 

As such "Whereas the syndicalist alternative re-privatizes the economy into "self-managed" collectives and opens the way to their degeneration into traditional forms of private property - whether "collectively" owned or not - libertarian municipalism politicizes the economy and dissolves it into the civic domain. Neither factory or land appear as separate interests within the communal collective. Nor can workers, farmers, technicians, engineers, professionals, and the like perpetuate their vocational identities as separate interests that exist apart from the citizen body in face-to-face assemblies. "Property" is integrated into the commune as a material constituent of its libertarian institutional framework, indeed as a part of a larger whole that is controlled by the citizen body in assembly as citizens - not as vocationally oriented interest groups." 

===The revolution and the transition===
For platformist anarcho-communist Wayne Price "Todays proposals for Parecon, in which workers are rewarded for the intensity and duration of their labor in a cooperative economy, would fit into Bakunins or Marxs concept of a transitory, beginning, phase, of a free society ... Kropotkin rejected the two-phase approach of the Marxists and the anarchist-collectivists. Instead he proposed that a revolutionary society should transform itself immediately into a communist society, that is, should go immediately into what Marx had regarded as the more advanced, completed, phase of communism. Kropotkin and those who agreed with him called themselves anarchist-communists (or communist anarchists), although they continued to regard themselves as a part of the broader socialist movement." "What is Anarchist Communism?" by Wayne Price 

Marxists believe that without a transitionary period of state control (their interpretation of the dictatorship of the proletariat) it would be impossible for any revolution to maintain the momentum or cohesion to defend the new society against external and internal threats. Friedrich Engels noted: "Without a previous social revolution the abolition of the state is nonsense; the abolition of capital is in itself the social revolution and involves a change in the whole method of production." Alternatively, such quotations have been interpreted by Anarcho-Communists supportive of Marx and Engels to suggest the abolition of capitalism and the state simultaneously, not the creation of a new state. Anarchists reject the Marxist-Leninist model of the "dictatorship of the proletariat," arguing that any revolutionary minority taking over state power would be just as authoritarian as the ruling class in capitalism to defend the new state, and would eventually constitute itself as a new ruling class. As an extension of this, Anarcho-communists counter-argue that decentralized, stateless collective federations are sufficient to give both power to workers and preserve personal freedom and point to the fact that no socialist state has ever showed signs of "withering away". Again, the Spanish Revolution is cited as an example of successful anarchist military mobilisation, albeit one crushed by superior forces.

=== Free association of communes as opposed to the nation-state ===
Anarcho-communism calls for a confederal form in relationships of mutual aid and free association between communes as an alternative to the centralism of the nation-state. Peter Kropotkin thus suggested that "Representative government has accomplished its historical mission; it has given a mortal blow to court-rule; and by its debates it has awakened public interest in public questions. But to see in it the government of the future socialist society is to commit a gross error. Each economic phase of life implies its own political phase; and it is impossible to touch the very basis of the present economic life-private property -without a corresponding change in the very basis of the political organization. Life already shows in which direction the change will be made. Not in increasing the powers of the State, but in resorting to free organization and free federation in all those branches which are now considered as attributes of the State." Peter Kropotkin. "Anarchist Communism: Its Basis and Principles" 

As such "no community can hope to achieve economic autarchy, nor should it try to do so unless it wishes to become self-enclosed and parochial, not only "self-sufficient." Hence the confederation of communes"the Commune of communes"is reworked economically as well as politically into a shared universe of publicly managed resources. The management of the economy, precisely because it is a public activity, does not degenerate into privatized interactions between enterprises; rather it develops into confederalized interactions between municipalities. That is to say, the very elements of societal interaction are expanded from real or potential privatized components to institutionally real public components. Confederation becomes a public project by definition, not only because of shared needs and resources. If there is any way to avoid the emergence of the city-state, not to speak of self-serving bourgeois "cooperatives," it is through a municipalization of political life that is so complete that politics embraces not only what we call the public sphere but material means of life as well." 

==Example societies through history==

===Early examples===
There have been several attempts, both successful and unsuccessful, at creating other anarchist-communist societies throughout much of the world. Anarchist-communists and some green anarchists (especially anarcho-primivists) argue that hunter-gatherer tribes, like families, were early forms of anarchist-communism, due to their egalitarian nature.

Early Christian communities have been described as having anarcho-communist characteristics. Hinson, E. Glenn. The Early Church: Origins to the Dawn of the Middle Ages, (1996) pp 423 Frank Seaver Billings described "Jesusism" as a combination of anarchism and communism. Examples of later Christian egalitarian communities include the Diggers.

===Gift economies===

In anthropology and the social sciences, a gift economy (or gift culture) is a mode of exchange where valuable goods and services are regularly given without any explicit agreement for immediate or future rewards (i.e. no formal quid pro quo exists). Ideally, voluntary and recurring gift exchange circulates and redistributes wealth throughout a community, and serves to build societal ties and obligations. Bollier, David. "The Stubborn Vitality of the Gift Economy." Silent Theft: The Private Plunder of Our Common Wealth. First Printing ed. New York: Routledge, 2002. 3839. Print. In contrast to a barter economy or a market economy, social norms and custom governs gift exchange, rather than an explicit exchange of goods or services for money or some other commodity. R. Kranton: Reciprocal exchange: a self-sustaining system, American Economic Review, V. 86 (1996), Issue 4 (September), pp. 83051 
 Watercolor by James G. Swan depicting the Klallam people of chief Chetzemoka at Port Townsend, with one of Chetzemoka's wives distributing potlatch.
Traditional societies dominated by gift exchange were small in scale and geographically remote from each other. As states formed to regulate trade and commerce within their boundaries, market exchange came to dominate. Nonetheless, the practice of gift exchange continues to play an important role in modern society. Lewis Hyde: The Gift: Imagination and the Erotic Life of Property One prominent example is scientific research, which can be described as a gift economy. Hagstrom, Warren (1982). "Gift giving as an organizing principle in science". In Barry Barnes and David Edge. Science in Context: Readings in the Sociology of Science. MIT Press (Cambridge, MA). Contrary to popular conception, there is no evidence that societies relied primarily on barter before using money for trade. Mauss, Marcel. 'The Gift: The Form and Reason for Exchange in Archaic Societies.' pp. 3637. Instead, non-monetary societies operated largely along the principles of gift economics, and in more complex economies, on debt. David Graeber: Debt: The First 5000 Years, Melville 2011. Cf. http://www.socialtextjournal.org/reviews/2011/10/review-of-david-graebers-debt.php When barter did in fact occur, it was usually between either complete strangers or would-be enemies. Graeber, David. 'Toward an Anthropological Theory of Value'. pp. 153154. 

The expansion of the Internet has witnessed a resurgence of the gift economy, especially in the technology sector. Engineers, scientists and software developers create open-source software projects. The Linux kernel and the GNU operating system are prototypical examples for the gift economy's prominence in the technology sector and its active role in instating the use of permissive free software and copyleft licenses, which allow free reuse of software and knowledge. Other examples include: file-sharing, the commons, open access. Anarchist scholar Uri Gordon has said that "the collaborative development of free software like the Linux operating system and applications such as OpenOffice clearly approximate an informational anarchist communism. Moreover, for anarchists it is precisely the logic of expropriation and electronic piracy that enables a radical political extension of the cultural ideals of the free manipulation, circulation and use of information associated with the hacker ethic (Himanen 2001). The space of illegality created by P2P (peer- to-peer) file-sharing opens up the possibility, not only of the open circulation of freely- given information and software as it is on the Internet today, but also of conscious copyright violation. The Internet, then, enables not only communist relations around information, but also the militant contamination and erosion of non-communist regimes of knowledge  a technological weapon to equalise access to information, eating away at intellectual property rights by rendering them unenforceable." Uri Gordon. Anarchism and Political Theory: Contemporary Problems 

The interest in such economic forms goes back to Peter Kropotkin, who saw in the hunter-gatherer tribes he had visited the paradigm of "mutual aid". Mutual Aid: A Factor of Evolution (1955 paperback (reprinted 2005), includes Kropotkin's 1914 preface, Foreword and Bibliography by Ashley Montagu, and The Struggle for Existence, by Thomas H. Huxley ed.). Boston: Extending Horizons Books, Porter Sargent Publishers. ISBN 0-87558-024-6. Project Gutenberg e-text, Project LibriVox audiobook anarchist anthropologist David Graeber in his 2011 book argues that with the advent of the great Axial Age civilizations, the nexus between coinage and the calculability of economic values was concomitant with the disrupt of what Graeber calls "human economies," as found among the Iroquois, Celts, Inuit, Tiv, Nuer and the Malagasy people of Madagascar among other groups which, according to Graeber, held a radically different conception of debt and social relations, based on the radical incalculability of human life and the constant creation and recreation of social bonds through gifts, marriages and general sociability. The author postulates the growth of a "military-coinage-slave complex" around this time, through which mercenary armies looted cities and human beings were cut from their social context to work as slaves in Greece, Rome and elsewhere in the Eurasian continent. The extreme violence of the period marked by the rise of great empires in China, India and the Mediterranean was, in this way, connected with the advent of large-scale slavery and the use of coins to pay soldiers, together with the obligation enforced by the State for its subjects to pay its taxes in currency. This was also the same time that the great religions spread out and the general questions of philosophical enquiry emerged on world history - many of those directly related, as in Plato's Republic, with the nature of debt and its relation to ethics.

===Anarchist Spain and later examples===
The best known examples of an anarchist communist society, established around the ideas as they exist today, that received worldwide attention and knowledge in the historical canon, are the anarchist territories during the Spanish Revolution and the Free Territory during the Russian Revolution. Through the efforts and influence of the Spanish Anarchists during the Spanish Revolution within the Spanish Civil War, starting in 1936 anarchist communism existed in most of Aragon, parts of the Levante and Andalusia, as well as in the stronghold of Anarchist Catalonia before being brutally crushed by the combined forces of Francoism, Hitler, Mussolini, Spanish Communist Party repression (backed by the USSR) as well as economic and armaments blockades from the capitalist countries and the Spanish Republic itself. The Spanish example, in which high levels of mobilisation and swift improvements to production were implemented by anarchists, is often cited as an example of an anarchist-communist society which saw rapid improvements to both industrial and scientific output. Dolgoff, Sam. The Anarchist Collectives, ch. 10 

During the Russian Revolution, anarchists such as Nestor Makhno worked to create and defend- through the Revolutionary Insurrectionary Army of Ukraine- anarchist communism in the Free Territory of the Ukraine from 1919 before being conquered by the Bolsheviks in 1921. Later movements include the free territories of Hungary during the Hungarian Revolution of 1956.

===Contemporary examples===
The Korean Anarchist Movement in Korea led by Kim Jwa Jin briefly brought anarcho-communism to Korea. The success was short-lived and much less widespread than the anarchism in Spain or Hungary. . 
Inside Utrecht Giveaway shop. The banner reads "The earth has enough for everyone's need, but not for everyone's greed."
Give-away shops, freeshops, or free stores are stores where all goods are free. They are similar to charity shops, with mostly second-hand itemsonly everything is available at no cost. Whether it is a book, a piece of furniture, a garment or a household item, it is all freely given away, although some operate a one-in, one-outtype policy (swap shops). The free store is a form of constructive direct action that provides a shopping alternative to a monetary framework, allowing people to exchange goods and services outside of a money-based economy. The anarchist 1960s countercultural group The Diggers opened free stores which simply gave away their stock, provided free food, distributed free drugs, gave away money, organized free music concerts, and performed works of political art. . The Diggers took their name from the original English Diggers led by Gerrard Winstanley and sought to create a mini-society free of money and capitalism. 
 Although free stores have not been uncommon in the United States since the 1960s, the freegan movement has inspired the establishment of more free stores. Today the idea is kept alive by the new generations of social centres, anarchists and environmentalists who view the idea as an intriguing way to raise awareness about consumer culture and to promote the reuse of commodities.

Aspects of the Free Software community, like the Free Software movement, the GNU Project and its copyleft principle are a type of a gift economy for information and software; a gift economy is the preferred economic system of anarcho-communists. Programmers make the source code of their programs available for anyone to copy, modify and improve. Individual programmers gain prestige and respect, and the community benefits from better software. Markus Giesler, in his ethnography Consumer Gift Systems, explored music downloading as a system of social solidarity based on gift transactions. Markus Giesler, Consumer Gift Systems Some organizations such as online commons (such as Wikipedia, the Wikimedia Commons), wikis and Indymedia are held up as examples of functioning anarcho-communistic organizations. 

==See also==

==References==

==Further reading==
* Alexander Berkman, What is Communist Anarchism?, Prison Memoirs of an Anarchist, others
* Murray Bookchin Post Scarcity Anarchism (1971 and 2004). ISBN 1-904859-06-2
* Carlo Cafiero. Revolution. Black Cat Press. ISBN 978-1-926878-11-9
* Luigi Fabbri Anarchism and Communism
* Federazione dei Comunisti Anarchici, Anarchist Communists: A Question Of Class, others
* Ricardo Flores Magn Dreams of Freedom: A Ricardo Flores Magn Reader. Chaz Bufe and Mitchell Cowen Verter (ed.) 2005.
* Georges Fontenis. Manifesto of Libertarian Communism
* Luigi Galleani. Anarchy Will Be!: Selected Writings Of Luigi Galleani. AK Press. 2007. ISBN 978-1-904859-29-1
* Emma Goldman, Anarchism and Other Essays, Living My Life, others
* Robert Graham, , Volume 1: From Anarchy to Anarchism (300CE-1939) () contains extensive selections from the anarchist communists, including Joseph Djacque, Carlo Cafiero, Peter Kropotkin, Luigi Galleani, Errico Malatesta, Charlotte Wilson, Ricardo Flores Magn, Shifu, Hatta Shuzo, Alexander Berkman, Voline, and Isaac Puente.
* Peter Kropotkin , 1998 paperback, London: Freedom Press. ISBN 0-900384-36-0, also at Project Gutenburg
* Peter Kropotkin The Conquest of Bread, first published 1892, also at Anarchy Archives
* Peter Kropotkin Fields, Factories and Workshops, available at Anarchy Archives
* Peter Kropotkin Anarchist Communism: Its Basis and Ideals
* Peter Kropotkin "Communism and Anarchy"
* Makhno, Mett, Arshinov, Valevski, Linski, The Organizational Platform of the Libertarian Communists (available in: Castellano, etina, Deutsch, English, , Franais, Italiano, Ivrit, Magyar, Nederlands, Polska, Portugus, Pycc, Svenska, Trke, )
* Errico Malatesta A Talk About Anarchist Communism Between Two Workers
* Jessica Moran. "The Firebrand and the Forging of a New Anarchism: Anarchist Communism and Free Love."
* Johann Most."Anarchist Communism"
* Alain Pengam. Anarchist-Communism
* Isaac Puente Libertarian Communism
* Ilan Shalif. GLIMPSES INTO THE YEAR 2100 (50 years after the revolution) Daily life in the libertarian communist society
* Michael Schmidt and Lucien van der Walt. [http://www.revolutionbythebook.akpress.org/black-flame-the-revolutionary-class-politics-of-anarchism-and-syndicalism-%E2%80%94-book-excerpt/ ]. AK Press. 2009

==External links==
* Anarkismo.net - Anarchist communist news maintained by platformist organizations with discussion and theory from across the globe
* libcom.org - The home of anarchism and libertarian communism in the UK
* Anarchocommunism texts at The Anarchist Library
* Kropotkin: The Coming Revolution  short documentary to introduce the idea of anarchist communism in Kropotkin's own words.

;Anarcho-communist theorists archives

 



